
 How Snakes Work 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

1
 How Snakes Work 
 Structure, Function, and Behavior of 
the World’s Snakes 
 Harvey B. Lillywhite  
 

 Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
 It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, 
 scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide. 
 Oxford New York 
 Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi 
 Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi 
 New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 
 With offi  ces in 
 Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
 Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore 
 South Korea Switzerland Th ailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam 
 Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
 in the UK and certain other countries. 
 Published in the United States of America by 
 Oxford University Press 
 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016 
 © Oxford University Press 2014 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
 stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the 
 prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, 
 by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization. 
 Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent 
 to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.   
 You must not circulate this work in any other form 
 and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Lillywhite, Harvey B., 1943– 
 How snakes work : structure, function, and behavior of the world’s snakes / Harvey B. Lillywhite. 
 pages cm 
 ISBN 978-0-19-538037-8 (alk. paper) 
 1. Snakes. I. Title. 
 QL666.O6L724 2014 
 597.96—dc23  2013019018 
 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
 Printed in the United States of America 
 on acid-free paper 
 
 

 This book is dedicated to 
Rodolfo Ruibal, 
George Bartholomew, and 
Kenneth Norris, 
who inspired and mentored my passion 
for discovery and science. 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

 | vii
 C O N T E N T S  
 F O R E W O R D  B Y  R I C K  S H I N E    
 i x 
 P R E FA C E    
 x i 
 A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S    
 x i i i 
 C H A P T E R  1  : 
 E v o l u t i o n a r y  H i s t o r y 
a n d  C l a s s i f i c a t i o n  o f  t h e 
Wo r l d ’s  S n a k e s    
 3 
 C H A P T E R  2  : 
 F e e d i n g ,  D i g e s t i o n ,  a n d  Wa t e r 
B a l a n c e   
 3 7 
 C H A P T E R  3  : 
 L o c o m o t i o n :  H o w  S n a k e s  M o v e   
 7 7 
 C H A P T E R  4  : 
 Te m p e r a t u r e  a n d  E c t o t h e r m y   
 1 0 3 
 C H A P T E R  5  : 
 S t r u c t u r e  a n d  F u n c t i o n  o f  S k i n   
 1 1 7 
 C H A P T E R  6  : 
 I n t e r n a l  Tr a n s p o r t :  C i r c u l a t i o n 
a n d   R e s p i r a t i o n   
 1 4 1 
 C H A P T E R  7  : 
 P e r c e i v i n g  t h e  S n a k e ’s  Wo r l d : 
S t r u c t u r e  a n d  F u n c t i o n  o f  S e n s e 
O r g a n s   
 1 6 3 
 C H A P T E R  8  : 
 S o u n d  P r o d u c t i o n   
 1 8 1 
 C H A P T E R  9  : 
 C o u r t s h i p  a n d  R e p r o d u c t i o n   
 1 9 1 
 G L O S S A RY  O F  T E R M S    
 2 1 3 
 I N D E X    
 2 2 7  

This page intentionally left blank 

 | ix
 F O R E W O R D  
   We share this beautiful planet with an astonishing array of 
diff erent kinds of creatures, but few are as remarkable as 
snakes. Some people worship snakes, some are terrifi ed of 
them, and some even keep them as pets. Despite a wide 
public interest in serpents, however, we still know very 
little about the day-to-day lives of most species—including 
really basic issues such as how they move around, fi nd food 
or mates, or infl uence the ecosystems in which they occur. 
 Dedicated fi eld biologists like Harvey Lillywhite are 
shedding new light on these questions. Over his long ca-
reer, Harvey has pioneered many new insights into snake 
biology—not just in the laboratory, but also out in the fi eld, 
where he can explore an animal’s functioning in the condi-
tions that it actually encounters. Harvey has worked on a 
very wide variety of snake species, in many parts of the 
world, and thus brings a truly broad perspective to this en-
gaging book. Importantly, Harvey is one of the very few 
 researchers to have focused on the physiology of snakes—
that is, the ways that these mysterious animals deal with 
basic challenges such as fi nding, capturing, and digesting 
their food, maintaining their water balance, and regulating 
their body temperature. By embedding his research in 
the fi eld biology of his study animals, Harvey has revealed 
the fascinating complexity and elegance of these much- 
misunderstood creatures. 
 Th is book brings together a lifetime of experience, to ex-
plain in easy-to-understand terms what snakes do, and 
how and why they do it. I am sure that this attractive vol-
ume not only will educate people about snakes, but also 
will inspire its readers and help them to understand why 
we need to conserve these amazing creatures for future 
generations. 
 —Rick Shine,  Sydney,  January 2013 

This page intentionally left blank 

 | xi
 P R E F A C E  
  Since childhood I have marveled at the sleek form, rich colors, 
and absolutely intriguing behaviors of snakes. Having no 
limbs, these reptiles possess incredible stealth, grace, and 
beauty. Th ey exhibit a wonderful capacity for actions that 
amuse, startle, or evoke intense curiosity. Snakes live in a rich 
variety of habitats, from oceans to rocky hillsides, from subter-
ranean spaces to open sand deserts. Th ey have evolved colors 
and patterns that awaken the artist, and they have inspired 
mythical reverence and respect from many cultures. Th ey per-
sistently survive, and yet they are perhaps the most maligned 
group of vertebrates—misunderstood by far too many hu-
mans who carry out death sentences at every opportunity. 
 For many years I have planned to write a book about 
snakes, one that is intended to interest both the general 
reader and professionals. Th ere are numerous books that 
have been written about snakes—gems of information as 
well as collections of great photographs. As more and more 
books appeared with snakes as their subjects, I had cause to 
ponder how I might make a meaningful contribution in the 
form of another “snake book.” My professional training and 
much of my career as a scientist has been related to physi-
ology and the subdiscipline that is generally known as 
“physiological ecology.” My perspectives are quite broad, 
however, and much of what interests me as a research scien-
tist involves interdisciplinary investigation and integrative 
studies of structure, function, and behavior—focused with 
questions related to the ecology and natural world of the 
animals that fascinate me. Th e majority of books that have 
been written about snakes provide relatively little in-depth 
coverage of these topics, and none to my knowledge focuses 
on physiology—or structure and function—as the principal 
subject of treatment. Th us, I decided to write this book, 
which specifi cally targets this “niche” of subject matter. 
 Th ere are comparatively few persons with rigorous training 
in physiology who focus their research on snakes, and many of 
the persons with physiological training who do investigate 
snakes at one time or another may not have a background of 
knowledge that includes extensive fi rsthand fi eld experience 
as well as a passionate appreciation for the natural history of 
this group of animals. Th us, I hope that in some manner I 
might bring a unique perspective to the subject matter, and to 
cover a range of topics in this book that will interest a wide 
group of readers. Snakes are wonderful animals, and they 
have become very popular in the pet trade as well as a high-
priority attraction at zoological parks. As one begins to under-
stand and appreciate their inner “workings,” snakes become 
even more fascinating and evoke even greater emotional as 
well as intellectual response. My sincerest hope is that readers 
of this book will fi nd enjoyment in discovering new knowl-
edge, increased curiosity, and a greater respect for a group of 
animals that refl ect an amazing amount of innovation and 
success in life’s evolutionary game. Insofar as possible, I have 
attempted to illustrate the many fascinating features of 
snakes— sometimes related to complex or diffi  cult concepts—
using photographs instead of relying on dense and tedious 
text. I shall be extremely delighted if many persons enjoy 
reading this book as much as I have enjoyed producing it. 
 To assist readers with understanding the terminology 
that is used throughout the book, I have defi ned many useful 
and specialized terms in the glossary. I have avoided the use 
of equations or complicated graphs, but I have provided lists 
of additional readings that provide roads to  further—often 
more technical—presentation of the subject matter. Such 
readings are listed at the end of each chapter, and they in-
clude articles by the authors who are mentioned specifi cally 
in the text.  

This page intentionally left blank 

 | xiii
 A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S  
 I owe a debt of gratitude to many persons who helped to 
make this book possible. First, I thank my parents, who 
allowed me to keep snakes at home when I was a very young 
boy. Reluctant at fi rst, they encouraged me in very impor-
tant ways as it became evident that my interest in snakes 
began to open many other doors in the world of science and 
learning. I am equally indebted to my wife Jamie, who has 
assisted me with patience, tolerance, and also encourage-
ment for a meaningful project. My son and daughter, Steve 
and Shauna, have also been supportive in various impor-
tant ways. 
 I am grateful to the many persons who have contributed to 
the illustrations, both photographs and drawings. Th ese in-
clude Dan Dourson, Coleman Sheehy, Elliott Jacobson, Jason 
Bourque, Rom Whitaker, Laurie Vitt, Gowri Shankar, Richard 
Shine, Indraneil Das, John C. Murphy, Sara Murphy, Joseph 
Pfaller, Xavier Bonnet, Irene Arpayoglou, David and Tracy 
Barker, John Randall, Phil Nicodemo, Blair Hedges, Tony Cro-
cetta, Ray Carson, Akira Mori, Ming-Chung Tu, Erik Frausing, 
Jesús Rivas, Dhiraj Bhaisare, Parag Dandge, Howie Choset, 
Th imappa, James Nifong, Lincoln Brower, Alejandro Solórz-
ano, John Roberts, Lauren Dibben, Nicholas Millichamp, 
Arne Rasmussen, Amanda Ropp, Gavin Delacour, Nikolai 
L. Orlov, Stephen Beaupre, Guido Westhoff , Richard Sajdak, 
Shauna Lillywhite, Steven Lillywhite, Jake Socha, Tracy Lang-
kilde, Mac Stone, Glenn J. Tattersall, William Montgomery, 
and Kanishka Ukuwela. 
 Numerous other persons were invaluable for contrib-
uting stimulating discussions, reviews of chapters, scien-
tifi c clarifi cation, and general support of the project. Th ese 
include, but are not limited to, Coleman Sheehy III, Richard 
Shine, Harold Heatwole, Harry Greene, Phil Nicodemo, 
 David Barker, Roger Seymour, Bruce Jayne, Natalia Anan-
jeva, François Brischoux, John C. Murphy, Michael Th omp-
son, Paul Maderson, Michael Douglas, Bruce Means, Carl 
Franklin, Bruce Young, Xavier Bonnet, Matthew Edwards, 
Elliott Jacobson, Stephen Secor, Brad Moon, Max Nicker-
son, Sergio Gonzalez, Jennifer Van Deven, Joe Pfaller, 
Li-Wen Chang, and Lauren Dibben. Th ere are numerous 
other persons—friends, associates, and students—who 
also deserve thanks, but who are too numerous too men-
tion without error of missing one or two individuals. 
 Finally, I also express my appreciation to the editors and 
other production staff  at Oxford University Press who en-
couraged me and provided professional assistance in the 
production of this book. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 How Snakes Work 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

 | 3
 What Is a Snake? 
 If we think about snakes we might have seen, and also 
about other animals that look much like snakes in superfi -
cial resemblance, we begin to ponder what features there 
are that actually defi ne a snake. If we focus carefully on 
some of the more obvious features of snakes, we can enu-
merate some important and potentially diagnostic charac-
ters. A  diagnostic character is an attribute that is unique to a 
particular chosen taxon or group of related animals—in our 
case the snakes. Snakes are elongate in body form, they 
have no legs or arms, they are covered with scales and do 
not bear fur or feathers ( fi g.  1.1 ). All snakes possess a forked 
tongue, and they do not have external ear openings of any 
sort ( fi g.  1.2 ). Internally, it is important to notice that any 
snake we might examine has a bony and segmented verte-
bral column bearing ribs ( fi g.  1.3 ). All of these characteris-
tics, however, are not diagnostic because they can be found 
in some other groups of animals as well. 
 Let us think about some other animals that we know ap-
pear superfi cially snakelike but are not what taxonomists or 
systematists call a snake. Th ese might include eels, worms, 
legless lizards, and some elongate amphibians that are also 
without limbs. Many persons, including trained biologists, 
might mistake some of these animals for a snake in certain 
circumstances ( fi g.  1.4  ). Some species of eels, for example, 
resemble sea snakes in both size and color, and the distinc-
tions are not clear when the animal is seen swimming at 
some distance. Upon closer inspection, of course, the eel is 
seen to possess gills, mouth, skin, and other features that 
allow us to recognize it as a fi sh and not a snake. Worms and 
limbless amphibians (caecilians) might appear very snake-
like if we catch but a glimpse of one of these creatures as it 
slips away quickly in moist, low vegetation, or into soil be-
neath a log or rock that we might turn while looking for 
these animals. If one of these animals is in our hand, how-
ever, we note the creature—which might even be a slender 
and nearly legless salamander—has no scales, and its tongue 
is not forked. Similarly, a worm has neither scales nor a de-
fi ned head with jaws, nor a vertebral column internally. So, 
what are the characters that determine with certainty that 
we have a snake and not one of these other animals?  
 If we explore further, we fi nd there are other characters 
that are peculiar to snakes when compared with other verte-
brates. Th e eyes of snakes appear always “open.” Th is is be-
cause snakes have no eyelids, and the cornea is covered with 
a clear extension of the skin called a  spectacle  (also  brille or 
 eyecap ) ( fi g.  1.5 ; also compare with  fi g.  1.2 and  fi gs.  7.3 ,  7.4 ). 
Th e spectacle is fi xed in place, transparent, and serves a pro-
tective function as do eyelids. Th is feature distinguishes 
snakes from many lizards, but some aquatic amphibians, 
cave salamanders, and some lizards also exhibit partial fu-
sion of the skin with the eye to form a spectacle or similar 
structure. Th us, by itself, this feature is not explicitly diag-
nostic of snakes, although it is helpful in most cases. 
1
 EVOLUTIONARY HISTORY AND 
CLASSIFICATION OF THE 
WORLD’S SNAKES  
 It has been truly said that we do not know a species until we know 
everything about it, its anatomy, its physiology, its development, its habits. 
The variations in structure in different families and genera, sometimes even 
in species that are placed in the same genus, have no doubt their interpretation 
in their varying modes of life, and the correlation of the two is a fascinating 
study. It is one that has been much neglected by the ﬁ eld naturalist. Here is 
a great ﬁ eld of research waiting for him, for it is upon the living creature that 
all our theories concerning the function of structure must ﬁ nally be tested. 
 —Malcolm A. Smith,  Reptilia and Amphibia , vol. 3,  Serpentes (1943), p. 2  

 4  | How Snakes Work
 Many snakes also possess a lightened and highly movable 
skull with jaws that are modifi ed to engulf and swallow large 
prey items, although some groups of snakes such as blind 
snakes are exceptions. Many snakes also are venomous; but 
an even larger number of species are relatively harmless. 
Moreover, the Gila Monster lizard also can envenomate 
prey, and the saliva of varanid lizards is toxic. Th us, we need 
to look at still more characters.    
 Snakes are unlike other reptiles in that the skin un-
dergoes synchronous shedding cycles in which the entire 
outer epidermis is sloughed from the body all at one time. 
Th e underlying cycle of epidermal renewal occurs also in 
other  lepidosaurs —snakes, lizards, amphisbaenians, and 
tuatara—but the old generation of snake epidermis is typi-
cally shed as one sheet and at one time, instead of in pieces. 
Exceptions sometime occur in dehydrated, stressed, or older 
and larger snakes, which may shed patches of skin (see also 
discussion of blind snakes below). Normal whole-body 
 ecdysis (skin shedding), however, is one of the earliest phe-
nomenological observations about snakes and is another dis-
tinct and ubiquitous characteristic of these reptiles ( fi g.  1.6  ). 
Some amphibians might also slough the epidermis all at 
once, but the shed skin does not consist of scales like that of 
snakes. Also, in snakes there is a vertical alternation of syn-
thesized keratin proteins known as  α and  β during the re-
newal of epidermis in shedding cycles (see  chapter  5 ). Only in 
snakes and in other lepidosaurs is this vertical alternation of 
keratins expressed throughout life over the entire body. 
 Th e more we examine features of snakes, the more we 
appreciate that a number of characteristics are shared with 
other vertebrates, whereas some characters are unique at-
tributes of snakes. Th e shared attributes suggest relation-
ships during evolutionary history, whereas the unique 
attributes evolved exclusively in the group in question and 
are said to be  derived . All of these features have been useful in 
classifying snakes among living organisms in a manner that 
refl ects their evolutionary history, and such a classifi cation is 
refl ected in a branching structure called a  phylogenetic tree . 
Increasingly, molecular data related to genetic structure and 
 
 
 Figure 1.1.   Photograph of a reproduced antique print from the late 
19th century (1890–1899) featuring cobras and a rat snake eating a 
rodent. Original sources include Warne and Co. Ltd. (1895) and “Royal 
Natural History” by Richard Lydekker (1896).  
 
 
 Figure 1.2.   Comparison of the external characters on the head of a 
snake and a lizard. The  upper photo is of a Herald Snake 
( Crotaphopeltis hoamboeia ), which is an African colubrid. The  lower 
photo features a legless Eastern Glass Lizard ( Ophisaurus ventralis ). 
Note that unlike the snake, the glass lizard has eyelids (white arrows) 
and an external ear opening (black arrow), whereas the only external 
opening on the head of the snake is the nostril that is visible near the 
snout. Photographs by the author. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  5 
biochemical properties are used, sometimes in combination 
with the observable structures (or phenotype), to resolve 
details of the phylogeny. Th is subject will be elaborated in 
the next section of this chapter. 
 Back to the question: What is a snake? We can describe a 
snake using a list of characters that confer specifi city when 
considered collectively. We may call this an informal descrip-
tion that has utility when one is inspecting a newly found an-
imal and wants to decide whether or not it is a snake. Th e other 
way in which the question can be answered is by what I call a 
formal defi nition. In order to understand the more formal 
approach, we need fi rst to consider the evolutionary history 
of snakes and their relationships with other vertebrates.   
 Evolutionary History of Snakes  
 Th ere is great diffi  culty in determining the evolutionary 
history of snakes, including the origins and classifi cation of 
currently living species. Th ere are many reasons why this is 
so. Th e fossil record of snakes is quite scattered and scanty, 
and piecing together the origins of snakes is diffi  cult without 
a more complete record. Furthermore, many specimens are 
either poorly preserved or incomplete, and there are few re-
searchers who study the material. When characteristics of 
snakes are considered—including fossil and living forms—
human judgments and personalities sometime lead to dis-
agreement when it comes to forming hard conclusions. With 
respect to living species, there are more characters to be con-
sidered than what is present in fossilized material, including 
internal organs, coloration, DNA, proteins, and other prop-
erties of tissues. But again, disagreements can emerge when 
diff erent people examine diff erent characters and attempt to 
construct an evolutionary tree. Indeed, the classifi cation of 
living snakes has been fraught with disagreement and con-
troversy. What follows is an assessment of our current state 
of knowledge concerning these subjects.  
 Fossils and Origins 
 Snakes are unquestionably  tetrapods , which are four-limbed 
vertebrates including amphibians, reptiles (including 
birds), and mammals. Th us, snakes represent a specialized 
branch of vertebrates that descended from limbed ances-
tors. Representatives of some snake families possess ves-
tiges of a pelvic girdle or posterior limbs, although in living 
snakes the pelvic girdle has lost direct contact with the ver-
tebral column or is absent altogether. Th e vestigial elements 
that are present in living snakes are greatly reduced bones 
representing the femur and/or pelvis. In male specimens 
of boas and pythons these are associated with external pro-
trusions of keratinized tissue called  spurs (see  chapter  9 , 
 fi g.  9.21 ). Th ere is no trace of forelimbs or an anterior limb 
girdle in either living or fossil snakes.       
 Most paleontologists believe that reptiles shared a 
common ancestor with a prominent group of extinct am-
phibians known as labyrinthodonts, named for a distinc-
tive structure of teeth having complexly infolded enamel. 
Th ese ancient tetrapods comprised a diverse group of ani-
mals that lived during the Paleozoic era more than 300 mil-
lion years ago ( fi g.  1.7 ). It is not clear from which group of 
labyrinthodont amphibians the reptiles evolved, and there 
might well have been multiple origins from ancient am-
phibians that appeared to be developing reptilian charac-
teristics. Th e oldest known fossils that are defi nitely 
recognized as reptiles are from small animals resembling 
lizards and classifi ed as cotylosaurs, also called the “stem 
reptiles” ( fi g.  1.8 ). Th ese ancient reptiles are believed to be 
ancestral to all the taxa of reptiles that are living on the 
earth today. Th e cotylosaurs appeared fi rst during the late 
Carboniferous or early Permian period over 275 million 
years ago. Subsequently these early reptiles diversified 
and gave rise to lineages that produced turtles, dinosaurs, 
mammals, crocodilians, birds, tuatara, and the modern liz-
ards and snakes (Squamata). 
 
 
 Figure 1.3.   The  upper photo features a fully articulated skeleton of 
a water snake ( Nerodia spp.), photographed by Phil Nicodemo. The 
 lower photo shows a segment of the vertebral column of a Florida 
Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ). Each pair of ribs 
articulate with processes on the vertebrae.  See also ﬁ g.  3.2 for further 
details. Skeleton courtesy of the Florida Museum of Natural History, 
photographed by the author. 

 6  | How Snakes Work
 Th e oldest fossil snakes come from the middle of the Cre-
taceous period roughly 70 to 95 million years ago. Fossil 
snakes are by no means abundant, and the historical record 
is incomplete, as is the case with many other vertebrates. 
Sometimes the fossil consists of only a few ribs or vertebrae, 
or other bones, and a proper interpretation can be quite 
challenging. For example, one of the earliest fossils thought 
to be a snake later proved to share some characters that also 
existed in Cretaceous lizards and is no longer regarded as a 
snake. Th e oldest unequivocal snakes have a snakelike verte-
bral column with evidence of limbs. A fossil snake named 
 Najash rionegrina , recently discovered in Argentina’s Rio Ne-
gro province, has a primitive pelvis and legs that were pre-
sumably functional outside the rib cage. It is purported to be 
the earliest limbed snake to be found in a terrestrial deposit. 
Th e skeletal structure of this snake appears to be closer to 
that of a quadrupedal ancestor than is that of previous fos-
sils, but the closest ancestor remains unknown. 
 Because  Najash rionegrina was found in a terrestrial de-
posit, it supports the hypothesis that snakes evolved on 
land. Th e idea that snakes evolved from terrestrial ances-
tors, eventually losing their limbs after they adopted habits 
of burrowing in soil, was popular for most of the 20th cen-
tury and enjoys considerable support. Th e skull of snakes 
resembles that of lizards with respect to certain features, 
for example a moveable quadrate bone at the rear of the 
jaw and the absence of a quadratojugal bone at the rear of 
the skull. Snakes probably evolved during the Jurassic—
perhaps 150 million years ago—however, there are currently 
no fossils dating back that far. During the early Cretaceous 
(about 120 million years ago) these early snakes radiated 
into a number of forms, including some that were aquatic 
and some that were terrestrial. Both terrestrial and aquatic 
species of snakes existed in the mid-Cretaceous (about 95 
million years ago), and there is still debate about which type 
evolved fi rst. 
 
 
 Figure 1.4.    Some vertebrate animals that people might mistake for a snake.  Upper left: An Eastern Glass Lizard ( Ophisaurus ventralis ) is a 
legless anguid lizard common in the eastern United States. Photograph by the author.  Upper right: A Florida Worm Lizard ( Rhineura ﬂ oridana ), 
which is an amphisbaenid squamate and not a true lizard. This is a subterranean species, characterized by having degenerated eyes, a blunt 
worm-like tail, and a rigid head that helps it burrow its way through soil. Photograph by the author.  Lower left: Burton’s Snake Lizard ( Lialis 
burtonis ) is a legless gekkonid lizard that lives in Australia. Photograph by the author.  Lower right: A species of eel ( Myrichthys colubrinus ) 
that very closely resembles a banded sea snake that also lives in its habitat. This specimen was photographed in Bali, Indonesia, by John E. 
Randall, Bishop Museum, Hawaii. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  7 
 Some of the earliest fossil snakes are marine forms that 
have been unearthed in 95-million-year-old marine deposits 
in North Africa, the Middle East, and eastern Europe. One 
of these possesses a complete hind limb that extends be-
yond the body wall, but is certainly a snake. Th us, some sci-
entists argue that snakes lost their limbs in the ocean 
instead of on land, the immediate ancestors being now-
extinct marine lizards called  mosasaurs ( fi g.  1.8 ). Fossils 
identifi ed in marine environments are at least 8 million 
years older than are those from terrestrial deposits. Th e 
question of “Who came fi rst?” may never be resolved with 
universal consensus. And, of course, both of these alternative 
evolutionary scenarios might have played out in ancient 
times roughly in parallel. If this was the case, the marine 
forms probably died out and the current lineages of snakes 
evolved from the terrestrial ancestors. DNA sequencing and 
other data suggest that the living lineages of snakes have a 
 monophyletic origin, which means they all evolved from a 
single common ancestor or ancestral lineage. 
 Studies of fossil snakes and their comparisons with ana-
tomical features of modern reptiles have led a number of 
scientists to suggest that snakes evolved from a family of 
lizards during the time when dinosaurs were prominent. 
Varanid lizards (monitor lizards or goannas) are very sim-
ilar to snakes in the structure of the skull, sensory systems, 
and also other features. Th e Earless Monitor ( Lanthanotus 
borneensis ) of Borneo, Indonesia, has movable eyelids, but 
the lower lid bears a clear “window” resembling the snake’s 
eyecap. As its name implies, the Earless Monitor lacks an 
external ear, just as in snakes, and also exhibits a number 
of snakelike features in the architecture of its skull. Based 
on such similarities, some scientists have theorized that 
ancient lizards related to monitors adopted a burrowing 
mode of life, tunneling through loose dirt or sand as do a 
number of lizard species today. In this manner, a number of 
features characteristic of snakes evolved, such as reduction 
and eventual loss of limbs and external ears, and the devel-
opment of a spectacle to protect the eyes while moving 
through earth. Th e various descendants of these burrowing 
forms diversifi ed and radiated into terrestrial habitats af-
ter emerging from a subterranean lifestyle to exploit a va-
riety of terrestrial niches. Once the limbs were lost during 
the subterranean existence, they were not regained by 
“reversals” in the other environments. Rather, the limbless 
creatures we call snakes evolved many specializations and 
marvelous means of living without arms or legs. 
 It is interesting to note that numerous losses and reduc-
tions of limbs have occurred during vertebrate evolution, 
including many species of skinks and other reptiles beside 
snakes. Th e loss of limbs and elongation of the trunk of 
snakes is related to changes in the expression of genes called 
 Hox genes. Th ese genes are known to control development 
 
 
 Figure 1.5.    The eyes of snakes are covered with a spectacle or brille. 
The  upper photo features the eye of a Florida Cottonmouth 
( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ) photographed by the author. The 
facial pit, an infrared thermal imaging receptor, and the nostril are also 
easily seen. This snake is largely nocturnal and has a vertically 
elliptical pupil. The  lower photo features the relatively large eye 
and round pupil of a Speckled Racer ( Drymobius margaritiferus ), a 
diurnally active forager. Note the complete absence of any sort of 
eyelid or covering at the edges of the pupil. Compare this photograph 
with that of the lizard that is featured in  ﬁ g.  1.2 . The racer was 
photographed in Belize by Dan Dourson.  
 
 
 Figure 1.6.    Shed skin from a Gaboon Adder ( Bitis gabonica , inset) 
showing dorsal scales and ventral scutes separated by interscale 
tissue. The shed skin is epidermis from the entire body surface, intact 
and inside out as it “peels” from the snake and subsequently dries. 
Photographs by the author. 

 8  | How Snakes Work
by specifying embryonic cell division along the long axis of the 
body and determine limb development and specifi c bound-
aries of related morphological changes. Martin Cohn and 
Cheryll Tickle have shown that the patterns of Hox gene ex-
pression along the body axis in developing embryos of py-
thons accounts for the absence of forelimbs and the expansion 
of the thoracic axial skeleton. Th ese authors also suggested 
that the failure of signaling pathways to activate the develop-
ment of limbs might be related to changes in the expression of 
Hox genes during the early evolution of snakes.  
 The Concept of Phylogeny  
 Phylogeny  refers to an evolutionary history of species, or a 
group of species, and is represented by a branching diagram. 
Such a diagram is called a dendrogram, cladogram, pheno-
gram, or tree, depending on the methods used to construct 
the diagram and the information content it is intended to 
convey. For our purposes we will call such a diagram simply 
a  phylogeny or  tree . Scientists use many alternative methods, 
indeed incorporating even entire philosophies, for building 
a phylogenetic tree. Th e process involves reconstructing 
 
 
 Figure 1.7.   Geologic time scale with nomenclature for major units of time in millions of years before the 
present. The ﬁ gure illustrates the major units of geological time related to deﬁ nitive events of the Earth’s history. 
The animal cartoons to the right of the table indicate approximate times of radiation and dominance, not the 
earliest points of origin. Cartoons by Dan Dourson.  

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  9 
evolutionary events, inferred from changes in  character states 
(diff erent forms of the same character) represented by dif-
ferent taxa or lineages. Various characters are used, usually 
depicting  phenotypic traits  such as anatomical features, or 
molecular data such as properties of proteins or DNA. Phe-
notypic traits are observable features that are expressed 
from the genetic makeup of an organism. Molecular data are 
increasingly being used to reconstruct evolutionary histories, 
and recent technological advances in genetics and genomics 
have greatly enriched the data base and helped to produce 
many new and sometimes radical changes in phylogenetic 
trees. Th is is true for many organisms, not just snakes.  
 A tree-shaped branching diagram conveys potentially 
two kinds of information: the tree  topology , or sequential 
order in which the taxa branch from one another, and the 
lengths of the individual branches ( fi g.  1.9 ). Typically, the 
length of a branch on a tree is scaled as proportional to trait 
changes, commonly expressed using molecular data as the 
number of mutations in a genetic sequence. Hence, species 
evolving at diff erent rates will have unequal branch lengths. 
If such empirical data are not available, branch lengths may 
be represented in terms of relative time, or constructed 
from evolutionary models. Th e branching order is deter-
mined from phylogenetic methods that estimate or infer 
ancestral phenotypes from characters studied in living spe-
cies. Th e methods are used to optimize character states at 
internal nodes (branching points) of the tree, which are hy-
pothesized to represent speciation events. Comparison of 
trait values at ancestral and descendant nodes of the tree 
allow the history of phenotypic changes to be traced. 
 Species descend from each other in a hierarchical 
 fashion—that is, a branching or treelike process of specia-
tion. So character evolution is regarded as a process of his-
torical transformation from a primitive to a derived state. 
 Primitive or  ancestral  traits are characteristics that resemble 
ancestral or early conditions, whereas  derived  traits are those 
 
 
 Figure 1.8.    The  upper drawing illustrates a  cotylosaur , 
representing one of the earliest families of reptiles. Cotylosaurs were 
small lizard-like reptiles that date from the late Carboniferous through 
the Permian (see  ﬁ g.  1.7 ), and they have sometimes been called “stem 
reptiles” or “root reptiles” in reference to their basal position in 
reptilian phylogeny. The  lower drawing depicts an extinct marine 
lizard known as a  mosasaur . These reptiles were powerful swimmers 
and well adapted to living in the warm, shallow seas that were 
prevalent during the late Cretaceous period. Mosasaurs probably 
evolved from semiaquatic squamates and have a body shape that is 
similar to that of modern terrestrial monitor lizards (varanids), except 
for being longer and streamlined for swimming. Mosasaurs are 
considered to be close relatives to snakes, judged from analysis of the 
jaw and skull anatomy. Drawings by Dan Dourson.  
 
 
 Figure 1.9.    Hypothetical phylogeny of several taxa of snakes, 
illustrating variation in topology and lengths of branches for different 
taxa. The scale of time is relative and arbitrary. Alternate scales (with 
more variable branch lengths) could be expressed in terms of genetic 
substitutions assuming availability of molecular data. Two examples 
of sister taxa are represented by pairs of the letter “s” above the two 
respective branches. Drawing by Coleman Sheehy III and the author.  

 10  | How Snakes Work
that have undergone change (phenotypic or molecular) from 
the ancestral condition in relatively recent time. Th us, char-
acter evolution is perceived as trait change on a tree. 
 Because species descend from common ancestors in a hier-
archical fashion, closely related species tend to resemble each 
other more than they do distantly related species. Traits can 
be shared among species through common descent (called  ho-
mology ) or by independent origin (called  convergence or  homo-
plasy ). Homologous characters are ones that are inherited 
from a shared common ancestor, whereas homoplastic char-
acters are convergent because of similar functional pressures 
and natural selection. Th us, two species that are unrelated 
might resemble each other in some character simply because 
of similar selection pressures in similar kinds of environ-
ments. For example, two independent lineages of sea snakes 
both evolved a paddle-shaped tail that is used as an aid in 
swimming. Th ese structures represent two independent 
origins of the same character (see  fi g.  3.8 ). Within each group, 
however, paddle-shaped tails are inherited through separate 
lineages; each can be traced to a common ancestor, and 
they are therefore homologous. Th e concept extends to other 
character states, including color and behavior (see below). 
 Many persons will assume that the value of phylogenetic 
trees is simply to provide a picture image of how snakes are 
related as part of understanding their evolutionary history. 
Indeed, this is the intention implicit in this conceptual 
overview and the more detailed discussion that follows in 
the next sections of this chapter. However, the reader 
should also appreciate that phylogenetic trees are being 
used in concert with evolutionary approaches using com-
parative data to study the evolution of various characters 
ranging from molecular and biochemical features to attrib-
utes of morphology, physiology, and behavior. Indeed, a 
richer understanding of how snakes or other organisms 
work is growing from an interdisciplinary approach to evo-
lutionary questions using tools from both phylogenetics 
and comparative anatomy or physiology. 
 Classiﬁ cation and Phylogeny of the 
World’s Snakes  
 Deciphering the evolutionary relationships among the 
world’s snakes has been very challenging for scientists. 
Constructing a phylogeny can be time-consuming and ex-
pensive, and is subject to error, reinterpretation, and con-
troversy. Certain groups of snakes, such as the speciose 
colubrids (Colubridae) have been especially problematical, 
and there remains disagreement and many questions about 
the details of relationships. 
 From a long-standing conventional viewpoint, snakes 
are classifi ed in the class Reptilia (reptiles), which includes 
all the ectothermic animals with dry scaly skin. By this 
criterion, reptiles include the traditional divisions into tua-
taras, turtles, crocodilians, snakes, and lizards. In recent 
years, however, most taxonomists have begun to agree that 
natural groups, or  taxa , should be monophyletic to include 
all the descendants of a particular ancestral form. By this 
convention, “reptiles” (or the class Reptilia) would include 
all birds because it is clear that birds and crocodilians are 
sister taxa ( fi g.  1.10 ). Th us, traditional members of the class 
“Reptilia” are often now referred to as “non-avian reptiles” 
to emphasize the close relationship between crocodilians and 
birds. For clarity and ease of understanding, however, we 
shall consider snakes as part of the traditional class Reptilia 
and refer to them simply as reptiles. 
 As part of the reptiles, snakes comprise a  clade or mono-
phyletic lineage within the order Squamata, which also in-
cludes lizards and amphisbaenians. Th e latter are essentially 
highly derived lizards. Amphisbaenians are elongate and gen-
erally limbless, and they are characterized by heavily ossifi ed 
skulls that are modifi ed for subterranean digging ( fi g.  1.4 ). 
All squamates are characterized by generally prominent and 
obvious scalation, and they share some other characteristics 
as well. Th e tuataras of New Zealand, which superfi cially 
 
Amphibians
Mammals
Turtles
Lizards
Amphisbaenians
Snakes
Tuatara
Lepidosauria
Squamata
Crocodilians
Reptilia
Birds
 
 Figure 1.10.   Phylogenic tree illustrating a schematic representation 
of the evolution of vertebrates. The vertical bars at the right-hand side 
of ﬁ gure encompass clades that are identiﬁ ed to the left: Squamata, 
Lepidosauria, and Reptilia (in reverse hierarchical order). Drawing by 
Coleman M. Sheehy III and the author. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  11 
resemble lizards, belong to a separate and ancient order that 
is a sister taxon to the Squamata having a separate evolu-
tionary history. Collectively, all snakes are classifi ed as a sub-
order of Squamata, called Ophidia or Serpentes. Hence, when 
people speak or write about “ophidians” (or use this term as a 
descriptor), they are referring to snakes. 
 Th e following discussion is an attempt to summarize 
what is currently known about these relationships, with 
emphasis on broad patterns rather than details and hard-
ened opinions about alternate classifi cation schemes. Th us, 
one may well consider the relationships to be a work in pro-
gress. What is important is for the reader to acquire an ap-
preciation for the diversity and marvelous adaptations that 
characterize snakes as a living and successful group of ver-
tebrates. Some lineages contain only one or a few species, 
while others are extremely rich and include hundreds of 
species. Th ere is evidence from the fossil record which indi-
cates that some groups were more diverse in the past, so the 
present diversity has been impacted by past extinctions. 
Let’s now explore the living diversity of snakes. 
 Scolecophidia: The Blind Snakes  
 Th e Scolecophidia, technically an infraorder or superfamily, 
represents one branch of a primary dichotomy of snakes. 
Th is is a monophyletic group of snakes consisting of three 
families: Leptotyphlopidae, known as thread snakes, worm 
snakes, or blind snakes; Typhlopidae, also called blind snakes; 
and Anomalepididae, also called blind snakes or dawn blind 
snakes. All of the snakes classifi ed within these families—a 
little over 300 species—are considered to be evolved from a 
common ancestral form. Th is conclusion is inferred largely 
from possession of common characters unlike those of other 
snakes, including features of the skull, eyes, and soft anatomy. 
Th e collective vernacular name of blind snakes is derived 
from the eyes being reduced or vestigial—usually buried 
beneath the head scales—and in some species absent entirely 
or reduced to small patches of dark pigment ( fi g.  1.11 ). 
 Collectively, Scolecophidians resemble each other in 
having uniformly smooth scales encircling the body with-
out enlargement of the ventral scales as in other snakes. 
Th e skin is smooth and shiny, adheres tightly around a cy-
lindrical body, and sometimes separates into discrete mul-
tiple rings of sloughed epidermis during skin shedding. Th is 
feature is unlike other snakes in which the outer generation 
of epidermis is shed generally as one entire piece. Whereas 
the skin of snakes is generally without glands, some species 
of blind snakes possess numerous small glands in the skin 
covering the head. 
 Blind snakes generally have rounded or blunt heads as well 
as blunt tails, the latter often tipped with a harmless spine 
( fi g.  1.11 ). Members of Typhlopidae and Leptotyphlopidae 
have a remnant pelvic girdle, but this is variably lacking in the 
Anomalepididae. Some leptotyphlopid species in Africa pos-
sess external spurs. Th e skulls are highly modifi ed and quite 
peculiar in some species. Typically, the small, curved mouth is 
set well below the snout, somewhat like that of a shark, and 
some species have enlarged, shovel-like or sharpened snouts 
that presumably facilitate digging. Th e rostral scale is en-
larged and sometimes covers much of the anterior head 
( fi g.  1.11 ). Th e two lower jaws are attached anteriorly, a 
character state that is similar to most other vertebrates but 
unlike other snakes. Some worm snakes (Leptotyphlopidae) 
possess relatively large teeth on the lower jaws while lacking 
teeth on the upper jaws, whereas others (Typhlopidae) have 
teeth only on the upper jaws or on both upper and lower jaws 
(Anomalepididae). Little is known about the functional 
biology of worm snakes, but one recent study describes an 
unusual manner of feeding (see  chapter  2 ). 
 Blind snakes are nonvenomous and harmless, although 
when aroused they often emit a strong and off ensive odor 
related to secretions from well-developed musk glands lo-
cated in the base of the tail. Th ese secretions might assist 
aggregation behaviors in addition to defensive functions. 
Chemical stimuli as well as the sensory capacity for re-
sponse are probably very important to these animals, which 
have weak or no vision and live in a world where vision is 
not very useful. 
 Th ese snakes are typically small, and so they have been 
diffi  cult to study. Some species are less than 2 mm wide in 
body girth and weigh less than a single gram. Th e group in-
cludes the world’s smallest snake— Leptotyphlops carlae —
discovered by Blair Hedges in June 2006 on the Caribbean 
island of Barbados. Fully grown adults of this species stretch 
less than 10 cm and can coil upon a coin the size of a US 
 
 
 Figure 1.11.   A Brahminy Blind Snake ( Rhamphotyphlops braminus , 
Leptotyphlopidae), sometimes called Flowerpot Blind Snake, 
photographed in India by Indraneil Das. The head is shown in the 
inset. Note the enlarged rostral scale, rounded snout, smooth scales, 
degenerative eyes, and short blunt tail.  

 12  | How Snakes Work
quarter ( fi g.  1.12  ). Larger species of blind snakes generally 
range in length up to about 40–41 cm, but several species 
measure more than 60 cm, and there are two unusual species 
of blind snakes reaching lengths approaching 80 cm. Th e body 
color of most species is generally brown, pink, or black. Be-
cause of their colors and long, thin appearance, some species 
of blind snakes are also called worm snakes or thread snakes. 
 Owing to their small size and tendencies to burrow, 
blind snakes are diffi  cult to fi nd. Th ey feed on several life 
history stages of social insects. Many species prey on the 
larvae and pupae of ants or termites, so the probability of 
fi nding them increases greatly inside ant or termite nests. 
All species burrow, and most spend much of their time in 
deep, loose soil, only to be seen when found by fl ipping logs 
or rocks, or when crawling on the surface of the soil at night 
and especially after rainfall. Th ey also emerge following 
saturating rainfall that can fl ood their subterranean homes. 
Th e Flowerpot Blind Snake ( Ramphotyphlops braminus , 
 fi g.  1.11 ) is so named because it is often transported from 
location to location in garden soil or plant debris. Although 
scolecophidians are characteristically fossorial, some species 
live among roots of tree ferns, while others crawl over veg-
etation at night and are occasionally found several meters 
above ground. Interestingly, blind snakes can sometimes be 
found in the nests of large birds, where they are apparently 
brought by the parents to feed the chicks, inadvertently or 
not. Blind snakes are found in the Americas, from south-
western United States southward to Uruguay and Argen-
tina, and they also occur in parts of the Caribbean, Europe, 
Africa, southwestern Asia, and Australia. 
 Blind snakes reproduce by laying eggs, and the female 
Texas Blind Snake ( Leptotyphlops dulcis ) coils around her eggs 
and shivers like some pythons to elevate temperatures during 
egg incubation. Th is is an extraordinary feat considering the 
small size of these snakes! Equally fascinating, the Flowerpot 
Blind Snake is the only snake that is known to be  parthenoge-
netic . Th is is a unisexual species in which eggs develop with-
out being fertilized by sperm. Probably most blind snakes are 
 oviparous and reproduce by laying eggs, but Diard’s Blind-
snake ( Typhlops diardii ) is possibly  viviparous (live bearing) in 
some parts of Asia. Again, because of their secretive habits, 
much more remains to be learned about the reproduction, 
behavior, and ecology of this primitive group of snakes. 
 Th e systematics and ecology of blind snakes are very 
poorly known in comparison with other terrestrial verte-
brates. Th ey are the closest relatives of all other snakes 
(Alethinophidia). A recent molecular study of the Lepto-
typhlopidae suggests that living lineages diversifi ed as early 
as the mid-Cretaceous (~ 100 Ma), infl uenced by the breakup 
of continents. Th e diversity of species appears to be much 
greater than is currently recognized, and new species are 
continually being discovered all over the world.  
 Alethinophidia: The “Modern Lineages”  
 Th is grouping of snakes is the second branch in the basal 
dichotomy of the world’s snakes. Th ese are so-called true 
snakes or advanced snakes and include all of the modern 
lineages except for the Scolecophidia. Within this large group 
of snakes there is a primary dichotomy between what some 
call Henophidia (formerly Booidea) and Xenophidia, or Cae-
nophidia (formerly called Colubroidea). Th e former group, 
henophidians, include dwarf pipe snakes, pipe snakes, shield-
tail snakes, sunbeam snakes, boas, and pythons. All of these 
are relatively basal lineages within the Alethinophidia. Th e 
remaining more advanced snakes, Caenophidia, include the 
well-known colubrids, elapids, and viperids; the lesser known 
homalopsids, lamprophiids, pareatids, and xenodermatids; 
 
 
 Figure 1.12.   The  upper photo shows the world’s smallest species 
of snake,  Leptotyphlops carlae , the Barbados Threadsnake. This 
diminutive species was discovered in 2006 on the Caribbean island of 
Barbados. The species is less than 10 cm (4 inches) in length. 
Photograph by S. Blair Hedges. The  lower photo features a juvenile 
Black Threadsnake,  Leptopyphlops ater , photographed by the author 
in Guanacaste, Costa Rica. The 50 colones coin in this photograph 
measures 2.7 cm in diameter and is 3 mm wider than the US quarter. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  13 
plus the acrochordids, which are sister to all the others. 
Th e position of the Acrochordidae is now fairly well accepted, 
and the sister caenophidians collectively comprise the 
Colubroidea in current terminology. We begin with a dis-
cussion of the more basal groups.  
 Henophidia: The Basal Lineages  
    Several taxa of basal lineages are collectively referred to by 
many herpetologists as “pipe snakes.” So-called dwarf pipe 
snakes (family Anomochilidae) were once considered to be 
transitional between the blind snakes and the other alethi-
nophidians, but this supposition is no longer supported by 
molecular studies (see below). Th ere are three species of 
dwarf pipe snakes—also called “stump heads”—known from 
Indonesia and all belonging to a single genus,  Anomochilus 
( fi g.  1.13 ). We have very little knowledge about the natural 
history and functional biology of these animals. Historically, 
these snakes have long been associated with other pipe 
snakes, but they appear to be a sister taxon to other alethi-
nophidians and thus have been placed in their own family.  
 Th e other pipe snakes include a single neotropical species 
( fi g.  1.14  ) belonging to its own family, Aniliidae, and nine spe-
cies of Asian pipe snakes belonging to the family Cylindrophi-
idae ( fi g.  1.15 ). Pipe snakes are small to medium-size snakes, 
ranging in length from roughly 0.5 to 1 m. Th ey are generally 
somewhat stouter than blind snakes, possess smooth scales, 
rounded heads, and short, blunt tails. Th e head is no wider 
than the neck; the eyes are degenerated and diminutive. Pipe 
snakes are usually dark brown to black and may have colorful 
yellow or reddish bands, which can be pale and diffi  cult to see. 
Th e neotropical Red Pipe Snake,  Anilius scytale , is colorful, 
and to some—most importantly potential predators—it re-
sembles a coral snake ( fi g.  1.14 ; see  chapter  5 ). 
 Pipe snakes burrow in loose soil or vegetation, like blind 
snakes, and are strong diggers. Th ey inhabit lowland forests 
near sources of water and can be common at rice paddies 
and other places that are disturbed by humans. Prey items 
are constricted and consist of elongated animals such as 
eels, lizards, and other snakes. Captive snakes also eat small 
mice and fi sh. Defensive behaviors include fl attening the 
body and waving a curled tail to show its colorful underside 
while hiding the head beneath part of the body. When 
touched or attacked, pipe snakes emit a foul-smelling secre-
tion from their postcloacal musk glands. Th ese snakes are 
viviparous and give birth to living young. 
 The family Uropeltidae contains almost 50 species of 
small snakes (15–40 cm) called shield-tail snakes, inhab-
iting Sri Lanka and southern India. These snakes are 
highly specialized burrowers that are closely related to 
the pipe snakes, which they are sometimes called. The 
head is conical, more slender than the trunk, and often 
bears a distinct keel ( fig.  1.15 ). The tail is blunt and in 
many species bears a single large scale that is roughened 
at the very end of the snake. The tail collects a plug of 
dirt or mud and protects the snake when it is inside a 
tunnel. The anterior body musculature is specialized 
structurally and biochemically for sustained burrowing. 
These muscles together with the vertebral column and 
viscera move relative to the skin and thus allow these 
snakes to use a portion of the body to anchor within a 
tunnel while the head and anterior body move forward. 
The head is then used to enlarge and compact the sides of 
the tunnel by moving from side to side, after which it an-
chors while the posterior body is dragged forward to find 
a new point of friction anchor. Most species of uropeltids 
are poorly known and unstudied, while others are quite 
common. These interesting snakes are thought to eat 
earthworms, and most or possibly all reproduce by giving 
birth to live young.  
 Two other small families are known as sunbeam snakes 
because of their highly iridescent scales. Th ese are the 
Loxocemidae and Xenopeltidae. Th e Loxocemidae has a 
single species, the Mexican Burrowing Python ( Loxocemus 
bicolor ,  fi g.  1.16 ), which grows to a length of about 1 m, lives 
a secretive and burrowing lifestyle in forests, but emerges 
at night (often during heavy rains) to forage on small mam-
mals and other reptiles.  Loxocemus ranges along the Pacifi c 
coast of Mexico and Central America. Th is species is ovipa-
rous and oviposits small clutches of relatively large eggs. 
Th e Xenopeltidae includes two species of Asian sunbeam 
snakes in the genus  Xenopeltis  that grow to a length of just 
a little more than 1 m. Th ey live in burrows or beneath logs 
or vegetation, and they prey on various small animals in-
cluding other snakes. Like  Loxocemus , these snakes lay 
eggs. Several studies place the families Loxocemidae and 
Xenopeltidae as sister taxa, and both of these taxa as sister 
to the pythons.    
 
 
 Figure 1.13.   A recently described species of pipe snake, 
 Anomochilus monticola , photographed in Borneo by Indraneil Das. 

 14  | How Snakes Work
 Boas and Pythons: Big Is Beautiful  
 Th e boas and pythons are snakes that are well known be-
cause of their popularity in movies, storybooks, and the 
current pet trade. Th ey are simultaneously loathed and 
loved for being large, and clearly certain boas and pythons 
represent the world’s largest snakes. Th e Reticulated Py-
thon ( Broghammerus reticulatus ; formerly  Python reticula-
tus ) of Southeast Asia is probably the world’s longest living 
snake and grows to maximum length of about 10 m (al-
though most specimens are no longer than 6 m) ( fi g.  1.17 ). 
South American anacondas are probably the world’s 
heaviest snake, if the measure is relative mass. Wild Green 
Anacondas ( Eunectes murinus ) can grow to lengths of about 
5 m and weigh up to 45 kg ( fi g.  1.18 ). Th ere are reports of 
longer and heavier anacondas, but their validity is ques-
tionable. Since the early 1900s the Wildlife Conservation 
 
 
 Figure 1.14.    The  upper photo features a beautiful Red Pipe Snake ( Anilius scytale )—also called a False Coral Snake—photographed in 
the Mato Grosso, Brazil. This is the only species currently recognized in the monotypic family Aniliidae. It possesses a pair of cloacal spurs, 
presumably representing a vestigial pelvic girdle. The  lower photos feature the head of  A. scytale , which is somewhat ﬂ attened and 
shows diminutive eyes. This specimen is from Pará, Brazil. All photographs are courtesy of Laurie J. Vitt. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  15 
Society has off ered a cash reward, currently about US 
$50,000, for any snake that is 30 or more feet in length 
(≥ 9.1 m). To date, no one has been able to claim this prize. 
Th e largest fossil snake,  Titanoboa cerrejonensis , is related to 
boas and was discovered recently in Colombia beneath an 
open pit coal mine ( fi g.  1.19 ). Th is snake measured nearly 13 
m and weighed in excess of one ton (1,135 kg)! It is from a 
neotropical rainforest dating 58–60 million years ago. Th is 
snake could have been the largest nonmarine vertebrate 
living at a time when the Earth was recovering from the 
mass extinction of dinosaurs. 
 Boas and pythons are classifi ed into three or four sepa-
rate families depending on one’s view of the classifi cation 
scheme. Th ese snakes were previously classifi ed as a single 
family, but clearly they represent two to four independent 
lineages that diverged from ancestral snakes leading to the 
Caenophidia. Th e largest living snakes are boas and pythons 
that inhabit the tropics of South America and Southeast 
Asia. However, not all species of boas and pythons are large. 
 An assemblage of about 21 species of relatively small 
snakes called dwarf boas are contained in the family Tropi-
dophiidae, distributed in Middle America (Central America 
including tropical Mexico and northern South America), Ca-
ribbean islands, and Malaysia. Th ese snakes grow to a max-
imum length of about 1m, but most species are 30–50 cm and 
usually moderately slender with a somewhat enlarged head. 
 Another species of boa ( Casarea dussumieri ) is placed 
in the family Bolyeridae, confi ned to Round Island near 
 
 
 Figure 1.15.   The  upper photo shows the underside of a Red-tailed 
Pipe Snake ( Cylindrophis rufus ) photographed by the author in 
Thailand. This is a burrowing snake found throughout many parts of 
Southeast Asia. The scales are smooth and shiny. The tail is blunt and 
pointed with variable red coloration and is used defensively to deter 
predators. The  lower photo features a head view of a shield-tailed 
snake (Blyth’s Earth Snake,  Rhinophis blythii ). This is a burrowing 
snake, like other species of uropeltids, and it exhibits specializations 
for a fossorial life. The head and skull are primitive and inﬂ exible, with 
a rigid jaw, pointed snout, and degenerative eyes that lie beneath a 
head shield lacking a spectacle. This is a preserved specimen from Sri 
Lanka photographed by John C. Murphy. 
 
 
 Figure 1.16.   A Mexican Burrowing Python ( Loxocemus bicolor ) 
photographed by the author at Palo Verde Field Station, Guanacaste, 
Costa Rica. Note the smooth scales, stout body, and enlarged rostral 
scale. 
 
 
 Figure 1.17.   A recently described subspecies of Reticulated Python 
( Broghammerus reticulatus jampeanus ) from Jampea Island in the 
Flores Sea. This is the ﬁ rst adult wild-caught specimen in captivity, 
measuring ﬁ ve feet in length. Photograph by David Barker. 

 16  | How Snakes Work
Mauritius in the Indian Ocean and called the Round Island 
Boa or Split-jawed Boa. Th is species is unique among tetra-
pods in having divided maxillary bones with movable front 
and rear parts. A second species called  Bolyeria multocari-
nata is thought to have gone extinct only recently within 
the past 30 years. Round Island Boas are oviparous and eat 
primarily skinks and geckos. 
 Th ere are roughly 28 species of boas and sand boas in the 
family Boidae. Some 15 species of sand boas have been sep-
arated from the other boas for at least 50 million years, and 
some scientists place these in a separate family (Erycidae) 
or subfamily (Erycinae). Th ese are semifossorial small to 
medium-sized snakes distributed across central and north-
ern Africa, the Middle East, and parts of Eurasia, and also 
include rubber boas ( Charina spp.) and Rosy Boa ( Lichanura 
trivirgata ) of western North America. Th e Old World sand 
boas ( Eryx  spp.) exhibit some marvelous adaptations for 
living in sandy habitats, including dorsally placed eyes and 
nostrils and a countersunk lower jaw ( fi g.  1.20 ). Other boas 
occur largely in neotropical forests, and many of these have 
infrared-sensitive pits commonly present on or between 
upper or lower labial scales. Among these species are the 
popular and well-known Boa Constrictor ( Boa constrictor ) 
( fi g.  1.21 ) and the anaconda ( Eunectes spp.), which is special-
ized for aquatic life ( fi g.  1.18  ). All boas are viviparous and 
collectively consume a variety of vertebrate prey. 
 Th ere are roughly 27 species of pythons in the family 
Boidae. Th ese are sometimes treated as a separate family 
(Pythonidae) and are distributed through central Africa 
through Southeast Asia, southern China, and the East In-
dies to Australia and Papua New Guinea. Most pythons 
have premaxillary teeth directly beneath the snout, and 
both boas and pythons have long, curved teeth for snaring 
prey that might include large mammals and birds. All py-
thons are oviparous, and some incubate their eggs by coil-
ing about them and shivering the body muscles to produce 
heat. Pythons are diverse in size, color pattern, and habitat. 
Some species are arboreal or climb readily, and these are 
generally more slender than are terrestrial species (also true 
for boas). Snakes of the genus  Python  evolved as part of an 
Australasian radiation and include stout species such as the 
Ball Python ( P. regius ) and very long species such as the 
Burmese Python ( P. molurus ), African Rock Python ( P. sebae ), 
and Reticulated Python ( Broghammerus reticulatus ; =  Python 
 
 
 Figure 1.18.   A Green Anaconda ( Eunectes murinus ) captured by Ed George and Jesús A. Rivas at El Frio, Apure, Venezuela. Photograph by 
Tony Crocetta. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  17 
reticulatus  of earlier nomenclature), which might exceed 10 
m in total length. Some of the Australian species of pythons 
also grow to great lengths, with Scrub Pythons ( Morelia am-
ethystina ) reaching lengths of around 8.5 m. Australian py-
thons of the Australian genus  Aspidites comprises a  sister 
taxon of all other living pythons. Th e Green Tree Python 
( Morelia viridis ), common to New Guinea, is highly special-
ized for arboreal life, as is the neotropical Emerald Tree Boa 
( Corallus caninus ) ( fi g.  1.22 ). 
 Caenophidia: Advanced Snakes  
 Th e Caenophidia is a monophyletic group of snakes, including 
what are generally regarded as the more advanced lineages of 
snakes (Colubroidea) and a sister group (Acrochordoidea) of 
odd snakes, the family Acrochordidae. Th e Colubroidea also is 
a monophyletic group and contains the families Colubridae, 
Elapidae, Homalopsidae, Lamprophiidae, Pareatidae, Viperi-
dae, and Xenodermatidae. Th e colubrids contain the most 
 
 
 Figure 1.19.   Vertebra of the world’s largest fossil snake ( Titanoboa cerrejonensis ,  right ) shown side by side with the vertebra of a Green 
Anaconda ( Eunectes murinus ,  left ). The length of  Titanoboa was 13 m (42 feet), and the snake was estimated to weigh as much as 1.3 tons—30 
times the weight of an anaconda! The scientiﬁ c name  Titanoboa cerrejonensis means “titanic boa from Cerrejon,” which is the region where the 
fossil was found. Photograph by Ray Carson, University of Florida Photography. The inset depicts what the snake might have looked like (drawn 
by Jason Bourque, Florida Museum of Natural History).  
 
 
 Figure 1.20.   A Kenya Sand Boa ( Eryx colubrinus ) displays some 
prominent characteristics of semifossorial boas. These include a 
muscular body, dorsally placed and upward-looking eyes, a prominent 
rostral scale with countersunk lower jaw beneath, and a short, blunt or 
spine-like tail. This is a captive specimen owned by Phil Nicodemo 
and photographed by the author. 

 18  | How Snakes Work
species of any family of snakes. Caenophidia is characterized 
by several osteological and anatomical characters, and the 
close relationships among the inclusive groups are now 
strongly supported by molecular data.  
 File Snakes: The Bizarre and the Ugly  
 File snakes are among the more unusual snakes by almost 
any measure. Th ey are indeed bizarre and fascinate almost 
all persons who might have the good fortune to see one. 
Th ree species belong to a single genus and collectively 
comprise the family Acrochordidae. Th e two larger spe-
cies,  Acrochordus javanicus and  A. arafurae , are also called 
elephant trunk snakes, which inhabit freshwater streams 
or estuaries in tropical Asia and northern Australia, re-
spectively ( fi g.  1.23 ). Th e third species of this family,  A. 
granulatus , is smaller than the other two and is largely 
marine ( fi g.  1.23 ). Th is snake inhabits mostly mangroves 
and shallow, coastal waters, but there are populations 
that also occur in freshwater streams, ponds, and lakes. 
All three species are entirely aquatic and rarely leave water 
except when they occasionally become stranded on tidal 
mud fl ats. 
 All of the fi le snakes possess small tuberculate scales 
terminating outwardly in small spines, creating a rough 
body surface that gave rise to the popular name (see  chap-
ter  5 ). Th e small, granular scales encircle the body, and 
there is very little enlargement of the mid-ventral scales. 
Th e tail is only slightly compressed, but the ventral skin 
protrudes to form a small ridge, and the body is fl attened 
laterally when swimming. File snakes are capable swim-
mers, but they mostly crawl along the muddy bottoms of 
 
 
 Figure 1.21.   In the bush and in the hand. The  upper photo 
captures a wild Boa Constrictor ( Boa constrictor ) resting on a tree 
branch against a steep rock face in Río de Janeiro, Brazil (photograph 
by Steven Lillywhite). The  lower photo shows William Garcia 
holding a Boa Constrictor, soon after its capture in Belize (photograph 
by Dan Dourson).  
 
 
 Figure 1.22.   Evolutionary convergence in the trees. The  upper 
photograph shows a New World Emerald Tree Boa ( Corallus 
caninus ), and the  lower photograph features an Old World Green 
Tree Python ( Morelia viridis ). Both snakes are highly arboreal and 
exhibit remarkable convergence in body form, behavior, and color. 
The inset at the top shows a juvenile Emerald Tree Boa, which often 
differs in color from the adult. The juveniles are typically yellow to 
orange. Both photographs are by Laurie J. Vitt. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  19 
streams, ponds, or mangroves. Th ey are secretive and hide 
among roots of aquatic vegetation or in holes or burrows 
formed by other aquatic animals. Th e skin is loose and 
very fl accid, and the body of these snakes tends to collapse 
downward against a surface when they are taken out of 
water. Th ey crawl slowly with seeming eff ort when outside 
of water, and the skin collapses in various directions with 
the body as the animal moves. Th e eyes are small and bead-
like, while the nostrils are upturned with an internal valve 
that is an aquatic specialization ( fi g.  1.23  ). File snakes feed 
on fi sh and sometimes crustaceans, and they are capable 
of rapidly capturing prey by ensnaring it within a body 
coil. Th e snake does not constrict the prey, but the gran-
ular scales assist in holding the prey until the head locates 
the item and quickly swallows it. All fi le snakes are vivipa-
rous and reach high population densities in local waters.    
 Mole Vipers: Packing a Dangerous, 
Unusual Bite  
 About 60 species of snakes inhabiting sub-Saharan Africa 
and Arabian Peninsula are called mole vipers because of 
their burrowing habits. Th ey do not look like typical vipers, 
but most possess a venom apparatus. Mole vipers were 
formerly classifi ed as a family Atractaspididae, but the 
member species are now considered to be two colubroid 
subfamilies within the family Lamprophiidae. Th e sub-
family Atractaspidinae contains about 23 species of snakes, 
most in the genus  Atractaspis  and known as stiletto snakes. 
Th e Aparallactinae is a sister subfamily containing about 50 
species of small (less than 1 m), nocturnal, and usually se-
cretive or burrowing snakes that are distributed through-
out sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East. Most of these 
snakes eat elongate vertebrates such as snakes, skinks, and 
caecilians, but species of  Aparallactus eat centipedes almost 
exclusively. Some of these species bear resemblance to sti-
letto snakes ( Atractaspis ). Th e composition of these two sis-
ter taxa includes several lineages of snakes previously 
classifi ed in the other colubroid families—Colubridae, 
Elapidae, and Viperidae. However, these are now shown to 
bear closer relationships among each other, warranting a 
separate classifi cation, although the phylogeny of this group 
remains somewhat unclear. In the following discussion, we 
will consider both subfamilies together. 
 Mole vipers are small to medium-size snakes (up to 1 m), 
usually black or brown, but some species have stripes or 
bright bands of color. Th e head has a compact skull and small 
eyes, and it joins a cylindrical body with a short, pointed tail. 
Th e scales are smooth or keeled, and those on the head are 
relatively enlarged ( fi g.  1.24 ). Most species are oviparous, 
but one species is a live bearer ( Aparallactus jacksoni ) and 
the reproductive habits of several species are presently not 
known. 
 Most species of mole vipers have grooved rear fangs that 
are preceded by smaller solid teeth on the more anterior 
parts of the maxillary bone, resembling some colubrid spe-
cies of snakes. Another species ( Aparallactus modestus ) lacks 
grooved teeth and is possibly nonvenomous. Yet other spe-
cies have fi xed front fangs resembling those of cobras and 
other elapid snakes. Th e stiletto snakes ( Atractaspis spp.) 
possess movable front fangs resembling those of vipers, but 
these fangs are employed diff erently during prey capture. A 
distinctive feature of these snakes is a reduced maxilla that 
bears an enormous hollow or grooved fang ( fi g.  1.24 ). Th ese 
are not true vipers, but like them, the maxilla has a complex 
articulation and can move to erect the fang. Because of the 
nature of the jaw movement and the large size of the fangs, 
the “erected” fangs protrude just a little from the jaw mar-
gin and are directed posteriorly. Striking and envenomating 
prey are accomplished by a lateral and posterior stabbing 
 
 
 Figure 1.23.   File snakes (Acrochordidae). The  upper photo 
illustrates the smaller marine species,  Acrochordus granulatus , 
photographed by the author in the Philippines. The inset illustrates 
the bead-like scales and the dorsally positioned eyes and nostrils. The 
 lower photo features aboriginal women hunting the Australian 
species,  A. arafurae , which they collect for food. The lower 
photograph is by Richard Shine.  

 20  | How Snakes Work
motion of the head, which is the reason for the name sti-
letto snake. Th e ability to bear the fangs without greatly 
opening the mouth is no doubt an advantage to these 
snakes when they forage within subterranean tunnels where 
they feed on small mammals (mostly rodents and shrews), 
nestling birds, and other reptiles. 
 Th e diversity of venoms and venom delivery systems 
in this group probably refl ects adaptations to diverse diet 
specializations. Many eat elongate reptiles or other small 
vertebrates, some eat earthworms, and some like to eat 
centipedes. Most species of mole vipers present little 
danger and are too small to envenomate a person eff ec-
tively. However, the venom glands of  Atractaspis spp. are 
distinctive from elapids and viperids, containing unusual 
toxins that subdue prey and can be dangerous to humans. 
Th ese snakes are well known and feared in parts of rural 
Africa where inquisitive children, snake catchers, and 
others are often bitten because the snakes cannot be 
picked up safely using one’s hands. Th e stiletto snakes re-
semble other harmless species and often respond defen-
sively by becoming immobile but suddenly striking with 
a slashing, backward movement. These snakes occupy 
diverse habitats from forests to sandy semideserts. All of 
these snakes burrow and are generally secluded in soil or 
hiding beneath objects during the day. As with other bur-
rowing snakes, movements above ground often occur at 
night, especially following rainstorms.  
 Other Lamprophiid African Snakes  
 Th e Lamprophiidae, of which the mole vipers are a part, also 
contains many other species representing a late Eocene radi-
ation of nocturnal snakes endemic to the African continent. 
Th ese include a widespread genus  Lamprophis , many mem-
bers of which are known as house snakes, water snakes 
( Lycodonomorphus ), racer-like sand snakes,  Psammophis spp., 
and other lesser known taxa. Aside from the mole vipers 
and stiletto snakes (Atractaspidinae and Aparallactinae), 
the family incorporates many of the more characteristic 
and widespread nonvenomous snake species of Africa. Al-
together, there are more than 290 species of snakes repre-
sented within this family.    
 Vipers and Pit Vipers  
 Vipers and pit vipers (Viperinae and Crotalinae, respec-
tively) are among the more spectacular, interesting, misun-
derstood, and maligned snakes. Th ese are all venomous 
with prominent fangs and defensive behaviors that feature 
striking toward a threatening human or animal, as featured 
popularly on movie and television screens. Th ese are reac-
tive behaviors, however, and venomous snakes like all the 
others do not harbor aggressive tendencies toward humans. 
Many people believe they are aggressive, but their impres-
sions that lead to such stories are misguided exaggerations, 
possibly with a few exceptions. Snakes are perceived as 
aggressive and “on the attack” only after they have been 
attacked or treated with aggression fi rst. Th e toxins of ven-
omous snakes evolved primarily in relation to prey capture, 
and defensive functions are usually secondary with few 
possible exceptions (e.g., spitting cobras; see  chapter  2 ). 
 Collectively, vipers and pit vipers are members of the 
family Viperidae, which contains some 230 species. Th e typ-
ical vipers or adders of the Old World represent one major 
lineage of viperid snakes, and these are placed in the 
subfamily Viperinae. Member species of the family exhibit 
“typical” viper-like appearance with relatively short and bulky 
bodies, distinct and slightly triangular heads—often with 
enlarged cheeks to accommodate the venom glands—heavily 
keeled scales with small scale size adorning the head, and 
sometimes spectacular defensive behaviors. Most species feed 
on mammalian or avian (endothermic) prey and often swallow 
relatively large items potentially harmful to the snake. Other 
species, however, consume a variety of prey including insects 
 
 
 Figure 1.24.   Head views of a Small-scaled Burrowing Asp 
( Atractaspis microlepidota ), one of the “mole vipers” present in the 
middle part of Africa. The  upper photo illustrates the ﬂ attened head 
with a blunt snout, adaptations for burrowing in soil. This species grows 
to lengths between 45 and 75 cm. The  lower photo shows the fangs of 
this snake, which are relatively long and hollow—resembling fangs of 
viperid snakes but uniquely different. The fangs are situated such that 
the snake can approach its prey (say a rodent) inside a burrow and 
impale a single fang deep into the animal without completely opening 
its mouth. Little is known about this behavior, but the snake can use 
just one fang at a time. Photographs by John C. Murphy.  

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  21 
(e.g., Orsini’s Viper,  Vipera ursinii ), other reptiles, and carrion 
(especially Cottonmouths,  Agkistrodon piscivorus ). Most vi-
pers, including viperine species, give birth to live young ex-
cept members of the genus  Causus , which lay eggs.    
 Vipers belonging to the genus  Vipera , also called adders, 
comprise a diverse group of smaller species ranging across a 
variety of habitats and are, at northerly latitudes, active in 
cool weather with rather low body temperatures ( fi g.  1.25 ). 
Th ere are about 20 species of Eurasian viperines that belong 
to the genus  Vipera , and these include the only vipers that 
are familiar to many central and northern Europeans.  Vi-
pera berus  is one of only two species of snakes to range into 
the Arctic Circle (the other is  Th amnophis sirtalis ). 
 Other groups or related lineages of vipers are distinctive 
in various interesting ways. Six species of African vipers be-
longing to the genus  Causus , commonly called night adders, 
are distinctive in having smooth scales, large head plates, 
round pupils, and dietary specialization for eating anurans 
(frogs or toads). Some have an upturned snout ( fi g.  1.26 ), 
perhaps of some value for digging loose earth or debris in 
search for toads, and two species have very elongate venom 
glands extending into the trunk beneath the skin. Another 
group of African vipers includes arboreal species known as 
bush vipers (genus  Atheris ). Th e more arboreal forms largely 
occupy the equatorial forests of central Africa, while others 
range further south ( fi g.  1.27 ). 
 Th irteen species of African vipers belonging to the genus 
 Bitis , and many of these have exceptionally massive, stout 
bodies and are truly spectacular ( fi g.  1.28 ). Some of the 
better known species include the Gaboon Adder ( Bitis 
gabonica ), the Rhinoceros Adder ( B. nasicornis ), and the Puff  
Adder ( B. arietans ). Th ese snakes move slowly but can strike 
 
 
 Figure 1.25.   Two species of European viper. The  upper photo 
features a common European Adder or Viper ( Vipera berus ) 
photographed by the author on an island off the coast of Sweden. This 
scene illustrates the camouﬂ age value of the color pattern when seen 
against the rocks in the snake’s habitat. The  lower photo shows a 
Nose-horned Viper ( Vipera ammodytes ) photographed by Xavier 
Bonnet in its native habitat in Golem Grad, Macedonia.  
 
 
 Figure 1.26.   Spotted Night Adder ( Causus maculatus ), 
photographed in the Ivory Coast by Xavier Bonnet.  
 
 
 Figure 1.27.   A female African Bush Viper ( Atheris squamigera ), also 
called Rough-scaled Bush Viper, found in western and central Africa, 
usually in low bushes. The coloration is variable, and females are 
usually larger than males. This is a captive specimen photographed 
by Elliott Jacobson. 

 22  | How Snakes Work
extremely fast and with much force. Th ey possess unusu-
ally long fangs—up to 4 cm in  B. gabonica —and feed on 
 generally large endothermic prey relative to their body size 
(see  chapter  2 ). Th e color patterns are beautiful and provide 
eff ective camoufl age. When disturbed or threatened, these 
snakes may emit a sharp, loud, and frightening hiss, which 
is sometimes repeated at regular or irregular intervals. Th e 
Puff  Adder derives its name from this behavior. 
 Snakes widely known as pit vipers belong to the sub-
family Crotalinae, which includes a diversity of species 
distributed in eastern Asia and the Western Hemisphere. 
Th e name is derived from the presence of paired facial pits, 
each located between the nostril and eye. Th e inner recess 
of the pit bears a thin, vascular, and densely innervated 
membrane that is sensitive to heat and infrared radiation. 
Th ese pits function to detect warm prey and objects in the 
environment (see  chapter  7  ).    
 Rattlesnakes are familiar pit vipers, represented by some 
30 species of  Crotalus  and three species of  Sistrurus collec-
tively distributed from North to South America but with 
greatest diversity in the southern United States and Mexico 
( fi g.  1.29 ). Th e tip of the tail bears a characteristic appendage 
(the “rattle”) consisting of interlocking segments of rigid, 
dead tissue (keratin) derived from successive shedding of 
the outer skin. Individual segments are added to the rattle at 
its base during skin shedding ( chapter  5 ). When a rattle-
snake is disturbed or acts defensively, the tail is shaken rap-
idly and produces a loud sound (scaled to body size of the 
species) that resembles the sound of escaping steam. Spe-
cialized muscles in the tail of a rattlesnake vibrate the inter-
locking rattle segments which move against each other to 
produce the rattling sound. Th e rattle is characteristic of all 
species except for its secondary loss in two insular species, 
 Crotalus catalinensis (Santa Catalina Island Rattlesnake) and 
 C. ruber lorenzoensis (San Lorenzo Island Rattlesnake). Some 
rattlesnakes are very small (e.g., pygmy rattlesnakes,  Sistru-
rus spp.) while the larger species (e.g., diamondback rattle-
snakes,  C. adamanteus  and  C. atrox ) may exceed 2 m in length.  
 Old World pit vipers contain about 50 species including 
the Japanese Mamushi ( Gloydius blomhoffi   ) and Habu ( Pro-
tobothrops fl avoviridis ) ( fi g.  1.30 ), Malayan Pit Viper ( Callose-
lasma rhodostoma ), three species of Sri Lankan hump-nosed 
pit vipers ( Hypnale spp.), and the beautiful Chinese Moc-
casin ( Deinagkistrodon acutus ) (see  chapter  7 ). Th ere are 31 
species of  Trimeresurus confi ned to Asia and numerous is-
lands in the western Pacifi c, and some of these are arboreal 
( fi gs.  1.31 ,  5.6  ). New World pit vipers other than rattlesnakes 
include snakes of the genus  Agkistrodon  (Copperheads and 
Cottonmouths,  fi g.  1.32  ) and numerous species of several 
genera distributed in Middle America and South America. 
Th e latter include more than 30 species of terrestrial lance-
heads ( Bothrops spp.), the feared bushmaster ( Lachesis spp.) 
( fi g.  1.33 ), seven species of palm vipers ( Bothriechis spp.) ( fi g. 
 1.34  ), seven species of forest pit vipers ( Bothriopsis spp.), 
and nine species of thick-bodied hog-nosed pit vipers 
( Porthidium spp.) ( fi g.  1.35 ). Th ree species of jumping pit 
vipers ( Atropoides spp.;  fi g.  1.36  ) are extremely stout-bodied, 
approaching the relative girth of the African  Bitis .    
 Functional attributes of viperids will be discussed else-
where in this book, but there is one more viperid species 
that merits mention before leaving a general introduction to 
this group of snakes. Fea’s Viper ( Azemiops feae ) is an inter-
esting species native to the mountainous regions of South-
east Asia. It has a decided non-viper-like appearance with 
colorful bands, smooth scales, relatively large head plates, 
and a somewhat rounded head ( fig.  1.37  ). This species 
 
 
 Figure 1.28.    Two large and very heavy-bodied viperid snakes native 
to west-central Africa south of the Sahara, especially forested areas. 
The  upper photo features a Gaboon Adder,  Bitis gabonica —the 
world’s heaviest viperid snake. This species also has the longest fangs 
and the highest yield of venom of any venomous species. The  lower 
photo features a Rhinoceros Viper,  Bitis nasicornis , which is stout 
with several prominent keratinized horns on its snout. Both species 
are largely ambush foragers and are very nicely camouﬂ aged against 
backgrounds of dappled light and leaf litter. These are captive 
specimens photographed by the author. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  23 
 
 
 Figure 1.29.   Some North American rattlesnakes.  Upper left: Timber Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) at Roan Mountain, Virginia.  Upper 
right: Black-tailed Rattlesnake ( Crotalus molossus ).  Middle left: An unusually light specimen of Rock Rattlesnake ( Crotalus lepidus ).  Middle 
right: A Hopi Rattlesnake, subspecies of the Prairie Rattlesnake ( Crotalus viridis nuntius ).  Lower left: A juvenile Eastern Diamondback 
Rattlesnake ( Crotalus adamanteus ).  Lower right: Aruba Island Rattlesnake ( Crotalus durissus unicolor ). The Timber Rattlesnake and Eastern 
Diamondback Rattlesnake were photographed by Dan Dourson. All other photographs were taken by the author. 

 24  | How Snakes Work
appears to be closely related to pit vipers, but it was once 
considered to be the most “primitive” (basal) living viper. 
Recent molecular data place this snake in a separate sub-
family, Azemiopinae, which is sister to the Crotalinae.  
 Elapids: Cobras, Coral Snakes, Mambas, 
and Sea Snakes 
 Th e family Elapidae includes familiar terrestrial species of 
snakes such as cobras, mambas, coral snakes, kraits, and ex-
tensive radiations of Australian-Papuan snakes and marine 
species we call sea snakes. Th e elapids are characterized by 
fi xed, hollow fangs located in the front of the mouth, and 
these are relatively short in the majority of species ( chapter  2 ). 
 
 
 Figure 1.30.    The often feared Habu ( Protobothrops ﬂ avoviridis ) is a 
pit viper found in Japan and the Ryukyu Islands ( upper photo ). It is 
the largest member of its genus and grows to a length of nearly 230 
cm (7.5 ft). The body is relatively slender, and the head is quite long. 
This species has a toxic venom and inﬂ icts numerous snake bites on 
humans living on certain islands. Many Habus are collected and used 
to make strong liquor called awamori, which is alleged to have 
medicinal properties. Photograph by Akira Mori. The  lower photo 
features a Jerdon’s Pit Viper ( Protobothrops jerdoni ), also called 
Red-spotted Pit Viper. This is a captive-bred snake from individuals 
originating in Vietnam. Photograph by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 1.31.   A female Chinese Green Tree Viper ( Trimeresurus 
stejnegeri ) in Taiwan. This species is highly arboreal and has a more 
slender body form than is typical of ground-dwelling viperid species. 
The green color also is cryptic, for the snake occurs typically in green 
tropical vegetation. Photograph by Ming-Chung Tu. 
 
 
 Figure 1.32.   Upper photo : An adult Florida Cottonmouth 
( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ) rests within vegetation while 
photographed by the author on an island near the Gulf coast of Florida. 
The  lower photo features an adult Northern Copperhead ( Agkistrodon 
contortrix mokasen ) photographed by Dan Dourson in Kentucky.  

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  25 
All elapids are venomous, but some are far more dangerous 
than others. Extremely toxic venoms are characteristic of 
mambas, some cobras, and sea snakes as well as certain larger 
terrestrial species inhabiting Australia. Th ere are more than 
270 species of elapids worldwide, and they occur throughout a 
diversity of habitats including warm, tropical oceans and some 
of the world’s driest deserts. Most terrestrial species are ovipa-
rous, but viviparity is characteristic of some African and many 
Australian forms. Other species (e.g., Australian Red-bellied 
Black Snake,  Pseudechis porphyriacus ) give birth to young that 
are enveloped in transparent fetal membranes, from which 
they escape over the course of a few days (see  chapter  9 ). 
 Elapids are represented in the Americas by coral snakes, 
which are brightly colored with patterns of bands and rings 
that are commonly mimicked by harmless species with 
overlapping ranges ( fi gs.  1.51 ,  1.52 ,  5.19 ). Th ere are about 65 
species of coral snakes, primarily neotropical in distribution. 
Most coral snakes eat other reptiles, including snakes, and 
such dietary specialization also is characteristic of various 
other elapids inhabiting the Old World.       
 
 
 Figure 1.33.    The South American Bushmaster ( Lachesis muta ) is 
the longest pit viper in the Western Hemisphere. The longest recorded 
specimen measured a little over 3.5 m (about 12 feet) in length. This 
specimen was photographed by Laurie J. Vitt in Mato Grosso, Brazil. 
 
 
 Figure 1.34.    A Blotched Palm-pitviper ( Bothriechis supraciliaris ), 
arboreal and endemic to Costa Rica. This species was once thought to 
be a subspecies of the Eyelash Pitviper, which it resembles 
superﬁ cially. The color pattern varies, and specimens from most parts 
of Costa Rica are variably blotched in dorsal coloration. This is a 
captive individual that belonged to Carl Franklin and was 
photographed by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 1.36.   Central American Jumping Pit Viper ( Atropoides 
mexicanus ). This species is found from Mexico south to Panama, and 
it occurs on the Paciﬁ c slopes of Costa Rica, where this specimen was 
found. It is ground-dwelling, well camouﬂ aged, and has a stout body. 
The common name of this genus—jumping pit viper—is attributable 
to energetic defensive strikes that sometimes lift the snake off the 
ground as if it was “jumping.” This specimen was photographed by 
the author in Costa Rica.  
 
 
 Figure 1.35.   An adult Hognosed Pit Viper ( Porthidium nasutum ) in 
Costa Rica. This species is found in mesic lowland broadleaf forest or 
rainforest. This snake was photographed by the author at the Instituto 
Clodomiro Picado, University of Costa Rica, in San José.  

 26  | How Snakes Work
 Cobras and their relatives such as kraits and mambas 
occur over extensive regions of Africa and Asia. Mambas 
( Dendroaspis  spp.) are native to sub-Saharan Africa where 
they pose a particular hazard to humans because of their 
arboreal habits, swift movements, and aggressive defenses. 
Because a mamba might be well concealed while resting in a 
shrub or low tree one or more meters above the ground, 
accidental encounters might involve an aggressive bite re-
ceived at the head or chest level ( fi g.  1.38 ). Cobras are 
common throughout much of Africa and Asia, posing po-
tential dangers to humans, but the perception of danger is 
exaggerated by the spectacular behaviors of rising erect 
while spreading the neck region into a hood and emitting 
loud and abrupt hisses ( fi g.  1.39 ). Th e hoods of cobras often 
bear markings that resemble eyes and have startling eff ects. 
Several species of cobras have evolved the habit of spitting 
venom toward an intruder, often aiming for the eyes (see 
 fi g.  2.29 ). A number of Australian elapids also exhibit hood-
ing behaviors, but the neck is seldom fl attened as exten-
sively or consistently as in cobras. One of the more 
spectacular species of cobra is the King Cobra ( Ophiophagus 
hannah ) of southern and southeastern Asia ( fi g.  1.39  ). Some 
specimens reach a length of 5 m, and all feed on other 
snakes, which is the basis of the generic name. Th e King 
Cobra is the longest venomous snake living today.       
 Other Asian elapids include 13 species of terrestrial kraits 
( Bungarus spp.), which are brightly colored, nocturnal species 
that prey on other snakes and often bite persons while they 
sleep on the ground or in huts ( fi g.  1.40  ). Like coral snakes, 
kraits often live sympatrically with harmless or mildly ven-
omous colubrid snakes that mimic them. Two species of  Bou-
lengerina (called water cobras) frequent rocky shorelines of 
lakes where they feed primarily on fi sh. Various other elapids 
are arboreal, and others of varying habits resemble New 
World coral snakes. Among the latter are seven species of Af-
rican garter snakes ( Elapsoidea  spp.), so-called Asian coral 
snakes ( Calliophis spp.;  fi g.  1.41 ), and two peculiar species of 
the genus  Maticora having exceptionally elongate venom 
glands measuring up to one-third of the body length! Th ese 
are also called coral snakes. Many coral snakes, including all 
the Old World species, may raise their tail when disturbed 
and display brilliant colors on the underside of the body.  
 More than a fourth of the world’s elapid snakes are repre-
sented by the diverse radiation of species inhabiting Austra-
lia, New Guinea, and nearby islands. It is interesting to 
become acquainted with these snakes, as many species have 
evolved similarities with counterparts in other snake families 
by the process called  convergent evolution. Th us, there are 
large and swift terrestrial species of elapids that are very sim-
ilar in behaviors and movements to colubrid whipsnakes and 
racers; others resemble secretive or burrowing species such as 
ringneck snakes, ground snakes, and Asian coral snakes; and 
still others are similar to arboreal species of colubrids, and so 
forth. A very impressive convergence of body form and be-
havior involves three species of Australian death adders ( Ac-
anthophis spp.), which resemble some terrestrial vipers ( fi g. 
 1.42 ). Th e similarities include cryptic coloration, stout body 
with triangular head, ambush method of capturing prey, and 
luring of prey by wiggling an elevated tail. Death adders also 
have evolved relatively long fangs that fi t into fl eshy sockets 
in the fl oor of the mouth. Th e sockets are receptacles for the 
fangs, which like other elapids are fi xed in place but, like vi-
pers, have some mobility and are relatively long for snaring 
and envenomating mammals and birds. Other large, swift, 
and dangerous elapids playing counterpart role to mambas, 
cobras, and large, diurnally active colubrid snakes include two 
species of taipan ( Oxyuranus spp.), brown snakes ( Pseudonaja 
 
 
 Figure 1.37.   An adult Fea’s Viper ( Azemiops feae ) from Cao Bang 
province, Vietnam. Photograph by Dr. Nikolai L. Orlov, Russian 
Academy of Sciences.  
 
 
 Figure 1.38.   The head of a Jameson’s Mamba ( Dendroaspis 
jamesoni ), a highly arboreal species of elapid that is common 
throughout central Africa. Photograph by John C. Murphy. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  27 
nuchalis and  P. textilis ), tiger snakes ( No-
techis spp.), and the Red-bellied Black 
Snake ( Pseudechis porphyriacus ).  
 Two radiations of elapids have 
evolved marine habits (independently) 
and are collectively called “sea snakes.” 
Th ese were formerly sometimes classi-
fi ed into two separate families, but here 
are treated as two clades within the Elap-
idae. Th is latter classifi cation scheme 
seems most widely accepted at the pre-
sent time. Sea snakes known generally as 
sea kraits (Laticaudini) include eight 
species of amphibious elapids that are 
oviparous and spend varying amounts of 
time in humid, near-shore environments 
such as rocky shores and limestone crev-
ices of islands in the western Pacifi c 
Ocean ( fi g.  1.43 ). Th ese snakes spend 
much time at sea, however, where they 
feed on fi shes, largely or exclusively eels. 
 Th e other sea snakes—roughly 60 spe-
cies (Hydrophiini)—are entirely marine 
and give birth to live young at sea. Th e 
Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis pla-
turus ) is uniquely pelagic in habits and is 
the only species of marine elapid to have 
reached the Americas, being quite 
common along the Pacifi c coast from Baja 
California to Ecuador ( fi g.  1.44 ). Else-
where it is the world’s most widely distrib-
uted snake, ranging from the southeast 
coast of Africa across the Indo-Pacifi c to 
the Americas. Recently, Kate Sanders and 
colleagues have suggested that the Yel-
low-bellied Sea Snake and several other 
mostly monotypic genera be recognized 
as a single genus,  Hydrophis , based on 
their studies providing an improved phy-
logenetic framework and evolutionary 
timescale for hydrophiine sea snakes. I 
believe this suggestion is adequately sup-
ported and justifi ed, but I will retain the 
name  Pelamis platurus  in this book simply 
because of its long-standing historic familiarity. 
 Numerous other hydrophiine species occur generally on 
coral reefs, where they prey on fi shes or fi sh eggs. Some sea 
snakes have a generalist diet, consuming a variety of fi shes, 
while others are more specialized with prey often restricted 
to eels or gobies. Th ree species specialize on fi sh eggs and 
forage by probing the head into crevices and burrows. Th ese 
egg specialists have reduced fangs and relatively blunt faces. 
Most hydrophiine sea snakes are moderate in size, measuring 
usually between 0.5 and 1 m, while the largest species (Stokes’ 
Sea Snake,  Astrotia stokesii ) reaches lengths near 2 m. Stokes’ 
Sea Snake has a massive and muscular body and broad snout, 
and its fangs are long enough to pierce a wetsuit ( fi g.  1.45  ). 
Th ese snakes have been reported to sometimes drift in the 
thousands together on slicks in the Strait of Malacca. 
 Sea snakes as a group (both clades, or subfamilies) are 
generally distributed throughout tropical marine and usually 
 
 
 Figure 1.39.    Cobras with defensive hoods on display. The  upper left photo features a 
dorsal view of an Indochinese Spitting Cobra ( Naja siamensis ) photographed by the author 
in Thailand. The  upper right photo shows a ventral view of a raised Chinese Cobra ( Naja 
atra ), photographed by Coleman Sheehy III in Taiwan. The  lower photo displays the hood 
of a King Cobra ( Ophiophagus hannah ) photographed in India by Gowri Shankar.  

 28  | How Snakes Work
 
 
 Figure 1.40.   Many-banded Krait ( Bungarus multicinctus ) 
photographed by Ming-Chung Tu in Taiwan. 
 
 
 Figure 1.41.    Oriental Coral Snake ( Calliophis sauteri ), photographed 
in Taiwan by Ming-Chung Tu. 
 
 
 Figure 1.42.    Common Death Adder ( Acanthophis antarcticus ) 
photographed by the author in Victoria, Australia. Note the superﬁ cial 
resemblance to vipers, in terms of the stout body and triangular-
shaped head. This species also has elongated fangs compared with 
other elapid snakes, and some of its behaviors resemble those of 
vipers (e.g., ambush foraging on prey). The resemblance of this 
species to vipers is a marvelous example of convergent evolution.  
 
 
 Figure 1.43.    Upper photo: Yellow-lipped Sea Krait ( Laticauda 
colubrina ).  Center photo: Blue-banded Sea Krait ( Laticauda 
laticaudata ).  Lower photo: Chinese Sea Krait ( Laticauda 
semifasciata ). All snakes were photographed in Taiwan. Note the 
paddle-shaped tails, which assist swimming. All three species are 
predominantly marine, but tendencies to spend time on land 
increase from bottom to top. The upper and lower photographs 
are by Ming-Chung Tu, and the center photograph is by Coleman 
M. Sheehy III.  

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  29 
nearshore waters with greatest species diversity in the Aus-
tralasian region. Australia has an especially rich fauna of ma-
rine snakes, which include over half of the world’s species. 
Th e genus  Hydrophis contains by far the most species, which 
is around 50 percent of the world’s total. All sea snakes—
both hydrophiine and laticaudine species—characteristically 
have fl attened, paddle-shaped tails ( fi gs.  1.43 – 1.45 ; see also 
 chapter  3 ) and nostrils with valve-like structures that can 
close the external openings (see  fi gs.  6.10 and  7.14 ). During 
swimming, the body also is fl attened in a dorsoventral plane 
as an aid to more effi  cient locomotion (see  chapter  3 ). Some 
species dive as deep as 100 m ( Hydrophis ), but most live in 
relatively shallow waters ranging generally from 20 to 50 m 
in depth. Th e skin of sea snakes that have been carefully in-
vestigated is modifi ed to exchange a substantial fraction of 
respiratory gases and also to vent nitrogen as an aid in pre-
venting the Caisson disease (known as “the bends”). More 
information on the diving adaptations of these remarkable 
snakes is given in  chapter  6 .  
 Colubrids: Common, Diverse, and 
Familiar Snakes  
 Many of the familiar and common “harmless” or rear-
fanged snakes belong to the family Colubridae, which contains 
approximately 320 genera and more than 1,800 species dis-
tributed throughout the New and Old World land masses. At 
least seven subfamilies are recognized. It is diffi  cult to describe 
these snakes in general terms, and the subfamilies are not 
easily assigned to single common names. It is worth pointing 
out that the family Colubridae is not the same thing as the 
larger, more inclusive taxon Colubroidea. 
 Snakes belonging to the subfamily Natricinae (more than 
200 species) are a familiar element of the snake fauna of North 
America and include the water snakes ( Nerodia spp.;  Natrix in 
the Old World), garter and ribbon snakes ( Th amnophis spp.), 
and related species (e.g., Queen Snake and crayfi sh snakes,  Re-
gina spp.; Swamp Snake,  Seminatrix pygaea ) ( fi g.  1.46 , 147;  see 
also fi gs.  4.2  and  4.8  ). Counterparts to the North American 
species are represented by other genera distributed largely in 
Europe, Asia, and Africa. Natricine snakes are semiaquatic or 
amphibious, but none are completely aquatic like the elapid 
sea snakes. Th e diets are varied, but most feed on fi sh and am-
phibians. Reproduction varies within this group, as North 
American species tend to give birth to live young, whereas the 
majority of Old World species lay eggs.  
 More than 650 species considered to be “typical” colubrids 
have worldwide distribution and are classifi ed in the subfamily 
Colubrinae ( fi g.  1.48  ). Some of the more familiar species 
 
 
 Figure 1.44.   An exceptionally colorful Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) photographed from beneath the ocean surface off the 
Paciﬁ c coast of Costa Rica. This snake depicts a typical “ﬂ oat-and-wait” posture that is used when these snakes lie at the ocean surface, where 
they feed on relatively small pelagic ﬁ shes. Photograph by Joseph Pfaller. 

 30  | How Snakes Work
include king snakes and milk snakes ( Lampropeltis spp.), rat 
snakes ( Elaphe  and  Pantherophis spp.), racers and whipsnakes 
( Coluber ,  Drymobius , and  Masticophis spp.), various smaller 
species of secretive ground-dwelling snakes (e.g.,  Tantilla 
spp.), large indigo snakes ( Drymarchon spp.), rear-fanged 
mangrove, tree, or cat snakes ( Boiga spp.; the Brown Tree 
Snake  Boiga irregularis  being known for having invaded Guam 
and decimated parts of the native bird fauna), specialized 
feeders such as the African egg-eating snakes ( Dasypeltis spp.; 
see  chapter  2 ), swift-moving arboreal species ( Th elotornis ,  Den-
drelaphis ,  Opheodrys , spp. and others) including the remark-
able Asian fl ying snakes ( Chrysopelea spp.; see  chapter  3 ). Th e 
latter have evolved morphological and behavioral specializa-
tions for gliding. Many of the colubrine snakes are a conspic-
uous and common element of North American vertebrate 
fauna and well known to may persons residing on that conti-
nent. Interestingly, there is a parallel dominance of numerous 
species of venomous elapids that are equally familiar to resi-
dents of Australia, where terrestrial colubrids are largely 
 
 
 Figure 1.45.    Some species of sea snakes grow large and bulky. At 
the left, Arne Rasmussen holds a large adult  Hydrophis ornatus , 
captured in the seas near Sulawesi (photograph by Erik Frausing). 
The inset shows a specimen of the largest sea snake species,  Astrotia 
stokesii , captured on the Australian Great Barrier Reef by Robb 
Dockerill and photographed by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 1.46.   A Bluestriped Garter Snake,  Thamnophis sirtalis 
similis , photographed in Levy County, Florida by Dan Dourson. 
 
 
 Figure 1.47.    Two species of water snakes common to Florida. The 
 upper photo features the Florida Banded Water Snake ( Nerodia 
fasciata pictiventris ), and the  lower photo shows the Florida Green 
Water Snake ( Nerodia ﬂ oridana ). An enlargement of the head is shown 
in the inset. Both snakes were photographed in Levy County, Florida, 
by Dan Dourson. 

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  31 
 
 
 Figure 1.48.   A sample of characteristic colubrid species in the subfamily Colubrinae.  Upper left , Central American Blacktail Cribo 
( Drymarchon melanurus ), photographed in Belize by Dan Dourson.  Upper right , Florida Redbelly Snake ( Storeria occipitomaculata obscura ), 
photographed in Gainesville, Florida by the author.  Middle left , Central American Speckled Racer ( Drymobius margaritiferus ), belonging to a 
clade of snakes also known as Neotropical racers. This individual was photographed in Belize by Dan Dourson.  Middle right , Black Rat Snake 
( Pantherophis obsoletus ), photographed in Florida by Dan Dourson.  Lower left , Brown Vine Snake ( Oxybelis aeneus ), photographed in Belize 
by Dan Dourson.  Lower right , Pufﬁ ng Snake ( Pseustes poecilonotus ) named for its defensive display of laterally compressed neck. This 
specimen was photographed in Belize by Dan Dourson.  

 32  | How Snakes Work
absent. Th e two respective faunas—elapids in Australia and 
colubrines in North America—exhibit numerous  convergences 
in habitats that are structurally and climatically similar. Diets 
of the various colubrine species are remarkably diverse, and 
the large majority of species are oviparous with some laying 
large numbers of eggs (40 or more).  
 Th e subfamily Xenodontinae is a monophyletic taxon 
that contains about 300 species of medium to large (1.3 m) 
terrestrial snakes found in a diversity of habitats in North, 
Middle, and South America. Th is group includes all of the 
endemic colubrids of the West Indies and the Galapagos Is-
lands. Some of the false coral snake species belong to this 
group, as well as the familiar North American hognose 
snakes ( Heterodon spp.;  fi g.  1.49  ), which specialize on eating 
toads. Ringneck snakes ( Diadophis spp.) and Mud Snakes 
( Farancia abacura ) are also xenodontines ( fi g.  1.50 ). Th e 
three species just mentioned belong to a subfamily Car-
phophiinae, which also includes the genera  Carphophis and 
 Contia . A number of the tropical species are swift and racer-
like in appearance with arboreal or semiarboreal habits. 
Other species are fossorial or aquatic. Xenodontines prey 
on a range of animals, mostly vertebrates. Some are rear-
fanged but with relatively mild venom. Most xenodontines 
lay eggs, but viviparity occurs in some species.       
 A clade of snakes formerly defi ned as Central American 
xenodontines are now considered to be a subfamily called 
Dipsadinae and a sister group to the Xenodontinae. Th e Dip-
sadinae include about 350 species of mostly small to medium-
sized snakes having diverse habits and diets, mostly in Central 
and South America. Blunt-headed vine snakes ( Imantodes 
spp.) are extremely slender and arboreal and feed on lizards 
( fi g.  1.51  ). Many dipsadine snakes, however, specialize on in-
vertebrates such as earthworms or gastropods, and include 
the interesting snail-eating snakes (e.g.,  Dipsas ,  Sibon spp.; 
 fi g.  1.52 ). Nearly all of the dipsadine species are oviparous.  
 
 
 Figure 1.49.   Western Hognose Snake ( Heterodon nasicus ). These 
photographs feature the upturned and heavily corniﬁ ed snout used as 
an aid in burrowing. Other features of this snake superﬁ cially 
resemble a viper.Photographs by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 1.50.   Two North American xenodontine snake species, both 
featured in a defensive posture with the tail elevated to display the 
colorful underside. The  upper photo with inset features a Prairie 
Ringneck Snake ( Diadophis punctatus ) photographed in Kansas by 
the author. The  lower photo shows a Mud Snake ( Farancia abacura ) 
photographed in Florida by Dan Dourson. Both species are secretive 
and display the red to orange underside of the tail when disturbed.  

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  33 
 Gastropod Feeders in the Old World  
 Th ere are about 20 species of Old World snail- and slug-eat-
ing snakes, ecologically equivalent to the neotropical gen-
era  Dipsas and  Sibon , that belong to a separate family 
Pareatidae. Th e New and Old World gastropod feeders were 
once thought to be closely related, but the similarities are 
now known to be attributable to convergence. Th e Asian 
snakes belong to the genera  Aplopeltura ,  Asthenodipsas , and 
 Pareas distributed through Southeast Asia and the Sunda 
Shelf. Many of the species are arboreal and, like arboreal 
counterparts in some of the other subfamilies, extremely 
slender with broad, blunt heads and large eyes ( fi g.  1.53 ). 
Th ese snakes are primarily nocturnal, and all are oviparous.    
 The Homalopsidae: Snakes of Mud and Water  
 Another group of colubroid snakes with partial to strong 
aquatic tendencies comprises the family Homalopsidae, which 
is a well-defi ned lineage containing about 40 species distrib-
uted largely in Southeast Asia and Australasia ( fi g.  1.54 ). Many 
of these species live in shallow water habitats, and they have 
valved nostrils and dorsally directed eyes situated on the top 
of the head ( fi g.  7.6  ). One species, the Keel-bellied Watersnake 
( Bitia hydroides ), superfi cially resembles the true sea snakes in 
attributes of body form, including reduced ventral scales, rel-
atively enlarged posterior body, and a feebly compressed tail. 
 All homalopsids have enlarged fangs at the rear of the 
mouth, which serve to envenomate prey usually consisting 
of amphibians or fi sh. Some species (e.g.,  Fordonia and  Ge-
rarda spp.) consume invertebrates, including hard-shelled 
animals such as crabs or other crustaceans, which the snakes 
 
 
 Figure 1.51.   A Blunt-headed Tree Snake ( Imantodes cenchoa ) 
shown in its natural habitat of rainforest in Belize. Photograph by Dan 
Dourson. 
 
 
 Figure 1.52.   A Terrestrial Snail Sucker ( Tropidodipsas sartorii ) 
photographed in its native habitat in Belize by Dan Dourson.  
 
 
 Figure 1.53.   Two closely related Taiwan Slug Snakes ( Pareas 
formosensis ) illustrating very different eye colors. Both snakes were 
photographed in Taiwan and have been considered to be a single 
species, although current unpublished studies may divide the species 
into three. This species of the family Pareatidae is ecologically and 
behaviorally convergent with various dipsadine colubrid snakes in the 
New World. These snakes were photographed in Taipei by the author. 

 34  | How Snakes Work
amazingly rip apart into smaller pieces to swallow. Some 
members of this family occupy freshwater habitats such 
as lakes, swamps, or streams (e.g., numerous species of 
 Enhydris ), whereas others are estuarine and occur in shallow 
coastal marine waters (e.g., Dog-faced Water Snake,  Cer-
berus rhynchops ). One very unusual species, popular among 
some herpetoculturists, is the aquatic Tentacled Snake ( Er-
peton tentaculatum ) from southeastern Asia ( fi g.  7.14 ). Th is 
snake has two fl eshy “tentacles” on its snout, which are sen-
sory and are likely an aid to navigation in murky water as 
well as provider of information from mechanical stimuli 
such as the disturbance to water when a swimming fi sh is 
nearby ( fi g.  2.10 ). It appears that all homalopsids give birth 
to live young, and some may reach incredibly high popula-
tion densities. In some habitats,  Cerberus rhynchops can 
reach densities up to three individuals per square meter!  
 Toward a Phylogeny of Snakes  
 Confusion over the evolutionary history and taxonomic 
classifi cation of snakes has stimulated both debate and con-
troversy among scientists for decades. Th e works of Bogert, 
Cope, Dowling, Duméril, Dunn, Hoff stetter, Jan, Under-
wood, and others provided the classical foundations for snake 
phylogeny, while more recent historical reviews of the pro-
gress made have been off ered by Burbrink, Cadle, Crother, 
Greene, Rieppel, Pyron, Vidal, Wiens, Wilcox, Zaher, and 
others. Knowledge of morphology continues to be helpful to 
evaluate phylogeny, and molecular studies have provided 
large quantities of data that have advanced the understanding 
of ophidian evolution rapidly. Numerous scientists are 
now contributing molecular studies and adding new insights 
concerning phylogenetic relationships at all levels, including 
specifi c and limited assemblages as well as higher level 
taxa. Ultimately, consensus of a comprehensive phylogeny of 
snakes will be achieved through improved understanding of 
both morphological and molecular data. At the time of this 
writing, however, molecular studies are appearing so rapidly 
that taxonomic revisions are not always adequately evaluated 
by the broader community of systematists before other 
studies appear and keep moving. Th is is sometimes confusing 
to the novice for whom it is not always clear what is what. 
 In spite of the controversy over details, a generalized 
phylogeny for snakes seems pretty well known and can be 
qualifi ed without too much debate. So here I shall present 
what is simply a broad pattern of phylogenetic relation-
ships of snakes that is based in consensus insofar as 
 possible. Th e following discussion is with reference to a 
consensus phylogeny that is illustrated in  fi gure  1.55 . 
 What are called lepidosaurs include the ancient but still 
living New Zealand tuataras and the squamates, which are 
sister taxa ( fi g.  1.10 ). Sister taxa (or groups) are derived 
from an ancestral species not shared by any other taxon, 
and they appear on a cladogram as lineages that arise as 
branches from a single divergence node. Lepidosaurs are a 
sister group to the branch of reptiles that gave rise to the 
birds and crocodilians, as illustrated in  fi gure  1.10 . Th e 
squamates are further subdivided into lizards, amphisbae-
nians, and snakes. Th e snakes collectively comprise the sub-
order Serpentes, which is sometimes called Ophidia. Snakes 
are considered to be monophyletic but have diverged con-
siderably from ancestral conditions. Th ey have diversifi ed 
to form a rich assemblage of species within the squamates.    
 Here you will see a simplifi ed phylogeny of snakes based 
in consensus from a number of studies including both mor-
phological and molecular data ( fi g.  1.55 ). Th e early or basal 
divergence of snakes occurred between the Scolecophidia 
and all other snakes comprising the Alethinophidia. Th e he-
nophidian snakes are polyphyletic and diversifi ed relatively 
early into many taxa including the evolution of boas and 
pythons. Th e placement of acrochordids (Acrochordidae, or 
Acrochordoidea) was long considered to be problematic, but 
recent taxonomic arrangements consider the only three spe-
cies of acrochordids to be a lineage that is sister to the Colu-
broidea. Within the latter group, the viperid snakes are sister 
to the collective taxa of elapids, lamprophiids, homalopsids, 
and colubrids. Th e reader may consult recent descriptive tax-
onomic and phylogenetic literature for more details re-
garding the classifi cation of higher snakes, much of which is 
still unresolved or in dispute. One recent molecular phyloge-
netic analysis places acrochordids, pareatids, and xenoder-
matid snakes as basally divergent from other caenophidians, 
and suggests that viperid snakes comprise a successive sister 
clade to all remaining caenophidians. Th e fairest thing I can 
say is that one may regard all current phylogenetic trees as 
“fl uid” hypotheses about evolutionary events that are be-
coming increasingly, but not entirely,  understood. 
 
 
 Figure 1.54.   A Puff-faced Water Snake ( Homalopsis buccata ) as 
seen from below when air-breathing in shallow water. Photographed 
at Kota Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia by Indraneil Das.  

Evolutionary History and Classiﬁ cation of the World’s Snakes  |  35 
 Returning to our earlier question—What is a snake?—a 
summary defi nition might be given as follows. A snake is a 
squamate reptile of the suborder Ophidia (or Serpentes), 
characterized by having a cylindrical, limbless, and scaled 
body with fused eyelids and no external ear. Th e jaws are mod-
ifi ed for capturing and swallowing relatively large prey, and 
numerous species in various taxa are venomous. Other attrib-
utes will become better understood and more appreciated as 
the reader explores the remaining chapters in this book.  
 Additional Reading  
 Adalsteinsson, S. A., W. R. Branch, S. Trape, L. J. Vitt, and S. B. 
Hedges. 2009. Molecular phylogeny, classifi cation, and bioge-
ography of snakes of the family Leptotyphlopidae (Reptilia, 
Squamata).  Zootaxa 2244:1–50. 
 Alfaro, M. E., D. R. Karns, H. K. Voris, C. D. Brock, and B. L. Stuart. 
2008. Phylogeny, evolutionary history, and biogeography of 
Oriental-Australian rear-fanged water snakes (Colubroidea: 
Homalopsidae) inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear DNA 
sequences.  Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 46:576–593. 
 Cadle, J. E. 1987. Geographic distribution: Problems in phylogeny 
and zoogeography. In R. A. Seigel, J. T. Collins, and S. S. Novak 
(eds.),  Snakes: Ecology and Evolutionary Biology . New York: 
Macmillan, pp. 77–105. 
 Cadle, J. E. 1994. Th e colubrid radiation in Africa (Serpentes: 
Colubridae): phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary 
patterns based on immunological data.  Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean. Society 110:103–140. 
 Caprette, C. L., M. S. Y. Lee, R. Shine, A. Mokany, and J. F. Down-
hower. 2004. Th e origin of snakes (Serpentes) as seen 
through eye anatomy.  Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 
81:469–482. 
 
Typhlopidae
Leptotyphlopidae
Anomalepididae
Aniliidae
Tropidophiidae
Loxocemidae
Pythonidae
Xenopeltidae
Boidae
Calabariidae
Bolyeriidae
Anomochilidae
Cylindrophiidae
Uropeltidae
Acrochordidae
Xenodermatidae
Pareatidae
Viperidae
Homalopsidae
Lamprophiidae
Elapidae
Colubridae
Colubroidea
Colubroidea
Caenophidia
Caenophidia
Alethinophidia
Alethinophidia
Serpentes
Serpentes
Scolecophidia
Scolecophidia
Henophidia
Henophidia
 
 Figure 1.55.   A phylogeny of snakes illustrating the author’s interpretation of current consensus among 
herpetological systematists, all of whom do not agree on the details of the relationships. Any such phylogeny should 
be considered “ﬂ uid” (or a hypothesis) and is expected to change as new work is done based on molecular and other 
methods. The phylogeny illustrates relationships among the principal families of snakes that are listed as terminal 
branches at the right of the ﬁ gure. Higher taxa, or groupings of families, are bracketed with bars at the right, each 
corresponding to principal branchings that are identiﬁ ed within the phylogenetic tree. Drawing by Coleman M. 
Sheehy III and the author. 

 36  | How Snakes Work
 Cohn, M. J., and C. Tickle. 1999. Developmental basis of limbless-
ness and axial patterning in snakes.  Nature 399:474–479. 
 Greene, H. W. 1997.  Snakes: Th e Evolution of Mystery in Nature . 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 351 pp. 
 Gutberlet Jr., R. L., and M. B. Harvey. 2004. Th e Evolution of New 
World Venomous Snakes. In J. A. Campbell and W. W. Lamar 
(eds.),  Venomous Reptiles of the Western Hemisphere , vol. 2. 
Ithaca, NY: Comstock (Cornell University Press), pp. 634–682. 
 Head, J. J., J. I. Bloch, A. K. Hastings, J. R. Bourque, E. A. Cadena, 
F. A. Herrera, P. D. Polly and C. A. Jaramillo. 2009. Giant boid 
snake from the Palaeocene neotropics reveals hotter past equa-
torial temperatures.  Nature 457:715–718. 
 Heatwole, H. 1999.  Sea Snakes . Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing. 
 Hedges, S. B. 2008. At the lower size limit in snakes: Two new spe-
cies of threadsnakes (Squamata: Leptotyphlopidae:  Leptotyph-
lops ) from the Lesser Antilles.  Zootaxa 1841:1–30. 
 Heise, P. J., L. R. Maxson, H. G. Dowling, and S. B. Hedges. 1995. 
Higher-level snake phylogeny inferred from mitochondrial 
DNA sequences of 12S rRNA and 16S rRNA genes.  Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 12:259–265. 
 Highton, R., S. B. Hedges, C. A. Hass, and H. G. Dowling. 2002. 
Snake relationships revealed by slowly-evolving proteins: Fur-
ther analysis and a reply.  Herpetologica 58:270–275. 
 Hoso, M., T. Asami, and M. Hori. 2007. Right-handed snakes: Con-
vergent evolution of asymmetry for functional specialization. 
 Biology Letters 3:169–172. 
 Keogh, J. S. 1998. Molecular phylogeny of elapid snakes and a con-
sideration of their biogeographic history.  Biological Journal of 
the Linnaean Society 63:177–203. 
 Knight, A., and D. P. Mindell. 1994. On the phylogenetic relation-
ships of Colubrinae, Elapidae and Viperidae and the evolution 
of front fanged venom systems in snakes.  Copeia 1994:1–9. 
 Kraus, F., and W. M. Brown. 1998. Phylogenetic relationships of 
colubroid snakes based on mitochondrial DNA sequences.  Zoo-
logical Journal of the Linnean Society 122:455–487. 
 Lee, M. S. Y. 2005. Molecular evidence and marine snake origins. 
 Biology Letters 1:227–230. 
 Lee, M. S. Y., A. F. Hugall, R. Lawson, and J. D. Scanlon. 2007. 
Phylogeny of snakes (Serpentes): Combining morphological 
and molecular data in likelihood, Bayesian and parsimony 
analysis.  Systematics and Biodiversity 5:371–389. 
 McDowell, S. B. 1987. Systematics. In R. A. Siegel, J. T. Collins, and 
S. S. Novak (eds.),  Snakes: Ecology and Evolutionary Biology . 
New York: Macmillan, pp. 3–50. 
 Pough, F. H., R. M. Andrews, J. E. Cadle, M. L. Crump, A. H. Sav-
itzky, and K. D. Wells. 2004.  Herpetology . 3rd edition. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice-Hall. 544 pp. 
 Pyron, R. A., and F. T. Burbrink. 2011. Extinction, ecological op-
portunity, and the origins of global snake diversity.  Evolution 
66:163–178. 
 Pyron, R. A., F. T. Burbrink, and J. J. Wiens. 2013. A phylogeny and 
revised classifi cation of Squamata, including 4161 species of 
lizards and snakes. BMC  Evolutionary Biology 13:93. 
 Pyron, R. A., F. T. Burbrink, G. R. Colli, A. N. Montes de Oca, L. J. 
Vitt, C. A. Kuczynski, and J. J. Wiens. 2011. Th e phylogeny of 
advanced snakes (Colubroidea), with discovery of a new sub-
family and comparison of support methods for likelihood 
trees.  Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 58:329–342. 
 Sanders, K. L., M. S. Y. Lee, Mumpuni, T. Bertozzi, and A. R. Ras-
mussen. 2012. Multilocus phylogeny and recent rapid radiation 
of the viviparous sea snakes (Elapidae: Hydrophiinae).  Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution 66:575–591. 
 Scanlon, J. D., and M. S. Y. Lee. 2011. Th e major clades of snakes: Mor-
phological evolution, molecular phylogeny, and divergence dates. 
In R. D. Aldridge and D. M. Sever (eds.),  Reproductive Biology and 
Phylogeny of Snakes . Vol. 9 of  Reproductive Biology and Phylogeny , 
B. G. M. Jamieson, series editor. Enfi eld, NH: Science Publishers, 
pp. 55–95. 
 Shine, R. 2009.  Australian Snakes: A Natural History . Frenchs For-
est, New South Wales, Australia: Reed New Holland. 
 Slowinski, J. B., and J. S. Keogh. 2000. Phylogenetic relationships 
of elapid snakes based on Cytochrome b mtDNA sequences. 
 Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 15:157–164. 
 Townsend, T. M., A. Larson, E. Louis, and J. R. Macey. 2004. Mo-
lecular phylogenetics of squamata: Th e position of snakes, 
amphisbaenians, and dibamids, and the root of the squamate 
tree.  Systematic Biology 53:735–757. 
 Vidal, N. 2002. Colubroid systematics: Evidence for an early ap-
pearance of the venom apparatus followed by extensive evo-
lutionary tinkering.  Journal of Toxicology: Toxin Reviews 
21:21–41. 
 Vidal, N., and S. B. Hedges. 2002. Higher-level relationships of 
snakes inferred from four nuclear and mitochondrial genes. 
 Comptes Rendus Biologies 325:977–985. 
 Vidal, N., and S. B. Hedges. 2002. Higher-level relationships of cae-
nophidian snakes inferred from four nuclear and mitochon-
drial genes.  Comptes Rendus Biologies 325:987–995. 
 Vidal, N., and S. B. Hedges. 2004. Molecular evidence for a terrestrial 
origin of snakes.  Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B (Sup-
pl .) 271:S226–S229. 
 Vidal, N., S. G. Kind, A. Wong, and S. B. Hedges. 2000. Phyloge-
netic relationships of Xenodontine snakes inferred from 12S 
and 16S ribosomal RNA sequences.  Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution 14:389–402. 
 Wiens, J., and J. L. Slingluff . 2001. How lizards turn into snakes: 
A phylogenetic analysis of body-form evolution in anguid 
lizards.  Evolution 55:2303–2318. 
 Wiens, J . . . , C. A. Kuczynski, S. A. Smith, D. G. Mulcahy, J. W. 
Sites Jr., T. M. Townsend, and T. W. Reeder. 2008. Branch 
lengths, support, and congruence: Testing the phylogenomic 
approach with 20 nuclear loci in snakes.  Systematic Biology 
57:420–431. 
 Zaher, H., F. G. Grazziotin, J. E. Cadle, R. W. Murphy, J. C. de 
Moura-Leite, and S. L. Bonatto. 2009. Molecular phylogeny of 
advanced snakes (Serpentes, Caenophidia) with an emphasis 
on South American Xenodontines: A revised classifi cation and 
description of new taxa.  Papéis Avulsos de Zoologia (Museu de 
Zoologia da Universidade de São Paulo) 49:115–153. 
 Zug, G. R., L. J. Vitt, and J. P. Caldwell. 2001.  Herpetology . 2nd 
edition. San Diego: Academic Press. 630 pp. 

 | 37
 FEEDING, DIGESTION, AND 
WATER BALANCE  
 There are many and ridiculous stories about the swallowing feats of the 
big snakes. The tales relating to giant pythons engulﬁ ng animals as large as 
an ox are utterly fallacious, nor do the big snakes ever wantonly attack large 
mammals. The limit of their swallowing capacity would be a moderate-sized 
antelope—an animal about the size of an American white-tailed deer—and 
nothing but an unusually large specimen could engulf such prey. A twenty-
foot python has been observed by the writer to swallow a forty-pound pig 
and the process was by no means an easy one. 
 —Raymond L. Ditmars,  Reptiles of the World (1943), p. 140   
 Feeding is one aspect of snake behavior that generally fasci-
nates people. Th ere are perhaps two root causes that elicit 
both interest and awe in the feeding habits of snakes. First, 
the animals are limbless and must overpower their prey by 
such unusual means as constriction or envenomation. Sec-
ond, snakes are intermittent feeders, and most of the 
common and usually larger species that are familiar to 
people consume prey that is larger in girth than the mouth 
of the snake. Many persons are fascinated that snakes 
swallow relatively large prey and manage to do so by what 
appears to be amazing elastic properties of the jaws ( fi gs. 
 2.1 ,  2.7 ). Th e skin also stretches an amazing amount as the 
prey item is swallowed beyond the jaws. 
 A snake is basically a long tube and possesses an elon-
gated digestive system ( fi g.  2.2 ). Th us, a snake could more 
or less continually process numerous small items, such as 
insects or small eggs, or it could feed intermittently on 
larger items that are accommodated by stretch of the gut, 
body wall, and skin. Most snakes utilize the second option 
and swallow the prey entire because they have not evolved 
teeth that are specialized for tearing, shredding, breaking, 
or mashing the food into smaller pieces. It is interesting to 
consider the evolutionary reasons why snakes have evolved 
the feeding habits they employ, and to ask: What is unique 
about snakes that constrain or limit the prey they exploit 
and the manner in which they feed? On the other hand, 
one can ask: What attributes of snakes have provided evo-
lutionary opportunities for employing the exceptionally 
 eff ective means by which they capture and utilize prey? As-
pects of these questions have fascinated people for cen-
turies ( fi g.  2.3  ).    
 Constraints Related to a Limbless and 
Elongate Body Form  
 Th e following discussion is essentially speculative, but it 
provides a conceptual basis from which to launch consider-
ations of feeding and digestion in snakes. Fundamentally, 
because snakes are lacking arms and legs, they cannot 
catch, handle, and manipulate prey in the same manners 
that are employed by many other animals. Moreover, with-
out an eff ective “anchor”—or means of stable stance—it is 
somewhat problematic or diffi  cult for an animal to browse 
or graze on vegetation. So what are the most likely foods 
that are available to snakes? 
 Insofar as snakes are elongate creatures without limbs, 
we may consider them to be a long tube with a head at the 
front end and a tail at the rear. Th ere are three ways in which 
such an animal might capture food: (1) seize it with the 
mouth, (2) wrap the body around it, or (3) wrap the tail 
around it. Two further considerations are important. First, 
the head is at the end of the animal that fi rst encounters the 
environment. Second, regardless of the manner of capture, 
the prey object must be seized by the mouth before swal-
lowing. For these reasons, it seems reasonable to expect the 
head end of the snake to evolve a mouth with associated 
2

 38  | How Snakes Work
jaws and teeth that are adapted for seizing prey, in con-
trast to cutting or masticating prey. Also, we must remem-
ber that snakes evolved from lizard-like ancestors and 
thus inherited lizard-like attributes both of dentition 
and gape. 
 Snakes as a group exhibit a propensity to grasp prey 
items using the mouth, and this involves having an appro-
priate gape and a good set of recurved teeth. Without having 
appendages for grasping, holding, and manipulating prey, 
the teeth must hold the prey fi rmly, or there must be an al-
ternative means to immobilize the prey. Immobilization is 
achieved either by injecting the prey item with toxic venom, 
enwrapping the prey item in body coils, or holding the 
item firmly within the mouth. Whatever the reasons, the 
evolutionary radiation of snakes involved a diversifi cation 
of feeding specializations for capturing animal prey ranging 
in size from smaller organisms such as insects, fi sh, frogs, 
or lizards to larger avian and mammalian prey having a 
range of body sizes. Because of the central role of the head 
in capturing prey, snakes evolved either venoms or con-
stricting mechanisms that subdue prey rapidly in order to 
avoid potential harm that might be infl icted by the prey. 
Th is is especially important for the capture of larger species 
that are capable of infl icting considerable damage to a snake. 
 Snakes are well adapted for swallowing relatively large 
prey entire, without reduction to smaller pieces. Th ere is, 
however, at least one documented exception to this state-
ment. Gerard’s Water Snake ( Gerarda prevostiana ), a homalop-
sid species, eats crabs by tearing them apart and ingesting 
the individual pieces. Reducing the prey to pieces is accom-
plished by holding a crab by the mouth and pulling it through 
a loop of the body that is formed around it, thereby straining 
the joints of the crab and causing them to separate. Th is be-
havior was reported by Bruce Jayne, Harold Voris, and Peter 
Ng, but it is rare as far as we know. 
 Th e majority of snakes are characterized by compara-
tively high mobility of the jaws and a large gape size. More 
basal groups of snakes feed primarily on elongate prey such 
as earthworms, lizards, or invertebrates, whereas innova-
tions of the feeding apparatus enabled larger snakes to 
consume heavier and bulkier prey, particularly mammals. 
Furthermore, snakes or other animals that specialize on 
eating particular prey typically possess behavioral and mor-
phological traits that facilitate successful foraging. Th ese 
are generally less important in snakes that have a relatively 
broad diet, and especially ones that might include carrion 
as well as living prey. 
 The Kinetic Skull and Prey Transport  
 Many persons have witnessed dramatic scenes of snakes 
swallowing animals that are larger around than their head, 
and it is well known that these prey are swallowed whole 
and then moved to the stomach by muscular actions called 
 peristalsis . Th e swallowing of prey is called  prey transport by 
functional morphologists, and it is accomplished in snakes 
only because of unusual mobility of various elements of the 
skull and jaws. Th e term, of course, implies movement of 
prey and also includes “transport” through the esophagus 
to the stomach. 
 Th e skulls of snakes are derived from those of lizards and 
have been further modifi ed for  kinesis  (joint mobility) and a 
functional need to better enclose the brain cavity. Anyone 
who has watched a snake swallow a prey item such as a mouse 
appreciates the mobility of jaws and skull that are necessary 
 
 
 Figure 2.1.   Photos illustrating the distensibility of jaws and skin 
when snakes ingest relatively large objects. In the  upper photo an 
Indian Egg-eating Snake ( Elachistodon westermanni ) swallows a bird 
egg, with amazing stretch of both mucosal tissue and scales on the 
lower jaw. The  lower photo illustrates a Green Anaconda ( Eunectes 
murinus ) swallowing a deer. The upper photo is courtesy of Parag 
Dandge; the lower photo is courtesy of Jesús A. Rivas.  

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  39 
for the animal to manipulate the prey 
without having arms or hands, and to 
swallow something that is large in terms 
of its relative girth. In living reptiles ex-
cept for turtles, the skull has two postor-
bital or temporal openings (termed 
 fenestrae ), known as a  diapsid condition. 
Th us, bony elements of the skull form two 
temporal arches, one below the lower 
opening and one between the lower and 
upper opening. Most lizards have lost the 
lower temporal arch, whereas snakes have 
lost both of the temporal arches ( fi g.  2.4 ). 
Th is feature lightens the skull and in-
creases the potential for mobility ( fi g.  2.5 ). 
 Some of the skull bones form mov-
able joints with one another. Typically, 
the quadrate bone articulates loosely to 
join the lower jaw with the skull above 
 
 
 Figure 2.2.   Internal anatomy of a young Florida Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon piscivorus 
conanti ). Photograph by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 2.3.    Historic drawing depicting large constrictors subduing large mammals, which are imaginary exaggerations of the snakes’ 
abilities to swallow large prey. This antique print was originally from  History of the Earth and Animated Nature , by Oliver Goldsmith (1774), 
and used in a later edition  A History of the Earth and Animated Nature , by Oliver Goldsmith, published by A. Fullarton (1850) and Blackie 
and Son (1862).   

 40  | How Snakes Work
it. Th e condition of a movable quadrate is called  strepto-
styly , and this condition allows the quadrate to move for-
ward and rearward and, to a lesser extent, mediolaterally 
with respect to the braincase. Streptostyly is associated 
with the loss of the temporal arches, and this allows the 
quadrate to swing on a complex articulation between its 
upper end and the side of the skull. Compared with liz-
ards, the quadrate bone has extraordinary movement in 
snakes ( fi g.  2.5 ).  
 Th ere is also some degree of motion between the quadrate 
and the supratemporal bone, and between the supratemporal 
bone and the braincase. Th ese generate a three-joint system 
that facilitates lowering the lower jaw and increasing the 
size of the gape. Other movable bones include the ectopter-
ygoid, maxilla, and prefrontal ( fi gs.  2.5 ,  2.6 ). In other rep-
tiles these skull bones are fi xed to the braincase or have 
restricted movement, whereas in snakes these form a 
linkage of bones having extensive motion relative to the 
braincase. Th e parts are joined by ligaments and muscles, 
characteristically with greater mobility than is seen in 
lizards. Th e mechanical linkages include many units, and a 
variety of movements is possible. Collectively, these permit 
the capture and ingestion of relatively large prey, which 
must be swallowed entire. Th e elements are loosely joined 
together and operate independently on each side of the 
head. 
 For all the movement and potential harm that could be 
infl icted by the prey, the brain must be protected. Th e brain 
of snakes is enclosed in a rigid structure that is formed by 
downward extensions of the frontal and parietal elements 
which are sometimes fused and articulate extensively with 
bone that lies below the brain ( fi g.  2.6 ). Th ese structures 
form a rather solid braincase protecting the brain, and also 
provide much of the surface area for the attachment of 
muscles that power much of the movements that are in-
volved in feeding. 
 Th e conversion of much of the skull into a rigid box 
necessitated the losses of certain hinges in the roof of the 
skull that were present in lizards. Th e only movable part of 
the skull roof of snakes is in the facial region where the 
nasal bones are hinged to the frontal elements ( fi g.  2.6 ). In 
the majority of living snakes the snout can move about this 
joint, and the condition of having a kinetic joint anterior to 
the eyes has been termed  prokinesis . Th e palatomaxillary el-
ements are movably attached to each other and to the snout 
and prefrontal, which are capable of movement relative to 
the braincase. Additionally, however, in natricine snakes 
( Nerodia  and  Th amnophis ), there are four movable elements 
in the snout, and these impart a special condition of mo-
bility that has been termed  rhinokinesis . In these snakes, 
movements of the snout bones themselves allow the teeth 
of the right and left sides to separate further, thereby in-
creasing the extent of movement involved in each cycle of 
swallowing (see below). Mobility of the nasal elements ac-
counts for the unusual rotations of the snout tip that are 
sometimes seen during swallowing movements made by 
garter snakes. 
 Th e most uniquely important feature of kinesis in snakes 
is its association with unilateral mobility of the jaws. Inde-
pendent movements of the two sides of the lower jaw, cou-
pled with the fact that skin and other tissues connecting 
them are distensible, permit swallowing of prey that are 
much larger than the normal size of the snake’s head ( fi g.  2.1   
 
 
 Figure 2.4.    Fenestrae (openings) in the bony skull of representative 
diapsid reptiles. The  upper drawing illustrates a primitive diapsid 
condition in which there are two complete temporal fenestrae, with 
each fenestra bounded by a bony temporal arch. This is characteristic 
of some primitive reptiles (e.g., dinosaurs) and the living tuatara. The 
 middle drawing illustrates the skull of a lizard, representing 
secondary loss of the lower temporal fenestra. The  lower drawing 
illustrates the skull of a snake with secondary loss of both the upper 
and lower temporal fenestrae. The evolutionary changes illustrated 
here eventually allowed extreme reduction of bone mass and the 
associated ﬂ exibility of the snake skull that is used during feeding. 
Drawings by Dan Dourson. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  41 
and below). Most snakes transport prey 
through the mouth using ratcheting move-
ments of the upper jaws, each jaw on right 
or left side of the head alternately moving 
over the prey. Characteristically, a snake 
works prey (and that is  whole prey) into its 
mouth by alternately advancing and re-
tracting each of the jaws. During a unilat-
eral cycle of movement, the braincase of 
the snake is advanced over the prey, rather 
than the prey being “pulled” into the 
mouth. Th e teeth-bearing elements of the 
upper jaws are “walked” over the prey by 
alternating shifts of their position, and the 
prey is never free of grip during the swal-
lowing process. In most snakes the lower 
jaws have little direct role in transporting 
prey, but they serve to control the position 
of the prey in the mouth and to press it 
against teeth of the overlying palatine and 
pterygoid bones ( fi g.  2.6 ). A detailed ex-
ample of a snake swallowing prey is shown 
in  fi g.  2.7 . 
 Basal or earlier-evolved snakes gener-
ally have more limited unilateral exten-
sion of the jaws, and the transport of 
food appears to be the role of the maxil-
lary bone as well as the palatopterygoid 
bar. However, feeding movements in the 
basal (scolecophidian) thread snakes be-
longing to the Leptotyphlopidae exhibit a 
unique feeding mechanism in which the 
anterior tooth-bearing elements of the 
lower mandibles (lower jaws) rotate syn-
chronously in and out of the mouth, 
thereby dragging the prey into the mouth 
and esophagus. Th e prey is transported 
exclusively by movements of the lower 
jaw, and such a transport mechanism is 
unusual among vertebrates. Th e authors 
of the study in which this mechanism was 
reported—Nathan Kley and Elizabeth 
Brainerd—named these feeding move-
ments  mandibular raking . Two joints in each lower jaw have 
unusual mobility and allow their distal half (splenial) to 
rotate backward into the mouth, something like swinging 
doors. In most other snakes these joints conform passively 
to the shape of the prey being swallowed and thus maxi-
mize the “fi t” of the gape to the prey item. In contrast, 
mandibular raking in  Leptotyphlops involves active fl exion 
of these joints. Moreover, there is a rather wide dorsal gap 
between the anterior splenial bone and the posterior 
angular bones, which renders the joint between these 
elements extremely mobile. 
 Th read snakes feed primarily on the larvae and pupae of 
social insects and often face dangers during foraging be-
cause large, aggressive ants defend their nests tenaciously 
and can easily kill small snakes. Mandibular raking allows 
these snakes to feed quickly and to minimize the time they 
are exposed to potential attack. Studies show that cycles of 
mandibular protraction and retraction occur at frequencies 
that can exceed 3 Hz (cycles per second). Th is represents 
 
 
 Figure 2.5.   Skull of a Bearded Dragon lizard ( Pogona vitticeps ,  upper photo ) 
compared with a skull of an Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake ( Crotalus adamanteus , 
 lower photo ). The quadrate is movable in both animals, but much more so in the 
rattlesnake. Note that many elements of the rattlesnake skull are longer, and the skull is 
lighter, compared with the lizard. Each maxilla of the rattlesnake bears a long fang, and 
there is an additional replacement fang also in view. The rostral end of the pterygoid 
functions as a lever during erection of the fangs. Photos courtesy of Elliott Jacobson; 
skulls courtesy of Jeanette Wyneken (lizard) and Michael Sapper (rattlesnake).  

 42  | How Snakes Work
exceptionally rapid feeding movements in a snake, and thereby 
reduces the “handling time” involved in swallowing the prey. 
 Another example of feeding in which the mandibles have 
a primary role in transporting prey involves evolutionary 
modifi cations in advanced, rather than basal, snakes. Sev-
eral species of tropical colubrid snakes are specialized for 
feeding on snails. Th ese snail eaters cannot crush the shell, 
so they must extract the soft body of the snail from its 
shell. Th e snake carefully targets the soft body of a snail, 
grasps it, and then uses its mandibles to extract the fl eshy 
body from its hard shell ( fi g.  2.8 ). Th e mandibles are in-
serted into the interior of the snail’s shell and pull the an-
imal into the mouth using movements that are at least 
superfi cially similar to those involved in mandibular raking. 
 Research has shown that snail-eating snakes have ev-
olved specializations that maximize the eff ectiveness with 
which snails are extracted from their shells. Th e snail body 
is asymmetric, and the shell of a snail opens either to the 
right- or the left-hand side. Th ere is a simple genetic basis 
for whether a shell is “right” or “left-sided.” Examination of 
snake’s mandibles reveals that they diff er in the number of 
teeth on the right or left side. Th is asymmetry is present in 
all 12 snail-eating specialists in the Pareatidae whereas the 
jaws of two non-snail-eating species in the same subfamily 
are symmetric. Th e asymmetry of the snail eaters matches 
the “sidedness” of the snails that predominate in their hab-
itat, and it is easier for “right-mandibled” snakes to extract 
“right-sided” snails from their shells, and they experience 
more diffi  culty if a snail is “left-sided.” 
 Feeding on gastropods has evolved independently nu-
merous times among colubrid snakes. Th ese species have 
vernacular names that include slugsnakes, slug-eating 
snakes, snail-eaters, and snail-eating snakes—terms that 
apply especially to the neotropical dipsadine genera  Dipsas , 
 Sibon , and  Sibynomorphus (also called tree snakes), to the 
Asian pareatine genus  Pareas  and  Aplopeltura , and to the 
African genus  Duberria . Additionally, there are many spe-
cies of natricine snakes that occur  sympatrically  with slugs 
and include them in their diet. 
 Kinesis of the skull and jaws presumably enables more 
eff ective apprehension of food by use of jaws in the absence 
of using the tongue. Th e tongue has assumed predomi-
nantly sensory functions in snakes and is not used to sub-
due or handle prey. Mobility of the jaws has another 
important consequence. Transport of food in more special-
ized (less “primitive”) colubroid snakes has shifted to 
varying extents from the maxillary bones to the more me-
dial pterygoid bones ( fi g.  2.5 ). Th is uncoupling of structure 
and function allowed for further evolutionary “innovation” 
involving uses of the maxillary bone in prey capture and the 
parallel evolution of specializations for the injection of 
venom. Th ese consequences for prey capture are discussed 
in the next section.    
 Modes of Capturing and Subduing Prey  
 Th ere are several ways in which snakes capture and subdue 
prey. In nearly all cases, the head is all important and fi rst 
meets the prey. One exception occurs in the fi le snakes, 
particularly the Little File Snake  Acrochordus granulatus , 
which capture fi sh using looping movements of the body 
trunk or tail. I have watched this behavior many times in 
captive snakes. Usually these snakes are rather sluggish in 
many of their movements, and they are inclined to crawl 
around on a muddy substratum at the bottom of a water 
column rather than swim rapidly in the open water col-
umn. Th is is fi tting, as this species lives largely in shallow 
coastal waters such as mangroves. When a fi sh swims near 
 
 
 Figure 2.6.    Skull and mandibles of a Black 
Mamba ( Dendroaspis polylepis ). The fangs are 
supported by the maxillae, which are relatively long 
compared with vipers and pit vipers. As shown 
here, the maxillary and palatine bones are capable 
of erecting the fangs. Note the solid braincase 
formed by downward extension of the frontal and 
parietal bones. The photograph is by Elliott 
Jacobson, and the skull was provided by Michael 
Sapper. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  43 
 
 
 Figure 2.7.   Sequence of jaw movements by a California King Snake ( Lampropeltis californiae ) swallowing a mouse that has been immobilized 
by constriction. The jaw movements progress in sequence from left to right, each stroke advancing the upper jaw and skull of the snake over the 
mouse ( A through  E ). Note also the mouse is positioned within a loose coil of the snake, thereby “anchoring” the prey so that it does not shift 
away from the snake during advances of the jaws. Except for the tail and the rear limbs, the entire mouse is within the neck of the snake in  F . 
At all stages, stretching of the skin between the scale rows can be seen. Photographs by author. 

 44  | How Snakes Work
the snake and disturbs the water in a characteristic way, 
the snake rapidly throws part of its body around the fi sh, 
entrapping it with its spiny-keeled scales (see  chapter  5 ). 
Th ese snakes often cruise in shallow waters of low tides, 
hunting for fi sh that have become concentrated and more 
easily captured because of the confi nement of shallow 
water. In one instance I observed a snake that was swal-
lowing a fi sh while holding a second one it had captured 
within a loop of its trunk at midbody. While swallowing 
and holding the second fi sh, it rapidly captured a third fi sh 
by means of rapid coiling movements of its tail. Wow! 
Th ree fi sh at a time!  
 Other snakes possibly employ a similar strategy in using 
loops or coils of the body to restrain a prey item—or at least 
slow its escape—while the head of the snake zeros in for a 
bite.  Nerodia clarkii , the Gulf Salt Marsh Snake, for example, 
forage for fi sh in shallow waters similarly to  Acrochordus , 
but in all circumstances where I have observed these snakes 
capture their prey, the fi sh are grabbed by swift lateral 
movements of an open mouth. Small fi shes are captured 
somewhat similarly by the pelagic Yellow-bellied Sea Snake, 
 Pelamis platurus . Th ese snakes lie fl oating on the ocean sur-
face using what has been called a “fl oat and wait” strategy 
for snaring small fi shes. When a fi sh swims nearby, the 
snake captures it in its jaws by rapid sideward swiping 
movements of the open mouth ( fi g.  2.9 ). 
 Recent studies by Kenneth C. Catania have demonstrated 
that Tentacled Snakes ( Erpeton tentaculatum ), which are 
aquatic homalopsids, can take advantage of their prey’s es-
cape response by startling fi sh with their body before striking 
them. During fl oat-and-wait foraging, a snake assumes a po-
sition with the head end forming a J-shaped position and 
the head forming the base of the J. Th e snake waits for a fi sh 
 
 
 Figure 2.8.    A Cloudy Snail Sucker ( Sibon nebulatus ) in Belize 
extracting a snail from its shell. The mandibles are inserted deeply 
into the shell, and the recurved teeth are used to extract the snail 
while the upper jaws grasp the shell. Photographs by Dan Dourson.  
 
 
 Figure 2.9.   A Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) lies near 
the ocean surface in a “ﬂ oat-and-wait” posture, waiting to capture a 
small ﬁ sh when it swims nearby ( upper photo) . The inset illustrates 
the relatively long jaw that characterizes this species. In the  lower 
photo , a snake is shown with the mouth open to illustrate the gape 
associated with the elongated jaws, effective for snaring small ﬁ shes 
from the water. These snakes were photographed on the Paciﬁ c coast 
of Guanacaste, Costa Rica by Joseph Pfaller and Coleman Sheehy III 
(inset). 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  45 
to approach, and when a fi sh is nearby—usually within the 
concave region between the head and the snake’s body—the 
snake startles it with jerky movements of the body that ini-
tiate an escape response by the fi sh ( fi g.  2.10 ). Th e snake then 
strikes to capture the fi sh and adjusts the strike to the future 
location of the fi sh as it moves rapidly in an escape trajectory 
that is judged quite accurately by the sensory system of the 
snake. Th e tentacles of these snakes are sensitive mechano-
receptors that respond to nearby movements in water (see 
 chapter  7 ). Vision also is important, but the tentacles pro-
vide additional sensory information that becomes increas-
ingly important when vision is diminished by nightfall or 
turbid water. 
 Generally, the more commonly employed methods that 
are used to capture and subdue prey include the following: 
(1) biting and swallowing; (2) constriction; and (3) enven-
omation. Of course, the fi rst method is always part of prey 
capture at some stage of the process. Many snakes simply 
grasp a prey item and swallow it. Th e examples of this be-
havior are far too numerous to mention, but primarily 
these include snakes that feed on smaller ectothermic prey 
such as insects or other invertebrates, eggs, carrion, and 
small vertebrates such as frogs or lizards. Larger, swiftly 
moving snakes such as racers and whipsnakes, indigo 
snakes, and even some garter snakes, may capture endo-
thermic prey such as mice or smaller bird species by 
grasping with the mouth and swallowing the prey directly. 
I have watched captive Central American indigo snakes 
(Blacktail Cribo,  Drymarchon melanurus ) chase full-grown 
mice around in cages, simply grabbing each one with the 
mouth and rapidly swallowing the animal while it kicked 
and attempted to bite the snake. Once past the mouth, 
muscular movements of the neck quickly moved the still-
live and wiggling mouse toward the stomach, and one 
could still see movements of the mouse as it passed poste-
riorly within the esophagus. One after the other, the snake 
would swiftly swallow each of several mice in rapid succes-
sion. Indigo snakes have a broad, generalist diet and prob-
ably capture many small animals in this manner as they 
move through their habitat in the wild. What I am left to 
wonder is how many cuts or scratches are infl icted on the 
snake’s internal soft parts as these live animals pass 
through the snake’s mouth and esophagus! Of course 
these ingested animals will suff ocate rather quickly once 
they are inside the gut.    
 And this brings us to a very important consideration. As 
snakes evolved feeding behaviors that included increasingly 
larger and dangerous prey (in the sense of infl icting serious 
damage to a snake in self-defense), there arose a dire need 
for parallel evolution of means to subdue such prey while 
minimizing the possibility of harm. Also, remember the 
snake is without limbs and must overcome larger animals 
without the use of arms or legs—no easy feat if the prey is 
relatively large! Th ere appear to be no measurements of 
biting force in snakes, but observations suggest that indigo 
snakes and some other species that neither constrict nor 
envenomate their prey have strong jaws and can bite with 
considerable force. Ophiophagous snakes often kill their 
prey by using powerful jaws to hold and subdue them 
 
 
 Figure 2.10.   Schematic representation of a Tentacled Snake 
( Erpeton tentaculatum ) capturing a ﬁ sh in water. When a ﬁ sh 
approaches the snake ( upper drawing ), the snake jerks part of its 
neck (arrow) such that a segment of the body disturbs the water and 
sends a compressional wave (arrow) toward the ﬁ sh. This movement 
disturbs the ﬁ sh, which in turn moves its head to begin swimming 
away from the snake (curved arrow). The snake anticipates the 
movement of the ﬁ sh and rapidly captures the ﬁ sh in its jaws ( lower 
drawing ). The strike of the snake (arrow) is guided by vision and by 
water movements (especially at night). The scaled tentacles are 
sensitive mechanoreceptors that respond to water movements. The 
stippled ﬁ sh in the lower ﬁ gure shows the original position of the ﬁ sh 
before it engages in the escape movement. Drawing by Dan Doursen 
(after ﬁ g. 2 in K. C. Catania, Born knowing: Tentacled snakes innately 
predict future prey behavior,  PLoS ONE 5:1–10, 2010). 

 46  | How Snakes Work
( fi g.  2.11 ). Clearly, there are limitations to this method of 
immobilizing prey considering the range of sizes and the 
dangers posed by various prey in comparison with the sole 
mouth of the predator. Th e problem of subduing potentially 
harmful and larger prey was solved in a historical sense by 
the evolution of constriction or venom as a central part of 
the prey acquisition process in diff erent lineages of snakes 
( fi g.  2.3 ). Generally, these two means of prey capture are ex-
clusive. Th at is, snakes that constrict their prey do not en-
venomate them, and vice versa. 
 Constriction is an important means of subduing large or 
potentially harmful prey, prior to swallowing the item ( fi g. 
 2.12 ). Harry Greene and Gordon Burghardt—two herpetol-
ogists who are interested in natural history and behavior—
have emphasized this is a key behavioral innovation that 
evolved during the early history of snakes. Constriction is 
characteristic of relatively more basal snakes, and has been 
lost in many of the advanced snakes. If one thinks about it, 
constriction is a rather obvious means by which a limbless 
animal might subdue and kill prey, especially if the head is 
relatively small. Earlier views supposed that the prey an-
imal was crushed by the act of constriction, but it is now 
widely accepted that the coils that tighten about an animal 
either kill it or render it unconscious by means of suff oca-
tion or blockage of adequate blood fl ow to the brain. It is 
possible, of course, that some prey might be crushed faster 
than they are suff ocated when falling victim to large con-
strictors, but this might also depend on one’s subjective 
defi nition of the word “crushed.” 
 Constriction is considered to be generally more eff ective 
in overcoming endothermic birds and mammals than it is 
for ectothermic prey. Perhaps this is because of the higher 
metabolic rate of the former, which succumb quickly if 
subjected to inadequate oxygen or blood fl ow to the brain, 
whereas ectothermic prey require less oxygen for lower 
metabolic rates and also are more tolerant of oxygen defi -
ciency at the brain. Snakes that are specialized for constric-
tion have generally thick bodies and move relatively slowly. 
Perhaps in part because of these characters, envenomation 
evolved as a very eff ective alternative means of subduing 
large prey (see below).    
 Foraging Behaviors  
 Th ere are various means by which snakes seek out and cap-
ture prey. So-called  active foragers move through the envi-
ronment searching for prey, which they attempt to capture 
at the moment of encounter. Th ere are many examples of 
this behavior, and it is characteristic of probably most snake 
species—at least to some degree. Many natricine snakes pa-
trol the edges of streams or ponds seeking frogs, or some-
times enter the water to hunt for fi sh. Sea snakes are fi sh 
specialists, and many species move slowly over coral reefs 
probing holes and crevices for eels or other fi sh. Some probe 
bottom substrates in search of fi sh eggs. Various species that 
are called racers or whipsnakes move through terrestrial ter-
rain alert to the movements of lizards or other small verte-
brates, striking or chasing them with rapid movements. 
Similar behaviors characterize various species of elapids. 
Coral snakes and many other species search for, and follow, 
the scent trails of small animals using head movements and 
tongue fl icking to locate chemical cues that are left behind 
by the recent movement of potential prey. Florida Cotton-
mouth snakes,  Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti , are attracted to 
dead and rotting fi sh that are located by airborne chemical 
cues possibly from considerable distances ( fi g.  2.13 ).  
 Many snakes seek out particular microenvironments 
where prey is likely to be concentrated. Examples include 
cobras, rat snakes, and other species with abilities to climb 
trees, where they seek out bird nests. Florida Cottonmouth 
 
 
 Figure 2.11.   A King Cobra ( Ophiophagus hannah ) shown eating a 
rat snake it has captured and subdued with strong biting prior to 
ingestion. This snake was photographed in India by Dhiraj Bhaisare.  
 
 
 Figure 2.12.   A Green Anaconda ( Eunectes murinus ) constricting a 
turtle. Photographed in Hato el Cedro, Venezuela, by Jesús A. Rivas. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  47 
snakes living on some Gulf islands forage beneath bird 
rookeries where fi shes are dropped or regurgitated by colo-
nial nesting sea birds ( fi g.  2.13 ). Th ese same snakes, as well 
as various natricine, homalopsid, and acrochordid species, 
are attracted to dried-down pools, or shallow waters that 
are created by low tides, where fi shes are likely to be 
 concentrated during drought. Rattlesnakes, Bullsnakes, rat 
snakes, and many other species seek rodent nests where 
young as well as older occupants might be found. And many 
snakes in various taxa enter burrows, where they seek out 
prey items that might be hiding or living within. Th e elon-
gate body form of snakes enables them to be very eff ective 
predators on burrow- or soil-dwelling animals ( fi g.  2.14 ). 
 Akira Mori and his colleagues have documented an un-
usually interesting foraging behavior in the colubrid snake 
 Dinodon semicarinatum , which exploits the eggs and hatch-
lings of sea turtles. Th ese snakes actively crawl around the 
beach and prey on hatchling sea turtles moving to the sea; 
they also ambush hatchlings by lying on the sand just above 
the nest point where the tiny turtles emerge; and they poke 
their head into the sand and capture hatchlings just before 
emergence, or eggs before hatching. Similar behaviors have 
been observed recently involving an Eastern Coachwhip 
( Masticophis fl agellum ) at a beach in Florida ( fi g.  2.14 ). 
 In contrast with active foragers,  ambush foragers are 
snakes that literally lie in ambush for prey, usually at loca-
tions where unsuspecting animals are likely to appear. Var-
ious pit vipers, for example, coil in positions at the side of 
rodent trailways or at the base of trees or logs where small 
mammals might pass. Studies in which the activity and 
movements of snakes have been assessed usually employ 
radiotelemetry methods whereby an animal with an im-
planted radio transmitter can be located using radio signals 
that are picked up with a receiver (see  fi g.  4.5 ). Ambush for-
aging pit vipers have been noted to spend much of their 
time at a single location without moving. For example, 
Harry Greene studied a bushmaster in Costa Rica that 
spent only 1 percent of alert time moving about during a 
period of 35 days in which the snake rested for various 
 
 
 Figure 2.13.   Florida Cottonmouth snakes ( Agkistrodon piscivorus 
conanti ) swallowing dead ﬁ sh on which they forage beneath bird 
rookeries at the Gulf island of Seahorse Key. In the  lower photo a 
snake attempts to swallow a long-dead and dried toadﬁ sh. 
Photographs by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 2.14.    Unusual photographs of an Eastern Coachwhip 
( Masticophis ﬂ agellum ﬂ agellum ) foraging on hatchling Loggerhead 
Sea Turtles ( Caretta caretta ) at St. Lucie Inlet State Park, Florida. The 
 upper photos show the snake with a hatchling in its mouth (inset) 
while emerging from the beach sand in which the turtle eggs were 
laid. The  lower photo shows the snake’s body, which clearly reveals 
the snake has swallowed several individual hatchlings. The arrow 
indicates a point of peristalsis where body muscles were being used 
to push the prey further along the gut. Photographs are courtesy of 
Irene Arpayoglou. 

 48  | How Snakes Work
times at three locations. Th is snake ate a meal on the 24th 
night of observation. 
 Generally, the size of prey increases as the body size of a 
snake increases during growth to adult size. It might seem 
self-evident that snakes switch prey items as they grow 
from very small babies to much larger adults, and these 
changes are sometimes associated with alterations of for-
aging behaviors. Some of the better studied examples of 
 ontogenetic prey switching (changing prey with growth) are 
various species of vipers and pit vipers, which may switch 
from consuming largely ectothermic prey (e.g., lizards) 
as juveniles to endothermic prey (e.g., small mammals) as 
adults. Th e Common Death Adder,  Acanthophis antarcticus 
(an elapid species) also switches from ectothermic lizards 
to small mammals when juvenile snakes grow to adulthood. 
Th is is particularly interesting because this species of elapid 
shares many characters in common with vipers as a result 
of convergent evolution ( fi g.  1.42 ). 
 Shifts in prey type are also particularly evident in popu-
lations of snakes living on islands. For example, Australian 
tiger snakes,  Notechis  spp., living on the mainland feed 
principally on frogs, whereas conspecifi cs on islands con-
sume mostly mammals and birds. Insular water snakes 
( Nerodia sipedon ) and Cottonmouths ( Agkistrodon pisci-
vorus ) feed largely on fi sh, whereas conspecifi cs consume 
more amphibians and other prey on the mainland. Most ex-
amples of such dietary diff erences refl ect diff erences in the 
prey that are available on an island versus mainland. 
 Gape and Striking  
 Many persons are somewhat familiar with the striking behav-
ior of snakes, due in part to the tendency of fi lmmakers usu-
ally to feature snakes that are engaged in defensive behaviors. 
Indeed, while snakes might exhibit alternative defensive be-
haviors, one is often greeted with biting or striking if he or 
she approaches a wild snake and attempts to touch or handle 
it against its will. Th ese circumstances can vary a lot, however. 
Many harmless snakes can, in fact, be handled without biting 
if they are approached slowly and without aggressive move-
ments. Placid behaviors also characterize some venomous 
snakes, although no one should ever make this assumption 
and handle a venomous snake with bare hands! Th is being 
said, there are a number of species of sea snakes that rarely or 
never bite in defense of being handled. I have watched chil-
dren at Suva Harbor in Fiji fearlessly playing with Yellow-
lipped Sea Kraits,  Laticauda colubrina , which appear never to 
infl ict any harm to their exuberant captors (see also  fi g.  2.15 ). 
 We must distinguish two categories of striking by 
snakes. A  defensive strike is often more a display and may 
not be directed at an intruder as accurately or rapidly as is a 
 predatory strike that is intended to capture prey. Defensive 
strikes can involve hissing, gaping of the mouth, and star-
tling but undirected movements intended to frighten off  a 
person or other animal without making actual contact or 
infl icting a bite. On the other hand, predatory strikes are 
more carefully executed and more accurately directed at an 
animal that is intended to be captured for a meal ( fi g.  2.16 ). 
While these diff erences are well evident to persons who 
have observed snakes carefully, the details and mechanisms 
involved in the two categories of strikes have proven diffi  -
cult to demonstrate and to quantify. 
 Predatory strikes that might be very carefully executed 
by a snake also may not be perfect. Strikes can be fl awed in 
various ways, and in some studies David Cundall found that 
up to 47 percent of strikes by rattlesnakes result in neither 
 
 
 Figure 2.15.   Many sea snakes are not inclined to bite when handled 
or in contact with humans. In the  upper photo Micheal Guinea 
gently extracts a Yellow-lipped Sea Krait ( Laticauda colubrina ) from 
limestone rocks on a small Paciﬁ c island. The snake is handled gently 
and does not attempt to bite. Photographed in Fiji by the author. The 
 lower photo  features Julia Bonnet holding a Turtle-headed Sea 
Snake ( Emydocephalus annulatus ) which gently accommodates to the 
contact. Photographed in Nouméa by Xavier Bonnet.  

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  49 
fang penetrating the prey. Th e probability of missed fang 
contact or penetration increases with the distance of the 
strike. Th is might explain why snakes are observed to strike 
only when prey animals come into very close range. 
 Predatory behaviors that involve striking by snakes in-
clude (1) visual, mechanical, or chemical location of prey, (2) 
preparation for the strike—usually by means of intense 
sensory focus on the prey item and drawing the neck into 
S-shaped curves, (3) rapidly extending the body during the 
strike, (4) grasping the prey item with the mouth upon con-
tact, followed by either (5a) continuing to bite or grasp the 
prey while subduing it with constriction, envenomation, or 
biting force, or (5b) releasing envenomated prey and trail-
ing it for later ingestion following its death or paralysis. 
Kenneth Kardong and others have shown that the trailing 
behaviors of rattlesnakes ( Crotalus spp.) following a strike 
can be induced by the strike itself, after which the struck 
prey is discriminated from others using a distinctive che-
mosensory profi le during trailing. Subtle as it might seem, 
the odor of the struck prey is changed by the fang penetra-
tion and the injection of venom. Envenomation is the most 
important factor contributing to the chemosensory “image” 
of the prey following the strike. 
 Th e trailing behaviors of rattlesnakes and other viperid 
species following envenomation of prey are even more 
complex and fascinating than one might suppose. Recent 
studies by Eli Greenbaum, David Chiszar, and others have 
demonstrated that rattlesnakes and Copperheads can rec-
ognize prey that is envenomated by conspecifi c animals and 
prefer it to non-envenomated prey. However, prey that is 
envenomated by a distantly related species is not preferred 
over non-envenomated prey or prey that is envenomated by 
another individual of the same species. Th e behavior of 
sensing and trailing envenomated prey enables a snake to 
distinguish an animal, say a mouse, from trails that are 
made by other mice living in the vicinity. Th is leads the 
snake to the animal that will succumb to the venom instead 
of wasting time and energy following other trails. An en-
venomated rodent can move considerable distances before 
succumbing to venom, so anything that facilitates the task 
of fi nding the prey is likely to be adaptive. Th us, phylogeny, 
genetic diff erences between snake species, and the evolu-
tion of venom composition might all interact in complex 
but meaningful ways. 
 Observations of anatomy and analysis of fi lmed move-
ments by Th omas Frazetta, Kenneth Kardong, David Cundall, 
 
 
 Figure 2.16.   A predatory strike executed by an 
Amazon Tree Boa ( Corallus hortulanus ) in a 
laboratory setting. The kinematic sequence of the 
strike is illustrated with progression of photos from 
top to bottom. In the  upper photo the body of the 
snake is drawn into several S-shaped loops in 
preparation for striking the mouse, while vision 
and thermal cues play key roles in aligning the 
snake’s strike trajectory from the position of its 
head to the mouse on the platform at the left. The 
 middle photo illustrates the “propulsive” force 
produced by the muscle actions of the snake, 
which creates an equal “reaction” force acting in 
the opposite direction to accelerate the snake’s 
head and forebody in the forward direction. The 
reaction force is essentially equal to the force of 
friction, which acts opposite to the propulsive 
force and is dependent on both the mass (weight) 
of the snake and the nature of the surface with 
which it interacts. In the  middle and  lower 
photos , note the gape of the snake’s mouth as its 
lower jaws engage the mouse and the head moves 
forward to bite forcefully and immobilize the prey. 
The images are taken from a video sequence 
produced by Phil Nicodemo.  

 50  | How Snakes Work
and others have revealed some general similarities of striking 
in pythons and in several species of vipers. Predatory strikes 
are extremely rapid. Th e reaction times involved for the head 
and trunk muscles to activate or deactivate during striking 
movements are less than 15 msec, and possibly half that time. 
As a snake strikes, both mandibles are lowered and the pala-
tomaxillary arches are moved upward while the head is rap-
idly accelerated toward the prey. Th e pterygoids move forward 
with the ectopterygoids, raising the maxilla and pushing the 
prefrontals forward. Th is fl exes the snout and braincase up-
ward and tends to slant the teeth forward in a stabbing mo-
tion. Movements of the head are considered to be important 
for erection of the fangs, while the mandibles are the fi rst ele-
ments to contact the prey. Th ese movements are reversed as 
the jaws close, bringing the teeth-bearing bones closer and 
engaging the teeth in the prey. Th e lower jaw is thrust forward 
during the strike and is retracted as the mouth closes. 
 Th e total duration of typical predatory strikes that 
have been studied in viperid snakes varies from 150 to 500 
ms, and the time between the beginning of a strike to 
making contact with the prey is typically about 50 to 100 
ms. Th ese times can vary as a function of the size of the 
snake and its prey. One should always remember that 
however slowly some of these snakes move during routine 
movements and other nonfeeding behaviors, their strike 
can be lightning fast! 
 In some crotaline snakes (e.g.,  Crotalus horridus ), rotation 
of the prefrontal bone around its attachment to the frontal 
bone elevates the snout and helps to elevate the fang base rel-
ative to the braincase during the extension phase of the strike 
( fi g.  2.5 ). Elevation of the prefrontal decreases the distance be-
tween the tip of the fang and the roof of the mouth, which 
better enables each fang to be carried over the dorsal surface 
of the prey before it impales the animal. Th e fangs are brought 
down on the prey’s surface and often penetrate during the 
contact or bite phase of the strike when the jaws are below 
their maximum displaced positions. If the prey is released fol-
lowing envenomation, the maximum gape involving displace-
ments of both mandibles and the fangs is usually achieved 
after envenomation when the prey is released. 
 In the case of venomous snakes, there is a tendency for 
larger species possessing elongated fangs to envenomate 
and quickly release the bite of the prey if it is large and po-
tentially dangerous. Th is is especially true for mammalian 
prey that can struggle vigorously, bite, tug, and scratch. If 
the prey item is relatively small or innocuous, however, the 
snake often maintains a grasp on the animal and holds it 
fi rmly in the mouth (before swallowing) until the prey 
ceases to struggle. Indeed, the biting tactics of snakes are 
dependent on the nature of their prey. 
 Cottonmouths are an excellent example of striking vari-
ability, insofar as these snakes have a generalist diet and 
take a wide range of prey. If the prey is a dead or small fi sh, 
a frog, or even a baby mouse, the items are swallowed im-
mediately upon being bitten, whereas larger rodents are 
struck and envenomated, then released to be followed and 
eaten later. Th is latter behavior appears to be a common 
strategy among viperid snakes that prey on larger rodents 
or small mammals that might infl ict considerable harm if 
they are not immobilized. Another example of “bite and re-
lease” is the tactic employed by sea kraits (e.g.,  Laticauda 
colubrina ) to envenomate dangerous fi shes like moray eels 
while minimizing the probability of being harmed. Th ese 
snakes search for moray eels by entering holes among 
corals, and if one is found the snake quickly bites and en-
venomates the eel, then quickly withdraws and waits for 
the venom to act. Th e snake reenters the hole somewhat 
later to swallow the eel after it has succumbed to the venom. 
 On the other hand, nonvenomous constrictors such as 
boas and pythons necessarily retain a bite on their prey, 
which must be quickly enveloped and subdued with con-
stricting coils. Arboreal snakes that eat birds tend to bite 
and hold because it would be diffi  cult to follow the prey if it 
was released. Finally, rear-fanged snakes (see below) tend 
to hold onto prey items that must be worked to the poste-
rior aspect of the open jaws in order to inject venom. Th ese 
snakes often bite with much force and may “chew” or close 
hard on the prey for some while in order to eff ectively en-
venomate the prey ( fi g.  2.17 ). 
 
 
 Figure 2.17.   A Cat-eyed Snake ( Leptodeira septentionalis ) eating a 
tree frog ( Smilisca baudinii ) in Belize. The frog inﬂ ates its lungs to 
enlarge the body in an effort to prevent being swallowed. The snake, 
in turn, patiently “chews” on the frog to impale the posterior maxillary 
teeth, which function as fangs to envenomate the frog. The venom 
eventually causes paralysis and deﬂ ation of the lung, so the frog can 
be pulled further into the mouth and eventually swallowed. 
Photograph by Dan Dourson.  

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  51 
 Th e striking and biting behaviors of snakes can be very 
diff erent when we consider species that are adapted to for-
aging in diff erent media. Whereas various prey items on 
terrestrial surfaces are generally struck head-on, fi shes in 
water are often struck by lateral movements of the open 
mouth. Studies of Cottonmouths have demonstrated that 
terrestrial strikes exhibit higher angular velocities during 
closure of the mouth and higher angles of gape during the 
retraction phase of a strike when the head pulls back from 
the prey, compared with strikes when the snakes are in 
water. Shawn Vincent and colleagues have demonstrated 
that the success of strikes is considerably greater in terres-
trial situations than in water. 
 Th e size of the prey that can be swallowed depends, of 
course, on the gape of the mouth, and this varies among 
diff erent taxa of snakes. Fundamentally, snakes exhibit 
very large gape compared with other vertebrates owing to 
several features of the jaws and skull ( fi gs.  2.9 ,  2.18 ). Th e two 
mandibles are fused by a rigid joint in most amniotes, but in 
snakes the distal tips of the jaw are connected by ligaments 
and can move independently of one another. Moreover, 
each mandible can bow outward and adjust to the shape of 
the prey owing to a joint at or near its center (where the 
dentary meets the compound bone of the lower jaw) and to 
the kinetic attachment of the quadrate, which connects the 
lower jaw with the skull ( fi gs.  2.5 ,  2.18 ). Th e muscles that 
move the various skull and jaw elements are complexly 
elongate, representing conditions that favor a large gape 
and mobility of the teeth-bearing bones. Th e extreme gape 
of snakes is perhaps best seen and appreciated when a snake 
swallows a rigid-shelled egg of a bird ( fi gs.  2.1 ,  2.19 ). 
 Vipers, in particular, exhibit morphological specializa-
tions that enhance the ability to capture and swallow rela-
tively large prey. Th ese include a stout body, relatively large 
head with elongate jaws, long fangs, and comparatively 
small-size scales on the head that favor kinesis. Th e ante-
rior and posterior excursions of the palate and maxillary 
bones in vipers exceed those that have been recorded for 
any other major clade of snakes. Such movements are re-
lated to features of the fl oor of the braincase and its at-
tached constrictor muscles. Th e upper-jaw movements of 
some rattlesnakes can exceed those in nonviperid snakes by 
a factor of two. One measure of how these features trans-
late into swallowing performance and effi  ciency is that vi-
pers use fewer cycles of jaw movements than do colubrids 
to transport prey through the mouth, if the prey are equiv-
alent in terms of relative mass. 
 Th e mechanics of striking varies with the size and shape 
of a snake. Two considerations are most important. First, ei-
ther high inertia or some amount of anchoring is required 
for snakes to avoid inaccurate or totally fl awed strikes. Con-
sequently, on horizontal surfaces resistance to unwanted 
movement attributable to propulsive forces ( fi g.  2.16 ) can be 
provided by anchoring against irregularities in the substrate 
or by the inertia attributable to large mass, or both. Striking 
performance might be assisted in large- bodied snakes such 
as vipers through relatively large posterior mass, which 
also increases the frictional resistance to movement. More 
 
 
 Figure 2.18.   Defensive displays illustrating the large gape of snakes. 
The  upper photo illustrates a Brown (or Mexican) Vine Snake 
( Oxybelis aeneus ) with open mouth that is specialized for snaring 
lizards or small birds. The  middle and  lower photos depict a 
Neotropical Bird Snake (also called Pufﬁ ng Snake) ( Pseustes 
poecilonotus ) which displays a menacing mouth, showing the 
extreme width while the tips of the mandibles are separated. The 
open glottis (entry to trachea) can be seen in the middle photo. Dan 
Dourson photographed these snakes in Belize.  

 52  | How Snakes Work
 
 
 Figure 2.19.    A sequence in which an Eastern Rat Snake ( Pantherophis alleghaniensis ) swallows a chicken egg. The rows of teeth in the lower 
jaws can be seen at the margins of the mandible in the  upper two photos . In the photograph at  right-center , note the glottis is open and 
protruded from the mouth (arrow) to enable breathing while the egg is in the mouth. Photographs by the author. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  53 
gracile species—for example, many arboreal snakes—can 
also anchor by coiling a prehensile tail or part of the trunk 
around a branch or other object ( fi gs.  1.31 ,  2.20 ). 
 David Cundall has suggested that the body form of 
snakes has been adapted to optimize striking in relation to 
momentum of the head and anterior body. Th e mass of the 
head is accelerated and increases momentum as it propels 
toward the prey. If the momentum is too high, there will be 
a tendency for the head to continue beyond the point of 
contact with the prey. Th is might explain why many snakes, 
especially vipers, have a reduced mass at the anterior trunk 
in addition to attributes of the head that increase shock-
absorbing ability. Th ese adjustments are especially impor-
tant for larger-size snakes. Generally, larger species exhibit 
relatively greater mass and velocity of their heads. 
 One question that has intrigued biologists and snake 
specialists alike is whether a character such as predatory 
gape is “plastic” and can be induced to change with an ex-
perimental change in the size of prey. There are mixed 
 answers to this question. In some cases, experimental ma-
nipulation of prey size during the growth of young snakes 
does not result in any diff erences in growth of the 
head skeleton, for example in the Boa Constrictor ( Boa 
 constrictor ). On the other hand, the jaw length of Australian 
tiger snakes ( Notechis spp.) living on islands is diff erent 
from conspecifi cs that live on the mainland, and the diff er-
ence appears to be controlled both by genes and by the en-
vironment. Neonates of the insular tiger snakes have larger 
heads than do counterparts living on the mainland, despite 
similar body sizes. Th is geographic diff erence is apparent at 
birth and presumably refl ects genetic adaptation to dif-
ferent diets, the insular snakes feeding on relatively large 
chicks of nesting birds and the mainland snakes feeding 
mainly on frogs. Moreover, the relative size of the jaws of 
insular snakes that feed on large prey (large mice) increases 
during growth to become larger than those of siblings that 
are fed on smaller prey (small mice). Th ese tiger snakes ap-
pear to be highly adaptable predators that can track prey 
resources by means of a complex response that involves ge-
netically “hard-wired” traits as well as developmental plas-
ticity of these traits. 
 Th e growth of head shape in Cottonmouths ( Agkistrodon 
piscivorus ) is especially interesting. Th e size of prey gener-
ally increases with body size of Cottonmouths, as occurs in 
other snakes generally, but shifts of prey type during on-
togeny have not been detected. Cottonmouths undergo a 
developmental change in head shape, in which juveniles 
tend to have relatively broader and higher, but shorter, 
head shapes compared to adults. Relatively small head size 
appears to characterize the adults, in which the gape scales 
with negative allometry relative to body size according to a 
recent study by Shawn Vincent and coworkers. Th at is, the 
head becomes relatively smaller as the body grows larger. 
Th e authors of this study suggest that the gape and head 
shape characteristics of Cottonmouths likely refl ect the 
generalist nature of their diet. My own studies of Florida 
Cottonmouths on islands emphasizes that dietary breadth 
exhibited by these snakes increases the probability of en-
countering usable energy resources in situations where 
these can be ephemeral, transitory, and variable in quality 
and quantity. Specialization of diet or strongly selective for-
aging behaviors could be disadvantageous in such environ-
ments, whereas the acceptance of a range of prey increases 
the foraging opportunities. 
 Teeth and Fangs 
 Teeth are very important for the capture and swallowing 
of prey by snakes. Th e dentition of the earliest reptiles is 
poorly known, but appears to have consisted usually of 
simple, conical teeth that correlated with a carnivorous or 
 
 
 Figure 2.20.   A Grenada Bank Tree Boa ( Corallus grenadensis ) on the 
island of Grenada, shown in a striking position while its body is 
anchored on a tree branch. Note how the prehensile tail anchors the 
snake to a part of the tree branch. Photograph by Richard Sajdak.  

 54  | How Snakes Work
piscivorous (fi sh) diet. Th ese evolved in snakes to become 
adapted for seizing prey. In most snakes the teeth are 
long, thin, sharp, and recurved—ideal for piercing and 
grasping ( fi gs.  2.5 ,  2.6  ). Th ey are fi rmly anchored to the jaw 
and are often set in deep grooves, but usually against a 
higher “outer” (labial) than “inner” (lingual) wall ( fi g.  2.21 ). 
Th is is known as a  pleurodont condition of tooth attach-
ment, which is characteristic of lizards and snakes. Th e 
maxillary teeth are attached to the jawbone by mineral-
ized tissue, and the attachment morphology is known as 
 ankylosis .  
 Th ere are exceptions to this basic form. Highly special-
ized tubular teeth evolved in elapid and viperid snakes to 
deliver venom ( fi gs.  2.5 ,  2.6 ). Teeth are reduced in both size 
and number in the egg-eating snakes,  Dasypeltis  and  Elachis-
todon , so the eggshell is more easily enveloped by a mouth 
having an interior that is very “fl eshy.” And there are several 
genera of snakes including the primitive genus  Xenopeltis (a 
xenopeltid) and at least fi ve genera of colubrids that have 
hinged teeth adapted for feeding on hard-bodied and nonde-
formable prey such as skinks. Th ese lizards are covered with 
stiff , strongly cycloid scales underlain by osteoderms. Such 
armor poses dangers of breakage to long, sharp, and fi rmly 
anchored teeth. Th erefore, the teeth of these snakes are at-
tached to bone by fl exible connective tissue fi bers, and they 
fold backward against the jaws. Th e teeth are also modifi ed 
to be typically small, numerous, fl attened at their ends, and 
extremely smooth on their leading surfaces. Th ere are also 
other modifi cations of the head in these snakes, which, to-
gether with the teeth, enable them to grasp and to swallow 
very hard prey. Th ere are exceptions to these statements, 
and numerous snakes swallow both soft- and hard-bodied 
prey depending on the relative size ( fi g.  2.22  ).    
 Replacement 
 Th e dentition of snakes is not static, but rather the func-
tional teeth are continually being replaced. Hence, new 
teeth take the place of older ones that are lost or damaged. 
Th e replacement process begins very early in life and con-
tinues throughout the life of the animal. Th e organization 
of teeth begins early in the embryo where precursors of 
teeth appear on bands of specialized epithelium. Th e ear-
liest formed teeth are often reabsorbed at a rudimentary 
stage of development. Subsequently, teeth form as new 
buds, often in successive waves along the length of the jaw. 
Th e teeth continue to grow until they become full size, at 
which time they attach to bone and become functional. Af-
ter some time, the teeth begin to undergo reabsorption and 
 
 
 Figure 2.21.   A schematic image showing a pleurodont condition of 
tooth attachment. The tooth does not have a “root” but is anchored by 
ﬁ brous attachment largely to the inner (lingual or medial) wall of the 
bone and within a groove of the bony element on which it is 
supported. Drawing by Dan Dourson.  
 
 
 Figure 2.22.   A Crayﬁ sh Snake ( Regina rigida ) swallowing a crayﬁ sh 
in Florida. This species lives in swampy, low, wetland areas where it 
specializes on eating crayﬁ sh. It has chisel-shaped teeth that help to 
ingest this hard-shelled prey. However, these snakes have a 
preference for crayﬁ sh that have recently molted and are therefore 
relatively soft-bodied compared with animals in which the cuticle has 
mineralized. Photograph by Joseph Pfaller. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  55 
are  replaced, a process that is not depen-
dent on wear. Th e pattern of replacement 
usually is such that the teeth undergoing 
replacement are fl anked by new, more or 
less intact, teeth that develop at the 
bases of the functional teeth and will 
contribute the next generation. Th e re-
placement occurs in “waves” except in 
some taxa. 
 Visible evidence of the replacement 
process for teeth is the common occur-
rence of one or more smaller “replace-
ment” fangs just behind the functional 
fang of a viperid snake ( fi g.  2.5 ). Th e 
paired fangs are replaced alternately, and 
the new fang becomes anchored and con-
nected to the venom duct before the 
functional fang is shed. Such shed fangs 
are frequently found undigested in the 
feces of these snakes! Hmm  . . . Certain 
enterprising persons might not have re-
alized they could use this as a renewable 
source of fangs to be used for jewelry, 
rather than killing snakes for their fangs.    
 Patterns of Dentition 
 Th e primitive pattern of teeth in snakes evidently consisted 
of a single row of sharp, conical teeth numerously distrib-
uted on the premaxilla, maxilla, dentary, pterygoid, and pal-
atine bones. Th is pattern of distribution is observed in 
living pythons ( fi g.  2.23 ). It has generally been conserved, 
except for the evolution of long, recurved teeth, reductions 
or expansions of tooth number, and the development of 
grooved or tubular fangs on the maxilla in various lineages 
of snakes ( fi gs.  2.5 ,  2.6  ). 
 In the majority of living snakes the premaxilla is reduced 
and without teeth, except in boas and pythons. Teeth have 
persisted on the pterygoid and palatine bones (palate), but 
are reduced in size or number in certain colubrid species. 
Teeth are present on the dentary in most snakes, but they 
may be absent, reduced in number, or limited to the ante-
rior part of this element in some taxa. 
 Th e structure and dentition of the maxilla is very im-
portant in snakes, and maxillary characters have been 
very useful for interpreting phylogeny. In the more basal 
snakes, the maxilla bears rather simple and uniformly 
shaped teeth. In scolecophidians, the dentition is special-
ized in relation to the burrowing habits of these animals. 
In  Typhlops , the maxillary teeth are small, slightly com-
pressed, simple cones, and there are no teeth on the den-
tary. Th e maxilla of  Leptotyphlops is without teeth, and the 
dentary bears only a few small teeth. Uropeltid snakes 
have a limited number of teeth on the maxilla and den-
tary, none on the premaxilla, and rarely on the palate. 
Boas and pythons, on the other hand, have a moderately 
large number of teeth on all of the usual teeth-bearing 
bones ( fi g.  2.23 ). Th e teeth are usually long, recurved, and 
lacking compression. In various more derived lineages, 
the maxillary teeth become regionally enlarged, anteriorly 
or posteriorly, either as part of a continuous series of 
teeth or with gaps in dentition where teeth are absent. 
Th e enlarged teeth are solid, grooved, or tubular in various 
groups of snakes ( fi gs.  2.5 ,  2.6  ). 
 Colubrid snakes have undergone extensive adaptive 
radiations, refl ected in part by variation of dentitions. All 
colubrids lack teeth on the premaxilla, but there are usu-
ally well-developed teeth on the dentary and in a long row 
on the palatine and pterygoid. Th e maxillary teeth are 
rather uniform and form a fairly long row of simple con-
ical structures. Elapid snakes vary in the arrangement of 
dentition on the maxilla, some having a series of teeth 
that become reduced in size posteriorly (front to rear), 
whereas others exhibit well-developed tubular fangs on a 
greatly abbreviated maxilla. In mambas ( Dendroaspis ), 
the maxilla usually bears but a single prominent fang, 
and there is an enlarged tooth on the anterior end of the 
dentary ( fi g.  2.6 ). Th e elongated fangs and anterior teeth 
of mambas are likely to be adaptations for securing prey 
 
 
 Figure 2.23.    Palatal view of the skull and medial proﬁ les of the mandibles of a 
Reticulated Python ( Broghammerus reticularis ) illustrating the teeth-bearing bones. 
The outermost elements in the photograph (dentary) represent the lower jaw, which 
articulates with the upper jaw shown in the center. Note that some replacement teeth 
can be seen at the end of the lower dentary. Photograph by Elliott Jacobson; skull 
courtesy of the Florida Museum of Natural History. 

 56  | How Snakes Work
without dropping it, insofar as these snakes are arboreal. 
In vipers and pit vipers, the maxilla is highly specialized 
as a reduced bone that is short and hinged, bearing an 
elongate fang that rotates with movement of the element 
( fi g.  2.5 ).  
 Feeding on slugs and snails (malacophagy) has arisen in-
dependently in several lineages of colubroid snakes, most 
notably the Asian pareatids and the neotropical dipsadines 
and xenodontines ( fi g.  2.8 ). Long, slender teeth tend to be 
typical on the anterior dentary and posterior maxilla of 
malacophagous snakes and are hypothesized to be speciali-
zations for gripping the slippery, mucus-covered skin of the 
prey. However, Eric Britt and his colleagues could not dem-
onstrate such features in certain garter snakes ( Th amnophis 
spp.) when their teeth were compared with congeneric spe-
cies having diff erent dietary preferences. Numerous teeth 
that are narrow and prominently recurved tend to be char-
acteristic of fi sh specialists, which often have elongated 
jaws ( fi gs.  2.9 ,  2.24 ). 
 Examples of greatly reduced dentition include the colu-
brid egg-eating snakes,  Dasypeltis , and the elapid sea snake 
 Emydocephalus .  Dasypeltis has at most four or fi ve very 
small curved teeth on the maxilla, three or four teeth on the 
palatine, and another three at the extreme rear of the den-
tary. Th e reduction of teeth is associated with the habit of 
eating eggs, which have relatively fl at and hard surfaces 
( fi gs.  2.1 ,  2.19  ). Sea snakes belonging to the genus  Emydo-
cephalus  are specialized for feeding on fi sh eggs and also ex-
hibit extreme reduction of teeth. Th e dentary and palate 
both lack teeth, and the maxilla bears no teeth except for 
the fangs. 
 Fangs 
 Fangs evolved to inject venom into the prey of various 
snakes that possess them. Th e term  fang refers to a grooved 
or tubular tooth that is used to inject venom, although nu-
merous teeth could well serve the same purpose in species 
in which the fangs are small and venom secretions are dis-
persed during chewing actions on the prey. Fangs are func-
tionally best developed in representatives of the Elapidae 
(e.g., cobras) and Viperidae (e.g., rattlesnakes) ( fi gs.  2.5 , 
 2.6 ). Th e fangs of viperids are the largest and most eff ective 
structures that have evolved in nature for injecting venom 
( fi g.  2.25 ). 
 Snakes that possess completely tubular fangs are re-
ferred to collectively as  solenoglyphs . During development, 
these fangs begin as conical teeth with a pulp cavity. As they 
develop, one wall of the tooth pushes inward and the side 
walls grow over it to form a tube. Each fang is erected by 
rotation of a reduced maxilla on the prefrontal bone ( fi g. 
 2.5 ). Th e maxilla bears no teeth other than the hollow, 
 tubular fang. When the fang is not erected, it folds against 
the roof of the mouth. Snakes with such fangs include the 
viperid and atractaspidine species. In the viperids, the tips 
of the fangs are directed toward the prey during striking 
and eff ectively “spear” it, rather than biting prey in a down-
ward movement. Unlike the viperids, stiletto snakes ( Atrac-
taspis ) envenomate prey by moving a fang sideward out of 
one side of a closed mouth and slashing it sideways or back-
ward into the prey. Th e fang movements are very agile and 
considered to be adaptations for envenomating prey that 
are encountered inside earthen burrows. Th ese fangs are 
relatively long and associated with a relatively short max-
illa. Other species of atractaspidine snakes curiously ex-
hibit every known type of fang dentition, some having 
fangs resembling those of elapids and others having 
 
 
 Figure 2.24.   Prof. Mahmood Sasa and Jazmín Arias, University of 
Costa Rica, extract venom from the fang of a Yellow-bellied Sea Snake 
( Pelamis platurus ). Note in the  lower photograph how the teeth are 
elongated and recurved for snaring ﬁ shes, and the fang is equivalent 
in size to other teeth on the maxilla. Clear venom can be seen in the 
upper part of a capillary tube that covers the left fang of the snake. 
Photographs by Coleman Sheehy III (upper) and Philipp Figueroa 
(lower). 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  57 
grooved posterior fangs. One species 
( Aparallactus modestus ) appears to lack 
grooved fangs altogether ( aglyphous con-
dition) and may not produce venom. 
 Th e fangs of viperid snakes are excep-
tionally long, hollow teeth that rotate 
through extremely large angles due to 
mobile connections between the upper 
jaws and the braincase. Recent analysis 
of video records by David Cundall indi-
cate that vipers representing 86 species 
in 31 genera reposition fangs after they 
contact the prey in more than a third of 
750 recorded strikes. A snake may repo-
sition a fang when it misses the prey en-
tirely, or when it initially contacts prey 
regions that do not permit adequate 
penetration. Repositioning is prevalent 
even in species that normally release 
prey following a strike. Th e rapidity of 
fang repositioning suggests there is ex-
traordinary development and sensitivity 
of the neuromuscular system that con-
trols the fang movement, including sen-
sitive detection of fang penetration and 
very rapid modulation of antagonistic 
muscle contractions. 
 Elapid snakes possess single, hollow, 
or grooved fangs at the anterior end of 
each maxilla, which is relatively long ( fi g. 
 2.6  ). Each fang is fi xed and does not fold 
back because of the relative immobility 
of the maxillary unit. Th is condition is 
known as  proteroglyph . In many species 
the fangs of elapids are relatively short, 
sometimes hardly distinguishable from the other teeth ( fi g. 
 2.24 ). If one looks inside the mouth of many elapid snakes 
(not recommen ded), it is diffi  cult to imagine the snake is 
dangerous in comparison with the appearance of fangs in 
viperid species. In Australian death adders ( Acanthophis 
spp.), however, the fangs are quite long and represent one 
of the morphological characters of these snakes that are 
convergent with those of viperids. 
 Various colubroid snakes possess posterior maxillary 
teeth that are enlarged or grooved to function as fangs. In 
 Boiga , for example, the maxilla bears a pair of alternately 
functioning fangs, preceded by a series of relatively small 
and simple anterior teeth. In this and other opisthogly-
phous colubrids, there may be a few small teeth behind the 
fangs and a gap between the fangs and the more anterior 
teeth. 
 Venom  
 One cannot adequately consider the mechanisms and strat-
egies of feeding in snakes without discussing the subject of 
venom.  Venom is a term that is used to describe some form 
of potentially toxic secretion produced by one organism to 
the detriment of another. Th e secretion is delivered to an-
other animal through some form of specialized structure—
in the case of snakes, a fang. Venoms are often confused or 
categorized with  poisons , but the latter must be ingested to 
alter the physiology of the consuming organism. Th e princi-
pal diff erence between venom and poison is that venomous 
animals actively deliver their toxic secretions (through a 
fang or stinger), whereas poisonous animals generally rely 
on passive means of affl  icting another organism. 
 Venoms also should not be confused with  toxins . Th ese 
are chemicals of biological origin that can adversely alter 
the physiology of an organism. Toxins are pure substances, 
 
 
 Figure 2.25.   Freeze-dried heads of viperid snakes illustrating fang erection and gape 
in three species:  top , Southern Paciﬁ c Rattlesnake ( Crotalus oreganus helleri );  center , 
Rhinoceros Viper ( Bitis nasicornis );  bottom , Gaboon Adder ( Bitis gabonica ). There is a 
ﬂ eshy sheath that covers each fang, normally folded ﬂ at against the roof of the mouth 
when not erected. The Gaboon Adder has the largest relative fang size of any species of 
snake. Photographs are of freeze-dried heads and taken by the author. 

 58  | How Snakes Work
whereas venoms are mixtures of biologically active and 
 inert substances. Both venoms and poisons generally con-
tain toxins. Th e oral secretions of snakes that contain 
toxins and are used to immobilize prey are considered to 
be venoms. Th ere is debate, however, concerning whether 
similar oral secretions that are not known to have an eco-
logical role should be considered venoms. Recent publica-
tions have championed the view that all oral secretions 
having biologically active compounds and arising in spe-
cialized glands should be considered venoms. Th ere is 
little question that many snake species that are now con-
sidered to be “harmless” may eventually prove to have 
venom. A tragic instance of such reclassifi cation occurred 
when Dr. Karl P. Schmidt of the Field Museum of Natural 
History in Chicago was killed from the bite of a Booms-
lang ( Dispholidus typus ), which previously had been con-
sidered to be harmless. 
 Snake venoms occur only within the families of snakes 
comprising the Colubroidea. Thus, it is generally held 
that venom arose in the ancestor(s) of this clade and 
subsequently underwent modifications in composition, 
glandular morphology, and tooth shape as the basal 
snakes of this group radiated and speciated. However, 
venoms are found in multiple lizard families, and per-
haps only the type of modified venom apparatus, and 
not venom itself, is of unique origin in the Colubroidea. 
Bryan Fry, an Australian venom specialist, has suggested 
that venom had an earlier reptilian origin than was pre-
viously supposed. 
 Generally, snake venoms consist largely of soluble poly-
peptides in water, but may also include carbohydrates, 
lipids, metal ions, and other organic compounds such as 
amines. Polypeptides comprise about 90 percent of the dry 
weight of most venoms, and many of these have enzymatic 
activity. Enzymes vary in their specifi city and have catalytic 
properties that induce biochemical transformations with-
out themselves being modifi ed. Various components of 
venom aff ect a wide range of physiological functions. Th e 
numerous actions of venoms include eff ects on cells and 
cell membranes, transmission of nervous signals, muscular 
contraction, blood pressure, blood components and coagu-
lation, infl ammation, and necrosis. 
 Historically, venoms have been considered to be either 
 hemotoxic , aff ecting the blood, or  neurotoxic , aff ecting the 
nervous system. However, these terms do not adequately 
describe the variation and complexity of venom, and spe-
cifi c venoms may contain compounds that produce both 
eff ects. Although the potency of venoms varies, recent 
studies (e.g., Susanta Pahari, Stephen Mackessy, and 
Manjunatha Kini) suggest that there is greater composi-
tional similarity among advanced snakes than has been 
previously recognized. The many effects of venom are
 diverse, and they vary among taxonomic group, ecology, 
diet, population, and even within individuals. Some of the 
important components of venom follow. 
  
 •  Proteolytic enzymes ( proteases ) are components of venom 
that degrade structural proteins into component 
peptides or amino acids, often leading to damage in the 
walls of blood vessels. Th ey are involved in the tissue 
destruction that is present in  necrosis , and many have 
important actions on blood coagulation. Th ey are found 
in the venoms of all known venomous species, and the 
concentrations are particularly high in the venoms of 
viperid snakes.  
 •  Hyaluronidases are commonly called “spreading factors” 
because they degrade hyaluronic acid, which is a ubiquitous 
component of the extracellular matrix of tissues and helps 
to cement cells together. When hyaluronic acid is degraded 
by hyaluronidase, the remaining venom components are 
more easily spread throughout tissues, including blood 
vessels that are rendered to be “leaky.” Th is enzyme is 
common in most snake venoms.  
 •  Phospholipases hydrolyze phospholipids, which are im-
portant components of cell membranes. Th ese can we aken 
cell walls and lead to numerous physiological eff ects 
including edema and damage to muscle. Th ese enzymes 
are found in nearly all snake venoms. 
 •  Acetylcholinesterase  is an enzyme that hydrolyzes 
acetylcholine, a chemical that is important for mediating 
the transmission of nerve signals. Th is enzyme is a 
common component of elapid snake venoms and 
contributes to the neurotoxic actions of those venoms. 
 •  Toxins are proteins of variable molecular weight, but 
generally smaller than that of enzymes. Th ey are highly 
variable in structure and function, but most aff ect the 
nervous system by altering the transmission of nerve 
signals at the neuromuscular junction. Th e venoms of 
elapid snakes are particularly rich in toxins.  
 •  Nerve growth factors are proteins that stimulate growth 
of nerve cells and are found in elapid and viperid venoms. 
Th e actions and biological function of these components 
of snake venom are not well understood. 
 •  Disintegrins are peptides found in viperid venoms, and 
they act to inhibit integrins. Th ese are proteins in 
membranes that transfer messages across cell mem-
branes to the intracellular cytoplasm. 
 •  A large variety of other factors display a range of actions, 
including inhibition or activation of enzymes, vas odilation 
of blood vessels, destruction of cells and rec eptor sites, 
lowering of blood pressure, and cessation of breathing.  
  
 Th e effi  cacy of venoms and the diversity of their phar-
macological properties have fascinated humans since the 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  59 
time of Aristotle, and the ancients developed many snake 
products—including venom, blood, and viscera—that were 
used in various medical remedies of the time. Some of these 
practices are still thriving in parts of Asia, and treatments 
using snake venom are still an important part of mystical 
healing and folklore ( fi g.  2.26 ). Today components of snake 
venoms are used in basic research, pharmacology, diagnos-
tics, and therapeutics. Venom properties have enabled sci-
entists to achieve numerous advances in medical diagnosis 
and treatment related to hypertension, vascular disease, 
muscular dystrophy, cancer, hemorrhage, congenital neu-
ropathies, and many other disease states. Th ey have also 
contributed useful applications for such things as surgical 
sutures and enhancement of drug delivery. Th e famous bi-
ologists James Watson and Francis Crick used nucleotidase 
enzymes from cobra venom to help elucidate the structure 
of the DNA molecule. 
 Venom Delivery Systems 
 Th e production and eff ective use of venom depends on the 
 venom delivery system , which consists of the venom itself, 
an associated gland that produces and stores the venom, 
and specialized teeth that are used for delivery of the 
venom ( fi g.  2.27 ). Th e evolutionary origin of venom pre-
sumably involved a co-opted salivary gland, modifi cations 
of teeth, and natural selection for improved abilities to cap-
ture and subdue prey. Most evidence suggests that venoms 
are most important for aiding the capture of prey, although 
other uses of venom include defense and the possible en-
hancement of digestion. Indeed, it is conceivable that a di-
gestive function could have led to increasing toxicity of 
salivary secretions that secondarily became eff ective in 
capturing prey. 
 Venom injected into prey reduces the time that a snake 
is in contact with something that is alive, either because the 
animal is struck, released, and followed later to its point of 
death, or because the envenomated animal ceases strug-
gling while being held in the snake’s mouth. Th e reduction 
of contact time with living prey is important because strug-
gling and biting prey can be injurious or even lethal to a 
hungry snake. A reduction of prey handling time reduces 
the energy involved in subduing the prey and signifi cantly 
decreases the potential for injury to the snake. Th is is al-
most certainly the reason that so many snake venoms are 
 
 
 Figure 2.26.   A snake shop in Taiwan where the proprietor and a cobra entertain people who visit and purchase snake products that are sold 
for various supposed health beneﬁ ts. A live Chinese Cobra ( Naja atra ) is displayed on the table next to jars containing snake parts and ﬂ uids. 
To the left one can see two snakes that are suspended while blood is being drained from a cut tail. The photo to the  lower right features other 
snakes—rat snakes and a cobra—that are having their skin removed. The skin of each snake, as well as other internal organs, is used for 
commercial products. Photographs by the author. 

 60  | How Snakes Work
very potent: they have evolved to paralyze or kill prey 
quickly, and the potential harm to humans who might be 
bitten by a snake acting defensively is a secondary factor in 
relation to the evolution of venom properties. Th e more 
dangerous the prey item of a snake, the more likely the ten-
dency for the snake to strike and envenomate the animal, 
release it, and consume it later after it has died. Some spe-
cies have a demonstrated capacity to track envenomated 
prey by sensing and following trails that bear chemical cues 
related to the unique chemical signatures of the venom. 
 Since the origin of a rudimentary venom gland, the mor-
phology of the gland has been altered in diff erent lineages. 
Generally, diff erences in the morphology of venom glands 
can be categorized in four general types: (1) the atractaspi-
dine type; (2) the colubrid type, historically referred to as 
Duvernoy’s gland; (3) the elapid type; and (4) the viperid 
type. Th e more consistent gland structures are found in the 
Elapidae and Viperidae, whereas there is more variation in 
the atractaspidine and colubrid species. 
 Th e atractaspidine type of venom gland generally is large, 
tubular, and elongated posteriorly behind the eye (extending 
beyond the head in some species). Th ese glands consist of 
largely unbranched tubules radiating from a central lumen. 
Th e terminal duct of the gland typically empties venom into 
anterior, tubular fangs, and venom appears to be forcibly 
ejected through the compressive action 
of an adductor muscle that extends from 
the parietal bone around the posterior end 
of the gland to the corner of the mouth. 
 Th e venom (or Duvernoy’s) gland of col-
ubrids, when present, is relatively small in 
most species and located posteriorly and 
ventrally to the eye. Th is gland is somewhat 
oval, laterally compressed, and considered 
to be the ancestral state of the Colubroidea. 
In  Boiga irregularis (one of the few colubrid 
species in which the venom gland has been 
examined), the gland is multilobed with 
secondary branching within each lobe. Th e 
Duvernoy’s gland contains either purely se-
rous cells or a mixture of serous and mu-
cosal cells in diff erent species. Th ere is a 
small central cistern analogous to the lu-
men of other venom glands, but is gener-
ally greatly reduced in comparison. A single 
primary duct empties the central cistern 
into the oral epithelium near the corner of 
the mouth. Usually there are no compressor 
muscles associated with the gland. 
 Elapid snakes possess an oval-shaped 
serous gland that is associated with a mu-
cous-secreting accessory gland. Th e main 
gland is located ventrally and posterior to 
the eye and is composed of tubules with simple or complex 
branching patterns. Th ese tubules empty into a narrow 
lumen that is surrounded by the accessory gland. Venom is 
discharged to the anterior fangs after passing through the 
accessory gland, powered by muscular compression of the 
dorsal and ventral aspects of the gland. It appears that in 
elapid species of snakes the venom is stored mostly within 
cells, rather than in the lumen of the gland. 
 Th e viperid venom gland is the most intensely studied 
and appears to have a rather consistent morphology ( fi g. 
 2.27 ). Th e gland is large, triangular in profi le, and divided 
into several lobules by folds in the surrounding tissue. Th ere 
is a large lumen that is fed by multiple, complexly branched 
tubules. Th e lumen connects by means of a primary duct to a 
mucosal accessory gland, which in turn leads to a secondary 
duct that empties into large, tubular fangs at the anterior 
end of the mouth. Th e viperid venom gland stores large 
quantities of venom, which are ejected by a complex pattern 
of muscle sometimes referred to as the  compressor glandulae . 
 Venoms that are produced by the various glands are de-
livered to prey by means of specialized teeth that aid in rup-
turing of the skin and/or conducting the venom by means 
of dental grooves or canals. Th ese include (1)  aglyphous 
(small, ungrooved) teeth throughout the oral cavity (many 
 
 
 Figure 2.27.   Schematic illustration of the venom delivery apparatus in a viperid 
snake. The  upper drawing is an enlargement featuring details of the venom gland and 
ducts, shown in association with the skull and fang in the  lower drawing . Drawings 
by Dan Dourson, after ﬁ g. 13.36 in K. V. Kardong,  Vertebrates: Comparative Anatomy, 
Function, Evolution , 4th ed. (McGraw-Hill, 2006). 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  61 
colubrids); (2)  opisthoglyphous (grooved) teeth located in 
the dorsal, posterior aspect of the mouth (many colubrids 
and some atractaspidines); (3)  proteroglyphous fangs fi xed to 
the anterior maxilla (all elapids and some atractaspidines); 
and (4) large, rotating  solenoglyphous  fangs located on the 
anterior maxilla (viperids and some atractaspidines). 
 Th e various venom delivery systems represent a progres-
sion from simpler teeth and less specialized venom delivery 
to more specialized fangs and venom glands that are ca-
pable of delivering large volumes of highly toxic venom in 
species of snakes that feed on larger and more dangerous 
prey. Th e latter are capable of infl icting considerable damage 
to envenomated prey, and to potential predators! 
 An interesting problem is how the venom gland can syn-
thesize and store a suite of toxins that can be mobilized al-
most instantaneously to subdue prey, yet can be stored 
without the components of venom harming the snake or de-
stroying each other. Several mechanisms are protective during 
storage, including acidic pH of the venom and the presence of 
components that inhibit enzymatic activity during storage of 
the toxins. However, the toxins are activated spontaneously 
upon their being injected into prey. Venom glands are struc-
turally complex, and the accessory gland might be a site where 
venom components are activated.  
 Spitting Venom 
 Venom is used defensively during bites infl icted when a 
venomous snake defends itself and bites an attacker or 
threatening animal. Even better for the snake, however, if 
it can keep its adversary at bay without contacting it. Th is 
is the reason that snakes have evolved concealing colora-
tion or behaviors, and stereotyped threatening displays 
such as infl ating the neck, hissing, or gaping the mouth 
( fi g.  2.28 ). Unfortunately, humans sometimes misinter-
pret these displays as aggressive actions or attacks be-
cause they can be frightening. Chances are, however, the 
snake prefers simply to be left alone rather than to strike 
or bite.  
 Spitting venom is a highly specialized behavior that has 
evolved multiple times in species of African and Asiatic co-
bras. Th e term “spitting” refers to the expulsion of venom 
as a pressurized horizontal stream, usually aimed at the 
eyes of a harasser or predator ( fi g.  2.29 ). Some cobras can 
spit venom as far as 3 meters and can “aim” the spit quite 
accurately. During spitting, muscle contractions rotate the 
maxilla and elevate the palatomaxillary arch, which moves 
the fang sheath dorsally and removes a physical barrier of 
soft tissues to the expulsion of venom. Simultaneously, 
contraction of muscles associated with the venom gland in-
creases pressure on the venom within the gland and forces 
the venom through the venom duct and fang. Th e elevated 
venom pressure propels the venom as an airborne stream 
beyond the orifi ce of the fang, but only after physical dis-
placement of the fang sheath allows venom to fl ow through 
the fang. Th e fang opening of a spitting cobra has a more 
circular aperture than does that of nonspitting cobras, 
which assists the venom stream to exit forward rather than 
downward ( fi g.  2.29 ). 
 Th e Allocation of Venom 
 Th e amount of venom that a snake injects into a target (or 
spits at a target) can vary with the size of a snake, whether 
the situation is defensive or predatory, the size and nature 
 
 
 Figure 2.28.   A young Florida Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon piscivorus 
conanti ) gaping its mouth in a defensive display. The common name 
is attributed to the white appearance of the ﬂ eshy mouth that is 
shown during these defensive gaping behaviors. Photographed in 
Florida by Dan Dourson.  
 
 
 Figure 2.29.   Jets of venom being “spat” by an Indochinese Spitting 
Cobra ( Naja siamensis ). The venom can be rapidly expelled from the 
fangs and aimed at the eyes of a threatening animal at distances up 
to about 3 meters. Photograph by Guido Westhoff. 

 62  | How Snakes Work
of the target, and a variety of other factors. Th ere is dis-
agreement regarding whether snakes have the ability to 
control, or “meter,” the expenditure of venom, or whether 
the expenditure of venom is related more to the nature of 
a “strike” and the features of the surface of the target. 
Th ere appears to be rather good evidence supporting the 
abilities of snakes to meter the quantity of venom they ex-
pel. William Hayes and colleagues have demonstrated that 
spitting cobras, for example, expend larger quantities of 
venom during biting than during spitting, related to a ca-
pacity for regulating the contraction of the venom gland 
according to the context. It seems likely that such regula-
tion is widespread in snakes and that selection favors be-
havioral or physiological mechanisms that expel the 
appropriate amount of venom depending on the target 
and the context.    
 Factors Aﬀ ecting the Variation and Evolution of Venom   
 Th e variability of snake venoms is widely known and has 
been reported since antiquity, based on the observations 
of snakebite victims and confi rmed more recently using 
molecular and immunological techniques. Research has 
demonstrated there is much variation in venom composi-
tion and toxicity at multiple taxonomic levels and within a 
single species. Th ere are important variations in venom 
within a  population—even within a small group of related 
individuals. In some snake species certain components 
have been found in individuals of one sex but not the 
other. Th ere is usually stability of various components 
throughout the age of an individual, but some studies have 
shown there are changes in venom properties during 
aging. For example, the venom of juvenile  Bothrops jara-
raca  was shown to have a higher toxicity for frogs than that 
of adults, and this diff erence correlates with the diet of 
young snakes including frogs and lizards, which are not 
eaten by the adults. It has also been noted that certain 
proteins appear, disappear, or become modifi ed during the 
life span of an individual snake. 
 In many cases the reasons for variation in the chemical 
components of venom are not well understood, and there is 
tremendous variation that needs to be explained. However, 
in well-studied examples the properties of venom have 
been shown to correlate with variation in the local diet, ge-
netic relatedness, and geographic location (including  ge-
netic drift related to random mutations following the 
isolation of snake populations on islands). In one case it 
was shown by Jenny Daltry and coworkers that variation in 
the composition of venom in diff erent populations of the 
Malayan Pit Viper ( Calloselasma rhodostoma ) correlated 
strongly with the nutritional status of the population. 
Th ese results suggest that the availability of certain prey 
species could exert selection pressures on the composition 
of the venom. Th e manner in which venoms evolve diff er-
ences has been debated, and clearly venom composition can 
be infl uenced by diff erent modes of evolution including 
natural selection, patterns of gene fl ow, and genetic drift. 
In some cases it has been proposed that some variation of 
venom composition might simply have no adaptive value. 
 Th e toxin components of snake venom evolve with rela-
tive rapidity, and this is usually viewed as an adaptation 
related to feeding. However, molecular research indicates 
that proteins of opossums that counteract the eff ects of 
snake venom have evolved rapidly in species of this mammal 
that eat venomous snakes. Th is suggests that venom has a 
defensive role as well as one related to prey capture. Recent 
data published by researchers associated with the American 
Museum of Natural History now support the hypothesis 
that there is a biochemical “arms race” between venomous 
animals and their prey. 
 Th e variability in the biochemical composition of venom 
can, of course, alter the immunological sites that are recog-
nized by antibodies that are used in the treatment of snake-
bite. Th us, the eff ectiveness of a given antivenin might vary 
depending on the geographic location where a particular 
snakebite occurred. Further, the random mixing of venoms 
that are obtained from diff erent populations of snakes has 
been found to be an insuffi  cient solution to the problem. 
Envenomation of humans by snakes continues to be a glo-
bal problem, especially in developing tropical countries of 
Africa, Asia, and Latin America. However, the actual 
frequencies of snakebite and their severity throughout the 
world remain largely unknown.    
 Digestion 
 Gut Structure and Function 
 Digestion refers to the mechanical and chemical breakdown 
of food prior to the absorption of the resulting nutrients 
for further modifi cation and distribution to the body. Th e 
organ that functions in the digestion of food is called the 
 digestive tract ,  alimentary canal ,  gastrointestinal tract , or 
simply  gut ( fi g.  2.2 ). Th e digestive tract of snakes is funda-
mentally similar in its anatomical features to that of other 
vertebrates. Th e food is passed (transported) from the 
mouth through the  esophagus , which connects the throat, 
or pharynx, with the stomach. Th e prey item is transported 
through the esophagus by muscular contractions involving 
the trunk muscles of the neck, which “push” the prey into 
the stomach ( fi g.  2.30 ). Salivary secretions from the mouth 
and mucous secretions in the esophagus lubricate the prey 
and help it to “slide” through the esophagus in front of the 
wave of muscle contraction. From the stomach food passes 
through the small intestine to the large intestine, and 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  63 
 fi nally to the  cloaca , where the feces are formed and evacu-
ated from the animal via the cloacal opening. 
 Generally, snakes swallow their prey entire and do not 
chew or otherwise tear and break the items into smaller 
pieces. Th erefore, when the prey reaches the stomach where 
chemical digestion begins, the digestive enzymes must act 
on the prey from the outside to in. As humans, we appreciate 
our parents’ advice to “chew our food” so that it is broken 
into smaller pieces, thereby increasing the surface area for 
the action of digestive enzymes and thereby enhancing the 
effi  ciency of the process. Because prey items are swallowed 
whole by snakes, digestion generally takes longer than it 
does in humans or many other mammals depending on the 
exact nature of the food ( fi g.  2.31 ). Th e injection of venom 
into animals that fall prey to venomous snakes introduces a 
cocktail of enzymes to the internal body, where they are dis-
tributed by “spreading factors” of venom and blood circula-
tion. Th us, some herpetologists speculate that enhancement 
of digestion might have been one of the early factors in nat-
ural selection that helped to promote the evolution of venom 
and venom delivery systems. Recent studies by Marshall Mc-
Cue have shown, however, that injection of venom into mice 
that are fed to rattlesnakes does not speed up or facilitate 
their digestion. Th us, some persons may well doubt that 
venom facilitates the breakdown and digestion of food.  
 Stomach 
 Th e swallowed prey item passes from the esophagus into 
the stomach, which is the fi rst (or most anterior) expanded 
part of the digestive tract. Its walls are highly distensible, 
 
 
 Figure 2.30.    A sequence wherein an Eastern Rat Snake 
( Pantherophis alleghaniensis ) moves an egg through its neck toward 
the stomach. Contraction of the body muscles create a wave where 
ﬁ rst the left side of the neck pushes against the egg ( upper photo ), 
followed by the right side of the neck pushing against the egg 
( middle photo ). Photographs by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 2.31.    A partially digested rat as it was found in the stomach 
of a juvenile Mexican Boa Constrictor ( Boa constrictor ). The digestion 
of the animal is in its very early stages. The  upper photo and the 
 inset in the  lower photo illustrate the size of the rat in relation to 
that of the snake, internalized and externalized respectively. This 
snake was found freshly dead from unknown causes in Puerto Angel, 
Mexico. Photographs by Coleman Sheehy III.  

 64  | How Snakes Work
and its expanded size helps to accommodate large food 
items during the initial period of digestion ( fi gs.  2.31 ,  2.32 ). 
In cases where multiple, very large, or especially long prey 
such as fish are eaten by a snake, the swallowed items 
are accommodated only partly within a greatly stretched 
stomach and partly within the esophagus rather than en-
tering the intestine ( fi g.  2.33  ). Of the two compartments, 
however, only the stomach has capacity for digestion. When 
the stomach is not distended with food, its wall relaxes into 
folds called  rugae —something after the manner of an ac-
cordion. Th ese folds, as well as generally thickened tissue 
relative to the esophagus, help to delineate the stomach 
portion of the digestive tract ( fi g.  2.34 ). 
 Th e epithelium lining the inner wall of the stomach is 
glandular and characterized by the presence of gastric 
glands ( gastric refers to stomach). Various of these gastric 
glands secrete mucus, hydrochloric acid, or proteolytic en-
zymes. Th e enzymes digest the food with aid from the acid 
medium. Th e food eventually becomes a liquefi ed and par-
tially digested soup-like slur (called  chyme or  digesta ) before 
entering the intestine. Th e lowermost part of the stomach 
that meets the intestine is called the  pylorus , and the entry 
of chyme into the intestine is regulated by a pyloric valve. 
 The gastric pH that is maintained during digestion 
ranges from 1.5 to 4 in several species of snakes that have 
been studied. Unlike mammals, which maintain an acidic 
stomach environment between meals, after food leaves the 
stomach of snakes the pH increases to around 7 to 7.5. Th e 
duration of gastric acid and enzyme production is a func-
tion of body temperature and both the size and composi-
tion of a meal. Th e duration of gastric pH and enzyme 
 
 
 Figure 2.32.   A Timber Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) rests while 
engorged with a recently ingested small mammal (likely a squirrel, 
chipmunk, or rat). The prey item has greatly distended the stomach 
and surrounding body wall. This snake was photographed in Arkansas 
by Steven Beaupre.  
 
 
 Figure 2.33.    A neonate Florida Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ) has cannibalized a littermate of approximately the same size. 
The ingested littermate has been curled back on itself, and the stomach of the predatory snake has been stretched exceptionally thin to 
accommodate the meal. The  lower photograph shows a closer view in which the ingested snake can be seen abutting against the duodenum 
of the intestine (arrows). Photographs by the author. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  65 
secretion increases with the size and structural composi-
tion of food. Digestion is prolonged at lower temperatures 
and is critically slowed or ceases altogether if the tempera-
ture falls below about 10°C. Th e precise temperature thresh-
old varies in diff erent species (see  chapter  4 ). 
 Intestine 
 Th e intestine is a very important segment of the gut where 
the fi nal digestive breakdown of food occurs, and the resulting 
products are absorbed into the blood circulation. Th e surface 
of the intestinal mucosa bears numerous fi ngerlike strictures 
called  villi ( villus singular), and the mucosal cells covering the 
surfaces of individual villi are in turn covered with numerous 
smaller projections, termed  microvilli — perhaps several thou-
sand per individual cell ( fi g.  2.34  ). Collectively these greatly 
enlarge the absorptive surface area that is exposed to the 
chyme within the lumen. Th e membrane of the microvilli has 
embedded enzymes that act strictly in the local environment 
of the microvilli. Th e anterior part of the intestine also re-
ceives digestive enzymes via a small duct that conveys these 
enzymes from the pancreas. Th e liver secretes bile, which is 
stored in the gall bladder and conveyed by a duct to the intes-
tine, where it serves to emulsify lipids, or fats ( fi g.  2.2 ). Collec-
tively these various secretions neutralize the acids from the 
stomach, break fats apart, and further digest the chyme 
within the lumen of the intestine. Because snakes are carni-
vores, many of the digestive enzymes—both in the stomach 
and in the intestine—are proteases that digest protein. 
 Th e chyme is broken, mixed, and moved in a net posterior 
direction by the peristaltic actions of smooth muscle in the 
intestinal wall. Th e arrangement of these muscles involves an 
inner circular layer and an outer longitudinal layer ( fi g.  2.34 ). 
Contraction of the circular layer and simultaneous relaxation 
of the longitudinal layer both constricts and elongates the 
intestinal tube. Alternately, relaxation of the circular layer 
coordinated with active shortening of the longitudinal layer 
results in shortening and distension of the intestinal tube. 
 Th e intestine consists of two principal regions, the ante-
rior  small intestine and the posteriormost segment called 
the  large intestine . Th e large intestine is much shorter than 
the small intestine and usually has an enlarged diameter. 
Following the acidic phase of digestion in the stomach, the 
fi nal stages of digestion and mixing occur in the small intes-
tine. Absorption of the digestive products, including water, 
occurs largely within the large intestine. Th e undigested 
parts of the chyme that are not absorbed are formed into 
feces, which become increasingly more solid in composition 
due to the intestinal absorption of water. Th e feces also 
contain large amounts of bacteria that are passed along 
from the upper parts of the gut where bacterial populations 
fl ourish and participate in digestion.    
 Th e feces empty into the cloaca, which is the most posterior 
segment of the gut ( fi g.  2.35 ). It is a common chamber that 
receives digestive products from the intestine and urinary 
products from the kidney, and is also a passageway for prod-
ucts from the reproductive tract. As such, the cloaca typically 
contains the feces together with a slurry of  uric acid and  urates 
from the kidney. Urates are salts of uric acid. Together these 
form a crystalline waste product of nitrogen metabolism, 
which is excreted by the kidney. Uric acid is poorly soluble in 
water and can be eliminated in a precipitated form, which is 
 
 
 Figure 2.34.   Photomicrographs illustrating histological sections 
through portions of the stomach ( upper photo ) and small intestine 
( lower photo ) of a Dumeril’s Ground Boa ( Acrantophis dumerili ). The 
absorptive epithelial cells of the mucosa are arranged on mucosal folds 
(stomach) or villi (intestine), and the latter especially increase the 
absorptive surface area. Arrows point to the layers of smooth muscle 
in the intestine. The smooth muscle of the mucosa is thin and 
consists of a single cell layer in the intestine (m). The outer smooth 
muscle is circular in arrangement (c), with outer longitudinal muscle 
(l) being thinner and shown only for the intestine. The histological 
stain is Masson’s trichome. Photomicrographs by Elliott Jacobson.  

 66  | How Snakes Work
the familiar white to yellow solid material that is seen together 
with the fecal elimination of snakes. If a snake is in good water 
balance both the feces and the urates might appear quite soft 
or fl uid, especially if these are eliminated after the snake has 
had a good drink of water. On the other hand, if a snake is 
partially dehydrated and has not drunk recently, the feces and 
the urates appear more solid and can actually be very hard and 
compressed. Th is is due to extra water absorption, which prob-
ably occurs in the cloaca as well as the small intestine. Occa-
sionally, excess water absorption from a large volume of feces 
can result in a compaction that forms a blockage and is not 
easily passed by the snake. Th us, access to water is important 
with respect to adequate digestive function in snakes. 
 Th e various enzymes, venom toxins, acid secretions, and 
bacteria chemically reduce the food to elemental compo-
nents of carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids, which are ab-
sorbed into the blood circulation across the wall of the 
intestine. Th e digestive tract can be regarded as an input-
output system, with food entering the mouth and feces ex-
iting the cloacal opening (vent), while water and nutrients 
are taken up and distributed to the body from the digestive 
regions that lie between these “in” and “out” terminal 
 poi nts of the gut. Th e mechanical motions attributable to 
smooth muscle are coordinated largely by nerves that acti-
vate the smooth muscles in the wall of the gut. Th e simulta-
neous coordination of digestive secretions is controlled by 
the physical presence of food in the gut, and by gastrointes-
tinal hormones secreted from endocrine cells in the walls of 
the stomach and intestine. Compared with some other ver-
tebrates (especially mammals), very little is known about 
the control of digestive secretions in snakes, although it is 
assumed to be quite similar.    
 Periodic Feeding 
 Snakes are characterized as  discontinuous ,  intermittent , or 
 periodic feeders. Because rates of metabolism, and therefore 
energy requirements, are relatively low, snakes do not re-
quire a lot of food—at least in comparison with endothermic 
birds and mammals (see  chapter  4  ). Further, because many 
snakes have the capability for feeding on comparatively large 
prey, which they swallow entire, snakes do not need to feed 
often. However, one other consideration is very important. 
Th e period of annual time that is available for feeding and 
growth is variously limited in temperate climates, because 
snakes are dormant or inactive during the colder months and 
cannot digest food at low temperatures. Th erefore, there are 
circumstances in which many species of snakes do not eat as 
frequently as their digestive systems might otherwise per-
mit. Th e requirement for energy varies with many factors 
including temperature, activity, growth, and reproduction. 
 Generally, snakes ingest about 6 to 30 meals per year, 
totaling 55 to 300 percent of their body mass, to meet their 
overall energy needs according to estimates by Harry 
Greene. Very little is known about the frequency of feeding 
by wild snakes in their natural environment, and whether 
prey is suffi  ciently abundant for a given snake population 
or whether it is limited. Studies in which rattlesnakes ( Cro-
talus atrox and  C. horridus ) were artifi cially fed supplemental 
food demonstrated that such food supplementation led to 
increased rates of growth and reproduction. Of course the 
foraging success of individual snakes in a wild population 
will vary, and some may do very well while others may be-
come emaciated and die from malnutrition. Here we can 
appreciate the advantage of the low metabolic rate,  however. 
If mammals cannot fi nd food, generally they will perish 
within a few days or weeks, whereas some species of snakes 
in captivity can survive for more than a year without a 
meal. Some rattlesnakes can survive without food for pe-
riods up to two years. Further, if we consider only the en-
ergy required for routine maintenance, a 50 g garter snake 
in Michigan requires only the equivalent of one 44 g frog to 
sustain itself for an entire year according to estimates by 
Warren Porter and C. Richard Tracy. In another study, Mar-
shall McCue and I estimated that an insular adult Cotton-
mouth in Florida requires only 1 kg of fi sh for annual 
maintenance and activity. Th is would be equivalent to only 
a few small to medium-size fi sh. In a study of foraging 
modes comparing a “lie and wait” Sidewinder Rattlesnake 
 
 
 Figure 2.35.   Cloaca of a Florida Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon 
piscivorus conanti ). This is the posteriormost aspect of the digestive 
tract and receives the digestive wastes from the intestine, fetuses 
from the paired oviducts, and urine from paired ureters. Each oviduct 
connects to one of the paired ovaries, and where the terminal 
segment enters the cloaca it is termed  vagina or  vaginal pouch . The 
vagina at the left has been cut to reveal the ureter that runs alongside 
of it. One also sees the mucosal folds where sperm can be stored. 
Each of the paired ureters communicates with one of the kidneys. 
This snake died from unknown causes and was frozen until the 
tissues were observed following thawing. Photograph by the author. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  67 
 
 
 Figure 2.36.   Relative increases in metabolic rate and wet mass of 
the small intestine, measured as mean changes in Burmese Pythons 
( Python molurus ) following the ingestion of rodent meals. The original 
units were measured as rates of oxygen consumption and grams, 
respectively. These graphs are approximations of the original data and 
are intended only to show relative changes through time (see 
references for Stephen Secor and Jared Diamond). Drawing by the 
author. 
( Crotalus cerastes ) with a widely “active foraging” Coach-
whip ( Masticophis fl agellum ), Stephen Secor and Kenneth 
Nagy found that the more active Coachwhip consumed prey 
energy at a rate about 2.1 times greater than did the less 
active sidewinder. 
 Th e digestive tract is a highly dynamic organ that re-
sponds dramatically to changes in the quantity and quality 
of food. Diff erent sections of the gut become immediately 
active upon the arrival of food or chyme. Additionally, the 
demands for digestion related to feeding lead to changes in 
morphological and physiological features of the gut, in-
cluding increases in metabolic activity and changes in the 
mass and shape of the epithelial lining that double or triple 
the absorptive surface area. Simultaneously, there is an in-
crease in the capacity to secrete digestive enzymes and for 
molecular “transporters” to take up nutrients across the in-
testinal wall. Such a response to feeding is termed  up- 
regulation and may occur within 24 to 48 hours of ingesting a 
meal. Th e responses are fully reversible, and  down-regulation 
occurs in the absence of food or during voluntary fasting. Ex-
tended periods of fasting are characterized by reductions in 
metabolic rate and in the atrophy of the digestive tract.  
 Th e responses to feeding have been especially well studied 
in the Burmese Python,  Python molurus , by Stephen Secor. 
Within one to three days after ingesting a meal, the intestinal 
capacity for nutrient uptake increases from 11 to 24 times that 
of fasting levels, while the intestinal mucosa more than doubles 
in mass ( fi g.  2.36 ). Th ere are also considerable increases in the 
masses of other organs, such as the liver, that are active in pro-
cessing nutrients. Th e up-regulated condition of the intestine 
returns to fasting levels by the time of defecation at 8–14 days. 
Similar up-regulation occurs in the digestive responses of 
snakes that feed infrequently (four- to six-week intervals). 
 In contrast, snakes that feed more frequently (one- to 
two-week intervals) exhibit very little changes in the intes-
tinal mass or capacities for nutrient uptake. Consideration 
of digestive costs suggests that saving energy has probably 
driven the evolution of low mass and low activities of the 
digestive organs during fasting, and of large up-regulated 
responses to ingestion of a meal in species that feed infre-
quently. Generally, the dichotomy of responses I have de-
scribed is seen between ambush foraging snakes (mostly 
pythons, boas, and vipers) and actively foraging snakes that 
feed relatively more frequently in the wild (e.g., many colu-
brid and elapid snakes).    
  Rates, Costs, and Eﬃ  ciency of Digestion 
  Rates of Digestion 
 Rates of digestion in snakes vary considerably depending 
on both the external and internal conditions of the an-
imal. Generally, digestion increases with temperature, but 
only up to some limit. Th us snakes at low body tempera-
tures digest more slowly than do those at higher tempera-
tures, other factors being equal. Further, it seems intuitive 
as well as based in observation that for a given tempera-
ture, it takes a snake longer to digest a large meal (remem-
ber, swallowed whole) than it does to digest a smaller 
meal. But within certain limits the size of prey seems not 
to aff ect digestion rates in some species of snakes (e.g., 
 Th amnophis elegans ,  Vipera aspis ). However, the nature or 
composition of the prey can defi nitely infl uence the diges-
tion rate. Softer prey such as a frog or fi sh is digested 
quite rapidly, within 36 to 72 hours depending on size, 
whereas harder items such as crustaceans or hard-shelled 
insects take longer. Mammals and birds are digested more 
slowly than are fi sh or frogs owing to the presence of hair, 
feathers, claws, or beaks ( fi gs.  2.31 ,  2.37 ). Hard, keratinous 
proteins are more diffi  cult to digest than are softer tis-
sues, and these are typically passed and eliminated intact 
in feces.  

 68  | How Snakes Work
 
 
 Figure 2.37.   Radiographs of a Black Rat Snake ( Pantherophis 
obsoletus ) digesting a chick that was injected with barium. The 
 uppermost image shows the position of the chick in the stomach 
shortly after being swallowed. The descending images that follow 
illustrate the condition of the chick during sequential times following 
ingestion. Photographs by Elliott R. Jacobson.  
 Digestive Eﬃ  ciency 
 Scientists usually quantify the “effi  ciency” of digestion in 
terms of the net energy that is absorbed into the body by 
the digestive tract. Th at is, digestive effi  ciency can be ex-
pressed as the ratio of the absorbed energy to the total en-
ergy that is present in the intact prey before digestion, 
expressed as a decimal fraction or as a percentage. Th e en-
ergy that is neither digested nor absorbed is what appears 
as feces, together with some added bacteria. Generally, di-
gestive effi  ciencies of most squamate reptiles that have 
been studied approach or exceed 90 percent. Th e few mea-
surements in snakes are generally between 85 to 95 percent 
and vary with species, individuals, meal size, and tempera-
ture. If the indigestible hair component is excluded from 
calculations, the digestive effi  ciencies can be extremely 
high—between 99.3 and 99.8 percent! Perhaps the high di-
gestive effi  ciencies are important in species with long inter-
vals between feeding and refl ect the longer passage times 
for feces in these species (see below). 
 Th e high effi  ciencies of digestion have some important 
implications for how snakes increase their acquisition of en-
ergy when there is need. Because the amount of energy ex-
tracted from meals is relatively high, there is not much 
room for improving the energy gain per meal. Further, some 
studies indicate that digestive effi  ciency varies little with 
temperature. Th erefore, the manner by which snakes are 
able to increase their input of chemical energy is to increase 
the rate of feeding and passage of feces, rather than to in-
crease the amount of calories that are absorbed from indi-
vidual meals. Th at is, increasing energy gain from food is a 
game of increasing  rate rather than  effi  ciency  of extraction.    
 Th e effi  ciency achieved depends on the composition of 
the prey. Fur, feathers, and mineralized structures such as 
teeth and some bones are indigestible, as are most plant 
materials. Plants with thin and relatively soft cellular walls 
can be digested by some species, however ( fi g.  2.38 ). 
 Fecal Passage Time 
 Th e formation, storage, and evacuation of feces are impor-
tant features of the digestive processing of food. If we con-
sider the relatively large size of meals that are eaten by 
snakes, the time that feces are held within the lower diges-
tive tract adds a potentially considerable component to the 
overall mass of a snake. Th e time elapsed from ingestion to 
defecation, known as the gut  passage time , typically varies 
from a few hours or a few days in birds and mammals to 
several weeks or longer in other species of vertebrates. 
However, snakes are clearly champions when it comes to 
the range and maximum passage time for fecal matter. 
 Stout and heavy species of terrestrial snakes, especially 
ground-dwelling viperid and boid species, retain and accumu-
late fecal material for periods of months while on a regular 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  69 
feeding schedule. My investigations of the Gaboon Adder,  Bi-
tis gabonica , indicate that these snakes accumulate feces to 
what appears to be a maximum of storage capacity regardless 
of the rate of feeding. Th us, at slower feeding rates the pas-
sage time can be as long as a year or more, whereas at faster 
feeding rates the passage time is reduced to about 1.5 months. 
In either case, feces are accumulated to the extent they repre-
sent about 5 to 20 percent of the total mass of the snake. Th e 
maximum defecation interval that has been observed in the 
Gaboon Adder is 420 days! Other maxima include 174 days in 
 Python molurus and 386 days in  Python curtus . 
 In contrast to the heavy-bodied species just mentioned, 
slender arboreal species of snakes are characterized by rela-
tively rapid passage times—the known minimum being 23 
hours in a Haitian tree snake,  Uromacer oxyrhynchus , to my 
knowledge. Th ere is also a trend among snakes for more ac-
tive species to have shorter passage times than do seden-
tary species. It appears to make sense for more active 
species to void excess fecal mass and thereby lighten the 
load in locomotion. Th is appears to be especially important 
in arboreal species that climb within, or over, foliage that 
might provide weak and unstable support. 
 Th ere is one possible penalty that snakes might pay 
when they retain fecal mass, especially without adequate 
intake of water. Compacted fecal matter can form an intes-
tinal obstruction if the mass of material is large, and/or if 
the material is very dense and hard due to removal of water 
(that is taken up by the gut). Gastrointestinal obstructions 
are known in various captive snakes, and have been re-
ported, albeit rarely, in wild-caught animals. 
 In summary, the storage of fecal mass in snakes varies 
positively with the structural body mass of species, which 
in general refl ects their habitat and foraging mode. For 
whatever reasons arboreal species have evolved slender 
body shape with low mass, the frequent defecation exhib-
ited by these species helps to keep the mass low. On the 
other hand, for whatever reasons the stout, ground-dwell-
ing, ambush predatory vipers and pythons have evolved 
heavy bodies, the accumulation of feces adds to the struc-
tural body mass especially at the posterior end of the an-
imal. Th e posterior trunk of these snakes usually remains 
on the ground as an important anchor during striking, and 
perhaps this is nature’s reason for the evolution of ex-
tremely long passage times. Th us, extremely prolonged re-
tention of feces possibly functions as metabolically inert 
ballast in the heavier species, while simultaneously en-
hancing the maximum uptake of water and nutrients. Void-
ing a large mass of feces that might be stored in this way is 
potentially risky and is greatly facilitated by access to 
drinking water. 
 Th e Energy Cost of Digestion 
 When snakes consume a prey item and digest it, there is an 
energetic cost that is refl ected in an increase in the rate of 
metabolism ( fi g.  2.36 ). Th e increment of metabolism above 
normal resting levels is called  specifi c dynamic action (abbre-
viated  SDA ),  postprandial metabolic response ,  postprandial 
thermogenesis , or  postprandial calorigenic response . SDA rep-
resents the sum total of energy that is expended on the in-
gestion and processing of a meal. Th ese energy costs refl ect 
the mechanical and biochemical processes involved in di-
gestion and the assimilation of digestive products. 
 Th e digestion of an intact meal is an expensive under-
taking, especially for snakes that consume large prey items. 
For example, SDA responses of Burmese Pythons charac-
teristically involve 5- to 44-fold increases in the rate of 
 metabolism measured in these snakes. Stephen Secor 
 estimated that in Burmese Pythons activities of the stom-
ach contributed about 55 percent of SDA, protein synthe  sis 
contributed another 26 percent, gastrointestinal up-
 regulation contributed about 5 percent, and other activities 
about 14 percent. 
 Characteristically, the postfeeding rate of metabolism in-
creases rapidly within 24 hours after feeding, and then de-
clines more slowly. Th e response peaks early, usually within 
24–48 hours, and declines to normal after about 4–12 days 
depending on the species and prey item ( fi g.  2.36 ). Generally, 
species of snakes that feed infrequently have lower rates of 
metabolism when fasting but greater increases of metabo-
lism in SDA, longer durations of elevated metabolism, and 
 
 
 Figure 2.38.   A captive Florida Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon piscivorus 
conanti ) eating marine algae ( Ulva lactuca ) that was tainted with ﬁ sh 
odor. This alga species has soft cell walls and is digestible by the 
snake. Such consumption of plant material probably rarely happens, 
but is possible when Cottonmouths forage along island beaches and 
consume dead ﬁ shes that might be washed ashore along with other 
objects including much marine plant material. Photograph by the 
author. 

 70  | How Snakes Work
higher total extra energy expenditure in SDA than do spe-
cies that feed relatively frequently. Stephen Secor and 
Jared Diamond found that in various species, SDA repre-
sents from 13 to 33 percent of the total energy that is in-
gested with a meal and tends to be higher in infrequent 
feeders compared with frequent feeders. Evidently, how-
ever, down-regulation of the gut ( fi g.  2.36 ) and other organs 
following feeding contributes to the low rates of fasting 
metabolism and saves long-term energy during the periods 
between meals in the infrequent feeders. Arguably, it ap-
pears there has evolved an association between natural 
feeding intervals and the regulation of gut performance in 
snakes.      
 Water Balance in Snakes  
 Water is an essential resource for snakes, just as is food or 
energy. Like other vertebrates, it is important for snakes 
to maintain an appropriate content of body water so that 
the composition of cells and body fl uids are kept within a 
range that is compatible with living processes. Generally, 
the tissues of snakes consist of about 65 to 80 percent 
water, and dehydration below this range can be deleterious 
or lethal. Th erefore, snakes require water for living just as 
they do food. 
 Th ere are three sources of water available to snakes (or 
any other animal). First, there is a certain amount of pre-
formed water that is available in the food that is eaten. Th is 
is called  dietary water . Second, small amounts of water are 
formed during the metabolism of food, after it is broken 
down during digestion and assimilated into tissues. Th is is 
called  metabolic water . Th e third source of water is free 
water in the environment, which ultimately comes from 
rainfall. All three sources of water are part of a snake’s 
“water budget,” but most species depend to some degree on 
drinking fresh water in the environment in order to main-
tain water balance. 
 To remain in water balance, an animal must replenish 
water that is lost from the body. Hence, averaged over 
time, the input of water must equal the summed outputs 
or losses of water, just as the same is true of energy inputs 
and outputs with respect to the food that is required for 
fueling an animal’s metabolism. Th e inputs of water for a 
snake include dietary water, metabolic water, water that is 
obtained by drinking from the environment, and water 
that might leak across the skin or other membranes from 
the environment. Th e latter is potentially quite important 
for aquatic animals, which also accidentally ingest water 
that “leaks” through the mouth during the process of swal-
lowing food. Th is latter water has been referred to as “inci-
dental drinking.” On the output side, the losses of water 
include water that is lost in feces and urine, and water that 
leaks across the skin surfaces either in evaporation, or in 
the case of aquatic animals, water that leaks across the skin 
or exposed membranes in response to osmosis. Th e latter 
can be potentially important for marine animals. Th ese in-
ward and outward fl uxes of water are summarized in  fi gure 
 2.39 and are discussed in more detail in the sections that 
follow.   
 Th e Kidney 
 Th e kidneys of snakes are paired structures located in the 
dorsal body cavity with the right kidney more anterior in 
location than the left kidney ( fi gs.  2.2 ,  6.5 ). Th e kidneys fi l-
ter the blood and remove waste products. Th ey are simpler 
than those of mammals, and they cannot produce urine 
that is more concentrated than the body fl uids. Snakes do 
not have a urinary bladder, and the urine is carried by ducts 
from the kidneys and empties directly into the cloaca. 
 With respect to water balance, urine is liquid derived 
from blood plasma and therefore contains water. Th us, ex-
cretion of wastes in urine requires losses of water. However, 
water can be a waste product in need of excretion if it is 
present in excess amount. In this case, the urine will be less 
concentrated and greater in volume to remove body water. 
On the other hand, if water is in short supply the urine will 
be more concentrated and produced in smaller quantities to 
conserve water. Once urine enters the cloaca it can be fur-
ther modifi ed by the uptake of water—either in the cloaca 
or hindgut—and held for some while or excreted with less 
water. Also, snakes produce  uric acid as the principal form 
of nitrogenous wastes that result from the metabolism of 
protein. Th e white or yellow mass associated with urine or 
feces consists of urates, and these may be present as a slurry 
of soft material or as a solid mass, sometimes nearly stone-
like. Th e diff erences in fl uidity depend on how much water 
has been reclaimed from the urine and urates before their 
elimination. Th us, a dehydrated snake will eliminate solid 
and very dry urates (and also feces) as a result of water re-
tention prior to elimination. Uric acid is an advantageous 
form of nitrogenous excretion because it easily precipitates 
and can be eliminated with minimum loss of water (com-
pared with the other forms of nitrogenous waste, urea and 
ammonium). 
 As a husbandry issue, adequate water is important for 
the normal elimination of feces and urates. If a snake be-
comes dehydrated, these products tend to form a more 
hardened mass that can sometimes create a blockage that 
can be harmful or even lethal to a snake. It can be surmised 
that there are very eff ective mechanisms for conserving 
water by withdrawing and retaining water that is normally 
eliminated with urine and feces, and this occurs in the 
hindgut and cloaca. Th ese processes are not well studied in 
snakes, however. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  71 
 Salt Glands 
 Salt glands are excretory structures that 
are accessory to the kidney and have the 
capability to secrete concentrated salt so-
lutions. Th ese have evolved in various 
taxa of tetrapods that live in dry habitats 
and are lacking a kidney with a capacity to 
excrete very concentrated urine, which 
include birds and various reptiles. Among 
snakes these occur in various lineages of 
marine species living in habitats where 
ingestion of excess salt creates an osmotic 
problem and compounds the tendency to 
lose water to a salty environment. Th e salt 
concentration in the body fl uids of 
snakes, including marine species, is only 
about one-third or less of that present in 
seawater. Th us, marine snakes will tend 
to lose water and gain salt from the envi-
ronment, which can greatly disturb water 
balance. Salt glands help to alleviate this 
dual problem, but they are variously ef-
fective in diff erent species depending on the size of the 
glands and their rate of secretion. 
 Th e salt glands of snakes are relatively small structures 
that are located in the lower jaw beneath or anterior to the 
tongue casing (acrochordids, laticaudines, and hydrophi-
ines), or in the case of homalopsids there is a premaxillary 
location. In other taxa of tetrapods, salt glands are associ-
ated with other locations in the head, including nasal, or-
bital, and oral cavities. 
 Th e presence of salt glands in marine snakes may help to 
confer the ability of these animals to live in seawater. In-
deed, François Brischoux and his colleagues have demon-
strated that species residing in ocean water of higher 
salinity generally possess salt glands that have been shown 
to secrete salts at higher rates than do those of other spe-
cies inhabiting lower salinity water. However, some species 
of marine snakes ( Acrochordus granulatus ,  Laticauda spp. 
and  Pelamis ) require fresh water to avoid dehydration, so in 
these species salt glands might help to regulate salt balance 
and slow the rate of dehydration, but they are not suffi  cient 
alone to maintain water balance. Th ese subjects need to be 
investigated more thoroughly in a broader range of species. 
 Water Flux across the Skin   
 Th e skin is a complex organ that has many functions, in-
cluding regulation of the amount of water that moves 
across the skin, either as a bidirectional osmotic fl ux (e.g., 
aquatic species) or as evaporation from skin surfaces to 
 surrounding air ( fi g.  2.39 ). Th ese movements of water—
either in or out of the skin—are regulated in large part by a 
 permeability barrier  consisting of layered lipids sandwiched 
in between alternating layers of keratin inside the stratum 
corneum of the epidermis (see  chapter  5  ). Within the skin, 
lipid bodies (termed  lamellar granules ) are secreted from dif-
ferentiating  α -cells and subsequently become organized 
into lamellar “sheets” that fi ll the extracellular spaces. 
 Both the quantity and organization of these lipids gener-
ally correlate with the aridity of the habitat in which a 
 species lives. Th e drier the environment, the greater the 
quantity of lipids that occur in the permeability barrier. 
Th is appears to be the mechanistic basis for the generaliza-
tion that species of snakes living in drier terrestrial habitats 
tend to have lower rates of cutaneous evaporative water 
loss, compared with those living in more mesic habitats. 
Among sea kraits ( Laticauda spp.), studies by the author 
and his colleagues have demonstrated that rates of water 
loss across the skin are much lower when snakes are in sea-
water than when they are in air. Sea kraits are partly terres-
trial, however, and species that spend more time on land 
tend to have lower rates of evaporative water loss than do 
those that are more thoroughly aquatic. Finally, those spe-
cies of sea kraits that are relatively more aquatic tend to 
have lower rates of water loss across the skin when in sea-
water than do the species with more terrestrial tendencies. 
In other words, the properties of the skin tend to be “ad-
justed” for conserving water relative to the habitat in which 
a species spends more of its time. 
 In the embryos of egg-laying species of snakes, the em-
bryonic epidermis tends to slough within the egg, and a 
permeability barrier of partial competence is formed within 
the epidermis prior to the snake’s hatching. Th e resistance 
 
 
 Figure 2.39.    Hypothetical water ﬂ uxes in and out of a Central American Rattlesnake 
( Crotalus simus ). The net exchange (over time) determines whether the snake will be in 
positive or negative water balance. This rattlesnake was crossing a road in Guanacaste 
Province, Costa Rica. Photograph by Shauna Lillywhite.  

 72  | How Snakes Work
of the skin to evaporative water loss improves with subse-
quent skin-shedding events, which indicates there is some 
capacity for the skin to improve its barrier eff ectiveness. 
Th ere is some indication that the eff ectiveness of the per-
meability barrier can be improved or “adjusted” during ec-
dysis in response to the aridity of the environment. Further 
research is needed on this subject before it can be general-
ized, however. 
 Drinking Behaviors of Snakes 
 Many persons who have maintained snakes in captivity have 
noted that occasionally certain individuals will stop feeding, 
and that some species are reluctant to eat at all. However, a 
thirsty snake will always, in my experience, drink water. Th e 
voluntary “will” to drink implies a snake is thirsty, and the 
sensation of thirst implies there is a physiological signal re-
lated to dehydration and negative water balance. In wild 
populations, snakes have various opportunities to drink. 
Th ese include standing bodies of water such as ponds or 
lakes, freshwater streams, rainfall, and water that might col-
lect on the body of a coiled snake, or on leaves, small depres-
sions, and so on, during rainstorms and persist for some 
while thereafter. If water is not available, for example during 
a seasonal drought, snakes might go for long periods with-
out a drink. In these circumstances, dehydrating snakes 
might become reclusive and remain down burrows or in 
other places where evaporative losses are mitigated and 
body water is conserved. Generally, snakes that are living in 
arid environments have a suite of adaptations to conserve 
water and/or tolerate a considerable degree of dehydration. 
Some species might be able to depend largely, or perhaps ex-
clusively, on dietary and metabolic water. However, such 
ability has not yet been demonstrated for snakes. 
 Terrestrial species of snakes will generally drink water 
on a somewhat regular basis whenever water balance be-
comes slightly negative. In some cases the consumption of 
water increases following feeding. Digestion requires water, 
followed by production of urine to eliminate nitrogenous 
wastes that result from the metabolic processing of the ab-
sorbed food products. If snakes have access to water, feces 
are eliminated in a moist or wet condition, which also re-
fl ects these water losses. In contrast, recent studies by the 
author and his associates have demonstrated that sea 
snakes are reluctant to drink fresh water unless they have 
been dehydrated to a considerable extent (10 to 20% or 
more loss of body mass in several species). Th is probably 
refl ects an evolutionary suppression of the drinking stim-
ulus related to the infl uence of other traits that conserve 
body water and increase the tolerance to dehydration as 
these snakes adapted to marine existence. 
 David Cundall and his colleagues have investigated the 
biomechanics of drinking in snakes. Many advanced species 
of snakes drink by sucking water into the mouth followed 
by compression of the mouth cavity that forces the water 
into the esophagus. However, some of these species are ca-
pable of drinking without sealing the margins of the mouth, 
which implies that water can be ingested without being de-
pendent on buccal pumping. Opening and closing move-
ments of the jaws are variable, as is the volume of water 
that is ingested with each cycle of jaw movements. Snakes 
drink using a variety of movement patterns, and the jaws 
might be variably “sealed” (or not) in diff erent circum-
stances. In addition to the use of periodic buccal pumping, 
mucosal folds in the mouth of snakes act like a sponge to 
trap water or attract water by capillarity. Cundall and his 
colleagues have proposed a second model for drinking—
termed the “sponge model”—in which water is moved by 
the rhythmic squeezing and relaxation of parts of the 
mouth having channels or surfaces with sponge-like prop-
erties. Some of the adhering water can move in an anterior 
direction, but water that moves in a posterior direction 
goes toward the esophagus. Th e rear part of the mouth 
cavity contains expanded regions that are sponge-like and 
overlain by muscles. Complex movements of these and 
other muscles drive the water. 
 Th e mucosal folds in the mouth that entrap and move 
water are features that likely evolved in relation to the 
stretching of mouth parts around relatively large prey. Th e 
function of these features in drinking is therefore likely to 
represent a secondary use of anatomical traits having an-
other, perhaps principal, function related to feeding. 
 Additional Reading  
   Aubret, F., R. Shine, and X. Bonnet. 2004. Adaptive developmental 
plasticity in snakes.  Nature 431:261–262. 
 Bedford, G. S., and K. A. Christian. 2000. Digestive effi  ciency in 
some Australian pythons.  Copeia 2000:829–834. 
 Bels, V., and K. V. Kardong. 1995. Water drinking in snakes: Evi-
dence for an esophageal sphincter.  Journal of Experimental 
Zoology 272:235–239. 
 Bonnet X., and F. Brischoux. 2008. Th irsty sea snakes forsake ref-
uge during rainfall.  Australian Ecology 33:911–921. 
 Brischoux, F., R. Tingley, R. Shine, and H. B. Lillywhite. 2012. Sa-
linity infl uences the distribution of marine snakes: Implica-
tions for evolutionary transitions to marine life.  Ecography 
35:994–1003. 
 Britt, E. J., A. J. Clark, and A. F. Bennett. 2009. Dental morphol-
ogies in gartersnakes ( Th amnophis ) and their connection to 
dietary preferences.  Copeia 43:252–259. 
 Catania, K. C. 2009. Tentacled snakes turn C-starts to their advan-
tage and predict future prey behavior.  Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences (USA) 106:11183–11187. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  73 
 Catania, K. C. 2010. Born knowing: Tentacled snakes innately pre-
dict future prey behavior.  PLoS ONE 5:1–10. 
 Chippaux, J.-P. 2006.  Snake Venoms and Envenomations . Malabar, 
FL: Krieger Publishing. 
 Chiszar, D., A. Walters, and H. M. Smith. 2008. Rattlesnake prefer-
ence for envenomated prey: Species specifi city.  Journal of Her-
petology 42:764–767. 
 Corbit, A. G., C. Person, and W. K. Hayes. 2013. Constipation associ-
ated with brumation? Intestinal obstruction caused by a fecalith 
in a wild Red Diamond Rattlesnake ( Crotalus ruber ).  Journal of 
Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition . doi:10.1111/jpn.12040. 
 Cox, C. L., and S. M. Secor. 2007. Eff ects of meal size, clutch, and 
metabolism on the energy effi  ciencies of juvenile Burmese py-
thons,  Python molurus .  Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 
A 148:861–868. 
 Cox, C. L., and S. M. Secor. 2008. Matched regulation of gastroin-
testinal performance in the Burmese python,  Python molurus . 
 Journal of Experimental Biology 211:1131–1140. 
 Cundall, D. 2000. Drinking in snakes: Kinematic cycling and water 
transport.  Journal of Experimental Biology 203:2171–2185. 
 Cundall, D. 2002. Envenomation strategies, head form, and feed-
ing ecology in vipers. In G. W. Schuett, M. Höggren, M. E. 
Douglas, and H. W. Greene (eds.),  Biology of the Vipers . Eagle 
Mountain, UT: Eagle Mountain Publishing, pp. 149–161. 
 Cundall, D., E. L. Brainerd, J. Constantino, A. Deufel, D. Grapski, 
and N. J. Kley. 2012. Drinking in snakes: Resolving a biome-
chanical puzzle.  Journal of Experimental Zoology 317:152–172. 
 Cundall, D., and A. Deufel. 2006. Infl uence of the venom delivery 
system on intraoral prey transport in snakes.  Zoologischer An-
zeiger 245:193–210. 
 Cundall, D., and H. W. Greene. 2000. Feeding in snakes. In K. 
Schwenk (ed.),  Feeding: Form, Function, and Evolution in Tetra-
pod Vertebrates . San Diego: Academic Press, pp. 293–333. 
 Daltry, J. C., W. Wüster, and R. S. Th orpe. 1996. Diet and snake 
venom evolution.  Nature 379:537–540. 
 De Queiroz, A., and J. A. Rodríguez-Robles. 2006. Historical con-
tingency and animal diets: Th e origins of egg eating snakes. 
 American Naturalist 167:682–692. 
 Deufel, A., and D. Cundall. 2003. Feeding in  Atractaspis (Serpentes: 
Atractaspididae): A study in confl icting functional constraints. 
 Zoology 106:43–61. 
 DeVault, T. L., and A. R. Krochmal. 2002. Scavenging by snakes: 
An examination of the literature.  Herpetologica 58:429–436. 
 Dmi’el, R. 1998. Skin resistance to evaporative water loss in viperid 
snakes: Habitat aridity versus taxonomic status.  Comparative 
Biochemistry and Physiology 121A:1–5. 
 Fry, B. G., W. Wüster, S. F. R. Ramjan, T. Jackson, P. Martelli, and 
R. M. Kini. 2003. Analysis of Colubroidea snake venoms by liq-
uid chromatography with mass spectrometry: Evolutionary 
and toxinological implications.  Rapid Communications in Mass 
Spectrometry 17:2047–2062. 
 Fry, B. G., N. Vidal, J. A. Normal, F. J. Vonk, H. Scheib, S. F. R. 
Ramjan, S. Kuruppu, K. Fung, S. B. Hedges, M. K. Richardson, 
W. C. Hodgson, V. Ignjatovic, R. Summerhayes, and E. Kochva. 
2006. Early evolution of the venom system in lizards and 
snakes.  Nature 439:584–588. 
 Furry, K., T. Swain, and D. Chiszar. 1991. Stike-induced chemosensory 
searching and trail following by prairie rattlesnakes ( Crotalus viri-
dis ) preying upon deer mice ( Peromyscus maniculatus ): Chemical 
discrimination among individual mice.  Herpetologica 47:69–78. 
 Gartner, G. E. A., and H. W. Greene. 2008. Adaptation in the Afri-
can egg-eating snake: A comparative approach to a classic 
study in evolutionary functional morphology.  Journal of Zool-
ogy 275:368–374. 
 Greenbaum, E., N. Galeva, and M. Jorgensen. 2003. Venom varia-
tion and chemoreception of the viperid  Agkistrodon contortrix : 
Evidence for adaptation.  Journal of Chemical Ecology 29:1741–
1755. 
 Greene, H. W. 1983. Field studies of hunting behavior by bushmas-
ters.  American Zoologist 23:897. 
 Greene, H. W., and G. M. Burghardt. 1978. Behavior and phylog-
eny: Constriction in ancient and modern snakes.  Science 
200:74–77. 
 Hayes, W. K. 2008. Th e snake venom-metering controversy: Levels of 
analysis, assumptions, and evidence. In W. K. Hayes, K. R.  Beaman, 
M. D. Cardwell, and S. P. Bush (eds.),  Th e Biology of Rattlesnakes . 
Loma Linda, CA: Loma Linda University Press, pp. 191–220. 
 Hayes, W. K., S. S. Herbert, J. R. Harrison, and K. L. Wiley. 2008. 
Spitting versus biting: Diff erential venom gland contraction reg-
ulates venom expenditure in the Black-Necked Spitting Cobra, 
 Naja nigricollis nigricollis .  Journal of Herpetology 42:453–460. 
 Herbert, S. S., and W. K. Hayes. 2008. Venom expenditure by rat-
tlesnakes and killing eff ectiveness in rodent prey: Do rattle-
snakes expend optimal amounts of venom? In W. K. Hayes, K. 
R. Beaman, M. D. Cardwell, and S. P. Bush (eds.),  Th e Biology of 
Rattlesnakes . Loma Linda, CA: Loma Linda University Press, 
pp. 221–228. 
 Jackson, K. 2003. Th e evolution of venom-delivery systems in 
snakes.  Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 137:337–354. 
 Jackson, K., N. J. Kley, and E. L. Brainerd. 2004. How snakes eat 
snakes: Th e biomechanical challenges of ophiophagy for the 
California King Snake,  Lampropeltis getula californiae (Serpen-
tes: Colubridae).  Zoology 107:191–200. 
 Janoo, A., and J.-P. Gasc. 1992. High speed motion analysis of the 
predatory strike and fl uorographic study of oesophageal deglu-
tition in  Vipera ammodytes : More than meets the eye.  Amphibia-
Reptilia 13:315–325. 
 Jansa, S. A., and R. S. Voss. 2011. Adaptive evolution of the venom-
targeted vWF protein in opossums that eat pitvipers.  PLoS 
ONE 6:e20997.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020997. 
 Jayne, B. C., H. K. Voris, and P. K. L. Ng. 2002. Snake circumvents 
constraints on prey size.  Nature 418:143. 
 Kardong, K. V. 1974. Kinesis of the jaw apparatus during the strike 
in the cottonmouth snake,  Agkistrodon piscivorus. Forma et 
Functio 7:327–354. 
 Kardong, K. V., and V. Bels. 1998. Rattlesnake strike behavior: 
 Kinematics.  Journal of Experimental Biology 210:837–850. 
 Kardong, K. V., and H. Berkhoudt. 1998. Intraoral transport of 
prey in the reticulated python: Tests of a general tetrapod feed-
ing model.  Zoology 101:7–23. 
 Kardong, K. V., P. Dullemeijer, and J. A. M. Fransen. 1986. Feeding 
mechanism in the rattlesnake,  Crotalus durissus. Amphibia- 
Reptilia 7:271–302. 
 Kardong, K. V., and J. E. Haverly. 1993. Drinking by the common 
boa,  Boa constrictor .  Copeia 1993:808–818. 
 Kardong, K. V., and T. L. Smith. 2002. Proximate factors involved 
in rattlesnake predatory behavior: A review. In G. W. Schuett, 
M. Höggren, M. E. Douglas, and H. W. Greene (eds.),  Biology of 
the Vipers . Eagle Mountain, UT: Eagle Mountain Publishing, 
pp. 253–266. 

 74  | How Snakes Work
 Kley, N. J., and E. L. Brainerd. 1999. Feeding by mandibular raking 
in a snake.  Nature 402:369–370. 
 Kley, N. J., and E. L. Brainerd. 2002. Post-cranial prey transport 
mechanisms in the black pinesnake,  Pituophis melanoleucus 
lodingi : An x-ray videographic study.  Zoology 105:153–164. 
 Lahav, S., and R. Dmi’el. 1996. Skin resistance to water loss in col-
ubrid snakes: Ecological and taxonomic correlations.  Ecoscience 
3:135–139. 
 Lavin-Murcio, P., B. G. Robinson, and K. V. Kardong. 1993. Cues 
involved in relocation of struck prey by rattlesnakes,  Crotalus 
viridis oreganus .  Herpetologica 49:463–469. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 2006. Water relations of tetrapod integument. 
 Journal of Experimental Biology 209:202–226. 
 Lillywhite, H. B., L. S. Babonis, C. M. Sheehy III, and M.-C. Tu. 
2008. Sea snakes ( Laticauda spp.) require fresh drinking water: 
Implication for the distribution and persistence of popula-
tions.  Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 81:785–796. 
 Lillywhite, H. B., F. Brischoux, C. M. Sheehy III, and J. B. Pfaller. 
2012. Dehydration and drinking responses in a pelagic sea 
snake.  Integrative and Comparative Biology 52:227–234. 
 Lillywhite, H. B., P. de Delva, and B. P. Noonan. 2002. Patterns of 
gut passage time and the chronic retention of fecal mass in vi-
perid snakes. In G. W. Schuett, M. Höggren, M. E. Douglas, and 
H. W. Greene (eds.),  Biology of the Vipers . Eagle Mountain, UT: 
Eagle Mountain Publishing, pp. 497–506. 
 Lillywhite, H. B., J. G. Menon, G. K. Menon, C. M. Sheehy III, and 
M.-C. Tu. 2009. Water exchange and permeability properties of 
the skin in three species of amphibious sea snakes ( Laticauda 
spp.).  Journal of Experimental Biology 212:1921–1929. 
 Mackessy, S. P., and L. M. Baxter. 2006. Bioweapons synthesis and 
storage: Th e venom gland of front-fanged snakes.  Zoologischer 
Anzeiger 245:147–159. 
 McCue, M. D. 2005. Enzyme activities and biological functions of 
snake venoms.  Applied Herpetology 2:109–123. 
 McCue, M. D. 2007. Prey envenomation does not improve diges-
tive performance in Western Diamondback Rattlesnakes ( Cro-
talus atrox ).  Journal of Experimental Zoology 307A:568–577. 
 McCue, M. D. 2007. Western Diamondback Rattlesnakes demon-
strate physiological and biochemical strategies for tolerating pro-
longed starvation.  Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 80:25–34. 
 McCue, M. D., and H. B. Lillywhite. 2002. Oxygen consumption 
and the energetics of island-dwelling Florida Cottonmouth 
snakes.  Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 75:165–178. 
 McCue, M. D., H. B. Lillywhite, and S. J. Beaupre. 2012. Physio-
logical responses to starvation in snakes: Low energy special-
ists. In M. D. McCue (ed.),  Comparative Physiology of Fasting, 
Starvation, and Food Limitation . Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 
pp. 103–131. 
 Mori, A., H. Ota, and N. Kamezaki. 1999. Foraging on sea turtle 
nesting beaches: Flexible foraging tactics by  Dinodon semicari-
natum (Serpentes: Colubridae). In H. Ota (ed.),  Tropical Island 
Herpetofauna: Origin, Current Diversity, and Conservation . New 
York: Elsevier Science, pp. 99–128. 
 Pahari, S., S. P. Mackessy, and R. M. Kini. 2007. Th e venom gland 
transcriptome of the Desert Massasauga Rattlesnake ( Sistru-
rus catenatus edwardsii ): Towards an understanding of venom 
composition among advanced snakes (superfamily Colubroi-
dea).  BMC Molecular Biology 8:115. 
 Pope, C. H. 1958. Fatal bite of captive African rear-fanged snake 
( Dispholidus ).  Copeia 1958:280–282. 
 Porter, W. P., and C. R. Tracy. 1974. Modeling the eff ects of temper-
ature changes on the ecology of the garter snake and leopard 
frog. In J. W. Gibbons and R. R. Sharitz (eds.),  Th ermal Ecology 
Symposium . AEC Symp. Ser. Conf-739505, Oak Ridge, pp. 594–
609. 
 Pough, F. H., and J. D. Groves. 1983. Specializations of the body 
form and food habits of snakes.  American Zoologist 23:443–454. 
 Reinert, H. K., D. Cundall, and L. M. Bushar. 1987. Foraging behav-
ior of the timber rattlesnake,  Crotalus horridus .  Copeia 
1984:976–981. 
 Rodriguez-Robles, J. A., C. J. Bell, and H. W. Greene. 1999. Gape 
size and evolution of diet in snakes: Feeding ecology of erycine 
boas.  Journal of Zoology  (London) 248:49–58. 
 Roberts, J. B., and H. B. Lillywhite. 1980. Lipid barrier to water 
exchange in reptile epidermis.  Science 207:1077–1079. 
 Roberts, J. B., and H. B. Lillywhite. 1983. Lipids and the permeabil-
ity of epidermis from snakes.  Journal of Experimental Zoology 
228:1–9. 
 Schuett, G. W., D. L. Hardy Sr., R. L. Earley, and H. W. Greene. 
2005. Does prey size induce head skeleton phenotypic plastic-
ity during early ontogeny in the snake Boa constrictor?  Journal 
of Zoology (London) 267:363–369. 
 Secor, S. M. 1995. Ecological aspects of foraging mode for the 
snakes  Crotalus cerastes and  Masticophis fl agellum .  Herpetologi-
cal Monographs 9:169–186. 
 Secor, S. M. 2003. Gastric function and its contribution to the 
postprandial metabolic response of the Burmese python  
Python molurus .  Journal of Experimental Biology 206:1621–
1630. 
 Secor, S. M. 2009. Specifi c dynamic action: A review of the post-
prandial metabolic response.  Journal of Comparative Physiology 
B 179:1–56. 
 Secor, S. M., and J. M. Diamond. 1995. Adaptive responses to feed-
ing in Burmese Pythons: Pay before pumping.  Journal of Exper-
imental Biology 198:1313–1325. 
 Secor, S. M., and J. M. Diamond. 1998. A vertebrate model of ex-
treme physiological regulation.  Nature 395:659–662. 
 Secor, S. M., and J. M. Diamond. 2000. Evolution of regulatory 
responses to feeding in snakes.  Physiological and Biochemical 
Zoology 73:123–141. 
 Secor, S. M., and K. A. Nagy. 1994. Energetic correlates of foraging 
mode for the snakes  Crotalus cerastes  and  Masticophis fl agellum . 
 Ecology 75:1600–1614. 
 Shine, R. 1980. Ecology of the Australian death adder  Acanthophis 
antarcticus (Elapidae): Evidence for convergence with the 
Viperidae.  Herpetologica 36:281–289. 
 Smith, T. L., G. D. E. Povel, and K. V. Kardong. 2002. Predatory 
strike of the tentacle snake ( Erpeton tentaculatum ).  Journal of 
Zoology , London 256:233–242. 
 Taub, A. M. 1967. Comparative histological studies of Duvernoy’s 
gland of colubrid snakes.  Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History 138:1–50. 
 Taylor, E. N., M. A. Malawy, D. M. Browning, S. V. Lemar, and D. F. 
DeNardo. 2005. Eff ects of food supplementation on the physi-
ological ecology of female Western diamond-backed rattle-
snakes ( Crotalus atrox ).  Oecologia 144:206–213. 

Feeding, Digestion, and Water Balance  |  75 
 Tu, M.-C., H. B. Lillywhite, J. G. Menon, and G. K. Menon. 2002. 
Postnatal ecdysis establishes the permeability barrier in snake 
skin: New insights into lipid barrier structures.  Journal of 
 Experimental Biology 205:3019–3030. 
 Vidal, N. 2002. Colubroid systematics: Evidence for an early ap-
pearance of the venom apparatus followed by extensive evolu-
tionary tinkering.  Journal of Toxicology, Toxin Reviews 21:21–41. 
 Vincent, S. E., A. Herrel, and D. J. Irschick. 2004. Ontogeny of in-
tersexual head shape and prey selection in the pitviper  Agkis-
trodon piscivorus .  Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 
81:151–159. 
 Vincent, S. E., A. Herrel, and D. J. Irschick. 2005. Comparisons of 
aquatic versus terrestrial predatory strikes in the pitviper, 
 Agkistrodon piscivorus .  Journal of Experimental Zoology 303A:
476–488. 
 Young, B. A., A. Aguiar, and H. B. Lillywhite. 2008. Foraging cues 
used by insular Florida Cottonmouths,  Agkistrodon piscivorus 
conanti .  South American Journal of Herpetology 3:135–144. 
 Young, B. A., K. Dunlap, K. Koenig, and M. Singer. 2004. The 
buccal buckle: The functional morphology of venom spit-
ting in cobras.  Journal of Experimental Biology 207:3483–
3494. 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

 | 77
 Limbless Movement 
 One of the truly remarkable attributes of snakes is how 
well these limbless animals move through a variety of 
 landscapes—over, through, or around features of their 
highly varied habitats. Snakes swim, dive, move rapidly 
through bushes or across rocks, crawl across featureless sand 
terrain, climb vertically up trees where they move swiftly 
through canopy, and, in some species, catapult from great 
heights and glide through the air to land without harm on 
the ground below. Even the more usual or common move-
ments over terrestrial landscapes can be extraordinary in 
their appearances. I recall vividly on several occasions while 
looking for snakes that might be crossing country roads, 
when a large, dark-colored snake such as a Southern Black 
Racer or Southern Pacifi c Rattlesnake moved on pavement 
and progressed without interruption to cross to the other 
side. In many such cases the snake’s movement conjured the 
image of black oil pouring onto the road and fl owing, seem-
ingly frictionless, across the road surface. A similar scene 
was witnessed on numerous occasions while driving slowly 
and looking for snakes during the evening on paved roads in 
the California desert. Sidewinder Rattlesnakes, appearing 
white when illuminated by the headlights of an automobile, 
appeared to glide across the road as they were watched from 
a distance. On other snake hunts, off -road, I recall hearing 
countless “swishes” in dry, summer grasses as racers or 
whipsnakes moved off  rapidly in advance of my walking, 
never to be seen as they disappeared into the drying vegeta-
tion. I was only aware of their presence because of the sounds 
that were created by undulating, slender bodies moving 
through stems and leaves of the summer grasses. Once at a 
beach near Naples, Florida, I heard a distinct sound 
 resembling a  low-pitched whirring noise as a magnifi cent 
large Eastern Coachwhip snake undulated across damp sand 
to escape into nearby vegetation. I was surprised, and simul-
taneously delighted, by the sound that was produced when 
the belly scales of the snake met the damp sand of the beach. 
Of course, occasional captures or sightings of snakes con-
fi rmed the meaning of these particular sounds, which are 
available to anyone who is alert to his or her surroundings 
while enjoying a summer walk. 
 Th e more one thinks about how snakes move, and their 
ability to move rapidly and gracefully over many surfaces, 
the more we are in awe at the amazing, swift, and seem-
ingly eff ortless locomotion of snakes when moving with-
out limbs. How do snakes perform the amazing and 
impressive feats that anyone can witness in the appro-
priate circumstances? Obviously, we need to learn more 
about the structure of the snake’s body, especially the 
skeletal elements and their attached muscles with over-
lying skin.  
 Muscle and Skeletal Adaptations  
 Th e body of a snake is elongated and limbless, and these 
conditions have evolved many times in various vertebrate 
lineages—for example fi shes, salamanders, and lizards. 
Snakes, however, exhibit marvelous variation and seeming 
perfection of these attributes. To simplify matters, one 
might consider a snake to be a simple tube with elongated 
organs inside, separated by numerous supporting bones 
with muscles to move them and a tough but pliable skin cov-
ering the outside ( fi gs.  2.2 ,  6.9 ,  6.12 ). Relative to standing 
quadrupedal vertebrates, snakes have a low center of mass 
3
 LOCOMOTION: HOW SNAKES MOVE  
 There has been much conjecture about the methods of locomotion of 
serpents. The speed, strength and agility of many species appears 
astonishing . . .  . Here is true specialization, presenting a group of creatures 
which have lost their limbs yet acquired remarkable dexterity with apparently 
little effort, through no visible means. 
 —Raymond L. Ditmars,  Snakes of the World (1943), p. 16  

 78  | How Snakes Work
that is close to the ground. Th e limbless body presents a 
large area of frictional contact with the ground (but see be-
low), and the mass of the snake is distributed over an ex-
tended area, rather than two or four points of contact that 
are associated with feet, as in mammals. 
 One obvious problem with elongating the body is the 
internal organs must be adjusted, reshaped, and reorga-
nized to fi t into the narrow body without sacrifi cing mo-
bility. Th us, many of the internal organs of snakes are 
elongate in comparison with those of less attenuated ani-
mals ( fi g.  2.2 ). Th is condition is especially true for the lung, 
liver, the  kidneys, and the testes. Th e heart is also elon-
gated and  comparatively slender in arboreal species of 
snakes, many of which are exceptionally thin.  
 In most snakes the internal organs are contained within 
an elongated body cavity that is surrounded by skeletal el-
ements above and on both sides. Th ese skeletal elements 
consist of vertebrae and attached ribs. Th e latter in most 
cases are curved outward and downward, with their free 
ends positioned at or near the ventrolateral edges of the 
snake just above the ground ( fi g.  1.3 ). Th e belly plates are 
underlain within the snake by connective tissue and 
muscle, so the ribs and vertebral column surround the in-
ternal organs except for the ventral aspect of the animal. 
In many terrestrial snakes the ventral boundary of the in-
ternal body cavity is relatively wide, but in some other 
groups, for example, sea snakes, the body is considerably 
compressed in the vertical plane for swimming and the tips 
of the ribs on each side of the body lie relatively closer to-
gether ( fi gs.  3.1 ,  5.7 ). In any event, the evolutionary elonga-
tion of a limbless body has resulted in an extended 
vertebral column with many well-developed vertebrae. Hu-
mans, for example, have 12 vertebrae articulating with ribs 
that enclose the thoracic cavity, and these elements are ab-
sent from much of the body length (if the legs are in-
cluded). Many species of fi sh typically have 30 to 60 
vertebrae, including the body and the tail. In contrast, 
snakes usually have more than 100 vertebrae in the body 
alone, and some species have more than 400 vertebrae ex-
tending from the neck to near the tip of the tail. As a re-
sult, snakes are extremely fl exible. Ribs are distributed 
along the length of the body, but not the tail ( fi g.  1.3 ). 
 Th e number of vertebrae possessed by a snake is related 
to its maximum length, and it therefore appears that the 
number of vertebrae has evolved in response to selection on 
body size. Studies by Lars Lindell also show, however, that 
the number of vertebrae can be related to behavior and 
ecology, apart from being aff ected by body size. For ex-
ample, constricting species have more vertebrae per unit of 
size than do nonconstricting species, and burrowing spe-
cies tend to have fewer vertebrae per unit of size than do 
species that occupy other habitats. Th e number of vertebrae 
can also aff ect the locomotion of snakes. Snakes with more 
vertebrae are generally slower than those having fewer. 
 All movements of snakes are dependent on the interac-
tions between the elongate skeleton and the muscles that 
attach to them. A common feature that is present in most 
(but not all) patterns of snake locomotion is that vertebral 
bending is used in various ways to generate propulsive 
forces. Commonly, undulating forms of locomotion depend 
on waves of lateral bending that are propagated from head 
to tail. Th e vertebrae of snakes have many accessory ele-
ments that resist torsion, and the various parts are aligned 
such that lateral bending is generally easier than is bending 
in the dorsal-to-ventral plane. Exceptions are the ability of 
the neck to bend during displays of the well-known “hood” 
of cobras ( fi g.  1.39  ), and the prehensile tails of various arbo-
real species such as rat snakes, vine snakes, and many boas 
( fi g.  2.20 ). 
 Many aquatic and fast-moving terrestrial species of 
sn akes possess vertebrae with articulating parts called  zyg-
apophyses that are prominently broad with lateral extension 
( fi g.  3.2 ). Presumably, this increases the eff ectiveness of the 
lever systems involved with muscles that fl ex the vertebral 
column laterally. In these snakes the articulating surfaces 
also tend to be relatively small, and the vertebrae tend to be 
long and narrow. In arboreal species of snakes, the structure 
of the zygapophyses provides a bony shelf on which attach-
ments of muscles can act to lock the otherwise fl exible verte-
bral column into a rigid beam to facilitate the snake extending 
the unsupported body considerable distances when it climbs 
from one branch of a tree to another.  
 Th e axial musculature of snakes is extremely complex 
with many muscles and tendons that have origins and in-
sertions at various locations with respect to the axial skel-
eton ( fi g.  3.3  ). Collectively, these muscles have segments 
that form longitudinal columns and span many ribs. If one 
thinks about it, the central nervous system of a snake must 
do an amazing job of integrating information about the 
landscape across which it moves, and simultaneously acti-
vate the requisite muscles in an appropriate pattern all 
along the length of the body. For long-bodied species, espe-
cially, this requires superb neural control to ensure that the 
appropriate muscles are activated with precise timing at 
variable distances from the brain, which serves as a “com-
mand center.” 
 Various muscles act as coherent units. For example, the 
 spinalis-semispinalis ,  longissimus dorsi , and  iliocostalis con-
sist of overlapping segments that form longitudinal col-
umns ( fi g.  3.3 ). Th ese are  epaxial  muscles and have been 
shown to be activated to provide most of the power and 
control that are required for the undulatory movements of 
snakes. Th e various muscle actions cause bending of the 
body and also stabilize the ribs against pulling when the 

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  79 
 
 
 Figure 3.1.   Underwater views of the Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) illustrating the vertically ﬂ attened body when the snake is 
swimming or ﬂ oating in the ocean. Individual ribs can be seen in the  upper photo , and the absence of broad ventral scutes can be seen in the 
 lower photo (arrow). The skin below the ribs is ﬂ attened into a ventral body keel. These snakes were photographed in Costa Rica by Joseph Pfaller. 
body bends laterally. Some of the axial muscles extend over 
large numbers of vertebrae, and elongated tendons form 
connections between these muscles ( fi g.  3.3 ). In fast-mov-
ing species, the distances spanned by some muscle-tendon 
chains extend over 40 consecutive ribs (or vertebral units), 
whereas in slower species the same muscle units may span 
fewer than 9 vertebral units. Relatively short muscle units 
are thought to facilitate the force of constriction, which 
tends to be associated with slower-moving snakes. Con-
strictors are relatively less “stiff ” and have greater fl exibility 
than many faster-moving snakes. Th e evolution of vertebral 
number and, in some cases shorter muscle segments, seems 
to account in part for this diff erence. In contrast, the longer 
muscle-tendon units characteristic of the faster snakes 

 80  | How Snakes Work
might enable a snake to utilize longer undulations, theoret-
ically with more effi  cient use of power due to having fewer 
points of force application and dissipation of energy in 
overcoming lateral resistance (see below). A point of force 
application (from snake to a physical feature in the environ-
ment) is called a  resistance site ( fi g.  3.4 ). Elongated tendons 
add length to a contractile unit while minimizing the muscle 
involved, which has greater mass. Generally, studies have 
demonstrated that much of the variation in segmental 
length of the locomotor muscles is related to habitat, body 
form, and the manner of movement (see below). 
 Locomotion: How Do Snakes Move?  
 A simple game that one can engage to illustrate the amazing 
locomotor adaptations of snakes is to lie on the fl oor with 
arms held straight back against the side of the body and, 
while holding this position, try to move forward without 
using arms, hands, or feet. Th is sounds simple and prob-
ably silly, but after some while during serious attempts at 
moving without the use of arms or legs, one begins to re-
alize that appropriate forces are necessary and missing due 
to the inadequate structure and function 
of the human skeleton and the muscles 
attached to it. Similarly, one can also try 
this in water. Again, after a short time 
making serious attempts to glide for-
ward like a snake, one appreciates the 
fact that the human body, while capable 
of bending at the waist, is not designed 
for eff ective undulating movements that 
are capable of creating forward propul-
sion in water. But we are limbed crea-
tures, so we swim using our arms and 
legs. Following these simple and enter-
taining games, watch a snake carefully as 
it moves, and think about the amazing 
movements you see in context of the fea-
tures that are described in this chapter.    
 Aquatic Locomotion: 
Swimming in Water  
 All living aquatic reptiles—including 
 crocodilians, turtles, and lizards, as well 
as snakes—are secondary swimmers, in-
sofar as these aquatic species evolved 
from terrestrial ancestors. Interestingly, 
all snakes can swim—some better than 
others—and all species have the ability to 
undulate in water, usually with the head 
held up while fl oating due to infl ation of 
the elongated lung. Sometimes, the conscious and pur-
poseful aquatic tendencies of snakes are surprising. For 
 example, Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnakes,  Crotalus ada-
manteus , often enter marine waters voluntarily, and they are 
regularly sighted as they swim between islands in the coastal 
waters of Florida. Indeed, some of the more plentiful, re-
maining populations of this species are on the coastal keys of 
Florida’s Gulf coast or the East coast intracoastal waterway. 
Some rattlesnakes have been sighted more than 10 miles 
from shore in the Gulf of Mexico. In Southern California, 
Red Diamond Rattlesnakes,  Crotalus ruber , are occasionally 
washed down rivers during periods of high rainfall. Subse-
quently, they can be seen swimming in off shore ocean waters 
or crawling onto beaches. Unlike rattlesnakes in the eastern 
United States, however, these are not likely to be in the ocean 
water out of choice.  
 All aquatic snakes swim by movements called  undulation , 
regardless of the type of locomotion their terrestrial rela-
tives might have used on land. Th is is the most ubiquitous 
form of swimming and occurs in representatives from all 
classes of vertebrates except birds. Snakes undulate with 
lateral movements, in contrast with specialized marine 
 
 
 Figure 3.2.   A segment of the vertebral column of a Cottonmouth snake ( Agkistrodon 
piscivorus ) showing several vertebrae with articulating ribs. The head of each rib 
( capitulum ) articulates with a single vertebra. The  zygapophyses provide surfaces for 
articulation between successive neural arches, allowing some degree of horizontal (and 
lesser vertical) movement but preventing undue torsion. Skeleton courtesy of the 
Florida Museum of Natural History and photographed by the author. 

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  81 
mammals, which undulate in a vertical plane. Undulatory 
locomotion can be illustrated by the swimming movements 
of a sea snake. In smooth propulsive movements, the body 
is bent into a wave that travels backward along the body 
( fi g.  3.5 ). Each body segment moves from side to side as suc-
cessive waves move from head to tail. As each undulating 
wave travels backward, water is accelerated to the side and 
toward the rear by the rear-facing segment of the body, 
which produces a propulsive force by pushing against the 
water. Almost immediately the water is acted on by the next 
propulsive segment of the wave. 
 Th e amplitude of lateral movements and the tendency for 
undulating body segments to act more directly backward 
(opposite to forward movement) with propulsive force 
against the water tend to increase toward the tail. Th at is, the 
angle of the body relative to the overall direction of swim-
ming tends to increase and thereby accelerate the water rear-
ward. Eventually, after being infl uenced by all the propulsive 
segments of the entire body, water is “discharged” into a 
wake beyond the tip of the tail or body ( fi g.  3.5 ). Th ese as-
pects of the locomotion may not be obvious to a casual ob-
server who watches a snake swim rapidly across a pond or 
a stream. 
 Th e swimming behavior of Yellow-bellied Sea Snakes 
 ( Pelamis platurus ) has been studied by a team of investiga-
tors led by Jeff rey Graham at the Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography. Th e swimming movements are very much 
like that of an eel (termed  anguilliform swimming). During 
near-surface swimming there are four half-waves present 
along the body having amplitudes that increase toward the 
tail. Routine swimming velocities ranged up to 20 cm/s 
when snakes were near or at the surface, while swimming 
velocities were lower at 1–8 cm/s when snakes swam below 
the surface. During subsurface swimming the snake typi-
cally assumes a posture in which the tail is elevated—also 
characteristic of other sea snakes—and the posterior part of 
 
 
 Figure 3.3.   Axial muscles of snakes, used in locomotion. The  upper photograph illustrates a dissection of the axial muscles in a preserved rat 
snake ( Pantherophis obsoletus ). The  lower photograph illustrates ﬁ ne dissection of a preserved  Ahaetulla prasina , illustrating fused and 
elongate tendons (arrows) associated with the anterior  spinalis semispinalis muscles. Note the individual muscle units associated with each 
tendon to the left of each respective element in the ﬁ gure. This illustrates an unusual morphology located in the trunk near the head, and is not 
typical. The scale bar at the lower left of this photograph equals 1 cm. Abbreviations: IC,  iliocostalis ; LD,  longissimus dorsi ; M,  multiﬁ dus ; SP, 
 spinalis ; SSP,  semispinalis . Dissections and photographs by Phil Nicodemo. 

 82  | How Snakes Work
 
 
 Figure 3.4.    A Cat-eyed Snake ( Leptodeira annulata ) crawling vertically up a rock face in Guanacaste, Costa Rica. 
Points of force application, called  resistance sites , are indicated by the solid black arrows. These are places where a 
physical irregularity in the rock surface provides a “catch” where the snake’s body pushes and creates propulsive force 
as an undulation passes the point. The summed reaction forces at these points provide the force vector that moves the 
snake forward, or upward, on the rock face. The resistance site near the center of the photograph is shown with 
enlargement to its  left . The white “x” indicates the point where the body is pushing maximally against the resistance 
site. Notice how the snake’s body is “tightened” at this point to exert force against the rock. At the  lower right a 
second snake ( Leptodeira nigrofasciata ) is shown crawling up a rock face. Here a prominent resistance site (x and arrow) 
is illustrated where there is a distinct projection on the rock face. This feature is shown with magniﬁ cation in the 
projected enlargement (follow broken white arrowheads). Snakes were photographed in Guanacaste, Costa Rica:  L. 
annulata by Coleman Sheehy III;  L. nigrofasciata by Shauna Lillywhite. 

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  83 
the body assumes a nearly vertical orientation. Swimming in 
this posture involves torsional and rolling motions rather 
than simple undulations, and these may contribute to 
thrust. Swimming speeds measured in other species of both 
laticaudine and hydrophiine sea snakes by Richard Shine 
and his coworkers range between mean values of 23 and 
141 cm/s, with males swimming faster than females. Am-
phibious sea snakes swim faster in water than they crawl 
when they are on land. 
 Th rust is the forward-acting force on the animal and 
equals the sum of all contributions of the propulsive seg-
ments (imagine the length of the snake being divided up into 
as many segments as you like, each interacting against the 
surrounding water at variable angles). Th e various  propulsive 
segments do not contribute equally to thrust. Th e more pos-
terior body segments move with greater amplitude; hence, 
the posterior parts of the body move faster through greater 
distances and “push” against the water with vectors of pro-
pulsive force that act more directly toward the tail. Th erefore, 
the greater forces are more nearly aligned with the direction 
of movement. Th is principle is illustrated in  fi g.  3.5 .  
 Th e propulsive force depends on the mass of the water 
aff ected by each propulsive segment, which depends, in 
turn, on body shape. Th e depth, or width, of the body in-
creases the propulsive force. Because the more posterior 
parts of the body contribute more to thrust, forces are max-
imized when the greatest depth of the body is posterior. 
Th is is precisely the way the body is designed in many of the 
 
 
 Figure 3.5.    A swimming Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) near the Guanacaste coast of Costa Rica illustrates the forces that 
contribute to its movement through water. The muscles of the snake create waves of undulation that move backward along the body, 
progressing from the neck to the paddle-shaped tail. Each undulating wave presses against the water to produce a  propulsive force . The water 
in turn creates a  reaction force , which acts in the opposite direction and produces forward  thrust . The directions of the propulsive forces 
generated by a hypothetical body segment (yellow) are indicated by arrows at the left, including component vectors that act laterally or 
sideways at right angles to the direction of movement. The magnitude of each force is indicated by the length of the respective arrow. The 
collective forces act more or less equally on each side of the body as waves progress from the head to tail. Therefore, the lateral force vectors 
cancel and add nothing to the thrust that moves the snake forward. The vector components are further illustrated in the lower diagram to the 
right of the snake, where the edge of a body segment is represented by the yellow curved line. Similarly, at the left-hand side of the snake one 
sees that both the direction and magnitude of the propulsive forces change in relation to the curvature of the body, again represented by the 
yellow curved line. Only a single force vector is illustrated in more detail to the right of the snake. The wavelets that are evident in the water 
adjacent to the snake are produced by the undulating waves of the snake’s body pushing against the water. Note that these are greater and 
broader near the tail end of the snake, where the larger components of thrust are produced by the tail, which can be seen in this photo to be 
“pushing” more in the backward direction than sideward against the water. Photograph and labeling by the author. 

 84  | How Snakes Work
fully aquatic sea snakes ( fi g.  3.6 ). However, there are nearly 
always exceptions to general rules in nature, and the Yel-
low-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) undulates its body 
to move backward as well as forward. Th is species is pelagic 
and spends time fl oating on the surface of the sea, waiting 
to capture fi shes that attempt to hide beneath objects in-
cluding the snake. Swimming backward seems to be a ma-
neuvering strategy, which might explain the more uniform 
body shape that characterizes this species ( fi g.  1.44 ). 
 Th e swimming performance of an aquatic animal depends 
not only on thrust propelling it forward, but also on over-
coming forces that resist the forward motion. Such forces are, 
collectively or individually, referred to as  resistance . Th e ori-
gins of resistance are complex but can be divided into several 
components. First is an  inertial  component due to mass of 
the animal and the enveloping water around it. Th e inertial 
force predominates when an animal has large size and rela-
tively low velocity. Second is a  drag force  attributable to vis-
cosity of the water, which is equivalent to friction. Th ird is a 
 vertical force attributable to gravity. If an animal is negatively 
buoyant, or has a tendency to sink in water, this decreases the 
total resistance when an animal is swimming toward the 
bottom, and, conversely, it increases the resistance when 
the swimming is toward the surface. Fourth, if an animal is 
turning,  centrifugal acceleration adds to the resistance. Th is 
force acts at right angles to the forces resisting forward move-
ment. Th e relative magnitudes of the resistance forces vary 
with the type of swimming. When inertial forces dominate 
drag forces, then an object will usually continue to move for a 
considerable distance after it stops producing thrust, as oc-
curs when boats shut off  their engines.  
 Of the forces mentioned, the drag force is the most 
complex. It arises primarily from viscous eff ects in the  bou n-
dary layer , which refers to a thin fi lm of water that immediately 
surrounds the moving snake. In physical terms, the boundary 
layer is the region of water adjacent to the animal’s surface 
where the velocity of water relative to the snake decreases 
from near zero (at the body surface) to that of surrounding, 
undisturbed water (called the “free stream” velocity) with in-
creasing distance away from the snake ( fi g.  3.7 ). In other words, 
there is a gradient of velocity extending outward in water away 
from the snake’s surface. Energy is dissipated in shearing 
forces that resist a distortion of the adjacent “layers” of water. 
Stated another way, there is frictional dissipation of energy as 
adjacent layers of water try to “slide” past each other. Here fric-
tion is related to the “stickiness” of fl uid in the adjacent inter-
acting layers of water. (In this description the reader must 
imagine a layer of water to consist of a three-dimension sheet, 
which includes all the water of a particular velocity and ex-
tends as a continuous envelope around the snake. Th e next 
adjacent sheet, or layer, moves at a slightly diff erent velocity, 
as long as one is within the boundary layer, and so on.) 
 
 
 Figure 3.6.    A Black-headed Sea Snake ( Hydrophis melanocephalus ) 
photographed on a board to illustrate the overall body morphology 
( left ). Note that the body increases in depth toward its posterior end 
where the tail terminates in a broad “paddle.” The smaller head and 
neck are related to feeding habits that involve probing the head into 
small holes or crevices in the sea ﬂ oor or coral. This specimen was 
photographed at Heron Island on the Great Barrier Reef of Australia. 
The snake on the  right is another species of  Hydrophis ( H. elegans ) 
collected near Weipa on the Gulf of Carpentaria. The two snakes 
illustrate variability in the body form of these related species. Not all 
sea snakes exhibit the extreme morphology of  H. melanocephalus , 
which is used here simply to illustrate some of the features that are 
discussed in the text. Photographs by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 3.7.   Illustration of a boundary layer of ﬂ uid next to a 
hypothetical patch of skin. The length of the horizontal arrows 
represents the velocity of the ﬂ uid, which increases with distance 
away from the skin surface (*). The boundary layer ends where the 
velocity becomes constant with further distance, which is called the 
“free stream.” Drawing by the author. 

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  85 
 Th e magnitude of the drag force depends on the fric-
tional properties of skin, the area that is in contact with 
water, and how the boundary layer interacts with the rest of 
the fl ow around the animal. During high rates of accelera-
tion, the boundary layer gradually increases in thickness. 
Initially, although acceleration is high, the speed or actual 
velocity of movement is low. Th erefore, the frictional drag is 
small during fast starts, and the resistance to movement is 
dominated largely by inertial forces. Th is can be very impor-
tant, as we will see in the following discussion. 
 With respect to periodic or intermittent (stop-and-go) 
swimming, it is advantageous for the propulsive segments to 
maximize thrust. Because the frictional drag is relatively 
small during accelerations, a propulsive segment with large 
area has a relatively small penalty in terms of drag. Th e prin-
cipal source of resistance for intermittent swimming is the 
mass of the system, or more correctly the nonmuscular “dead 
weight.” Adaptations of morphology that reduce the dead 
weight and increase the proportion of body represented by 
force-producing muscle increase the capacity for accelera-
tion. On the other hand, drag increases with the square of 
swimming speed and is the principle source of resistance for 
prolonged or sustained swimming at moderate speeds. 
 Both thrust and the theoretical “effi  ciency” of locomotion 
can vary with the speed of swimming. Insofar as drag in-
creases with swimming speed, thrust must also be increased 
to enable forward movement. Th is increase in thrust is 
achieved by an increase in either the frequency or the ampli-
tude of undulations, or both. In a recent study of swimming 
in sea kraits ( Laticauda spp.), a team of investigators led by 
François Brischoux attached accelerometers to snakes and de-
termined that swimming speed was related to a combination 
of increase in frequency and amplitude of the sway undula-
tions produced by the swimming muscles. Th ese observations 
confi rmed previous studies that were based more strictly on 
analysis of motion. Th ese and previous data also confi rm that 
the amplitude of the body undulation increases progressively 
from head to tail, which implies that the speed of propagation 
of the propulsive wave also increases from head to tail. 
 Th e various factors aff ecting thrust and the resistance to 
motion during acceleration and turning can be summarized 
in terms of a hypothetical optimal morphology, which can 
be defi ned to maximize performance. Th ese features are, 
fi rst, a relatively large body with area of body increasing to-
ward the tail. A second important feature is an appropriately 
fl exible body so that the amplitude of swimming undula-
tions can be maximized. Th is is also a property of swimming 
snakes. A third feature is a large ratio of muscle mass rela-
tive to body mass.  Power is proportional to the volume 
(more strictly, cross-sectional area) of muscle, whereas drag 
is proportional to the area of the object that interacts with 
water. Th erefore, power increases relative to drag if the body 
mass consists largely of muscle. Th ese combined features 
appear to be present in the body design of a number of sea 
snakes, illustrated by  Hydrophis spp. ( fi g.  3.6 ). Considering 
all species of snakes, however, some experts will realize 
there are exceptions to these generalizations.  
 Sea snakes tend to fl atten the entire body medially or 
vertically (midsaggital or vertical plane) when swimming, 
which enlarges the area of contact with water to produce 
thrust ( fi g.  3.1  ). Such vertical fl attening also is characteris-
tic of the extremely supple-bodied fi le snakes ( Acrochordus 
spp.) as well as some highly aquatic colubrid snakes while 
swimming. Some aquatic species also fl atten the skin below 
the tips of the ribs to produce a ventral body keel (e.g., 
 Pelamis platurus ,  fi gs.  3.1 ,  5.7 ). Moreover, the tail of sea 
snakes is laterally fl attened into a paddle-like structure that 
comprises most of the tissue posterior to the vent ( fi g.  3.8 ). 
Presumably, this feature increases the capacity for poste-
rior thrust when swimming, and more powerful swimmers 
have larger “paddles” with greater area in the vertical plane, 
in addition to greater muscle mass ( fi g.  3.8 ). Recent studies 
by Kate Sanders and her colleagues have demonstrated that 
the fully aquatic hydrophiine sea snakes have evolved spe-
cialized extensions of the caudal vertebrae that help to sup-
port the laterally compressed tail in these marine species. 
Considering this principle in broader terms, one may note 
that evolutionary shifts from terrestrial to aquatic habitats 
has produced laterally compressed “paddles” on the feet, 
fi ns, or tails of a variety of vertebrates. 
 Curious to investigate this phenomenon further, Fabien 
Aubret and Richard Shine conducted studies in which artifi -
cial paddles were affi  xed to the tails of juvenile tiger snakes 
( Notechis scutatus , a terrestrial species), and they demon-
strated that relatively small paddles on the tail (35 percent 
of tail length) increased swimming speeds by 25 percent, 
but decreased crawling speed on land by 17 percent. Sur-
prisingly, a larger paddle (84 percent of tail length) was less 
than half as eff ective for increasing swimming speed as was 
the smaller paddle. Of course, these were artifi cial struc-
tures that no doubt increased the stiff ness of the tail. Evi-
dently, the larger paddles of sea snakes are only eff ective 
following adaptive modifi cation of the musculoskeletal 
systems that generate propulsion ( fi g.  3.8 ). While swim-
ming is almost certainly the key adaptation of the paddle-
shaped tail of sea snakes, other additional functions are 
also possible. On several occasions I have observed sea 
kraits ( Laticauda semifasciata ) near the ocean surface slap 
the water violently with the tail just before diving to escape. 
Perhaps this is a behavior that communicates a threat to 
other snakes, or that acts to startle or confuse potential 
predators. Th is statement is admittedly pure speculation, 
and the “slapping” might simply be the inadvertent result 
of a snake attempting to dive rapidly. 

 86  | How Snakes Work
 Bruce Jayne has compared swimming performance be-
tween an amphibious, nonconstricting semiaquatic snake 
( Nerodia fasciata ) and a constricting terrestrial snake ( Ela-
phe, = Pantherophis, guttatus ). Th is comparison is of interest 
because of diff erences in habits, number of ribs ( Elaphe has 
50 percent more total vertebrae than  Nerodia ), and other an-
atomical features. Both species swam with similar waveform 
and maximum speed, which ranged from 103 to 155 cm/s in 
the larger snakes. Th e maximum forward velocity increased 
positively with increasing length of a snake in both species. 
Also in both species the amplitude and wavelength of lateral 
undulations increased from anterior to posterior along the 
length of the body. Many of these  parameters were quite 
similar to those of swimming eels. 
 In another study, Fabien Aubret and coworkers investi-
gated locomotion in young tiger snakes ( Notechis scutatus ) 
that they raised for fi ve months in either an aquatic or ter-
restrial environment. Th e snakes raised in water were able 
to swim 26 percent faster, but crawled 36 percent slower, 
than did their siblings that were raised without water for 
swimming. Th us, swimming performance can be  phenotypi-
cally plastic  in these snakes, which are closely related to sea 
snakes. Some have suggested that such plasticity might 
have accelerated large-scale evolutionary transitions like 
those from terrestrial to aquatic or marine environments. 
 Terrestrial Locomotion: Moving over 
Varied Landscapes  
 Th e movements of swimming snakes are also quite relevant to 
terrestrial locomotion, but the lack of buoyancy and nature of 
the substrate add variation to the principles that are involved. 
Gravity pulls downward on the mass of the animal, and the 
resulting inertial forces and frictional interaction with the sub-
strate must be overcome in order to achieve forward move-
ment. It is amazing how eff ortless this appears when snakes of 
various species are observed while moving in their native hab-
itats. Th ere are several fundamental patterns of movement 
that are observed in snakes, referred to as “modes” of locomo-
tion, and most species are capable of switching their manner 
of movement depending on the particular features of the envi-
ronment or, sometimes, the speed required. Th e movements 
of snakes are complex and may involve more than one manner 
of movement in diff erent circumstances, or sometimes simul-
taneously in diff erent regions of the body. Th ere is recent evi-
dence that progression of speed with movement can involve 
changes in the mode of movement, similarly to changes of gait 
in terrestrial vertebrates with limbs, notwithstanding the bio-
mechanical diff erences.  
 Lateral Undulation 
 Th e more commonly familiar form of serpentine locomo-
tion is termed  lateral undulation or  horizontal undulatory pro-
gression . Some might also refer to this mode of movement as 
“slithering,” for the body of the snake moves continuously 
relative to the ground or substrate. Th is behavior makes for 
eff ective escape reactions and also adds fun and challenge to 
the act of catching snakes! 
 During lateral undulation the mass of the animal is sup-
ported by forces that are transmitted by means of the ven-
tral and lateral body surfaces, which are continually in 
contact with the ground and associated objects. Th e propul-
sive forces, however, are exerted via the sides of the trunk. 
 
 
 Figure 3.8.   Paddle-shaped tails of three species of sea kraits having 
different aquatic tendencies are shown in the  upper photo . From top 
to bottom these are  Laticauda semifasciata , highly aquatic;  Laticauda 
laticaudata , somewhat amphibious;  Laticauda colubrina , amphibious, 
but spending considerable time on land. Note that the more highly 
aquatic species ( L. semifasciata ) has a somewhat broader tail in the 
dorsoventral plane, and it appears more muscular, presumably to 
power swimming (see  chapter  1 for further description of habits). The 
arrows point to the vent (cloacal opening) of each snake. Photograph 
was taken at Orchid Island, Taiwan, by Coleman M. Sheehy III. The 
 lower photo illustrates a relatively broader tail in a fully aquatic sea 
snake,  Acalyptophis peronii , photographed by the author in Australia. 
The sea kraits are partly terrestrial, whereas this latter species is a 
“true” sea snake and is entirely marine. The sea kraits and true sea 
snakes represent two independent lineages, so the similar paddle-
shaped tails in the two groups represent a nice example of  convergent 
evolution (see reading by Sanders et al.,  2012 ). 

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  87 
Beginning at the head, a series of undulant or wavelike 
curves passes from front to rear, and the backward facing 
surfaces contact and push against irregularities in the 
ground surface ( fi g.  3.4 ). Whenever a bend of the body con-
tacts a surface object such as a rock or small hillock of soil, it 
deforms locally to fi t more closely around it and exerts force 
against it ( fi g.  3.4 ). If the surface over which a snake moves 
lacks these irregularities and has extremely low friction, the 
snake cannot move forward and simply thrashes back and 
forth in vain! However, most natural surfaces contain irreg-
ularities, and even very small ones that may not be obvious 
to human observers will work. Th e entire body of the snake 
slides past these sites, and the resistance forces are exerted 
at these points ( fi g.  3.4 ). Th ese are variously called  contact 
zones ,  reaction sites ,  push points , or  sites of resistance .       
 During lateral undulation the head of the snake pushes 
off  an uneven part of the ground, and each succeeding 
body part follows where the head left off . Each part of the 
body progressively follows the direction of the head. Th e 
snake travels forward, each point along the body moving at 
constant speed following a more or less sinusoidal path. 
Th e snake produces thrust by bending continuously around 
each point of contact, thereby shifting it to more posterior 
segments of the body. Th e waves of bending are propa-
gated posteriorly such that they push laterally and poste-
riorly against the reaction sites on the surface of the 
substrate. When a snake pushes against multiple reaction 
sites simultaneously, the vectors of force that act laterally 
cancel each other, and the resultant vector propels the 
snake forward. Th at is, the summation of these reactive 
forces produces a net forward thrust ( fi gs.  3.4 ,  3.9 ,  3.10 ). 
Each bend pushes against an object, and then slides out of 
contact with it. 
 Th e lateral undulations are created by alternating waves of 
muscle contraction that progress from the neck toward the 
tail. Such movement requires precise neuromuscular coordi-
nation. Th e propulsive forces due to the snake pushing 
against the resistance sites are generated by the axial muscles 
( fi g.  3.3  ). Such forces pass perpendicular to the contact sur-
faces. Because all of the body is in constant motion, frictional 
forces at the resistance sites and the substratum induce 
forces that oppose the forward motion. Th erefore, progres-
sion by means of lateral undulation is facilitated by low-fric-
tion surfaces so long as there are points for resistance 
contact. Th e ventral scale surfaces are designed with a mor-
phology and orientation to reduce friction that opposes the 
direction of forward movement (see  fi gs.  5.9 ,  5.13 ). Th is as-
pect of a snake’s scale design is evident if one runs a hand 
both forward and backward along the belly of a snake and 
compares the frictional resistance with similar movements 
over the back of the snake. Th e hand slides more easily in the 
front-to-rear direction along the belly. 
 As the animal moves, it senses irregularities while it is in 
motion, and the curves of the body are forced into contact 
with variously spaced resistance sites wherever they are en-
countered. In many cases, the head of the snake is elevated 
 
 
 Figure 3.9.    Schematic illustration of muscle activity (gray color) 
during lateral undulation in snakes. The snake at the  left is crawling on 
a smooth surface with pegs provided for resistance sites (dark circles). 
The snake to the  right is swimming in water. The undulations are 
traveling from head to tail, and the onset and offset of activity is 
indicated by the posterior and anterior boundaries of the shaded areas, 
respectively. The drawings are based on information from 
electromyography of major epaxial muscles.  For both types of lateral 
undulation, muscle activity is propagated posteriorly, and at a given 
longitudinal location muscle activity occurs only on one side of the body 
in an alternating fashion between the left and right sides.  For terrestrial 
locomotion, the muscle activity along the entire length of the snake 
begins at maximal convexity and ends at maximal concavity with 
respect to the side of the active muscle.  By contrast, during swimming 
the timing of muscle activity relative to bending shifts along the length 
of the snake because the speed of propagation of muscle activity 
exceeds the speed of propagation of lateral bending (as also occurs in 
the swimming of ﬁ shes). Drawings by Jason Bourque, Florida Museum 
of Natural History, after ﬁ g. 18 in B. C. Jayne, Muscular mechanisms of 
snake locomotion: An electromyographic study of lateral undulation of 
the Florida Banded Water Snake ( Nerodia fasciata ) and the Yellow Rat 
Snake ( Elaphe obsoleta ),  Journal of Morphology 197:159–181, 1988.  

 88  | How Snakes Work
and carried off  the substrate as the body moves. Raising the 
head involves a cantilevering action, and the axial muscula-
ture shifts the weight of the elevated part toward the region 
of the body that remains in contact with the ground. 
 Studies of snake locomotion generally involve a combina-
tion of motion analysis (called  kinematics ) and measurements 
of the electrical activity of muscles (called  electromyography , 
abbreviated EMG). Th e latter is accomplished by means of 
placing electrodes in specifi c muscles and recording the timing 
and intensity of their activity. Most of these studies have in-
volved snakes that are moving by means of lateral undulation. 
In such movements, the epaxial muscles are activated sequen-
tially along the body such that waves of muscle activity propa-
gate along the trunk in a posterior direction. Th e timing of 
such muscle activity is consistent with the shortening of 
muscle units and the formation of bends in the snake. 
 Some studies of snake locomotion have employed snakes 
that are observed while moving over a fl at, smooth surface 
with vertical pegs that are provided as the sole resistance 
sites ( fi g.  3.9  ). When snakes are moving among pegs, muscle 
activity on the side of the animal opposite the point of con-
tact pushes the snake’s body against the peg. Th e activity of 
the muscles causes the vertebral column to bend around the 
peg and reverse its curvature anterior to it 
( fi g.  3.9 ). Most of the force that is directed 
against a peg is produced by the muscles 
in the bend of the body contacting the 
peg, rather than by the muscles in distant 
bends. Th e extent of bending around a 
peg and the reversal of curvature anterior 
to the peg determine the direction of 
force exertion and the consequent move-
ment that results. 
 Th e mechanical features of the snake’s 
body result in relatively low curvature 
(that is, a long radius) of the vertebral col-
umn around each peg, while the body wall 
exhibits greater (short radius) but asym-
metric curvature around the peg. Th e sharp 
bends around resistance sites involve 
complex movements produced largely by 
the epaxial muscles. Th e higher curvature 
of the body wall around the anterior 
surface of each resistance site appears to 
involve a suite of factors including the ver-
tebral curvature, possibly axial torsion, 
and movements of the ribs and body wall. 
 Th e forces exerted by a laterally undu-
lating snake must be suffi  cient to bend the 
body laterally, push its sides against ver-
tical surfaces at reaction sites, and over-
come resistance due to lateral and ventral 
 sliding friction (roughly equal to the mass of 
the snake multiplied by the  coeffi  cient of friction ). Th e term 
 sliding friction  refers to a resistance to motion that is gener-
ated at a point (or area) of contact between two surfaces that 
are in motion. Th e body curvature and the activity of muscle 
units increase in response to increased resistance to forward 
motion that might be acting on a snake. Experimentally, the 
addition of mass to a snake increases the resistance it must 
overcome to move itself forward, and therefore increases the 
force that is required for propulsion. Th e increased force that 
is exerted by the snake can be judged from the increased 
muscle activities indicated by the EMG. One other feature of 
muscle activity seems to be important. Th e axial muscles are 
activated immediately before, or when, they become stretched 
to maximum, and they are deactivated when they reach either 
resting length or maximal shortening. 
 Early studies suggested that progression by lateral undu-
lation is most stable with at least three contact points, 
hence posteriorly directed vectors. More recent studies 
have shown that the mechanism of propulsion by lateral un-
dulation also works with one or more contact points, al-
though parts of the body can tend to slip sideways more 
when there is just a single contact point. Situations in which 
 
 
 Figure 3.10.   Forces generated by snakes using variable numbers of pegs for lateral 
undulation movement across a ﬂ at surface. Each arrow represents the reaction force 
exerted by the peg against the body of the snake, which is equal and opposite to the 
force exerted by the body of the snake against the peg. The length of each arrow 
indicates the relative magnitude of the reaction force. The sum of the reaction forces 
has a net forward component that contributes to the forward progression of the snake. 
With increasing number of pegs, the energy lost to lateral forces increases. Longer 
snakes have a greater array of contact sites to utilize and should be able to contact 
three or more points more often than can shorter relatives. Hypothetically, there is likely 
to be an optimal number of contact points for any particular size snake that maximizes 
the forward movement for any output of energy. Drawing by Jason Bourque, Florida 
Museum of Natural History, and after  ﬁ g.  9.5 in J. L. Edwards,  chapter  9 in M. 
Hildebrand, D. M. Bramble, K. F. Liem and D. B. Wake (eds.),  Functional Vertebrate 
Morphology (Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1985). 

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  89 
snakes cannot fi nd one or more stable contact points cause 
the snake to shift to a diff erent mode of movement, such as 
 sidewinding or  concertina  locomotion (see below). Increasing 
the number of contact points increases both friction and 
the laterally directed forces relative to the forward directed 
forces. However, investigations involving snakes that are 
crawling on a smooth surface having intermittent vertical 
pegs indicate there are two advantages associated with mul-
tiple points for propulsive contact. First, contact with mul-
tiple pegs enables the cancellation of lateral force vectors 
over an extended length of the body, and this stabilizes the 
body against lateral slippage. Second, contact with multiple 
pegs reduces the curvature around each individual peg ( fi g. 
 3.10 ). Th ese two eff ects seem to facilitate higher speeds of 
travel with less lateral slippage, but to a limit. When the 
contact points are very numerous, the lateral vectors be-
come relatively larger and the friction increases—which 
means losses of energy and a reduction in speed. Fast- 
moving snakes such as racers and whipsnakes characteristi-
cally move with fewer long and shallow bends in the body, 
rather than numerous shorter and deeper bends. 
 Recently, David Hu working with collaborators in mathe-
matics has investigated undulating locomotion (“slither-
ing”) of snakes on strictly fl at surfaces. Th e team used video, 
mathematical models, and measurements of the frictional 
properties of snake skin to evaluate the mechanics of slith-
ering locomotion. When a snake is undulating over a 
smooth, fl at surface, it dynamically distributes its weight so 
that its belly presses against the substrate and periodically 
“loads” its weight at specifi c points of contact where the 
ventral scutes press against the surface. Th ese points of 
weight loading are where the body has zero curvature. Th e 
snake’s body may remain in contact with the substrate all 
along its length, but the weight distribution is nonuniform. 
During more rapid locomotion, segments of the body are al-
ternately lifted off  and then onto the substrate. Whereas the 
body undulates from side to side, the center of the snake’s 
mass moves constantly in the forward direction as sliding 
friction is used to generate propulsive forces and exceeds the 
inertial forces by an order of magnitude. Th e inertial forces 
attributable to the sideward undulations are balanced by the 
sum of sliding frictional forces in addition to the forces gen-
erated by the internal muscles of the body. One important 
property of ventral scales that Hu and his team discovered is 
that friction, or resistance to movement, is highest when a 
snake is sliding sideways, rather than forward. Th e increased 
sideways friction seems to be necessary for forward move-
ment across bare terrain that lacks rocks or other objects as 
push points. Other biomechanical studies have demon-
strated that nanoscale geometric surface features of scales 
impart low friction for forward movement, but are an eff ec-
tive stopper for backward motion (see also  chapter  5 ). 
 I believe it is fair to conclude that the movements of un-
dulating snakes in many habitats arise from a combination 
of features that are observed when a snake in the laboratory 
moves among pegs or when it slithers over a featureless 
 terrain. Some functional morphologists also speculate that 
snakes might dynamically change their frictional interac-
tions with the surfaces over which they crawl by actively 
adjusting the attitude or orientation of the belly scutes. 
 Lateral undulation is commonly employed by numerous 
terrestrial species of snakes and is often used in combination 
with other modes of locomotion. Undulating movements are 
seen in the graceful and dramatic crawling of swiftly moving 
species such as racers, whipsnakes, or brown snakes, and are 
also used by snakes such as mambas and vine snakes to climb 
over objects or to move in three-dimensional habitats of 
bushes and trees. Th e slender appearance of many terrestrial 
and arboreal species is well suited to undulatory progression, 
but this mode of movement likely becomes less effi  cient and 
more diffi  cult in stouter and heavier species. While snakes 
that are undulating appear to move very quickly and may 
well escape someone who is in pursuit, the maximum veloc-
ities measured in swiftly crawling snakes such as racers and 
mambas are around 12–13 km/h (3.33 to 3.61 m/s) and some-
what less in other species such as garter snakes. Research 
investigations by Bruce Jayne and Albert Bennett have 
shown that rapid but usually brief locomotion (called 
“sprint”) increases in speed (m/s) with increasing body 
length of snakes, except for the larger snakes tested. Th ese 
same investigators also demonstrated that the inherent 
sprint speed of individual garter snakes is correlated with 
their survival in nature, except during the fi rst year of life. 
 Lateral undulation in snakes appears to be highly special-
ized and provides a unique propulsive system that uses 
 marvelous control of body muscles. Limbless lizards, in 
comparison, cannot as eff ectively maintain contact with a 
push point or resistance site as the body travels forward sliding 
along a push point. Lizards often push against the resistance 
site for a short distance and then slip laterally out of contact 
with it, whereas snakes can keep the body in contact with, and 
pushing against, the resistance site until they push off  of it 
with the tail. Th e local adjustment of curvature around an 
object or point of contact represents exquisite sensory control 
of muscles and appears to be a unique characteristic of snakes.    
 Concertina Locomotion 
 Th is mode of snake locomotion utilizes stationary body parts 
as anchors to push or pull the remaining body forward 
( fi g.  3.11 ).  Static friction  associated with the stationary part is 
used as the reaction force to enable forward progression. Th is 
arrangement works so long as muscular-induced forces do 
not exceed the static friction force. Th erefore, neuromuscular 
control during concertina locomotion is very important. Th e 

 90  | How Snakes Work
force of friction is related to the product of the friction coef-
fi cient (characteristic of the properties of the substrate) mul-
tiplied by the mass. Th erefore, the mass of the snake must be 
suffi  cient to induce an adequate reaction force. On the other 
hand, as the body mass increases, so does the sliding friction 
associated with the moving part of the snake, and so does the 
eff ort that is required to lift the body. When a snake is 
moving through an earthen tunnel, or burrow, the snake ac-
tively pushes against the sides of the tunnel to provide a 
static anchor. Considerable muscular force might be gener-
ated in anchoring the body against the walls of the burrow, so 
the energetics of concertina locomotion inside a burrow is 
likely to be diff erent from that of a snake that is moving on a 
fl at surface. Concertina locomotion on a fl at surface outside 
a burrow is often mentioned or illustrated in review articles 
and books, but in fact it is rarely observed. Recently, Mat-
thew Edwards and the author uncovered a secretive blind 
snake ( Leptotyphlops ater ) beneath a stone in Guanacaste, 
Costa Rica. Th is small snake made repeated attempts to crawl 
away using concertina movements. 
 While moving forward, a snake using 
concertina 
movement 
alternates 
an-
choring with folding, then anchoring 
with extension, and so on. One part of the 
body anchors against the substrate or 
tunnel wall while a body segment immedi-
ately behind folds like an accordion to 
“pull” that part of the snake forward. Once 
forward, a part of the snake posterior to 
the original anchor being considered then 
again anchors the body and the segment 
immediately in front extends the folded 
body forward. Th ese actions are repeated 
along the length of the snake and alter-
nately in time. Th e snake alternately pulls 
its body into bends and then straightens 
out the body forward from the bends. 
Some have compared this locomotion to 
snakes taking steps. Mean velocities asso-
ciated with concertina locomotion are 
around 0.1 km/h (2.78 cm/s) or less de-
pending on the attributes of the environ-
ment (tunnel width relative to snake, etc.). 
 Concertina movement can be used in 
three dimensions and is often used by ar-
boreal snakes on tree limbs or branches, as 
well as by fossorial or terrestrial species 
moving in burrows. Having one part of the 
body anchored can be a very advantageous 
thing when crawling over objects that 
are thin, capable of movement, and poten-
tially unstable. Also, the static friction 
force can be increased by muscular eff ort as in constricting 
around branches ( fi g.  2.20 ). When crawling in burrows, 
snakes can use multiple sites for anchoring the body, and 
static friction can be employed by lateral as well as ventral 
surfaces of the snake. Th e confi ning space limits the ampli-
tude of fl exions, and therefore a greater number of fl exions 
are typically used. Th is could be energetically more expen-
sive and diminishes the endurance of the snake when crawl-
ing distances through subterranean tunnels. 
 Both concertina and lateral undulation locomotion are 
probably diffi  cult for snakes that are both short and stout. 
In these cases, either  rectilinear or  sidewinding locomotion 
usually compensates for the disadvantages. 
 Rectilinear Movement 
 Th is term refers to straight-line motion, which in snakes in-
volves comparatively slow forward progression powered by 
muscles and movements of the belly scales. Such movement 
relies on fl exibility of the integument and the use of muscles 
that are bilaterally symmetric ( fi g.  3.12  ). Th e belly scales are 
 
 
 Figure 3.11.   Schematic representation of hypothetical snakes engaged in concertina 
locomotion, one inside a tube or burrow ( left ) and one moving over a ﬂ at surface ( right ). 
In each case the snake progresses from right-to-left (anterior direction) by anchoring part 
of the body against the interior of the burrow of against the ground surface, extending 
the body anterior to the anchored segment of snake, then anchoring the anterior part of 
the body and pulling the posterior body toward the newly anchored segment. The 
shaded part of each snake represents the anchored segment of body. Sequences are 
stopped in time progressively from bottom to top of each drawing (arrow). Progression of 
the snake in the burrow involves bending of the internal axial skeleton. Drawings by 
Jason Bourque, Florida Museum of Natural History, after  ﬁ g.  9.7 in J. L. Edwards,  chapter 
 9 in M. Hildebrand, D. M. Bramble, K. F. Liem and D. B. Wake (eds.),  Functional 
Vertebrate Morphology (Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1985).  

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  91 
alternately lifted somewhat from the sub-
strate and pulled forward, then positioned 
downward and pushed backward. When 
the ventral scales are in static contact with 
the substrate, the body is actually pulled 
forward over them. Th e cycle repeats when 
the body has moved far enough forward to 
stretch the scales. Th us, groups of ventral 
scales are alternately placed in static con-
tact with the ground followed by local ac-
tive stretching that extends the ventral 
body wall somewhat like that of an inch-
worm. Th ese movements occur simulta-
neously at several points along the body. 
Th e dorsal surface of the snake progresses 
at a constant velocity, and the continual 
movement of mass conserves momentum. 
But the movement is slow and typically 
characteristic of heavy-bodied snakes such 
as vipers, boas, and  pythons, although 
probably all snakes are capable of such pro-
gression. Instead of the body undulating 
gracefully back and forth across the 
ground, the snake moves in a nearly 
straight line and appears to be powered by 
some unseen force. Th e progression of the 
animal can be very precise, quiet, and 
rather amazing to watch. 
 Th e principal muscles employed in rec-
tilinear locomotion involve the  costocuta-
neous  muscles that run between the ribs 
and the skin ( fi g.  3.12 ). One set of inferior 
muscles at a particular point along the 
body pulls on the ventral scales and an-
chors them to the ground, thereby pro-
viding a pivot point against which other 
muscles can act. Similar muscles immedi-
ately posterior to this point pull the verte-
bral column forward and simultaneously 
add their aff ected ventral scales to the 
pivot site. Another set of superior mus-
cles anterior to the pivot site acts simulta-
neously to lift the local scales off  the 
substrate and pulls them forward of the 
pivot site. Th e result is that each of several pivot sites moves 
posteriorly along the body of the snake. Th e sequential con-
tractions of the muscles impart a continuous momentum 
to the vertebral column, imparting the steady forward 
movement of the dorsal body of the snake. Simultaneously, 
the ventral part of the snake alternately fi xes to the sub-
strate, then lifts out of contact and quickly accelerates for-
ward to catch up with the dorsal side of the body. Th e belly 
scales are alternately lifted and pulled forward, then pulled 
downward and backward. Flexibility of the skin is of para-
mount importance here. As in the other modes of locomo-
tion, if one observes a snake crawling in this fashion—and 
especially a heavy snake—it can be seen that the ventral 
scutes and segments of the snake respond to irregularities 
in the substrate such that the detailed pattern of the scute 
movements is dynamic and variable. 
 
 
 Figure 3.12.    Schematic illustration of features in rectilinear locomotion by a 
hypothetical snake. The costocutaneous muscles connect the ribs with skin and 
impart forces involved in moving the snake forward from left to right in the ﬁ gure. The 
ventral costocutaneous muscles anchor the ventral scutes in contact with the ground, 
and successive scutes are recruited in this manner to the region of ground contact 
( upper to  lower ﬁ gure). These scutes provide a zone of resistance points against 
which the muscles can act to move the snake forward. The ventral costocutaneous 
muscles associated with the contact zone act to pull the ribs and vertebral column 
forward, while the dorsal costocutaneous muscles act to lift the ventral scutes in 
advance of the contact zone and to pull them forward. The actions of both sets of 
muscles impart a continuous momentum to the vertebral column, and the dorsal 
body of the snake moves steadily forward. Several different ventral parts of the snake 
alternately ﬁ x to the substrate, then lift out of contact and quickly accelerate 
forward to “catch up” with the dorsal part of the body. The ventral scutes are 
alternately lifted and pulled forward, then pulled downward and backward. The 
ﬂ exibility of the skin is important to these actions. Drawing by Dan Dourson, modiﬁ ed 
from ﬁ g. 3.34 in C. Gans,  Biomechanics. An Approach to Vertebrate Biology  
(Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott, 1974).  

 92  | How Snakes Work
 Sidewinding 
 Th is form of locomotion is well known and has been some-
what romanticized in context of western movies and various 
tales of life challenges in the desert. One immediately thinks 
of the Sidewinder Rattlesnake ( Crotalus cerastes ), but other 
desert vipers of Africa and Asia (as well as some other spe-
cies) also employ sidewinding as a means of moving over 
fl at, smooth, or slippery surfaces. Homalopsid snakes, for 
example, might employ sidewinding to move over mudfl ats, 
and various diurnal snakes can behave similarly when lifting 
the body off  of excessively warm ground. Various surfaces 
can be of either lesser or greater frictional resistance, and 
sidewinding locomotion can still be employed.  
 Sidewinding progression involves a snake lifting the 
head and moving the anterior body forward, placing it in 
static contact with the substrate. While both head and tail 
are anchored in static contact with the ground, the middle 
section of the body is lifted forward and essentially “rolls 
out” against the substrate from that point. Th e neck is then 
curved, lifted, and moved forward again to repeat the action 
( fi g.  3.13 ). During these movements the trunk of the snake 
may become bent in more than a single plane. Th e mecha-
nism of movement involves static friction and irregularities 
in the substrate, which are either present as a passive fea-
ture of the physical environment or are created by the snake 
as its body pushes sand into a small ridge, 
for example ( fi g.  3.14  ). Movement of the 
snake creates vertical and posteriorly di-
rected pressure against the ground, which 
produces the reaction force and moves the 
snake forward without slippage or sliding. 
 Sidewinding movements utilize axial 
muscle units in ways that are fundamen-
tally similar to those studied in lateral un-
dulation, except that some muscles are 
activated bilaterally in the regions of 
trunk that are lifted off  the substrate. 
A key aspect of sidewinding locomotion is 
the ability of the snake to transfer the sup-
port of its mass to the body segments that 
progressively contact the substrate. Such 
actions depend on exquisite control of the 
axial musculature. Compared with other 
snakes, species that specialize in side-
winding (e.g.,  Crotalus cerastes ) possess 
fewer vertebrae and shorter segments of 
axial musculature, and are relatively small 
and moderately stout with short tails. 
 Because sidewinding involves lifted 
segments of the body, the laterally di-
rected forces produced at each contact site 
are unbalanced and the snake moves later-
ally as well as forward. Sidewinding 
snakes leave characteristic tracks that appear as a series of 
short separated impressions set at roughly 30° angles from 
the direction of movement. Th e ends of the individual im-
pressions consist of a “J” on one side, formed by the head and 
neck, and a “T” on the other side, formed by the tail. Th e di-
rection of movement is indicated by the hook of the J, and 
fresh impressions allow one to easily follow the movements 
of a snake ( fi g.  3.14 ). 
 Studies by Bruce Jayne and Stephen Secor have confi rmed 
a long-held conjecture that sidewinding is mechanically 
profi cient and conserving of energy. Probably all midsized 
snakes are capable of sidewinding, but only desert vipers and 
certain homalopsid species appear to be specialized to rou-
tinely employ this mode of locomotion. Maximum speeds of 
sidewinding snakes are around 3.7 km/h (about one m/s).  
 Slide-pushing 
 Th is is a mode of terrestrial locomotion that involves vigorous 
undulations and sliding of the body. It is functionally inter-
mediate between lateral undulation and sidewinding, and is 
also similar to undulating motions of snakes when swimming 
in water. Th e term is attributable to Carl Gans, who described 
this as a separate mode of locomotion although it may well 
employ elements of the other two modes just mentioned. An 
 
 
 Figure 3.13.   Schematic illustration of the progressive movements of a Sidewinder 
Rattlesnake ( Crotalus cerastes ), moving by sidewinding in a direction toward the top of 
the illustration. The shaded portions of the body are in contact with the substrate 
(sand), and the open portions of the body are lifted above the substrate. At any 
moment, the snake typically has two parts of its body in contact with the substrate and 
two parts lifted above the substrate. See text for further explanation. Drawing by Jason 
Bourque, Florida Museum of Natural History, after  ﬁ g.  9.8 in J. L. Edwards,  chapter  9 in 
M. Hildebrand, D. M. Bramble, K. F. Liem, and D.B. Wake (eds.),  Functional Vertebrate 
Morphology (Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1985). 

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  93 
alternative and very descriptive name for this movement is 
 slipping undulation . Picture a snake that is attempting to crawl 
either by lateral undulating movements or by sidewinding 
movements, except that the substrate has very low friction 
and the body of the snake slides backward as it attempts to 
push against reaction sites. What happens is the posterior 
contact zones slide backward relative to the ground at several 
times the forward velocity. Th e snake does move forward, but 
at a slow rate. Th e head and neck travel forward at a relatively 
steady pace, while the head swings back and forth less so than 
the trunk. 
 Th e propulsive forces used in slide-pushing involve local 
force application by rapidly traveling waves of the snake’s 
body. As the surfaces contact the ground, sliding friction is 
induced, but with an asymmetry. Anteriorly, the scales of 
the ventral body contact the ground. Posteriorly, there is 
torsion of the body and the ground contact also involves the 
sides of the trunk. Th e dorsolateral scales have a higher 
coeffi  cient of friction and experience somewhat less slippage 
at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the body. Th e resis-
tance to slippage is proportional to the product of the fric-
tion coeffi  cient and the mass, which are both usually greater 
at the posterior end of the snake. Slowly this moves the 
snake forward over a low-friction surface, often at an angle 
to the direction it is facing. Th e principal diff erence between 
this mode of movement and that of lateral undulation is 
that the posterior reaction zones are fi xed in an “undulating 
snake,” but they move backward in the case of slide-pushing. 
 Slide-pushing is comparatively ineffi  cient, for it in-
volves many more undulating movements per unit of for-
ward progression than occurs in a lateral undulating 
snake. Rather than considering this to be a specialized, 
evolved mode of movement, it should perhaps be regarded 
simply as an exaggerated attempt at movement when 
conditions of the substrate become poorly suitable for 
limbless locomotion. Th is mode of movement is used by 
 
 
 Figure 3.14.   Tracks in sand made by a Sidewinder Rattlesnake ( Crotalus cerastes ) that moved up a mound of sand in the direction of the 
arrow. The snake was found coiled beneath a shrub at the top of the mound. These tracks are particularly deep as the snake had to exert 
considerable force against the sand in order to sidewind uphill. This trackway was photographed by the author in the Anza-Borrego Desert 
of Southern California.  

 94  | How Snakes Work
various snakes when moving on slippery surfaces, or 
during initial attempts to rapidly escape a potential 
threat. An example might be the terrifying sight for some 
people who might encounter a snake in their house, and 
when disturbed the poor animal attempts to escape by 
wriggling and slipping across a slick fl oor such as lino-
leum. Such a snake appears frantic and probably much 
larger than it actually is when the story is told to a neigh-
bor. Or the misunderstood animal is interpreted as at-
tacking the resident, should the observer accidentally get 
between the snake and the shelter it is seeking.  
 Other Specialized Behaviors in 
Terrestrial Locomotion  
 Burrowing 
 Many snakes live in burrows or utilize subterranean tunnels 
for refuge from weather and predators. A variety of cav-
ernous underground spaces are used for “denning” or over-
wintering when snakes seek refuge individually, or they 
form social aggregations consisting of tens or hundreds of 
individuals. In many cases, snakes share burrows with other 
animals, or they construct their own. Snakes that truly 
burrow usually exhibit a number of morphologic specializa-
tions including modifi ed heads and rostral scales, shovel-
like snouts, and tails with roughened or spiked scales 
( fi g.  3.15 ; see also  fi gs.  1.11 – 1.16 ,  1.20 ,  1.24 ,  1.49 ). Burrowing 
is accomplished by “wiggling” or “plowing” through loose 
soil and sometimes scooping dirt laterally with the enlarged 
rostral scale. Th e rough tail is used to anchor the body 
during these movements, or to plug the burrow and prevent 
the entry of unwanted guests. Head modifi cations usually 
involve reinforced buttressed skulls to absorb the forces 
that are generated during digging. 
 Certain snakes such as uropeltid and probably typhlopid 
species employ a special type of concertina locomotion in 
burrows and crevices only slightly larger in diameter than 
the body of the animal. Th ese snakes bend the vertebral col-
umn separately from the outer parts of the body, which can 
be expanded to contact the wall of the burrow or crevice. 
Such contact provides sites of stable support, allowing the 
axial core of the body to move forward (or backward) rela-
tive to the contact sites which, in turn, are repositioned to 
produce forward movement ( fi g.  3.11 ). 
 Snakes that occur in habitats with desert sands either 
utilize burrows made by other animals (e.g., Sidewinder 
Rattlesnakes use rodent burrows) or move beneath the 
sand in a manner that resembles swimming.  Sand swim-
ming enables snakes to move through sand without form-
ing a tunnel due to the loose nature of the collective sand 
grains. Th is manner of movement is not well studied but 
involves propulsion by means of reaction forces attributed 
to all surfaces of the animal that might contact sand grains 
during undulating movements, as in swimming. Snakes 
that engage in this behavior with regularity possess valvu-
lar nostrils to prevent the entry of particles when breathing, 
and concave bellies that prevent the fi lling of spaces around 
the snake so the body can expand and contract during lung 
inhalation and exhalation of air. Breathing by means of ver-
tical movements is common in sand-swimming reptiles and 
also in rock-dwelling forms. Kenneth Norris and Lee Kava-
nau investigated burrowing behaviors of the Western 
 Shovel-nosed Snake ( Chionactis occipitalis ) and observed 
that during active burrowing the head was bent slightly 
downward, and the overhanging rostral scale created a 
cavity that was free of sand. Th is snake breathes while in 
 
 
 Figure 3.15.   The head of the Mexican Burrowing Python, 
 Loxocemus bicolor , exhibits a strong, countersunk jaw ( upper photo ) 
that is used for burrowing in tunnels and animal burrows. The  lower 
photo shows the snake with its head and neck in soil as it begins to 
burrow. This species enters tunnels and nesting sites of iguanas 
where it feeds on their eggs. Both snakes are different specimens that 
were photographed by the author in Guanacaste, Costa Rica.  

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  95 
sand by vertical movements of the gular region that is lo-
cated in this sand-free cavity near the head.  
 A modifi ed mode of burrowing occurs in a behavior that 
has been termed “cratering.” Desert vipers will coil on the 
surface of sand and, by continually moving the body while 
remaining in a coiled posture, gradually displace the sand be-
neath while the snake “sinks” gradually downward into the 
substrate. With enough eff ort such snakes can bury them-
selves completely, but they usually leave the eyes exposed 
and may use the position as an advantage for ambushing 
prey that might wander near unknowingly ( fi g.  3.16 ). Cot-
tonmouths and probably other snakes sometimes crater 
themselves deeply into leaves or other debris in response to 
cool or falling temperatures.  
 Jumping 
 Amazing as it sounds, although snakes are without limbs 
some species or individuals can actually “jump” during certain 
defensive actions. Th e behavior is not common, as most 
snakes prefer to anchor the body when striking at prey or a 
potential predator. An actual “jump” involves a vigorous 
strike in which the momentum of the accelerated head and 
anterior trunk carry the attached body momentarily off  the 
ground. Sometimes particularly agitated snakes will slide or 
jump forward during strikes that occur while the animal is on 
unstable or down-sloping substrate. Some species such as Af-
rican Horned Adders ( Bitis caudalis ) and jumping pit vipers 
( Atropoides spp.;  fi g.  1.36 ) characteristically spring forward 
into the air during vigorous strikes that comprise a defensive 
strategy. In other cases, smaller snakes may catapult into 
the air during frantic strikes or escape behaviors, and some 
arboreal species may purposely leave their substrate during 
launches into aerial descents (see below). 
 A very interesting aspect of snake behavior is that some 
species and individuals may exhibit exaggerated aggression 
if someone is in the way of a snake that is escaping from 
 
 
 Figure 3.16.   A Sidewinder Rattlesnake ( Crotalus cerastes ) partially cratered in desert sand beneath a creosote bush at Borrego Valley, 
California. Note the close camouﬂ age match between the snake and the surrounding sand. The “horns” over the eyes keep them free of sand 
when the snake is buried more deeply. This is a common “ambush” behavior of this species of snake, which feeds on rodents and lizards. 
Photograph by the author. 

 96  | How Snakes Work
disturbance in a particular direction. Bruce Means has 
termed this “blocked-fl ight” aggression, during which a 
snake may raise its head, fl atten its body, mouth-gape, 
strike, and  sometimes “jump” toward a person if he or she 
is blocking the fl ight path of the animal.     
 Life in the Canopy: Climbing and Gliding   
 Life and movement in arboreal habitats is challenging for a 
variety of reasons. Probably the majority of snake species that 
are said to be  arboreal also move on the ground during for-
aging, nesting, dispersing, and other behaviors; therefore the 
presence in a canopy is transient or cyclic, but not permanent. 
However, some species of snakes are highly arboreal and are 
typically found (most of the time) above ground in shrubbery 
or trees. On the other hand, there are numerous snakes that 
are terrestrial and ground-dwelling, but readily climb into veg-
etation for a variety of reasons including basking, foraging, 
escape from predators, and so on. In the New World, a variety 
of whipsnakes, racers, and rat snakes readily take to trees and 
can move swiftly through above-ground vegetation. Similarly, 
Old Word rat snakes, mambas, and some cobras perform sim-
ilar feats. Th ere are a number of snake species in which the 
young are highly arboreal, but switch to a more ground-dwell-
ing existence as they grow older and longer. Th e switch could 
be related to predator avoidance, prey-switching, or the fact 
that vertical postures are less stressful on the cardiovascular 
system if the body—hence blood column of the major arteries 
and veins—is short rather than long (see  chapter  6  ). 
 In terms of locomotion, movement through vegetation or 
upon branches requires precise neuromuscular coordination 
and the ability to sense whether smaller, unstable branches 
can support the mass of the climbing snake. A variety of 
movements is used, primarily lateral undulation in combina-
tion with concertina and, more rarely, rectilinear progression. 
Currently, detailed investigations of climbing behavior and 
mechanics in snakes are being carried out in the laboratory of 
Bruce Jayne at the University of Cincinnati. Some of the new 
fi ndings indicate that Corn Snakes ( Pantherophis guttatus ) 
and Boa Constrictors ( Boa constrictor ) characteristically per-
form a variant of concertina locomotion with periodic stop-
ping and gripping when moving horizontally or uphill on 
cylindrical perches. If pegs are present on cylindrical perches, 
the added resistance sites elicit lateral undulation and in-
creased speed of movement. Maximal speeds are greatest on 
perches of intermediate diameter that approximate the width 
of the snake. Th e forward velocity decreases when either the 
incline or diameter of a perch increases, and the snakes are 
not able to move, either uphill or downhill, when large-diam-
eter perches are experimentally inclined to 45° or 90°. Th ese 
studies indicate that balance, grip, and the “fi t” to a perch all 
can limit the ease of climbing on perches.    
 Many terrestrial snakes, and arboreal species in particular, 
have a remarkable ability to  cantilever , or to extend the 
anterior body horizontally without support. Some gracile 
and arboreal species (e.g., vine snakes and the like,  fi gs.  1.48 , 
 1.51 ) are able to extend the body to more than 50 percent of 
its length when bridging gaps in vegetation or substrate 
( fi g.  3.17  ). Amazingly, one of the recent observations from 
Bruce Jayne’s laboratory is that some individual Brown Tree 
Snakes ( Boiga irregularis ) are able to support nearly 90 per-
cent of their snout-vent length in air above a supporting 
perch before making contact with a second destination perch 
directly above the supporting perch! Studies in Jayne’s labo-
ratory have shown recently that snakes are able to cross larger 
gaps when there is a vertical component of the gap distance 
relative to strictly horizontal distance. When the gap has a 
vertical component (i.e., higher or lower than the level of the 
snake’s starting perch), gravity acts over a relatively shorter 
horizontal distance, and this enhances a snake’s ability to 
produce suffi  cient muscular force to prevent buckling. 
 Juvenile snakes are able to cantilever better than can 
adults of the same species, presumably due to a lower mass 
relative to the length of body. While features of muscle and 
 
 
 Figure 3.17.   A Grenada Bank Tree Boa ( Corallus grenadensis ) 
illustrating a dramatic extension of the body in air, while the posterior 
tail and body are anchored to a tree. Photographed in Grenada by 
Richard Sajdak.  

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  97 
skeletal features of a snake’s vertebral column are generally 
conserved in evolutionary terms, several modifi cations of 
vertebrae and associated epaxial muscles and their tendons 
appear to be related to cantilever performance. Arboreal 
snakes are generally slender with low relative mass and a 
compressed body form compared with strictly ground-
dwelling relatives ( fi gs.  1.31 ,  1.48  ). A large number of arbo-
real species are relatively short compared with nonarboreal 
relatives, and the body exhibits lateral compression ( fi g. 
 1.51 ). Additionally, some arboreal boas and vipers possess 
ribs that are directed downward rather than outward, 
thereby rendering the body to be narrow, yet deep, in cross-
section. Th ese features assist a snake to extend its body 
horizontally without undue downward displacement of 
muscle to form a dorsally convex vertebral arc. 
 Aspects of arboreal locomotion have also been studied re-
cently by Ron Rozar at the University of Miami. He investi-
gated movement behaviors and performance in eight pairs of 
taxonomically related species having terrestrial and arboreal 
relatives. He demonstrated that the arboreal species were 
generally superior in their abilities to bridge gaps and to trav-
erse narrow-diameter perches. Th e arboreal species were also 
found to have greater climbing endurance than their terres-
trial relatives; that is, they could sustain climbing movement 
for longer periods of time. Overall, the arboreal snakes were 
superior to their terrestrial relatives in climbing abilities, but 
the terrestrial species won out when it came to crawling 
 performance over horizontal ground. Rozar suggests that 
there might be “trade-off s” in the profi ciency of locomotion 
in the two habitats related to the specialized morphology 
that is characteristic of many arboreal species of snakes.  
 Straight Up and Down 
 Probably in most circumstances snakes climbing or moving 
through vegetation are nearly horizontal and use “switch-
backs” (like roads coursing up a mountainside) to change 
elevation. However, there are instances where snakes climb 
using a fully vertical posture. One example is the climbing 
by New World rat snakes straight up the trunks of pine 
trees. Th ese snakes might climb vertically to heights in the 
tens of meters, and one reason for such ascent is to forage 
for eggs or chicks in bird nests. Th e fully vertical position of 
the snake challenges the blood circulation, and this is dis-
cussed further in  chapter  6  . Additionally, the snake must 
fi nd irregularities on the tree surfaces where it can engage 
resistance sites for production of thrust.    
 People have sometimes asked me how such climbing 
snakes come  down from the tree. Th e answer to this question 
 
 
 Figure 3.18.   A Yellow Rat Snake ( Pantherophis obsoletus ) clinging to a pine tree in central Florida. It is not clear whether snakes are able to 
proﬁ ciently move downward on such a tree trunk, or whether they simply fall (purposely) to the ground. Photograph by Mac Stone.   

 98  | How Snakes Work
is not clear. It is possible for snakes to climb down trees 
using the same features of the tree surfaces that are used in 
upward movement, or sometimes snakes simply fall to the 
ground ( fi g.  3.18  ). No one knows the intentions of snakes in 
these circumstances, but purposeful “dropping” could have 
been a behavioral precursor to the launches of gliding 
snakes that are discussed next. 
 Gliding 
  Perhaps the most remarkable behavior of moving snakes is 
that of  gliding . While numerous cylindrical animals swim 
through water, “fl ying” snakes of the genus  Chrysopelea are 
the only limbless animals that glide through air. Most an-
imal gliders, such as fl ying squirrels or tree frogs, use static 
structures such as paired, outstretched “wings” to generate 
lift during gliding, but snakes have no appendages to create 
the wings or to assist with control during aerial movements. 
Yet gliding that has been studied in the Paradise Tree Snake 
( Chrysopelea paradisi ) is on par with that of other gliders 
and demonstrates remarkable control over the direction of 
descent. Th is snake is a colubrid species that lives in tropical 
forests of Southeast Asia. Evidently, it engages fl ight pri-
marily for escape, or to chase prey, or simply to glide from 
tree to tree ( fi g.  3.19 ). Remarkably, Paradise Tree Snakes can 
take off  by jumping, maintain a stable glide path, maneuver 
while in gliding fl ight, and land safely without injury. 
 Th e  kinematics  of this “fl ying snake” was investigated in 
detail by John (“Jake”) Socha while he was a graduate stu-
dent at the University of Chicago. He determined the entire 
three-dimensional gliding trajectory of wild-caught  Chryso-
pelea  that were videotaped when jumping from a horizontal 
branch at the top of a 10-meter-high tower in an open fi eld 
at the Singapore Zoological Gardens. Th e snake prepares for 
“take-off ” by hanging from a branch with the anterior body 
looped into the shape of a J. It then jumps by accelerating 
up and away from the branch; simultaneously it straightens 
and fl attens the body dorsoventrally. Th e body width nearly 
doubles, and the ventral surface becomes slightly concave 
in shape. Dorsoventral fl attening is one of the key features 
of the gliding behavior of snakes ( fi g.  3.19 ). 
 As the snake pitches downward and increases in speed, 
the head and tail are drawn laterally toward the midpoint 
into the shape of an S, and the snake begins to undulate lat-
erally and to generate lift. In mid-glide, the anterior body ori-
ents parallel with the ground while the posterior body cycles 
up and down in the vertical plane. Th e aerial lateral undula-
tion appears to be a modifi ed form of typical terrestrial loco-
motion, although the frequency of undulations is about 
one-third lower, while the amplitude is higher. Th e feat is 
probably more complex than terrestrial locomotion because 
the snake maintains a ventrally concave shape while undu-
lating. Th e combination of movement and postural regulation 
presumably requires neuromuscular control that is quite spe-
cialized. John Socha has suggested that mobility and control 
of rib movements that are necessary for holding body shape 
during undulation might have originated in relation to fi ne 
grip control that is involved in climbing vegetation. Th e high 
amplitude undulations might serve to maximize the body 
length that is available for generating lift and might also 
function to control instabilities related to pitch and roll. 
 A gliding Paradise Tree Snake is amazingly adept at ma-
neuvering while in air. Unlike many fl iers, the snake can turn 
sharply without banking. A turn is made by moving the ante-
rior body while the head is moving toward the direction of 
the turn. One snake that was being fi lmed turned sharply to 
avoid a tree during mid-glide. Typically, the fl ights of these 
snakes indicated the airspeed along the trajectory of glide av-
eraged 8.1 m/s, or 29.2 km/h. Th e minimum glide angles of 
 
 
 Figure 3.19.   Photographs of a Paradise Tree Snake ( Chrysopelea 
paradisi ) in various stages of gliding. The  upper left photo shows a 
dorsal view of a snake just after it has “launched” itself from an 
arboreal perch. The other images illustrate the extremely ﬂ attened 
shape of the snake during gliding, both dorsal and ventral views. 
Photographs are by Jake Socha.  

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  99 
snakes averaged 28° and ranged from 13° to 46°. In more prac-
tical terms, the gliding ability of these snakes is roughly 
equivalent to that of other gliding vertebrates.     
 The Energetic Costs of Snake Locomotion  
 A limbless condition has evolved independently in several 
groups of vertebrates, including salamanders, amphisbae-
nians, and lizards, in addition to the snakes. Earlier specula-
tions based solely on biomechanical considerations presumed 
that the energetic cost of such locomotion was lower than 
that for vertebrates with limbs. Some of the arguments fa-
voring low energy expenditure during limbless locomotion 
include no cost for vertically displacing the center of gravity 
(as occurs in a walking or running human), no cost for acceler-
ating or decelerating limbs (there are none!), and a relatively 
low cost for supporting the body. Subsequent investigations 
have shown, however, that the actual energetic costs of 
locomotion in snakes can vary considerably depending on 
the species and the mode of locomotion that it employs. 
 Contrary to earlier expectation, the net energetic cost of 
a racer ( Coluber constrictor ) moving by lateral undulation is 
equivalent to that of running in many limbed animals such 
as lizards, arthropods, and mammals. Energy costs are often 
compared using a measure called the  net cost of transport , 
which specifi es the amount of energy that is used to trans-
port a given mass of an animal (say a gram) a given distance 
(for example, per kilometer). Such energy costs associated 
with locomotion vary signifi cantly with the mode of move-
ment. Th us, it was found that the energetic cost of concer-
tina locomotion is about seven times greater than is that for 
lateral undulation. Th e greater cost associated with the con-
certina mode of locomotion possibly relates to the greater 
frequency of movements, the smaller distance traveled per 
cycle of movement, and the summed contributions of both 
sliding plus static frictional resistances. If the same snake is 
moving by either mode, it travels less distance per cycle 
during concertina locomotion compared with lateral undu-
lation, and the cost per cycle of movement is higher during 
concertina movement. Th e anchoring aspect of concertina 
locomotion requires that part of the trunk must be at rest, 
so acceleration of body segments alternates with decelera-
tion during the movement cycles. Th eoretically, such loss of 
momentum with each cycle of progression costs energy. 
 In contrast, a Sidewinder Rattlesnake ( Crotalus cerastes ) 
that is moving by sidewinding exhibits a net cost of transport 
that is somewhat less than half that of a racer ( Coluber con-
strictor ) that is moving by lateral undulation. It appears that 
the lifting of the body during sidewinding movements is ener-
getically more economical than is the combined work that is 
involved in overcoming the ventral and lateral sliding fric-
tional forces that are inherent in lateral undulation. It is 
unclear whether the reduced cost of sidewinding also is re-
lated to the specialized anatomical features that are found in 
profi cient sidewinders such as  Crotalus  cerastes . Of course, the 
energy cost of locomotion depends on the nature of the sub-
strate and the incline of the path of movement (see  fi g.  3.14 ). 
 In spite of the diff erences in energy costs, the endurance 
of locomotion is not very diff erent between a laterally un-
dulating racer and a sidewinding rattlesnake. Th e term  en-
durance refers to how long a given level of locomotion eff ort 
can be sustained. If the two snakes mentioned above are 
moving at a speed of 0.6 km/h, the mean endurance is 
about 73 minutes. 
 Snakes as Robots  
 Snakes have provided an interesting subject for robotics in 
context of military, medical, and sundry other applications 
where movement over complex terrain or narrow spaces is 
important. Robotic snakes have been made small enough to 
maneuver around organs that are inside the human chest 
cavity, while larger ones are able to carry a camera and 
transmit views from a treetop after crawling or swimming 
to a tree and climbing it ( fi g.  3.20 ). Robotic snakes have 
been called  snakebots . Some of the advantages of snakebots 
over other types of robots include (1) ability to maneuver 
over rough terrain; (2) ability to climb steps; (3) ability to 
move over soft or thick materials; (4) ability to span gaps; 
(5) ability to fi t or squeeze into tight or narrow spaces; (6) a 
segmental structure in which similar segments can be re-
placed easily; (7) ability to change body shape; and (8) ad-
vantages in hostile environments in which exposed and 
projecting surfaces such as limbs are easily damaged. Some 
disadvantages of snakebots relate to control problems, lim-
itations of transporting loads, temperature control, and op-
erating speeds that are slower than those of robot vehicles 
having wheels. Th e numerous advantages, however, render 
snakebots to be potentially quite useful. 
 It is important to realize that no snakebot can accurately 
or completely mimic the actual locomotion of live snakes, 
but these robots can be made in various shapes and sizes 
and perform a large variety of tasks that would be diffi  cult 
otherwise. One example of a very clever use of snakebots is 
an application in animal control. A snakebot can pursue 
dangerous or invasive animals (a rabid raccoon, for example) 
and assist with their capture. Many such animals will attack 
a snakebot when it comes close, and the potential contact 
will result in the snakebot emitting an electrical shock that 
paralyzes the aggressive animal. Snakebots are currently 
being developed for search and rescue applications at a 
Biorobotics Laboratory at Carnegie Mellon University, and 
are being investigated as a new type of interplanetary probe 
by engineers at the NASA Ames Research Center. Th umbs 

 100  | How Snakes Work
 
 
 Figure 3.20.   Robotic snakes, or “snakebots,” illustrated crawling over various surfaces, and climbing a tree. Each snakebot has a camera 
mounted in front. Photos are courtesy of Howie Choset, a professor at Carnegie Mellon University’s Robotics Institute who was named as one 
of the top 100 innovators in the world under the age of 35.  

Locomotion: How Snakes Move  |  101 
up for real snakes being the inspiration for such innovative 
research!      
 Additional Reading  
 Aubret, F., and R. Shine. 2008. Th e origin of evolutionary innova-
tions: Locomotor consequences of tail shape in aquatic snakes. 
 Functional Ecology 22:317–322. 
 Aubret, F., X. Bonnet, and R. Shine. 2007. Th e role of adaptive plas-
ticity in a major evolutionary transition: Early aquatic 
experience aff ects locomotor performance of terrestrial 
snakes.  Functional Ecology 21:1154–1161. 
 Brisçhoux, F., A. Kato, Y. Ropert-Coudert, and R. Shine. 2010. Swim-
ming speed variation in swimming sea snakes (Laticaudinae): 
A search for underlying mechanisms.  Journal of Experimental 
Marine Biology and Ecology 394:116–122. 
 Byrnes, G., and B. C. Jayne. 2010. Substrate diameter and compliance 
aff ect the gripping strategies and locomotor mode of climbing 
boa constrictors.  Journal of Experimental Biology 213:4249–4256. 
 Cundall, D. 1987. Functional morphology. In R. A. Seigel, J. T. Col-
lins, and S. S. Novak (eds.),  Snakes: Ecology and Evolutionary 
Biology . New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 106–140. 
 Dial, B. E., R. E. Gatten Jr., and S. Kamel. 1987. Energetics of con-
certina locomotion in  Bipes biporus (Reptilia: Amphisbaenia). 
 Copeia 1987:470–477. 
 Gans, C. 1974.  Biomechanics: An Approach to Vertebrate Biology . New 
York: Lippincott. 
 Gans, C. 1984. Slide-pushing: A transitional locomotor method of 
elongate squamates.  Symposium of the Zoological Society of 
 London 52:12–26. 
 Gasc, J.-P., D. Cattaert, C. Chasserat, and F. Clarac. 1989. Propul-
sive action of a snake pushing against a single site: It’s com-
bined analysis.  Journal of Morphology 201:315–329. 
 Graham, J. B., W. R. Lowell, I. Rubinoff , and J. Motta. 1987. Surface 
and subsurface swimming of the sea snake  Pelamis  platurus . 
 Journal of Experimental Biology  127:27–44. 
 Gray, J. 1946. Th e mechanism of locomotion in snakes.  Journal of 
Experimental Biology 23:101–120. 
 Hazel, J., M. Stone, M. S. Grace, and V. V. Tsukruk. 1999. Nanoscale 
design of snake skin for reptation locomotions via friction an-
isotropy.  Journal of Biomechanics 32:477–484. 
 Hirose, S. 1993.  Biologically Inspired Robots: Snake-Like Locomotors 
and Manipulators . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Hu, D. L., J. Nirody, T. Scott, and M. J. Shelley. 2009. Th e me-
chanics of slithering locomotion.  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences (USA) 106:10081–10085. 
 Jayne, B. C. 1982. Comparative morphology of the semispinalis-
spinalis muscle of snakes and correlations with locomotion 
and constriction.  Journal of Morphology 172:83–96. 
 Jayne, B. C. 1985. Swimming in constricting ( Elaphe g. guttata ) and 
nonconstricting ( Nerodia fasciata pictiventris ) colubrid snakes. 
 Copeia 1985:195–208. 
 Jayne, B. C. 1986. Kinematics of terrestrial snake locomotion. 
 Copeia 1986:915–927. 
 Jayne, B. C. 1988. Muscular mechanisms of snake locomotion: An 
electromyographic study of lateral undulation of the Florida 
Banded Water Snake ( Nerodia fasciata ) and the Yellow Rat 
Snake ( Elaphe obsoleta ).  Journal of Morphology 197:159–181. 
 Jayne, B. C. 1988. Muscular mechanisms of snake locomotion: An 
electromyographic study of the sidewinding and concertina 
modes of  Crotalus cerastes ,  Nerodia fasciata  and  Elaphe obsoleta . 
 Journal of Experimental Biology 140:1–33. 
 Jayne, B. C., and A. F. Bennett. 1990. Selection on locomotor per-
formance capacity in a natural population of garter snakes. 
 Evolution 44:1204–1229. 
 Jayne, B. C., and A. F. Bennett. 1990. Scaling of speed and endur-
ance of garter snakes: A comparison of cross-sectional and 
longitudinal allometries.  Journal of Zoology (London) 
220:257–277. 
 Jayne, B. C., and J. D. Davis. 1991. Kinematics and performance 
capacity for the concertina locomotion of a snake ( Coluber 
 constrictor ).  Journal of Experimental Biology 156:539–556. 
 Johnson, R. G. 1955. Th e adaptive and phylogenetic signifi cance of 
vertebral form in snakes.  Evolution 9:367–388. 
 Kelley, K. C., S. J. Arnold, and J. Gladstone. 1997. Th e eff ects of 
substrate and vertebral number on locomotion in the garter 
snake  Th amnophis elegans .  Functional Ecology 11:189–198. 
 Lillywhite, H. B., J. R. LaFrentz, Y. C. Lin, and M.-C. Tu. 2000. Th e 
cantilever abilities of snakes.  Journal of Herpetology 34:523–528. 
 Lindell, L. E. 1994. Th e evolution of vertebral number and body 
size in snakes.  Functional Ecology 8:708–719. 
 Means, D. B. 2010. Blocked-fl ight aggressive behavior in snakes. 
 IRCF Reptiles and Amphibians 17:76–78. 
 Moon, B. R., and C. Gans. 1998. Kinematics, muscular activity and 
propulsion in gopher snakes.  Journal of Experimental Biology 
201:2669–2684. 
 Norris, K. S., and J. L. Kavanau. 1966. Th e burrowing of the West-
ern Shovel-nosed Snake,  Chionactis occipitalis  Hallowell, and 
the undersand environment.  Copeia 1966:650–664. 
 Ruben, J. A. 1977. Morphological correlates of predatory modes in 
the coachwhip ( Masticophis fl agellum ) and rosy boa ( Lichanura 
roseofusca ).  Herpetologica 33:1–6. 
 Sanders, K. L., A. R. Rasmussen, and J. Elmberg. 2012. Indepen-
dent innovation of paddle-shaped tails in viviparous sea snakes 
(Elapidae: Hydrophiinae).  Integrative and Comparative Biology 
52:311–320. 
 Secor, S. M., B. C. Jayne, and A. F. Bennett. 1992. Locomotor per-
formance and energetic cost of sidewinding by the snake 
 Crotalus cerastes .  Journal of Experimental Biology 163:1–14. 
 Shine, R., H. G. Cogger, R. N. Reed, S. Shetty, and X. Bonnet. 2003. 
Aquatic and terrestrial locomotor speeds of amphibious sea-
snakes (Serpentes, Laticaudidae).  Journal of Zoology (London) 
259:261–268. 
 Shine, R., and S. Shetty. 2001. Moving in two worlds: Aquatic and 
terrestrial locomotion in sea snakes ( Laticauda colubrina , Lati-
caudidae).  Journal of Evolutionary Biology 14:338–346. 
 Socha, J. J. 2002. Gliding fl ight in the paradise tree snake.  Nature 
418:603–604. 
 Socha, J. J. 2011. Gliding fl ight in  Chrysopelea : Turning a snake 
into a wing.  Integrative and Comparative Biology 51:969–982. 
 Walton, M., B. C. Jayne, and A. F. Bennett. 1990. Th e energetic cost 
of limbless locomotion.  Science 249:524–527. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 | 103
 Heat Exchange with Long Bodies and 
No Limbs 
 Like most other reptiles, snakes are exemplary of 
 ectotherms —animals that rely on the external environ-
ment for sources of heat to elevate the body temperature. 
Th is condition is fundamentally diff erent from the physi-
ology of birds and mammals, which generate internal heat 
production by means of relatively high rates of metabolism 
(energy expenditure attributed to all the living processes 
within cells). Th e condition in birds and mammals is 
termed  endothermy , in contrast to that of snakes, which is 
termed  ectothermy . Th e higher rates of metabolism of en-
dotherms confer relatively more freedom from the varia-
tion of external conditions related to geography and 
climate, but it comes with a cost. Endotherms must take in 
more energy as food in order to run their heat-generating 
machines, whereas ectotherms require less energy per 
time, in many cases approaching a full order of magnitude 
less than what is required by an endotherm. Th us, endo-
therms—especially smaller animals such as hummingbirds 
and rodents—must eat on a daily or even hourly basis, 
whereas some snakes have survived more than a year with-
out food. Considering ecological communities, Harvey 
Pough of Cornell University estimated that reptiles can 
produce as much biomass annually as do the resident birds 
and mammals, even though they consume a much smaller 
fraction of the net primary production in their environ-
ment. Th e comparatively low rates of metabolism of snakes 
conserves energy relative to that expended by birds and 
mammals, but it does not produce suffi  cient heat to elevate 
the body temperature signifi cantly. Th us, if a snake is to 
warm itself, it must seek sunlight or warmer parts of the 
microenvironment in order to elevate its body tempera-
ture (but see below).  
 Th e attenuate and limbless body form of snakes has im-
portant consequences with respect to the manner in which 
these animals are infl uenced by their physical environment 
and the behaviors by which they interact with it ( fi g.  4.1 ). 
First, an elongated body has a relatively large surface-to-
mass ratio and does not accumulate and store heat as easily 
as is the case for a more spherical shape and centrally posi-
tioned mass. Of course, this limitation can be off set tempo-
rarily when the length of a snake is drawn into a tight coil, 
as shown in  fi g.  4.1  . But when moving, the mass of the 
snake exchanges heat with the environment along its 
length, and there is less “thermal inertia” in a snake than 
there is in, say, an armadillo of similar mass. Furthermore, 
the long body is subject to more regional variation of body 
temperature and heat exchange than would be the case for 
a more compact body form. 
 Second, because snakes have no limbs, their body is in 
continuous contact with the ground or other surfaces upon 
which it crawls. Th erefore, the exchange of heat is infl u-
enced strongly by conduction to and from the substrate, in 
contrast with, let’s say, a lizard that can erect its limbs and 
stilt its trunk off  the ground ( fi g.  4.2 ). Both animals are sub-
ject to radiative and convective heat exchange due to wind 
or air movement, but the snake is relatively more infl u-
enced by conductive exchange of heat with the ground 
upon which it crawls. When a desert lizard runs across hot 
sandy surfaces (sometimes bipedally!), only the hands or 
feet have minimal and intermittent contact with the 
ground, whereas a crawling snake on the same hot sub-
strate conducts heat into its body over a much larger area of 
contact.    
 I was very surprised on two separate occasions to fi nd 
snakes that were moving at midday in full summer sun 
across an open fi eld. Th e setting was a fi eld of dried grass in 
4
 TEMPERATURE AND ECTOTHERMY  
 Of the hundreds of variables that can shape the phenotype of an organism, 
temperature has undoubtedly captured more than its share of attention. 
 —Michael J. Angilletta Jr.,  Thermal Adaptation: A Theoretical and Empirical 
Synthesis (2009), p. 1  

 104  | How Snakes Work
the Laguna Mountains of San Diego County, California. 
Th ese snakes were likely moving from one area of chaparral 
or shaded oak woodland to another, but each was traversing 
an open fi eld that was in between. I captured each of these 
snakes on the two occasions—one a Southern Pacifi c Rat-
tlesnake and the other a San Diego Gopher Snake—and 
took the body temperature of each, which felt warm to my 
hands. Th e body temperature of the rattlesnake was 39.5°C, 
and that of the gopher snake was very near the same value. 
Both temperatures were quite close to the upper lethal limit 
of temperature tolerance. If either snake had not found a 
hole or shelter, or had not been captured by me, it might 
have met its death in the open fi eld. Th ese were two events 
that stimulated my thinking about the ease of overheating 
in snakes that fi nd themselves on heated ground surfaces 
during very warm days ( fi g.  4.3 ). 
 Lawrence Klauber during the 1930s recognized that tem-
perature limited the activity of snakes, and soon thereafter 
both Walter Mosauer and Raymond Cowles became infl uen-
tial in promoting further thoughts about body temperature 
and its control in squamate reptiles. Studies by these two 
herpetologists, and by Charles Bogert, established that both 
lizards and snakes have rather specifi c preferences for body 
temperature. Th ese early investigations stimulated what 
 
 
 Figure 4.1.   Heat exchanges between a South American Rattlesnake ( Crotalus durissus ) and its environment. Streams of thermal energy 
radiating to the snake include direct solar radiation, indirect long-wave radiation from sky and surrounding objects, and possibly conduction 
from the ground. The snake, in turn, radiates long-wave radiation to the environment, may conduct heat to the substrate, and loses heat by 
convection and evaporation of water. Pathways (or modes) of heat transfer represented by  red arrows indicate heat transfer from the 
environment to the rattlesnake (plus metabolic heat production); pathways of heat transfer represented by  blue arrows indicate heat transfer 
from the rattlesnake to the environment; and pathways of heat transfer represented by  brown arrows indicate bidirectional heat exchange to or 
from the environment depending on which object is warmer. If it is a very warm day with air temperatures greater than the snake’s surface 
temperature, the snake might gain heat by convection. The direction of net heat exchange depends on the difference in absolute temperature 
between the snake, the ground, and other objects in the snake’s environment. All objects having a temperature above absolute zero radiate 
long-wave infrared radiation, and the net exchange of such radiation between the snake and any object in its environment depends on the 
difference in temperature. The snake’s body temperature depends on the balance between input and output of the various streams of energy 
ﬂ ow. This snake was photographed in Belize by Dan Dourson. 

Temperature and Ectothermy  |  105 
later became a long-lasting interest in  behavioral thermoregu-
lation and the importance of temperature in the ecology and 
life history of reptiles. Lizards have been the principal sub-
jects of these studies, but snakes have provided important 
additional insights and are uniquely suitable animals for in-
vestigating many interesting facets of this subject. Th e word 
“thermoregulation” is a shortened form of “temperature reg-
ulation” and is commonly used in literature on this subject.       
 During the several decades following the early studies of 
Ray Cowles and Charles Bogert, scientists have reported 
data for body temperatures measured in more than 100 
species of snakes representing more than 10 diff erent fam-
ilies. Many of the early measurements were obtained op-
portunistically using a rapid-registering glass thermometer 
(then called a  Schultheis thermometer, named after its man-
ufacturer) or an electronic thermometer using either a 
thermistor or thermocouple as a sensor ( fi g.  4.4 ). Herpeto-
logical humorists have referred to this as “grab and stab” 
because investigators enthusiastic to obtain body tempera-
tures of animals in the wild would catch an animal (espe-
cially lizards) and quickly obtain a cloacal temperature 
using one of the devices shown in  fi g.  4.4  . It was relatively 
easy to obtain fi eld data in this way. People eventually real-
ized, however, that interpretations of such data had limita-
tions if there was inadequate information provided about 
the thermal environment of a snake. Additional limitations 
related to (1) reporting single instead of repeated measure-
ments from an individual, (2) having a limited number of 
measurements from conspecifi c individuals, and (3) intro-
ducing a bias due to the time of day that individuals col-
lected measurements according to their own schedule. 
Th us, the evaluation of thermoregulation and the variation 
and causes of temperature selection in snakes has been in-
adequate until the more recent adoption of more sophi-
sticated approaches. Th ese have included continuous or 
repeated measurements of body temperatures from free-
ranging snakes using  radio telemetry ( fi g.  4.5 ), and the corre-
lation of behaviors and physiology with body temperatures 
of snakes during experimental studies in the laboratory. 
 Behavioral Thermoregulation  
 With a few exceptions (see below), ectothermic vertebrates 
depend on behavioral interactions with their environment in 
order to regulate body temperature because there is insuffi  -
cient heat production from metabolism to maintain a warm 
body temperature continuously in variable environments. 
 
 
 Figure 4.2.    A Red-sided Garter Snake ( Thamnophis sirtalis 
parietalis ) basks with its body ﬂ attened, remaining largely in contact 
with the substrate on which it lies ( upper photo ). The body 
temperature therefore is inﬂ uenced to a large extent by the 
temperature of the ground or objects on which it lies. In contrast, a 
Collared Lizard ( Crotaphytus collaris ) ( lower photo ) can minimize the 
inﬂ uence of the substrate by raising its body off the ground or above 
the object on which it rests. Many lizards do this when the substrate 
becomes too warm, whereas the snake must crawl to a cooler 
substrate if it is threatened by an excess rise in its body temperature. 
The snake was photographed in Kansas, and the lizard was 
photographed in Nevada by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 4.3.    A Dusky Pygmy Rattlesnake,  Sistrurus miliarius 
barbouri , will potentially overheat if it remains too long in open, sunlit 
sand during hot days in northern Florida. Photo by Dan Dourson.  

 106  | How Snakes Work
Endotherms such as birds and mammals can do so primarily 
due to their high rate of metabolism, combined with insula-
tion (fur, feathers, or blubber in the case of aquatic forms) 
that sequesters the metabolic heat within the body and re-
tards the losses of heat to cooler surroundings. Snakes, 
lacking insulation and having an attenuate body form, dis-
sipate heat rather rapidly and thus seek out direct solar ra-
diation and warm microenvironments in order to elevate 
body temperature ( fi g.  4.2 ). Th e modest rate of metabolic 
heat production does contribute to the animal’s heat load at 
any given time, and there are physiological attributes such 
as variations of blood fl ow that can help to control the rates 
of heating or cooling. However, behavior is overridingly im-
portant because it is used to adjust the net rate of heat fl ux 
to and from the physical environment, which determines 
the rate and direction of body temperature change ( fi g.  4.1 ). 
 Th ere are two aspects of behavior that are of primary im-
portance to thermoregulation in snakes. Th e fi rst is sometimes 
 
 
 Figure 4.4.   Various devices that have been used to measure body temperatures of snakes and other small vertebrates, and the temperatures of 
their environment. Progressing clockwise from the upper left: ( A ) A Wescor two-channel Digital TC Thermometer, which measures temperature 
by means of a thermocouple at the termination of two small wires attached to the posts on the instrument. Each channel can utilize a separate 
thermocouple wire, and the output can be recorded on a computer. ( B ) A Yellow Springs Intruments Co., Inc. 12-channel Tele-thermometer, 
which measures temperature by means of a thermistor embedded at the end of various cables or leads that are attached to the instrument. The 
one shown here is a ﬂ at disc that is designed to measure temperatures of ﬂ at surfaces, or can be used to indicate the temperature of a fully 
absorbing “black body” if painted black and used to intercept solar radiation. Each of 12 channels can accommodate a separate thermistor 
probe, and the various outputs can be recorded on a computer. ( C ) A Holohil Systems Ltd. implantable radio transmitter with an attached aerial. 
This unit can be implanted into the body cavity of a snake, and temperature-dependent signals can be picked up from a distance using an 
antenna and a calibrated recording device. ( D ) An Omega noncontact Infrared Thermometer, which detects the infrared energy emitted by any 
material (e.g., an animal surface) and converts the energy factor into a temperature reading. The temperature of the emitting surface must be 
above absolute zero (0º Kelvin). This instrument enables temperature measurements from a distance without contacting the object that is being 
measured. ( E ) A Schultheis rapid-registering thermometer is shown lying next to a metal protective carrying case. This small thermometer has a 
reduced bulb and can rapidly measure temperatures from 0 to 50 ºCelsius. The early models of these thermometers were manufactured by 
Schultheis and Sons of Brooklyn, New York, but are available now from Miller and Weber of Queens, New York. These thermometers are easily 
carried in the ﬁ eld and have been used to quantify ﬁ eld temperatures for more than 50 years. Photograph by the author.  

Temperature and Ectothermy  |  107 
termed  shuttling and refers to movements back and forth be-
tween warmer or cooler parts of the environment, depending 
on the need of the animal. Numerous species of snakes living 
in temperate climates fl atten the body to absorb solar radia-
tion following their morning emergence in the spring prior to 
engaging in movement and activity ( fi g.  4.2 ). During hotter 
periods of the day these same snakes will seek shaded environ-
ments to avoid overheating ( fi g.  4.6 ). Retreating to subterra-
nean shelters or beneath leaf litter sometimes can retard heat 
loss and can be important in limiting nocturnal cooling. On 
the other hand, boa constrictors in tropical climates were 
shown by investigations of Samuel McGinnis and Robert 
Moore to maintain body temperature as much as 7°C below 
shaded ground temperatures by seeking out subterranean en-
vironments that were cooler.  
 Th e elongate body form of snakes presents a relatively 
large surface area to the environment, especially if the 
snake is fl attened and fully outstretched. However, when 
the body is tightly coiled (as in  fi g.  4.1 ) the surface-to-mass 
ratio is greatly reduced and in some species can approach 
the minimum possible ratio exemplifi ed by a sphere. Such 
coiling minimizes heat exchange with the environment and 
increases the likelihood of controlling body temperature 
by means of cardiovascular adjustments or metabolic heat 
 
 
 Figure 4.5.    Dhiraj Bhaisare radio-tracks a King Cobra ( Ophiophagus hannah ) in the rainforest of the Western Ghats, India. Radio signals allow 
the tracking antenna and receiver (not shown) to locate the snake, which is some distance away and shown here in the  inset . A radio 
transmitter has been surgically implanted into the body cavity of the snake. Such transmitters can be conﬁ gured to transmit temperature as well 
as other physiological information (e.g., heart rate), in addition to the location of a free-ranging animal. Photographs by Thimappa, a local tracker.  
 
 
 Figure 4.6.   A Southern Paciﬁ c Rattlesnake ( Crotalus oreganus 
helleri ) seeks a shaded shelter during midday when environmental 
temperatures have warmed considerably and the radiant energy from 
direct sun is relatively intense. This animal was photographed by the 
author in the Laguna Mountains of Southern California, where the 
species is largely diurnal but restricts much of its activity to nighttime 
in the middle of the summer. 

 108  | How Snakes Work
production. In large constrictors such as boas and pythons, 
rates of heat loss to the environment are reduced by as 
much as one-half, although this factor varies with the envi-
ronment. Social aggregations of snakes can also further 
modify the environment-body surface interactions. Large 
overwinter aggregations of snakes tend to occur at north-
ern latitudes, where James Gillingham and Charles Carpen-
ter discovered that the tendency of snakes to form tight 
aggregations within a den is temperature-dependent. Th e 
snakes increasingly aggregate as the temperature falls ( fi g. 
 4.7 ). On the other hand, many snakes with ranges in lati-
tudes having more moderate climates tend to overwinter 
singly rather than in large aggregations.    
 Opportunities for active thermoregulation can be some-
what limited in fossorial habitats, aquatic environments, 
and even some terrestrial environments in the tropics. Th us, 
some snakes might behave “passively” and merely conform 
to their thermal environment. Aquatic snakes living in fresh-
water or marine environments live essentially at ambient 
water temperature, which might be thermally uniform or 
variable depending on the particular habitat. However, Rich-
ard Shine and Robert Lambeck studied aquatic fi le snakes 
( Acrochordus arafurae ) in northern Australia and found that 
the variability of body temperature is signifi cantly less than 
that of the surrounding water in which they live. Much of the 
year, the body temperature varies by no more than a few de-
grees Celsius owing to the stability of water temperature and 
the selection of microhabitats on the part of the fi le snakes. 
Snakes living in ponds or streams can alter their body tem-
perature by moving between warmed shallow edge waters 
and the deeper waters that are nearer midstream ( fi g.  4.8  ). 
 Th e second aspect of behavior important to thermoregula-
tion involves postural adjustments such as fl attening, tilting, 
coiling, or extending the body. Such behaviors alter the expo-
sure and contour of body surfaces, thereby adjusting the 
regional exchanges of heat between the snake and its environ-
ment. Postural adjustments are a way in which a snake “fi ne-
tunes” the direction, rate, and location of heat fl ows to and 
from the body. On cold mornings, Australian Red-bellied 
Blacksnakes ( Pseudechis porphyriacus ) fl atten the body broadly, 
somewhat akin to a cobra but including the entire body, and 
then tilt up on edge so the broad surface is exposed at right 
angles to the early morning sun. Harold Heatwole and Cliff ord 
Ray Johnson studied blacksnakes that were implanted with 
thermocouples and demonstrated that postural adjustments 
over a narrow range of body temperature abruptly alter the 
thermal gradients within the body.  
 Snakes are long creatures, so there is clearly a likelihood 
of thermal variation along the length of the body in various 
circumstances. When snakes are observed to thermoregulate 
behaviorally in the laboratory using a fi nite heat source such 
as heat lamp, there is a pronounced tendency for at least 
 
 
 Figure 4.7.   Hundreds of Red-sided Garter Snakes ( Thamnophis 
sirtalis parietalis ) amass together outside the entrance to a den where 
these snakes overwinter in southern Manitoba, Canada. Large 
aggregations of snakes are typical at many denning sites in temperate 
regions having cold winters. Photograph by Tracy Langkilde.  
 
 
 Figure 4.8.   A Florida Green Water Snake ( Nerodia ﬂ oridana ) rests 
at the edge of a pond where the water has been warmed by the sun. 
This snake was photographed in Levy County, Florida, by Dan Dourson. 

Temperature and Ectothermy  |  109 
some individuals to adjust their position such that diff erent 
parts of the body alternate location beneath the heat lamp. 
Th ese behaviors suggest the snake is altering the regional 
heat input through time so as to maintain a more uniform 
body temperature throughout its length. I discovered this 
phenomenon while studying the thermoregulatory behav-
iors of Australian elapid snakes ( fi g.  4.9  ). During early obser-
vations, I found myself saying simply “Yes, the snake is still 
under the heat lamp.” But upon closer inspection I came to 
realize that individual snakes were making subtle adjust-
ments in their position. Th e result was very crudely analo-
gous to grilling meat or kabobs on a barbecue: various parts 
of the meat or vegetables (body of the snake) must be turned 
regularly with respect to the heat source if one wishes to 
cook (warm) the object evenly.  
 A number of species of pythons have been reported to 
bask “upside down” by inverting the normal body position 
such that the ventral side is facing up. Such body inversion 
is usually limited to the posterior half of the snake, while 
the head and anterior body remain with a more normal 
upright posture ( fi g.  4.10 ). Such inverted basking postures 
are more prevalent when a female snake is gravid, possibly 
 functioning to distribute heat to the reproductive tract 
and incubating embryos. On the other hand, David Barker 
suggested to me that the position might be related more 
to the comfort of the female when the body is heavy with 
young, much as position becomes important to the com-
fort of a pregnant woman. Basking positions and postures 
of various snakes also are thought to maximize body tem-
perature of the gut when a recently taken meal is being 
digested.  
 Th ermal Preferences 
 Th e tendency for snakes to maintain their body temperature 
within a narrow range or at a particular level has been de-
scribed by various words. Th e more commonly used terms 
are  preferred body temperature ,  thermal preferendum ,  mean se-
lected temperature , or sometimes  preferred range . For sake of 
convenience in this chapter I will use the term preferred 
body temperature (PBT) to indicate the mean of body tem-
peratures that are measured either in active snakes in the 
wild, or as the mean of body temperatures that are recorded 
when snakes are allowed to exploit a gradient or mosaic of 
temperatures in the laboratory. When given a choice of envi-
ronments with adequate thermal opportunities, many spe-
cies of snakes select a PBT generally within the range of 29 to 
34°C, and usually very close to 30°C. Measurements for nu-
merous species have been summarized in various publica-
tions that are listed at the end of this chapter. Diurnal species 
inhabiting relatively open habitat may regulate body tem-
perature at levels in excess of 30°C, whereas lower tempera-
tures are characteristic of snakes that are nocturnal, fossorial, 
or occupants of shaded habitats. Some species that have 
been investigated carefully are capable of regulating body 
temperature with a very high degree of precision, sometimes 
varying no more than 1–2°C when a heat source is available.  
 Charles Peterson of Idaho State University studied garter 
snakes ( Th amnophis elegans ) using radio telemetry and dem-
onstrated a typical triphasic pattern of thermoregulation. 
Th is consisted of (1) a rapid heating phase in the morning 
when relatively cool snakes emerged and basked in direct 
sunlight, (2) an extended “plateau” phase while snakes ther-
moregulated during the day, and (3) a long cooling phase 
during the late afternoon and night when snakes were se-
cluded in nocturnal retreats ( fi g.  4.11  ). Raymond Huey and a 
 
 
 Figure 4.9.    Schematic illustration of a recorded sequence of body 
positions, noted at 10-minute intervals, for an adult Red-bellied Black 
Snake ( Pseudechis porphyriacus ) basking beneath an infrared heat 
lamp. The “x” represents the center of irradiance from the lamp, and 
the circle indicates roughly the isotherm where irradiance falls off to 
50 percent of maximum. The numbers indicate the time and core 
body temperature of the snake (measured by radiotelemetry). Drawing 
by Jason Bourque, Florida Museum of Natural History, based on ﬁ g. 2 
in H. B. Lillywhite, Behavioral thermoregulation in Australian elapid 
snakes,  Copeia 1980:452–458, 1980. 
 
 
 Figure 4.10.   A gravid female Burmese Python ( Python molurus 
bivittatus ) lying in an “upside-down” position with much of the 
ventral body upright. This snake also features an unusual color morph 
of this species. Photograph by David Barker. 

 110  | How Snakes Work
team of collaborators studied these snakes at Eagle Lake in 
northeastern California and found that they retreated be-
neath rocks of intermediate thickness, which off ered the 
snakes an appropriate variety of thermoregulatory oppor-
tunities relative to thinner or thicker rocks. Snakes beneath 
the selected rocks were protected from overheating, but 
they could achieve their preferred body temperature for 
long periods—longer times than if they remained on the 
ground surface or if they moved up and down within a 
burrow. One female snake, for example, maintained a body 
temperature between 27.6 ° and 31.6 °C for 14 hours (the 
mean or “average” = 30.3°C), and for an entire 24 hours the 
body temperature never decreased below 23.6°C. 
 A number of herpetologists have found that temperatures 
of a snake’s head are maintained within more narrow limits 
than are body temperatures measured elsewhere in the 
snake, suggesting that relatively more precise regulation of 
head temperature above that of body temperature might 
help to optimize functioning of the central nervous system. 
Some diurnal lizards and snakes have been observed to warm 
the head before they fully emerge from nighttime retreats. 
 In a very interesting study of Northern Rubber Boas ( Cha-
rina bottae ), Michael Dorcas and Charles Peterson found that 
diurnally active snakes maintained a warmer head at temper-
atures below their thermal preference, but they maintained 
warmer bodies when temperatures were above their thermal 
preference. In other words, rubber boas regulate their head 
temperature more precisely than their body temperature 
during the daytime. Furthermore, rubber boas were shown to 
exhibit signifi cantly higher head temperatures than body tem-
peratures during the night. Th e active maintenance of head-
body temperature diff erences (about 2 °C) can be attributed 
either to behavioral mechanisms such as preferential head 
warming, or to physiological mechanisms involving blood 
shunts or countercurrent heat exchangers (see  chapter  6  ). 
Whether physiological mechanisms ex-
plain the maintenance of regional body 
temperature diff erences in snakes is not 
known (see below). 
 Th e preferred body temperatures of 
snakes may undergo seasonal changes and 
can be modifi ed by changes in physiological 
factors or the physical environment. Th e 
term  acclimation refers to a reversible 
change in a character (including measures 
of performance such as the speed of loco-
motion) that results from a prolonged 
change in the environment, especially tem-
perature. Th us, if an animal that is, let’s say, 
adapted to low temperature experiences 
warm temperatures for a prolonged period 
of some days or weeks, a physiological  per-
formance curve (see below) might gradually 
shift upscale so that the function is improved to better match 
the temperature. Such physiological changes usually involve 
alterations in the quality and quantity of enzymes that are re-
lated to alterations of genetic expression induced by the 
change of temperature. By defi nition, these changes are re-
versible, and of course they have limitations. In scientifi c liter-
ature, the term acclimation generally refers to such changes 
when they are induced in the laboratory, whereas the term 
 acclimatization is used to describe such changes that go for-
ward naturally in a wild animal’s environment. 
 Studies of acclimation that occurs when snakes are sub-
jected to diff erent temperatures in the laboratory demon-
strate an inverse relationship between the PBT and the 
acclimation temperature. Such acclimation responses have 
various interpretations, but they indicate a resetting of 
thermoregulatory “set points” during prolonged exposure 
to the temperature changes. A variety of factors in addition 
to environmental temperature potentially infl uence PBT 
set points, including illumination, reproductive condition, 
feeding, skin shedding, endogenous seasonal or circadian 
rhythms, age, and sex. Much work remains to be conducted 
in order to understand the variation of body temperature, 
both within and between species, and the genetic determi-
nants of the PBT in relation to interactions with forces of 
natural selection in a species’ environment. 
 Physiological Thermoregulation  
 Internal Th ermogenesis and Endothermy   
 Although the majority of snakes are likely to be strict ecto-
therms nearly all of the time, we know of documented cir-
cumstances in which internal heat production is capable of 
elevating body temperature above that of the immediate 
 
 
 Figure 4.11.   Hypothetical but characteristic plot of the daily changes in body 
temperature of a snake that ( 1 ) emerges in the morning and heats rapidly during exposure 
to full sunlight, ( 2 ) behaviorally regulates body temperature during an extended “plateau” 
phase when the thermal environment is appropriate, and ( 3 ) cools slowly when the sun 
sets and the snake seeks shelter from the cooling environment. Drawing by the author.  

Temperature and Ectothermy  |  111 
environment. Th e most dramatic and well-known example is 
in connection with the brooding behavior of female pythons. 
Female pythons gather their eggs into a heap around which 
the snake coils tightly and encloses the clutch in the center 
of the coils ( fi g.  4.12 ). Th e female generates heat for transfer 
to the eggs by means of twitching her body muscles. Th e 
means of heat generation is very similar to what occurs 
when mammals—including humans—shiver to produce 
body heat in response to cold exposure. Skeletal muscles are 
activated by nerves, but not in a coordinated way to produce 
movement. Rather, the muscles twitch sporadically and gen-
erate tension without shortening to produce movement. Th e 
spasmodic twitching of muscles in the python thus gener-
ates heat, which warms the body of the female and transfers 
heat to the eggs that are located between the body coils. 
 Th e controlled production of body heat with signifi cant 
transfer to elevate the temperature of a brooded clutch of 
eggs has been shown convincingly in three species of py-
thons, but many others might be incapable of signifi cant 
heat production. Isometric muscle contractions have also 
been noted in rat snakes ( Pantherophis obsoletus ) and Bull-
snakes ( Pituophis melanoleucus ) when exposed to low tem-
peratures (10°C and 8°C, respectively). Th e contribution of 
such muscle activity to body temperature in these circum-
stances is not known, however. 
 Th e phenomenon of heat generation during brooding by 
pythons is known as  facultative endothermy (and in mam-
mals  shivering thermogenesis ). Th e phenomenon has been 
studied most completely in Burmese Pythons ( Python molu-
rus ) and was fi rst investigated by Lodewyk H. S. Van Mierop 
and Susan Barnard. Brooding female Burmese Pythons gen-
erate muscular heat when ambient temperatures fall below 
about 31°C, and the elevated body temperature remains 
within the general range of 31 to 33°C over an ambient range 
of at least 10°C. Th e heat that is generated by the snake 
maintains the temperature of her brooding eggs close to 
30°C when air temperatures range between 23 and 30°C. 
Th us, brooding female pythons can elevate the tempera-
tures of developing eggs by some 7°C above the temperature 
of the nest outside the brooding female. Th ese snakes 
are not only capable of endothermy, but they use it to regu-
late body temperature and, indirectly, the temperature of 
the incubating eggs. Th is brooding behavior is advantageous 
in pythons whose geographic range extends to mountains 
where air temperatures can fall to levels that might slow the 
development and hatching of the species’ eggs. Some other 
pythons (e.g., Water Pythons,  Liasis fuscus ) show facultative 
maternal brooding behavior, with the genesis of body heat 
being used to warm the clutch. Richard Shine and others 
have therefore suggested that a female python’s “decision” 
where to locate her eggs and whether to remain and brood 
them can have important consequences for the subsequent 
development and success of the off spring. Th ese are won-
derfully “hot” topics in snake biology!    
 Surprisingly, there are other very interesting examples 
of endothermy in snakes. One is a condition that I discov-
ered recently in newly hatched California King Snakes. Th e 
hatchlings are born with a large amount of yolk that is still 
present in their digestive tract. For periods up to two weeks, 
the skin temperature of hatchlings averages 0.6°C above the 
ambient temperature. Th is small but signifi cant elevation 
of body temperature is thought to result from the active ab-
sorption and metabolism of the yolk and is therefore analo-
gous to what is called  postprandial thermogenesis (specifi c 
dynamic action; see  chapter  2  ). A group of scientists led by 
Glenn Tattersall have carefully investigated South Ameri-
can Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus durissus ) and demonstrated that 
postfeeding elevation of body temperatures can result from 
internal thermogenesis related to metabolic responses to 
feeding. Th e body surfaces of fed rattlesnakes have been 
shown to elevate 0.9–1.2°C by thermal imaging, so the mag-
nitude of associated changes in deep core temperatures 
could well be even more pronounced ( fi g.  4.13 ). Th is degree 
of thermogenesis is suffi  cient to enhance digestion signifi -
cantly. More important, however, are voluntary seeking of 
warmer environments or increased basking to elevate body 
temperature following feeding. For example, David Slip and 
Richard Shine found that Australian Diamond Pythons 
( Morelia spilota ) select temperatures that are several de-
grees higher after feeding in order to speed up the digestion 
of food. Not all snakes, however, elevate their body temper-
ature following feeding. 
 Larger snakes, by virtue of their mass, can retain heat 
longer than can smaller individuals and thus have greater 
thermal inertia, especially when the body is drawn into a 
 
 
 Figure 4.12.   A Ringed Python ( Bothrochilus boa ) brooding her 
clutch of eggs. The egg temperatures are regulated by spasmodic 
muscle twitches of the female snake, which is similar to muscle 
“shivering” in humans. Photograph by David Barker. 

 112  | How Snakes Work
tight coil. Th e possibility of endothermic elevation of body 
temperature is increased further when snakes aggregate in 
large numbers. Th eoretical calculations by Fred White and 
Robert Lasiewski have suggested that a hypothetical aggre-
gate of 150 denning rattlesnakes could maintain an aggre-
gate body temperature about 15°C above the ambient den 
site temperature. Th is level of endothermy is attributable to 
metabolic heat production relative to an aggregate “eff ec-
tive” surface area that is 40 percent of the summed surface 
areas of individual snakes if they were in isolation. While 
snakes in aggregated situations appear 
very capable of controlling their rates of 
heat loss to some extent, there is no evi-
dence that metabolic heat production is 
actively engaged in thermoregulation as 
in the brooding female pythons. 
 Respiratory Heat Transfer Mechanisms 
 When snakes are exposed to stressfully 
higher body temperatures, they may in-
crease the rate of lung ventilation and 
breathe with the mouth open. Evapora-
tion from moist membranes lining the 
mouth, trachea, and lung cools these sur-
faces and potentially removes heat from 
the body. Such  evaporative cooling can be 
important to thermoregulation in endo-
thermic birds and mammals, and can 
stabilize brain temperatures of desert 
Chuckwalla lizards some 3ºC below air 
temperatures. However, such cooling 
probably has marginal infl uence in the 
body’s heat balance of snakes. Th ermo-
graphic images of temperature diff erences 
between the head and body of rattle-
snakes have revealed regions of cooling 
around the mouth and nasal capsule, sug-
gesting that heat loss occurs by means of 
evaporative cooling in the ventilatory pas-
sageways ( fi g.  4.13 ). A research team lead 
by Brendan Borrell demonstrated that the 
diff erences in temperature between the 
head and body increase from about 2ºC to 
about 3ºC when rattlesnakes begin rat-
tling. Th ese and other studies suggest that 
behavioral activities such as  locomotion 
and rattling might change breathing rate 
and thereby infl uence cooling of the head 
relative to the body. How these mecha-
nisms might be activated during heat 
stress has not been evaluated. 
 Whether or not snakes actively pant 
to remove body heat is not well studied 
(see also  chapter  6 ). Th e phenomenon is documented in a 
number of lizards, yet no snake is known to eff ectively 
pant. Perhaps panting is less eff ective in snakes because of 
the long shape of the body with its heat content being more 
removed from the region of cooling (at or near the head) 
than is the case in lizards. Th e hypothalamus of the brain is 
an important center for regulating thermoregulatory re-
sponses, including behavior, in both mammals and lizards. 
Th is is likely to be true in snakes as well. 
 
 
 Figure 4.13.   Thermal images illustrating postfeeding thermogenesis in a South 
American Rattlesnake ( Crotalus durissus ). The  upper photo shows a rattlesnake prior 
to feeding on a live mouse that can be seen nearby. Note the warm body temperature of 
the endothermic mouse relative to that of the rattlesnake. The  lower photo shows the 
rattlesnake again, 24 hours after it has eaten the mouse. The elevated body 
temperature of the rattlesnake is due to metabolic heat production related to an 
up-regulation of metabolism associated with digestion of the mouse. The “cold” spot at 
the head of the snake is attributable to respiratory evaporative cooling of the nasal 
passages associated with breathing. The vertical numerical scales to the right of each 
photo indicate how surface temperature varies according to the colors in the image. 
Note these scales are different for each image. Photographs by Glenn J. Tattersall.  

Temperature and Ectothermy  |  113 
 Why Do Snakes Thermoregulate?  
 Snakes regulate their body temperature for basically two 
reasons: (1) to avoid thermal extremes that threaten their 
existence, and (2) to maximize or optimize bodily functions. 
At the low end of the temperature scale, snakes and other 
animals must avoid freezing to death. At the high end, tem-
perature disrupts the structure of proteins and can be es-
pecially injurious to enzymes, causing denaturation that 
impairs the ability of molecules to maintain proper struc-
ture and therefore function. One immediate consequence is 
that coordinated systems such as nerves and muscles lose 
orchestration and therefore their integrity of response. Th e 
result is death as movement, breathing, blood circulation, 
and other vital activities become disrupted or impaired.  
 Tolerance Limits to Cold 
 Th e temperature at which a cooling snake loses coordina-
tion and movement is potentially lethal if the animal 
cannot escape from that condition. Laboratory determina-
tions of such a temperature is termed the  critical thermal 
minimum (CTMin), representing the temperature at which 
long-term survival is not possible unless the snake escapes 
from this or lower temperatures. Critical thermal minima 
have been determined for perhaps about a dozen species 
and are generally in the range of one to two or several de-
grees Celsius above freezing. Freezing temperatures are 
threatening because of the potential damage that occurs to 
cells from ice crystals that form in the cellular or extracel-
lular fl uids and physically disrupt or destroy the cellular 
membranes and other structures. Freezing of body fl uids 
also increases the osmotic concentration of fl uids that re-
sult when water is withdrawn from solutes during the for-
mation of ice crystals. Th is reduces the solvent relative to 
solutes, and the resulting osmotic concentrations in the re-
maining fl uids disturb cellular function and the distribution 
of body fl uids in the various body compartments. Th e eff ect 
is very similar to dehydration. 
 Many reptiles and some snakes have the ability to escape 
the lethal eff ects of freezing temperatures by “supercooling” 
the entire body to temperatures that are below the normal 
freezing point without the formation of ice crystals. Several 
colubrid, elapid, and viperid species of snakes have been 
shown by Charles Lowe and his colleagues to supercool to 
temperatures ranging roughly from −4 to −7°C. Survival fol-
lowing supercooling without the formation of internal ice is 
widespread among ectothermic vertebrates and is probably 
quite common among snakes, especially those that manage 
to survive at high latitudes and high mountains. 
 Numerous animals living in seasonally cold environ-
ments also have the ability to endure the freezing of extra-
cellular body fl uids (cells must be protected from freezing). 
Th is phenomenon is termed “freeze tolerance” and has been 
studied and best characterized in several species of frogs 
and turtles. Garter snakes ( Th amnophis sirtalis ) and boreal 
vipers ( Vipera berus ) can endure brief exposures to freezing 
temperatures, but they die when temperatures fall below 
about −2 to −3°C for more than a few hours. Some periph-
eral freezing of skin and muscle tissue is probably tolerated, 
but the penetration of ice to core vital organs such as the 
heart is not. 
 Th e process of freezing has been studied in frogs and in 
turtles. Formation of ice crystals is initiated at a peripheral 
site such as the skin, and is propagated inward in a direc-
tional manner through the body. Ice forms fi rst in spaces 
outside the organs, such as the abdominal space; then even-
tually the organs freeze. During thawing, melting occurs 
uniformly throughout the body core, and the organs melt 
before the ice that surrounds them. 
 In amphibians and some reptiles other than snakes, so-
called “antifreeze” proteins inhibit the formation of ice crys-
tals in body fl uids, and “ice-nucleating” proteins may initiate 
and control the formation of ice in the extracellular fl uids. 
A common adaptation is for low molecular weight metabo-
lites such as glucose to accumulate seasonally during cold 
weather and to provide resistance to freezing of intracellular 
fl uids and the whole body. Studies of turtles have shown 
that genes responsive to cold produce proteins that help to 
protect cells from the injurious eff ects of reduced blood fl ow 
and oxygen that results from the freezing of blood plasma 
during exposure to extreme cold. However, these physiolog-
ical and biochemical aspects of freeze tolerance have not yet 
been demonstrated in snakes.  
 Tolerance Limits to Heat 
 Temperatures that are high-end counterparts to critical 
thermal minima are termed  critical thermal maxima (CT-
Max). Th ese also have been measured in about a dozen spe-
cies of snakes and typically range from 37 to 44°C with a 
mean around 40°C. Death ensues if the body temperature 
increases just a few degrees higher than this point. Like 
many other vertebrates, the operational body temperature 
of snakes is much closer to the upper lethal limit than it is 
to the lower lethal limit. At least, this is true if the animal is 
given a choice and has the means to achieve its preferred 
body temperature. Again, snakes must be very careful to 
avoid overheating because they crawl with the ventral body 
surfaces in contact with the substrate. Th is imposes great 
diffi  culty for regulating body temperature if the environ-
mental temperatures are hot. Therefore, the principal 
defense of snakes against overheating is the behavioral 
avoidance of microenvironments that might transfer exces-
sive heat to a snake. Such avoidance explains why one does 
not see snakes crawling around during the hotter daylight 
hours in open, hot environments such as a low-latitude 

 114  | How Snakes Work
desert. Th e snakes are secluded down holes or beneath 
rocks and other objects where the extreme temperatures of 
more open environments are avoided. 
 Th ermal Sensitivity, Performance Curves, 
and Trade-oﬀ s 
 Anyone familiar with chemistry and physics knows that 
fundamental physical and chemical processes are acceler-
ated by temperature, and that biochemical reaction rates 
increase with increasing temperature up to some max-
imum. Th erefore, life processes that depend on underlying 
biochemistry—respiration, digestion, growth, and so on—
are sensitive to changing temperatures. Th is means also 
that coordinated systems—composed of many parts but 
acting as a whole—alter in performance with changes in 
temperature. Most persons familiar with snakes or other 
ectothermic reptiles have observed comparatively slow 
movements during locomotion or tongue fl icking when the 
animal is cold, whereas at higher temperatures all the  action 
speeds up considerably. 
 So-called “performance curves” usually refer to the ther-
mal sensitivity of key tasks or functions, which are quanti-
fi ed in some manner and plotted as a function of temperature. 
Examples are illustrated in  fi gure  4.14 . Th e concept has be-
come widely used in comparative biology, particularly in con-
text of linking phenotypic traits, performance, and fi tness. 
Th ere is, of course, tremendous variation of performance 
curves, and they can be expected to vary with species as well 
as individual acclimation history related to previous thermal 
exposure. Each performance curve predicts the thermal opti-
mum, or temperature of maximum value, and the  perfor-
mance breadth of a given function, which is some measure of 
the thermal range over which performance has some subjec-
tive value to the organism. 
 Regardless of the underlying mechanism or causation of 
the thermal sensitivity, adaptation for performance at low 
temperatures (e.g., locomotion in cold-climate European vi-
pers) usually involves a trade-off  with performance at high 
temperatures, and vice versa (e.g., locomotion in warm- 
environment tropical fi le snakes). Put in other words, a ge-
notype or phenotype that performs well at low temperatures 
usually performs poorly at high temperatures and vice versa. 
Hence, there are constraints on performance depending on 
the environment and the adaptive specialization of the an-
imal. However, some “escape” from these constraints is pos-
sible owing to acclimation ( fi g.  4.14 ). 
 Another word that is commonly used to express the var-
iation of a phenotype attributable to environmental infl u-
ence is  phenotypic plasticity . And the range of phenotypes 
that are expressed by a given genotype operating under a 
range of environmental conditions common to an animal’s 
habitat is called  reaction norm . Fundamentally, all such 
terms relate to the inherent ability (genetic capacity) of a 
species to alter its structure, function, and behavior for im-
proved survival in response to changing aspects of the 
 dynamic environments in which a species lives. 
 Th e sensitivity of life processes to temperature, as well as 
other resources such as availability of water, limits the activ-
ities of snakes both in time and in space. Hence, many snakes 
that live in temperate climates are active at diff erent times of 
the day depending on the season and how daily changes in 
the thermal environment infl uence the ability of a snake to 
achieve appropriate body temperatures. A dramatic example 
of such seasonal change is the switch in behavior of snakes 
that are diurnal during early spring and become nocturnal 
during the hotter periods of summer ( fi g.  4.15 ). 
 Th e variation of body temperature has potentially many 
consequences for snakes, just as for other ectotherms that also 
have variable body temperatures. Rates of resting metabolism 
generally increase exponentially with temperature so that en-
ergy requirements are increased at higher temperatures but 
with the advantage of enhanced muscle performance, foraging 
 
 
 Figure 4.14.   Hypothetical  performance curves depicting how a 
chosen variable (digestion, for example) changes with temperature. 
The breadth of each performance curve is indicated by the horizontal 
arrows, which describe the limits of temperature within which a large 
percentage of the functional range is expressed (say, 95 percent). 
 Curve A depicts a hypothetical performance curve in a species of 
snake that is adapted to living at low temperatures (e.g., at high 
altitude or latitude) and is subjected to colder environmental 
temperatures than is the species represented by  curve B , which 
features a performance curve for a species adapted to living at higher 
temperatures (a warm-environment species). The variation or shifts of 
the function depicted at curve B (dashed line) represents hypothetical 
changes that are related to  acclimation or  acclimatization . That is, if 
the animal is subjected to changing temperatures in the environment, 
the performance shifts upscale (in response to warmer temperatures) 
or downscale (in response to cooler temperatures) if the environmental 
change is prolonged. The horizontal dashed line represents the total 
increase in performance breadth that is attributable to thermal 
acclimation. These changes in the physiology or performance of the 
animal in response to environmental variation are called  phenotypic 
plasticity . Drawing by the author. 

Temperature and Ectothermy  |  115 
success, and so on—up to some limits, of course. Some snakes 
exhibit a “plateau” of the rate of metabolism at temperatures 
corresponding to the activity range of the species, suggesting 
there is adaptation to stabilize performance related to energy 
use at those temperatures that are most favorable for the ani-
mal’s activity. Temperature also aff ects growth and develop-
ment, but there have been surprisingly few studies of these 
phenomena in snakes. Th e advantage of higher temperatures 
for growth is related in part to increased muscle performance, 
foraging success, and rapid digestion and absorption of in-
gested food items. In ecological terms, temperature can aff ect 
the frequency of feeding, the manner in which snakes forage, 
the time spent foraging, success of prey capture, processing of 
ingested energy, reproduction, avoidance of predators, and sur-
vivorship. Nocturnal behaviors of snakes during summers, for 
example, can reduce the exposure of active snakes and there-
fore the risk of capture by diurnal predators such as hawks. 
 An interesting example of how temperatures that are se-
lected by snakes infl uence important functions is the behav-
ioral choice of temperature that increases the chemical 
energy that might be gained following the ingestion of a 
meal. Using empirical models related to digestion in Chinese 
Green Tree Vipers ( Trimeresurus s. stejnegeri ), Tien-Shun 
Tsai and his collaborators demonstrated that selection of el-
evated body temperatures (about 28ºC) for a brief period 
following eating (see  chapter  2  ) consistently maximized the 
amount of energy that was gained from the meal. 
 Herpetologists have recognized that there are costs as 
well as benefi ts to thermoregulation in ectotherms such 
as snakes. Th e idea has been championed by Raymond 
Huey and holds that a snake that maintains a high body 
 temperature—by sun exposure for example—might also 
be more exposed to predators than if it was more reclusive 
in its behavior. Equally or more important, higher temper-
atures increase the rate of metabolism so that snakes use 
more energy when the body temperature is high. Th is sit-
uation is all right provided the foraging success compen-
sates, but if prey items are in short supply it might be a 
better strategy to conserve energy by spending less time 
at the higher temperatures. Th is subject of “trade-off s” be-
comes even more complicated when one considers the in-
teractions of temperature with evaporative water losses, 
skin shedding, reproduction, immune responses, and nu-
merous other living processes. Th ere is evidence that some 
snakes adjust their thermoregulatory strategy according 
to the status of energy and water balance, reproduction, 
and other factors. More detailed studies are needed, how-
ever, before models of cost-benefi t analyses can be gener-
alized. As with many things in nature, we can take 
satisfaction in knowing that behaviors of snakes are un-
doubtedly far more complex and interesting than we 
usually give credit.  
 Additional Reading  
   Avery, R. A. 1982. Field studies of body temperatures and thermo-
regulation. In C. Gans and F. H. Pough (eds.).,  Biology of the 
Reptilia , vol. 12. New York: Academic Press, pp. 93–166. 
 Bennett, A. F. 1984. Th ermal dependence of muscle function. 
 American Journal of Physiology 247:217–229. 
 Borrell, B. J., T. J. LaDuc, and R. Dudley. 2005. Respiratory cooling 
in rattlesnakes.  Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A 
140:471–476. 
 Cowles, R. B. 1939. Possible implications of reptilian thermal toler-
ance.  Science 90:465–466. 
 Cowles, R. B., and C. M. Bogert. 1944. A preliminary study of the 
thermal requirements of desert reptiles.  Bulletin of the Ameri-
can Museum of Natural History 83:261–296. 
 Dorcas, M. E., and C. R. Peterson. 1997. Head-body temperature 
diff erences in free-ranging rubber boas.  Journal of Herpetology 
31:87–93. 
 
 
 Figure 4.15.    Bar graph illustrating the percentage of Black Tiger 
Snakes,  Notechis ater niger , that are active in two different seasons, 
based on studies at the Franklin Islands, South Australia. Note that 
snakes are more active during midday in winter when the season is 
cooler, but during the hotter summer the activity shifts to early morning 
or late afternoon and evening hours. Data are redrawn by the author, 
from T. D. Schwaner, A ﬁ eld study of thermoregulation in Black Tiger 
Snakes ( Notechis ater niger : Elapidae) on the Franklin Islands, South 
Australia,  Herpetologica 45:393–401, 1989.  

 116  | How Snakes Work
 Gillingham, J. C., and C. C. Carpenter. 1978. Snake hibernation: 
Construction of and observations on a man-made hibernacu-
lum (Reptilia, Serpentes).  Journal of Herpetology 12:495–498. 
 Graham, J. B. 1974. Body temperatures of the sea snake  Pelamis 
platurus .  Copeia 1974:531–533. 
 Gregory, P. T. 1990. Temperature diff erences between head and 
body in garter snakes ( Th amnophis ) at a den in central British 
Columbia.  Journal of Herpetology  24:241–245. 
 Hammerson, G. A. 1977. Head-body temperature diff erences mon-
itored by telemetry in the snake  Masticophis fl agellum  piceus . 
 Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 57:399–402. 
 Heatwole, H., and C. R. Johnson. 1979. Th ermoregulation in the 
Red-bellied Blacksnake,  Pseudechis porphyriacus (Elapidae). 
 Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 65:83–101. 
 Heatwole, H., and J. A. Taylor. 1987.  Ecology of Reptiles . 2nd edi-
tion. Chipping Norton, New South Wales, Australia: Surrey 
Beatty & Sons,. 
 Huey, R. B. 1982. Temperature, physiology, and the ecology of rep-
tiles. In C. Gans and F. H. Pough (eds.),  Biology of the Reptilia , 
Vol. 12. New York: Academic Press, pp. 76–98. 
 Huey, R. B., C. R. Peterson, S. J. Arnold, and W. P. Porter. 1989. Hot 
rocks and not-so-hot rocks: Retreat-site selection by garter 
snakes and its thermal consequences.  Ecology 70:931–944. 
 Huey, R. B., and M. Slatkin. 1976. Costs and benefi ts of lizard ther-
moregulation.  Quarterly Review of Biology 51:363–384. 
 Klauber, L. M. 1939. Studies of reptile life in the arid Southwest. 
 Bulletin of the Zoological Society of San Diego 14:1–100. 
 Landreth, H. F. 1972. Physiological responses of  Elaphe obsoleta 
and  Pituophis melanoleucus to lowered ambient temperature. 
 Herpetologica 28:376–380. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 1980. Behavioral thermoregulation in Australian 
elapid snakes.  Copeia 1980:452–458. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 1987. Temperature, energetics, and physiological 
ecology. In R. A. Seigel, J. R. Collins, and S. S. Novak (eds.), 
 Snakes, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology . New York: Macmillan, 
pp. 422–477. 
 Lowe, C. H., P. J. Lardner, and E. A. Halpern. 1971. Supercooling in 
reptiles and other vertebrates.  Comparative Biochemistry and 
Physiology 39A:125–135. 
 McGinnis, S. M., and R. G. Moore. 1969. Th ermoregulation in the 
Boa Constrictor  Boa constrictor .  Herpetologica 25:38–45. 
 Mosauer, W. 1936. Th e toleration of solar heat in desert reptiles. 
 Ecology 17:56–66. 
 Naulleau, G. 1983. Th e eff ects of temperature on digestion in 
 Vipera aspis .  Journal of Herpetology 17:166–170. 
 Peterson, C. R. 1987. Daily variation in the body temperatures of 
free-ranging garter snakes.  Ecology 68:160–169. 
 Porter, W. P., and C. R. Tracy. 1974. Modeling the eff ects of tem-
perature changes on the ecology of the garter snake and 
leopard frog. In J. W. Gibbons and R. R. Sharitz (eds.),  Th er-
mal Ecology AEC Conference 730505 . Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 
pp. 595–609. 
 Pough, F. H. 1983. Amphibians and reptiles as low-energy systems. 
In W. P. Aspey and S. I. Lustick (eds.),  Behavioral Energetics: Th e 
Cost of Survival in Vertebrates . Columbus: Ohio State University 
Press, Columbus, pp. 141–188. 
 Scott, J. R., and D. Pettus. 1979. Eff ects of seasonal acclimation on 
the preferred body temperature of  Th amnophis elegans vagrans . 
 Journal of Th ermal Biology 4:307–309. 
 Shine, R., and R. Lambeck. 1985. A radiotelemetric study of move-
ments, thermoregulation, and habitat utilization of Arafura fi le-
snakes (Serpentes: Acrochordidae).  Herpetologica 41:351–361. 
 Shine, R., T. R. L. Madsen, M. J. Elphick, and P. S. Harlow. 1997. 
Th e infl uence of nest temperatures and maternal brooding on 
hatchling phenotypes in water pythons.  Ecology 78:1713–1721. 
 Slip, D. J., and R. Shine. 1988. Th ermoregulation of free-ranging 
diamond pythons,  Morelia spilota (Serpentes, Boidae).  Copeia 
1988:984–995. 
 Tattersall, G. J., W. K. Milsom, A. S. Abe, S. P. Brito, and D. V. An-
drade. 2004. Th e thermogenesis of digestion in rattlesnakes. 
 Journal of Experimental Biology 207:579–585. 
 Tsai, T. S., H. J. Lee, and M.-C. Tu. 2009. Bioenergetic modeling 
reveals that Chinese green tree vipers select postprandial tem-
peratures in laboratory thermal gradients that maximize net 
energy intake.  Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A 
154:394–400. 
 Tu, M.-C., H. B. Lillywhite, J. G. Menon, and G. K. Menon. 2002. 
Postnatal ecdysis establishes the permeability barrier in snake 
skin: New insights into lipid permeability barrier structures. 
 Journal of Experimental Biology 205:3019–3030. 
 Van Mierop, L. H. S., and S. M. Barnard. 1976. Th ermoregulation 
in a brooding female  Python molurus bivittatus (Serpentes: Boi-
dae).  Copeia 1976:398–401. 
 White, F. N., and R. C. Lasiewski. 1971. Rattlesnake denning: Th e-
oretical considerations on winter temperatures.  Journal of Th e-
oretical Biology 30:553–557. 

 | 117
 Where Body Meets the Outside World 
 Th e skin of snakes is a very important organ and one that can 
be incredibly beautiful, adorned by natural selection with ex-
quisite colors and patterns. Th e color pattern of the skin, and 
its sleek appearance, is for many persons the foremost at-
tribute that focuses our attraction to the animal. Th e word 
 integument refers to the covering of an animal, which is the 
skin and its derivatives such as scales, feathers, fur, or “horns” 
of various kinds. It is in this broader context that I will use 
the term “skin” in this book. As such, the skin of a snake is 
usually the largest organ of its body, at least in terms of mass. 
It is also of extreme importance, having multiple functions 
and interactions with the environment. We humans take 
comfort in the fact that beauty is more than skin deep, but 
for snakes the beauty we see is virtually all in the skin.  
 Th e interest of humans in the skin of snakes, and specu-
lations about the functions of reptilian skin, has had a long 
history. Th e disciples of Aesculapius, the Greek god of heal-
ing, revered snakes and interpreted their periodic skin-
shedding as a symbol of rebirth and renovation ( fi g.  5.1 ). 
Aristotle was interested in the abilities of Old World cha-
meleons to change colors. More recently the idea that rep-
tiles fi rst “conquered” dry land because of their cornifi ed 
integument has been implied in general textbooks, and 
some folks still believe that squamate reptiles are essen-
tially waterproof owing to the presence of “scales” on the 
skin. Herpetoculturists have become fascinated with the 
many unusual color patterns that are expressed within a 
species, and they have selected for particular genetic lines 
that are popular with pet enthusiasts. Unfortunately, many 
snakes have been killed in various parts of the world and 
their skins have been tanned to adorn various products of 
leather or jewelry ( fi g.  5.2 ). But let us return to a consider-
ation of skin that is based in structural features and func-
tions that are more relevant to the snake itself. 
 First and foremost, the integument of any animal pro-
vides a barrier between the internal environment and the 
outside world. It is a mechanical barrier that protects the 
underlying muscles, blood vessels, and internal organs 
from abrasion and physical injury. It also functions as a 
physiological barrier and prevents the excess losses or gains 
of water, ions, and other components of the body fl uids. 
Th e skin acts to prevent things from getting in as well as 
out. Th erefore, the skin acts to prevent the entry of un-
wanted chemicals, especially microbes and toxins. 
 We see that the skin acts as a barrier, but the barrier is 
not absolute. Th us, the skin acts to regulate the exchange of 
some things but does not prevent their passage entirely. For 
example, respiratory gases—oxygen and carbon dioxide—
are exchanged to some extent in aquatic snakes that bre-
athe, in part, across the skin. Simultaneously, skin that is 
permeable to the respiratory gases must also regulate the 
exchange of water, ions, and toxins. Th is is a complicated 
subject that will be revisited elsewhere in this book. Th e 
skin also is a transducing surface, absorbing solar radiation 
that is converted to heat and very often used to warm the 
body. (A  transducer is something that changes the form of 
energy that impinges on it. See  chapter  7   for further discus-
sion.) Another example is when mechanical vibrations are 
sensed by nerves in the skin, which convert the mechanical 
energy into bioelectric energy that is used to transmit nerve 
signals from the skin to the brain. Solar energy impinging 
on the skin also is used to initiate chemical reactions that 
lead to the synthesis of Vitamin D. 
5
 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION 
OF SKIN  
 He who does not ﬁ nd core or substance in any of the realms of being, like 
ﬂ owers which are vainly sought in ﬁ g trees that bear none,—such a monk 
gives up the here and the beyond, just as a serpent sheds its worn-out skin. 
 — The Worn-out Skin: Reﬂ ections on the Uraga Sutta , translated by 
Nyanaponika Thera ( Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society , 1989)  

 118  | How Snakes Work
 As we can judge from this discussion, the skin is an organ 
having many functions. And there are others. Shedding of 
skin releases substances that communicate chemical sig-
nals between snakes. As an example, female garter snakes 
of various species shed their skin soon after they emerge 
from dens or overwintering sites. Th e new skin bears a sub-
stance identifi ed as a methyl ketone, which acts as a chemi-
cal attractant for male snakes of the same species. Such a 
chemical is called a  pheromone , defi ned as a chemical sub-
stance produced by an individual organism and released 
into the environment for the purpose of signaling a social 
response from other individuals of the same species. Th e 
pheromone of the garter snake adheres to the ground where 
they crawl, and males locate the females by trailing them. 
Th us, the skin mediates communication between individ-
uals by means of releasing pheromones onto trails (see also 
 chapter  9 ). 
 Structure of the Dermis and Epidermis  
 Much of what people know about skin is based in clinical, 
pharmaceutical, and cosmetic contexts related to human 
skin, which for most practical purposes is fairly homoge-
neous (although it is a composite organ). In contrast, the 
skin of snakes is very heterogeneous and consists of a 
system of layered membranes. Th e more complex, outer 
part of the skin is the  epidermis , separated from the  dermis 
below it by a basement membrane ( fi g.  5.3 ). Th e innermost 
dermis consists largely of fi brous connective tissue com-
posed mostly of collagen fi bers, and is separated from un-
derlying body muscles by looser connective tissue and fat. 
For reasons not entirely understood, the dermis of some 
species is applied very tightly to the underlying muscle, 
whereas in others it is considerably looser. Persons who 
have skinned snakes are probably aware of these diff er-
ences. In other reptiles (e.g., crocodilians, turtles, and some 
 
 
 Figure 5.1.   Stone carvings depicting various items of snake worship, located on a Hindu temple ground in south India. The stone at the far 
right resembles a caduceus, or “herald’s staff” carried by Hermes in Greek mythology. The same staff was also borne by heralds in general and 
consists of a staff entwined by two snakes. This symbol was used in astrology and alchemy, and also became recognized as a symbol of 
commerce. The caduceus is sometimes confused with the traditional medical symbol, which has only a single snake and represents the rod of 
Asclepius ( inset ). The photograph is courtesy of Romulus Whitaker, and the inset was drawn by Shauna Lillywhite. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  119 
lizards) the dermis gives rise to bony plates and other struc-
tures that are lacking in snakes. Th e dermis in snakes adds 
mechanical strength and thickness, and it is an important 
underlying support for the epidermis above it. 
 Th e epidermis of snakes consists of a layered structure 
including both dead and living cells. Two principal types of 
keratin are present, each adding strength and rigidity to the 
scaled surfaces. Keratins are fi brous proteins that are 
formed when living cells—keratinocytes—die as they ma-
ture and synthesize protein fi bers. Th e resulting matrix of 
keratin fi bers is simply called  keratin , a word that is also syn-
onymous with  corneous or  cornifi ed  layers. Whereas mam-
malian skin has only one type of keratin,  α -keratin—which 
gives rise to nails, claws, and hair—the skin of snakes con-
sists of both  α -keratins and  β -keratins. Th e latter resemble 
the very stiff  keratins that are characteristic of bird feathers. 
Th ese two classes of keratins occur in separate horizontal 
layers that are arranged vertically in snake skin. All of the 
keratinized layers of the epidermis—termed the  stratum 
corneum —are derived from living cells that proliferate from 
a basal layer lying above the dermis ( fi gs.  5.3 ,  5.4 ). 
 Th e more rigid layers of  β -keratin overlie the less rigid 
layers of  α -keratin beneath. Th e outermost keratin is derived 
from a single layer of  β -cells and is termed  ober hautchen . Th is 
is a unique constituent of the epidermis of lepidosaurs and 
gives rise to the sculptured patterns that adorn the surfaces 
of scales (see below). Beneath the oberhautchen are several 
more cell layers of  β -keratin. Evidently, the function of the 
entire  β -layer is largely mechanical. Th e presence of this 
stiff er type of keratin serves to maintain the shape of a scale 
(see below) by acting in equilibrium with forces that are gen-
erated by the complex arrangement of horizontal struts and 
vertical columns of collagen fi bers within the dermis. 
 Th e  β -keratin is separated from the  α -keratin layers 
deeper below by a thin layer of strand-like keratin known as 
the  mesos layer. Th e mesos layer is a highly specialized re-
gion that is rich in lipids and comprises the barrier to water 
movement, thus serving as a check against excessive losses 
of water to the environment. A complex mixture of lipids is 
secreted from specialized organelles into extracellular 
spaces where they become organized into fl attened layers 
that envelope, and alternate with, layers of keratin. Several 
 
 
 Figure 5.2.    Hundreds of tanned snake skins in a warehouse of the Bharat Leather Corporation in Chennai (formerly Madras), India. This was a 
clearinghouse for snake skins that was established after the ban on snake skin trade was enacted in the 1970s, the idea being to clear existing 
stocks of snake skins once and for all. Presently there is no legal snake skin industry in India. Photograph by Romulus Whitaker. 

 120  | How Snakes Work
layers of  α -keratin occur immediately below the mesos 
layer, followed by living immature  α -cells yet to undergo ke-
ratinization. Th ese  α -cells diff erentiate from the basal layer 
that marks the inner boundary of the epidermis ( fi g.  5.4 ). 
 Scales 
 Th e layered distribution of cell types occurs over the entire 
body surface, but regional diff erences of thickness are re-
lated to the structure of scales. Th e skin of snakes and 
other squamates develops within the embryo as a surface 
that becomes folded into scales. Each fold, or scale, has an 
outer and inner surface creating a region known as a  hinge . 
Th e hinge regions are more fl exible than either the outer or 
inner scale surfaces and enable the epidermis to be de-
formed when the snake moves. Th ey also permit consider-
able stretching when a swallowed prey item expands the 
skin. Indeed, when a snake is engorged with a large prey 
item it has eaten, the area of exposed hinge tissue may ex-
ceed that of the scales that occur in between ( fi gs.  2.19 , 
 2.31 ,  2.32  ). Th e epidermal covering of the hinge region is 
usually thinner than that of the other scale surfaces. More-
over, the  β -layer is relatively thin on both the hinge and 
inner scale surfaces compared with the outer scale surfaces 
( fi g.  5.5  ).             
 Th e size, geometry, and gross structure of scales also 
vary from species to species, and regionally on the body. 
Generally, the ventral scales (termed  scutes ) are broad and 
extend from side to side as one single structure ( fi g.  5.6 ; see 
also  fi g.  1.6 ). Th ere are exceptions to this morphology, how-
ever, and the ventral scales are much smaller or equivalent 
to dorsal body scales in fi le snakes ( Acrochordus spp.), many 
sea snakes, and species in some other taxonomic groups 
( fi g.  5.7 ; see also  fi g.  3.1 ). Th e scales on the remainder of the 
trunk tend to be rather uniform but variable among species 
( fi gs.  5.8 ,  5.9 ). Th e scales on the head also vary considerably 
depending on the species of snake. 
 Scales in various taxa have evolved to be small and gran-
ular (e.g., as in fi le snakes,  Acrochordus spp., and some other 
marine species), large and fl attened (as in boas and pythons, 
various elapids and colubrids), or thickened with cornifi ed 
keels, projections, or other structures (various vipers and pit 
vipers). Scales having a relatively smooth and usually fl at-
tened surfaces are termed  smooth in contrast to scales having 
a visibly roughened appearance attributable to a small spine 
or a central longitudinal ridge, which are termed  keeled ( fi gs. 
 5.8 ,  5.9 ; see also  fi gs.  1.16 ,  1.26 – 1.29 ,  1.33 ,  1.46 – 1.48 ). Th is ter-
minology refers strictly to the external appearances of scales 
when these are viewed with the naked eye.    
 
 
 Figure 5.3.   Schematic illustration of the generalized skin structure in snakes. Two generations of epidermis are shown, representing the outer 
generation (OG) of tissue that will be sloughed from the body during skin shedding, and the inner generation (IG), which is new epidermis that 
is formed before the older OG is shed. The outermost thin layer of beta ( β ) keratin is termed oberhautchen and bears the microsculpturing that 
is discussed elsewhere in the text. The mature  α - and  β -keratin layers collectively comprise the stratum corneum, and are derived from the 
living layer of stratum germinativum cells below. The stratum germinativum cells lie against a basement membrane, which separates the 
epidermis from the dermis with its blood capillaries below it. The mesos layer is a layer of specialized cells that separates the  β - and  α -keratin 
and contains lipids that comprise the water permeability barrier. Another zone of specialized cells (not labeled) separates the inner and outer 
generations, which split apart in this region during shedding of the OG. Drawing by Dan Dourson, after ﬁ g. 1 in H. B. Lillywhite, Water relations 
of tetrapod integument,  Journal of Experimental Biology 209:202–226, 2006. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  121 
 
 
 Figure 5.4.   Photomicrographs featuring 
histological features of the skin of Dumeril’s Ground 
Boa ( Acrantophis dumerili ). The  upper image  
illustrates cell layers in skin during the resting 
stage prior to epidermal renewal of a shedding 
cycle. The alpha ( α ) and beta ( β ) keratin layers are 
separated by the mesos layer, which tends to split 
as an artifact of preparation due to the presence of 
lipids that form the permeability barrier against 
water loss. The stratum germinativum (sg) is a 
living layer of cells that gives rise to all the 
keratinized cells above it. The basement 
membrane of the sg separates the epidermis from 
the dermis below. The  middle image features an 
early stage of epidermal renewal. The  α - and 
 β -keratin layers of the outer (o) and inner (i) 
generation of epidermis are separated by a clear 
layer that becomes a zone of separation when the 
old outer epidermis separates from the new inner 
generation epidermis. The oberhautchen layer 
(Obi) of cells forming in association with the inner, 
renewing epidermis is seen just below the clear 
layer. It will keratinize to become the thin, 
outermost surface layer of the  β -keratin to become 
the new epidermis. Immature cells that will 
contribute to the  β - and  α -keratin of the new 
generation are seen between the stratum 
germinativum and the newly keratinizing  β -layer of 
the inner generation ( β i). The  lower image shows 
a biopsied scale in the late renewal phase 
approximately two days before shedding of the 
outer epidermis. Lacunar tissue can be seen just 
above the region of epidermal separation (clear 
layer), and the oberhautchen, remaining  β -layer, 
and much of the  α -layers of keratin have completed 
maturation in the inner epidermal generation, so 
that only a few immature cells can be seen above 
the stratum germinativum. Photomicrographs by 
Elliott Jacobson.  
 Th e outermost (oberhautchen) surfaces of snake scales 
bear microscopic patterns of sculpturing, referred to by 
various names such as  microornamentation ,  microdermato-
glyphics ,  microstructure ,  microarchitecture , and other terms. 
Th e patterns of microsculpture have been revealed by 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), which produces en-
larged images of minute structures on the surfaces of 
objects. Scanning electron micrographs have shown that 
the scale surfaces of various snakes are sculptured in 
complex patterns of minute ridges, spines, and other pro-
tuberances ( fi g.  5.10 ). Specifi c patterns of microsculptur-
ing are characteristic of particular taxa of snakes, and 
these characters have been proposed for use as diagnostic 
characters. Less is known about the signifi cance of these 
features to the lives of snakes that exhibit various sculp-
tured patterns.  
 Patterns of microsculpturing seem likely to infl uence the 
exchange of radiant energy, heat, and evaporation of water, 
but these possibilities have not yet been rigorously investi-
gated. Th ere is strong circumstantial evidence that the mi-
croscopic surface morphology of some burrowing species 
acts to prevent the adhesion of dirt, and the scale surfaces 
of many snakes are hydrophobic and repel water ( fi g.  5.11 ). 
Th e prevention of wetting at the surfaces of snake epider-
mis may well be important with respect to the potential 
problem of swelling, which results from hydration of kerati-
nous tissue. Such swelling might physically disrupt the me-
sos layer and thereby impair the permeability properties of 

 122  | How Snakes Work
the skin. Numerous snakes are exposed to water for signifi -
cant periods, especially species that are aquatic or semiaquatic, 
or that live in areas of high rainfall. Moreover, some natri-
cine species of snakes are known to overwinter in circum-
stances where they are entirely immersed in water at the 
blind ends of burrows. Th e hydrophobic properties of the 
outer scale surfaces thus might function partly to prevent 
the inward diff usion of unwanted water that otherwise 
contacts the skin. 
 Th e shape, orientation, and pigmentation of scales 
might also infl uence rates of radiative heat exchange and 
consequently the temperature and evaporation characteris-
tics of the skin. It need not be inferred, however, that the 
water or thermal relations of snakes are necessarily signifi -
cant selective forces that have shaped the topography of the 
integument. On the other hand, nor do the charac teristic 
microsculptured patterns appear to be simply a by-product 
of the splitting of the corneous layers of old from new epi-
dermis during skin shedding, an idea that has been a sub-
ject of some discussion. My own observations have revealed 
that the outer keratinous surface of the spectacle covering 
the eye is not sculptured like the other scale surfaces, but 
 
 
 Figure 5.5.   Photomicrograph of a histological section through the skin of Dumeril’s Ground Boa ( Acrantophis 
dumerili ). The section illustrates both the outer and inner regions of the scale during the resting phase when one 
generation of the epidermis is present. The beta ( β ) keratin is thicker on the outer scale surface and is represented 
only by the thin oberhautchen on the inner scale surface. The mesos layer can be seen as strand-like material 
between the  β - and  α -keratin, an artifact of separation especially at the right end of the scale. The cells with bluish 
nuclei comprise the stratum germinativum. Section was stained with H & E. Photomicrograph by Elliott Jacobson.  
 
 
 Figure 5.6.   A Chinese Green Tree Viper ( Trimeresurus stejnegeri ) 
rests on a branch, revealing the width of the belly scutes in 
comparison with the dorsal and lateral body scales. This photo 
features a Taiwanese specimen and is courtesy of Ming-Chung Tu. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  123 
rather is comparatively smooth to permit the unobstructed 
entry of light. Th erefore, given the regional variation, the 
microsculpturing patterns on various scale surfaces cannot 
be a simple nonadaptive product of skin shedding. 
 Th ere is one feature of the epidermis that appears, how-
ever, to be a physical coincidence of the structure. Th e outer 
skin of a newly shed snake may be colorful with iridescence 
that results from the physical interaction of visible- spectrum 
radiation with the sculptured surfaces. Th e  patterns of mi-
crosculpturing act as a diff raction grating and project colors 
of the spectrum when light is refl ected in specifi c patterns 
from the opaque edges of the sculpture pattern ( fi g.  5.12 ). 
Th ese appear to be incidental structural colors that are unre-
lated to any adaptive meaning or signifi cance. Th e brilliance 
of these colors is most intense just after shedding and fades 
as time passes, probably due to the gradual wear or the accu-
mulation of minute debris upon the oberhautchen surfaces. 
 In at least some species, it has been shown that the sculp-
turing of scale surfaces diff ers between the sexes. Th is sub-
ject has been studied in some detail for sea snakes by Carla 
Avolio, Richard Shine, and Adele Pile at the University of 
Sydney. Th ey have suggested that sexual diff erences in the 
roughness of scale surfaces is more common in marine than 
in terrestrial snakes, that the condition is more pronounced 
in male snakes, and that roughness of scale  surfaces might 
assist the positioning of males during courtship. Th e ro-
ugher surfaces that are characterized by spines or pro-
truding structures are more highly innervated and likely to 
be sensitive to tactile cues, and they also enhance friction 
between male and female when the bodies are in contact. 
Th e surface structures might also play a hydrodynamic role 
in modifying water fl ow over the body. Th e authors demon-
strated that the rougher scale surfaces reduce the boundary 
layer over the body and create more turbulent fl ow, which 
they suggest might enhance the cutaneous exchange of re-
spiratory gases during activities such as courtship.  
 Th e nanoscale structures of microsculpturing on scale 
surfaces also have important implications for locomotion. 
Th e surfaces of ventral scales exhibit highly organized ar-
rays of microfi brilar projections or “micro-hairs” that point 
in the posterior or caudal direction and are separated by 
sharp grooves ( fi g.  5.13 ). Each microfi bril is from one to a 
few hundred nanometers in diameter, based on measure-
ments in boid snakes. Th ese create an asymmetry with 
 
 
 Figure 5.7.    Underwater view of a Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) illustrating the single row of ventral scales. Broad ventral scutes 
are simply absent. This is no doubt an adaptation for swimming because the snake ﬂ attens its body in the dorsoventral plane, and the 
lowermost aspect (belly) becomes a ﬂ attened keel with rows of scales not greatly different from the rest of the body. The  inset  shows the ventral 
keel in more detail. This snake was photographed in Costa Rica by Joseph Pfaller. 

 124  | How Snakes Work
respect to the frictional properties of the scales, which ex-
hibit low friction for forward motion relative to backward 
motion (see also  chapter  3  ). 
 Finally, there have also been observed systems of micro-
pores penetrating the oberhautchen surfaces. Th ese are 
speculated to be a possible delivery system for lipids that 
might provide surface lubrication, enhance resistance to 
water loss, or expel chemical attractants related to courtship 
(see  chapter  9 ). Th e real function of such pits has not been 
demonstrated, however, and requires further research.  
 Ecdysis: The Shedding of Skin  
 Snakes periodically shed their skin, a phenomenon that oc-
curs in all lepidosaurs and is usually referred to as shedding, 
sloughing, or ecdysis. Skin shedding was well known to the 
ancients, and there is considerable mythology and folklore 
related to the subject. Snakes shedding skins have become 
powerful symbols of rebirth and renewal ( fi g.  5.14 ). 
 It is generally well known that snakes initiate the act by 
rubbing the snout or head against an object, which loosens 
the skin and breaks it away from the new skin beneath  
( fi g.  7.4  ). As the snake crawls forward, it literally crawls out 
of the old skin, which turns inside out and is left behind in 
the process. Th ere are certainly subtle variations on this 
theme, but the procedure is generally similar in all species, 
and in normal circumstances the old skin is left behind as 
one entire piece rather than being shed in patches. Some 
aquatic species of snakes living where rough objects are not 
generally present to assist skin shedding may tie themselves 
into loose knots and use their own body to push or pull the 
old epidermis backward and off  the trunk or tail. Th is be-
havior has been observed in pelagic sea snakes ( Pelamis pla-
turus ) and in fi le snakes ( Acrochordus granulatus ) ( fi g.  5.15 ). 
 Th e shed skin is soft and moist at fi rst, but it soon dries 
to become relatively brittle. It appears whitish in color and 
translucent, being quite thin upon careful inspection; for it 
is only a mature generation of epidermis that is shed, and 
not the next immature generation of epidermis or the 
thicker dermis that lies beneath. 
 Paul Maderson first described in detail the cellular 
changes that take place in the skin of a snake throughout 
the shedding cycle. Many subsequent studies have empha-
sized the wonderful complexity of the cycle especially in the 
context of the interaction between intrinsic and environ-
mental factors in its control. Th e entire shedding cycle is 
surprisingly complex, and the controlling infl uences are 
still very much a mystery. Here we shall explore only a brief 
overview of the relevant morphological changes that occur. 
 A mature generation of epidermis ( epidermal generation : 
 fi gs.  5.3 ,  5.4 ) consists of a keratinized layer of  β -keratin, with 
 
 
 Figure 5.8.   Photos featuring the body scales of three species 
of snakes. The  upper photo shows a Florida specimen of Eastern 
or Black Racer ( Coluber constrictor ), which has smooth scales. 
The  middle photo reveals the keeled scales of a Florida Green 
Water Snake ( Nerodia ﬂ oridana ). In the  lower photo a male 
and female Rough-scaled Bush Viper ( Atheris squamiger ) 
are seen resting together. These snakes have very rough 
scales with prominent central ridges and spiny tips, especially 
prominent in the male (at left). The upper and middle photographs 
are by Dan Dourson, and the lower photograph is by Elliott 
Jacobson.  

Structure and Function of Skin  |  125 
 
 
 Figure 5.9.   Photographs of skin surfaces of a Yellow-bellied Sea 
Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) ( upper photo ), Shaw’s Sea Snake ( Lapemis 
curtus ) ( middle photo ), and an Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake 
( Crotalus adamanteus ) ( lower photo ). The scales of  Pelamis are 
tuberculate and well separated with ﬂ attened surfaces. Note there are 
small spinules or spots in the middle of the scale surfaces (arrows). 
These are almost certainly sensory structures, but they have not been 
studied in detail morphologically or physiologically (see  chapter  7 ). 
Prominent keels with central spines (arrow) are seen on the lateral 
scales of  Lapemis , which is a male and develops such scale roughness 
during the mating period. The scales of the rattlesnake are keeled, 
and each dorsal scale has a central ridge, or “keel,” running its length. 
The belly scutes are shown in the lower part of the ﬁ gure. Note that 
there are transitional scales between the ventral scutes and dorsal 
scales that do not have ridges. The direction of orientation with 
respect to the snake is head-to-tail from left-to-right. The sea snakes 
were photographed in Costa Rica ( Pelamis ) and Australia ( Lapemis ). 
The rattlesnake was photographed in Florida. All snakes were living 
specimens photographed by the author. 
the microsculptured oberhautchen forming the outermost 
surface contacting the environment. Th e entire  β -layer is 
derived from multiple cell layers. Beneath the  β -layer is the 
mesos layer, consisting of several thin layers of keratin 
sandwiched between alternating layers of lamellar lipids as 
described above. Keratinized  α -keratin occurs  beneath the 
mesos layer, formed from multiple cell layers similarly to the 
 β -layer. Below the  α -keratin there is a transitional region 
wherein mature keratin merges with immature  α -cells that 
are in various stages of keratinization ( fi g.  5.4  ). All of the 
living cells that contributed to these described layers are 
derived from the  stratum germinativum  at the innermost 
base of the epidermis, overlying the dermis beneath. 
 Immediately following ecdysis, the new generation of 
epidermis is more or less in the state just described, and it 
may remain that way for some time that is known as the 
“resting stage.” After some while, which can vary from weeks 
to months, the skin enters a “renewal stage” in which a new 
 inner generation  of epidermis begins to form beneath the 
older, mature  outer generation  of epidermis ( fi g.  5.4 ). Essen-
tially what happens is that cells proliferate from the basal 
germinal layer and begin to keratinize as they accumulate 
between the outer generation and the stratum  germinativum. 
Progressive keratinization of these newly proliferated cells 
produces a new generation of epidermis that is nearly ma-
ture by the time of shedding. Th us, at ecdysis there is a ma-
ture outer generation of epidermis that overlies a newly 
formed, but not quite mature, inner generation of epidermis. 
Th e extent of development of the new, inner generation  α -
layer varies considerably at the time of ecdysis. 
 One further detail regarding these tissues requires com-
ment. Prior to formation of the new  β -layer belonging to 
the inner generation, several layers of unusual cells form at 
the base of the outer generation. Th ese cells separate the 
two generations of epidermis, although technically they are 
part of the older outer generation because they disappear at 
the time of shedding. Th ese cells are called “lacunar cells,” 

 126  | How Snakes Work
and the single layer of cells overlying the oberhautchen of 
the new inner generation is called the “clear layer.” Th e 
tissue of the clear layer interdigitates with the sculptured 
surfaces of the inner (new) generation of oberhautchen and 
essentially “unzips” from it during the actual process of 
shedding when the two generations of epidermis separate. 
Th us, the shed “skin” that is lost from the snake at ecdysis 
consists of the outer generation  β -layer (including ober-
hautchen) and  α -layers of keratin, including the lacunar 
cells and clear layer. 
 Th e process of shedding is aided evidently by fl uids that 
penetrate these tissues at the time of shedding, but the na-
ture and control of such fl uids are not well understood. Th e 
“fl uid” may contain water and/or lipids and accounts for the 
generally damp nature of the shed generation of epidermis 
immediately after it is shed from the snake’s body. Enzymes 
that degrade some of the clear layer and lacunar tissue are 
also present at the time of shedding. 
 Periodic shedding occurs in all snakes, and it seems that 
the general features of epidermal renewal are similar in all 
species. Characteristically, the renewal and shedding of the 
epidermis is a synchronized cycle of events that occur 
 simultaneously over the entire body, rather than in patches. 
Th e periodicity of shedding, however, varies. Some snakes 
may shed their skins only once or twice per year, whereas 
others shed more frequently (sea snakes, for example). 
 Because the keratin in the scales of snakes is a rigid mate-
rial, shedding is required to permit growth. Th us, shedding 
can be expected to relate generally to the growth of snakes, 
and those snakes with the higher inputs of food might be 
expected to shed more frequently than others, assuming 
that all other factors are equal. 
 Other factors, however, can also infl uence the frequency 
of shedding, independently of growth per se. Sea snakes 
shed their skin relatively frequently, sometimes at two- to 
six-week intervals. One of the reasons is thought to relate 
to removal of fouling organisms that can tend to grow on 
the outer surfaces of these snakes. Barnacles, bryozoans, 
and algae have all been found growing on the skin of sea 
snakes ( fi g.  5.16 ). It is also thought that shedding is impor-
tant to renew epidermis that might become damaged over 
time, likely involving minute breaks or fractures in the per-
meability barrier. Th us, an important function of shedding 
might also relate to renewal or possibly improvement of the 
permeability barrier in relation to environmental infl u-
ences on water balance. 
 Many snakes shed their skin within a few days following 
birth or hatching. Working in my laboratory at the Univer-
sity of Florida, Ming-Chung Tu and I discovered that in 
California King Snakes ( Lampropeltis californiae ) this initial 
ecdysis results in a doubling of the skin resistance to evap-
orative water loss, and the resistance increases still further 
following the second ecdysis. Th ese phenomena might ex-
plain some behaviors of newborn snakes, which often re-
main either with a parent in some viviparous species (e.g., 
certain pit vipers) or at the site of hatching from eggs until 
the fi rst ecdysis, after which the young snakes disperse 
away from the site of birth. Remaining more reclusive right 
after birth might conserve evaporative losses of body water 
during the period before the fi rst ecdysis when evidently 
the permeability barrier to water loss has not yet been es-
tablished (see  chapters  2 and  9 ). 
 
 
 Figure 5.10.   Scanning electronmicrographs illustrating 
microsculpturing on the surfaces of snake scales. The  upper photo 
shows part of the dorsal scale from an African Stripe-bellied Sand 
Snake,  Psammophis subtaeniatus . The surface oberhautchen in this 
species illustrates a pattern of ridges separated by shallow crevices 
sculptured with tertiary spaces and ridges. The rear (or caudal) end of 
the scale (and snake) is toward the right side of the micrograph. The 
 lower photo features the rear part of the dorsal scale from a Russell’s 
Viper,  Daboia russelii . The oberhautchen scale surfaces in this species 
consist of elevated knobs or projections, each having a honeycombed 
surface and being increasingly elevated in the central part of the 
scale, which forms a “ keel .” The rear of the scale (and snake) is toward 
the bottom of the micrograph. Each black scale bar is 10  μ m, and the 
lower micrograph is at a higher magniﬁ cation than the upper one. 
Micrographs are by the author. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  127 
 Skin Color: Causes, Patterns, 
Signiﬁ cance  
 Colors are wonderful, and without them 
snakes would be far less interesting. Ima-
gine if every snake you encountered or 
saw featured in a fi lm was the same drab 
color of pink or gray. Boring? But, in fact, 
snakes have myriad colors and patterns 
of color in their skin, not all of which is 
genetically determined by the expression 
of pigments. First, we shall examine the 
physical basis of coloration, and then 
turn to some interesting topics related to 
its signifi cance. 
 Th e Physical Basis of Color 
 What we call “color” results from the vi-
sual perception of specifi c wavelengths 
of electromagnetic radiation. Radiation 
wavelengths between 400 nm and 750 
nm comprise what is called the “visible 
spectrum” of light, with reference to the 
visual capabilities of the human eye. 
Other animals, including some snakes, 
can perceive wavelengths somewhat 
outside this range. Th e colors we see are 
attributable to wavelengths of light that is refl ected back 
from an object (say, skin) to enter our eyes, where it ex-
cites visual receptors that are categorically diff erent de-
pending on which wavelengths they are “tuned.” Th is 
excitation of visual receptors is passed on to the parts of 
the brain responsible for interpreting visual sensation by 
means of nerve signals that pass along the appropriate 
pathway of interconnected neurons (single nerve cells). 
Wavelengths of light that are either absorbed by the skin 
or transmitted through it do not contribute to the colors 
we see. We see only the components of light that are re-
fl ected back to our eyes. 
 Skin color results from complex interactions among the 
chemical and physical properties of the tissue. What is 
known as  structural color is that component of coloration 
which is attributable to physical features of the skin other 
than pigments. For example, the microsculpturing pat-
terns on the surfaces of scales create patterns of wave-
length interference that produce iridescent colors, 
especially prominent right after skin shedding, when the 
skin surfaces are new and clean ( fi g.  5.12 ). Th e physical 
properties and geometry of keratin organization in the 
skin can determine what wavelengths of light are selec-
tively absorbed, refracted, or refl ected. Fluorescence—the 
emission of light from a surface after it has absorbed radi-
ation from an outside source—might possibly occur in a 
species of blind snake ( Leptotyphlops humilis ), but the sug-
gestion is anecdotal. 
 Most of the color we see in snake skin, however, is attribut-
able to the presence and pattern of chemical compounds we 
call  pigments . Most of the pigments involved are fi xed within 
the skin, but the lighter skin regions of some snakes may turn 
from pinkish to white depending on the amount of blood that 
is fl owing through the skin. In this case, the pink or reddish 
coloration is attributable in large part to refl ectance of light 
from hemoglobin within the red blood cells. Hemoglobin is a 
respiratory pigment and carries oxygen around the body (see 
 chapter  6 ). Nevertheless, it is called a pigment because of its 
light-refl ecting properties that impart color to it. 
 Pigments that are fi xed within the skin are synthesized 
within cells called  chromatophores . Th ere are four principal 
groups of chromatophores that contribute to the coloration 
of snakes. Th e more common, widespread, and better kn-
own of these is the  melanophore , an irregular-shaped cell 
that contains the pigment  melanin . Melanin is a dark pig-
ment derived from the oxidation products of tyrosine and 
dihydroxyphenol compounds. Th e color can vary from dark 
red to dark brown or black. Melanins are present in the skin 
and are also found associated with some of the internal 
organs of an animal. Th ere are two kinds of melanophores 
in the skin. Dermal melanophores are broad, fl at cells that 
 
 
 Figure 5.11.    Water droplets are shown beaded on the surface of a Fer-de-Lance 
( Bothrops asper ) photographed in Belize by Dan Dourson ( upper photo ). A higher 
magniﬁ cation of the phenomenon is illustrated on the shed epidermis from a sea krait, 
 Laticauda semifasciata , photographed by the author ( lower photo ). The scale surfaces 
are hydrophobic and repel water; thus the surface tension forces cause the water 
droplet to assume a near-spherical shape instead of spreading to form a ﬂ atter ﬁ lm. 

 128  | How Snakes Work
occur in the dermis, whereas epidermal melanophores (also 
called melanocytes) are thin, elongated cells that contribute 
pigment to regions of the epidermis. Once pigment is pro-
duced within melanocytes, it is “packaged” in a sense and 
transferred to epidermal cells (keratinocytes) that will pro-
duce keratin. Whether pigments are transferred between 
the dermis and epidermis is an entirely unresolved issue. 
 Pigment cells termed xanthophores contain oil-fi lled 
vesicles with suspended pigments called carotenes that 
are yellowish or orange in hue. Th e carotenes are taken up 
from the diet and are related to vitamin A. Pigment cells 
termed erythrophores contain oil with heterocyclic com-
pounds called pteridines, and are reddish in color. Some 
consider the erythrophores to be a type of xanthophore 
that is reddish in color, in contrast to the other xantho-
phores that are yellow in color. Silvery chromatophores 
termed iridophores do not contain true pigments but con-
tain crystals of guanine. Guanine is a purine that refl ects 
light and imparts a noniridescent bluish or silvery white 
color. Th e color varies depending on the scattering of light 
and the surrounding pigments in the skin. Th ey may also 
contain derivatives of other purines, and the combination 
of diff erent crystals determines the variety of hues that 
are produced by diff raction, scattering, and refl ection of 
light. Th e colors are structural and not attributable to true 
pigments. Th e diff erent kinds of chromatophores may as-
sociate in the skin to produce various colors by virtue of 
their refl ectance of light and their collective interference 
with refl ected light. 
 In preserved snakes such as those in museum col-
lections, the pigments contained in xanthophores and 
erythrophores are soluble in formalin or alcohol and thus 
slowly leach from the skin. Melanins are insoluble, so 
over time the colors of preserved snakes fade except for 
the patterns that are attributable to the distribution of 
melanins.  
 
 
 Figure 5.12.   Photos of a Cross-barred Tree Snake ( Dipsadaboa 
ﬂ avida ) ( upper photo ) and a Rainbow Boa ( Epicrates cenchria ) 
( lower photo ) illustrating iridescent scale colors attributable to 
structural features of the epidermal surfaces (not pigments). Note the 
blue and green colors on the edges of the scales and head plates, 
which are due to reﬂ ected light patterns dependent on the direction 
of lighting. Such structural colors are most vivid just after a snake has 
shed its skin. These are captive snakes owned by Ron Rozar and 
photographed by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 5.13.   Microstructural projections on the surface of a ventral 
scute from the African Stripe-bellied Sand Snake,  Psammophis 
subtaeniatus . The head-to-tail direction of the projections is from top 
to bottom in the photograph. The black scale bar at the bottom of the 
photograph equals 5  μ m. Minute pores can be seen in the regions 
between the elevated projections running parallel with the length of 
the snake (arrows). Scanning electron micrograph by the author. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  129 
 Th e Functions of Color Pattern 
 Anyone familiar with even a modest sampling of the diver-
sity of snakes knows that they come in a variety of colors 
and patterns of color, which to the novice might not make 
much sense in terms of understanding reasons for the vari-
ation. Some snakes such as desert vipers appear quite well 
camoufl aged against a background of sand ( fi g.  3.16 ), and 
thus we might suppose that diff use, buff  colors fi t that 
 purpose. Others seem brilliantly colored with amazing 
 patterns of rings, bands, or blotches, and these are not nec-
essarily  cryptic  (camoufl aged). Still other snakes might ap-
pear dull when viewed from above, but the underside is a 
brilliant color that is obvious when presented by turning 
over or curling the tail ( fi gs.  1.48 ,  1.50 ). Considering all that 
is known about these various color patterns reveals some 
generalizations regarding their function. 
 We begin by regarding color patterns to be phenotypic 
traits, which in some manner “fi t” a snake to its environ-
ment. Th e contexts of “purpose” usually have to do with 
antipredator behaviors, social interactions, or the physical 
environment—for example, the relative heat absorption 
that infl uences body temperature. Investigations by Har-
vey Pough, James Jackson, and their coworkers suggest 
there is a correlation between the dorsal color pattern of 
snakes and the manner in which they respond to preda-
tors. Snakes with uniform colors or disruptive patterns of 
blotches, spots, or irregular crossbands tend to rely on 
crypsis, or concealment, to avoid being seen by potential 
predators. Some excellent examples are blotchy or speck-
led vipers that blend with their background when viewed 
upon rocky or course soils ( fi g.  1.25 , 3.16); green or brown 
tree snakes that are concealed in green foliage or twigs 
and branches, respectively; and blotched or banded 
snakes when viewed among leaves ( fi gs.  1.28 ,  1.29 ,  1.33 , 
 3.16 ,  5.17  ). Many of these species also defend themselves 
with aggressive behaviors when the concealment fails. 
Th us, many viperid species will coil and strike when dis-
covered by a human or other animal, rather than fl eeing 
to escape. Th is behavior also tends to correlate with a 
lesser ability to crawl rapidly. Th ese are generalizations, 
however, and there are many exceptions involving indi-
viduals or even species. 
 
 
 Figure 5.14.   Part of the Mayan-Toltec ruins at Chichen Itza, Mexico. This wall is covered with iconography depicting many snakes, the larger 
one at the top representing the Mayan snake deity Kukulkan, or “Plumed Serpent.” Feathers, or plumes, can be seen to decorate the stones at 
the top of the wall and just beneath it. Many of the other snakes represented in this stone structure clearly represent rattlesnakes. The white 
arrows point to some of the rattles at the tails of these stone serpents. Photograph by Ming-Chung Tu. 

 130  | How Snakes Work
 On the other hand, snakes that possess colors forming 
stripes or more uniform patterns than those discussed 
above tend to be more active and rely on rapid escape by 
fl eeing away from potential predators. Herpetologist Ed-
mund Brodie III found this to be true even within a species 
when he investigated color patterns of individuals of the 
Northwestern Garter Snake,  Th amnophis ordinoides . Indi-
viduals of this species have colors that vary from distinct 
stripes to patterns of spots. When Brodie measured the 
tendencies of snakes to fl ee following provocation, he found 
that striped snakes tended to crawl away from the ag-
gressor, whereas snakes with more blotched patterns were 
more likely to fl ee a short distance and then suddenly stop 
and assume a motionless position. Such behaviors are 
termed “reversals” and refl ect a behavioral component of 
crypsis that is employed following the initial detection of 
an animal by a predator. It is a defensive tactic that does not 
rely greatly on speed. Th e behavior confuses a predator 
when a fl eeing animal that is being followed rapidly and 
suddenly “disappears” (when it stops). 
 Optical illusions can be created by moving color patterns 
and their eff ects on visually foraging predators. Studies 
have found that the ability to perceive motion and the 
 velocity of an object depends on the color pattern of the 
object and its surrounding fi eld on which it moves. Striped 
snakes appear to be stationary when crawling slowly, and 
they can appear to be moving more slowly than they actu-
ally are. It is diffi  cult for the eye of the predator to “fi x” on a 
particular point on the fl eeing snake and follow it, so the 
result can be that the stripe is seen momentarily but then 
suddenly the tail appears in a fl ash and the striped object 
vanishes! Th is optical illusion clearly has advantages for the 
escaping snake and suggests the striped pattern may be 
more eff ective in permitting escape than does some other 
color patterns when fl eeing is involved. Th e striped pattern 
becomes more apparent with increasing size of garter 
snakes, and the tendency to fl ee from threats intensifi es in 
older striped individuals of  Th amnophis ordinoides . 
 Ed Brodie III also studied natural selection for combina-
tions of color pattern and escape behavior in a population 
of  T. ordinoides . Newborn snakes that were scored for be-
havior and color pattern in the laboratory were released 
into the wild, and their survival was followed by mark and 
recapture techniques. Snakes with the highest probability 
of survival performed uninterrupted fl ight if striped, but 
tended to fl ee evasively by performing reversals if they were 
 
 
 Figure 5.15.   Left : Knotting behavior in a pelagic Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) photographed in Costa Rica. The knotting 
behaviors of sea snakes are thought to be employed to remove debris and potentially settling ectoparasites (barnacles for example) as well as to 
remove old epidermis during skin shedding. The specimen shown in this photograph is not shedding its skin.  Right : A Little File Snake 
( Acrochordus granulatus ) photographed in the Philippines. The snake is outside of water to illustrate a “knot” that was being used to remove old 
epidermis during skin shedding. The arrows point to the location on the body where a tight coil (above arrowheads) is being used to push 
against part of the body where the old epidermis is sliding toward the tail and off the snake (below arrowheads). The old epidermis can also be 
seen as the wrinkled skin in the lower part of the photo. The greenish color is attributable to the presence of algae. The anterior part of the 
snake from which the skin has been removed is evident in the upper part of the photo. The photograph of  Pelamis is by Joseph Pfaller, and that 
of the  Acrochordus is by the author. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  131 
spotted or nonstriped. Th e covariation of color pattern and 
behavior help to explain the variation of color pattern that 
is seen in natural populations of this species. 
 Another important function of snake colors is that of 
a warning signal to predators. Th e warning function is 
termed  aposematism and is probably best known in coral 
snakes of the genera  Micrurus and  Micruroides . Th ese 
snakes are conspicuously colored with usually red, yellow, 
and black bands, which function as a warning signal to 
avian predators. Aposematic colors are most eff ective 
when they contrast strongly with that of the animal’s 
background, and the warning colors tend to be avoided by 
would-be predators. Such contrasting colors have also 
been shown, or suspected, to be aposematic in other spe-
cies of snakes including some sea snakes, other elapids, 
colubrids, and viperids ( fi gs.  1.14 ,  1.41 ,  1.52 and below). 
 A very interesting example of an aposematic color pat-
tern occurs in European Vipers,  Vipera berus , which have a 
dorsal zigzag pattern that has been shown to be aposematic. 
Th e zigzag pattern of European vipers is not very conspic-
uous and could also have both a cryptic and aposematic 
function ( fi g.  1.25 ). Th e dorsal colors can reduce the detec-
tion by avian predators while the snake is coiled motionless, 
but change into a highly conspicuous and characteristic sig-
nal once the snake has been seen. Moreover, the pattern can 
create a “fl icker-fusion” illusion during movement, which 
makes it diffi  cult for a predator to focus on a moving snake 
 
 
 Figure 5.16.   Barnacles encrusting into the skin atop the head of an 
Olive-headed Sea Snake,  Disteria major . The lower photo shows a 
closer-up view of two such barnacles. Photographs by Sara E. Murphy. 
 
 
 Figure 5.17.   An Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake ( Crotalus 
adamanteus ) resting on a sand dune at Sapelo Island, Georgia. From 
a distance ( upper photo ) the snake (arrow) is almost completely 
cryptic and difﬁ cult to see. At reasonably close range ( middle photo ) 
the snake remains cryptic. Only if the observer is right upon the snake 
does it become conspicuous ( lower photo ). Photographs by James 
Nifong. 

 132  | How Snakes Work
and thereby increases the chances for escape. Many snakes 
are brightly banded, and during rapid crawling movement 
the bands create a similar eff ect, or they blur to produce a 
seemingly uniform color that also enhances escape by 
fl eeing. A similar eff ect occurs in swimming sea snakes, 
many of which have banded coloration ( fi gs.  1.43 ,  1.45 ). 
 Numerous venomous snakes possess potent venom and 
irritable defensive behaviors, but are cryptically colored 
and not conspicuously marked like the European vipers. 
Th e use of such weak color signals combined with strong 
defenses is a common phenomenon (see writings by John 
Endler). Many snakes are preyed upon largely by birds, and 
a number of these birds are specialists that feed primarily 
on snakes. If some predators avoid venomous snakes be-
cause of their coloration, while others do not, it makes 
sense to employ a color strategy that involves crypsis to 
avoid being seen by predators, while also having an apose-
matic function once an individual is seen. 
 Other examples of warning coloration include tail 
curling or exposure of ventral surfaces, which are brightly 
colored in various species of snakes ( fi gs.  1.48 ,  1.50 ). Th e 
arboreal Red-tailed Rat Snake ( Gonyosoma oxycephalum ) of 
Southeast Asia presents blue colors to predators when it 
is in a defensive attitude, and similar defenses have also 
evolved in other arboreal species. Th e blue colors are some-
times revealed when body scales are spread apart by neck 
infl ation, or when the mouth is opened or the tongue is 
fl icked ( fi g.  5.18  ; see also  fi g.  6.19 ). 
 Mimicry 
 Th e term  mimicry refers to the phenomenon where organ-
isms resemble one another in context of gaining an advan-
tage in the avoidance of predators. Studies of coral snakes, 
in particular, have demonstrated the existence of mimicry 
systems in which harmless snakes resemble or “mimic” 
coral snakes in color pattern and thereby gain the benefi t 
of signaling avoidance to avian predators ( fi g.  5.19 ; see also 
 fi gs.  1.14 ,  1.52  ). Field studies by Ed Brodie III have provided 
direct evidence that avian predators avoid banded patterns 
of model snakes. Th us, there appears to be a generalized 
avoidance by free-ranging avian predators of ring patterns 
resembling those of coral snakes. Other plausible but less 
tested systems might involve mimicry of viperid body form 
and coloration by snakes such as American hognose snakes 
( Heterodon spp.; see  fi g.  1.49 ), or spreading the neck in a 
cobra-like fashion among various colubrid species of 
snakes. Many such displays occur in snakes that are not 
sympatric with an appropriate model species, however, 
and are likely to represent convergent evolution of defen-
sive tactics ( fi g.  5.20  ). 
 Mimicry involving snakes might also extend to other 
kinds of organisms. For example, coloration of some tropical 
insects appears to mimic snakes, and the sophistication of 
the resemblance can be indeed remarkable ( fi g.  5.21 ). Trop-
ical millipedes with ringed patterns might also gain some 
advantage in resembling ringed patterns of snakes, but this 
is simply speculation at present.  
 Melanism 
 Melanism refers to excessive pigmentation or blackening 
of the skin, usually determined by genetics and having 
evolutionary origin. In some cases, melanism is deter-
mined by recessive homozygotes at a single gene locus. 
Th e signifi cance of melanism has attracted the attention 
of biologists since the 19th century. As in other reptiles, 
birds and mammals, melanism is quite common in snakes. 
In some circumstances, the melanism in individuals may 
be partial, and populations may refl ect a mixture of me-
lanistic and normally colored individuals representing 
 either rare or well-established polymorphism. Th ere are 
several plausible advantages for melanistic individuals, 
depending on the environment, ecology, and behavior of a 
species. 
 
 
 Figure 5.18.   The  upper photo shows the open mouth of a Brown 
(or Mexican) Vine Snake ( Oxybelis aeneus ) and reveals dark blue 
coloration that is displayed within. In the  lower photo one sees the 
blue colors that decorate the tongue of a Red-tailed Rat Snake 
( Gonyosoma oxycephalum ). This species also displays a dark blue 
spot on the inside of the mouth when it is opened in a threatening 
defensive display. The vine snake was photographed by Dan Dourson 
in Belize; the rat snake was photographed by the author. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  133 
 
 
 Figure 5.19.   Coral snakes and coral snake mimics. The  upper left photo is an Eastern Coral Snake ( Micrurus fulvius ), paired with a sympatric 
mimic ( upper right ), a Scarlet King Snake ( Lampropeltis elapsoides ). The  middle left photo is a Central American Coral Snake ( Micrurus 
nigrocinctus ), paired with a sympatric mimic ( middle right ), a Black Milk Snake ( Lampropeltis triangulum gaigeae ). The  lower left photo 
features a Brazilian Coral Snake ( Micrurus decoratus ), and the  lower right photo features a Terrestrial Snail Sucker ( Tropidodipsas sartorii ) that 
is common throughout much of Central America. Note the variation of banding and ring patterns, all of which can have a generalized advantage 
of being avoided by avian predators. The  Micrurus fulvius was photographed in Florida by Dan Dourson. The other snakes were photographed 
by the author:  Lampropeltis elapsoides in south Florida;  Lampropeltis triangulum ,  Micrurus nigrocinctus , and  Tropidodipsas in Costa Rica; and 
 Micrurus decoratus in Itatiaia National Park, Brazil. 

 134  | How Snakes Work
 One advantage clearly is cryptic in cases where black or 
very dark individuals match a dark background ( fi gs.  5.22 , 
 5.23  ). Examples are darkly colored specimens of the South-
western Speckled Rattlesnake,  Crotalus mitchellii pyrrhus , 
which occur on dark lava rock fl ows, as mentioned earlier, 
and the Arizona Black Rattlesnake,  C. cerberus , which has a 
limited range in the vicinity of black lava outfl ows from an 
ancient volcano ( fi g.  5.22 ). Another context for crypsis is a 
match of dark skin color against charred backgrounds or 
objects that result from wildfi res. From personal experi-
ence, I know that Southern Pacifi c Rattlesnakes ( C. oreganus 
helleri ,  fi g.  4.6 ) tend to be very dark in regions of Southern 
California that have had a history of frequent fi res. Al-
though wildfi res are an ephemeral event, selection is very 
intense for perhaps one to three or four years afterward be-
cause of increased appearance of aerial predators that tend 
to forage in the open habitat. Moreover, charred stalks 
from shrubs tend to remain dark in color for many years, 
and the author has often confused these momentarily for 
snakes while walking through recently burned habitats. 
 Another adaptive context for melanism is a presumptive 
advantage for more rapid warming and thermoregulation in 
relatively cool environments. Th is has been shown to play an 
important role in a number of lizard species, as well as in 
garter snakes and melanistic color morphs of the European 
Adder,  Vipera berus . Ralph Gibson, Bruce Falls, Tonya Bittner, 
and others have demonstrated that melanistic adult garter 
 
 
 Figure 5.20.   A Red Coffee Snake ( Nina sebae ) with threatening 
display. This snake is normally secretive and when uncovered it 
typically remains motionless (a behavior that has earned it the name 
“dormiloma,” meaning “sleepyhead,” in parts of Mexico). However, 
when startled or disturbed the snake may dorsoventrally ﬂ atten its 
neck and part of its body, crawl forward, and elevate its head. The 
snake also thrashes or moves its body jerkily to keep its red-colored 
back facing toward a potential predator. Such a head and neck display 
is relatively rare in snakes that are this small (maximum length 40 cm) 
and probably serves to make the snake look larger or more 
threatening. This snake was photographed in Belize by Dan Dourson.  
 
 
 Figure 5.21.    A Brazilian Hawkmoth caterpillar ( Hemeroplanes 
ornatus , =  Leucorampha ornatus ) inﬂ ates itself to resemble a snake 
when it is frightened by a potential predator. The resemblance is 
amazing, and the caterpillar sways from side to side in effort to 
improve the resemblance. The would-be predator might even think 
the false snake is striking! Photograph by Lincoln Brower. 
 
 
 Figure 5.22.    An Arizona Black Rattlesnake ( Crotalus cerberus ) 
illustrating the predominantly black color that renders this snake 
cryptic when seen against dark rocks that are part of an ancient lava 
ﬂ ow associated with its range. Photograph by William B. Montgomery. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  135 
snakes ( Th amnophis sirtalis ) maintain  signifi cantly higher 
body temperatures (by about 1.3°C) during the colder periods 
of the day when compared with normally colored morphs of 
this species. Th e higher body temperatures can infl uence 
rates of metabolism and growth of individuals, leading to 
increased reproductive success. Black morphs might also be 
active for somewhat longer periods of a year. However, mela-
nistic individuals of a species may occur at particular loca-
tions, or at moderate to relatively low frequencies in a 
population, due to being conspicuous and subject to increased 
predation. Th e increased predation risk was demonstrated 
for melanistic color morphs in an island population of  Vipera 
berus by Claes Andrén and Göran Nilson. 
 Another function of dark pigmentation is protection of 
reproductive and other critical organs from harmful ultra-
violet radiation. In various species, and particularly in those 
inhabiting open habitats with intense sunlight, dense 
layers of melanin can be found in the internal thin membra-
nous tissues that surround the gut (called  peritoneum ), re-
productive organs, and venom glands of venomous snakes. 
Th ese internal melanins, in addition to those present in the 
skin, are thought to protect sensitive internal organs from 
the harmful eff ects of penetrating UV radiation. Changes in 
the amount of melanin and its dispersion throughout the 
skin signifi cantly aff ect the amount of radiation that pene-
trates the body wall. Studies of color-labile desert lizards by 
Warren Porter and Kenneth Norris have demonstrated that 
lightening of the skin color doubles the amount of UV and 
visible radiation that penetrates the body wall to the perito-
neum and is potentially mutagenic judged by eff ects on 
 bacteria. Hence, the so-called “black peritoneum” is an im-
portant shield that guards against incoming radiation.    
 Changes of Color Pattern 
 Th e color patterns of snakes are generally fi xed, and the la-
bility (especially short-term variation) of color change in 
any individual is not as pronounced as what occurs in some 
other taxa such as frogs, lizards, and fi shes. However, it is 
fairly common for snakes to exhibit signifi cant change of 
color pattern during development, with juveniles exhibit-
ing blotched or banded patterns that transform to uni-
formly colored or striped patterns in adults. In some cases, 
the changes in color pattern correspond with changes in 
behavior and appear to be related to crypsis or escape 
strategies. For example, juvenile Cottonmouths ( Agkistro-
don piscivorus ) are orange or brownish in color with pat-
terns of blotches and crossbands, whereas the adults are 
more uniformly colored brown or black ( fi g.  1.32 cf.  fi g. 
 2.28 ). Th e colors of the juveniles tend to provide crypsis re-
lated to a tendency of young snakes to spend more time 
immobile in situations where there are leaves or other 
ground vegetation in contrast to adults, which forage noc-
turnally in shallow water or muddy banks of ponds and 
streams. Put another way, the color pattern of juvenile cot-
tonmouths resemble somewhat closely the color pattern of 
the related Copperhead ( Agkistrodon contortix ), which is 
very inconspicuous when coiled amid the leaf litter of a 
hardwood forest ( fi g.  1.32 ). Unfortunately, there are no 
quantitative data to confi rm the tendency of juvenile cot-
tonmouths to coil among leaf litter in comparison with the 
behaviors of adults. 
 Studies of the racer  Coluber constrictor  by Douglas Creer 
demonstrated that newborn and juvenile racers were more 
 
 
 Figure 5.23.    The  upper photo features a Southwestern Speckled 
Rattlesnake ( Crotalus mitchellii pyrrhus ) that has emerged from a 
granite rock outcrop that was blackened by a recent wildﬁ re. The 
charred rocks in this habitat are typically pinkish-orange in color, 
which matches the color of the snake. The  lower photo illustrates 
the normal pink color of rocks in the vicinity (before the ﬁ re). The 
snake to the  left is another Southwestern Speckled Rattlesnake 
( C. m. pyrrhus ), and that to the  right is a Southern Paciﬁ c Rattlesnake 
( C. oreganus helleri ). This photograph was taken in the early morning, 
and shadows unintentionally exaggerate the dark colors. The speckled 
rattlesnake matches the rock more closely after it warms up and its 
colors lighten akin to the one in the upper photograph. The Southern 
Paciﬁ c Rattlesnake, on the other hand, is naturally quite black. It is an 
obvious mismatch of color with the pink rock, but it is relatively 
camouﬂ aged on the blackened substrate following a ﬁ re. These 
snakes were photographed by the author in the southern Laguna 
Mountains of San Diego County, California.  

 136  | How Snakes Work
likely than adults to exhibit aggressive behavior in con-
trast to fl eeing that is more characteristic of adults. Th e 
young snakes have a blotched color pattern in contrast 
with adults, which develop a more uniform color ranging 
from blue or brown to black. Generally, however, the sig-
nifi cance of ontogenetic color changes in snakes is not well 
understood. 
 Th e changes of color that occur during ontogeny in-
volve fi xed pigment patterns that do not vary substan-
tially from day to day, and the transformation from 
juvenile to adult patterns is an example of what is called 
 morphological color change . Th ese take place over the life-
time of an individual, or might describe evolutionary 
changes in which the color pattern of a species changes 
over relatively long periods of evolutionary time. On the 
other hand, shorter-term changes can occur over periods 
of minutes to hours in individuals experiencing hormonal 
or nervous stimulation of chromatophores, termed  physi-
ological color change . While common in some other ani-
mals, such changes are comparatively rare in snakes, 
but they do occur. Th e distinction is that physiological 
changes involve the movement of pigment (usually mel-
anin) into or out of dermal melanophore processes (to 
cause  darkening or lightening, respectively) whereas mor-
phological color changes involve increases or decreases in 
the  absolute numbers of melanophores that are present in 
the skin. 
 Physiological color change has been documented in sev-
eral families of snakes including viperids, boids, tropidophi-
ids, bolyeriids, and colubrids. In many cases it seems to be 
cyclical and related to activity or 24-hour light cycles. In 
other cases, colors may vary seasonally and might be diffi  -
cult to detect by human visual systems. Scott Boback and 
Lynn Sieff erman studied such phenomena in Boa Constric-
tors and suggested that physiological color changes can be 
related to underlying hormone cycles involving  melatonin 
and  melanophore stimulating hormone (or MSH). Th e pat-
terns of color changes in snakes have probably evolved in 
relation to crypsis, thermoregulation, and sexual signaling 
in various species. 
 Some rattlesnakes tend to lighten with increased tem-
perature or activity, and hormonal control of the relative 
state of melanin dispersion has been suggested to con-
stitute the mechanism for controlling these changes. 
Early studies by Hermann Rahn revealed that high tem-
peratures contracted melanophores in rattlesnakes, and 
the state of lightening resembled that seen in response 
to surgical removal of the pituitary gland, which elimi-
nates the melanophore dispersing actions of pituitary 
hormones. 
 Th e Speckled Rattlesnake,  Crotalus mitchellii , of the 
southwestern United States seems to be particularly labile 
in color pattern. Specimens that are captured on or near 
lava fl ows in the Mojave Desert appear nearly slate gray in 
color, whereas individuals captured on nearby areas of sand 
or light substrate can be a peppered whitish color in appear-
ance. Th e author has also seen specimens of variable colors 
that generally match the predominant soils or rocks with 
which they associate, ranging from darker gray or bluish 
tones through lighter, usually pinkish colors. Moreover, 
these snakes appear capable of changing their dorsal color 
pattern to match not only the basic ground color but also 
the speckled appearance of granite rocks in their habitat. 
Nonetheless, the fundamental ground color of these snakes 
appears to become “fi xed” sometime during early ontogeny 
( fi g.  5.23 ). 
 Acquisition of Color Directly from Environment 
 Genetically based color patterns can also be aff ected by the 
adherence of dirt or mud particles that a snake contacts 
directly in its environment. Generally, the skin of snakes is 
kept exceptionally clean due, in part, to the hydrophobic 
nature of the microstructural properties of the epidermis. 
However, snakes that frequent muddy environments such 
as stream banks, or which occur in dry habitats with wind-
blown dirt or sand, can accumulate a thin layer of debris 
that alters the normal skin color. One example is the ad-
herence of mud to the skin of Cottonmouth snakes that 
crawl over muddy surfaces associated with stream banks or 
ponds ( fi g.  5.24  ).    
 Genetics of Snake Coloration 
 Th e genetics of skin color is not well studied in snakes, and 
much knowledge of genetic systems and expression related 
to coloration has been derived from investigations of other 
animals. Investigations of snake colors arise, however, in 
relation to two principal interests. First, evolutionary biol-
ogists interested in coloration, evolutionary principles, or 
natural selection recognize that snakes off er a diversity of 
fascinating color systems and are subject to selection pres-
sures that provide useful experimental systems for under-
standing the underlying genetic mechanisms related to 
certain patterns or variation. Second, herpetoculturists 
are interested in breeding various mutant lines of color 
variants that have become popular in the pet trade. Var-
ious private and commercial breeding programs have 
yielded information about fundamental Mendelian ge-
netics of color in various strains or subspecies of interest 
to buyers. Much of the knowledge related to these breeding 
programs has not been published in the scientifi c litera-
ture, but is available from various individuals who are in-
volved ( fi g.  5.25 ). 
 Skin color in snakes and in other vertebrates can be sub-
ject to relatively rapid natural selection and expressed by 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  137 
 
 
 Figure 5.24.   Florida Cottonmouths ( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ) 
with skin colored by a superﬁ cial layer of dried mud that occurs in 
the snake’s natural habitat (Lower Suwannee National Wildlife 
Refuge). In the  upper photo , two juvenile snakes are shown before 
(left) and after (right) shedding the skin. In the  lower photo , an older 
individual from the same region is shown with part of the old 
epidermis removed just prior to skin shedding. The older, outer 
generation of epidermis is covered with a layer of dry mud from the 
animal’s habitat, whereas the new skin revealed beneath is an entirely 
different color before it becomes covered with adhering mud particles. 
Photographs by the author. 
comparatively simple genetic mechanisms. Th e production 
of melanin in snakes is controlled by a single pair of genes, 
which when recessive can result in albinism. Unlike mam-
mals, however, an albino snake has normal amounts of red 
and yellow in the skin so the condition is more appropri-
ately referred to as  amelanistic partial albinism . Additionally, 
there are probably a number of genetic defects that are ca-
pable of producing amelanistic partial albinism. Th ere is 
great variation in the quantity of black that is present in the 
skin, and the quantity can also be controlled by multiple 
alleles (alternate forms of a specifi c gene). Th ere is a clear 
suggestion in some species that melanin related to color 
pattern is inherited diff erently from melanin that is scat-
tered more diff usely throughout the skin. 
 A number of snake species become melanistic or vari-
ously darkened with age. Examples are the Northern Black 
Racer ( Coluber c. constrictor ), which is very black as an adult, 
the Eastern Hognose Snake ( Heterodon p. platyrhinos ), in 
which melanistic individuals are normal color variants, and 
insular Florida Cottonmouths ( Agkistrodon piscivorus co-
nanti ), which darken to nearly uniform black color earlier in 
life than do conspecifi cs on the mainland (see color of the 
adult snake in the upper part of  fi g.  1.32 ). Some Eastern 
Garter Snakes ( Th amnophis s. sirtalis ) from nearshores of 
the Great Lakes are born jet black, and early breeding ex-
periments suggested this to be attributable to a single pair 
of recessive genes. Subsequent work, however, has put this 
supposition into doubt. Richard Zweifel suggested that 
 
 
 Figure 5.25.   A working scene at Vida Preciosa International, Inc., 
better known as VPI. This is a commercial enterprise owned and 
operated by David and Tracy Barker near San Antonio, Texas. VPI is 
best known for its collection and captive breeding of pythons. Here 
Tracy is shown preparing eggs from the cage of a Red Blood Python 
( Python brongersmai ) for artiﬁ cial incubation. Successful captive 
breeding of various python species at VPI has produced numerous 
color variants, many of which are related to natural taxonomic and 
geographic variation. Photograph by David Barker. 

 138  | How Snakes Work
melanism in this species may depend not only on genetic 
constitution but also on environmental infl uence, for ex-
ample, cold temperature. 
 Th ere is much normal variation in color pattern in spe-
cies and populations of snakes, related to individual varia-
tion, ontogenetic changes, regional geographic diff erences, 
and pattern dimorphism or polymorphism within a spe-
cies. Color anomalies are noted by herpetologists from time 
to time in wild-caught snakes, and various abnormal pat-
terns likely refl ect genetic mutations or abnormal changes 
in genetic expression. A classical example of pattern dimor-
phism is seen in the California King Snake,  Lampropeltis 
californiae . Th e usual color pattern consists of alternating 
black and white (or brown and yellow) bands, but an alter-
nate pattern consists of a white stripe running lengthwise 
along the center of the back ( fi g.  5.26 ). Th e majority of 
snakes throughout the range of this species exhibit the 
banded pattern, but in the vicinity of San Diego about 40 
percent of specimens exhibit the longitudinally striped pat-
tern. Both patterns occur in snakes from the same litter 
and represent a natural dimorphism, the striped pattern 
having originated as a genetic mutation. 
 Finally, an interesting example of color polymorphism 
involves the Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ). 
Th is pelagic species has the largest range of any snake spe-
cies and exhibits extensive variation of color and pattern. 
Most individuals have black or brown coloration largely re-
stricted to the dorsal surface, mixed with spots, stripes, 
bands, or mottling of yellow, which predominates on the 
ventral surface ( fi g.  1.44 ). Th e tail is usually a mottled com-
bination of black and yellow or white. All-yellow individuals 
have been reported from certain localities in Costa Rica and 
Panama. In particular, there appears to be a localized popu-
lation of all-yellow individuals in the Golfo Dulce of south-
ern Costa Rica ( fi g.  5.27 ). Alejandro Solórzano suggests that 
this population is relatively isolated within the gulf because 
of circulation patterns of surface currents within and out-
side the gulf. Preliminary evidence suggests that such isola-
tion by currents might restrict gene fl ow between oceanic 
and gulf populations and contribute to what appears to be 
population diff erentiation. 
 Conclusions concerning Color Polymorphisms 
 Th e variability of snake coloration includes variation within 
populations and species, and this likely refl ects, in large 
part, interactions with the environment and especially 
threats of predation. Snakes are very attractive prey to 
birds, and avian predation pressures can be very signifi -
cant. To the extent that intraspecifi c color variation refl ects 
polymorphisms, ecological and evolutionary consequences 
promote color “ecomorphs” involving coadapted complexes 
of genes. Recent comparative analysis of Australian squa-
mates by Anders Forsman and Viktor Åberg demonstrates 
that species with variable color patterns have larger ranges, 
utilize a greater diversity of habitats, and are less likely to 
be threatened with extinction. Th ese fi ndings likely refl ect 
theoretical predictions that variable color patterns, or  color 
polymorphisms , enable a species to increase the effi  ciency 
 
 
 Figure 5.26.   Three different color phases of the California King 
Snake ( Lampropeltus californiae ). The banded phase ( top ) is the more 
common form of this snake in the wild. The striped form ( center ) is 
less common but occurs somewhat commonly in the vicinity of San 
Diego. The spotted form ( bottom ) is quite rare but illustrates further 
variation of pattern in this species. These photos also illustrate 
variation of the ground color that ranges from brown to black. 
Photographs by the author. 

Structure and Function of Skin  |  139 
with which it exploits resources of the environment 
through increased ability to utilize varied environments 
and to extend its range. Th us, snakes provide excellent 
model systems in which studies of coloration can reveal im-
portant principles related to population and evolutionary 
processes. On the other hand, snakes are fundamentally 
exquisitely colorful animals, and one does not need addi-
tional justifi cation to enjoy the beauty that stimulates our 
raw emotions.       
 Additional Reading  
 Andrén, C., and G. Nilson. 1981. Reproductive success and risk of 
predation in normal and melanistic colour morphs of the 
adder,  Vipera berus .  Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 
15:235–246. 
 Avolio, C., R. Shine, and A. J. Pyle. 2006. Th e adaptive signifi cance 
of sexually dimorphic scale rugosity in sea snakes.  American 
Naturalist 167:728–738. 
 Bechtel, H. B. 1995.  Reptile and Amphibian Variants: Colors, Patterns 
and Scales . Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing 
 Bittner, T. D., R. B. King, and J. M. Kerfi n. 2002. Eff ects of body 
size and melanism on the thermal biology of garter snakes 
( Th amnophis sirtalis ).  Copeia 2002:477–482. 
 Boback, S. M., and L. M. Sieff erman. 2010. Variation in color and 
color change in island and mainland boas ( Boa constrictor ). 
 Journal of Herpetology 44:506–515. 
 Brodie, E. D., III. 1989. Genetic correlations between morphology 
and antipredator behavior in natural populations of the garter 
snake  Th amnophis ordinoides .  Nature 342:542–543. 
 Brodie, E.D., III. 1990. Genetics of the garter’s getaway.  Natural 
History 99:44–50. 
 Brodie, E. D., III. 1992. Correlational selection for color pattern 
and antipredator behavior in the garter snake  Th amnophis 
 ordinoides .  Evolution 46:1284–1298. 
 Brodie, E. D., III. 1993. Diff erential avoidance of coral snake banded 
patterns by free-ranging avian predators in Costa Rica.  Evolu-
tion 47:227–235. 
 Brodie, E. D., III, and F. J. Janzen. 1995. Experimental studies of coral 
snake mimicry: Generalized avoidance of ringed snake patterns 
by free-ranging avian predators.  Functional Ecology  9:186–190. 
 Creer, D. A. 2005. Correlations between ontogenetic change in 
color pattern and antipredator behavior in the racer,  Coluber 
constrictor .  Ethology 111:287–300. 
 Endler, J. A., and J. Mappes. 2004. Predator mixes and the conspic-
uousness of aposematic signals.  American Naturalist 163:532–547. 
 Forsman, A., and V. Åberg. 2008. Associations of variable colora-
tion with niche breadth and conservation status among Aus-
tralian reptiles.  Ecology 89:1201–1207. 
 Gibson, A. R., and J. B. Falls. 1979. Th ermal biology of the common 
garter snake  Th amnophis sirtalis (L.). II. Th e eff ects of mela-
nism.  Oecologia 43:99–109. 
 Hedges, S. B., C. A. Hass, and T. K. Maugel. 1989. Physiological 
color change in snakes.  Journal of Herpetology 23:450–455. 
 Hulse, A. C. 1971. Fluorescence in  Leptotyphlops humilis (Serpen-
tes: Leptotyphlopidae).  Southwestern Naturalist 16:123–124. 
 Jackson, J. F., W. Ingram III, and H. W. Campbell. 1976. Th e dorsal 
pigmentation pattern of snakes as an antipredator strategy: 
A multivariate approach.  American Naturalist 110:1029–1053. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 2006. Water relations of tetrapod integument. 
 Journal of Experimental Biology 209:202–226. 
 Lillywhite, H. B., and P. F. A. Maderson. 1982. Skin structure and 
permeability. In C. Gans and F. H. Pough (eds.),  Biology of the 
Reptilia , vol. 12,  Physiology C, Physiological Ecology . New York: 
Academic Press, pp. 379–442. 
 Maderson, P. F. A. 1965. Histological changes in the epidermis of 
snakes during the sloughing cycle.  Journal of Zoology (London) 
146:98–113. 
 Maderson, P. F. A. 1984. Th e squamate epidermis: New light has been 
shed.  Symposium of the Zoological Society of London 52:111–126. 
 Maderson, P. F. A. 1985. Some developmental problems of the rep-
tilian integument. In C. Gans, F. Billett, and P. F. A. Maderson 
(eds.),  Biology of the Reptilia , vol. 14,  Development A . New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 523–598. 
 Maderson, P. F. A., K. W. Chiu, and J. G. Phillips. 1070. Endocrine-
epidermal relationships in squamate reptiles.  Memoirs of the 
Society for Endocrinology 18:259–284. 
 Maderson, P. F. A., T. Rabinowitz, B. Tandler, and L. Alibardi. 1998. 
Ultrastructural contributions to an understanding of the cellu-
lar mechanisms in lizard skin shedding with comments on the 
function and evolution of a unique lepidosaurian phenome-
non.  Journal of Morphology 236:1–24. 
 
 
 Figure 5.27.   Yellow-bellied Sea Snakes ( pelamis platurus ) captured 
from a population of yellow color morphs at Golfo Dulce, Puntarenas, 
Costa Rica, and photographed by the author. Most of the snakes in this 
population are completely yellow, but a more “normal” bicolored snake is 
shown in the lower photograph for contrast with the yellow specimens 
as well as a snake that has diffuse black mottling on its dorsal surface.  

 140  | How Snakes Work
 Niskanen, M., and J. Mappes. 2005. Signifi cance of the dorsal zig-
zag pattern of  Vipera latastei gaditana against avian predators. 
 Journal of Animal Ecology 74:1091–1101. 
 Porter, W. P., and K. S. Norris. 1969. Lizard refl ectivity change and 
its eff ect on light transmission through body wall.  Science 
163:482–484. 
 Pough, F. H. 1976. Multiple cryptic eff ects of cross-banded and 
ringed patterns of snakes.  Copeia 1976:834–836. 
 Rahn, H. 1942. Eff ect of temperature on color change in the rattle-
snake.  Copeia 1942:178. 
 Sheehy, C. M., III, A. Solórzano, J. B. Pfaller, and H. B. Lillywhite. 
2012. Preliminary insights into the phylogeography of the 
Yellow-bellied Sea Snake,  Pelamis platurus .  Integrative and 
Comparative Biology 52:321–330. 
 Solórzano, A. 2011. Variación de color de la serpiente marina  Pela-
mis platura (Serpentes: Elapidae) en el Golfo Dulce, Puntare-
nas, Costa Rica.  Cuadernos de Investigación UNED 3:89–96. 
 Tu, M.-C., H. B. Lillywhite, J. G. Menon, and G. K. Menon. 2002. 
Postnatal ecdysis establishes the permeability barrier in snake 
skin: New insights into lipid barrier structures.  Journal of Ex-
perimental Biology 205:3019–3030. 
 Zweifel, R. G. 1998. Apparent non-Mendelian inheritance of mela-
nism in the garter snake  Th amnophis sirtalis .  Herpetologica 
54:83–87. 

 | 141
 The Need for Oxygen 
 Just like any other vertebrate, a snake requires oxygen in 
order to remain alive. Oxygen is required for cellular  respi-
ration , which in the strictest sense refers to the intracel-
lular oxidation of organic substrates by molecular oxygen, 
coupled in turn to the generation of usable energy that 
 becomes trapped in the molecular form of ATP. Th e organic 
substrates consist of macromolecules that are derived 
from the processes of digestion and absorption of the food 
that snakes eat. Th e well-known by-products of respiration 
are CO 2 and H 2 O. Th e latter is called  metabolic water and 
actually makes a small, but sometimes signifi cant, contri-
bution to the water input of an animal (see  chapter  2 ). In 
more popular and lay usage, the term “respiration” is often 
used (inaccurately) as a name for the process of exchange 
of O 2 and CO 2  between the animal and its environment. 
Th e term  external respiration is sometimes used in refer-
ence to breathing, which more accurately should be called 
 ventilation .  
 Oxygen is acquired from the environment, while CO 2 
 escapes the body and dissipates to the environment. Both 
processes are fundamentally essential to life. Collectively, 
these are referred to as  gas exchange , and any organ that 
evolves specifi cally for this task is called a  gas exchanger . In 
the case of snakes, the gas exchanger is a lung, although 
some aquatic species can supplement pulmonary exchange 
(meaning “lung” exchange) with some intake of O 2 and 
losses of CO 2  across the skin. Internally, the oxygen is trans-
ported throughout the body by means of the blood circula-
tion, which also transports CO 2 from the various body 
tissues back to the lung and skin ( fi g.  6.1 ). 
 Diffusion versus Convection: The Need 
for a Pump  
 Th e movement of gaseous molecules such as O 2  and CO 2 is 
by diff usion across the internal lung surfaces and from 
blood capillaries to the mitochondria of cells where the 
 oxidation processes involving oxygen occur. Th e term  diff u-
sion refers to the movement of molecules by random mo-
tion that depends on the temperature and a gradient of 
concentration diff erence. Th e net movement occurs from 
higher to lower concentration (or, in the case of gases, par-
tial pressure). Diff usion is a slow process, however, and in 
a moderate size snake—say, a boa that is 3 or 4 meters 
long—it would require literally a few years for oxygen to 
diff use through tissues from the lung at the anterior quar-
ter of the animal to the tissues in its tail! Th us, animals 
larger than a few centimeters in size, including all verte-
brates, depend on the process of convection to speed the 
6
 INTERNAL TRANSPORT  
 Circulation and Respiration 
 As is well-known, snakes have a tendency to secrete themselves in very 
conﬁ ning quarters and they are capable of passing through relatively small 
apertures and channels. It was noted earlier that the air sac reduces the 
changes in diameter necessary for ventilation. Possibly of greater importance in 
the present context is the fact that if one region of the body is entirely 
immobilized ventilation can be maintained by regions that are free. In attempting 
to record breathing movements by means of mechanical levers and cuff 
pneumographs it was found that most snakes are very sensitive to pressure on 
their ribs. Almost invariably the region in contact with the cuff ceases movement 
and ventilation is taken up elsewhere. It is reasonable to suppose that a similar 
reaction occurs in nature when a snake passes through a narrow passage. 
 —Harry S. McDonald, Herpetologica 15 (1959): 195  

 142  | How Snakes Work
movement of gaseous molecules as well as other substances 
around the body ( fi g.  6.1 ). 
 Convection  refers to the bulk movement of something 
when it is carried in a medium such as air, water, or blood. 
Imagine you are outdoors and standing in front of your 
house. If the outside air was perfectly still and your neigh-
bor across the street opened a perfume bottle outside, you 
would not smell it, and the movement of perfume mole-
cules that happen to vaporize would be a slow process if it 
depended solely on diff usion from the source. However, if 
there is even a gentle breeze, you could smell the perfume if 
the vaporized molecules were carried by the air movements 
from the neighbor to you, assuming of course the wind is 
blowing in the right direction. Similarly, we could imagine 
the enhanced movement of a dye when a drop of it enters a 
body of water such as a pond or lake. Th e dye would not 
disperse very rapidly without movement of currents in the 
water (say by stirring) that would carry it from place to 
place. Th is is essentially the reason that circulatory systems 
evolved in animals. Indeed, some physiology books refer to 
the blood circulation as a “transport system” because this is 
precisely how it functions in moving various things from 
place to place within the body. Th ese include not only respi-
ratory gases but also blood cells, various ions, nutrients, 
waste metabolites, hormones, water, and heat. 
 Th e circulatory system of a snake consists of a central 
muscular pump, the heart, and distributing vessels that 
move blood (the transport medium) around the body. Th e 
blood is red because of red blood cells that contain hemo-
globin, which is a pigment that binds oxygen reversibly and 
permits the transport of much larger amounts of oxygen 
than would be possible otherwise (i.e., in simple solution). 
Th us, when the blood is oxygenated in the lung, the large 
majority of oxygen molecules is attached to hemoglobin 
and is transported within the red blood cells, which move 
freely while suspended in the blood plasma. Th e plasma is 
the liquid part of the blood and contains various dissolved 
substances—red blood cells, nutrients, and the like—and 
fl ows through the blood vessels. In the  capillaries , which are 
the smallest blood vessels that service tissues, oxygen 
 
 
 Figure 6.1.    Schematic representation of lung ventilation, blood circulation, and transfer of respiratory gases (O 2 and 
CO 2 ) between the lung and blood and between the blood and tissues. The squiggly lines represent movement of 
gases by convection (or bulk ﬂ ow transport), and the straight lines represent movement of gases by diffusion: oxygen 
from lung to blood (left part of schematic), and from blood to tissue and mitochondria (right part of schematic); CO 2 in 
the opposite directions. The circulation of blood is powered by muscular pumping of the heart (center of schematic). 
The snake to which the schematic arbitrarily applies is a  Deinagkistrodon acutus , photographed in Taiwan by 
Ming-Chung Tu. The schematic representation of gas transport was drawn by Shauna Lillywhite.  

Internal Transport  |  143 
comes off  the hemoglobin and diff uses into the cells that 
are oxidizing substrates in the process of respiration. 
 Th ere are two fundamental circuits in the blood circula-
tion of snakes and other terrestrial vertebrates. Th e  pulmo-
nary circulation  consists of all the vessels that convey blood 
from the heart to the lung, where the blood is oxygenated 
in pulmonary capillaries before returning to the heart for 
pumping to all other body tissues. Th e  systemic circulation 
consists of all the vessels that convey oxygenated blood 
from the heart to the body tissues where oxygen is ex-
changed for CO 2  in the systemic capillaries. Ideally, if the 
system operated as it does in a mammal, which has a four-
chambered heart, all of the oxygenated blood from the 
lungs would be pumped to the systemic tissues, and all the 
relatively unoxygenated (termed deoxygenated) blood 
 returning to the heart from the tissues would be pumped to 
the lungs for reoxygenation. In this system the blood fl ows 
from the systemic circuit through the heart to the lung, 
hence back to the heart for return to the tissues again, and 
so forth. Th e blood fl ows in series from the pulmonary ves-
sels to the systemic vessels, then back to the pulmonary 
vessels, and so on, and the blood in the two respective cir-
cuits is kept separated. In vertebrates other than crocodil-
ians, birds, and mammals, however, there is possibility for 
mixing of the two bloodstreams in the ventricle, which is 
not anatomically divided into two separate chambers. 
 The Heart: Central Pump and Controller 
of Shunts  
 Th e heart is a muscular pump and serves the important role 
of imparting motion to the blood that circulates throughout 
the system of interconnected blood vessels ( fi g.  6.2 ). Blood 
is returned to the heart in vessels called  veins , which fi ll the 
heart with blood during its state of muscle relaxation. When 
the  cardiac (heart) muscle contracts, much of the blood is 
ejected from the  ventricle through outfl ow vessels that con-
vey the blood to the various  arteries . Before the blood enters 
the ventricle, it fl ows from the veins into two  atria (individ-
ually termed  atrium ) that are capable of muscular contrac-
tion and positioned between the veins and the ventricle. It 
is the ventricle, however, that possesses stronger muscle 
and imparts the greatest force to the blood in order to pro-
duce movement throughout the system. 
 Th e heart of snakes is fundamentally similar to that of 
other squamates and turtles, but it diff ers substantially 
from that of crocodilians, birds, and mammals. Th e  sinus 
venosus  is the fi rst heart chamber to receive venous blood 
from systemic veins, and it contains a “pacemaker” that ini-
tiates contraction and determines its timing. From here 
blood enters the right atrium. In comparison with “primi-
tive” (basal) early vertebrates, the sinus venosus is reduced 
and the originally single atrium is divided into two distinct 
chambers. Th e muscular ventricle joins the two atria where 
each of two atrioventricular valves guards the entrances to 
the ventricular chambers. From the ventricle blood fl ows 
into three large arteries, and the base of these vessels is de-
rived in evolutionary terms from the primitive  conus arteri-
osus . Th e three arterial outfl ow vessels branch to form the 
pulmonary trunk and the right and left  aortic arches , the 
latter vessels sending blood fl ow to the systemic tissues. 
Th ere is a valved interaortic foramen that forms a tiny con-
nection between the bases of the adjacent aortic arches. 
Th is opening allows possible shunting or movement of 
blood from one aortic arch to the other, but the functional 
signifi cance of this connection has not been well studied in 
snakes. Contractile muscle tissue is dense near the base of 
the three outfl ow tracts and is especially important in con-
trolling the resistance of the pulmonary trunk to the blood 
that is fl owing to the lungs. 
 
 
 Figure 6.2.    Heart of a Florida Cottonmouth 
( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ). The snake 
weighed 656 g, and the heart shown weighed 
1.6 g. At the  left , the ventricle is shown in 
diastole, with the atria contracted while ﬁ lling 
the ventricle with blood. The ventricle contracts 
in systole at the  right , with the atria ﬁ lling with 
new venous blood. Symbols are CA,  cavum 
arteriosum ; CP,  cavum pulmonale ; CV,  cavum 
venosum ; LAo, left aortic arch; RAo, right aortic 
arch; PA, pulmonary arch. The abbreviations CA, 
CP, and CV overlie the locations of the respective 
heart chambers, which are internal and cannot 
be seen. Note the coronary arteries that are 
visible as small vessels branching over the 
surface of the ventricle. Photographs by the 
author. 

 144  | How Snakes Work
 Th e right atrium receives deoxygenated blood returning 
from the systemic body tissues, and the left atrium re-
ceives oxygenated blood that is returning from the lungs. 
When the atria contract, their respective bloodstreams fi ll 
 somewhat separated regions of the ventricle and are sub-
sequently ejected into the appropriate outfl ow tracts: de-
oxygenated blood to the lungs via the pulmonary trunk 
and arteries, and oxygenated blood to the body via the aor-
tic arches. Th e movement and separation of bloodstreams 
within the ventricle is complicated and subject to consider-
able variation depending on the prevailing physiological 
demands. 
 Th e ventricle is anatomically a single chamber and serves 
as a single pump to power the movement of blood into the 
major arterial branches leaving the heart. Internally and 
functionally, however, the ventricle is subdivided into three 
interconnected compartments ( fi g.  6.3 ). Th e  cavum arterio-
sum receives oxygenated blood from the left atrium but has 
no direct connection to an outfl ow tract. Deoxygenated 
blood from the right atrium fl ows into a cavity called the 
 cavum venosum  and then across a muscular ridge to a third 
cavity called the  cavum pulmonale . Th e muscular ridge is an 
incomplete muscular septum that partially divides the ven-
tricle by separating the cavum pulmonale from the cavum 
arteriosum and cavum venosum. Th e latter two chambers 
are partially separated by a structure called the  vertical sep-
tum and joined by an interventricular canal that communi-
cates between the two. During fi lling of the ventricle, termed 
 diastole (pronounced dye-ASS-toh-lee), the opened right 
atrioventricular valves lie across the opening to the inter-
ventricular canal and temporarily close it. Th us, oxygenated 
blood from the left atrium enters the cavum arteriosum and 
remains there during the period when the inter-ventricular 
canal is occluded by the valve structures. During contraction 
of the ventricle, termed  systole (pronounced SIS-toh-lee), 
the atrioventricular valves close and prevent a reversed fl ow 
of blood back into the atria, also removing the physical 
 occlusion of the interventricular canal. Hence, blood in the 
cavum arteriosum fl ows to the cavum venosum via the in-
terventricular canal, and from this compartment it is 
 expelled into the aortic arches. Th e contraction of the ven-
tricle also compresses the muscular ridge against the oppo-
site wall, which separates the cavum 
venosum from the cavum pulmonale. De-
oxygenated blood residing in the cavum 
pulmonale exits the ventricle through the 
pulmonary trunk (hence pulmonary 
arteries) to the lung, but some of this 
blood may leak across the muscular ridge 
to enter the left aortic arch. 
 Th e contraction of ventricular muscle 
is not synchronous, and deoxygenated 
blood is propelled into the pulmonary 
arteries before oxygenated blood exits the 
ventricle. When the oxygenated blood is 
compressed by contraction of the adja-
cent ventricular walls, it encounters high 
resistance in the pulmonary trunk that is 
mostly fi lled with deoxygenated blood. 
Th erefore, oxygenated blood enters the 
systemic arches partly because they off er 
less resistance. 
 A single ventricle such as that of a snake 
presents the potential for intracardiac 
shunting of blood from systemic to pulmo-
nary streams, or vice versa. Th e term  shunt 
basically refers to an alternate pathway. 
Th us, some of the blood that returns from 
the body tissues and is normally directed 
to the lungs might instead be “shunted” to 
the systemic circulation and thereby re-
turn to the body, whereas some of the oxy-
genated blood that  returns from the lung 
 
 
 Figure 6.3.   Schematic drawing of a generalized heart of a snake. This drawing 
illustrates the three chambers of the ventricle, which receive inﬂ owing blood from the 
atria, and the connections to outﬂ ow vessels are shown. Label abbreviations are LA, left 
aortic arch; RA, right aortic arch; PA, pulmonary artery. See text for further explanation. 
Drawing by Dan Dourson and the author. 

Internal Transport  |  145 
and is normally directed to the body might instead be 
“shunted” back to the lungs. Th ese circumstances are termed 
intracardiac shunts and may result in either pulmonary by-
pass or systemic bypass (or both), involving some fraction of 
blood that is passing through the single ventricle. 
 Partial or complete pulmonary bypass is called a  right-to-
left shunt  (R-L shunt), and partial or complete systemic by-
pass is called a  left-to-right shunt  (L-R shunt). Th e mechanisms 
controlling the magnitude and direction of shunting involve 
nervous control of the relative resistance or pressure diff er-
ences in the pulmonary and systemic outfl ow tracts. For ex-
ample, an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance will 
promote the translocation of a fraction of blood from the 
pulmonary to systemic circuit; that is, blood normally leaving 
the ventricle through the pulmonary trunk encounters in-
creased resistance and instead is redirected to the systemic 
outfl ow tracts (R-L shunt). Such a mechanism has been 
termed  pressure shunting . Alternatively, a passive mechanism 
for shunting can involve blood that is located within a space 
of the ventricle that is common to both pulmonary and 
systemic circulations at diff erent phases of the heart cycle 
and is subsequently “washed” into the “wrong” circulation by 
infl owing or outfl owing blood that is moving in the correct 
direction. Th is condition has been termed  washout shunting . 
Both pressure and washout shunting probably occur under 
various conditions in most or all species of snakes, but the 
subject has not been well studied in reptiles other than tur-
tles, crocodilians, and lizards. Furthermore, mixing in the 
ventricle can create both shunts simultaneously. 
 One of the more dramatic examples of pressure shunt-
ing in snakes occurs in the aquatic fi le snake,  Acrochordus 
granulatus , investigated by myself and John Donald, who 
was a postdoctoral associate in my laboratory at the Univer-
sity of Florida. Th is snake is a resident of mangrove swamps 
and shallow tropical waters, where it remains submerged 
for periods up to several hours. During submergence when 
the snake is quiescent, blood fl ow completely bypasses the 
lung except for periodic moments when fl ow is directed to 
the lung briefl y and at low fl ow rates. Th is pattern of inter-
mittent shunting, attributable to increased resistance in 
the pulmonary artery, keeps the partial pressure of circu-
lating oxygen low. Th is condition favors the uptake of ox-
ygen across the skin (from a higher partial pressure in 
water) and inhibits the losses of oxygen to surrounding 
water under conditions where the ambient water is low in 
oxygen. In a crude sense, this has been likened to “meter-
ing” the oxygen stores in the lung and allowing the transfer 
of lung oxygen to circulating blood at low or minimal rates. 
Th us, the intracardiac shunt capabilities of ophidian hearts 
have advantages and would not be possible if the pulmo-
nary and systemic fl ows of blood were completely sepa-
rated, as in mammals. 
 High degrees of shunting have also been shown to occur 
in sea snakes, which dive to considerable depths (maximum 
recorded about 100 meters) and breathe intermittently at 
the surface of the ocean. Some species appear capable of 
remaining submerged for very long periods, however, by 
“cutaneous breathing” (uptake of oxygen diff using across 
the skin, with release of CO 2  in the opposite direction). 
 Another important issue associated with diving is the 
prevention of decompression illness (also known as the 
“bends” or caisson disease). Th is occurs when nitrogen that 
diff uses into blood from the pulmonary air becomes pres-
surized at depth and “loads” the circulation. Th en it forms 
bubbles when the blood is depressurized and the gas comes 
out of solution as the snake ascends to breathe air. Small 
bubbles that form in the blood circulation can block smaller 
blood vessels and thereby cause tissue damage, but this has 
not been evaluated well in snakes or other reptiles that 
might have vessel size and properties that are diff erent 
from humans or other mammals in which decompression 
problems have been better studied. Roger Seymour and his 
colleagues have performed elegant studies that establish 
avoidance of decompression problems in sea snakes by vir-
tue of a combination of shunting blood away from the lung 
(thus avoiding nitrogen loading from the compressed lung 
gas) and losses of blood nitrogen to the ambient water 
across the skin. All of the nitrogen that enters the blood in 
the lung is mixed with nitrogen-poor blood that has come 
from the skin. Th is goes out into the body, but the pressure 
of nitrogen never increases enough to cause the bends. So it 
is central shunting plus the ability to lose nitrogen through 
the skin that prevents the bends. 
 Blood Vessels and the Vascular 
Distribution System  
 Th e heart is connected to a marvelously complex system of 
vessels that distribute the blood throughout the body and 
return it for repeated pumping in a conventional manner 
that is fundamentally similar to what occurs in mammals. 
Th e vessels transporting blood away from the heart are 
termed arteries. As in mammals, they are characterized by 
having relatively thick walls with layers of smooth muscle 
and elastic tissue. Th e vessels that return blood from the 
tissues to the heart are called veins, and these are generally 
thinner than arteries but also contain muscle and elastic 
tissues. Th e veins are more “stretchy” than arteries and con-
tain the major part of the circulating blood and thereby 
serve as a blood “reservoir.” Capillaries are the smallest ves-
sels of the circulatory system and collectively constitute the 
sites where respiratory gases, nutrients, ions, and other 
substances are exchanged with the interstitial fl uid that 
surrounds cells of the various tissues. In the pulmonary 

 146  | How Snakes Work
 circulation, the lung capillaries are where oxygen and CO 2 
are exchanged between the blood and the air spaces within 
the lung ( fi g.  6.4 ). Th e smaller arteries leading blood to the 
capillaries are called  arterioles , and the smaller veins leading 
blood away from the capillaries are called  venules . 
 Th e arterial outfl ow tracts from the ventricle include the 
right and left aortic arches, which typically leave the ven-
tricle ventromedially and arch around the esophagus to run 
toward the tail. Not far from the heart these two arches 
merge in the dorsal midline to form the  dorsal aorta ( fi g. 
 6.5 ). Th e  carotid arteries leave the right aortic arch near the 
cranial ends of the atria and carry blood to the head and 
brain. Th e left carotid artery is usually the dominant vessel 
and typically about the same diameter as the right aortic 
arch. Th e right carotid artery is smaller in diameter and 
may be absent or vestigial in some taxa of more advanced 
snakes (Caenophidia). A  vertebral artery  arises from the 
right aortic arch near where it curves to run in a posterior 
direction. Th e anterior vertebral artery courses toward the 
head for variable distances and then disappears in the mus-
culature between the vertebrae. Branches of this vessel per-
fuse the muscles of the body wall, skin, esophagus, lung 
fascia, and head. Progressing in the opposite direction to-
ward the tail, a series of vertebral vessels originates from 
the dorsal aorta in addition to prominent branches to the 
principal organs of the body cavity. Th e caudal segment of 
the aorta terminates within the tail. 
 Th e third arterial outfl ow tract from the ventricle gives 
rise to the pulmonary artery ( fi g.  6.5 ). Th e pulmonary trunk 
originates from the ventricle immediately adjacent to the 
aortic arches, and all three vessels emerge from the ven-
tricle to course for a short distance as a  truncus arteriosus , 
 
 
 Figure 6.4.    Respiratory, vascularized part of the lung of a Burmese 
Python ( Python molurus bivittatus ). The lung has been severed and laid 
open to reveal its internal anatomy (head end is to the left). The bronchial 
airway (B) opens into the lung where the internal air pockets (faveoli) are 
seen. Three-dimensionally, the faveoli (F) form a thickness of highly 
vascular red tissue comprising the wall of the lung. The density of blood 
capillaries in this tissue gives rise to its intense red color. Oxygen and 
CO 2 are exchanged between the blood capillaries of the faveoli and the 
lung air within the faveoli, derived from the pulmonary air that is 
ventilated in and out of the lung. Photograph by John Roberts.  
 
 
 Figure 6.5.    A schematic diagram of a snake showing the major blood vessels in two regions of the body. The arrangement of internal anatomy 
is based on that of a rat snake ( Elaphe or  Pantherophis spp.), which has a relatively anterior position of the heart. The ventricle, liver, and 
kidneys are shown in black; the atria are stippled; and the vascular lung is crosshatched. The blood vessel abbreviations are  ca , carotid artery; 
 da , dorsal aorta;  icv , inferior caval vein;  jv , jugular vein;  hpv , hepatic portal vein;  laa , left aortic arch;  pa , pulmonary artery;  pv , pulmonary vein; 
 raa , right aortic arch;  va , vertebral artery;  vv , vertebral vein. Redrawn by the author after ﬁ g. 1 in J. A. Donald and H. B. Lillywhite, Adrenergic 
innervation of the large arteries and veins of the semiarboreal rat snake  Elaphe obsoleta ,  Journal of Morphology 198:25–31, 1988. 

Internal Transport  |  147 
bound together by common elements of fi brous fascia. 
Eventually the pulmonary artery divides in variable pat-
terns in diff erent taxa, but there is usually a single 
prominent branch, or two branches that course in opposite 
directions away from the heart. In most species the ante-
rior branch is the predominant and longest pulmonary 
vessel, which services a vascular lung that is near the heart 
(see below). 
 Blood from the lung is returned to the heart in one or 
more pulmonary veins, and the pulmonary drainage paral-
lels the pulmonary arterial system. Pulmonary venous 
blood returns from the lung to the left atrium. Anterior 
drainage from tissues other than the lung returns to the 
heart in usually two jugular veins, one being dominant (the 
right) or the two joining to form a superior caval vein that 
conveys blood to the right atrium ( fi g.  6.5 ). Th e inferior 
caval vein originates from two renal veins in addition to a 
hepatic portal vein and numerous parietal veins, returning 
blood to the heart from the posterior body cavity. Th e por-
tal vein branches profusely within the liver but also conveys 
blood directly to the inferior caval vein. Variable portions of 
the portal vein may show a “corkscrew” confi guration at the 
level of the liver and immediately posterior to it in terres-
trial taxa of snakes ( fi g.  6.6 ). Th is structure conceivably acts 
as a bidirectional valve and prevents gravitational surges of 
large volumes of blood that is associated with the liver and 
vessel lumen. Th e inferior caval vein and the hepatic portal 
vein run parallel in close proximity posterior to the liver. 
 Snakes have an extensive system of lymphatic vessels, 
which often parallel the blood vessels as perivascular lym-
phatics. Major arteries, for example, might be surrounded by 
a sleeve of fl uid that fl ows in the lymphatic vessel surrounding 
the artery. Th e  lymphatic fl uid (also called  lymph ) that fi lls 
these vessels resembles blood plasma and is derived from ex-
cess fi ltration of fl uid at the capillaries. Th is fl uid eventually 
merges with the venous system, where it is returned to the 
heart and recirculated in blood. Th e lymphatic vessels of 
snakes are fascinating in their structural complexity but have 
not been well studied.    
 Properties of Blood  
 Blood Volume 
 Th e volume of blood contained in the circulation is an im-
portant parameter that is, of course, essential for ade-
quate pressure and flow in the vascular distribution 
system. Circulating blood volumes have been measured in 
a few species of snakes and generally correspond to about 
6 percent of the body mass. File snakes ( Acrochordus spp.) 
may have blood volumes about twice this amount, and the 
extra volume is thought to improve the storage of oxygen 
and thereby prolong the diving times in tropical waters 
where this species lives (see below). Measurements of fl uid 
movements between blood vessels and the surrounding 
interstitial fl uids have been evaluated in some snakes and 
suggest that capillary permeability is relatively great. 
Th erefore, plasma can move relatively freely across capil-
lary walls, and the blood volume is potentially labile. For 
example, interstitial fl uid moves into the blood compart-
ment when there are losses of blood due to hemorrhage, 
whereas activity such as locomotion may fi lter blood in the 
opposite direction and transiently reduce the blood vol-
ume (as much as 17 to 22 percent in some rattlesnakes). 
 
 
 Figure 6.6.    Corkscrew structure of the portal 
vein in a Florida Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon 
piscivorus ). The corkscrew turns of this 
segment of portal vein can be seen in the 
central part of the photograph, adjacent to the 
posterior aspect of the liver. The posterior 
direction (toward the tail) is to the right in the 
illustration, indicated by the arrow in the 
 inset . The inset is a schematic illustration of 
how “damming” of blood movement can occur 
hypothetically if there is retrograde (reversed 
and wrong direction) ﬂ ow in the vein, e.g., 
through a gravitational surge of blood. The 
damming effect is seen in the lower part of the 
inset where blood (dark stippling) collects at 
one of the turns of the “corkscrew,” which 
collapses on itself because of pressure of the 
surging blood. The direction of normal blood 
ﬂ ow, returning to the heart, is from right to left. 
Photograph and drawing by the author. 

 148  | How Snakes Work
Although the circulating blood volume may be subject to 
transient disturbance, this important parameter is, in 
fact, well regulated over time. Th e lymphatic system may 
also provide an important reservoir of fl uid that might 
contribute to the regulation of blood volume, as is the case 
in amphibians.    
 Blood Oxygen Capacity 
 Th e amount of oxygen that is present in the blood is re-
lated to the absolute volume of blood, and to the amount 
of circulating red blood cells with their characteristic con-
tent of hemoglobin. Considering somewhat sparse data 
that are available for snakes, the amounts of red blood 
cells and oxygen that are present in the blood are gener-
ally similar to that in other reptiles.  Hematocrit values, 
which represent the volume of red cells per unit of blood 
volume, generally range between 20 and 30 percent with 
marine species representing the higher values. Exception-
ally high values (around 50 percent) have been reported in 
marine fi le snakes. Maximum oxygen capacity is around 
10 vol% (which indicates the volume of oxygen per unit 
volume of whole blood, expressed as a percentage). Again, 
fi le snakes ( Acrochordus ) exhibit higher values that are 
thought to be important for the storage of oxygen in rela-
tion to diving. 
 Th e molecular properties of hemoglobin are also im-
portant and determine its affi  nity for oxygen at a given 
pressure of oxygen to which the blood is exposed. Typi-
cally, hemoglobin binds oxygen in adequate amounts to 
saturate its binding sites at normal atmospheric pres-
sures of oxygen in the air that is breathed into the lungs 
by snakes and other air-breathing vertebrates. Diving 
aquatic snakes may have hemoglobin with slightly greater 
oxygen affi  nity because of the requirement for extracting 
oxygen from lung air that becomes relatively depleted 
of oxygen (which reduces the oxygen pressure propor-
tionately) during the time underwater when the snake is 
not bre athing atmospheric air and the lung becomes es-
sentially a “closed system.” Diff erences in oxygen affi  nity 
of hemoglobin might also be related to diff erences in 
levels of behavioral activities, or other factors that are 
not yet well studied. 
 Th e blood properties of snakes can vary substantially 
with temperature, ontogeny, nutrition, and activity. Th e 
amount of data is limited for snakes, and the signifi cance of 
all the variation that has been observed has not been fully 
evaluated. We may conclude however—with some measure 
of caution—that the transport of respiratory gases is max-
imal or “optimal” in supporting activities at preferred body 
temperatures in characteristic environments in which a 
given species has evolved. Th is appears to be generally true 
in a variety of ectothermic vertebrates. 
 Hemodynamics: The Physics of Flow in the 
Vascular Fluid System  
 Th e transport function of the blood circulation requires 
that fl uid moves at appropriate rates throughout the body, 
and this depends on the pumping action of the heart and 
the nature of the vessels that distribute blood from the 
arteries to capillaries. Th ere must also be suffi  cient fl ow in 
the venous system so that blood returns to the heart for 
further pumping. Th e distributing vessel system, especially 
the smaller arterioles and capillaries, presents a certain re-
sistance to the fl ow of the blood, and the quantitative ex-
pression of this resistance is called  peripheral resistance . Th e 
resistance depends on the geometry of the vascular system, 
especially the diameter of the distributing vessels. Smaller 
diameter vessels present a greater resistance to fl ow than 
do larger diameter vessels. Th us, most of the resistance to 
blood fl ow occurs in the  microvasculature , which includes 
the smaller arterioles and capillaries. 
 Th e viscosity of the blood is another parameter infl u-
encing the resistance to blood fl ow. In essence, this refers to 
the interaction of the vascular geometry with the viscosity 
of the fl owing fl uid that determines how well the blood 
moves. Frictional interactions between concentric layers of 
blood moving past each other vary with the velocity of 
movement and the size and length of the vessels. Th e na-
ture of the blood also is important. Th e viscosity of blood is 
greatly increased over that of water by the presence of red 
blood cells, which also have frictional interactions with the 
surrounding blood plasma and especially suspended pro-
teins that have “sticky” qualities when contacting the outer 
walls or membranes of the red blood cells. Th e greater the 
number of red blood cells the greater the viscosity of the 
blood relative to water. 
 Th e muscular contraction of the heart’s ventricle cre-
ates pressure in the blood that is contained within it. Th is 
pressure adds energy to the blood, which imparts motion 
and powers its circulation. Because of the heart’s pumping 
action, the energy content of blood is highest in the arte-
rial outfl ow tracts and is dissipated during fl ow in over-
coming the peripheral resistance. Th us, there is a gradient 
of energy from the heart to the capillaries, and on to the 
veins, which induces fl ow. Blood pressures in the veins are 
very low, nearly zero, and the heart reenergizes the blood 
to produce continued fl ow into the arteries. Th is system is 
somewhat analogous to the continuous movement of 
water through a fountain, as example one that sprays 
water in an upward stream that falls into a quiet pool be-
low. Th e spout of water fl ow at the fountain is powered by 
a pump that pressurizes the water. Th e water in the pool is 
relatively still and fl ows at low energy level back to the 
pump where it is again pressurized and sprayed into the air 
against gravity. 

Internal Transport  |  149 
 Th e parameter of foremost physiological importance in 
the snake’s circulatory system is the actual  fl ow  of blood, 
which is of course necessary for the transport of materials 
around the body. Th e related parameter that energizes the 
fl ow is the blood  pressure , and this is what a physician usu-
ally measures as an indicator of the overall health and 
well-being of a person’s blood circulation. Th e pumping 
action of the heart produces repetitive “pulses” of arterial 
pressure that vary from a systolic high (related to ventric-
ular contraction) to a diastolic low (when the ventricular 
muscle is relaxed and the heart chambers are refi lling 
with blood). Th us, in a human, the arterial systolic pres-
sure is around 120 mm Hg and the diastolic pressure is 
around 80 mm Hg, giving a geometric mean of about 
100 mm Hg. Th e mean value and the diff erence between 
systolic and diastolic pressures are related to the  heart 
rate (frequency of heart contractions) and the level of pe-
ripheral resistance in the blood vessels. Mean levels of 
systemic arterial blood pressure in snakes typically vary 
from lows of 20–30 mm Hg to highs of 50–80 mm Hg in 
various species. Pulmonary arterial pressures run lower at 
about 15–30 mm Hg (see below). Venous blood pressures 
in both systemic and pulmonary circuits are very low, ap-
proaching zero, except when the vessels are compressed 
by the body during activities such as locomotion, climb-
ing, constricting prey, and so on. External compression of 
the veins produces transient increases of pressure inde-
pendent of the action of the heart and the levels of blood 
pressure in the arteries. 
 Although there are mechanisms that ensure that re-
gional or local blood fl ow rates are adequate for the needs of 
the tissue, the overall ability of the central circulation to 
provision these collective fl ows is related to the regulation 
of the central arterial blood pressure. Th e principal deter-
minants of the arterial blood pressure are the ventricular 
outfl ow of blood (called  cardiac output ) and the level of pe-
ripheral resistance. Both of these parameters are regulated 
principally by the nervous system, with lesser but impor-
tant controls exerted by circulating hormones and the in-
fl uence of tissue metabolites and chemicals that act locally 
on the smooth muscle of the blood vessels. 
 Th e cardiac output is determined by the rate and st-
rength of the heart contractions, which are driven pri-
marily by the infl uence of chemicals called  catecholamines . 
Th ese are released from nerve endings (as “neurotransmit-
ters”) at the heart muscle and may also be circulating as 
hormones derived from the medullary (deeper, internal) 
portion of the adrenal glands. Th e familiar catecholamines 
are known as  epinephrine and  norepinephrine , which are 
chemically very similar both in structure and actions. Th ese 
same catecholamines also act at nerve endings in the walls 
of the blood vessels, especially arterioles, to infl uence the 
state of constriction of the smooth muscle. Circulating cate-
cholamines have similar eff ects, and mostly these cause con-
striction of the smooth muscle (called  vasoconstriction ), but 
they may also cause dilation or relaxation of the smooth 
muscle (called  vasodilation ) in certain parts of the vasculature. 
 Acetylcholine is another chemical that is released from nerve 
endings at the heart and causes slowing of the heart rate. 
Generally, the heart rate is determined by a balance or a 
“push-pull” action between acetylcholine and catecholamines. 
 How do the nerve endings and adrenal medulla know 
when and how much of these regulatory substances to 
secrete? Regulation is accomplished by a feedback system 
of information involving sensitive structures called  baro-
receptors that monitor the moment-to-moment changes 
in arterial blood pressure. The baroreceptors are actually 
a discrete collection of nerve endings located in the walls 
of central arterial outflow vessels, especially the base of 
the pulmonary artery and possibly the carotid artery. 
These are sensitive to stretch, which indirectly monitors 
the blood pressure. Increasing pressure tends to stretch 
the vessel wall slightly, and a decrease in pressure has the 
opposite effect. Information from these nerve endings is 
sent via nerve signals (“impulses” or “action potentials”) 
to the central nervous system and interacts with other 
nerves in the brain to direct an outflow of nerve signals 
to modify the release of chemicals from nerve endings at 
the heart, peripheral blood vessels, and the adrenal 
medulla. So, as an example, a decrease in blood pressure 
reduces the stretch of baroreceptors, which then send 
signals to the brain, where integration results in in-
creased signaling from the nerves that release catechol-
amines at the heart, blood vessels, and adrenal medulla. 
Simultaneously, the integration also decreases the re-
lease of acetylcholine from other nerve endings that are 
acting on the heart. The result is an increase in the rate 
and strength of the heartbeat, which increases the car-
diac output, and a simultaneous increase in peripheral 
resistance due to vasoconstriction of peripheral vessels. 
These actions collectively tend to restore (increase) the 
arterial pressure. Alternatively, any transient increase of 
arterial pressure (above normal) produces the opposite 
effects. 
 Th ere are undoubtedly multiple baroreceptors associ-
ated with the central blood vessels near the heart. In mam-
mals, stretch-sensitive receptors are located in the aortic 
arch, the carotid artery, heart muscle, and major veins. 
Many of the blood vessels, including veins, can be to some 
degree stretch-sensitive in relation to the monitoring of 
blood pressure. Th e situation is probably similar in snakes, 
but these various receptors involved in the regulation of 
blood pressure have not been well studied in this group of 
vertebrates. 

 150  | How Snakes Work
 Gravity and Blood Circulation: Putting 
It All Together  
 Gravity’s Challenge 
 Gravity has an important influence on blood circulation 
that is potentially expressed in animals that are espe-
cially long or tall with upright posture. According to the 
third “law of Pascal,” fluid pressure increases with depth 
in any fluid column ( fig.  6.7 ). Such pressure is indepen-
dent of any other force, such as heart pumping that pres-
surizes the fluid, and is called  gravitational pressure or, 
more commonly,  hydrostatic pressure . It also follows that 
the pressure increase at the bottom of a fluid column de-
pends on the height of the column, and therefore the 
gradient of pressure (attributable to gravity) from top to 
bottom of a column depends on its height. The pressure 
also increases from top to bottom of a fluid column that 
is tilted at an angle and not necessarily fully vertical. The 
increased pressure at the bottom of the column depends 
on both the length of the fluid column and its angle of 
tilt. More specifically, the increased pressure at the 
bottom of any fluid column is dependent on the absolute 
height of the column. If a fluid column such as a blood 
vessel is turned from horizontal to vertical, the pressure 
decreases at the top of the column and increases at the 
bottom. There is a point or level near the center of the 
fluid column where the pressure necessarily does not 
change, and this is called the  hydrostatic indifferent point . 
Importantly, these changes in pressure within a fluid 
column attributable to gravity occur whether the fluid is 
stagnant or is circulating, as in the blood vessels of a 
living animal. 
 Snakes are excellent model animals for studies of gravi-
tational eff ects on blood circulation owing to their elongate 
body form and diversity of behaviors and habitats. At one 
extreme, arboreal or scansorial (climbing) species of snakes 
at times adopt fully upright postures when the blood ves-
sels become long fl uid columns with gradients of gravita-
tional pressures related to the absolute height of the blood 
column. Th e ambient pressure is atmospheric, or by con-
ventional reference zero, so the fl uid pressures in vessels 
push outward on the vessel walls and tend to distend them. 
At another extreme, fully aquatic snakes 
exist in a fl uid medium in which vertical 
gradients of gravitational pressure in 
water counteract the nearly identical gra-
dients in a snake’s blood circulation 
owing to the near match of fl uid density 
between blood and water. Th us, gravita-
tional fl uid pressures in the blood vessels 
are almost exactly counterbalanced by 
the external water pressures (which act 
across the body tissues) and there is no 
tendency for the gravitational blood 
pressures to distend vessels ( fi g.  6.7 ). 
Consequently, selection pressures for 
cardiovascular adaptations to counteract 
gravity are eff ectively not present in the 
aquatic medium in which fully aquatic 
forms have spent much of their evolu-
tionary history ( fi g.  6.8 ). 
 Gravity challenges the circulation pri-
marily in two ways. First, when the body 
is upright, the heart must pump against 
the pressure at the base of the arterial 
column between the heart and head. In 
animals like giraff es, long snakes, and 
perhaps certain longer-necked prehis-
toric dinosaurs this pressure can be con-
siderable. More specifi cally, the ventricle 
must produce a pressure that exceeds the 
pressure at the point of outfl ow into the 
 
 
 Figure 6.7.    Schematic drawing to illustrate the effects of pressure on a liquid such as 
blood that is held within a vessel, for example, a vein. The magnitude of pressure is 
indicated by the width of the arrows. Pressure increases with depth in any column of 
liquid. If the vessel containing liquid is in water, the external pressure is nearly equal to 
that of the blood within the vessel at any point of depth in the liquid column, so the 
pressures (P) acting on opposite sides of the wall of the vessel are essentially equal and 
cancel each other ( left-hand ﬁ gure). If the vessel is in air, however, the ambient pressure 
outside the vessel is everywhere atmospheric (zero by convention), whereas the pressure 
in the blood inside the vessel increases with depth according to the Law of Pascal. 
(Pressure also increases with depth in a column of air, but the effect is negligible at this 
scale because of the lesser density of air compared with water.) Therefore, in the case of 
a vessel in air ( right-hand ﬁ gure), the net pressure acting across the wall of the vessel 
(inside to outside) increases with depth in the vessel. This net increase in transmural 
(across the wall) pressure causes the vessel to distend in its lower part and creates a 
condition called “blood pooling.” See text for further explanation. Drawing by the author.  

Internal Transport  |  151 
arterial column above the heart in order to promote fl ow. 
Such pressure should exceed the gravitational pressure by a 
considerable factor if there is to be suffi  cient pressure at the 
head to perfuse the cranial blood vessels. Moreover, these 
pressures should be positive because if the blood pressure 
falls to zero or becomes negative anywhere along the arte-
rial branches, the vessel will collapse because of greater ex-
ternal pressure acting on the vessel wall. Again, there would 
be no fl ow of blood in this circumstance. Th erefore, blood 
fl ow into the head and brain becomes a challenge for long 
snakes that climb with the head up. 
 Th e second challenge to blood circulation from gravity is 
the tendency for pressures to increase in blood vessels be-
low the heart, especially at the feet and lower legs of terres-
trial tetrapods and near the tail or caudal end of an elongate 
snake. Th ese pressures can cause excess fi ltration of blood 
plasma at capillaries, thereby producing edema and swelling 
in tissues, and may also cause blood to “pool” in vessels that 
are especially distensible or compliant, particularly veins 
( fi g.  6.7 ). Th e tendency for blood to pool in these lower ves-
sels reduces the rate at which venous blood returns to the 
heart, which in turn diminishes ventricular fi lling and car-
diac output. Under this scenario, severe or even moderate 
blood pooling can reduce the cardiac output suffi  ciently to 
lower the arterial pressure.    
 Snakes, Posture, and Gravity 
 Gravity clearly poses a challenge to three-dimensional uses 
of terrestrial habitats by long snakes. Th e problem is dimin-
ished or goes away in two circumstances. First, completely 
aquatic snakes are immune to the gravitational disturbance 
of blood circulation because of the stabilizing eff ects of ex-
ternal hydrostatic pressures that match the intravascular 
gradients of gravitational pressure during postural changes 
(see above). Second, relatively short species of snakes 
(< about one meter) experience little problem during ver-
tical postures because of the limited length of blood col-
umns and, therefore, limited gradients of gravitational 
pressure. However, for many terrestrial species of snake 
that utilize vertical dimensions of habitat, gravity poten-
tially challenges the capacities of snakes to regulate arterial 
blood pressure and to maintain adequate blood fl ow to the 
head and other critical organs. 
 Many terrestrial species of snakes, and especially those 
that climb, have evolved marvelous defenses that guard 
against gravity’s eff ect on blood circulation. Semiarboreal 
colubrid (especially rat snakes, genus  Elaphe or  Panthero-
phis ) and elapid snakes have demonstrated abilities to regu-
late arterial blood pressure and to maintain adequate blood 
fl ow to the head during head-up postures. In some individ-
uals, the precision of such regulation is excellent, and ca-
rotid blood fl ow remains at usual levels even when the body 
is fully vertical. Note that the carotid artery is the principal 
route of blood fl ow to the head of snakes. Th e cardiovascu-
lar “performance” of various scansorial species is con sistent 
with a suite of physiological and morphological characteris-
tics that evidently coevolved to counteract gravitational 
forces acting on the circulation, and these are quite similar 
to comparable adaptations that have been studied in hu-
mans and other mammals. 
 
 
 Figure 6.8.    Views of two aquatic snakes 
illustrating the effects of gravity on internal body 
ﬂ uids. In the photo on the  left , Arne Rasmussen 
holds a sea krait ( Laticauda colubrina ) vertically in 
seawater, and there is no evidence for blood 
pooling in this individual. In the photo at the 
 right , Warren Watkins holds an aquatic ﬁ le snake 
( Acrochordus granulatus ) vertically outside of 
water. One can easily see the distension of the 
lower body, which is due to body ﬂ uids—
especially blood—“pooling” in response to gravity. 
A part of the distension is probably attributable 
also to sagging of viscera. Compare these 
photographs with the illustration in  ﬁ g.  6.7 . The 
photo at the left was taken by Erik Frausing in 
Sulawesi. The photo at the right was taken by the 
author on the Embley River, Cape York Peninsula, 
Australia. 

 152  | How Snakes Work
 The arsenal of adaptive traits that counteract gravity’s 
effect on blood circulation include morphological, physi-
ological, and behavioral attributes ( fig.  6.9  ). Morpholog-
ical traits include anterior location of the heart, which 
can be as close as 11–12 percent of body length to the 
head, and relatively “tight” tissues that surround blood 
vessels and counteract the tendencies to blood pooling, 
especially in lower body veins. The tight nature of the tis-
sues includes properties of the skin and body wall as well 
as the tissue spaces immediately surrounding certain 
vessels (for example, in the tail). The position of the 
heart close to the head shortens the gravitational column 
(pressure) against which the heart must work during 
head-up posture and tends to ensure adequate perfusion 
of head and brain tissues at all angles of body attitude. 
Such heart position, of course, increases the problem 
when the snake is in a head-down position. However, 
perfusion of the tail and lower body is less important 
than is the adequate and uninterrupted perfusion of the 
brain. It is interesting to think about the evolutionary 
migration of the heart in different taxa of snakes, which 
might not be possible in some other tetrapods in which 
the heart is constrained to a thoracic cavity that is 
 surrounded by rigid vertebrae and ribs. 
 In contrast with scansorial terrestrial species of snakes, 
fully aquatic species such as file snakes and sea snakes 
 exhibit generally looser tissues surrounding blood vessels 
and a more central position of the heart (generally 30–45 
percent of total body length from the head). Other things 
equal, a central heart location is energetically more effi  cient 
with respect to pumping of blood throughout the entire 
elongated animal. Th us, natural selection probably favors a 
central location in circumstances where gravity’s infl uence 
is reduced. Th e variation in heart position among species of 
snakes is quite likely related to the extent of time that an-
cestral species have been subjected to selection forces asso-
ciated with particular habitats. Of course, other factors 
such as the size of prey and feeding habits might also infl u-
ence heart position in snakes. 
 Roger Seymour and I demonstrated that the mean (resting) 
arterial blood pressure ranges from higher (50 to 70 mm Hg) 
to lower (20 to 30 mm Hg) in species of snakes ranging from 
 
 
 Figure 6.9.    Schematic features of snakes that counteract gravity disturbance to blood circulation.  Upper drawing  features a sea snake that is 
characterized by an elongate  vascular lung and a relatively short  saccular lung segment. The  middle drawing  features a ground-dwelling 
rattlesnake that has a comparatively central heart position (with respect to length) and an elongate  tracheal lung . The saccular segment of lung is 
relatively short, but less so than in the sea snake. The  lower drawing  features a semiarboreal rat snake that has a relatively anterior heart and a 
very short vascular lung that is located near the heart. The saccular lung comprises a relatively elongate segment of the lung structure. The rat 
snake is relatively more slender than the other snakes and has comparatively “tight” tissues surrounding blood vessels, in addition to superior 
nervous control of vessel constriction compared with the other snakes (these features not shown). Drawing by Dan Dourson, after ﬁ g. 6 in 
H. B. Lillywhite, Circulatory adaptations of snakes to gravity,  American Zoologist  27:81–95, 1987.  

Internal Transport  |  153 
scansorial to aquatic in behaviors. Also, regulation of arterial 
pressure is much tighter in the arboreal/scansorial species. Fi-
nally, mean arterial pressures in terrestrial snakes increases in 
exact proportion to the distance between the heart and head. 
 Structure and Function of the Ophidian Lung  
  Like other vertebrates, snakes possess a lung that is used for 
exchange of respiratory gases between the animal’s blood 
circulation and the outside aerial atmosphere. Air is breathed 
in and out of the system by means of nostrils, or nasal open-
ings, which are paired and referred to as external  nares (sin-
gular is  naris ). Some species such as sea snakes possess nasal 
valves in the nostril consisting of erectile tissue ( fi g.  6.10 ). 
Th e nasal passages communicate with the roof of the phar-
ynx, from whence air passes into the trachea via the glottis 
when the jaws are normally closed. (A glottis with the mouth 
open can be seen in  fi g.  8.5 .) Th e trachea communicates with 
the bronchial airway and remainder of the lung as a tubular 
air-conducting system (see bronchial airway in  fi g.  6.4 ).   
 Th e lung proper is shaped somewhat like a spindle and 
has a voluminous central space (lumen) that is free of tissue 
( fi g.  6.11 ). Th e inner surfaces are lined by a very thin layer of 
tissue, or  parenchyma , that is typically less than 3 or 4 mm 
in thickness. Fundamentally, the lung can be divided into 
two functionally diff erent regions: the “respiratory” seg-
ment consists of highly vascularized exchange tissue, here-
after referred to as  vascular lung , and in most cases there is 
also a simple extension of fl at, thin epithelium known as 
the  saccular lung . Th e vascular lung, including sometimes 
tracheal segments, is the region of the lung that functions 
in respiratory gas exchange (O 2 and CO 2 ), whereas the 
 
 
 Figure 6.10.   Views looking down on the snout of sea snakes, illustrating narial valves just inside the nostrils. The 
 upper left photograph shows the narial valves in a Little File Snake ( Acrochordus granulatus ) photographed by the 
author in Queensland, Australia. Note the ﬂ eshy valves come together in a vertical plane. The  upper right photograph 
shows the closed ﬂ eshy valves in a Shaw’s Sea Snake ( Lapemis curtus ) photographed by the author in Queensland, 
Australia. The  lower photographs illustrate a Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) breathing naturally outside 
water. The photos capture the narial valves open (left) during inhalation of air and closed (right) during pauses between 
breaths. This specimen was photographed in Costa Rica by Coleman M. Sheehy III.  

 154  | How Snakes Work
 saccular lung receives only a nutritive blood supply and 
does not function in gas exchange ( fi gs.  6.9 ,  6.12 ). 
 Of the internal viscera of snakes, the lung is perhaps the 
most variable in size and complexity. Unlike other verte-
brates having symmetrically paired lungs, the left lung is 
greatly reduced or vestigial in most species of snakes, and 
the right lung becomes elongated as the prominent single 
functional lung that is evident to the observer. In various 
species, including both primitive and advanced taxa, the 
left lung has been lost entirely. When present, the length of 
 
 
 Figure 6.11.   Histological cross-section through the lung of a king snake ( Lampropeltis getula ). The bronchial 
conducting airway is continuous with the central lumen, which opens into numerous faveoli. The bronchial airway 
has walls that are stiffer than the other lung structure, and comprised of cartilage (dense blue tissue, c). Adjacent 
faveoli are separated by a connective tissue septum, and the luminal end of each septum contains a bundle of 
smooth muscle. The histological stain is H & E. Microphotograph by Elliott Jacobson.  
 
 
 Figure 6.12.    Ventral view of the anterior 
coelomic cavity featuring segments of the right 
(dominant) lung in a Diamond Python ( Morelia 
spilota spilota ). The respiratory segment of the 
lung, termed the  vascular lung , is adjacent to the 
esophagus and near the liver. The vascular lung 
is red because of the numerous blood capillaries 
involved in gas exchange. Note that the vascular 
lung gradually transitions to the  saccular lung , in 
which three-dimensional  faveoli are lacking and 
there are no blood vessels involved in gas 
exchange. Individual and increasingly shallow 
faveoli are seen in the region of transition in the 
center of the photograph. The head and the heart 
of this snake are to the left in the illustration. 
Photograph by Elliott Jacobson.  

Internal Transport  |  155 
the left lung varies from 1 to 31 percent of snout-vent 
length, whereas the length of the right lung varies from 8 to 
82 percent of snout-vent length. Only in some primitive 
snakes (e.g., xenopeltids and boids) do the lungs function 
as paired structures. A nice summary of quantitative mea-
surements of ophidian lungs has been published by Van 
Wallach in the  Biology of the Reptilia series. 
 With the exception of certain aquatic snakes (see below), 
the vascular lung in the majority of species is best devel-
oped near the heart, often beginning at or just anterior to 
the heart or ventricle, and extending for variable distances 
in a posterior direction. Additionally, members of about 
half of living snake families possesses a  tracheal lung , which 
functions as the principal gas exchange organ in the region 
anterior to the lung. Th is is especially prominent in viperid 
species of snakes ( fi gs.  6.9 ,  6.13 ). 
 Th e lungs of snakes are generally cigar-shaped (fusiform) 
and have an elongated central lumen that is arranged as a 
single longitudinal unit. One exception to this structure is 
the lung of the aquatic fi le snakes,  Acrochordus spp., which 
consists of either two or four longitudinal lungs that are 
fused into a single organ having two or four corresponding 
air chambers in transverse sections. In all snakes the entire 
lung is attached to the body wall or associated membranes 
and is surrounded by other viscera. Th e internal surfaces 
are lined with a thin layer or vascularized tissue (vascular 
segment) and thin, membranous tissue (saccular segment). 
Th e total length of the lung can be somewhat short (e.g., 16 
percent of total body length in  Uropeltis ), or extremely long 
(94 percent of total body length in  Acrochordus granulatus ). 
Th e lung volume can be very large and represents from 30–
53 percent of the body volume in some European vipers. 
When snakes are engaged in defensive displays with the 
lung fully infl ated, these percentages are no doubt even 
larger but have not been measured. Obviously, the lung vol-
ume at any time varies considerably with the ventilatory 
status of the snake, and aquatic species adjust the volume 
to regulate buoyancy at various depths ( fi g.  6.14 ). 
 Respiratory gases are exchanged between the pulmo-
nary blood and ventilated air across the thin, vascular-
ized parenchyma of the vascular lung. Th e parenchyma is 
variously sculptured in diff erent species to increase the 
area of exchange surfaces. Th e structural elaboration of 
parenchymal surfaces varies from a single layer of low re-
lief trabeculae, or pockets, that lie in a polygonal pattern 
on the lung wall to a multilayered honeycomb-appearing 
structure consisting of raised walls or septa that form cu-
bicles or compartments that may be deeper than wide 
( fi gs.  6.4 ,  6.11 ,  6.13 ). Th ese structures are somewhat sim-
ilar to the alveoli present in mammalian lungs, except the 
parenchymal units in snakes are not homologous struc-
tures and are termed  faveoli  (singular  faveolus ) because 
they resemble a honeycomb. Th e faveolar parenchyma of 
snakes is highly variable and may exhibit up to four levels 
of subdividing walls or septa ( fi gs.  6.4 ,  6.11 ). Th e septa 
separating individual faveoli contain capillaries on both 
sides and are supported by connective tissue with col-
lagen and elastin fi bers. Th e diameters of individual fa-
veoli typically vary from a fraction of a millimeter to 
several mm (e.g., 7 mm in the viperids  Atheris and  Cau-
sus ). Th e faveolar parenchyma of the vascular lung is var-
iable within individuals as well as among species. It is 
most deeply partitioned near the heart and more sparsely 
 
 
 Figure 6.13.   Ventral view of the tracheal lung of a Florida 
Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ). A cut in the lung 
reveals the inner aspect featuring partly collapsed  faveoli (F) and the 
cartilaginous  trachea (T) above. The lumen of the trachea and the 
lung are continuous, and the vascular lung shown here expands 
outward during normal breathing by the snake. Photographed in 
Florida by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 6.14.   Streams of air bubbles can be seen rising from the 
nostrils of a Chinese Sea Krait ( Laticauda semifasciata ). This snake is 
adjusting its buoyancy by exhaling air after it submerged in a tank of 
seawater. Photographed by the author in Taiwan. 

 156  | How Snakes Work
partitioned with increasingly shallow depressions or 
pockets posteriorly where the vascular lung transitions 
to saccular lung ( fi g.  6.12  ).   
 Lung Ventilation: How Do Snakes Breathe? 
 Th e lungs of reptiles, including snakes, are fi lled by a mech-
anism that involves aspiration of air into the lungs. Th e 
lungs are expanded by muscular eff ort, and this creates a 
negative pressure with respect to atmospheric pressure 
around the animal. Th us, air moves in response to a pres-
sure gradient from outside to inside during the infl ow phase 
of the breathing cycle, called  inspiration . Th e opposite out-
fl ow of air, or  expiration , is attributable to passive elastic 
recoil of the stretched lung and surrounding tissues, in ad-
dition to ventilatory muscles that help to squeeze the lung 
and thereby assist the expulsion of air. Gravity may also as-
sist the passive component of expiration by creating a 
downward force on the expanded ribs and elevated body. 
Paired ribs surround the internal organs, including the 
lung, and run the length of the body cavity in snakes. Inter-
costal muscles between adjacent ribs act to move the ribs 
forward and outward, thereby expanding the lung and body 
wall during infl ation, while other sets of muscles pull the 
ribs inward to compress the lung space during expiration. 
 Breathing is intermittent, and the air that is inspired 
into the lung typically is held there for variable periods 
(called  apnea ) before the air is expired. Only a fraction of 
the lung air is inspired or expired in a given breath, and sev-
eral cycles of breathing are usually required to “turn over” 
the lung air completely. Th e glottis is open during inspira-
tion, allowing air to fl ow into the lung when its internal 
space expands. Following the active inspiration of air, the 
inspiratory muscles relax and the glottis is closed. Elastic 
recoil of the lung causes the lung space to compress slightly, 
but the lungs are maintained in a partly infl ated state 
during the period of apnea. After some while consisting of 
fractions of a minute or longer, the glottis is opened and air 
is expired from the lung, which empties partially and then 
expands immediately for the next cycle of infl ation. Terres-
trial snakes usually take a single breath at a time, spaced 
apart by variable apneic periods depending on the need. 
Aquatic snakes, however, typically have long apneic  periods, 
or breath-hold, while they are submerged. When these 
snakes surface to breathe, several or more breaths are 
 exchanged before the animal dives once again. 
 Respiratory Properties and Functions of Blood   
 Th e blood of snakes serves to transport oxygen from lungs 
to body tissues, and carbon dioxide from body tissues to 
lung. Th ese gases diff use freely across the thin barrier be-
tween the blood and lumen of the lung, and across the thin 
barrier between blood and cells of the various body tissues 
( fi g.  6.1 ). Th e exchanges occur within capillaries, which have 
thin and very permeable walls that are designed for such 
exchange. 
 Th e amount of respiratory gases that might dissolve 
freely in the blood plasma would not be suffi  cient to meet 
the transport needs of an active vertebrate animal such 
as a snake. Th erefore, the role of hemoglobin—carried 
within red blood cells—is very important. Once oxygen 
diff uses into the blood plasma across the capillary wall, it 
diff uses very rapidly to hemoglobin, where it attaches to 
specifi c sites. Each “molecule” of hemoglobin has four 
subunits, each with a  heme  group containing iron. Once 
oxygen attaches to one of the heme sites, the probability 
increases that the other sites will bind other oxygen mol-
ecules. When all the sites are bound on all the hemoglo-
bin molecules, the blood is said to be “saturated” with 
oxygen and exhibits its maximum transport capacity. Th e 
maximum transport of oxygen by hemoglobin is, very 
roughly, about 20 to 40 times greater than the amount 
that might be carried in simple physical solution (plasma) 
without hemoglobin. 
 Th ere are two important features of the physical envi-
ronment of hemoglobin that determine how much oxygen 
it carries and can provide for respiration. First, the ten-
dency for oxygen molecules to bind with hemoglobin de-
pends on the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood. 
Typically, oxygen binds to hemoglobin at pressures that 
occur within the ventilated lung, and the pulmonary blood 
saturates with oxygen during its passage through the vas-
cular lung parenchyma. Second, the physical diff usion of 
oxygen either from the lung air into pulmonary capillaries, 
or from systemic capillaries into respiring tissues, depends 
on the gradient of oxygen pressure. Th at is, there must be a 
diff erence of oxygen partial pressure in order for oxygen to 
diff use, and it will move from a region of higher to lower 
pressure. Th is is why lung ventilation is important, because 
it maintains the oxygen pressure closer to the ambient at-
mospheric value and thereby maximizes the pressure that 
drives diff usion into the lung capillaries. Because some of 
the oxygen is removed from the blood during its passage 
through systemic capillaries, the relatively oxygen-defi cient 
blood that is returned to the heart from tissues and sent to 
the lung for reoxygenation is at an oxygen pressure lower 
than that of the pulmonary air within the lung lumen. 
Th erefore, oxygen diff uses from the lung air into the 
 capillaries within the lung. At the other end—systemic 
 tissues—the removal of oxygen by respiring mitochondria 
within cells lowers the oxygen pressure well below that of 
the systemic blood, so now the oxygen diff uses from the 
pressure in the blood (equilibrated to atmospheric air 
within the lung) to the much lower pressure in tissues that 
act as the “sink” for the oxygen. 

Internal Transport  |  157 
 Th us, there are two competing processes that occur in the 
lung with respect to oxygen: diff usion into blood tends to 
lower the oxygen pressure, and renewal of oxygen by ventila-
tion tends to elevate the oxygen pressure. Th e actual oxygen 
pressure in the lumen of the lung at any given time depends on 
the balance between these two opposing processes ( fi g.  6.15 ). 
 It is important to realize that the oxygen that binds to 
sites on hemoglobin does not contribute to the blood levels 
of oxygen pressure. Th us, the oxygen pressure is deter-
mined by the amount of free oxygen in the blood plasma 
immediately surrounding the hemoglobin. At any given 
level of this pressure, the hemoglobin saturates to the ex-
tent determined by its binding properties in relation to the 
oxygen pressure. 
 Like other vertebrates, the hemoglobins of various spe-
cies of snakes are adapted to load and deliver oxygen ac-
cording to evolved properties that are appropriate for the 
gaseous environment, rate of metabolism, and the activity 
regimen of the animal, but these have been studied in but a 
few species of snakes. Th e blood of fi le snakes ( Acrochordus 
spp.) is unusual because of their generally sluggish behav-
ior, comparatively low rates of metabolism, and especially 
their tendency to be reclusive—probably to avoid possible 
predators. Th ese snakes have a comparatively large volume 
of blood, a high ratio of red blood cells (and thus hemoglo-
bin) to plasma, and possession of hemoglobin that has an 
unusually high affi  nity for oxygen and is capable of binding 
oxygen at relatively low oxygen pressures. Th ese aquatic 
snakes exchange a portion of their respiratory gases across 
the skin (8–24 percent of O 2 ; 33–76 percent of CO 2 ), so it is 
important that the hemoglobin not release its oxygen at 
low pressures that might prevail in water. Th e high affi  nity 
of the hemoglobin ensures that oxygen will be attracted 
from the aqueous environment that is near to the skin cap-
illaries as well from lung air, and that diff usion losses to 
water that might be defi cient in oxygen are minimized. In 
addition to this feature of acrochordid hemoglobin, the 
skin capillaries are associated with arterial vessels that can 
shunt blood toward or away from the skin. 
 In the case of Little File Snakes ( Acrochordus granulatus ) 
that live in the Philippines, I have measured nearly zero ox-
ygen in water within mud burrows where these snakes 
occur at the bottom of mangrove habitats. Presumably in 
these situations blood is shunted  away  from the skin to 
avoid cutaneous losses of oxygen due to diff usion from 
blood to water. On the other hand, high levels of oxygen 
pressure occur in the open waters of these mangroves espe-
cially at certain times of the day. During these times blood 
fl ow is presumably shunted  to the skin in order to capture 
oxygen from the ambient water as well as diff use away CO 2 . 
Th ese comments are speculations, and the phenomena as-
sociated with blood fl ow patterns to skin require much 
 further investigation. Sea snakes, incidentally, exchange 
higher proportions of respiratory gases across the skin, and 
they are probably subjected to higher environmental pres-
sure of oxygen than are fi le snakes living in mangroves. 
 Here we need to mention that the gaseous by-product of 
respiration, CO 2 , is transported in the blood with a reversal 
of features that have been described for oxygen. Th us, CO 2 
diff uses from respiring cells into systemic blood capillaries 
and then fl ows to the lung, where it diff uses across the vas-
cularized pulmonary parenchyma into the air of the lumen, 
from where it is ultimately ventilated away to the atmo-
sphere. Some of the CO 2 forms an attachment with hemo-
globin, but in a way that is diff erent from oxygen and in far 
lesser amounts. Th e majority of the gas becomes hydrated 
and is transported in plasma in the form of bicarbonate ion 
(HCO 3 − ). Carbon dioxide is highly soluble in water, and rel-
atively little is transported as a gas in physical solution. He-
moglobin also plays an important role in buff ering the pH 
of the blood, for acid is formed when CO 2 combines with 
water to form H + and HCO 3 − . 
 Th e control of breathing and transport of blood gases is 
driven by the need to eliminate CO 2 as much as the need to 
acquire oxygen. Also, the need to eliminate CO 2 is coupled 
to the requirement for regulating the pH of blood and other 
body tissues. Because the hydration reaction of CO 2 to form 
bicarbonate (HCO 3 − ) also produces acid (H + ), respiration 
tends to acidify the blood unless the H + is buff ered and/or 
removed from the body. Both processes occur. Hemoglobin 
and other components of the blood tend to buff er the H + , 
but over time the CO 2 being produced from metabolism 
must be eliminated or the pH will ultimately decrease to 
 
 
 Figure 6.15.   Schematic representation of oxygen transfer by 
diffusion from lung air into blood of a pulmonary capillary. The density 
of bubbles in the illustration represents the concentration and 
pressure of oxygen molecules, which are greatest where the air is 
ventilated in and out of the faveolar exchange unit (upper and left part 
of ﬁ gure) and becomes relatively depleted where oxygen diffuses into 
the blood capillary. The blood capillary carries relatively oxygen-
deﬁ cient blood returning from the body tissues (entry at left), and this 
blood becomes relatively more oxygenated as it passes through the 
lung faveolar exchange unit (center to right). Drawing by the author. 

 158  | How Snakes Work
lethal levels. Decreases in blood pH and increases in blood 
CO 2  tend to provide the more important respiratory signals 
controlling ventilation in tetrapod vertebrates, although 
diminishing levels of blood oxygen also participate. 
 Nonrespiratory Functions of the Lung 
 Th e saccular segment of lung—simply called “air sac” in ear-
lier literature—functions as a “bellow” because the volume 
expansion of the entire lung pulls air into the “sac” and this 
same air exits the lung when it is expired. Hence, the rela-
tively large volume of the saccular region of the lung helps 
to ventilate the vascular lung, in essence alternately “pull-
ing and pushing” air across it. Th e saccular region also al-
lows storage of air, in addition to that which is within the 
vascular lung. Th is means there is added storage of oxygen, 
which can be moved to the faveolar surfaces either by diff u-
sion or, more eff ectively, by convection due to body move-
ments or active contractions of smooth muscle that occurs 
in the lung wall. Th e bellows and storage functions of the 
saccular lung are, of course, indirectly related to respiration. 
 Th e storage function might be particularly important in 
aquatic or semiaquatic species of snakes because it in-
creases the time that a snake might remain submerged 
without needing to surface for breathing air. In sea snakes 
the terminal saccular segment of the lung is exceptionally 
thick and muscular ( fi g.  6.16  ), presumably important for 
storage but with capability to “inject” by muscular contrac-
tion the pressurized air into the respiratory parenchyma at 
periodic intervals. No one knows if, or how, this feature is 
actually used by sea snakes. 
 Infl ation of the total lung increases the body size of a 
snake, and extreme infl ation is typically used in many pit vi-
pers to enlarge the appearance of the body during defensive 
displays. Irritated rattlesnakes, for example, characteristi-
cally coil with an infl ated body while rattling ( fi g.  6.17 ). Also 
in connection with defense, this inhaled air can be expelled 
to produce loud hissing sounds in a variety of species (see 
 chapter  8 ). More about infl ation displays is explained in the 
next section. 
 Bayard Brattstrom is one of the fi rst of many herpetolo-
gists to have suggested there are various other functions of 
the saccular lung that are related to physiology. When 
snakes become overheated, they may begin to pant, as do 
lizards and other terrestrial vertebrates. Panting consists of 
rapid, shallow breathing that exchanges air across the moist 
membranes of the lung and its associated airways. Th is con-
vection removes water by evaporation, and in the process 
heat is also removed from the evaporating surfaces. Th is is 
called  evaporative cooling and is a mechanism employed to 
cool the body, or at least slow the rate of warming toward a 
lethal temperature. If the body has been warmed through 
accumulation of heat from solar radiation or contact with a 
warm substrate, it likely will be warmer than the sur-
rounding air. Th erefore, air that is moving in and out of the 
lung will remove heat by internal conduction and radiation 
from the body surrounding the lung as well as from evapo-
rative cooling of the lung parenchyma (largely in the ante-
rior part of the lung and associated airways such as the 
trachea). Of these phenomena, evaporative cooling is likely 
to be most signifi cant (see  fi g.  4.13 ; also  chapter  4 ). 
 Th e saccular lung might also play some role in reducing 
the temperature of the testes in male snakes. Sperm devel-
opment is sensitive to temperature, and heat-induced ste-
rility is the probable reason for the descent of the testes in 
mammals, which keeps the testes generally at temperatures 
that are lower than the core body temperature. Cooler air 
 
 
 Figure 6.16.    Muscular termination of the 
 saccular lung of a Chinese Sea Krait ( Laticauda 
semifasciata ). The white, opaque, and thick 
appearance of this organ reﬂ ects its function for 
storage, having lots of muscle and thick tissue that 
is not well vascularized for gas exchange. The 
arrow points to the termination of the  vascular lung 
that is functional with respect to gas exchange. 
The red lung tissue to the left of the arrow is the 
posterior aspect of the vascular lung, the arrow 
indicating its transition to saccular lung near the 
termination of the pulmonary artery. Above the 
lung structure an engorged portal vein can be seen 
returning systemic blood to the heart through the 
liver. Photograph by Coleman Sheehy III.  

Internal Transport  |  159 
 
 
 Figure 6.18.   Defensive posture being displayed by a Hill Death 
Adder ( Acanthophis rugosus ) in northern Queensland. The  upper 
photo shows the snake’s normal body form before ﬂ attening. The 
 lower photo shows the snake while it is ﬂ attened in defensive 
posture. Note the body is extremely ﬂ attened, likely in attempt to look 
larger to a potential predator. The color of this snake matches that of 
“red” soils characteristic of the region in which it was photographed. 
Photographs by Lauren Dibben.  
that is ventilated in the posterior saccular lung might play 
some role in the regulation of testes temperatures in 
snakes. 
 Th e entire lung including the extensive saccular segment 
in terrestrial species appears to be important in assisting 
support of the body, given that ribs are free ventrally except 
for attachment to skin and there is no sternum. When air is 
withdrawn entirely from the lung, terrestrial snakes can be-
come extremely fl attened when fully extended on a fl at sur-
face ( fi g.  6.18 ). Adjustments of the total lung volume also 
are important for the ability of sea snakes to control buoy-
ancy and orientation. Diving marine snakes have been ob-
served to vent excess air after arriving at a particular place 
in a water column (sea snakes,  fi g.  6.14 , and  Acrochordus ), or 
to adjust their vertical location (Yellow-bellied Sea Snake, 
 Pelamis platurus ) soon after submerging from a bout of air-
breathing at the water surface. Presumably, these snakes 
are adjusting buoyancy to a neutral condition that is appro-
priate for the particular depth at which they choose to re-
main or be active. 
 Structure and Function of Tracheal Air Sacs   
 More than 30 species of Asian snakes possess  tracheal air 
sacs , which are nonpulmonary, saccular extensions of the 
trachea and have been called various names including  tra-
cheal diverticula ,  neck sacs , and  tracheal chambers . Th ese are 
present in numerous colubrid snakes, especially arboreal 
species, and the King Cobra,  Ophiophagus hannah . All of the 
genera, and probably all of the species, that possess these 
structures engage in some form of extended neck display, 
and all are restricted to central and southern Asia. 
 Th e tracheal air sacs of the Asian Red-tailed Rat Snake, 
 Gonyosoma oxycephalum , are representative and illustrated 
in  fi gure  6.19 . Th ese structures are located in the ventral 
body cavity immediately below the trachea. Th ey are de-
rived from the tracheal airway, but are secondary and acces-
sory parts of the pulmonary system. Th e air sacs are thin, 
fragile, translucent, and poorly vascularized membranes. 
Th ey do not receive blood from the pulmonary artery and 
cannot have any direct signifi cant role in respiratory gas ex-
change. Each individual air sac is separated from adjoining 
neighbors by a transverse septum, and there are 11–15 sep-
arate sacs associated with the trachea and collectively ex-
tending from the head to the heart (about 16 percent of 
total body length). Th e air within each air sac communi-
cates with tracheal air by means of a foramen (hole) in the 
tracheal membrane, just above the tips of the cartilaginous 
tracheal rings ( fi g.  6.19 ). Th ere is a single foramen associ-
ated with each individual air sac. 
 Th e air sacs might be infl ated by one or a combination 
of two mechanisms. Ventral expansion of the neck might 
 
 
 Figure 6.17.   A Western Diamond-backed Rattlesnake ( Crotalus 
atrox ) in a defensive posture. The lung is abnormally inﬂ ated by the 
snake to increase its apparent size, which accounts for the spreading 
of scales to reveal the interscale tissue—most notably visible in the 
lower front of the ﬁ gure. This snake was photographed in Texas by the 
author. 

 160  | How Snakes Work
enlarge the air sacs and draw air into them under negative 
pressure. Or air might be forced into the air sacs from the 
trachea and lung, which would be a positive pressure 
mechanism. Because the air sacs can be seen to bulge 
during defensive displays ( fi g.  6.19  ), it seems likely that a 
positive mechanism is active at least in some circum-
stances. Also, the membranous air sacs are overlain by 
muscle, so there is some likelihood that contractile activity 
of these muscles exerts forces directly on the saccular 
membranes, in addition to control by adjoining lung pres-
sures or movements of the body wall. 
 There are two plausible functions of the tracheal air 
sacs of snakes. First, Bruce Young has shown experi-
mentally that these saccular structures can act as reso-
nating chambers that modify the acoustic properties of 
hissing sounds, especially in the King Cobra (see also 
 chapter  8 ). Second, the air sacs greatly enlarge the neck 
in a vertical dimension during defensive neck displays. 
In the Red-tailed Rat Snake, neck displays are easily 
evoked when snakes are disturbed, and the air sacs be-
come prominent by extreme inflation during a display 
( fig.  6.19 ). Both of these functions—sound modification 
and neck inflation—are related to defense.  
 Concluding Remark  
 Few persons probably give much thought to how the blood 
circulates within a snake and how the lung functions to as-
sist in the delivery of oxygen. Yet these are absolutely crit-
ical needs in the life of a snake, and both circulatory and 
pulmonary functions depart from the ordinary because of 
the elongate body of a snake, how it feeds, and how it 
moves. Understanding the physics of blood circulation, for 
example, can open one’s eyes to understanding some of the 
environmental constraint that infl uences the behaviors of 
snakes, and how evolutionary adaptation can be so very dif-
ferent in aquatic and terrestrial environments. Hopefully, 
the subjects discussed in this chapter will help to stimulate 
one to ponder more deeply, and to contemplate new ques-
tions, regarding the structure and function of these fasci-
nating reptiles. 
 Additional Reading  
 Brattstrom, B. H. 1959. Th e function of the air sac in snakes.  Her-
petologica 15:103–104. 
 Brischoux, F., G. E. A. Gartner, T. Garland Jr., and X. Bonnet. 2011. 
Is aquatic life correlated with an increased hematocrit in 
snakes? PLoS ONE 6(2): e17077. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0017077. 
 Burggren, W., A. Farrell, and H. Lillywhite. 1997. Vertebrate cardio-
vascular systems. In W.H. Dantzler (ed.), Handbook of Physiol-
ogy, Section 13: Comparative Physiology, Vol. I. Oxford 
University Press: New York, pp. 215–308. 
 Conklin, D. J., H. B. Lillywhite, B. Bishop, A. R. Hargens, and K. R. 
Olson. 2008. Rhythmic contractility in the hepatic portal 
“corkscrew” vein of the rat snake.  Comparative Biochemistry and 
Physiology , Part A, 152:389–397. 
 Frenkel, G., and E. Kochva. 1970. Visceral anatomy of  Vipera 
 palaestinae : An illustrated presentation.  Israel Journal of Zool-
ogy 19:145–163. 
 Graham, J. B., J. H. Gee, J. Motta, and I. Rubinoff . 1987. Subsurface 
buoyancy regulation by the sea snake  Pelamis platurus .  Physio-
logical Zoology 60:251–261. 
 
 
 Figure 6.19.   Inﬂ ation of the neck by tracheal air sacs in the arboreal 
Red-tailed Rat Snake ( Gonyosoma oxycephalum ). The  upper photo 
shows a snake with its neck inﬂ ated in a defensive display, and the 
individual air sacs can be seen as distinct bulges at the anterior 
aspect of the neck. The  middle photo illustrates a dried cast of 
several air sacs with one unit cut open to reveal the open space inside 
and its communication with an individual foramen (arrow) that 
perforates the tracheal airway. In the  lower photo the foramen and 
cartilaginous tracheal rings are seen with more detail in fresh tissue. 
The foramen or aperture opens in the tracheal membrane and is about 
3 mm in diameter. Photographs by the author. 

Internal Transport  |  161 
 Jensen, B., A. S. Abe, D. V. Andrade, J. R. Nyengaard, and T. Wang. 
2010. Th e heart of the South American Rattlesnake,  Crotalus 
durissus .  Journal of Morphology 271:1066–1077. 
 Jensen, B., J. M. Nielsen, M. Axelsson, M. Pedersen, C. Löfman, 
and T. Wang. 2010. How the python heart separates pulmonary 
and systemic blood pressures and blood fl ows.  Journal of Biol-
ogy 213:1611–1617. 
 Jensen, B., J. R. Nyengaard, M. Pedersen, and T. Wang. 2010. Anat-
omy of the python heart.  Anatomical Science International 
85:194–203. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 1985. Postural edema and blood pooling in snakes. 
 Physiological Zoology 58:759–766. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 1987. Circulatory adaptations of snakes to gravity. 
 American Zoologist 27:81–95. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 1995. Evolution of cardiovascular adaptation to 
gravity.  Journal of Gravitational Physiology 2:P1–P4. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 2005. Cardiovascular adaptations to gravity: Lessons 
from comparative studies of snakes. In A. Hargens, N. Takeda, 
and P. K. Singal (eds.),  Adaptation Biology and Medicine , vol. 4,  Cur-
rent Concepts . New Delhi, India: Narosa Publishing House, pp. 
68–81. 
 Lillywhite, H. B., J. S. Albert, C. M. Sheehy III and R. S. Seymour. 
2012. Gravity and the evolution of cardiopulmonary morphol-
ogy in snakes.  Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology  Part A 
161:230–242. 
 Lillywhite, H. B., and T. M. Ellis. 1998. Structure and function of 
tracheal air sacs in the Asian snake  Gonyosoma oxycephalum . 
 Hamadryad 23:121–126. 
 Pough, F. H., and H. B. Lillywhite. 1984. Blood volume and 
blood oxygen capacity of sea snakes.  Physiological Zoology 
57:32–39. 
 Rosenberg, H. I. 1973. Functional anatomy of pulmonary ventila-
tion in the garter snake,  Th amnophis elegans .  Journal of Mor-
phology 140:171–184. 
 Seymour, R. S. 1974. How sea snakes avoid the bends.  Nature 
250:489–490. 
 Seymour, R. S. 1982. Physiological adaptations to aquatic life. In C. 
Gans and F. H. Pough (eds.),  Biology of the Reptilia , vol. 13,  Phys-
iological Ecology . New York: Academic Press, pp. 1–51. 
 Seymour, R. S. 1987. Scaling of cardiovascular physiology in 
snakes.  American Zoologist 27:97–109. 
 Seymour, R. S., and J. O. Arndt. 2004. Independent eff ects of 
heart-head distance and caudal blood pooling on blood pres-
sure regulation in aquatic and terrestrial snakes.  Journal of 
 Experimental Biology 207:1305–1311. 
 Seymour, R. S., and H. B. Lillywhite. 1976. Blood pressure in snakes 
from diff erent habitats.  Nature 264:664–666. 
 Wallach, V. 1998. Th e lungs of snakes. In C. Gans and A. S. Gaunt 
(eds.),  Biology of the Reptilia , vol. 19. Ithaca, NY: Society for the 
Study of Amphibians and Reptiles, pp. 93–295. 
 Young, B. A. 1991. Morphological basis of “growling” in the King 
Cobra,  Ophiophagus hannah .  Journal of Experimental Zoology 
260:275–287. 
 Young, B. A. 1992. Tracheal diverticula in snakes: Possible 
 functions and evolution.  Journal of Zoology (London) 
227:567–583. 
 

This page intentionally left blank 

 | 163
 The Need for Information 
 Try to imagine how a snake perceives its world as it slithers 
through grass, makes its way through tropical vegetation 
high in a canopy forest, or swims through the ocean across 
a coral reef. Behind your head is a long, thin body. You have 
no external ears, but your eyes are large, your tongue fl icks 
regularly, and your long body pushes against fl uid or objects 
in the physical environment. We know that snakes have 
marvelous senses, including ways of perceiving their world 
in some ways that we cannot. Some senses have been well 
studied, while others have been neglected relative to what 
is known in other animals. What is certain is the brain of a 
snake receives a rich variety of information about its exter-
nal world, and this information is important to the survival 
and success of snakes as a group. 
 During the evolution of vertebrates, increases in body size 
and specializations for living in many diff erent habitats oc-
curred only with an increase in capacity for constant sur-
veillance of the environment. Animals acquired increasing 
sensory capabilities for acquiring information, as well as de-
velopment of the central nervous system for processing 
and using the information. Animals had to know what was in 
their environment and how to respond appropriately. Because 
the head end of bilaterally symmetric animals meets the 
environment fi rst, sensory structures tend to be concentrated 
at, or near, the head. Th is is true for snakes, although the body 
is also rich in having numerous sensory structures and re-
sponses to the environment. In this chapter we shall explore 
the sensory world of snakes, considering what is known about 
the various senses and the organs that acquire information in 
various modalities. 
 Th e term  modality refers to the qualitative nature of a 
 stimulus —whether it is light, sound, vibration, and so on. A 
stimulus refers to any form of energy that excites a  receptor , 
and a receptor in turn is defi ned as a structure that is excited 
by, and transduces, a stimulus. Receptors are typically special-
ized nerve endings or sometimes other cells that are modifi ed 
to receive a particular stimulus and are themselves coupled to 
specialized nerve endings. Th e rods and cones of the eye are 
examples. A  transducer is any device (biological or not) that 
changes energy from one form to another. So, continuing 
with the eye as an example, the rods and cones transduce cap-
tured light energy that falls upon them into the bioelectric 
signals that travel along nerve membranes. It is amazing to 
think that, regardless of the modality of stimulus—light, 
heat, sound, and so on—all stimuli are transduced into the 
same form of energy that travels as nerve impulses to the 
brain. Th e specifi city of the nerve pathway and the area of 
7
 PERCEIVING THE SNAKE’S WORLD  
 Structure and Function of Sense Organs 
 As one approaches a snake in the wild, the ﬁ rst evidence that the presence 
of an intruder has been recognized is likely to be given by the tongue. The 
eyes are without the possibility of expression or winking; there are no ears to 
cock forward. Instinctively endeavoring to remain undiscovered through its 
blending coloration, the snake will seldom move until it seems to detect that 
it has been noticed by the trespasser. And so the ﬂ icking tongue is being 
employed in some way to investigate the stranger; to give some indication of 
his character and intentions. Until quite recently, the nature of the impression 
conveyed by the tongue and the course of its transmission to the snake’s 
consciousness were unknown. Now the tongue is believed to be an adjunct 
to the sense of smell, although not the sole vehicle of that sense. 
 —Lawrence M. Klauber,  Rattlesnakes. Their Habits, Life Histories, and 
Inﬂ uence on Mankind (1956), 396–97  

 164  | How Snakes Work
the brain receiving signals determine the sensation that the 
 animal perceives, such as light or sound.  
 Vision: What the Eyes See  
 Snakes generally have good vision, but it is better developed 
in arboreal snakes than in many others, and is poorly devel-
oped in burrowing and possibly some aquatic species living 
in turbid waters. Fundamentally, the eye of a snake is quite 
similar in physical features to the eyes of other vertebrates, 
including humans ( fi g.  7.1 ). It is shaped like a cup. Th ere is a 
bilaterally symmetric pair on the head, and the “eyeball” is 
spherical. Light entering the eye passes through a trans-
parent layer of tissue called the  cornea , which is continuous 
with connective tissue termed the  sclera . Th e latter forms 
what is called the “white” of the eye in humans. Th e sclera of 
snakes does not possess a densely fi brous, cartilaginous, or 
bony ring that is present in some other vertebrates, how-
ever. Th e entering light next passes through fl uid within the 
eye chamber and is absorbed by the  retina , which is a tissue 
layer containing the visual receptors, termed rods and 
cones. Just behind the cornea are the  iris and  lens . Th e iris 
consists of pigmented smooth muscle surrounding an 
opening called the  pupil . Th e iris can constrict or dilate and 
thereby controls the aperture of the pupil, allowing more or 
less light to enter. In dim light the iris dilates, the pupil en-
larges, and more light is allowed into the eye ( fi g.  7.2  ).          
 
 
 Figure 7.1.   The eye of a Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ( Pelamis platurus ) 
( upper photo ) and a GreenTree Python ( Morelia viridis ) ( lower 
photo ). Notice the diffuse pigments in the eye of the sea snake and 
the vertically elliptical pupil of the tree python. The upper photograph 
is by Coleman Sheehy III, and lower photograph is by Nicholas 
Millichamp.   
 
 
 Figure 7.2.    Photographs of two viperid snakes illustrating differences 
in pupil dilation. The  upper photo is a Palestine Viper ( Daboia 
palaestinae ) that was photographed in bright light. The  lower photo  
features a Timber Rattlesnake ( Crotalus horridus ) that was 
photographed in dim light. Both species have a vertically elliptical 
pupil, but the pupil in the upper photograph is relatively more 
contracted to admit less light under the brighter condition. Both 
snakes were captive specimens at the University of Texas at Arlington 
and were photographed by the author with permission of Carl Franklin.   

Perceiving the Snake’s World  |  165 
 In species having a so-called “slit pupil” ( fi gs.  7.1 ,  7.2 ,  7.4 . 
 7.5 ) the arrangement of muscles around the “slit” makes it 
easier to control the amount of light entering the eye with 
minimum muscular contraction. Slit pupils can open to a 
fully round pupil in dim light, and the slit is not required for 
nocturnal vision. A number of nocturnal species do not 
have a slit pupil and are well able to see under conditions of 
dim light. Th e slit simply aff ords fi ner control over light en-
try in nocturnal or crepuscular species having retinas that 
are adapted for dim light conditions, but might also be ex-
posed to bright light conditions. 
 Th e lens is behind the iris and bends the light rays to-
ward each other as light passes through this structure. Th e 
bending of light in this way is called  refraction , and the de-
gree of refraction depends on the curvature of the lens. Th e 
cornea also refracts light, and the further refraction af-
forded by the lens is simply “fi ne-tuning” of the process. 
Th e point at which the light rays converge after passing 
through the cornea and lens is called the “focal point.” In 
order to produce a clear image, the light must converge at a 
focal point that is on the retina ( fi g.  7.3 ). Th is is accom-
plished in snakes by moving the entire lens in relation to 
the retina using muscles within the iris. Enlarged muscles 
of the iris apply pressure to the vitreous fl uid, which forces 
the rigid, spherical lens forward. Th e lens moves back pas-
sively when these muscles are relaxed. Such a means of so-
called  accommodation is a principal diff erence from other 
vertebrates in which the eye is focused by changing the cur-
vature of the lens by means of ciliary muscles (also called 
“ciliary bodies”) that were conceivably lost in the ancestors 
of snakes. Th e peculiar mechanism for focusing the eyes of 
modern snakes is presumably derived independently from 
other vertebrates, and likely represents the evolutionary 
“use” of the degenerated ancestral eye parts. 
 Snakes lack eyelids, and what is called a  spectacle consists 
of fused corneal and scleral tissue with epidermis. Th e spec-
tacle is protective and serves the same function as eyelids. 
In addition, the spectacle has been shown to contribute to 
 
 
 Figure 7.3.    Schematic illustration of a generalized eye of a snake. Light passes through the lens and activates photoreceptors that are arrayed on 
the retina. Snakes focus the light by means of contracting iris muscles that increase pressure on the vitreous ﬂ uid and thereby move the lens 
forward. The dashed lines indicate such movement of the lens. Drawing by Dan Dourson.  

 166  | How Snakes Work
the refractive properties of the eye. Th e spectacle is renewed 
when the epidermis is shed at each skin-shedding cycle ( fi g. 
 7.4 ). Because of the lack of eyelids, snakes will never wink at 
you in spite of what they might be thinking. 
 Most snakes, as well as most vertebrates, have two over-
lapping visual systems within the retina. One contains  rods , 
which are sensitive to dim light and are responsible for 
night vision, and the other contains  cones , which provide 
color vision under conditions of bright light. Rods and 
cones are light-sensitive cells that are characterized by pos-
session of diff erent visual pigments called “opsins.” Th ese 
are proteins that are conjugated with a light-absorbing de-
rivative of vitamin A. Eyes that possess both rods and cones 
are said to have “duplex retinas.” 
 Gordon Walls, who was a research associate in ophthal-
mology at Wayne University College of Medicine, wrote an 
early treatise on the adaptive diversity of vertebrate eyes 
and pointed out that the eyes of snakes exhibit a wide range 
of ratios of rods to cones. Many snakes are considered to 
have color vision, except for burrowing forms in which the 
eyes are degenerated to varying degrees. Diurnal snakes—
especially many terrestrial colubrids and elapids—have a 
round pupil and a retina that is characterized by a high ratio 
of cones to rods. Th e various types of cones contain pig-
ments that are sensitive to diff erent colors, although color 
vision can be restricted depending on the degree of spectral 
overlap of the pigments. Some diurnal elapids and colubrids 
(e.g., garter snakes,  Th amnophis sirtalis ) have been shown to 
have a retina that contains strictly cones, and there are four 
distinct cell types expressing diff erent visual pigments. 
 Depending on the pigments that are present, diurnal snakes 
possess dichromatic or trichromatic color vision. Under cer-
tain conditions of moderate lighting, rod pigments may also 
be active and contribute to what some have called a “condi-
tional” form of color vision. 
 On the other hand, crepuscular, nocturnal, or burrowing 
species of snakes often have a slit pupil and a retina that has 
exclusively or mostly rods. Only very recently have the mo-
lecular properties of visual pigments been studied in snakes. 
Certain henophidian snakes that are partly nocturnal (Ball 
Python,  Python regius ) or nocturnal and semifossorial (Sun-
beam Snake,  Xenopeltis unicolor ) were shown to possess du-
plex retinas, although rods accounted for more than 90 
percent of the total photoreceptors. Although these snakes 
are phylogenetically basal, their cones express two of the 
four classes of ancestral vertebrate cone pigments and pro-
vide these species with dichromatic color vision. In strictly 
fossorial species, however, there is no need for color vision, 
which is likely to be totally lacking in many such snakes. 
 Yang Liu and collaborators have investigated the varia-
tion of the size of eyes and how this correlates with behav-
ior and habitat among colubrid species of snakes. Th e 
diameter of the eye is larger in diurnal than nocturnal spe-
cies, both in absolute and relative terms. Furthermore, ar-
boreal species have larger eye diameters than do terrestrial 
and aquatic species. Th e eye diameters of terrestrial spe-
cies are similar to those of semiaquatic species, but larger 
than those of fossorial species. Th e fi ndings suggest that 
variation of eye size refl ects adaptation to specifi c habi-
tats, foraging, and other behaviors. 
 
 
 Figure 7.4.   Head of an Emerald Tree Boa ( Corallus caninus ) that is 
beginning to shed its outer generation of epidermis. The shed 
 spectacle that previously covered the eye can be seen immediately 
behind the eye (white arrow). Note also a series of  labial pits running 
lengthwise along the series of upper labial scales (black arrows). The 
external nostril is at the front of the head to the left in the photo. 
Photograph by Elliott Jacobson.  
 
 
 Figure 7.5.   Head view of an arboreal Oriental Whipsnake ( Ahaetulla 
prasina ) featuring the keyhole eye and lateral depression along the side 
of the head, extending from the eye to the snout. The  inset illustrates 
binocular vision and overlap of the visual ﬁ eld in this species, related to 
the narrowed snout and the relative position of the eyes. Note the 
extended tongue with tines together. Photograph by the author.  

Perceiving the Snake’s World  |  167 
 Th e pair of eyes that occur on the head 
of snakes occupy a considerable variation 
of position, usually on the sides but 
having varying distances from the snout 
and sometimes positioned higher on the 
head. Probably most snakes have a wide 
fi eld of vision, ranging from a little over 
100° to more than 160° in various species. 
Snakes also have  binocular vision , which 
refers to the overlapping visual fi elds of 
the two eyes ( fi g.  7.5 ). Images are focused 
on each of the two retinas simultaneously, 
and this aids in the perception of depth 
and distance. Binocular vision is espe-
cially well developed in species of arboreal 
snakes, which must judge distances and 
slight movements during prey capture. In 
the Asian colubrid  Ahaetulla prasina (an 
arboreal species), the range of binocular 
vision is about 45° compared with 20° to 30° in some other 
species. In this and some other arboreal colubrids, the 
snout is pointed and there is a depression on each side of 
the head that minimizes the nasal area and thereby in-
creases the range of visual overlap for the two eyes ( fi g.  7.5 ). 
Snout attenuation is characteristic of many species of arbo-
real snakes, likely as an aid for enhancing binocular vision. 
Also, when these snakes orient to a prey, the tongue is ex-
tended with the tines together, almost as if it acted as a 
“pointer.” 
 Perhaps a dozen or more arboreal colubrid snakes in Asia 
and Africa (e.g.,  Dryophis ,  Ahaetulla ,  Th elotornis ) have hori-
zontal pupils that provide “wraparound” vision while en-
larging the forward binocular fi eld. Th e shape of the pupil in 
some species also resembles a “keyhole” that is centered over 
the lens ( fi g.  7.5  ). Th ese snakes are considered to have very 
acute vision and comparatively keen abilities to detect move-
ment and to judge distance. Th ey also possess a  fovea centralis , 
which is a depression on the retina where there is a relatively 
high density of cones and therefore maximal visual acuity.    
 Some aquatic or semiaquatic species that spend time 
with the head at the surface of water have eyes that are 
positioned higher up on the head ( fi g.  7.6 ; see also  fi gs. 
 1.23 ,  4.8 ). Th is enlarges and shifts the binocular fi eld of 
vision so that these snakes can better see what is above 
them, whether in water or at its surface. Examples are the 
fi le snakes ( Acrochordus spp.) and some homalopsid spe-
cies (e.g.,  Cerberus rhynchops ). Many bottom-dwelling 
fi shes also have dorsal binocular fi elds. Moreover, the 
higher the eyes, the lesser amount of head that needs to 
protrude above the water when the snake is at the surface, 
which might render snakes less conspicuous to  visually 
oriented predators. Th e eyes are also dorsally displaced in 
some burrowing or desert snakes that spend time cratered 
into sand with just the eyes protruding ( fi gs.  1.20 ,  3.16 ). 
 Th e coloration of the eyes of snakes shows much varia-
tion, often related to rendering the eye inconspicuous. Eye 
stripes and other forms of head coloration also serve to ren-
der the eyes cryptic (see  fi gs.  1.29 ,  1.32 ,  1.36 ,  1.43 ,  1.48 ,  7.8 ). 
However, in many snakes the eyes are also very conspic-
uous, perhaps the inadvertent result of its necessary prom-
inence as a sensory organ. To be quite honest, we do not 
know why the eyes of many snakes are colored the way they 
are, nor need we always assume that these colors have some 
functional or adaptive value (see  fi g.  1.53 ). 
 Many snakes that are diurnal predators depend highly on 
vision for orientation to objects. Th ey can maintain visual 
contact with potential prey items and respond to subtle 
cues such as respiratory movements of lizards and the 
movement of antennae of insects. Visual information about 
the position and prominence of an object is increased by 
viewing it from more than one angle simultaneously, con-
ferred by binocular vision, or in rapid succession invoked by 
movements of the head. Head swaying occurs in a number 
of snakes in contexts related to prey capture.  
 Hearing, Vibrational, and Equilibrium 
Sense: Function of the Ears  
 Hearing and Vibration Sense 
 Snakes do not have external ears such as the elaborate 
structures characteristic of terrestrial mammals that func-
tion to collect and focus sound energy onto a tympanic 
membrane. Nor do snakes have a tympanic membrane or 
any external opening or canal that conducts sound energy 
 
 
 Figure 7.6.    Dorsally positioned eyes in two highly aquatic homalopsid snakes, Jagor’s 
Water Snake ( Enhydris jagorii ) ( left ) and the Rice Paddy Snake ( Enhydris plumbea ) 
( right ). Snakes were photographed in Thailand by John C. Murphy. 

 168  | How Snakes Work
to the inner ear, which is the organ of hearing. In other 
words, snakes have (secondarily) lost a tympanum and 
middle ear, which previously evolved independently in all 
major lineages of tetrapods. Because snakes are anatomi-
cally peculiar in this way—possibly a refl ection of fossorial 
or aquatic ancestry—it was thought for many years during 
the history of herpetology that snakes cannot hear. Th e 
inner ear is well developed, however, so many herpetolo-
gists assumed that it responds to vibrational stimuli that 
are fi rst transmitted from the ground through the head tis-
sues, and ultimately to the sensitive receptors that are re-
sponsible for hearing in other vertebrates. Since the 1970s 
it has been learned from both physiological and behavioral 
studies that snakes indeed respond to vibrational stimuli 
that occur on the ground, in air, or even water. Th erefore, 
the popular notion that snakes are deaf is not true, al-
though hearing is restricted to a limited range of sound 
frequencies, from approximately 50 to 1000 Hz (= cycles 
per second). By comparison, humans can sense airborne vi-
brations in the range from 20 to 20,000 Hz. By defi nition, 
hearing refers to the sensory detection of airborne vibra-
tions by the inner ear, as distinct from very low-frequency 
vibrational stimuli transmitted by the ground or by solid 
objects that might be in contact with an animal. 
 Snakes lack a tympanic membrane, or eardrum, and the 
element responsible for transmitting vibrational stimuli to 
the inner ear consists of a single thin bone called a  columella . 
Th e columella is equivalent to what is termed the stapes in 
mammals. Th e columella is attached by means of a short lig-
ament, and sometimes cartilaginous structures, to the 
quadrate bone, which is the posterior element of the upper 
jaw and articulates with the lower jaw at the rear angle of 
the head (see  fi g.  7.7 ; also  fi gs.  2.5 ,  2.6 ). Th us, either airborne 
sound pressures or vibrations from the ground aff ecting the 
body of a snake are transmitted through tissues surrounding 
the jaws, the bones and joints of the jaw, the long axis of the 
columella, and fi nally to fl uid of the inner ear on which the 
other end (footplate) of the columella is attached. Th e space 
that accommodates the columella is extremely reduced and 
immediately surrounds this structure, or is lost entirely. 
 Th e inner ear of snakes is fundamentally similar to that 
of other vertebrates ( fi g.  7.7 ). It consists of a bony structure 
that encloses a labyrinth of liquid contained within saccular 
structures, semicircular canals, and a cochlear duct or canal. 
Th e latter is an outgrowth of the saccular structure and be-
comes elongated and coiled to form the cochlea of mam-
mals. Th e structure is not elongated in snakes or other 
reptiles, but like the cochlea of mammals contains sensitive 
 hair cells that are arrayed on a vibration-sensitive membrane 
called the  basilar membrane . Th is is the region of the inner 
ear that is sensitive to vibrational stimuli or sound and pro-
vides the sense of hearing. Energy in the vibrational move-
ment of the columella moves the  oval window , a membrane 
that moves to create vibrational waves in the liquid of the 
cochlear canal. Th ese movements in liquid cause motion of 
the basilar membrane, which in turn creates shearing move-
ments of the hair cells. Th e cellular mem-
branes of the “stimulated” hair cells create 
the bioelectric potentials that are ulti-
mately expressed as nerve signals that 
travel through the auditory nerves to the 
brain where the “sound” is interpreted. 
 Christian Christensen and colleagues 
recently demonstrated that Ball Pythons 
( Python regius ) are sensitive to sound- 
induced vibrations, but they have lost 
the sensitivity to airborne sound pres-
sure that is sensed by the tympanic 
 membrane of other tetrapods. Both 
aerial sound and substrate vibrations 
that are incident on a snake’s body are 
transmitted to the inner ear by a me-
chanical pathway through the tissues of 
the head. Th e ear transduces the tissue-
borne v ibrations into a neural response 
that travels to the brain via the auditory 
nerve. Th e original stimulus of  sound or 
vibration can elicit a response regardless 
of where it impinges on the snake (head, 
tail, trunk, or tail). 
 
 
 Figure 7.7.    Schematic illustration of the hearing apparatus of a snake. The individual 
elements of artwork were drawn by Dan Dourson and based, in part, on ﬁ gs. 20-12, 20-16, 
and 20-21 in E. G. Wever,  The Reptile Ear (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1978). 

Perceiving the Snake’s World  |  169 
 It is not clear why the hearing of snakes is restricted to 
such a narrow band of frequencies. Th is could be related to 
several factors, including (1) the pathway of tissues through 
which a sound stimulus must be conducted before reaching 
the basilar membrane, (2) dampening of vibrational stimuli 
by inner ear fl uids that dissipate the pressure waves diff er-
ently than in mammals, and (3) properties of the auditory 
neurons that behave somewhat diff erently than those of 
other terrestrial vertebrates. Regardless of the frequency 
limitations, the sensitivity of snakes to vibration and sound 
is remarkably good. Th e populations of neurons that re-
spond to airborne sounds or ground vibrations are thought 
to largely overlap and could, in fact, be essentially the same. 
 Given the repertoire of senses that snakes possess, one 
might question whether hearing or vibrational sense is ac-
tually useful to snakes and whether acquired acoustic infor-
mation is used adaptively. It is defi nitely clear that this is 
the case. An excellent example is the auditory localization 
of ground-borne vibrations in Desert Horned Vipers, 
 Cerastes cerastes . Bruce Young and Malinda Morain demon-
strated in laboratory studies that these snakes can localize 
and strike live mice using only vibrational cues. Th e foot-
steps of a mouse cause the propagation of surface waves in 
sand, and these are detected by the snake when it rests with 
its lower jaw on the sand. Th e incoming surface wave sets 
the two independent sides of the lower jaw in motion, and 
these vibrational stimuli are then relayed through the quad-
rate and columella to the inner ear. Th ere are, of course, two 
receivers in the form of each inner ear. Because each side of 
the jaw can move independently of the other, a vibrational 
wave originating in sand from the right side will stimulate 
the right side of the lower jaw slightly earlier than the left, 
and vice versa. A very small diff erence in the arrival time of 
the wave stimulus at the right and the left ear is suffi  cient 
for the snake’s brain to discriminate the direction of the 
 vibration source. 
 It has also been shown experimentally that the midbrain 
of sea snakes ( Lapemis curtus ) responds with electric poten-
tials to vibrating motions and pressure fl uctuations in 
water. Th e sensitivity is low but probably suffi  cient for the 
detection of fi sh-generated motions in water. Both fi le 
snakes ( Acrochordus granulatus ) and sea snakes ( Pelamis pla-
turus ) are sensitive to motions caused by swimming fi sh. 
Some sea snakes have been observed to approach and even-
tually bite into a vibrating object. Bruce Young has also 
demonstrated that swimming anacondas will attack under-
water speakers playing the sounds that are made by swim-
ming rats. 
  Vestibular System and the Sense of Equilibrium   
 As in other vertebrates, snakes possess what is called a 
 vestibular system consisting of patches of hair cells in the 
 saccular structures ( sacculus ,  utriculus ) and  semicircular 
canals of the inner ear. Th ese hair cells are sheared by move-
ments of fl uid and solid structures that might be affi  xed to 
the tips of the hair cells when the animal changes position 
in space. As with auditory neurons, nerve endings associ-
ated with the vestibular hair cells relay messages on to the 
brain and provide a sense of movement and orientation. 
Very little neurobehavioral research has been conducted 
with the vestibular system of snakes, which is assumed to 
function similarly to that of other vertebrates. Movement 
and orientation also depend on appropriate inputs from 
 proprioceptors in muscles, tendons, and joints. Th ese provide 
the sense of position and relative motion of body parts. 
 Interestingly, rat snakes ( Elaphe quadrivirgata ) have 
been subjected briefl y to microgravity that is induced mo-
mentarily by parabolic fl ights using special research air-
craft. Apparently, the loss of surface contact and normal 
proprioceptive stimuli from muscles and joints caused 
these snakes to become aggressive and to strike their own 
body when they lost orientation momentarily during free 
fall that produced microgravity during the parabolic fl ights 
on the aircraft.     
 Chemoreception: Flicking Tongues and 
Snifﬁ ng Noses  
 Anyone familiar with snakes has noted their tendency to 
protrude the tongue and fl ick it toward objects ( fi g.  7.8 ). In 
folklore the serpent’s tongue has been regarded as a 
stinger, which surely brings death from a venomous spe-
cies such as the adder. Th e tongue has also been regarded 
as a cleaning device and as a tactile structure providing a 
sense of fi ne touch. Today, however, most herpetologists 
regard the snake’s tongue to be a sensory aid that during 
fl icking acquires volatile chemical molecules from the envi-
ronment and helps to guide the animal’s behavior. Scien-
tists working in the 1920s and 1930s demonstrated an 
important connection between tongue-fl icking and the 
chemical senses: molecules acquired by the tongue stimu-
late chemosensory structures above the palate, which are 
called  vomeronasal organs or Jacobson’s organ. Although 
much attention has been given to the role of the tongue in 
chemoreception, it is only an accessory contribution to the 
rich fabric of chemical senses that help make up a snake’s 
world. Functional  distinctions of the chemical senses are 
diffi  cult because of the interplay with other senses and a 
requirement for very carefully controlled experiments in-
volving invasive  techniques. 
 Smell and the Olfactory Epithelium of the Nasal Cavity 
 Th e nasal cavity of snakes bears a rich sensory epithelium that 
is sensitive to airborne molecules and allows the detection of 

 170  | How Snakes Work
volatile chemicals ( fi g.  7.9  ). Th ere has been a popular notion 
that the olfactory sense originating from activation of these 
nasal receptors triggers tongue-fl icking and is of secondary 
importance to the vomeronasal system. However, there are 
behavioral circumstances in which olfaction appears to be 
dominant, and the olfactory regions of the brain are relatively 
large. Moreover, some studies have found the olfactory epi-
thelium to be more sensitive than the vomeronasal epithe-
lium to chemical stimuli. Th e principal conclusion here is that 
snakes can smell using their nasal passageways to sample 
 volatile odors. How useful this information is in relation to 
other sensory inputs is not entirely clear, and there is much 
more scientifi c work that needs to be accomplished before we 
will have a better understanding of this subject. Clearly in 
snakes as in many other vertebrates, odorous molecules are 
delivered to the olfactory mucosa by inhaling or sniffi  ng with 
the nose. Stimulating molecules must be both volatile and ad-
sorbed by the olfactory mucosa. 
 I once kept a Gaboon Adder ( Bitis gabonica ,  fi g.  1.28 ) for 
some while and was impressed at how consistent was its 
feeding behavior. Typically, it would lie within a box inside 
its cage with its head protruding about half its length from 
an opening in the box at the level of the cage fl oor. Whenever 
I put a live mouse or rat inside the cage, the snake remained 
perfectly still except for two changes that told me it was alert 
to the presence of the mouse. First, there was a brief and 
rapid eye movement. Second, body movements indicated the 
snake was breathing more rapidly and shallowly, but the 
tongue was not protruded in fl icking that is characteristic of 
many other species when they are presented with food. Th e 
snake waited until the mouse came within a critical distance 
of its head before striking and holding the mouse, which was 
impaled by the snake’s fangs. Th is strike distance was sur-
prisingly short—about two mouse lengths—but the snake 
always succeeded in capturing and paralyzing the mouse 
quickly. One could suppose that the lack of tongue-fl icking 
was part of the furtive behavior of the snake while it was 
waiting to ambush the mouse. It further seems likely that 
the rapid but shallow ventilation enabled the snake to in-
crease the rate of sampling of airborne odors emanating 
from the mouse. Th us, in this circumstance the chemosen-
sory input from the mouse to snake did not involve the vom-
eronasal system, but rather the olfactory epithelium. 
 Recently, two investigators from Kyoto University, led 
by Takushi Kishida, demonstrated that genes related to ol-
factory receptors are greatly reduced in completely aquatic 
sea snakes (hydrophiines) but are still maintained in semi-
terrestrial laticaudine sea kraits (Laticaudini). Relatively 
large-scale degeneration of these genes in the hydrophiine 
sea snakes following separation from their terrestrial rela-
tives supports the hypothesis that olfactory receptors have 
little use in the aquatic environment. 
  Chemical Sense and the Vomeronasal System   
 Th e vomeronasal system appears to provide highly impor-
tant sensory input to snakes and infl uences many of their 
behaviors. Th e vomeronasal organ consists of paired struc-
tures located near the nasal cavity from which it originates 
( fi g.  7.9 ). However, during development it becomes isolated 
from the nasal passages to form two spherical structures, 
each bearing sensory epithelia on the inner surface. Th ese 
open and communicate with the roof of the mouth through 
 
 
 Figure 7.8.   Upper photo: Tongue ﬂ ick of a False Fer-de-Lance 
( Xenodon rabdocephalus ) photographed in Belize by Dan Dourson. 
 Center photo: Tongue ﬂ ick of a Yellow-lipped Sea Krait ( Laticauda 
colubrina ) photographed in Sulawesi by Arne Rasmussen. Note the 
extent of tongue protrusion is different in the two species and is 
exceptionally long in  Xenodon . The extent of protrusion in marine 
snakes is typically less than in terrestrial snakes.  Lower photo: 
Tongue ﬂ ick of a Black-headed Python ( Aspidites melanocephalus ) 
photographed in northern Queensland, Australia, by the author. Note 
the tines are separated in all photographs.  

Perceiving the Snake’s World  |  171 
two small respective orifi ces in the palate. Sensory cells 
comprising the vomeronasal epithelium contact and react 
to molecules that are brought into the mouth by means of 
the tongue, and the activated cells send nervous signals to 
the accessory olfactory bulb in the brain via the vomerona-
sal nerve. Th is nervous pathway is separate and diff erent 
from that associated with the nasal olfactory epithelium. 
 Th e stimulus molecules are delivered to the vomeronasal 
openings either by direct contact with the tongue or by con-
tact with ridges or pads on the fl oor of the mouth immedi-
ately anterior to the tongue sheath. Th us, in the latter case, 
stimulus molecules are fi rst wiped from the tongue onto tis-
sues in front of the tongue sheath before being transferred 
to the vomeronasal openings. Early evidence that the tongue 
was involved in delivery of particles to the vomeronasal 
organ came from experiments published in 1932 by H. Kah-
mann in which snakes that tongue-fl icked a piece of carbon 
and were sacrifi ced shortly thereafter had sooty particles in 
the lumen of the vomeronasal organ. Similarly, snakes that 
have tongue-fl icked cotton swabs soaked in prey extracts 
mixed with tritiated proline were shown by subsequent sac-
rifi ce and autoradiography to have radioactive material in 
the vomeronasal organ but not on the olfactory epithelium. 
 Generally, it is not clear to what extent snakes apply the 
tongue tips to the vomeronasal openings, or simply wipe 
the adjacent tissues. In many snakes, the tongue tips  appear 
 
 
 Figure 7.9.   Photomicrograph of a cross-section through the anterior head region of an Eastern Corn Snake 
( Pantherophis guttatus guttatus ). The  nasal cavity and  vomeronasal organ both have paired chambers lined with 
sensory epithelium. The tissues have been stained with a standard histological stain, H & E. Photomicrograph by 
Elliott Jacobson. 

 172  | How Snakes Work
to be too blunt to actually enter the vomeronasal canal ori-
fi ces. Also, some species are observed to completely retract 
the tongue into the tongue sheath before the mouth is 
closed following tongue protrusion. Experiments using 
X-ray cinematography and pythons have shown that the 
tongue does not enter the lumen of the vomeronasal organ 
during multiple investigative tongue-fl icks. 
 Th e tongue of snakes possesses morphological specializa-
tions that appear to enhance its ability to collect and trans-
port odorants from the environment during tongue-fl icking. 
Histological and electron microscopic studies show there are 
minute papilla-like processes and shallow depressions of var-
ious sizes on the tongue’s surface, and the forked regions of 
some colubrids have modifi ed epithelial cells that bear nu-
merous microscopic projections, termed “microfacets,” while 
some other species exhibit ridges made up of projections re-
sembling microvilli and small pores. Th ese are thought to aid 
in the collection and retention of odorant particles. More-
over, tissues on the fl oor of the mouth beneath the openings 
to the vomeronasal organs exhibit a surface anatomy of folds 
and pores. Th ese oral tissues also contain mucous glands that 
provide lubrication and enhance the adherence of sub-
stances. It has been postulated that oral secretions pool in 
this region, and these fl uids conceivably absorb the odorant 
molecules and transport them into the vomeronasal organ.  
 Th us, the snake’s tongue is used in fl icking to sample 
odors in the environment and thereby assists with the 
 detection of chemicals. When the tongue is protruded from 
the mouth, the tines are usually spread and are swept through 
the air or touched upon the substrate or other objects in 
front of the animal and, in so doing, collect a sample of chem-
icals from the environment ( fi g.  7.10 ; see also  fi gs.  5.8 ,  5.12 ). 
Th e tongue is retracted into the mouth and transfers the 
chemical stimuli to the vomeronasal organ via the small 
ducts that lead to each organ. Th e odorant molecules then 
bind to receptor cells on the sensory epithelia in the lumen of 
each vomeronasal organ. Axons of the receptor cells are bun-
dled together and form the nerve that communicates signals 
onward (via other higher-order nerve cells) to the brain. 
 Th e signals from each vomeronasal organ appear to be 
processed separately within the brain, so that the animal is 
able to discriminate stimuli from each tine of the tongue. 
Th eoretically, this provides a snake with the ability to dis-
criminate between paired stimuli from the two separate 
tines and therefore to detect directional diff erences of 
odorant molecules in the snake’s environment. Many 
snakes (but not all) separate the tines of the tongue widely 
during fl icking, which increases the distance between sam-
pling points when odor molecules are being sampled and 
retrieved ( fi gs.  5.12 ,  7.8 ,  7.10 ). Th e greater the distance 
 between sampling points, the greater the likelihood that 
a chemical gradient can be detected during a single fl ick. 
 
 
 Figure 7.10.   Tongue-ﬂ icking behavior of a Sidewinder Rattlesnake 
( Crotalus cerastes ) photographed by the author in the Anza-Borrego Desert 
of California. The tines are sometimes together ( upper photo ) but usually 
spread widely as the tongue is waved in a vertical arc while protruded 
for several seconds at a time ( middle and lower photos ). The change of 
tine separation reﬂ ects the active muscular control of the tongue. This 
snake was in a defensive posture during this series of photographs. 
When investigating an object more directly, the tongue is protruded 
toward the object without the wide vertical swing that is seen here.  

Perceiving the Snake’s World  |  173 
 Laboratory experiments have demonstrated, however, that 
there is no change in the trailing ability of certain rattle-
snakes ( Crotalus oreganus ) when a vomeronasal nerve is 
unilaterally severed. In other contexts, the tongue may be 
extended with the tines held together (e.g.,  fi g.  7.5 ). 
 Snakes are well known to use their vomeronasal system to 
detect prey odors, and many investigators consider this 
system important for behaviors related to courtship, mating, 
feeding, and aggregation. At least in the more advanced 
snakes (viperids and colubrids) behavioral performance in 
these contexts falls off  if the brain is deprived of input from 
the vomeronasal receptors. An interesting example is the 
well-studied predatory behaviors of rattlesnakes ( Crotalus 
spp.). The brain of the rattlesnake receives input from 
receptors related to both chemosensory systems, vision, and 
infrared stimuli from the facial pits (see below). All this in-
formation is integrated within the central nervous system to 
produce the appropriate motor response, for example, 
striking to capture prey. Th ere is convergence in the chemo-
sensory systems, which means that neurons conveying infor-
mation from separate olfactory and vomeronasal receptors 
act to infl uence the same cells to which they transfer stimula-
tion within the central nervous system. However, when the 
brain is deprived of vomeronasal input, strike performance 
decreases and trailing behavior following a strike is lost en-
tirely. So the olfactory input does not compensate for the loss 
of vomeronasal input, in spite of convergence in these two 
systems. Further, when snakes are deprived of chemosen-
sory input to the brain, the sensory information from vision 
and radiation does not compensate and predatory perfor-
mance also declines. Th us, chemosensory information (espe-
cially that of the vomeronasal system) seems to be very 
important in the multimodal sensory systems involved with 
such complex behaviors as hunting and procuring prey.  
 Do Snakes Have Taste Buds?   
 Th ere are numerous sources of information about snakes 
that state categorically that these reptiles cannot taste and 
they have no taste buds. Usually these statements are fol-
lowed by descriptions of the vomeronasal system and its 
importance in the chemosensory abilities of snakes. Gener-
ally, there has been a tendency to downplay, or even ignore, 
the sense of taste in snakes—probably in large part due to 
the obvious behavior of tongue-fl icking and the intense in-
terest in its signifi cance. Th e scientifi c literature on taste in 
snakes has been limited as well as contradictory. 
 Recently, taste buds have been reported to be present on 
the soft tissues inside the mouths of advanced snakes 
 ( Crotalus ) and in some basal scolecophidians. Th ese struc-
tures are similar in appearance in the two disparate groups 
and resemble taste organs that have been described in other 
reptiles. Th e number of taste buds is relatively few in any 
given animal, and these are restricted to the mucosa of the 
palate adjacent to the vomeronasal organ. 
 Sensory papillae considered to be taste buds also have 
been described in sea snakes and also a colubrid snake 
 ( Elaphe quadrivirgata ), wherein these were demonstrated to 
be present along the tooth rows. Each sensory papilla is 
comprised of a single taste bud and free nerve endings in 
the epithelium, and there are corpuscle-like structures in 
associated connective tissue beneath. Th ese are regarded to 
represent a compound sensory system that may receive 
both chemical and mechanical information from prey. 
 It remains equivocal whether taste buds on the tongue 
are functionally important, for their presence has been re-
ported as well as refuted in diff erent species. I have ob-
served behaviors of snakes that involve actions elicited 
from tongue protrusion before the tongue is withdrawn 
back into the mouth, thus suggesting that the tongue itself 
is sensory. Considering all the information available, there 
seems to be little doubt that snakes possess sensory recep-
tors within the mouth that probably respond to multiple 
stimuli including chemical, mechanical, and (possibly) ther-
mal characteristics of prey. Indeed, they may well possess 
some of the more specialized and useful chemosensory 
systems that are known among vertebrates.     
 Sensing Thermal and Infrared Radiation  
 Cutaneous Receptors and Temperature Sense 
 Like other vertebrates, snakes are able to sense temperature 
and respond to gradients of temperature and sources of heat 
in their environment. As ectotherms, snakes thermoregulate 
most generally by basking at sources of heat that is absorbed 
either by radiation or by conduction from the substrate (see 
 chapter  4  ). To function eff ectively and effi  ciently in its ther-
mal environment, snakes therefore must have a good temper-
ature or heat sense. Like other animals much of the sensory 
information related to heat and temperature is probably 
sensed by free nerve endings in the skin. Th erefore, it seems 
likely that a snake can sense the distribution of temperature 
along its body, as well as sense the nature of heat fl uxes from 
the environment in relation to the length of the body. Much 
is known about the properties of thermoreceptors in animals, 
but there is a paucity of such information as it applies directly 
to snakes. Instead, most attention to ophidian heat-sensing 
has been directed to understanding specialized infrared re-
ceptors in boas, pythons, and pit vipers.  
 Facial Pits and Sensing of Infrared Radiation in Snakes 
 Th e ability to sense infrared, or “thermal,” radiation has 
evolved independently in crotaline pit vipers and in several 
taxa of boas and pythons. Anatomically, the facial pits of pit 

 174  | How Snakes Work
vipers (from which they get the name) occur as a pair of indi-
vidually prominent pit organs, one on each side of the head, 
each located generally between the eye and the nostril ( fi g. 
 7.11 ). Th ese are sometimes termed  loreal pits as well as  facial 
pits or  pit organs . In some boas and pythons there are multiple, 
comparatively smaller pit structures that are aligned along 
variable lengths of the upper and sometimes lower lip, in or 
between the scales ( fi gs.  7.4 ; see also  fi gs.  1.17 ,  1.22 ). Th ese are 
termed  labial pits in contrast to the loreal pits of pit vipers. Th e 
facial pits of pit vipers are considered to be more advanced, 
and they diff er in some structural details from those of boas 
and pythons. In both cases, however, pit organs enable snakes 
to detect thermal contrast ( fi g.  4.13 ) and to form spatial im-
ages related to radiation from the environment within the in-
frared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Th e infrared 
imaging system provides a spatial image of the thermal envi-
ronment and thus complements the snake’s visual system. 
 Th e individual pit organ of pit vipers consists of a deep, 
saccular pocket having a thin membrane stretched across it. 
Th ere is an air-fi lled chamber behind the membrane, so each 
side of the membrane contacts air. Th e membrane is highly 
vascular and innervated with many heat-sensitive receptors, 
which are formed at the terminal endings of the trigeminal 
nerve. Th at is, each receptor is part of the trigeminal nerve 
and not a separately modifi ed sensory cell. Th e pit organs of 
boas and pythons are similar except the membrane is not 
suspended and instead lines the inner reaches of the recessed 
pocket. Like the crotaline membrane, the membrane of boas 
and pythons is richly innervated and vascularized, but it dif-
fers in not having an underlying cavity. Probably for this rea-
son, infrared detection in pit vipers has been shown to be 
more sensitive than that for pythons both in electrophysio-
logical studies of neural responses and in investigations of 
behavioral responses. Th e distance at which snakes can de-
tect an infrared stimulus also diff ers in the two groups of 
snakes: about 100 cm in pit vipers and about 30 cm in boids. 
 Research using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and 
other imaging techniques has revealed that the stratum cor-
neum of the pit organ is covered with microscopic pores or 
indentations termed  micropits or  nanopits . Th ese vary from 
1–2  μ m in diameter to smaller than 0.5  μ m diameters in 
both boid and crotaline snakes. Th e average spacing of 
nanopit arrays on the pit epidermis has been determined to 
be from 520 to 808 nm, which is close to a structural spacing 
required for effi  cient refl ection of ultraviolet and visible ra-
diation (characteristic of sunlight) without aff ecting the ab-
sorption of infrared radiation. Th us, it has been suggested 
that the “ultramicrostructural” (nanostructural) features of 
the surface stratum corneum of pit organs protects the in-
frared imaging sensors from high-energy fl ux of photons in 
ambient light and selectively absorbs infrared radiation, 
thereby enhancing the resolution of infrared images. Th e 
spacing of nanopits on epidermis outside the receptor organ 
areas is diff erent (330 nm). It is not clear, however, exactly 
where the epidermis from these pit organs was sampled, so 
the functional signifi cance remains uncertain. 
 In summary, scale surface and pit organ morphologies have 
been examined with high-resolution techniques that have re-
vealed three-dimensional details of nanostructures on these 
surfaces. Th e dimensions of micropits are shown to vary de-
pending on their location on the snake’s body, and the surface 
of the pit organ is distinct from other scale surfaces that bear 
 
 
 Figure 7.11.   Pit organs of pit vipers. The  upper photo illustrates 
sensory structures on the head and scales of the Florida Cottonmouth 
( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ). The external  naris (n) and  pit organ 
(p) are prominent on the head anterior to the eye. Paired  apical pits 
are visible on some of the body scales just to the left of the arrows. 
The white circle surrounds tiny projections on a head scale that are 
probably sensory (although this is speculation on the part of the 
author). The  lower photo illustrates the pit organ (p) just below the 
arrow on the head of a Chinese Moccasin ( Deinagkistrodon acutus ). 
The membrane of the pit organ can be seen within the pocket of the 
structure. The cottonmouth was photographed in Florida, and the 
Chinese Moccasin was photographed in Taiwan, by the author. 

Perceiving the Snake’s World  |  175 
these same structures. Th e dimensions, spacing, and size 
distribution of micropits depend on the scale type, and those 
that are associated with pit organs appear to enhance the ab-
sorption of infrared radiation while scattering ultraviolet and 
visible light in comparison with other body surfaces. One 
other possible advantage of the nanostructural features of pit 
organ membranes is to lower the surface thermal conductivity, 
which might enhance the detection of thermal contrasts re-
lated to patterns of radiation impinging on the pit membrane. 
 In pit vipers there are roughly 1,600 sensory cells arrayed 
on the membrane, which has a fi eld of view of about 100 de-
grees. Th e open entry to the pit is relatively large compared 
to the membrane, and radiation entering the pit strikes 
many points on the membrane. If the radiation intensity 
striking the membrane is larger than the emitted thermal 
radiation of the membrane itself, the membrane will heat up 
at that location. Th e nerve fi bers in the membrane are con-
stantly fi ring (action potentials, or nervous “impulses”) at a 
low rate determined by the average thermal radiation of all 
objects in the receptive fi eld of the pit organ. When a local-
ized stimulus ( fi g.  4.13 ) raises the temperature of nerve fi bers 
above “background,” the nerves are stimulated to increase 
their fi ring rate, which increases the rate of signal traffi  c 
going to the part of brain connected to those particular 
fi bers. Th ese nerve fi bers are estimated to be sensitive to 
temperature changes of at least 0.001°C! All of the nerve sig-
nals from the pit organs arrive ultimately at the optic tectum 
of the brain, which also receives information from the visual, 
motor, and auditory systems. Some of the neurons in the op-
tic tectum respond to combined infrared and visual stimula-
tion, which produce overlapping maps that are relayed to the 
forebrain. Th us, the infrared and visual information, along 
with other sensory inputs, merges to form imagery of the 
external world in a manner that we cannot well imagine. 
 Th e spatial heat distribution in the environment pro-
duces a heat image on the pit membrane, but it is blurred to 
a large extent. In the brain, however, the superposition of 
information enables a reconstruction of the blurred image 
on the membrane so that what the snake “sees” in infrared 
is conceivably clear and three-dimensional. Th is provides a 
remarkable sense that can detect the diff erence in tempera-
ture between a moving prey, such as a mouse, and its sur-
roundings on the scale of thousandths of degrees Celsius! 
 Given the means by which the infrared-sensitive neu-
rons in the pit organ respond to a stimulus, scientists have 
been interested in the observation that localized blood fl ow 
in the rich vasculature of the pit membrane changes in re-
sponse to the heating of the receptors that are subjected to 
an infrared stimulus. In response to heating, the smooth 
muscle elements of the pit organ blood vessels act locally 
and directly to increase blood fl ow in response to localized 
heating by a focused laser stimulus. Th us, it is believed that 
the rich vasculature and blood fl ow associated with pit 
organs constitute a cooling system (by carrying heat away) 
that enhances, or fi ne-tunes, the resolution of images.  
 Numerous studies have demonstrated the abilities of boid 
and crotaline snakes to utilize pit organs to image and target 
prey (see  fi g.  4.13 ), and these are the only animals known to 
form images of infrared radiation and to use this information 
adaptively. Rattlesnakes that are blinded experimentally, or 
are born blind, can target and strike prey accurately. Similarly, 
in boid snakes normal vision is not required for accurate prey 
targeting, although it is interesting that Burmese Pythons ( Py-
thon molurus ) born with a single eye preferentially target prey 
on the sighted side. On the other hand, experimental occlu-
sion of the pit organs does not eliminate the ability of a rattle-
snake to target prey accurately, although the targeting distance 
is decreased. Boid and crotaline snakes are further unique 
among animals in using information from two distinct parts 
of the electromagnetic spectrum (infrared plus vision) to form 
spatial representations of their environments in the brain. 
Both infrared information and visual information are likely to 
be normally involved in capturing prey. As with eyes and vi-
sion, pit organs are often directed forward in such a manner as 
to provide overlapping fi elds of environmental stimulus, anal-
ogous to binocular vision ( fi g.  7.12 ). 
 
 
 Figure 7.12.   Paired facial pit organs of a South American 
Rattlesnake ( Crotalus durissus ) and a Chinese Moccasin 
( Deinagkistrodon acutus ). The forward-projecting and overlapping 
sensory ﬁ elds of the bilaterally paired pit organs and also the eyes of 
these snakes are evident in these views. Photographs by the author. 

 176  | How Snakes Work
 Th e majority of behavioral research on the use of infra-
red radiation has related to the targeting and capturing of 
endothermic prey such as rodents. However, it seems also 
obvious that pit organs can be used to survey all of the spa-
tial variation of the thermal environment, and this infor-
mation might be used for judging movements related to 
thermoregulation, as well as capturing prey. Indeed, exper-
iments have demonstrated that rattlesnakes use their facial 
pits to guide thermoregulatory behaviors. In one series of 
interesting tests reported by Aaron Krochmal and George 
Bakken, Western Diamond-backed Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus 
atrox ) selected a relatively cool refuge when given choices of 
retreat sites that simulated natural conditions of hot desert 
habitat. Th e snakes detected the appropriate artifi cial 
burrow from a distance of about 1 meter. However, when a 
snake’s facial pits were blocked with insulating polystyrene 
and covered with a piece of aluminum to refl ect thermal ra-
diation, it could not locate the cooler burrow as before. 
When the foil and polystyrene were removed, the snakes 
quickly found the cooler burrows once again. Th ese snakes 
clearly were using their facial pits to seek refuge from heat 
when placed in a hot environment. 
 Pit organs are probably used to survey the environment 
in a general way, and the infrared imagery that is integrated 
with visual and other sensory inputs likely guides a variety 
of behaviors. Both prey capture and thermoregulation are 
now accepted by scientists to be documented functions of 
crotaline facial pits. Some infrared pit organs also respond 
to touch, however, and the temperature sensitive neurons 
can also function as touch neurons. Th e evolutionary origin 
of these exquisite sensory organs remains an unresolved 
mystery. 
 Supranasal Sacs of Vipers 
 Th e pit organs of boas, pythons, and pit vipers are exter-
nally obvious structures, and it is only natural that they 
have attracted early attention and study. Less obvious 
structures in some other snakes might serve similar func-
tions, however. Many of the Old World vipers (Viperinae) 
and night adders (Causinae) possess a  supranasal sac , which 
is a recess located beneath the supranasal or internasal 
scale and the nasal scale. Th e sac has an inconspicuous slit-
like opening and is innervated by nerve endings much like 
those of the labial pits of boas and pythons. Th e inner re-
cess of the sac bears ciliated epithelium and secretory tu-
bules that evidently deliver mucus that forms a think 
covering over the epithelium. 
 Th e supranasal sacs of viperine snakes are rarely men-
tioned, but some researchers have suggested that they 
might function as heat detectors similarly to the more fa-
miliar pit organs of boids and pit vipers. Behavioral studies 
have shown that Puff  Adders ( Bitis arietans ) and Russell’s 
Vipers ( Daboia russelli ) preferentially strike at warm objects 
in the laboratory. Further research will shed more light on 
the structure and function of these putative sense organs, 
and perhaps other similar structures are yet to be discov-
ered in the facial anatomy of other taxa of snakes. 
 A small pit has been described within each nostril of 
some species of  Trimeresurus and in some other pit vipers. 
Th ese consist of a minute pore lying on the inner posterior 
wall of the nostril, without any grooved connection with 
the main nasal cavity. Th ese structures have been termed 
“nasal pores,” but their function has not been investigated. 
 
 
 Figure 7.13.   Scanning electron micrographs of the apical pits on 
an individual scale of a Florida Cottonmouth ( Agkistrodon piscivorus 
conanti ). The  upper photo illustrates paired pits near the caudal 
(rear) end of a body scale. The  lower photo is magniﬁ ed another 
25-fold and illustrates the transition of scale topography from the 
normal sculptured surface (lower aspect of photo) to the ﬂ at and 
smooth depression of the apical pit (upper left aspect of photo). 
Photographs by the author. 

Perceiving the Snake’s World  |  177 
 Sensory Organs in Skin  
 Imagine again you are a snake, and you 
have a very long body without limbs. It 
seems a most justifi able conclusion that 
sensory input along the length of the 
body is an important requirement for 
survival. Note also your body is covered 
with scales, and there are cornifi ed folds 
in the epidermal layers between scales 
that allow bending and mobility. Not sur-
prisingly, the scales of snakes have sen-
sory structures that provide important 
information about the environment and 
a snake’s sense of where it is and how 
it should move in response to the envi-
ronment. Cutaneous sensory structures 
have been known for a long time, yet we 
know comparatively little about the 
 details of their function. 
 Free nerve endings in the skin are ca-
pable of transmitting information about 
temperature and mechanical stimuli to 
the central nervous system, and these are 
probably important to the sensory world 
of a snake. Other structures appear more prominent and 
specialized, with attached nerves suggesting these to be 
sensory in function. File snakes ( Acrochordus spp.) have 
prominent epidermal spines on each scale, and these are as-
sociated with a rich blood supply and connections with 
nerves. Th ey are speculated to be mechanoreceptors impor-
tant for detecting water displacements. Little File Snakes, 
 Acrochordus granulatus , are very sensitive to mechanical 
stimuli in water, and they respond very rapidly to certain 
movements that are made by nearby fi shes. Th ese snakes 
enwrap fi sh with body or tail coils with extreme rapidity in 
response to these movements. Th us, it appears the inner-
vated spines are used eff ectively in prey capture. Some sea 
snakes are sensitive to low-amplitude water motions, and 
the inner ear cells as well as scale structures may be in-
volved in the detection of hydrodynamic stimuli. Behav-
ioral studies also indicate that some sea snakes ( Pelamis 
platurus ) are sensitive to water motions caused by swim-
ming fi sh. Small spines are sometimes seen on the scales of 
this species and are probably sensory ( fi g.  5.9  ). Physiolog-
ical investigations have demonstrated nerve responses 
originating from both mechanoreceptors and separate tem-
perature receptors in the skin of snakes, but the precise na-
ture and identity of these receptors is unknown. Some 
mechanoreceptors of snakes (which respond to vibrations) 
resemble somewhat the Pacinican corpuscles of mammals. 
Th ey possess layers of lamellar cells, but they lack the cor-
puscular end-organs that are characteristic in mammals. 
 Th e scales of all snakes have various microstructural fea-
tures on their surfaces (see  chapter  5  ), and these include hair-
like projections, pits, spinules, and what appear to be 
microscopic holes. Some of these features might act as collec-
tion or transducing receivers of information from the envi-
ronment, but this has not yet been the subject of defi nitive 
research. Some scientists have even suggested that inner-
vated scale structures might be used for the detection of weak 
electric fi elds, as is known in some other aquatic animals.    
 Many snakes (but not all taxa) exhibit structures near the 
posterior tip of the dorsal scales termed  apical pits . Th ese are 
typically paired (symmetrically to either side of the scale 
midline) sense organs recessed in a small depression having a 
smooth surface and visible to the naked eye in many species 
( fi gs.  7.11 ,  7.13 ). Th ey occur on scales over the body and the 
tail. Similar structures having variable appearances and 
distribution occur on the head scales of snakes, and are 
known as  head pits or  parietal pits . Th ese may have an elabo-
rate three-dimensional structure within the skin and appear 
to be possible sense organs. Th e function of all these superfi -
cially positioned “pits” is completely unknown, however. 
 Harold Heatwole has noted that the tails of certain sea 
snakes are sensitive to light, and he postulates there are dif-
fuse light receptors on the skin of the paddle-shaped tail. 
Olive Sea Snakes ( Aipysurus laevis ) tend to rest at night with 
their bodies inside crevices of coral, but the tail remains ex-
posed and extends upward outside the coral. When light is 
shown on the tail, the snake is disturbed, suggesting a 
 
 
 Figure 7.14.   Head of the Tentacled Snake ( Erpeton tentaculatum , an aquatic 
homalopsid) illustrating the paired mechanosensory appendages (“tentacles”) 
protruding from the snout. These structures sense vibrational stimuli in water and are 
useful, for example, in capturing ﬁ sh (see  chapter  2 ). The  inset shows the epidermal 
and scaled nature of the tentacles in closer detail, and also illustrates the closed mode 
of the narial valves. Photographs by John C. Murphy. 

 178  | How Snakes Work
 behavioral response to the stimulation of the cutaneous 
light receptors. 
 Finally, I mention the unique pair of scaled appendages 
that protrude from the rostral margins of the head of the 
aquatic Tentacled Snake ( Erpeton tentaculatum ) ( fi g.  7.14 ). 
Th ese tentacles are very sensitive mechanoreceptors that 
respond to vibrational movements in water. Th ey are 
densely innervated and are used to detect the position of 
fi sh that comprise their prey. Strikes at prey (see  chapter 
 2 ) can be guided by either visual or mechanical cues, but 
normally the position of fi sh is signaled by integration of 
both visual and mechanosensory cues that are integrated 
in the brain. Tentacled Snakes are completely aquatic and 
feed almost exclusively on fi sh. Th e tentacle appendages 
are perhaps most useful when snakes are in turbid water 
or feeding at night when visual cues are less useful to 
 localize prey.    
 Concluding Remarks  
 As with we humans, so it is with snakes: our sense organs 
enable us to perceive the world around us, and they deter-
mine how we view it. Th e amazing thing is that all the 
 sensory input of stimuli—light, heat, sound, and so on—
becomes transduced into the same form of signals that 
move almost instantaneously (along nerve pathways) to 
our brain as action potentials, where they are interpreted. 
How a snake “views” its world might be quite diff erent 
from how we humans view ours. Consider, for example, 
what it might be like to view the world around us as ther-
mal images that are constructed in the brain from sig-
naling that originates in pit organs. On the other hand, 
perhaps our perception of the world around us is not really 
that diff erent from that of a snake. Th ink about this.  
 Additional Reading  
 Amemiya, F., R. C. Goris, Y. Masuda, R. Kishida, Y. Atobe, N. Ishii, 
and T. Kusunoki. 1995. Th e surface architecture of snake infra-
red receptor organs.  Biomedical Research (Tokyo) 16:411–421. 
 Bakken, G. S., and A. R. Krochmal. 2007. Th e imaging properties 
and sensitivity of the facial pits of pitvipers as determined by 
optical and heat-transfer analysis.  Journal of Experimental 
 Biology 210:2801–2810. 
 Berman, D. S., and P. Regal. 1967. Th e loss of the ophidian middle 
ear.  Evolution 21:641–643. 
 Bulloch, T. H., and R. B. Cowles. 1952. Physiology of an infrared 
receptor: Th e facial pit of pit vipers.  Science 115:541–543. 
 Burghardt, G. M. 1970. Chemical perception in reptiles. In J. W. 
Johnston Jr., D. G. Moulton, and A. Turk (eds.),  Advances in 
Chemoreception , vol. 1,  Communication by Chemical Signals . New 
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, pp. 241–308. 
 Burns, B. 1969. Oral sensory papillae in sea snakes.  Copeia 
1969:617–619. 
 Campbell, A. L., T. J. Bunning, M. O. Stone, D. Church, and M. S. 
Grace. 1999. Surface ultrastructure of pit organ, spectacle, and 
non pit organ epidermis of infrared imaging boid snakes: A 
scanning probe and scanning electron microscopy study. 
 Journal of Structural Biology 126:105–120. 
 Caprette, C. L., M. S. Y. Lee, R. Shine, A. Mokany, and J. F. Down-
hower. 2004. Th e origin of snakes (Serpentes) as seen through 
eye anatomy.  Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 81:
469–482. 
 Catania, K. C., D. B. Leitch and D. Gauthier. 2010. Function of the 
appendages in tentacled snakes ( Erpeton tentaculatus ).  Journal 
of Experimental Biology 213:359–367. 
 Chiszar, D., C. Andren, G. Nilson, B. O’Connell, J. S. Mestas Jr., H. 
M. Smith, and C. W. Radcliff e. 1982. Strike-induced chemosen-
sory searching in Old World and New World pit vipers.  Animal 
Learning and Behavior 10:121–125. 
 Christensen, C. B., J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, C. Brandt, and P. T. 
Madsen. 2012. Hearing with an atympanic ear: Good vibration 
and poor sound-pressure detection in the royal rython,  Python 
regius .  Journal of Experimental Biology 215:331–342. 
 De Cock Buning, T., S.-I. Terashima and R. C. Goris. 1981. Python 
pit organs analyzed as warm receptors.  Cellular and Molecular 
Neurobiology 1:271–278. 
 De Haan, C. C. 2003. Sense-organ-like parietal pits found in Psam-
mophiini (Serpentes, Colubridae).  Comptes Rendus Biologies 
326:287–293. 
 Ebert, J., S. Müller, and G. Westhoff . 2007. Behavioural examina-
tion of the infrared sensitivity of ball pythons.  Journal of Zool-
ogy 272:340–347. 
 Fuchigami, N., J. Hazel, V. V. Gorbunov, M. Stone, M. Grace, and V. 
V. Tsukruk. 2001. Biological thermal detection in infrared im-
aging snakes. 1. Ultramicrostructure of pit receptor organs. 
 Biomacromolecules 2:757–764. 
 Goris, R. C., Y. Atobe, M. Nakano, K. Funakoshi, and K. Terada. 
2007. Blood fl ow in snake infrared organs: response-induced 
changes in individual vessels.  Microcirculation 14:99–110. 
 Grace, M. S., W. M. Woodward, D. R. Church, and G. Calisch. 2001. 
Prey targeting by the infrared-imaging snake  Python : Eff ects of 
experimental and congenital visual deprivation.  Behavioural 
Brain Research 119:23–31. 
 Hartline, P. H. 1971. Physiological basis for detection of sound and 
vibration in snakes.  Journal of Experimental Biology 54:349–371. 
 Hartline, P. H., and H. W. Campbell. 1969. Auditory and vibratory 
responses in the midbrain of snakes.  Science 163:1221–1223. 
 Hartline, P. H., and E. A. Newman. 1981. Integration of visual and 
infrared information in bimodal neurons of the rattlesnake 
 optic tectum.  Science 213:789–791. 
 Jackson, M. K., and G. S. Doetsch. 1977. Functional properties of 
nerve fi bers innervating cutaneous corpuscles within cephalic 
skin of the Texas rat snake.  Experimental Neurology 56:63–77. 
 Jackson, M. K., and G. S. Doetsch. 1977. Response properties of 
mechanosensitive skin nerve fi bers innervating cehalic skin of 
the Texas rat snake.  Experimental Neurology 56:77–90. 
 Kahmann, H. 1932. Sinnesphysiologische studien an reptilien: 1. Ex-
perimentalle untersuchungen über das Jakobsonische organ der 
eideschen und schlangen.  Zoologische Jahrbücher Abteilung für 
allgemeine Zoologie ünd Physiologie der Tiere. Jena . 51:173–238. 
 Kardong, K. V., and H. Berkhoudt. 1999. Rattlesnake hunting be-
havior: Correlations between plasticity of predatory perfor-
mance and neuroanatomy.  Brain Behavior and Evolution 
53:20–28. 

Perceiving the Snake’s World  |  179 
 Kardong, K. V., and S. P. Mackessey. 1991. Th e strike behavior 
of a congenitally blind rattlesnake.  Journal of Herpetology 
25:208–211. 
 Kishida, T., and T. Hikida. 2010. Degeneration patterns of olfac-
tory receptor genes in sea snakes.  Journal of Evolutionary Biol-
ogy 23:302–310. 
 Krochmal, A. R., and G. S. Bakken. 2003. Th ermoregulation is the 
pits: Use of thermal radiation for retreat site selection by rat-
tlesnakes.  Journal of Experimental Biology 206:2539–2545. 
 Krochmal, A. R., G. S. Bakken, and T. J. LaDuc. 2004. Heat in evo-
lution’s kitchen: Evolutionary perspectives on the functions 
and origin of the facial pit of pitvipers (Viperidae: Crotalinae). 
 Journal of Experimental Biology 207:4231–4238. 
 Liu, Y., L. Ding, J. Lei, E. Zhao, and Y. Tang. 2012. Eye size variation 
refl ects habitat and daily activity patterns in colubrid snakes. 
 Journal of Morphology 273:883–893. 
 Molenaar, G. J. 1992. Anatomy and physiology of infrared sensitivity 
of snakes. In C. Gans and P. S. Ulinski (eds.),  Biology of the Reptil-
ia , vol. 17. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 367–453. 
 Newman, E. A., and P. H. Hartline. 1982. Th e infrared “vision” of 
snakes.  Scientifi c American 246:98–107. 
 Nishida, Y., S. Yoshie, and T. Fujita. 2000. Oral sensory papillae, 
chemo- and mechano-receptors, in the snake,  Elaphe quadrivir-
gata : A light and electron microscopic study.  Archives of Histol-
ogy and Cytology 63:55–70. 
 Parker, M. R., B. A. Young, and K. V. Kardong. 2008. The forked 
tongue and edge detection in snakes ( Crotalus oreganus ): 
An experimental test.  Journal of Comparative Psychology 
122:35–40. 
 Povel, D., and J. van der Kooij. 1997. Scale sensillae of the fi le snake 
(Serpentes: Acrochordidae) and some other aquatic and bur-
rowing snakes.  Netherlands Journal of Zoology 47:443–456. 
 Schwenk, K. 1994. Why snakes have forked tongues.  Science 
263:1573–1577. 
 Schwenk, K. 1995. Of tongues and noses: Chemoreception in liz-
ards and snakes.  Trends in Ecology and Evolution 10:7–12. 
 Sivak, J. G. 1977. Th e role of the spectacle in the visual optics of the 
snake eye.  Vision Research 17:293–298. 
 Walls, G. L. 1967.  Th e Vertebrate Eye and Its Adaptive Radiation . New 
York: Hafner Publishing. Facsimile of 1942 edition. 
 Westhoff , G., B. G. Fry, and H. Bleckmann. 2005. Sea snakes ( Lape-
mis curtus ) are sensitive to low-amplitude water motions.  Zool-
ogy 108:195–200. 
 Wever, E. G. 1978.  Th e Reptile Ear . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press. 
 York, D. S., T. M. Silver, and A. A. Smith. 1998. Innervation of the 
supranasal sac of the puff  adder.  Anatomical Record 251:221–225. 
 Young, B. A. 1990. Is there a direct link between the ophidian 
tongue and Jacobson’s organ?  Amphibia-Reptilia 11:263–276. 
 Young, B. A. 1993. Evaluating hypotheses for the transfer of stim-
ulus particles to Jacobson’s organ in snakes.  Brain, Behavior 
and Evolution 41:203–209. 
 Young, B. A. 2003. Snake bioacoustics: Toward a richer under-
standing of the behavioral ecology of snakes.  Quarterly Review 
of Biology 78:303–325. 
 Young, B. A., and A. Aguiar. 2002. Response of western diamond-
back rattlesnakes  Crotalus atrox to airborne sounds.  Journal of 
Experimental Biology 205: 3087–3092. 
 Young, B. A., J. Marvin, and K. Marosi. 2000. Th e potential signif-
icance of ground-borne vibration to predator-prey relation-
ships in snakes.  Hamadryad 25:164–174. 
 Young, B. A., and M. Morain. 2002. Th e use of ground-borne vibra-
tions for prey localization in the Saharan sand vipers ( Ceras-
tes ).  Journal of Experimental Biology 205:661–665. 

This page intentionally left blank 

 | 181
 Most people probably consider snakes to be generally silent 
creatures, making little noise during chance encounters, or 
when being seen at a zoo or fi lmed for a television docu-
mentary. Limited knowledge also suggests to most people 
that snakes cannot hear, or at least cannot hear well. Th is 
view is strengthened by considering that snakes do not 
have external ears, and many older writings have stated or 
implied that snakes cannot hear, although they are sensi-
tive to ground-borne vibrations. Although snakes may not 
hear well, those that hiss or rattle can make loud enough 
sounds to alarm persons who might encounter them. 
 Sound in the Environment  
 What we call “sound” refers to fl uid-borne vibrations (usu-
ally in air) that impinge on a sensory structure (the ear) 
where the energy of the vibrations is transduced into nerve 
signals (see  chapter  7 ). Th e nerve signals travel to the cen-
tral nervous system, where they are interpreted by the ap-
propriate (auditory) region of the brain. If the vibrational 
stimuli fall within the frequency range that is perceived by 
human ears and brain, the stimuli are called sound. Th e 
human ear can detect airborne vibrations in the range of 
frequencies from roughly 20 to 20,000 Hz (Hertz, = cycles 
per second). 
 A similar phenomenon would be expected to occur in 
snakes, except that the animals lack an external ear and ear 
canal. Th erefore, one might suppose that snakes cannot 
hear at all, but this is not true. Th ere are many animals that 
lack externally obvious ears, yet they can “hear” vibrational 
stimuli that are transduced through the tissues of the 
head, internal bony structures, or other mechanisms such 
as the vibrations of air sacs in fi shes. In snakes, vibrations 
are conducted through the tissues of the head (including 
the columella) to stimulate the inner ear, as described in 
 chapter  7 . 
 At lower frequencies, even for humans, there is some 
overlap (and fuzzy distinction) between what we might call 
a “vibration sense” and hearing. Th is may be especially true 
for snakes, given they respond to vibrational stimuli largely 
within the range of several dozens of Hz to about 600 Hz, 
with little or no ability to detect stimuli in excess of about 
1,000 Hz. Both the inner ear and the tissues of the body 
surrounding it are capable of responding to both ground-
borne vibrations and airborne sounds (see  chapter  7  ). So we 
know that snakes can sense at least many of the noises that 
they themselves produce. How they use this information in 
relation to various behaviors is a subject that is in need of 
much further study. 
 Externally Produced Sounds  
 Many snakes use the external body surfaces to produce 
sound, and various sounds are also made unintentionally 
by moving snakes in many circumstances. Th us, the “swish-
ing” sounds made by racers or other large snakes crawl -
ing through dry grasses, the “humming” sounds of snakes 
moving over damp sand (as on a beach), and the “scraping” 
sounds of larger snakes that crawl among or over rocks all 
provide detectable auditory stimuli that alert other animals 
to a snake’s presence and potentially inform the snake 
about its movements. Other sounds are made in specifi c 
contexts related to defense, sometimes using specialized 
features of a snake’s morphology. 
8
 SOUND PRODUCTION  
 A cornered gopher or bull snake is the picture of a vindictive and dangerous 
creature. It coils and vibrates its tail, and lunges repeatedly at any intruder. 
It hisses violently, having a peculiar construction of the epiglottis that 
accentuates the sound. This frightening pose will quite convince an observer 
that so ferocious an animal had best be let alone, which is exactly its purpose. 
 —Lawrence M. Klauber,  Rattlesnakes (1956), vol. 1, p. 22  

 182  | How Snakes Work
 Rubbing of Scales 
 Th e scales on the body of snakes are fortifi ed at their outer 
surfaces by numerous layers of keratin (see  chapter  5 ). Th is 
material is derived from living cells and consists of dead 
interlocking elements of protein. Keeled scales have the 
outermost layers elevated into ridges or other protuber-
ances on the scale surfaces, usually along the midlines 
( fi gs.  5.8 – 5.10 ). Th ese scales can create sounds when they 
are rubbed against objects or against each other.  
 In certain snakes, the scales are deliberately rubbed to-
gether by precisely orchestrated body movements to produce 
sounds that are assumed to be defensive. Th e behavior is no-
table in snakes of the genera  Echis (Saw-scaled Vipers),  Dasy-
peltis  (egg-eating snakes), and  Aspis (some adders). Th e 
rubbing sound is especially pronounced in Saw-scaled Vi-
pers, hence the common name. Th e lateral body scales are 
prominently keeled ( fi g.  8.1 ), and they rub against each other 
when segments of the body trunk make contact and slide in 
opposite directions while the snake is in a loose, but writhing, 
coil. Th e mutual abrasion of opposite-facing scales produces 
a “raspy” sound, which has not been analyzed in detail. 
 Two other observations are noteworthy. First, the lateral 
location of the relatively more prominent scale ridges 
(where the rubbing contact occurs) suggests these are a spe-
cifi c adaptation that has evolved in relation to the scale-
rubbing behavior. Second, the rubbing of scales occurs only 
in circumstances that suggest that the function of this be-
havior is defensive. 
 Tail Vibration and Rattling 
 Many snakes, both venomous and nonvenomous, vibrate 
or shake their tails when they are disturbed or threatened. 
Such tail vibrations produce audible sounds depending on 
the substrate that contacts the tail, the speed of shaking, 
and the mass and nature of the tail. A vibrating tail of, say, 
a Bullsnake or Gopher Snake ( Pituophis catenifer ) will pro-
duce a startling sound when it shakes among dry leaves, but 
the sound would be very diff erent and muted if the tail was 
shaken upon sand or in damp grass. Th e ability of the tail to 
produce sound also might depend on projections or ap-
pendages that are present at the tip of the tail in some spe-
cies (rattlesnakes). In another context, I have observed that 
shaking the tail may serve to disperse musk in presumably 
chemical defensive responses (e.g., Cottonmouths,  Agkis-
trodon piscivorus ). 
 Th e most obvious example of enhanced acoustic signals 
in tail shaking is that associated with the rattles of rattle-
snakes (genera  Crotalus  and  Sistrurus ). Th e rattle is similar 
in all species with respect to its fundamental structure, 
 except for size. It can be considered an epidermal ap-
pendage, having evolved from proliferated horny tissue 
that is derived from the outermost  stratum corneum  at the 
tip of the tail (see  chapter  5  ). Th e rattle consists of inter-
locking segments of keratin, each fi tting loosely within 
 another, and a new segment is added at each cycle of ec-
dysis ( fi g.  8.2  ). A prerattle segment on the tip of the tail, 
called a  prebutton , is present at birth but is lost at the fi rst 
ecdysis. Th e fi rst permanent and distal segment on the 
rattle is called the  button ( fi g.  8.3  ). Only after the second 
ecdysis does the rattle consist of two interlocking seg-
ments that can make sound. Each added segment increases 
in size as the snake grows larger, becoming more uniform 
as growth slows in adulthood ( fi g.  8.3  ). Th e rattle ap-
pendage, when shaken vigorously by its owner, produces 
the buzzing or hissing-like noise (similar to escaping steam 
or pressurized air) that results from the interlocking seg-
ments of the rattle striking against each other when the 
tail is shaken vigorously by tail muscles that are special-
ized for “rattling.” The sound of such a rattle is weak when 
there are only a few segments, but increases with the addi-
tion of more segments as the snake grows in size. 
 People generally fi nd rattlesnakes to be “noisy” animals, 
but many folks do not appreciate the elegant qualities of 
the rattle and the tail that shakes it. Th e rattling of a rattle-
snake rattle is one of the faster movements made by verte-
brates, and the so-called  shaker muscles in the tails of 
rattlesnakes are among the faster muscles that are known 
in nature. Th ese muscles can sustain contraction frequencies 
of 20–100 Hz for as long as several hours! Th e contraction 
frequency, and hence the oscillation frequency of the rattle, 
is dependent on temperature. In adult Western Diamond-
backed Rattlesnakes,  Crotalus atrox , the contraction 
frequency is 15 Hz at a temperature of 10°C, whereas the 
contraction frequency increases to 85 Hz at 35°C. Th e shaker 
muscles have large deposits of glycogen and are quite 
resistant to fatigue. Numerous mitochondria and blood 
 
 
 Figure 8.1.   A Saw-scaled Viper ( Echis carinatus ) in south India, 
illustrating the highly keeled condition of lateral body scales (arrow) 
that are rubbed together to produce a defensive rasping sound. 
Photograph by Indraneil Das.  

Sound Production  |  183 
capillaries are present in the muscle, which has compara-
tively small contractile elements and much noncontractile 
tissue. Consequently, the muscle is weak, albeit very eff ec-
tive in moving the lightweight rattle segments very rapidly 
to produce the characteristic rattling sounds. 
 Th ere are three large shaker muscles on each side of the 
tail in  C. atrox . (Th ese correspond to the  M. longissimus 
dorsi ,  M. iliocostalis , and  M. supracostalis lateralis in the body 
of the snake.) Each muscle appears to be a single motor unit 
with fi bers that contract synchronously. Th e individual con-
tractions (called  twitches ) are “all-or-none” and involve all 
of the contractile elements. Brad Moon at the University of 
Louisiana, Lafayette, has shown that the muscle forces ex-
erted on the rattle segments produce two motions: lateral 
displacement and torsion ( fi g.  8.4 ). Th e twisting motion en-
hances sound output, and particularly helps maintain 
sound output in long rattles, which have heavily dampened 
lateral displacements. 
 Recent investigations by Bruce Young, Ilonna Brown, 
Patrick Cook, and their colleagues have modeled the rattle 
as a multidimensional oscillator, and the acoustic profi le of 
the rattling sound can be predicted by measuring the size of 
the rattle or even just the basal segment of the rattle. Th e 
rattle can be considered a kinetic chain, producing sound as 
interlocking adjacent segments of the rattle are shaken 
against each other, generally back and forth from side to 
side (the “oscillator”) ( fi g.  8.4 ). Lateral displacement of the 
rattle segments during rattling oscillations is greatest at 
the tip and diminishes toward the base. In snakes having a 
large number of rattle segments, the segments near the 
base of the tail show little variation in size ( fi g.  8.3 ). Th is 
consistency in size produces a corresponding consistency in 
the frequency of sound that is produced during rattling. A 
“typical” rattling sound can be described as broad-band 
noise spanning from roughly 2,500 to 19,000 Hz with a 
dominant frequency near 9,000 Hz. Note that this range 
does not overlap with that of rattlesnake hearing (see  chap-
ter  7 ). Th ere is no frequency or temporal modulation of the 
sound at constant temperature and uninterrupted rat-
tling. In some rattlesnakes not especially prone to rattle 
vigorously, the tail may twitch periodically or rattle for brief 
periods with resting pauses in between. 
 As temperature increases the frequency of rattling, the 
frequency of muscle twitches that power the rattling move-
ments increase and the movements of the rattle segments 
require higher forces and accelerations. Yet the energy cost 
per twitch of rattling has been found to be independent of 
the twitch frequency. Recordings of the joint motions (be-
tween segments) and associated forces by Brad Moon, 
Kevin Conley, and Stan Lindstedt indicate that the in-
creasing force of a twitch is off set by a shorter duration of 
each twitch, which keeps the energetic cost per twitch cycle 
nearly constant over a wide range of temperatures and 
twitch frequencies. Also, as the twitch frequency increases, 
the lateral displacement of the rattle decreases. Th erefore, 
the increasing forces that are acting on the rattle segments 
are off set by reductions in the lateral displacement of the 
rattle, thereby keeping the mechanical work and force re-
quired to shake the rattle low. At higher frequencies of rat-
tling (tail shaking), the decrease in lateral displacement of 
the rattle is a major factor in keeping the work and energy 
demand from increasing as much as it would if lateral dis-
placement remained constant as the frequency increased. 
Fundamentally, the cost of any muscle contraction is pro-
portional to the force and duration of the contraction. In 
the rattlesnake shaker muscles, there is a trade-off  between 
 
 
 Figure 8.2.    Drawing of a rattlesnake rattle illustrating the interlocking of individual segments in the central part of the rattle. Drawing by 
Amanda Ropp.  

 184  | How Snakes Work
the force and duration of twitches with changing frequency, 
which keeps the energetic cost per twitch constant. Th us, as 
temperature increases, higher muscle forces accelerate the 
rattle faster, but for shorter periods and over smaller lateral 
excursions. Th e diminished lateral displacement allows 
rattle motion and sound production to be sustained for very 
little work. 
 Prolonged rattling of the shaker muscle necessitates con-
siderable blood fl ow, which supplies oxygen and removes 
waste metabolites associated with the muscle activity (espe-
cially lactate). William Kemper, Stan Lindstedt, and their col-
leagues demonstrated that the sustained rate of blood fl ow 
through the rattlesnake shaker muscles (> 450 ml · min −1  · 100 
g  −1 muscle) is among the higher levels reported and exceeds 
that of the skeletal and heart muscles in exercising racehorses! 
During rattling, the increases in blood fl ow, extraction of 
oxygen from blood fl owing through the shaker muscles, and 
high rates of lactate removal by the circulation all contribute 
to the avoidance of fatiguing muscle during rattling at high 
frequencies. Th e unusually high glycolytic fl ux of lactate, and 
the supply of ATP related to it, help to meet a substantial frac-
tion of the ATP energy demand of continuous shaker muscle 
contractions. Lactate results from the production of ATP en-
ergy in metabolic pathways (glycolysis inside muscle) that do 
not require oxygen. With respect to the energetics of the rat-
tlesnake shaker muscles, their mechanical effi  ciency is com-
parable to other muscles that operate at very high frequencies, 
for example the fl ight muscles of insects. 
 According to the early thoughts of Lawrence Klauber, 
published in 1956, “Th e rattle is used as a warning signal; 
upon this, experience permits no argument: if it has alter-
native purposes  . . . they are not matters of daily observa-
tion.” Although other hypotheses and theories have been 
proposed by various persons, it seems to be generally ac-
cepted that certainly the dominant, if not sole use of the 
rattle, is in defense against potentially dangerous animals, 
such as predators or large animals that could trample a 
snake. Some imagined uses of the rattlesnake rattle are 
amusing, including ideas that rattlesnakes always warn an 
intruder by rattling in advance of a strike. Some folks living 
during the 1700s and 1800s believed that a snake always 
rattles three times before striking! Some Brazilian peoples 
believe that venomous snakes, including rattlesnakes, 
 decoy small birds and mammals by imitating their calls. 
However, rattlesnakes rattle only in defensive contexts, 
and not always before the snake strikes. 
 
 
 Figure 8.4.   The rattle of a Western Diamond-backed Rattlesnake 
( Crotalus atrox ) illustrating the forces that are involved in movements 
of the rattle (arrows) during shaking by the shaker muscles. 
Photograph by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 8.3.   The  upper photo illustrates the button at the tip of the 
tail of a baby Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake ( Crotalus 
adamanteus ). This will become the terminal segment of the rattle as 
the snake grows and adds rattle segments. The  lower photo shows 
the rattle of an adult Western Diamond-backed Rattlesnake ( Crotalus 
atrox ). The terminal button has been lost to wear in this individual. 
Both photographs are of living snakes and taken by the author. 

Sound Production  |  185 
 Th e complex structure of the rattlesnake rattle is re-
markably similar across all species, suggesting to most her-
petologists that this structure evolved only once during 
rattlesnake evolution. Based on the dating of fossil rattle-
snakes, rattles have been in existence for at least 5 million 
years. How rattles evolved is still unknown and basically a 
matter of speculation and debate. 
 Internally Produced Sounds  
 Hissing is the most common means by which snakes pro-
duce sounds. Surprisingly, however, there is another novel 
means by which sounds are produced, involving the oppo-
site end of the animal. In all cases, the production of sound 
involves compressive forces that act to dispel air from inter-
nal storage sites.   
 Hissing and Related Sounds 
 I recall as a young boy the very fi rst rattlesnake that I cap-
tured, together with a person who was my best friend at the 
time. Th is dramatic occasion occurred during December in 
Southern California, at a site consisting of rocky caverns 
and outcroppings on the Irvine Ranch (today very near the 
University of California at Irvine campus). We were ex-
ploring the region, as we often did for pure outdoor fun. 
Insofar as the seasonal weather was quite cool we were not 
even thinking about collecting snakes. However, we discov-
ered a very large Red Diamond Rattlesnake ( Crotalus ruber ) 
visible within a rock crevice, so we pulled it out with a stick 
and set it in the open where we could check it out—with 
what I must say was great excitement! Th e snake slowly 
drew itself into a coil but did not rattle. I do not recall the 
temperature, but I suspect the shaker muscles of the tail 
might have been too cold to rattle eff ectively, so the defen-
sive behavior was diff erent from what we had anticipated. 
Th e snake slowly, over many seconds, infl ated itself to a 
girth that appeared more than twice its normal size. Th en, 
just as slowly, it gradually released the air during one, long, 
drawn-out, extraordinary hiss. Th e defensive eff ect was 
quite dramatic and twofold in purpose. First, the snake 
 appeared larger, and for two boys messing with their fi rst 
venomous snake, the perception of size had a chilling ef-
fect. Second, the sound of the hiss clearly impressed on us 
the danger that was before us in the form of this large 
snake. To conclude the story, we captured the rattlesnake, 
took it home, and held it for a week in captivity, then re-
leased it back to the wild on the following weekend. 
 Th is story helps to emphasize an important concept. As 
discussed in  chapter  6 , the elongated lung of snakes be-
stows numerous functions in addition to its primary job of 
exchanging respiratory gases, oxygen and carbon dioxide. 
In the case of the Red Diamond Rattlesnake, the lung 
volume was maximized by the prolonged inhalation, and 
the large storage of air permitted a prolonged hiss and 
thereby exaggerated the eff ect of instilling caution (and, at 
best, fear) on the part of any would-be predator. 
 Hissing 
 Hissing is an important defensive action in snakes, which 
otherwise have no “voice” to startle or alarm an approach-
ing predator. Th e most important function of the hiss is 
probably to alarm an approaching animal and thereby ei-
ther scare it away or, at least, instill caution on the part of 
an advancing predator and slow its advance toward the 
snake. Th is delay gives the snake more time either to escape 
or to optimize the position from which it can launch a strike 
or other defensive action, if necessary. 
 Th e hiss of a snake is clearly audible to humans. Th e sounds 
vary from low, guttural noises to sharper sounds resembling 
escaping steam or noisy gusts of air escaping through a tube. 
However, the hissing sounds of snakes are thought to have a 
very low potential for encoding information and can be gener-
ally regarded as a simple defensive warning. Th ere is a remark-
able acoustic similarity among hisses from many species of 
snakes, and the simplicity of the sounds has been said to ap-
proach the levels determined for “white noise.” Most hisses 
are essentially high intensity, unmodulated, dynamic fl ows 
of ventilatory air. Th ese are characterized by a generally 
simple acoustic structure with little frequency or amplitude 
modulation and little or no temporal patterning.  
 Th e mechanism of the hiss in most snakes involves sev-
eral elements. First, the energy that “drives” the production 
of sound is attributable to the movement of air within the 
lung and through the opening of the trachea or larynx. Th e 
release of air during exhalation that is associated with a 
hiss is due either to passive recoil of the infl ated lung and 
stretched body wall, or to active compression of the body 
and lung by surrounding muscles, or both. Second, the pro-
duction of sound as a result of escaping air involves an in-
teraction involving the dynamic fl ow of the air, the length 
of the tracheal airway, and the aperture ( glottis ) of the tra-
chea ( fi g.  8.5 ). Th e frequency of the hissing sound depends 
on the length and diameter relationships of the trachea 
and/or larynx. Th e trachea is essentially a long tube with 
one end that can be opened or closed by muscular actions of 
the glottis. Exhalation of air from the trachea through the 
glottis induces vibration of air within the trachea. Th e 
frequency of such vibration, and thus the sound that is pro-
duced, is directly related to the length of the tube. Of 
course, the trachea is not a solid tube (of cartilage) but con-
tains a fl exible membrane for part of its circumference ( fi gs. 
 6.13 ,  6.19 ). Th us, vibrations of the tracheal membrane can 
also infl uence the sound that is produced. Vibrations of the 
tracheal membrane are dependent on the vibrations of the 

 186  | How Snakes Work
air within the trachea, and the tensioning of the tracheal 
membrane. Finally, hissing sounds can be produced during 
both inhalation and exhalation of pulmonary air. 
 Dr. Bruce Young, currently at the University of Massachu-
setts, Lowell, has focused much of his research program 
on evaluating the sound production and sound-producing 
mechanisms of snakes. He has suggested a good analogy for 
understanding the hissing noises of snakes, and this is the 
musical instrument that we call a fl ute. Flutes are classifi ed 
according to their length, and the longer the fl ute the lower 
the frequency it is able to produce. For a given fl ute, the 
fi nger holes (allowing escape of exhaled air by the player) 
farthest from the air source produce the sounds of lowest 
frequency, whereas those adjacent to the air source produce 
the sounds having highest frequency. Th ese features are 
analogous to the length of the trachea and the relative posi-
tion of the opening (see also the section on “growling” below). 
 Ventilatory air fl ow in snakes is produced by localized 
movements of the ribs, and such actions have been referred 
to by Herb Rosenberg as the “costal pump.” In some snakes 
the defensive hisses exhibit a quadriphasic temporal pat-
tern characterized by (1) an initial exhalatory hiss, followed 
by (2) a brief transitional pause; (3) an inhalatory hiss; and 
then (4) a second pause or period of rest. Th e costal pump is 
responsible for generating this pattern, and the role of the 
pulmonary tract is generally passive.  Abduction of the ribs 
(movement away from the central axis) produces negative 
pressure in the lungs and powers inhalation, sometimes re-
sulting in an inhalation hiss.  Adduction of the ribs (move-
ment toward the central axis) does the opposite, increasing 
pressure within the lung and powering exhalation with as-
sociated hissing. Expansion of the body (on inhalation) is a 
common feature of defensive displays of snakes, and the 
exchange of air between the trachea, lung, and environ-
ment is often accompanied by hissing sounds. 
 Th e noise of a hiss is a broad spectrum of sound, span-
ning frequencies from roughly 3,000 to 13,000 Hz. Th ere is 
a dominant frequency at around 7,500 Hz, with little varia-
tion related to species or body size. While some herpetolo-
gists have suggested that snakes have the capability to 
modulate the amplitude and temporal properties of the 
hiss (changes through time), there is no convincing evi-
dence for such modulation. Snakes have two muscles that 
can act to alter the diameter of the glottal opening, which 
could change the nature of the hiss by altering the velocity 
of the air fl ow. Such active modulation of the glottal opening 
could possibly be employed to modulate the hiss, but no 
one has yet confi rmed that this actually occurs in any of the 
species that have been studied. Moreover, studies of artifi -
cial hissing in Puff  Adders ( Bitis arietans ) by Bruce Young 
suggest it would be nearly impossible for the snake to pro-
duce an acoustically complex hiss, and the trachea of this 
species imparts no distinct acoustic signature to the ex-
haled airstream. Th e larynx is simply not able to modulate 
frequency of the exhaled airstream even if the glottis is 
forcibly occluded against the fl ow of air by electrical stimu-
lation of the  Constrictor laryngis muscle. 
 Th e hiss of the colubrid snakes  Pituophis melanoleucus 
and  P. catenifer is especially noteworthy. Th ese species are 
called Pine, Bull, or Gopher Snake depending on the subspe-
cies and region of occurrence. Th e defensive hisses of these 
snakes can be very loud and have what has been described 
as a “raspy” texture. Unlike most other species of snakes, 
the frequency range of the hiss of  P. melanoleucus spans the 
range from 500 to 9,500 Hz. 
 Th e larynx of  Pituophis  is unusual in having two mor-
phological specializations: (1) a dorsal extension of the cri-
coid cartilage that is sometimes referred to as an “epiglottal 
keel”; and (2) a fl exible, horizontal shelf of tissue called the 
“laryngeal septum” that divides the anterior portion of the 
larynx. Th e laryngeal septum can be regarded as the fi rst 
described “vocal cord” of a snake. It is a uniquely unpaired 
structure compared with the paired vocal cords of other 
vertebrates, and it has not been found in species of snakes 
other than  P. melanoleucus . Bruce Young and his coworkers 
have studied sound production in this species and were 
able to demonstrate that the laryngeal septum vibrates 
and contributes harmonic elements in the defensive hisses 
of  Pituophis , whereas the epiglottal keel has little infl uence 
on the quality of these hissing sounds. A  harmonic is an 
overtone—present in the calls of some frogs, bats, and 
other animals—whose frequency is a whole-number mul-
tiple of a fundamental frequency. Vibration of the  laryngeal 
septum of  Pituophis  produces harmonics that have a funda-
mental frequency of about 500 Hz. 
 
 
 Figure 8.5.   Lower mouth of a Neotropical Bird Snake (also called 
Pufﬁ ng Snake) ( Pseustes poecilonotus ) showing the open glottis with 
tongue sheath beneath. Photograph by Dan Dourson.  

Sound Production  |  187 
 Several lineages of snakes have a means of expanding 
the trachea, which could clearly alter the acoustic nature of 
the hiss. Th ree means of expansion are (1) possession of a 
tracheal lung (see  chapter  6 ), (2) “pleating” of the tracheal 
membrane, and (3) tracheal diverticula, which are discussed 
below in relation to growling. Th e width of the tracheal 
membrane is taken up by large pleats in the membrane 
when it is not under tension. Except for the role of diver-
ticula discussed below, the acoustical infl uence of tracheal 
expansion has not been well studied or documented. 
 Bellowing 
 During defensive hissing in  Pituophis melanoleucus  the epi-
glottal keel functions merely to divide the fl ow of air and 
evidently does not vibrate to contribute a pulsatile quality to 
the sound. However, during the beginning of a series of hiss-
ing sounds produced by  P. melanoleucus there is a burst of 
loud (high amplitude), broad-frequency sound that Bruce 
Young and his collaborators have called a “bellow.” Th e 
bellow has been distinguished from a hiss in having simple 
modulation of both amplitude and frequency, evidently due 
to a brief period of imbalance between the air fl ow and ten-
sion in the laryngeal septum. Th e brief duration of such bel-
lowing is less than 0.2 of a second. Th is represents the time 
lag between dilation of the glottis to emit air fl ow and an 
adjustment of tension in the laryngeal septum by means of 
an associated smooth muscle. Th e sound of a bellow includes 
both temporal variation and harmonic elements that result 
from vibrations of the laryngeal septum. 
 Th e bellow is unique to  Pituophis and has not been de-
scribed in any other species of snake. Th e presence of a 
“vocal cord” (laryngeal septum) and the complex emission 
of both a bellow and a hiss in these snakes appears to ex-
plain the anecdotal reports of the unusual defensive sounds 
that they emit. I once encountered a Gopher Snake in Cali-
fornia that was, in my experience, uniquely bad-tempered. 
It struck repeatedly, falling forward with violent mo-
mentum during each strike. Also, with each strike I remem-
ber a very loud raspy hiss, probably with elements of 
bellowing that I would not have known about at the time. 
Together, the striking and hissing were most dramatic, and 
they created as good of a show as the defensive displays of 
many rattlesnakes or cobras. 
 Growling 
 Other sounds emitted from the tracheal airways of snakes 
have been described by Bruce Young as “growls.” Th e growl 
of a snake is the noise that is emitted when the exhalant 
airstream of the trachea passes over openings in the tra-
cheal membrane that lead to adjoining air sacs, or  tracheal 
diverticula (see  chapter  6 ). Th ese structures are not found in 
all snakes, but they potentially enable growling in those 
species in which they occur. Growling is best known (and 
evaluated) in the King Cobra ( Ophiophagus hannah ), and 
has also been recorded from a colubrid snake, the Red-
tailed Rat Snake ( Gonyosoma oxycephalum ). In the King Co-
bra, the growl involves frequencies below 5,000 Hz (and 
often below 2,500 Hz), with a dominant frequency of ap-
proximately 600 Hz. Th ere is evidence for frequency modu-
lation in the growl of the King Cobra, with higher intensity 
sounds at the beginning and ending of the emitted noise. 
Th e defensive growl of the Red-tailed Rat Snake consists of 
frequencies below 2,000 Hz, and a dominant frequency of 
about 625 Hz. Th e growling sounds of both species are dis-
tinct from the hisses of snakes. 
 Modeling of the tracheal diverticula (air sacs; see  fi g. 
 6.19 ) suggests that they act as resonating chambers, 
which means they essentially dampen or fi lter out some 
frequencies while enhancing others. Th e size and shape 
of the resonating chambers determine the frequencies 
that are generated and thus the power spectrum of the 
produced sound. Th e larger the diverticula, the lower the 
dominant frequency of the growl. Both growls and hisses 
can be intimidating, depending especially on the size and 
behavior of the snake!    
 Nasal Hissing 
 Observers have long had the impression that many snakes, 
especially vipers, can hiss through the nasal passages. Much 
of the impression comes from the observation of snakes 
hissing while the mouth is shut. In a very early experiment, 
Frank Wall in 1921 observed that the hiss of Russell’s Viper 
( Daboia russelii ) sounded diff erent after the nares were par-
tially occluded. 
 It is now believed that, in many snakes, the exhalant 
airstream passes through the internal nares. A number of 
species are regarded as obligate nasal hissers, and these 
include Eastern Hog-nosed Snakes ( Heterodon platyrhi-
nos ), the Puff  Adders ( Bitis arietans ), and Russell’s Vipers 
 ( Daboia russelii ). Th e air fl ow associated with sound pro-
duction passes through the nasal passageways, which are 
essentially static and do not actively modulate the sound. 
During typical defensive behaviors of the rattlesnakes  Cro-
talus atrox  (Western Diamond-backed Rattlesnake) and 
 C. adamanteus (Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake), air 
fl ow occurs only through the nasal passageways. Hissing is 
produced during inhalation (inspiration), and it is possible 
that these hisses are acoustically modifi ed during passage 
through the nasal passageway. In other heavy-bodied 
 viperid snakes, the external nares are variously modifi ed 
with complex openings ( fi g.  8.6 ). Th ese are likely to func-
tion with respect to very loud and prominent hissing 
noises that are made by these snakes during exhalation 
(expiration) of air.    

 188  | How Snakes Work
 Cloacal Popping 
 Imagine a snake is making a sound like a popping noise, but 
the sound is not coming from the head end. Th ere are var-
ious anecdotal claims in literature that snakes can produce 
sounds using the cloaca. Such a phenomenon has been 
reported in the genera  Ficimia ,  Gyalopion (hook-nosed 
snakes),  Micruroides , and  Micrurus (coral snakes). Snakes 
can produce the popping sounds both during, and indepen-
dent of, cloacal evacuation. Th e sounds result from a rapid 
expulsion of air from the cloacal vent, driven primarily by 
cloacal musculature (principally the  M. Sphincter cloacae ). 
 Th e “cloacal pops” recorded from snakes consist of low-
amplitude sounds (around 50–70 dB) with a limited fre-
quency range from about 350 to 15,000 Hz, and sometimes 
harmonics. Th e sounds are brief (about 0.2 sec) and exhibit 
a distinct temporal pattern. Th ere is some acoustic varia-
tion of cloacal pops both within and between species. Th e 
relative size of the cloaca and the associated musculature 
infl uence both the amplitude and frequency of the popping 
sounds that are emitted by an individual snake. 
 Controlled attempts to elicit cloacal pops from the 
Eastern Coral Snake ( Micrurus fulvius ) by means of visual 
and tactile stimulation are generally unsuccessful, unless 
the head is restrained. However, in the Western Hook-
nose Snake ( Gyalopion canum ) cloacal popping can be elic-
ited by light tactile stimulation and is usually associated 
with thrashing movements. In the Western Coral Snake 
( Micruroides euryxanthus ) cloacal popping occurs in con-
junction with elevation and curling of the tail. Cloacal pop-
ping is characteristic of snakes that have fossorial or 
secretive habits, and the phenomenon is 
sometimes associated with other defen-
sive behaviors. Th erefore, Bruce Young 
and others have concluded that this 
form of sound production evolved as a 
defensive behavior. As such, it is likely 
this mode of sound production occurs in 
other species that have poorly known 
natural histories.  
 Closing Comments  
 Snakes clearly generate some very inter-
esting sounds, which are used largely in 
defense. Several considerations are impor-
tant. First, there are many snake species 
around the world for which very little is 
known concerning their natural history, 
behavior, and ecology. Further studies of a 
broader range of species might yet reveal 
other sounds or uses of sound in addition 
to the ones described here. Second, al-
though the defensive use of sounds seems 
to be a reasonable conclusion in many contexts that have 
been widely observed or studied, other uses of sound are 
possible, including communication with other snakes. With 
these two thoughts in mind, some additional thoughts arise. 
 1. A long-considered theory for the evolutionary origin 
of the rattle of rattlesnakes holds that the structure 
evolved as a warning device for numerous grazing 
animals that might not otherwise avoid stepping on a 
snake. If this were true, why did rattles or similar 
structures not evolve in other snake lineages that live 
on the extensive plains of Africa or Australia? 
Moreover, if the rattle evolved as an acoustic warning 
device, what was the function of intermediate stages? 
Gordon Schuett and colleagues have suggested the 
possibility that an enlarged cap at the tip of the tail 
could enhance caudal luring (of potential prey) and 
then subsequently evolved into a rattle. However, 
other herpetologists dispute this notion and point 
out there is no evidence to support the idea. Th e 
rattle is a complex structure and therefore unlikely to 
have arisen de novo. So what was the function of an 
epidermal appendage that led to the eventual complex 
rattle at the tip of the tail in this clade of snakes? It is 
of interest to note that Australian death adders, 
 Acanthophis  spp., have elaborate protrusions of scales 
at the tip of the tail that suggests to the eye a possible 
precursor to a rattle ( fi g.  8.7 ). What is the function of 
 
 
 Figure 8.6.   Head of a Gaboon Adder ( Bitis gabonica ) illustrating the complex external 
naris. The  inset is a higher magniﬁ cation of the naris, showing there are two levels of 
circumferential ridges overlying the deep internal opening to the nasal passageway. This 
snake has the ability to hiss very loudly, and the external opening of the naris possibly 
acts to produce the loud sound that is heard during hissing. Photograph by the author.  

Sound Production  |  189 
this appendage, and what additional steps involving 
genetic mutations are required for natural selection 
to produce a full rattle? Ximena Nelson and colleagues 
have demonstrated that the motions involved in 
caudal luring in Common Death Adders ( Acanthophis 
antarcticus ) mimic the motion characteristics of 
invertebrates, and the snakes use this deceptive 
signal to attract agamid lizards. Perhaps the epidermal 
structures on the tail of death adders also mimic 
invertebrates (e.g., legs of crickets), reinforcing the 
possibility that tail structures used in mimicry might 
precede evolution of the rattle as suggested by 
Schuett and his colleagues. Th ese and many other 
intriguing questions relate to the evolution and uses 
of the wonderful acoustic appendages that decorate 
the tails of American  rattlesnakes. 
 2. Th e late Professor Fred White once told me he was 
convinced that rattlesnakes used their rattle for in-
traspecifi c communication. Th is was said following his 
return from a visit to a communal den of Prairie 
Rattlesnakes in the Midwestern United States (located, 
I believe, in Colorado). At the time, he and a colleague 
were embarking on a study of the thermal relationships 
and energetic consequence of mass denning among 
these snakes during the winter. I do not know Fred’s 
explanation for this particular remark, and he never to 
my knowledge published on the idea. But I do remember 
how convinced he appeared when he mentioned this in 
conjunction with other stories related to the research 
he was conducting at the den site. One problem with 
this idea is that the sounds produced by rattlesnake 
rattles do not overlap the hearing range of the snakes. 
However, it might be that visual cues are involved with 
what Fred observed, or that many snakes rattling 
simultaneously might create vibrational stimuli that 
could be detected by the sensory systems of the snakes 
(cutaneous receptors in addition to the inner ear).  
 3. Fully aquatic snakes such as sea snakes live in aquatic 
environments where vibrational information is of 
much value, and their behaviors as well as structure of 
their skin suggest they are very sensitive to mechanical 
stimuli ( fi g.  8.8 ; see also 7.14). We know almost 
nothing about the hearing of sea snakes (or other 
aquatic species) and whether they live in an acoustic 
world that is much richer and more useful to these 
animals than most persons might presently suppose. 
 4. How do sounds, as well as vibrations, aff ect burrowing 
species that live subterranean lives, and do some of 
these species produce sounds that might communicate 
with other conspecifi c individuals? Are there sounds 
that are produced by snakes, either underground or in 
the sea, which we have not yet noticed or recorded? 
 As in other areas of snake biology, the production and 
uses of sounds by these animals are in need of much further 
study. It is also true that there is a paucity of scientists who 
have both the interest and training in the relevant areas of 
physics to properly investigate the open questions. Hope-
fully, these circumstances will be remedied in the future, 
 
 
 Figure 8.7.    The tail of an adult Common Death Adder ( Acanthophis 
antarcticus ). The tail terminates with an epidermal spine, and there 
are spinous epidermal appendages arrayed for a short distance along 
the distal end of the tail (arrow). Photograph by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 8.8.    Photograph of the skin of a newly discovered sea snake 
from Australia ( Hydrophis donaldi ). This species was found recently in 
estuarine habitats in the Gulf of Carpentaria where it might encounter 
murky or turbid waters. The skin of this new species is strongly 
spinous, and each scale bears a prominent keel or sharp tubercle that 
is likely to be sensory. Photograph by Kanishka Ukuwela.  

 190  | How Snakes Work
and we shall discover many more acoustic secrets that exist 
in the world of snakes. 
 Additional Reading  
 Conley, K. E., and S. L. Lindstedt. 1996. Minimal cost per twitch in 
rattlesnake shaker muscle.  Nature (London) 383:71–72. 
 Cook, P. M., M. P. Rowe, and R. W. Van Devender. 1994. Allometric 
scaling and interspecifi c diff erences in the rattling sounds of 
rattlesnakes.  Herpetologica 50:358–368. 
 Fenton, M. B., and L. E. Licht. 1990. Why rattle snake?  Journal of 
Herpetology 24:274–279. 
 Gans, C., and P. F. A. Maderson. 1973. Sound producing mecha-
nisms in recent reptiles: Review and comment.  American Zoolo-
gist 13:1195–1203. 
 Kemper, W. F., S. L. Lindstedt, L. K. Hartzler, J. W. Hicks, and K. E. 
Conley. 2001. Shaking up glycolysis: Sustained, high lactate 
fl ux during aerobic rattling.  Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences  (USA) 98:723–728. 
 Klauber, L. M. 1997.  Rattlesnakes: Th eir Habits, Life Histories, and 
Infl uence on Mankind . 2nd edition. 2 vols. Berkeley: University 
of California Press. 
 Martin, J. H., and R. M. Bagby. 1973. Properties of rattlesnake 
shaker muscle.  Journal of Experimental Zoology 185:293–300. 
 Moon, B. R. 2001. Muscle physiology and the evolution of the rat-
tling system in rattlesnakes.  Journal of Herpetology 35:497–500. 
 Moon, B. R., J. J. Hopp, and K. E. Conley. 2002. Mechanical trade-
off s explain how performance increases without increasing 
cost in rattlesnake tailshaker muscle.  Journal of Experimental 
Biology 205:667–675. 
 Moon, B. R., T. J. LaDuc, R. Dudley, and A. Chang. 2002. A twist to 
the rattlesnake tail. In P. Alerts, K. D’Alo û t, A. Herrel, and 
R. Van Damme (eds.),  Topics in Functional and Ecological Verte-
brate Morphology . Maastricht, Th e Netherlands: Shaker Pub-
lishing, pp. 63–76. 
 Moon, B. R., and A. Tullis. 2006. Th e ontogeny of contractile per-
formance and metabolic capacity in a high-frequency muscle. 
 Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 79:20–30. 
 Nelson, X. J., D. T. Garnett, and C. S. Evans. 2010. Receiver psy-
chology and the design of the deceptive caudal luring signal of 
the death adder.  Animal Behaviour 79:555–561. 
 Rosenberg, H. I. 1973. Functional anatomy of pulmonary ventila-
tion in the garter snake,  Th amnophis elegans .  Journal of Mor-
phology 140:171–184. 
 Schaeff er, P. J., K. E. Conley, and S. Lindstedt. 1996. Structural cor-
relates of speed and endurance in skeletal muscle: Th e rattle-
snake tailshaker muscle.  Journal of Experimental Biology 
199:351–358. 
 Schuett, G. W., D. L. Clark, and F. Kraus. 1984. Feeding mimicry in 
the rattlesnake,  Sistrurus catenatus , with comments on the 
evolution of the rattle.  Animal Behaviour 32:625–626. 
 Young, B. A. 1991. Morphological basis of “growling” in the King 
Cobra,  Ophiophagus hannah .  Journal of Experimental Zoology 
260:275–287. 
 Young, B. A. 1992. Tracheal diverticula in snakes: Possible 
functions and evolution.  Journal of Zoology (London) 227:
567–583. 
 Young, B. A. 2003. Snake bioacoustics: Toward a richer under-
standing of the behavioral ecology of snakes.  Quarterly Review 
of Biology 78:303–325. 
 Young, B. A., and I. P. Brown. 1993. On the acoustic profi le of the 
rattlesnake rattle.  Amphibia-Reptilia 14:373–380. 
 Young, B. A., and I. P. Brown. 1995. Th e physical basis of the rat-
tling sound in the rattlesnake,  Crotalus viridis oreganus .  Journal 
of Herpetology 29:80–85. 
 Young, B., J. Jaggers, N. Nejman, and N. J. Kley. 2001. Buccal ex-
pansion during hissing in the Puff  Adder,  Bitis arietans. Copeia 
2001:270–273. 
 Young, B. A., K. Meltzer, and C. Marsit. 1999. Scratching the sur-
face of mimicry: Sound production through scale abrasion in 
snakes.  Hamadryad 24:29–38. 
 Young, B. A., K. Meltzer, C. Marsit, and G. Abishahin. 1999. Cloa-
cal popping in snakes.  Journal of Herpetology 33:557–566. 
 Young, B. A., N. Nejman, K. Meltzer, and J. Marvin. 1999. Th e 
mechanics of sound production in the puff  adder,  Bitis ari-
etans (Serpentes: Viperidae) and the information content 
of the snake hiss.  Journal of Experimental Biology 202:
2281–2289. 
 Young, B. A., S. Sheft, and W. Yost. 1995. Sound production in 
 Pituophis melanoleucus (Serpentes: Colubridae) with the fi rst 
description of a vocal cord in snakes.  Journal of Experimental 
Zoology 273:472–481. 

 | 191
 At the right time of the year—generally late summer in 
north temperate regions—various persons may see nu-
merous young snakes that appear very near to one another, 
and these are the wonderful product of reproduction by a 
female snake of the same species that is no doubt in the 
same vicinity. For some it may challenge the imagination 
how a legless and armless animal crawling around on its 
belly can be amorous and produce so many young. Fortu-
nately, at least to my thinking, snakes are able to fi nd one 
another of the opposite sex, court, mate, and reproduce 
even in the strangest of circumstances. Even so, studies 
have recently confi rmed what many have witnessed: snake 
populations are in global decline, just like amphibians and 
many other animals. Th e disappearance or increasing rarity 
of snakes adds much emphasis to the importance of under-
standing how these interesting creatures reproduce. 
 Snakes reproduce in diverse, complex, and fascinating 
ways, and there has been much human interest in this sub-
ject ranging from folklore to scientifi c investigations, as 
well as the economic interests of the herpetoculturists who 
breed snakes for sale ( fi g.  5.25  ). Since ancient times, snakes 
around the world have been regarded with symbolic and 
mythical value. Th e word “serpent” is of Latin origin and 
means snake, or something that creeps. Hence the serpent 
is one of the oldest and more widespread symbols in my-
thology, and reproduction is one of the more important of 
many varied contexts. 
 India is a land of many snake worshippers, and there are 
rich traditions regarding snakes to represent rebirth, death, 
and mortality ( fi g.  5.1 ). Th ere are several temples in Asia de-
voted to cobras, where it is believed that snakes are symbols 
of fertility and off er protection ( fi g.  9.1 ). Similarly, in West 
Africa and Haiti a “rainbow-serpent” is a spirit of fertility. 
Th e Rainbow Serpent also is a mythological being for ab-
original people across Australia, where it is part of a creation 
myth ( fi g.  9.2 ). In Fiji there is a serpent god who ruled the 
underworld and caused fruit trees to bloom. A common 
symbol in many diff erent religions and customs is a snake 
that is portrayed eating its own tail in the shape of a circle, 
and this represents life and rebirth. In ancient Greece it was 
in serpent form that Zeus was said to have fathered Alex-
ander the Great. And in Christianity it was a serpent who 
enticed Eve with the promise of forbidden knowledge, and 
this ultimately led to her mortality and bearing of children 
with Adam.    
 The Essentials of Reproduction  
 Reproduction is, of course, one of the core essential attrib-
utes of any living thing, and is part of the defi nition of life 
that can be found in elementary biology textbooks. Organ-
isms are the expression of their DNA, the molecular blue-
prints for their structure and function. Th us, for one living 
thing to be an off spring or product of another, the DNA 
must be reproduced and passed from the fi rst generation 
individual (G 1 ) to the second generation individual (G 2 ). If, 
as in cloning, the G 2 was an exact DNA copy of G 1 , both 
would be exactly alike unless there were accidental sponta-
neous changes within the DNA (mutations) or the environ-
ment changed and aff ected the expression of DNA in the 
second individual. Such changes do, in fact, alter individual 
organisms and contribute to the variation of life that we see. 
But there is even far greater variation in organisms because 
of sex: two diff erent individuals of the same species contrib-
ute their DNA to a second generation individual, more or 
less equally, so the traits of the two individuals—one male 
9
 COURTSHIP AND REPRODUCTION  
 Young sea snakes have been found to be extremely numerous at certain 
seasons, and it is quite possible that the pregnant females resort en masse to 
protected bays to bear their young. 
 —William A. Dunson,  The Biology of Sea Snakes (1975), p. 22  
 

 192  | How Snakes Work
and one female—are combined to produce new variation of 
traits in the new individual. As this process continues, the 
thousands of genes, or individual units of inheritance com-
posed of DNA, are recombined in diff erent ways to produce 
variation among sexually reproducing organisms, including 
snakes.   
 Sex 
 Although individuals of any given species of snake look 
more or less similar (albeit there is variation in size and 
color), populations include both male and female individ-
uals. Herpetologists have developed ways of sexing snakes, 
and these include probing or palping the base of the tale. In 
younger snakes, these procedures can be diffi  cult and un-
certain, but adult snakes of many species exhibit diff er-
ences in the shape of the tail that can identify the sex of the 
individual when inspected visually. In comparison with fe-
males, the tale of a male tends to be more elongate and is 
relatively broader near the vent due to internal copulatory 
organs that are held within a pocket at the base of the tale 
( fi g.  9.3 ). Th e copulatory organs can be everted to reveal 
them externally ( fi g.  9.4 ), or a blunt probe can be inserted 
into the passageway that allows their eversion during 
mating. Hence, if one attempts to push a blunt probe gently 
into the base of the tail (insertion at either side of the mid-
line), it cannot enter the tail of a female but will slide for 
some distance into the pocket that houses the copulatory 
organs in a male. 
 Th e copulatory organs of male snakes are paired and 
called  hemipenes . Yes—the structure we term the penis in 
humans is paired, and there are two of these in a snake. 
Each one individually is called a  hemipenis . In many species, 
the hemipenes are highly ornamented and may be hooked, 
bilobed, or bulbous in appearance. Th e terminal aspects of 
these structures bear spines or spurs and are rough in sur-
face texture ( fi g.  9.4 ). Th ese features secure internal attach-
ment within the cloaca of the female during mating, and 
their variation among species has been useful as a taxo-
nomic character. Usually only one hemipenis is used during 
copulation. When erected, internal sinuses become en-
gorged with blood and the structure is turned inside-out 
while being forced out of the vent. Following copulation the 
hemipenis is pulled back into the body of the male by a re-
tractor muscle and turns outside-in during the process. 
When copulating, the erected hemipenis is inserted into 
the cloaca of the female, and sperm travel down a narrow 
groove on the hemipenis into the cloaca or vagina (part of 
the  oviduct ) of the female. 
 Th e Gonads 
 Th e gonads of snakes are paired organs located in the ab-
dominal cavity, usually in close proximity to the anterior 
ends of the kidneys and posterior to the gall bladder. Th e 
gonads of males are the  testes ( fi g.  9.5 ), and those of the fe-
male are  ovaries ( fi g.  9.6 ). In males, the right testis is typi-
cally more anterior than the left, and both are generally 
smooth and elongated, although in blind snakes of the ge-
nus  Leptotyphlops  the structures have multiple lobes. Th e 
internal location of the testes is diff erent from that in 
mammals, and the organs develop in close association with 
the kidneys inside the embryo. 
 Th e size of the testes may vary seasonally, with increased 
size indicative of the production of sperm, called  spermato-
genesis . Th e sperm are produced from germ cells within  sem-
iniferous tubules , which are convoluted and comprise the 
interior of the testis. Th ese tubules are continuous with, 
and empty into, anterior eff erent ducts that are lined with 
ciliated cells and smooth muscle. Th e eff erent ducts drain to 
the  epididymis where sperm will be stored for varying pe-
riods until ejaculation. Th e sperm are ultimately transferred 
to the hemipenes during copulation. 
 Th e female reproductive tract consists of paired  ovaries 
and associated pairs of reproductive ducts. Ovaries vary 
 
 
 Figure 9.1.   A temple to Buddha at Mount Popa, central Myanmar 
(formerly Burma). The Buddha is under the protective umbrella of a 
many-headed King Cobra. Photograph by Indraneil Das.  

Courtship and Reproduction  |  193 
in their location, but are usually found near the gall-
bladder. Each ovary is elongated and contains egg follicles 
at diff erent stages of development, degeneration, or re-
sorption ( fi g.  9.6 ).  Vitellogenesis refers to the deposition 
of fat reserves, or accumulation of yolk, in the  ovarian 
follicles , and vitellogenic follicles are developing eggs that 
are being “yolked” within the ovary. Th e precursors of 
yolk are synthesized in the liver. Vitellogenic follicles in-
crease in size and become increasingly yellow in color as 
the process advances ( fi g.  9.6 ). Like testes, their status 
can be infl uenced by season, and the time that is involved 
in producing yolk-laden eggs varies among species. Hence, 
small pre-vitellogenic follicles may characterize quiescent 
ovaries for much of the year in many species that exhibit 
seasonal reproduction. Th e growth of follicles can be 
quite rapid just before mating in the spring. Ultimately, 
each individual follicle either releases its egg (termed  ovu-
lation ) or degenerates. 
 Ovulation releases a mature egg from its follicle, and the 
egg is now ready to be fertilized. Th e remaining follicle 
forms a  corpus luteum , which becomes an endocrine struc-
ture and releases hormones until it regresses following 
birth of the young or the laying of eggs to hatch outside the 
body of the female. Ovulated eggs enter the  oviduct , which 
is a narrow tube extending from the ovary to the cloaca (see 
 fi g.  2.35  ). It is lined with smooth muscle, both ciliated and 
nonciliated mucous cells, and various glands. Th e glands 
produce various membranes that will surround the devel-
oping egg, and their activity varies with the reproductive 
status of the female. Th e middle segment of the oviduct 
where eggs are retained before they are laid contains glands 
that produce the fi brous and calcium components of the 
eggshell (see below). Th is is also the region where embryos 
are incubated in live-bearing species (see below). Th e middle 
part of the oviduct is termed the  uterus and is homologous 
to the uterus of mammals. 
 
 
 Figure 9.2.    The snake is a common motif in the aboriginal art and mythology of Australia. This aboriginal painting depicts people surrounded 
by snakes, which are associated closely with water, land, fertility, birth, abundance (plants and animals), social relations, and protection. The 
snake is a creator of human beings, and its life-giving powers send spirits of conception to all the water holes. In essence, the serpent embodies 
regenerative and reproductive power in nature and in human beings. It is a principal character in major rituals. This painting is by Gavin 
Delacour, who is an aboriginal painter born at Mt. Isa and presently living in Townsville, Australia.  

 194  | How Snakes Work
 Fertilization 
 In snakes, and in all reptiles, fertilization occurs internally. 
Sperm unite with eggs near the upper, or cranial, end of the 
oviduct following ovulation and prior to the deposition of 
membranous structures that eventually envelope each egg. 
Fertilization may occur relatively soon after mating, or fol-
lowing long periods when sperm are stored in the female’s re-
productive tract. Females of some species can store sperm in 
 seminal receptacles , which are pocket-like structures associated 
with certain segments of the oviduct, primarily in the cranial 
region. However, sperm aggregations are associated with the 
 
 
 Figure 9.3.   Ventral tail morphologies in Florida Cottonmouths 
( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ). The male ( left ) shows a somewhat 
engorged tail near its base, whereas the tail of the female ( right ) is 
less “turgid” in appearance. The male condition is due to internal 
presence of hemipenes (bracketed region), which are everted just 
below the cloaca during mating. The cloacal opening in each photo is 
immediately below the lowermost ventral scute, which is marked with 
a white “x” in each photograph. These snakes were lightly 
anesthetized, and the photographs were taken by the author. 
 
 
 Figure 9.4.   Everted hemipenes of a sea krait ( Laticauda semifasciata ) 
illustrating paired structures, each engorged with blood and showing 
the sulcus and spiny terminus that assists internal attachment within 
the cloaca of a female during copulation. A metric rule is shown for 
scale. Photograph taken in Taiwan by Coleman M. Sheehy III.  
 
 
 Figure 9.5.   Ventral views of the coelomic cavity of a Corn Snake 
( Pantherophis guttatus ). The  upper view features the left testis, 
which is elongate and lies adjacent to the small intestine. The  lower 
view illustrates both testes, the right testis being cranial to the left 
testis. The cranial direction (toward the head of snake) is to the left in 
both photos. Photographs by Elliott Jacobson.  
 
 
 Figure 9.6.   Ovary of a Reticulated Python ( Broghammerus 
reticulatus ) showing multiple previtellogenic follicles (PF) and 
vitellogenic follicles (VF). Photograph by Elliott Jacobson.  

Courtship and Reproduction  |  195 
lumen or deep furrows of the posterior  oviduct in some species 
( fi g.  2.35  ). One hypothesis related to sperm location is that 
sperm enter the posterior oviduct following mating, reside for 
variable periods, and then are attracted to receptacles in the 
anterior region of the oviduct. Sperm from one or more mating 
are maintained and nurtured in the storage receptacles. One 
should also appreciate that viable sperm can be stored in the 
ducts of the testes and can live within males for long periods. 
 Female snakes can store sperm for periods of months to 
years, and thus mating and fertilization do not necessarily 
coincide closely in time. For example, some species might 
mate during the late summer or fall, but the young are born 
the following summer without the female having mated 
again. Moreover, females are able to produce two or more 
fertile cohorts of young from a single mating. Th is capability 
can be advantageous in circumstances where a population is 
sparsely distributed and there are relatively few opportu-
nities to mate. Th ere is undoubtedly great variation in the 
timing of mating, sperm storage, and fertilization in wild 
populations of snake species that are not yet well studied. 
 Examples of sperm storage are known largely from ac-
counts of reproduction in captive snakes. Several instances 
involve females that were kept isolated from males for very 
long periods and then surprised their owners by giving 
birth to healthy young snakes. Amazingly, a captive female 
Arafura File Snake ( Acrochordus arafurae ) was kept in isola-
tion for seven years and following its death was found to 
contain an apparently viable developing embryo! 
 Virgin Birth 
 One of the reasons biology is so fascinating is that almost al-
ways there are novel exceptions to the so-called general rules. 
Hence, there is one species of snake that does not reproduce in 
a sexual manner as appears to be characteristic of all the other 
snakes. Th e Brahminy Blind Snake ( Rhamphotyphlops brami-
nus ) is a small burrowing species, ori ginally from India and 
Southeast Asia, that has been accidentally introduced in many 
other parts of the world because of it secretive habits and 
ability to hide in small containers of soil ( fi g.  1.11  ). For this 
reason it is also called the “Flowerpot Snake.” Every individual 
is a female and, when mature, lays eggs that produce females 
that are clones of the mother. Each egg develops without the 
requirement of sperm from another individual and is thus an 
example of asexual reproduction known as  parthenogenesis . 
Th is condition in  Rhamphotyphlops  is possibly unique among 
snakes, although it is also known in several species of lizards.  
 Reproductive Modes  
 Th e majority of snake species lay eggs (termed  oviposition ), 
and this mode of reproduction is called  oviparity ( fi g.  9.7 ). Spe-
cialized glands lining segments of the oviduct lay down  fi brous 
structures that envelope the egg, and there may also be super-
fi cial layers to which calcium salts are added to impart some 
rigidity and to provide a likely source of calcium for the devel-
oping embryo. Th ese structures are termed the  eggshell and 
eggshell membranes, which protect the internal contents of 
the egg during its development outside the mother’s body. 
Prior to “shelling” of the eggs, the oviparous oviduct exhibits 
increases in the height of tissue related to growth of the shell 
glands and thickening of connective tissue and musculature 
that will envelop the uterus. Th e oviduct and uterus provide 
the eggs with water and oxygen prior to oviposition. After the 
eggs are laid, embryonic development continues outside the 
female, and the egg yolk provides the energy and nutrients 
that are required for development of the embryo. 
 In other species the embryo is retained within the ovi-
duct until development is complete ( fi g.  9.8 ). In this condi-
tion, the young are born in a developed state in contrast to 
laying eggs ( fi g.  9.9 ). Such reproduction is termed  viviparity , 
and snakes that exhibit this mode are  viviparous . Nutrients 
and respiratory gases are exchanged across a  placenta , 
formed by a close association (apposition) of extraembry-
onic membranes (the  chorioallantois ) with tissue of the ma-
ternal oviduct (uterus), and richly supplied with blood 
vessels ( fi g.  9.10 ). Th e embryos of viviparous snakes in-
crease in mass due to the uptake of water and nutrients. 
 Th ere are variable degrees of dependence on a placenta 
for nutrients. Th e developing young in some species are 
nourished by egg yolk, and they hatch or break through the 
egg membranes immediately before, during, or after the 
eggs are laid ( fi g.  9.11 ). 
 Whether a species of snake lays eggs or gives birth to 
developed young depends on the evolutionary history and 
geography. Viviparity has evolved convergently in 14 principal 
 
 
 Figure 9.7.    A Pueblan Milksnake ( Lampropeltis triangulum 
campbelli ) with newly oviposited eggs. The white egg near the center 
of the photograph is just exiting the cloaca where the skin is seen to 
be stretched. Photograph by David Barker. 

 196  | How Snakes Work
lineages of snakes representing virtually every type of hab-
itat that they utilize. Viviparity can reduce the mobility 
of female snakes, decrease feeding behavior, and constrain 
the size of a litter as well as the frequency of reproduction. 
On the other hand, viviparity confers 
benefi ts of thermoregulation and permits 
snakes to exploit environments where 
suitable sites for nesting are limited or 
absent. Th e evolution of viviparity ap-
pears to be causally linked to such bene-
fi ts related to temperature. 
 Th e terrestrial live-bearers, or viviparous 
species, tend to occur at higher altitudes and 
latitudes, representing locations where tem-
peratures are cooler. Carrying the young 
snakes inside the mother’s body has the ad-
vantage that the female can keep the devel-
oping embryos warm by basking in warm 
places (see  chapter  4 ). Such thermoregula-
tion by pregnant females accelerates embry-
onic development and allows young snakes 
to be born in time to feed and learn about 
their environment before cold weather sets 
in. By comparison, there are fewer sites 
available where developing eggs could be ex-
posed to warm temperatures that are suffi  -
cient to allow development to hatching 
before the fi rst frosts occur. An important 
point of this discussion is that carrying de-
veloping young inside the mother reduces 
chances that the vagaries of weather will kill 
the embryos, because the female snake can 
respond behaviorally to temperature chan-
ges, whereas eggs are dependent totally on 
the microenvironment in which they are laid. Th us, it is thought 
that viviparity reduces the mortality of young in colder envi-
ronments. Species of snakes that inhabit very cold habitats—at 
the extremes of ranges either by latitude or altitude—are all 
viviparous. 
 Similar patterns of reproductive mode and geography 
occur in lizards. Worldwide, viviparity has evolved indepen-
dently more than a hundred times in snakes and lizards 
combined. Th us, it appears that colder climates have stimu-
lated the evolution of live-bearing in many lineages of squa-
mate reptiles. I should mention that the proportion of 
viviparous species is much higher among snakes than 
among lizards. For example, Donald Tinkle and Whit Gib-
bons estimated that among North American reptiles the 
proportion of viviparous snakes is two to fi ve times greater 
than that of lizards at comparable latitudes. Th e reasons for 
this pattern are not clear. Rick Shine has suggested that the 
evolution of live-bearing might be favored by defensive ca-
pabilities such as large size or venom apparatus, which char-
acterize snakes more so than lizards. Finally, it should be 
noted that completely aquatic marine snakes are all vivipa-
rous, undoubtedly because there are no appropriate places 
 
 
 Figure 9.8.   In the  upper photo four embryonic Yellow-bellied Sea Snakes ( Pelamis 
platurus ) are shown in the condition inside the mother snake immediately before birth. 
The placental connection to the maternal tissues can be seen in the three embryos to 
the right. The  lower photo illustrates the developed condition of these same snakes in 
relation to the length of the mother. These four neonatal snakes represent the litter size 
for this particular female. The mother snake died inadvertently for no apparent reason 
just before these photographs were taken by the author in Costa Rica.  
 
 
 Figure 9.9.    A captive newborn baby Yellow-bellied Sea Snake 
( Pelamis platurus ) with its mother. Photographed in Costa Rica by the 
author. 

Courtship and Reproduction  |  197 
for externally oviposited eggs to develop 
if they were exposed to ocean water. 
 Placentation evolves together with vi-
viparity in snakes, and the functioning of 
a placenta requires a thinning of the egg-
shell as well as changes in its composition. 
As a consequence, there is an intimate as-
sociation between the fetal membranes 
and the lining of the oviduct. Such an im-
portant union of tissues gave rise to sub-
sequent specializations for the transfer of 
oxygen and nutrients from the mother to 
the embryo ( fi gs.  9.8 ,  9.10  ).    
 Eggs 
 Th e eggs of oviparous snakes vary consid-
erably in size and shape. Th ey are generally 
ellipsoid, but typically elongate rather than 
spherical ( fi g.  9.12 ). Th e eggshell is gener-
ally leathery and fl exible in most oviparous 
species and consists of two principal layers. 
Th e inner layer contains a thin network of 
proteinaceous and elastic fi bers that vary 
in their size and orientation in diff erent 
species. Th ese fi bers give strength to the 
shell, but they can also expand as the em-
bryo grows and the egg gains water during 
its development. Overlain onto this fi -
brous network is a mineral layer consisting 
of a sparse covering of calcium carbonate 
crystals. Th e mineralized layer is thicker 
and denser in what are termed “rigid-
shelled eggs.” Th ese are characteristic of 
many turtles and crocodilians, and some 
lizards. However, the mineralized layer of 
snake eggs is sparser and interspersed 
with fi bers, which renders the eggshell more fl exible and vari-
ably elastic ( fi g.  9.13 ). 
 Th e “fl exible-shelled eggs” of snakes are very permeable, 
say compared to avian eggs. Th ey take up water from moist 
environments during development and tend to expand 
against the partially mineralized shell. Th e fl exible shell 
stretches somewhat but also imparts pressure to the inter-
nal fl uid compartments of the egg. Such eggs may double or 
triple in mass due to the gain of water ( fi g.  9.13 ). On the 
other hand, these eggs also lose water easily, and the loss 
can be substantial if the water vapor pressure surrounding 
an egg is only slightly less than saturated (< 99 percent). 
Th e permeability of these eggs has much ecological signifi -
cance, and eggs can dehydrate lethally if the microenviron-
ment is not appropriate, say because of a drought. In 
contrast with the eggs of snakes, those that are more 
heavily calcifi ed and rigid can be virtually infl exible and are 
more resistant to water exchange. Such eggs can be incu-
bated in more open environments than is possible with the 
less calcifi ed eggs of oviparous snakes. 
 Inside the egg, the developing embryo is surrounded by 
other membranes that are internal to the eggshell. Th ese are 
so-called  extraembryonic membranes . One of these encloses 
the yolk to form the yolk sac, while three others surround the 
embryo in a fl uid-fi lled space and function to transport nu-
trients, sequester metabolic wastes, and exchange respira-
tory gases. A network of blood vessels functions to transport 
nutrients from the yolk to the embryo ( fi g.  9.11  ).    
 Female snakes lay eggs in various places where the temper-
ature and surrounding moisture must meet requirements for 
 
 
 Figure 9.10.   Schematic illustration of the placental membranes investing the embryo 
of a snake. The chorioallantoic placenta surrounds most of the embryo when its 
formation is mature, and the omphalallantoic placenta forms the ventral wall of the egg. 
Each placenta is formed by the union of the fetal membrane with the lining of the 
uterus. The developing embryo is shown in the center of the illustration. Drawing by 
Dan Dourson, based on the placental membranes in the natricine snake  Virginia 
striatula (Stewart, J.R., and K. R. Brasch, Ultrastructure of the placentae of the natricine 
snake,  Virginia striatula (Reptilia: Squamata),  Journal of Morphology 255:177–201, 2003, 
and  ﬁ g.  5.6 in R. D. Aldridge and D. M. Sever (eds.),  Reproductive Biology and 
Phylogeny of Snakes , vol. 9 of Reproductive Biology and Phylogeny, B. G. M. Jamieson, 
series editor (Enﬁ eld, NH: Science Publishers, 2011).  

 198  | How Snakes Work
proper development and hatching. Usually the eggs are buried 
in moist soil or oviposited in crevices or other places where 
they are protected from mechanical harm and from drying. 
Female King Cobras ( Ophiophagus hannah ) actually construct 
a nest for the eggs, consisting of a mound of leaves and or-
ganic debris, which provide a microenvironment that is char-
acterized by moderated and sometimes elevated temperature 
( fi g.  9.14  ). Also, the eggs are not exposed to the air and are less 
subject to drying within the leaf mound. Some sea kraits ( Lat-
icauda  spp.) lay their eggs on rock ledges inside moist caves 
that are adjacent to the sea. Th ese places may be visited by 
large numbers of snakes, and many females probably return to 
lay eggs at the same site year after year. Th ere are many species 
of snakes in which females aggregate communally to gestate 
and lay eggs in places where the soil conditions are “just right.” 
In some cases, females from a very wide area lay eggs in a com-
munal nesting site, or they aggregate during gestation of the 
young in areas that are limited in size. Such communal behav-
ior on the part of female snakes likely refl ects a scarcity of sites 
that are suitably moist or warm for eggs or gestation. Unfortu-
nately, there are many species of snakes for which little or 
nothing is known about reproduction and oviposition. 
 Th e proper development and hatching of snake eggs de-
pends on the temperature and moisture of the soil or other 
medium in which the eggs are laid. Th ese parameters are 
extremely important during incubation, and they infl uence 
the size, shape, growth rate, behavior, and other attributes 
of hatchling snakes. If temperature or soil moisture condi-
tions are not adequate, the hatching success of eggs can di-
minish and birth malformations can occur. For example, 
drier soils can lead to a decreased size of hatchlings, and 
smaller hatchling size can decrease the survival rate in 
some species of snakes. Even when conditions are within a 
normal range for hatching, subtle changes in these condi-
tions can cause shifts in the trajectories of embryonic 
 development. Such sensitivity suggests there is strong se-
lection pressure for female snakes to recognize and use 
nesting sites that provide optimal conditions for the eggs to 
develop and hatch. Th is probably explains why some sites 
are used repeatedly for communal nesting year after year. 
 Just before hatching the baby snake nearly fi lls the en-
tire space within the confi nes of the eggshell, and it has to 
create an opening in the eggshell from which it can emerge 
at hatching ( fi gs.  9.12 ,  9.15 ). Th ere is a deciduous toothlike 
 
 
 Figure 9.11.   Newly born Boa Constrictors ( Boa constrictor ) featuring 
an albinistic neonate in the center. The young snakes are fully 
developed at birth and enveloped temporarily within egg membranes, 
in which blood vessels can be seen. The young break through the 
membranes very soon after birth. Photograph by Tracy Barker. 
 
 
 Figure 9.12.    A female Yellow-tail Cribo ( Drymarchon corais corais ) 
from British Guyana, seen here with her clutch of eggs that were 
oviposited in captivity. The  inset in the  upper photo shows the 
complete clutch of eggs, which number 14. The  lower photo shows 
two newborn cribos that have just emerged from their eggshells. Note 
there are slits in the shell of the lower right-hand egg, made by the egg 
tooth of the neonate inside the shell. Photographs by Elliott Jacobson.  

Courtship and Reproduction  |  199 
projection from the tip of the premaxillary bone that is 
termed the “egg tooth.” Th is structure functions to cut or 
tear an opening in the leathery eggshell, from which the 
young snake can emerge ( fi gs.  9.12 ,  9.15 ). Th e egg tooth is 
temporary and is shed away at hatching. 
 Clutch and Litter Size  
 Th ere is quite a lot of information that has been published 
on the number of eggs ( clutch size ) or live young ( litter size ) 
that characterize reproducing snakes. As a group, snakes 
are generally more prolifi c than lizards and produce clutch 
or litter sizes that vary from 1 (a few species of boids and 
colubrids) to more than 100 (some  Th amnophis  species and 
elapids). Larger clutch sizes are characteristic of some spe-
cies of boids (e.g., Reticulated Python), and larger litter 
sizes are characteristic of some species of viperids (e.g., 
Fer-de-Lance) and natricine snakes (e.g., Northern Water 
Snake, Plains Gartersnake). Recently an invasive Burmese 
Python captured in the Florida Everglades was reported to 
be 17 feet and 7 inches long (a little less than 5 meters) and 
contained 87 eggs. Most snakes, however, produce young 
in the range of several to 20 in a single clutch or litter ( fi gs. 
 9.8 ,  9.12 ). 
 Th e number of young relative to the length of a female 
tends to be larger in viviparous than in oviparous species, 
and in aquatic and semifossorial species compared with ar-
boreal and terrestrial species. Another general fi nding is 
that the ratio of the total clutch mass to female mass (called 
 relative clutch mass ,  RCM ) is about 20 percent higher in ovip-
arous compared with viviparous species, which implies ei-
ther a greater brood size or off spring size, or combination 
of both, in the oviparous species. For a given RCM, the 
number of eggs produced (clutch size) is related to the en-
ergy that is allocated by the female to each individual off -
spring. Both female size and clutch size vary among snakes, 
even within a species. In general, marine snakes produce 
larger young than do terrestrial species. Within marine 
snakes, larger species produce the larger young, but smaller 
species also produce relatively large young by reducing the 
clutch or litter size. If one corrects for female body size, 
larger clutches generally result in smaller young. Among 
some oviparous species, larger females tend to lay larger 
eggs, and for a given size of female, eggs in larger clutches 
are shorter than those in smaller clutches. 
 Because the body of a snake is tubular, the volumetric 
geometry suggests that larger snakes can produce a larger 
number of similar size off spring and can increase clutch 
size with less eff ect on off spring size. All of these factors 
complicate analysis and generalizations, but suggest there 
are constraints on the size and number of young—which 
determine the fi tness or reproductive potential of the fe-
male. Th e term  fi tness refers to the ability of an organism to 
contribute genes to the next generation, and this equates 
approximately to the number of off spring weighted by the 
probability that those off spring will survive and reproduce. 
 When and How Often Do Snakes Reproduce?  
 Th is is an important question, and one that is not easily an-
swered because we do not have suffi  cient knowledge of 
many species of snakes to generalize with confi dence. In 
places where individuals of a particular species are quite 
 
 
 Figure 9.13.   The  upper photo shows the egg of a Black Rat Snake 
( Pantherophis obsoletus ) that has completed 80 percent of incubation. 
The outer shell layers including the calcareous components have 
fractured because of swelling of the egg from the uptake of water. The 
 lower photo is an electronmicrograph featuring the surface of the 
eggshell and reveals the calcareous layer with pores. The pores 
presumably enhance the exchange of gases across the eggshell. The 
bar in the upper photograph equals 1 cm, and that in the lower 
photograph equals 50  μ m. Photographs by the author. 

 200  | How Snakes Work
common—garter snakes for example—it would seem that 
at least most females reproduce every year. On the other 
hand, species that appear to be very rare—sometimes an ar-
tifact of human impressions or inability to fi nd specimens—
one might assume that reproduction occurs less frequently. 
Th e evidence at hand suggests that both situations occur 
in natural populations of snakes, and that the frequency of 
reproduction is dependent on the environment and the 
food resources that are available to a given female. 
 First, we know much about the captive breeding of snakes 
through eff orts at reproducing species on the part of zoos, 
private hobbyists, and commercial breeders who have pro-
moted herpetoculture as a signifi cant part of the pet industry 
( fi g.  5.25  ). Not only are many snakes capable of reproducing 
every year, but numerous oviparous and several viviparous 
species are capable of producing more than one clutch or litter 
during a year. Perhaps the best-known example of an unusu-
ally prolifi c snake is the African house snake ( Lamprophis 
spp.), which includes several small- to medium-size species 
native to sub-Saharan Africa. Th e species  Lamprophis fulgino-
sus  has become a commonly kept snake because it is easy to 
maintain in captivity and breeds prolifi cally. If these snakes 
are well fed, females will lay clutches of eggs as often as every 
two months, and the tendency for individuals to mate is not 
restricted seasonally! Examples of multiple clutches or pro-
lifi c live-bearing from captive snakes are artifi cial, however, in 
the sense that food is available in excess relative to what 
snakes might actually enjoy as resources in wild populations. 
 Temperature is an important factor that infl uences repro-
ductive rates because of its eff ect in determining activity, 
metabolism, and prey availability to fe-
males (see  chapter  4  ). Many snakes, espe-
cially in temperate climates, reproduce 
once per year or less frequently depending 
on both food resources and temperature, 
which generally equate with the length of 
the active season. Colder climates generally 
tend to slow reproduction. For example, 
European Adders ( Vipera berus ) reproduce 
approximately yearly in southern Europe, 
but every two years in northern France and 
every three years in the Alps.  
 Environmental Cues Aﬀ ecting 
Reproduction 
 Physical signals from the environment that 
infl uence reproduction seem logically to be 
more important in temperate than in trop-
ical environments. However, we know little 
about what infl uences reproductive cycling 
in the tropics, so this statement is a hypo-
thesis that remains untested. Th e more 
logical cues in temperate environments are 
the amount of day length, or  photoperiod , and temperature, 
both of which vary with seasons. Although photoperiod is an 
important cue for reproductive changes in birds and other 
animals, temperature is more important for ectothermic 
reptiles such as snakes. Th is is especially true in regions 
where these animals spend much time beneath ground 
during winter dormancy when changes in the levels and 
timing of light above ground are not evident below ground. 
 Increases in temperature—both below and above 
ground—are thought to play an important role in infl u-
encing the spring emergence and subsequent reproductive 
behavior of many snakes that live in temperate environ-
ments. Emergence of hibernating rattlesnakes, for example, 
is stimulated by increasing temperature, or reversals of 
temperature gradients, within dens where these snakes 
spend the winter. However, it seems that increasing tem-
perature is not essential for spring emergence of garter 
snakes that live in some of the Canadian provinces ( fi g.  4.7 ) 
because they emerge with body temperatures as low as 
0.5°C. As in the garter snake, many other species of snake 
breed seasonally and experience a period of winter dor-
mancy at relatively low temperatures prior to mating in the 
spring. In cases where reproduction occurs immediately fol-
lowing the emergence from dormancy in the spring, signif-
icant changes in reproductive physiology and behavior are 
likely to occur during the period of winter dormancy. 
 Because of the diffi  culties of access, there is, not surpris-
ingly, much “underground” ecology and behavior of snakes 
that is totally unknown. What are the metabolic status, 
 
 
 Figure 9.14.   A female King Cobra ( Ophiophagus hannah ) photographed while resting 
on its nest where the eggs are attended in the Western Ghats of India. The female 
snake constructs the nest by pulling leaves together with coils of its body. Photograph 
by Gowri Shankar. 

Courtship and Reproduction  |  201 
awareness, and infl uence of environmental cues for animals 
that are overwintering very deep beneath the ground and 
do not immediately experience warming temperatures of 
spring? Are there endogenous circannual or seasonal cycles 
that operate to stimulate the timing of emergence? What 
happens to those animals that happen to occupy sites of ref-
uge that are not very deep? When I was living in eastern 
Kansas for about 13 years, I noticed that occasionally there 
were unusual periods of warming that occurred during cer-
tain winters. I lived in rural countryside for part of this 
time, and I observed that certain species of snakes (espe-
cially garter snakes) emerged and were active during these 
warm spells, crossing roads for example. Th en what invari-
ably ensued was a cold front would turn the weather bitterly 
cold, and temperatures could drop to lethal levels for ecto-
therms within a very short time (less than a day). What 
happened to the snakes that had been active—which evi-
dently had occupied rather shallow retreat sites and could 
respond to the brief period of warming? Perhaps they es-
caped again to underground retreats, or perhaps some had 
been “caught” by the changes associated with the cold front 
and were killed in the winter because of their premature 
emergence. It is interesting to think about this, because 
there must have been other snakes that were located, and 
remained, in deeper places where they might not be aware 
of the brief warming that occurred because of limited 
ground penetration of the thermal changes. 
 Warmer temperatures induce courtship and mating be-
haviors of garter snakes, and they are probably important 
for activity of the gonads as well. Th ese behaviors are ex-
pressed more strongly, and in more individuals, when 
snakes fi rst experience a lengthy period of low temperature 
that appears to “reset” an endogenous seasonal clock. Per-
sons who breed snakes subject various captive species to 
periods of cooling in order to enhance the probability of 
success when males and females are placed together to en-
courage mating. More generally, the scientifi c literature 
suggests that temperature is the principal environmental 
cue that regulates reproduction in snakes as well as in other 
squamate reptiles. 
 Th e few snakes that have been studied in tropical loca-
tions generally exhibit seasonal reproduction. With respect 
to populations or species outside of equatorial regions, 
temperature is a potential environmental cue, although not 
as extreme in variation as in temperate regions. Seasonality 
of rainfall can be important, especially in regions that have 
distinctly seasonal drought. Th e timing of reproduction 
might be related to the availability of food resources (which 
might also be cyclic) to ensure successful vitellogenesis, 
mating, and embryogenesis in females, and/or to ensure 
the availability of food for neonates during their early life. 
 Th e Neuroendocrine Regulation of Reproduction 
 Relatively little is known about how nerves and hormones 
control the reproductive cycles of snakes, relative to the 
vast literature on this subject that exists for mammals and 
birds. Moreover, most of the knowledge presently available 
for snakes is focused on a single species, the Common Gar-
ter Snake ( Th amnophis sirtalis ). Generally, signals from the 
environment related to temperature and light conditions 
are cues to changes in neural pathways (nervous system), 
 endocrines (hormones), and  neuromodulators that infl uence 
reproduction ( fi g.  9.16 ). Th e prefi x  neuro - refers to nerve or 
neuron. Hence, neuromodulators are chemicals released 
from nerve endings that “modulate” or change the signaling 
behavior of neighboring neurons that are part of a common 
 
 
 Figure 9.15.   A hatchling Trans-Pecos Rat Snake ( Bogertophis 
subocularis ) as seen ( upper photo ) just as it has pierced the eggshell 
using the egg tooth (which is now gone) and ( lower photo ) as it 
appears following emergence from the eggshell. The  inset illustrates 
a Black Rat Snake ( Pantherophis obsoletus ) inside its eggshell just 
prior to hatching. Embryonic ﬂ uids can be seen inside the egg and 
oozing out the openings that were made in the eggs by the respective 
hatchlings. Photographs by Elliott Jacobson (upper, lower) and the 
author (inset).  

 202  | How Snakes Work
pathway. Variation in neuroendocrine mechanisms has 
contributed to evolutionary variation in the patterns of re-
production in these, as well as other, vertebrates. 
 Environmental temperature plays a key role in regu-
lating reproduction in snakes as well as in other ecto-
thermic vertebrates such as lizards. Temperature infl uences 
important centers of the brain, especially specifi c parts of 
the  hypothalamus and the  pineal gland , a small organ that is 
formed near the roof of the forebrain. Th e pineal gland se-
cretes  melatonin , which is synthesized and released rhyth-
mically in response to environmental cues of temperature 
and photoperiod. Levels of melatonin (which circulate in 
blood) are higher during night, or darkness, and therefore 
exhibit a  circadian  (daily)  rhythm that is related to daily cy-
cles of light and dark. Melatonin is also produced at other 
places in the body (e.g., retina, brain, and intestine), but 
the principal source is the pineal gland. Melatonin infl u-
ences both physiology and behavior, and it is therefore an 
important communicator between environmental cues of 
light and temperature and the internal functions that  aff ect 
reproduction. 
 In the absence of light, temperature alone can modulate 
the level of melatonin in garter snakes that are in winter dor-
mancy. Studies by Deborah Lutterschmidt and Robert Ma-
son showed that melatonin levels are lower in garter snakes 
exposed to low temperature, but the amplitude of cyclic mel-
atonin release is increased following a prolonged period at 
low temperature. Other studies indicate that surgical re-
moval of the pineal gland can change the courtship behav-
iors of snakes. While the precise actions of melatonin are not 
 
 
 Figure 9.16.   Conceptual diagram of the controlling elements in the reproduction of snakes. The gray circles 
represent factors that reside outside the animal, and the other elements interact within the animal. The scheme of 
interactions is generalized, and many of the details are not well known in snakes. Drawing by the author. 

Courtship and Reproduction  |  203 
understood, these and other investigations appear to estab-
lish that pineal secretions of melatonin both modulate and 
synchronize reproduction with environmental cues. Addi-
tionally, melatonin also plays a role in synchronizing daily 
patterns of activity with reproductive behaviors. 
 A specifi c region of the brain—including the anterior 
part of the hypothalamus and the nearby pituitary 
gland—is an important center for integrating external 
and internal cues related to reproduction. Th is site in the 
central nervous system also is important for responses to 
temperature and the orchestration of behaviors related to 
temperature regulation. With respect to reproduction,  go-
nadotropic hormones that stimulate the gonads (follicle 
stimulating hormone, leutinizing hormone) are synthe-
sized in this region—largely in the pituitary—and re-
leased into the blood circulation by the external signals 
that synchronize reproduction. Yet other factors called 
 gonadotropin-releasing hormones act in between to stimu-
late the release of the gonadotropic hormones (also called 
 gonadotropins ) when activated by signals related to the 
external cues. Th is describes the generally characteristic 
hierarchical control of gonadal function in tetrapod ver-
tebrates, including many reptiles, but we have very 
sketchy information about the mechanisms that govern 
this system specifi cally in snakes. For purposes of this 
discussion, we will assume that episodic secretion of go-
nadotropin-releasing hormones and, secondarily, the 
 release of gonadotropins from the hypothalamus, are 
 required for normal reproduction in snakes. 
 At the level of the gonads—testes in males and ovaries 
in females—steroids are secreted and stimulate gonadal 
tissues as well as other distant target organs via circulation 
in the blood. Th e principal gonadal steroids in tetrapod ver-
tebrates are  progesterone ,  estrogens , and  testosterone . Pro-
gesterone is essential for the development of eggs and 
embryos. Estrogens have many eff ects including the devel-
opment and maturation of egg follicles, vitellogenesis, and 
growth of the oviduct, in addition to secondary sexual char-
acteristics (changes in body coloration, for example) and 
reproductive behaviors. Testosterone is synthesized in the 
testes and regulates the secondary sexual characteristics 
of males. Testosterone belongs to a class of sex steroid 
hormones called  androgens . In both male and female rep-
tiles, androgens can be converted to estrogens in the cen-
tral nervous system and elsewhere (see below). Th ese 
conversions in the brain aff ect the reproductive behaviors 
of both male and female animals, but very little is known 
about these eff ects in snakes. 
 Various other peptide molecules and neuromodulators 
potentially infl uence reproduction and the reproductive be-
haviors of snakes. As with the other factors mentioned 
above, very little is known about these chemicals and their 
probable actions in modulating the reproductive system 
in snakes. Th erefore, further discussion of these is not 
warranted. 
 Reproductive Cycles 
 Th e periodicity of reproduction in snakes is variable among 
species, with underlying mechanisms or even changes being 
not well understood except for a few species. Robert Al-
dridge and his colleagues (in addition to others) have de-
scribed several types of cyclic reproduction in snakes, with 
various terminologies being applied to them. Here I shall 
attempt to simplify the description into basic patterns. 
 Reproductive processes cycle when the gonads or acces-
sory organs become quiescent for a period of the year. Th is 
seems to be widespread in both temperate and tropical spe-
cies. Spermatogenesis does not need to coincide with 
mating, and sperm that are produced at another time can 
be stored in the ducts that are used for transporting sperm 
in males, or in the oviducts of females (e.g., if mating oc-
curs during the fall). Another pattern occurs when the go-
nads or accessory organs exhibit a reduction of activity 
during part of the year but do not become completely qui-
escent. Such a phenomenon has been inferred to exist in 
snakes, but the details are not completely verifi ed. Finally, 
the gonads might remain more or less constantly active 
without any pronounced cycling in the level of activity. 
Again, this pattern has been inferred to exist, but the evi-
dence is not conclusive. 
 Whatever the pattern, variation occurs among species 
with respect to the phase relationships between reproduc-
tive behaviors and the cycling of activity of the gonads. 
Th ere can also be considerable variation among individ-
uals within a species, although generally speaking, repro-
duction is highly synchronous among individuals of a 
population. Th e majority of snake species that have been 
studied exhibit seasonal reproduction, and the synchrony 
of reproduction becomes stronger as the latitude increases 
away from the tropics. Fewer species have nonseasonal re-
production, and all of these occur in tropical or equatorial 
areas. 
 Investigations of reproductive patterns are challenging, 
and it is sometimes diffi  cult to adequately judge the repro-
ductive condition of the gonads, especially testes. For 
 example, Selma Maria Almeida-Santos and colleagues dem-
onstrated that male Brazilian Rattlesnakes ( Crotalus duris-
sus terrifi cus ) retain sperm in reproductive ducts throughout 
the year. Although the volume of semen appears not to 
vary, the highest counts of sperm are observed just prior to 
the mating season. 
 Th e Common Garter Snake exhibits what is called a “dis-
sociated reproductive cycle.” Th is term refers to mating 
when the circulating levels of sex steroid hormones are low 

 204  | How Snakes Work
because of quiescent condition of the gonads ( fi g.  9.17 ), 
which contrasts with most vertebrates, in which mating oc-
curs during periods when gonads are maximally active and 
circulating levels of sex steroids are elevated. In the garter 
snake, levels of androgens vary during spring emergence 
when mating occurs, evidently attributable to metabolic 
clearance of the hormones depending on the temperatures 
aff ecting snakes during winter dormancy following high go-
nadal activity in the summer and fall ( fi g.  9.17 ). Th us, the 
perception of the extent of “dissociation” of the reproduc-
tive cycle in this species is temporal and might be attribut-
able to the variation of temperature during any particular 
winter dormancy. Th e pattern of reproduction in this garter 
snake is unusual when compared to many other species of 
reptiles, likely due to the evolutionary infl uence of the ex-
treme winter conditions to which these snakes are sub-
jected in the populations that have been studied. Research 
with snakes that experience “extreme” conditions in their 
environment can be very useful in elucidating the regula-
tory mechanisms that underlie reproduction generally. 
 Courtship and Reproductive Behaviors  
 Like other vertebrates, snakes engage in ritualized court-
ship behavior prior to mating and the insemination of fe-
males. Courtship depends on visual, tactile, and chemical 
cues that trigger specifi c behavioral interactions between 
male and female snakes. Males also interact with other 
males to compete more successfully for access to females. 
Courtship, mating, and aggressive behaviors are complex 
and can vary among species. Th e expression of such activity 
in snakes can be quite spectacular, but due to the cryptic 
nature of many species, courtship and mating are rarely ob-
served. Detailed knowledge of reproductive behaviors is 
known for relatively few species of snakes, and is particu-
larly lacking in secretive, primitive, fossorial, and tropical 
species. 
 James Gillingham has categorized the reproductive be-
havior of snakes into three distinct phases: precourtship, 
courtship, and postmating. Th ere is a wealth of natural his-
tory observations related to the courtship behaviors of 
snakes, but these are often not consistent in details, termi-
nology, or interpretation. Robust investigations involving 
both fi eld observations and laboratory experimentation 
have advanced our understanding of courtship behaviors 
considerably—especially in recent years—but are lacking 
for many taxa of snakes. 
 Precourtship Behaviors 
 Many snakes are not particularly social during much of 
the year, and we could imagine that encounters between 
individuals of the same species might be somewhat rare 
 
 
 Figure 9.17.   The seasonal reproductive pattern of the male Red-sided Garter Snake ( Thamnophis sirtalis parietalis ). The variation of androgen 
levels (high or low during spring emergence) is hypothesized to be related to annual variation in the severity of winter temperatures. Redrawn 
by the author after  ﬁ g.  8.2 , p. 293 in R. D. Aldridge and D. M. Sever (eds.),  Reproductive Biology and Phylogeny of Snakes , vol. 9 of Reproductive 
Biology and Phylogeny, B. G. M. Jamieson, series editor (Enﬁ eld, NH: Science Publishers, 2011).  

Courtship and Reproduction  |  205 
(similarly to the rarity of encounters with humans). How-
ever, the persistence of a species or population depends 
on male and female individuals fi nding one another, and 
in the snakes’ world, awareness of one’s neighbors is prob-
ably much greater than we imagine. If you are a snake, 
knowing or fi nding your neighbors depends largely on 
communication with chemical cues, as far as we know. 
Chemicals on the skin of snakes adhere to the substrate 
over which they move, and other individuals have the ca-
pability to detect these chemicals and to derive important 
information from such “signals.” Th ese provide chemical 
trails, and are a means by which one individual can locate 
another. Th e ability of one individual to follow and locate 
another has been termed  trailing behavior . 
 How do snakes detect a chemical trail, and what is the 
basis of perception that is used to follow it? Watch a snake 
that is moving through its environment in an exploratory 
manner, undisturbed by any human observer, and you will 
notice it is frequently fl icking its tongue to sample the 
chemical cues associated with its surroundings. Th e tongue 
collects the chemical cues and transfers them to the vom-
eronasal organ in the roof of the mouth, where the chemi-
cals are sensed and the information is transmitted to the 
brain (see  chapter  7 ). Th ese chemical “cues” communicate 
between individuals and therefore function as  pheromones 
(see  chapter  5 ). Th us, pheromones are used in the trailing 
behavior of snakes, and certain ones also elicit sexual be-
haviors in snakes. 
 Th e vomeronasal system primarily infl uences courtship 
behavior, and olfaction plays a lesser or negligible role. 
Male garter snakes will not court female garter snakes if 
the vomeronasal nerves are cut, whereas eliminating input 
from the olfactory nerves does not eliminate courtship. 
 Th e vomeronasal system is most responsive to non-
volatile chemicals, which are also most persistent in the en-
vironment. Th e reproductive pheromones produced by 
snakes reside in the skin. Discharge from the cloacal glands 
plays either no role whatsoever or perhaps a secondary role 
that remains to be documented. Th e “sexual attractiveness 
pheromone” of garter snakes is well studied and is the only 
pheromone that is adequately documented in reptiles. It is 
a mixture of lipids consisting of long-chain methyl ketones. 
How such compounds are produced and sequestered in the 
skin for communication with other snakes is not well 
 understood. 
 Skin-based pheromones are the basis of trailing behavior 
in which male snakes follow females to initiate courtship. 
Trailing by males is complex and can involve multiple males 
trailing a single female, for example in some colubrid species 
with seasonal occurrence of mating (garter snakes, racers). If 
the pheromone trail is disrupted, either by confi guration of 
the environmental substrate or by the movement of multiple 
males, a trailing male relies on visual cues as well as chemical 
ones to locate or relocate the female.  Pheromone-based trail-
ing behavior is presumably widespread among snakes, being 
known for representatives of caenophidian, boid, and pytho-
nid species. Much evidence suggests that nonvolatile cuta-
neous lipids may communicate information about the 
species, sex, reproductive state, size, condition, and other 
properties of the individual snake that is the source of such 
pheromones. In some species, the ability of male snakes to 
trail females is seasonal and occurs only during the mating 
season. 
 Lipids that are dispersed from the skin are presumably 
less eff ective for intraspecifi c communication in aquatic 
 environments than in terrestrial ones. Richard Shine has 
shown that pheromones appear to play no role in trailing 
behavior of the entirely marine Turtle-headed Sea Snake 
( Emydocephalus annulatus ), which depends on visual cues to 
locate potential mates. 
 So what about chemical cues that go airborne? One 
study by Robert Aldridge and colleagues suggests that air-
borne chemicals can, in fact, be used to locate mates in the 
Northern Water Snake ( Nerodia sipedon ). Male individuals 
of this species orient preferentially to aerial cages that con-
tained conspecifi c females. Th e use of volatile chemical cues 
might be more important than previously supposed, partic-
ularly in arboreal environments where chemical trailways 
can be interrupted by gaps in the vegetation. 
 Courtship Behavior 
 Courtship behaviors are elicited by pheromones that render 
a snake sexually attractive as well as eliciting trailing behav-
ior. Once a male has located a female, whether by trailing or 
by closer association (e.g., simultaneous emergence from 
overwintering dens), the lipid products in the skin of the 
female elicit a characteristic sequence of behaviors that are 
well studied in garter snakes and are also known with little 
variation in some other species. Th ere is an important con-
nection here between the production of cutaneous phero-
mones and the act of skin shedding. Courtship is sometimes 
linked with the timing of ecdysis, and freshly shed females 
are particularly attractive to males ( fi g.  9.18 ). Th e compo-
nents of cutaneous pheromones are also found in the older 
epidermis that is shed from female snakes. 
 During periods of courtship male snakes that are com-
peting for females engage in ritualized behavior referred to 
as  combat dance . Th is is a behavior in which one male chal-
lenges another, usually of the same species, by elevating the 
anterior body and pushing the opponent in an attempt to 
knock the individual to the ground. In some species, the 
two males engaged in “combat” both assume a nearly ver-
tical posture and wave the fore-body, which may intertwine 
(with each other) when contact is made between the two 

 206  | How Snakes Work
snakes ( fi g.  9.19 ). Biting is not part of the ritual, but rather 
pushing the opponent to the ground and maintaining a 
higher position. Characteristically, the loser of the “com-
bat” crawls away when it is defeated. 
 Typically, larger males are dominant and win out in con-
tests that involve ritualized combat. In some species of 
snakes, larger males are more successful in mating with fe-
males than are smaller males. Characteristically, male 
snakes tend to grow larger than females of the same species 
if intermale combat is part of the species’ reproductive be-
havior. Also, the tail of a male snake is typically somewhat 
longer than is that of a female ( fi g.  9.3 ), which could be ad-
vantageous for successful mating when courtship involves 
“tail-wrestling” for cloacal alignment (see below). 
 Once a male snake has access to a female, courtship be-
gins with the male orienting toward the female and fl icking 
the tongue intensely. Th e tongue samples the chemical cues 
from the skin, while both touch and vision are used during 
these behaviors. Once the male has contacted the female, it 
rubs its chin along the back of the female while continuing to 
fl ick the tongue rapidly and maintaining contact. Biting the 
body of the female is sometimes involved during this stage of 
interaction, or even before. I have seen a male cottonmouth 
trailing a female and, when in close range, crawl quickly for-
ward and gently nip the female on the posterior body near 
the tail. Usually, however, biting is observed on the dorsal 
surface of the female, closer to the neck. Such biting seldom 
damages tissue, but it stimulates the female to assume a 
more tractable position prior to coitus. Biting during court-
ship seems to occur principally in colubrid snakes.  
 At the next stage, the male attempts to align his body with 
that of the female, and he orients his head in the same direc-
tion as hers. Th e male next engages in  caudocephalic waves , 
which are horizontally undulating waves of the body that 
gently contact the female while lying upon or beside her. 
Th ese waves move from the posterior part of the body toward 
the head and are thought to stimulate mating. Sometimes 
the wave movements are in the opposite direction, from head 
toward the tail. Th e last stage of courtship involves move-
ments in which the male attempts to align his cloaca with 
that of the female and then engage in copulation ( fi g.  9.20 ). 
In boas, courting male snakes use pelvic spurs to stimulate 
 
 
 Figure 9.18.    A pair of Florida Cottonmouth Snakes ( Agkistrodon 
piscivorus conanti ) resting together during a spring mating season. 
The female snake is beginning to shed its skin (visible in the lower 
part of photo), which imparts maximum attractiveness of the sexual 
pheromones in the skin. Photographed by the author at Seahorse Key, 
Levy County, Florida.  
 
 
 Figure 9.19.   Ritualized combat behavior between two male Florida 
Cottonmouth Snakes ( Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ) at Seahorse 
Key, Levy County, Florida. The  upper photo shows the two males 
with heads elevated in combat. The  lower photo shows the same 
two males with the dominant male elevated over the snake that lost 
the contest and eventually crawled away. Photographs by the author. 

Courtship and Reproduction  |  207 
cloacal opening of the female just before insertion of the 
hemipenis ( fi g.  9.21 ). Courting snakes may vibrate or jerk the 
tail in rapid movements during the period just before coitus. 
 Th e use of chemical cues during courtship is documented 
only in certain snakes, including viperids, natricine colubrids, 
and elapids. Other snakes such as boas and pythons appear to 
rely principally on touch and body contact once a potential 
mate has been identifi ed. Although sea snakes do not use 
pheromones for trailing, chemical cues are probably impor-
tant when mating pairs are engaged at close range. 
 Some intriguing research by Michael LeMaster, Robert 
Mason, Richard Shine, and colleagues have shown that male 
garter snakes can assess the body condition of a female 
based solely on the information that resides in the chemical 
cues from the cutaneous lipids of a female. Th e cue evidently 
depends on the amazing fact that the mix of lipids in the 
pheromone of a female becomes increasingly dominated by 
longer-chain molecules as the length and body condition of 
the female increases. Th e male snakes prefer to mate with 
females that are longer and in better body condition. 
 During copulation the male engages the cloaca of the 
female by inserting a single hemipenis into the cloaca or into 
one of her vaginas (see  fi gs.  9.4 and  2.35 ). Th e spiny distal 
surfaces of the hemipenis help to maintain the physical union 
between the two snakes. I once observed a dramatic example 
 
 
 Figure 9.20.    A pair of copulating Northern Copperheads 
( Agkistrodon contortrix mokasen ) with the tails entwined (arrow) just 
prior to coitus. Photographed in Kentucky by Dan Dourson.  
 
 
 Figure 9.21.   Photographs of cloacal spurs in pythons. The photo at the  left shows the paired spurs of a Ball Python ( Python regius ). The 
photos in the  center and at the  right illustrate a single spur of a Water Python ( Liasis fuscus ), in use during mating and inactive respectively. 
Photographs by David Barker. 

 208  | How Snakes Work
of just how strong this union can be when I watched a male 
Eastern Yellow-bellied Racer ( Coluber constrictor fl aviventris ) 
pull and drag a female nearly straight up into a pine tree that 
was being climbed while the two snakes were in copulation. 
For part of the distance the female climbed upward and par-
allel with the male in what appeared to be a cooperative eff ort 
to ascend together. However, there were moments during this 
ascent when the female was facing head-down in a direction 
opposite to that of the male, and she was being pulled upward 
solely by the means of physical contact at the cloaca. Th us, the 
full weight of the female was suspended by the hemipenis of 
the male! Once these two snakes had ascended quite high into 
the tree, they came to rest in a horizontal position upon some 
branches that were bearing pine needles, where presumably 
copulation continued. In snakes generally, the duration of 
coitus varies from several minutes to many hours. 
 Following the successful mating of garter snakes, the 
male deposits a  seminal plug (sometimes termed  copulatory 
plug ) in the cloaca of the female. Dried seminal secretions 
serve as a physical barrier to prevent the female from im-
mediately mating again by blocking her vaginal opening. 
Th e plug may also serve to prevent leakage of sperm from 
the cloaca of the female. Th ere is furthermore some evi-
dence that copulatory fl uids from an actively mating male 
garter snake contain an inhibitory pheromone that renders 
the female partner sexually unattractive for some while. 
 One very interesting behavior of snakes is the aggregation 
of large numbers of individuals during courtship to form 
what is termed a  mating ball . Th is is especially common in gar-
ter snakes. Th ere are anecdotal reports of the phenomenon in 
other species, including sea snakes, but some of the accounts 
are questionable. In garter snakes, males typically outnumber 
females in breeding aggregations when 10–100 males simul-
taneously court a single receptive female. In northern popula-
tions, numerous garter snakes emerge near-simultaneously 
from overwinter dens where they engage in courtship and 
mating before dispersing for the active season (see  fi g.  4.7 ). I 
have witnessed this phenomenon in eastern Kansas, where I 
once found hundreds of garter snakes ( Th amnophis sirtalis ) in 
a so-called mating ball at the base of a dead tree near the edge 
of a lake. I was most amazed to see how intense the males 
tongue-fl icked and moved with jerky motions in attempt to 
court a female. Th ere is intense competition among males for 
a female, and each male works to push other competing males 
out of the way. To be successful at mating, a male must phys-
ically push aside and outmaneuver other males to engage the 
cloaca of a female in coitus. I picked up several individuals and 
held them in my hand. Each of these snakes seemed com-
pletely oblivious to being handled and steadfastly persisted in 
rapid tongue-fl icking while the body and head continued to 
jerk rhythmically. I could not be sure about the ratio of males 
to females in this circumstance. 
 Another interesting aspect of the mating aggregations 
of garter snakes is the presence of “she-males,” which are 
male snakes that are courted as females because they pro-
duce female pheromones. Th e pheromones produced by 
she-males are close enough to that of true females to con-
found discrimination. Generally, however, larger females 
receive more intense courtship than do she-males. Current 
work by Robert Mason and others suggests that androgens 
are converted to estrogens locally in the skin of male garter 
snakes. Most, or nearly all, males emerge from winter dor-
mancy with some degree of “feminized” skin, but the 
amount and quality of the female pheromones diminish 
with time. Several hypotheses regarding the supposed ben-
efi ts for having a presence of she-males have been put for-
ward, but the phenomenon is presently poorly understood. 
 Postmating Behavior 
 Following mating there is probably little or no social behav-
ior that continues between male and female snakes in most 
species. However, aggregations of gravid females have been 
described in several species of viperid, colubrid, and elapid 
snakes. Reports of female snakes attending eggs following 
oviposition are numerous, especially involving colubrid and 
elapid snakes, pythons and pit vipers. Probably all pythons 
attend or brood their eggs as described in  chapter  4 , but 
there is little evidence for parental care of young snakes fol-
lowing their birth or hatching. 
 Some interesting observations of pit viper behaviors 
should be mentioned here. Newborn pit vipers of several 
species remain with the mother snake for short periods fol-
lowing birth, usually a matter of just a few days to two 
weeks until the very fi rst shedding of skin by the neonates. 
Th ereafter the young snakes disperse. Th ere is little evi-
dence for the adult female actively caring for the young 
during this period, but the newborn are tolerated and typi-
cally coil en masse with their bodies in close contact with 
the mother. One function of such behavior could be protec-
tion from rapid evaporative water loss through the skin, 
which builds a more protective barrier to water loss during 
the fi rst ecdysis in some species. Th e South American Rat-
tlesnake ( Crotalus durissus ), having a tropical lowland 
distribution, is the only species of rattlesnake that is known 
 not to engage in the parental attendance of neonates. 
 Th e newborn young of Florida Cottonmouths ( Agkistro-
don piscivorus conanti ) remain in close association with their 
mother until their fi rst ecdysis, as is known in several spe-
cies of rattlesnakes. I have observed this on several occa-
sions at the Gulf coast island of Seahorse Key. On one 
occasion, I found the newborn young of a cottonmouth in 
attendance by both a male and female adult snake. Among 
the larger adults on the island, male and female pairs are 
found in close association during all months of the year, 

Courtship and Reproduction  |  209 
and this possibly refl ects some degree of pair-bonding in 
this species. It seems highly likely that the pair of snakes 
that I found in association with the newborn snakes was a 
mated pair. Th ese social behaviors of cottonmouths are 
presently the subject of more intensive investigation. 
 Growth and Sexual Maturation of Snakes  
 Th e rates of growth and sexual maturation of snakes are im-
portant features of life history that determine the evolu-
tionary success of a species and its persistence in nature. 
Th e investment of females in their off spring is refl ected not 
only in the number of young that are born, but also in the 
size of the neonate and the amount of embryonic yolk that 
remains to help fuel its metabolism. Newborn snakes that 
contain some residual embryonic yolk can grow in length 
without feeding for variable periods of time, depending on 
the amount of yolk that is present at birth. It is the pres-
ence of residual embryonic yolk that permits some snakes 
that are born in the late summer to make it through their 
fi rst winter without feeding if they happen to have bad luck 
in fi nding food during their very early life. 
 Eventually young snakes begin feeding, and the rates of 
growth that are achieved depend on the genetic constitu-
tion of the individual, the availability of heat and water in 
its environment, and the success of the snake in capturing 
and digesting prey. Th ere is considerable variation in rates 
of growth and sexual maturation among snakes, and the 
diff erences are not always based in the “hard-wiring” of ge-
netic limitations. Rates of growth in captive snakes can ex-
ceed those of the same species in nature because of the 
constant availability of food and water. However, there are 
situations in which growth rates that are achieved in the 
wild are similar to those of captive snakes. Th e rate of 
growth in snakes is indeed fl exible, being determined partly 
by genes and partly by the environment in which the nutri-
tion of an individual is based. Within a species, the growth 
of individuals can vary depending on the quality of habitat, 
the availability of resources, variation in weather patterns, 
sex, and other attributes of morphology and physiology 
that can vary among individual animals. 
 Th e growth and maturation of snakes also depend on the 
size of the individual at birth, and generally larger species 
of snakes produce larger off spring. However, in many spe-
cies of snakes in which the adult size is small, off spring are 
proportionately larger (relative to the size of adults) than 
are those of larger species. Th is also is true among some 
other animals such as certain lizards, birds, and mammals. 
Th omas Madsen, Richard Shine, and others have also found 
that young snakes growing with relative rapidity during the 
fi rst year of life because of a favorable abundance of prey 
continue to grow more rapidly than average during their 
subsequent years of life. Th us, the eventual maximum size 
of a snake can depend, in part, on this “silver spoon” eff ect. 
 How rapidly can snakes grow? First, we need to distin-
guish numerous anecdotes concerning rapid growth rates 
and the large sizes of snakes that are raised in captivity. 
Captive pythons generally increase their length nearly four-
fold during the fi rst year of life. David Barker has informed 
me that Burmese and African Rock Pythons in his care have 
increased in length as much as sixfold during the fi rst year. 
It is also important to note that many captive individuals 
can be obese and very large in mass (weight) due to the 
“overfeeding” of such snakes by their owners. Nonetheless, 
growth of snakes can also be very rapid in nature. Species of 
snakes living in warmer climates more than double in 
length during the fi rst year of life and may achieve sexual 
maturity within one to two years. In some elapid species of 
snakes that were studied by Richard Shine, females fi rst 
mated at one year of age. Relatively early sexual maturation 
appears to be common among the Elapidae as well as some 
colubrid snakes, and many species will mate within the fi rst 
one to three years after birth. In contrast, species of snakes 
that live in colder climates (either at higher latitudes or 
higher altitudes) grow and reach sexual maturation more 
slowly. For example, growth rates in colubrid and viperid 
species living in colder climates are roughly half the rate of 
species living in warmer, tropical environments. Sexual 
maturation in the former species may require four to nine 
years. Viperid snakes as a group tend to exhibit “delayed” 
sexual maturity, as do freshwater fi le snakes ( Acrochordus 
arafurae ). In the latter species, males mature at fi ve years 
and females mature at seven years. Regardless of the envi-
ronment, male and female snakes characteristically achieve 
sexual maturity at diff erent times; females are generally 
later than males by several months to a full year or more. 
 Growth of snakes is more rapid during the early years 
of life and is generally most rapid during the fi rst one to 
two years. Th is fact has great signifi cance because smaller 
snakes are generally more vulnerable to predation and to 
death from other causes (such as dehydration). Also, growth 
is required for snakes to reach sexual maturity. Research of 
wild snake populations has documented repeatedly that 
growth is faster, and survivorship lower, in younger snakes 
compared with older individuals. In some sea snakes, only 
10–20 percent of neonates survive their fi rst year, and only 
6 percent of the females live to reproduce. 
 Snakes continue to grow as adults, unlike many species 
of mammals. However, the rates of growth slow consider-
ably as a snake ages, and larger snakes that are near their 
maximum size grow very slowly, or negligibly. Typically, 
growth rates decline markedly when snakes reach sexual 
maturity, likely as a result of increasing energy investment 
to structures and behaviors that are related to reproduction 

 210  | How Snakes Work
(rather than growth). Th e energy demands for reproduction 
can be quite diff erent between the sexes. For the multiple 
reasons discussed here, length is not a reliable indicator of 
age, and it is diffi  cult to compare the growth rates among 
species if one uses a single metric for comparison. As a very 
rough generalization, most snakes are likely to achieve 
nearly half of their maximum body length during the fi rst 
three to four years of growth, including larger species such 
as pythons that grow to lengths of several meters or longer 
(see  chapter  1 ). 
 Th e longevity of snakes tends to fall in between that of 
lizards and turtles. Snakes in captivity tend to live from 10 
to 20 years, with some aging up to 30+ years. A Ball Python 
in the Philadelphia Zoo lived to be a little older than 47 
years. Demographic studies of snakes have shown that life 
spans in the wild may be similar to that in captivity, with 
maxima ranging typically between 15 and 30 years. Olive 
Sea Snakes on the Great Barrier Reef live to about 15 years. 
 Snakes on Islands 
 Studies of reproduction in snakes that live on islands are 
interesting because of the nature of resources, which can be 
limited, ephemeral, or literally “boom or bust.” Clutch size 
and/or the mass of a young snake are signifi cantly greater 
during years when prey resources are more abundant and 
when females have a better condition of energy storage for 
the production of young. In snakes generally, however, the 
relations between variation of resources and reproduction 
are complex, and measures of reproductive output can bear 
little relationship to the costs of reproduction in a given 
system. Assuming that resources are adequate or “normal,” 
other factors can intervene to reduce the reproductive out-
put of a female. In many species of snakes reproduction is 
associated with a decrease in the feeding rates of females, 
and gravid females may even exhibit anorexia! Such an-
orexic females may not easily survive after parturition 
owing either to starvation and depletion of energy reserves, 
or to being susceptible to predation. 
 Various interpretations of this phenomenon have identi-
fi ed several advantages of females not feeding. Th ese include 
easier and more careful thermoregulation by females, which 
can also move more easily without prey in the digestive 
tract. Locomotion can already be physically constrained 
due to the bodily distension from oviductal eggs. François 
Brischoux and several coworkers have investigated the re-
production of sea kraits ( Laticauda spp.) on some islets at 
New Caledonia. Th ey report that female snakes cease feeding 
as their eggs develop, seemingly because the distension of 
the body tends to impede locomotion. Th erefore, these fe-
males would be less eff ective in movements and more vul-
nerable to aquatic predators if they continued to feed. Th e 
feeding rate decreases progressively with increasing follicle 
size, suggesting there is a lack of a “threshold” eff ect on the 
behavior. Rather, increasing degrees of burdening due to 
egg development render foraging less productive and in-
creasingly risky in relation to predators.  
 Snakes and the Future  
 It seems fi tting in this chapter to add a concluding com-
ment about the future of snakes. Indeed, this topic is tied 
closely to the future of the world as it relates to impacts of 
human population, technology, and climatic changes. Like 
many other vertebrates, snakes are documented to be in de-
cline, and the phenomenon appears to be global. What is 
further alarming is the impression in some parts of the 
world that the numbers of snakes are decreasing not only 
where human presence off ers obvious causes, but also in 
relatively pristine regions where there appears to be little, 
or no, direct human impact. Th e reasons might relate in 
various places to the indirect infl uence of invasive (intro-
duced) wildlife, eff ects of atmospheric pollutants or radia-
tion, climatic changes, or the subtle collapse of trophic 
systems. Of course, there could be unknown single or mul-
tiple eff ects of which we are totally unaware. 
 As long as appropriate habitat remains, I think that some 
species of snakes will survive even amid broad-scale reduc-
tions in other forms of wildlife. Smaller burrowing species, 
for example, might remain prevalent in suburban areas or 
even cities, and aquatic species might persist in bodies of 
water across varied landscapes. Some species might even 
thrive in agricultural landscapes, whereon a food base of ro-
dents tends to thrive. And there is an important question 
regarding human impact that begs for more research. Do 
certain snake species become increasingly rare because of 
reduced numbers in the population, or is the rarity due 
(perhaps in part) to a “switching” of behavior to more secre-
tive habits when encounters with humans increases? 
 What does appear certain is that larger, more spectac-
ular species will disappear from landscapes where human 
impact is a dominant force. Loss of habitat, direct killing 
upon highways and roads, predatory losses to dogs and cats 
that accompany human inhabitants in increasing numbers, 
use of chemical pesticides, reduction in food base (frogs, for 
example), and of course direct killing by humans all act with 
multiplicity to reduce the numbers of snakes that are pre-
sent in a given area. Despite many years of education re-
garding the place and value of snakes, far too many people 
still have misconceptions about snakes, fear them irratio-
nally, and will kill one at each opportunity. Th is may be es-
pecially true in rural areas, where people tend to kill snakes 
or, at best, want them removed from their property. I con-
trast this with a personal impression I have that many Aus-
tralians are well educated and tolerant of snakes, even 

Courtship and Reproduction  |  211 
though numerous species they encounter are venomous. It 
seems to me that Australians have learned to live with 
snakes being present in their surroundings, at least in com-
parison with some other cultures. I emphasize this is a 
strong impression that is based in my personal experiences, 
and not a statistically tested statement. 
 As one example, I knew an Australian couple who had 
two children and lived in a rural setting. Th ey not only tol-
erated, but in fact quite enjoyed, the presence of a Red-
bellied Black Snake ( Pseudechis porphyriacus ), which on 
some mornings sunned itself on an open porch that was 
attached to the house. Th is snake had been given a name, 
as was a goanna that also appeared on somewhat regular 
occasion. Th e snake was part of the natural environment 
that was both noticed and appreciated by the family. On 
the other hand, I cannot imagine many folks in Florida 
who would tolerate such presence of an Eastern Diamond-
back Rattlesnake ( Crotalus adamanteus ). Th e fi rst response 
would likely be to kill the animal and remove it from the 
property. Th ere are exceptions to this statement, of 
course. 
 So I appeal to the readers of this book to please share 
some of your excitement about the biology of snakes—
what they do and how they live—with others, especially 
children. I believe that most people are fundamentally cu-
rious about snakes, especially if they have not been taught 
to fear them. Th is reminds me also to entreat fi lmmakers to 
show people the many fascinating behaviors of snakes and 
to avoid the all-too-common tendency to feature snakes 
predominantly in defensive postures or attitudes, which 
gives viewers the wrong impression that a snake is always 
ready to attack and to harm you. If people change their be-
haviors and cease to kill snakes, we will come a long way 
toward preserving and appreciating environments in which 
rich and varied wildlife entertain the senses and evoke 
imagination. Remember there is nothing more practical 
and edifying than to learn about the world around you. For 
many, one or more species of snakes will be an important 
part of that world. Together we will celebrate each time a 
snake is born. 
 Additional Reading  
 Aldridge, R., A. Bufalino, and A. Reeves. 2005. Pheromone com-
munication in the watersnake,  Nerodia sipedon : A mechanistic 
diff erence between semi-aquatic and terrestrial species.  Ameri-
can Midland Naturalist 154:412–422. 
 Aldridge, R. D., and D. M. Sever (eds.). 2011.  Reproductive Biology 
and Phylogeny of Snakes . Vol. 9 of Reproductive Biology and 
Phylogeny, B. G. M. Jamieson, series editor. Enfi eld, NH: Sci-
ence Publishers. 
 Almeida-Santos, S. M., F. M. F. Abdalla, P. F. Silveira, N. Yama-
nouye, M. C. Breno, and M. G. Salomão. 2004. Reproduc-
tive cycle of the neotropical  Crotalus durissus terrificus : 
I.  Seasonal levels and interplay between steroid hormones 
and vasotocinase.  General and Comparative Endocrinology 
139:143–150. 
 Andren, C., and G. Nilson. 1983. Reproductive tactics in an island 
population of adders,  Vipera berus (L.), with a fl uctuating food 
resource.  Amphibia-Reptilia 4:63–79. 
 Blackburn, D. G. 1998. Structure, function, and evolution of the 
oviducts of squamate reptiles, with special reference to vivi-
parity and placentation.  Journal of Experimental Zoology 
282:560–617. 
 Blackburn, D. G. 2006. Squamate reptiles as model organisms 
for the evolution of viviparity.  Herpetological Monographs 
20:131–146. 
 Blackburn, D. G., K. E. Anderson, A. R. Johnson, S. R. Knight, and 
G. S. Gavelis. 2009. Histology and ultrastructure of the pla-
cental membranes of the viviparous Brown snake,  Storeria 
dekayi (Colubridae: Natricinae).  Journal of Morphology 
270:1137–1154. 
 Brischoux, F., X. Bonnet, and R. Shine. 2010. Confl icts between 
feeding and reproduction in amphibious snakes (sea kraits, 
 Laticauda spp .).  Australian Ecology 36: 46–52. 
 Burns, G., and H. Heatwole. 2000. Growth, sexual dimorphism, 
and population biology of the olive sea snake,  Aipysurus laevis , 
on the Great Barrier Reef of Australia.  Amphibia-Reptilia 
21:289–300. 
 Crews, D., and W. Garstka. 1982. Th e ecological physiology of re-
production in the Canadian red-sided garter snake.  Scientifi c 
American 247:159–168. 
 Ford, N. 1986. Th e role of pheromone trails in the sociobiology of 
snakes. In D. Duvall, D. Mueller-Schwarze, and R. Silverstein 
(eds.),  Chemical Signals in Vertebrates 4 . New York: Plenum 
Press, pp. 261–278. 
 Gillingham, J. 1987. Social behavior. In R. Seigel, J. Collins, and 
S. Novak (eds.),  Snakes: Ecology and Evolutionary Biology . New 
York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 211–217. 
 Greene, M., and R. Mason. 2000. Courtship, mating, and male 
combat of the brown tree snake,  Boiga irregularis .  Herpetologica 
56:166–175. 
 Kubie, J., A. Vagvolgyi, and M. Halpern. 1978. Roles of the vomero-
nasal and olfactory systems in courtship behavior of male gar-
ter snakes.  Journal of Comparative Physiology and Psychology 
92:627–641. 
 LeMaster, M., and R. Mason. 2002. Variation in a female sexual 
attractiveness pheromone controls male mate choice in garter 
snakes.  Journal of Chemical Ecology  28:1269–1285. 
 Lillywhite, H. B. 1985. Trailing movements and sexual behavior in 
 Coluber constrictor .  Journal of Herpetology 19:306–308. 
 Luboschek, V., M. Beger, D. Ceccarelli, Z. Richards, and M. Pratchett. 
2013. Enigmatic declines of Australia’s sea snakes from a biodi-
versity hotspot.  Biological Conservation  166:191–202. 
 Lutterschmidt, D. I., and R. Mason. 2009. Endocrine mechanisms 
mediating temperature-induced reproductive behavior in red-
sided garter snakes ( Th amnophis sirtalis parietalis ).  Journal of 
Experimental Biology  212:3108–3118. 
 Madsen, T., and R. Shine. 1993. Costs of reproduction in a popula-
tion of European adders.  Oecologia 94:488–495. 
 Mason, R. T., and M. R. Parker. 2010. Social behavior and phero-
monal communication in reptiles.  Journal of Comparative Phys-
iology A196:729–749. 
 Mason, R., H. Fales, T. Jones, L. Pannell, J. Chinn, and D. Crews. 
1989. Sex pheromones in snakes.  Science 245:290–293. 

 212  | How Snakes Work
 Mason, R., T. Jones, H. Fales, L. Pannell, and D. Crews. 1990. Char-
acterization, synthesis, and behavioral responses to sex attrac-
tiveness pheromones of red-sided garter snakes ( Th amnophis 
sirtalis parietalis ).  Journal of Chemical Ecology 16:2353–2369. 
 Mullin, S. J., and R. A. Seigel (eds.) 2009.  Snakes: Ecology and Con-
servation . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
 Parker, M., and R. Mason. 2009. Low temperature dormancy af-
fects the quantity and quality of the female sexual attractive-
ness pheromone in red-sided garter snakes.  Journal of Chemical 
Ecology 35:1234–1241. 
 Parker, W. S., and M. V. Plummer. 1987. Population ecology. In R. 
A. Seigel, J. R. Collins, and S. S. Novak (eds.),  Snakes, Ecology 
and Evolutionary Biology . New York: Macmillan, pp. 253–301. 
 Reading, C. J., L. M. Luiselli, G. C. Akani, X. Bonnet, G. Amori, J. 
M. Ballouard, E. Filippi, G. Naulleau, D. Pearson, and L. Rugie-
ro. 2010. Are snake populations in widespread decline?  Biology 
Letters 6:777–780. 
 Rigley, L. 1971. “Combat dance” of the black rat snake,  Elaphe o. 
obsoleta .  Journal of Herpetology 5:65–66. 
 Ross, P., and D. Crews. 1977. Infl uence of the seminal plug on mat-
ing behaviour in the garter snake.  Nature 267:344–345. 
 Schuett, G. W., S. Carlisle, A. Holycross, J. O’Leile, D. Hardy, E. Van 
Kirk, and W. Murdoch. 2002. Mating system of male Mojave 
rattlesnakes ( Crotalus scutulatus ): Seasonal timing of mating, 
agonistic behavior, spermatogenesis, sexual segment of the 
kidney, and plasma sex steroids. In G. W. Schuett, M. Hoggren, 
M. Douglas, and H. Greene (eds.),  Biology of the Vipers . Eagle 
Mountain, UT: Eagle Mountain Publishing, pp. 515–532. 
 Shine, R. 1985. Th e evolution of viviparity in reptiles: An ecological 
analysis. In C. Gans and F. Billett (eds.),  Biology of the Reptilia , 
vol. 15. New York: John Wiley, pp. 606–694. 
 Shine, R. 1988. Constraints on reproductive investment: A com-
parison between aquatic and terrestrial snakes.  Evolution 
42:17–27. 
 Shine, R. 1992. Relative clutch mass and body shape in lizards and 
snakes: Is reproductive investment constrained or optimized? 
 Evolution 46:828–833. 
 Shine, R. 1994. Sexual size dimorphism in snakes revisited.  Copeia 
1994:326–346. 
 Shine, R. 2003. Reproductive strategies in snakes.  Proceedings 
Royal Society London B 270:995–1004. 
 Shine, R. 2005. All at sea: Aquatic life modifi es mate-recognition 
modalities in sea snakes ( Emydocephalus annulatus , Hydrophi-
idae).  Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 57:591–598. 
 Shine, R., and X. Bonnet. 2009. Reproductive biology, population 
viability, and options for fi eld management. In S. J. Mullin and 
R. A. Seigel (eds.),  Snakes, Ecology and Conservation . Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, pp. 172–200. 
 Shine, R., B. Phillips, H. Wayne, M. LeMaster, and R. Mason. 2003. 
Chemosensory cues allow courting male garter snakes to as-
sess body length and body condition of potential mates.  Behav-
ioral Ecology and Sociobiology 54:162–166. 
 Shine, R., J. Webb, A. Lane, and R. Mason. 2005. Mate location 
tactics in garter snakes: Eff ects of rival males, interrupted 
trails and non-pheromonal cues.  Ecology 19:1017–1024. 
 Slip, D. J., and R. Shine. 1988. Th e reproductive biology and mating 
system of diamond pythons,  Morelia spilota  (Serpentes: Boi-
dae).  Herpetologica 4:396–404. 
 Stewart, J. R., and K. R. Brasch. 2003. Ultrastructure of the placen-
tae of the natricine snake,  Virginia striatula (Reptilia: Squama-
ta).  Journal of Morphology 255:177–201. 
 Sun, L.-X., R. Shine, D. Zhao, and T. Zhengren. 2002. Low costs, 
high output: Reproduction in an insular pit-viper ( Gloydius 
shedaoensis , Viperidae) from north-eastern China.  Journal of 
Zoology 256:511–521. 
 Tinkle, D. W., and J. W. Gibbons. 1977. Th e distribution and evolu-
tion of viviparity in reptiles.  Miscellaneous Publications of the 
Museum of Natural History, University of Michigan 154:1–55. 

 | 213
 G L O S S A R Y  O F  T E R M S   
  
 abduction ( v .  abduct) .  Movement of a part away from the 
medial axis or plane of the body, or movement of two 
parts away from each other. Cf.  adduction . 
 acclimation.   A reversible change in morphology, behav-
ior, or physiology that occurs in response to a prolonged 
change in the condition of a laboratory environment 
(e.g., temperature). Cf.  acclimatization . 
 acclimatization .  A reversible change in morphology, 
behavior, or physiology that occurs in response to a pro-
longed change in the condition of the natural environ-
ment (e.g., temperature). Cf.  acclimation . 
 accommodation .  Th e eye’s action or ability to bring an 
object into focus. 
 acetylcholine .  An important neurotransmitter in many 
diff erent types of neurons, having actions on the heart, 
smooth muscle of blood vessels, and the activation of 
muscle at neuromuscular junctions. 
 action potential .  A nerve “impulse” or propagated bio-
electric change in a nerve membrane. Th is is the unit of 
signaling in the nervous system. 
 active forager.     An animal that moves through its envi-
ronment actively searching for potential prey. 
 adduction ( v .  adduct).   Movement of a part toward the 
medial axis or plane of the body, or movement of two 
parts together. Cf.  abduction . 
 aglyph ( adj .  -ous) .      A snake in which teeth lack a groove or 
canal, therefore unable to transport venom eff ectively. 
 air sac .  See  tracheal air sac . 
 alimentary canal .  See  gastrointestinal tract . 
 allantois .  See  extraembryonic membranes . 
 allele .  Shorthand form of allelomorph, representing one of a 
number of possible alternate heritable forms of a given gene.  
 allometry .  Changes in the relative proportion of a body 
part in relation to the rate of growth of the whole body, 
or another body part, as total body size increases. Such 
changes can be either positive or negative. 
 alpha ( α ) keratin.   See  keratin . 
 ambush forager .  Reference to an animal that remains 
sedentary for periods, usually in strategic locations, and 
waits for prey to come within capture distance. 
 amelanistic partial albinism .  A condition where skin 
color lacks melanin, but other pigments are present to 
impart some, or partial, color.  
 amnion .  See  extraembryonic membranes . 
 androgen .  A class of sex steroid  hormones that stimulate 
male characteristics and promote protein synthesis. In 
female reptiles, androgens can be converted in the cen-
tral nervous system to  estrogens or other steroids. Th is 
also occurs in males. 
 ankylosis .  A rigid union between two parts, usually with 
reference to attachment between teeth and bone by hard 
mineralized tissue. 
 aorta .  See  dorsal aorta . 
 aortic arches .  Two (right and left) outfl ow vessels of the 
ventricle, which convey systemic blood and join to form 
the  dorsal aorta . 

 214  | Glossary of Terms
 apical pit .  A sense organ recessed in a small depression 
usually on the posterior tip of the dorsal scales of cer-
tain reptiles, particularly snakes. Little is known about 
the function of these structures. 
 apnea .  Breath-hold; cessation of breathing. 
 aposematism (adj. aposematic) .  Reference to charac-
ters, especially coloration, that advertises an organism 
as dangerous or unpleasant to potential predators. 
 arteriole .  A smaller artery that immediately precedes cap-
illaries. 
 artery .      A blood vessel that conveys generally well- oxygenated 
blood from the heart to tissues. Pulmonary arteries con-
vey relatively deoxygenated blood to the lung. Cf.  vein .  
 ATP .  Adenosine triphosphate, an energy-rich nucleotide 
used as a common energy currency in all living cells. 
 atrioventricular valves .  Valves separating and regulat-
ing the fl ow of blood from the atria to ventricle of the 
heart.  
 atrium ( pl .  atria) .  One of the receiving chambers of the 
heart, fi lling with blood returning from veins and emp-
tying to the  ventricle . 
 baroreceptor .  A sensory receptor that is stimulated by 
changes in pressure. Typically, this term refers to re-
ceptors in the walls of central blood vessels where they 
detect stretch or distension of the vessel wall due to in-
creased blood pressure. 
 basal.       Reference to the earliest lineage, or early lineages, 
in a  phylogeny . Th e internal nodes of a phylogeny in con-
trast with terminal branches. 
 basilar membrane .  Th e delicate strand of elastic tissue 
bearing the auditory  hair cells in the  inner ear . 
 behavioral thermoregulation .  Regulation of body tem-
perature attributable to behaviors of an animal that con-
trol its interactions with environmental heat sources. 
See  thermoregulation . 
 beta ( β ) keratin.   See  keratin . 
 binocular vision .  Overlapping visual fi elds involving two 
eyes, such that images are focused on both of two retinas 
simultaneously and thereby enhance the perception of 
depth and distance.  
 body wall.   Th e part of the animal body that encloses the 
internal body cavity. 
 boundary layer .  A layer of fl uid (air or water) adjacent to 
a physical boundary or surface, in which motion of the 
fl uid is aff ected by the boundary and exhibits a mean ve-
locity that is less than the free stream velocity away from 
the boundary. Th is region is responsible for frictional 
 drag of moving objects. 
 brille.   See  spectacle . 
 buoyancy .  Th e tendency to fl oat or sink in a fl uid environ-
ment, water or air. 
 button .  Th e fi rst permanent and distal segment on the rat-
tle of a rattlesnake, the  prebutton being lost at the fi rst 
 ecdysis . 
 cantilever .      A projecting beam or body that is supported at 
only one end. 
 capillary ( pl. -  ies) .  Th e smallest (microscopic) blood ves-
sels that are lined by a highly permeable endothelium 
and exchange gases and chemical substances with tis-
sues through which they pass. 
 cardiac .  Reference to the heart. 
 cardiac output .  Th e volume rate of blood outfl ow from the 
heart, expressed as volume of blood leaving the  ventricle 
per time. In snakes with a single ventricle, it is best to 
specify the cardiac outfl ow as systemic, pulmonary, or 
total. 
 cardiovascular system .  See  circulation . 
 catecholamines.   A group of molecules that act as  neu-
rotransmitters and  hormones , including  epinephrine and 
 norepinephrine . Th ese play important roles in accelerat-
ing the heart and constricting blood vessels in the car-
diovascular system.  
 caudocephalic wave .  A horizontal undulating wave of 
the body that results in gentle body contacts between 
a female snake and a courting male that produces the 
movement while lying beside or upon her. Th e undula-
tion characteristically moves from posterior to anterior 
and is thought to stimulate mating. 
 cavum arteriosum.        One of three cavities in the single 
ventricle of noncrocodilian reptiles, which receives 
 oxygenated blood from the left atrium but has no direct 
connection to an outfl ow tract. 
 cavum pulmonale .  One of three cavities in the single ven-
tricle of noncrocodilian reptiles, which lies on the left 
side of the  vertical septum and conveys blood into the 
pulmonary outfl ow tract. 
 cavum venosum .  One of three cavities in the single ventri-
cle of noncrocodilian reptiles, which lies to the right side 
of the  vertical septum and conveys blood to the systemic 
 aortic arches . 
 centrifugal.   Acting in a direction outward from a center 
of rotation. 

Glossary of Terms  |  215 
 character, or character state .  Reference to an observ-
able phenotypic property or trait of an organism. It 
represents the particular condition or expression of a 
feature that might have variable expressions in diff erent 
organisms. 
 chorioallantois, chorioallantoic membrane .  An extrae-
mbryonic membrane formed by union of the chorion 
and allantois (see  extraembryonic membranes ). 
 chorion .  See  extraembryonic membranes . 
 chromatophore .      A generalized term for a cell that con-
tains pigment and imparts color to skin. 
 chyme .  Partially digested food (also called  digesta ) in the 
form of a liquefi ed mass after it enters the intestine. 
 circadian rhythm .  A cycle of behavior or physiologi-
cal process that is repeated daily on a 23–25 h interval 
(roughly one day), attributable to an “internal clock” but 
synchronized to time-related factors in the  environment.  
 circulation (also blood circulation, cardiovascular 
system, transport system)  Th e heart and blood ves-
sels, which in aggregate move blood throughout the 
body. Th e  pulmonary circulation  transports blood to and 
from the lungs (where it becomes oxygenated), and the 
 systemic circulation transports blood to and from all the 
other body tissues. 
 clade .  A  monophyletic  lineage of organisms. A single species 
and its descendants, representing a distinct branch on a 
 phylogenetic tree . 
 clear layer .  A term given to the innermost living cells of 
an  outer epidermal generation during skin shedding of 
squamates. 
 cloaca .  Th e common chamber and passageway where re-
productive, urinary, and digestive ducts or canals re-
lease their contents. Th is chamber receives feces from 
the large intestine and voids its contents to the exterior 
through the  vent or cloacal opening. 
 cloacal pop, popping .  Rapid extrusion and retraction of 
the cloaca, which results in the rapid expulsion of air 
from the vent in certain North American snakes. Th e ac-
tion produces a clearly audible popping sound while the 
tail is held aloft as a defensive action. 
 clutch size .  Th e collective number of eggs that are ovu-
lated and laid by a single female at one time. Cf.  litter 
size . 
 coeffi  cient of friction .  A dimensionless value that de-
scribes the ratio of the force of friction between two bodies 
and the force pressing them together. Th is value is an em-
pirical measurement that is determined experimentally.  
 color polymorphism .  See  polymorphism . 
 columella .  Th e auditory ossicle (bone or cartilaginous ele-
ment) that crosses the middle ear cavity and transmits 
sound or vibrational stimuli from the surrounding tis-
sues of the head (in snakes) to the  oval window  and fl uid 
of the  inner ear . 
 combat dance .  A challenge behavior between two male 
snakes, usually of the same species, involving vertical 
postures, intertwining of bodies, and pushing of the op-
ponent in attempt to force the individual to the ground. 
Such behavior occurs typically during the mating season 
of the species involved.  
 concertina locomotion .  A mode of locomotion in snakes, 
characterized by sequential extension and contraction 
of the body from one anchored or stationary site to the 
next as the animal moves with accordion-like appear-
ance in one direction. 
 cone .  A photoreceptor in the  retina , functioning in bright 
light and diff erentially sensitive to light of diff erent 
wavelengths (thus imparting color vision). Cf.  rod . 
 contact zone .  See  resistance site . 
 conus arteriosus .  A thickened part of the amphibian 
heart between the ventricle and distributing vessels of 
the systemic and pulmonary circulations. Th is structure 
is not present in reptiles.  
 convection .  Th e mass transfer of heat or matter due to 
bulk transport in a moving fl uid (gas or liquid). 
 convergence, convergent character .  Reference to 
 homoplasy or the independent evolution of similar 
character states in unrelated lineages, usually attrib-
utable to similar selection pressures associated with 
similarity of one or more common features of the 
 environment.  
 copulatory plug .  See  seminal plug . 
 cornea .  Th e transparent surface covering the iris and pupil, 
through which light passes as it enters the eye.  
 corneous, cornifi ed .  Descriptive of keratinized epithe-
lium, as the  stratum corneum of the epidermis. 
 corpus luteum ( pl .  corpora lutea) .  Th e remnants of a 
ruptured egg follicle following ovulation, which secrete 
relatively large volumes of progesterone until late preg-
nancy in viviparous reptiles. 
 costocutaneous muscles .  Th e muscles that run between 
the ribs and overlying skin of snakes. 
 cranial kinesis .  Movements between parts of the skull, 
usually in contexts related to feeding of snakes.  

 216  | Glossary of Terms
 critical thermal maximum ( pl .  -a) (CTMax) .  Th e tem-
perature at which a species, when heated gradually, be-
comes incapacitated such that long-term survival is not 
possible at this or higher temperatures. 
 critical thermal minimum ( pl .  -a) (CTMin) .  Th e tem-
perature at which a species, when cooled gradually, be-
comes incapacitated such that long-term survival is not 
possible at this or lower temperatures. 
 crypsis, cryptic .  A condition of being camouflaged; 
 concealed. 
 defensive strike .      A strike made by a snake as a defensive 
movement to thwart a potential predator. Cf.  predatory 
strike . 
 derived, or derived character .  Reference to a more re-
cent character or feature that departs from the ancestral 
condition in a lineage. Opposite to  primitive . 
 dermis .  Th e inner layer of skin beneath the epidermis, 
 containing fi brous connective tissue, blood vessels, 
nerves, and chromatophores. 
 diagnostic character .  A specifi c character state that dis-
tinguishes unambiguously one species or clade of organ-
isms from another. 
 diapsid .  Reference to a reptilian skull in which there are 
two temporal, or postorbital, openings. 
 diastole .  Relaxation of muscles of the ventricle while fi ll-
ing with blood from the atria, prior to contraction. Cf. 
 systole . 
 dietary water .  Preformed water that is present in the food 
that an animal consumes. 
 diff usion .  Movement of atoms, molecules, or ions as a re-
sult of random thermal motion from a region of higher 
to lower concentration. 
 digesta .  See  chyme . 
 digestive tract .  See  gastrointestinal tract . 
 diverticulum ( pl.  -  a).   A circumscribed pouch or sac. 
 dorsal aorta .  Th e principal systemic blood vessel that con-
veys blood to the body tissues posterior to the heart, 
formed by the union of the right and left  aortic arches . 
 down-regulation .  Control of a physiological activity by a 
decrease in receptor density in a target cell membrane. 
Cf.  up-regulation . 
 drag .  Th e resistance to movement of an object through a 
fl uid, which increases with the viscosity and density of 
the medium and varies with the shape and surface area 
and properties of an object. A drag force acts parallel to 
the relative movement of fl uid and opposite to the direc-
tion of movement. 
 ecdysis .  Th e shedding or sloughing of the  stratum corneum 
of the  epidermis , which periodically renews the outer 
covering of the skin. 
 ectothermy ( adj .  ectothermic) .  Reference to an animal 
that depends on external heat sources to regulate body 
temperature. Cf.  endothermy . 
 eggshell .  Th e shell or outer covering of an egg, consist-
ing of fi bers and variable amounts of calcium carbonate 
crystals. 
 electromyography .  Th e recording (and study) of electrical 
activity of muscles.  
 endocrine ( adj .  or  n . )   Secreting (chemical messengers) 
into the blood circulation. See  hormone . 
 endothermy ( adj .  endothermic) .  Reference to organisms 
(e.g., birds, mammals) wherein regulated body tempera-
ture is attributable largely to internal heat production 
arising from relatively high rates of energy metabolism. 
Cf.  ectothermy . 
 endurance .  Th e ability of an organism to exert itself and to 
move or remain active for a long period of time. 
 epaxial muscles .  Muscles of the trunk that lie, or origi-
nate, dorsal to the vertebral column or body axis. 
 epidermal generation .  A unit of lepidosaurian  epidermis 
that is periodically formed and shed in  ecdysis . A com-
plete, mature generation of epidermis when superfi cial 
in position just before it is shed to the environment is 
called an  outer epidermal generation . During renewal 
of the epidermis during the shedding cycle, the newly 
forming unit, lying beneath the outer generation that is 
about to be shed, is called the  inner epidermal generation . 
 epidermis .  Th e outer layer of skin of a vertebrate, overly-
ing the  dermis . Th e epidermis contains the  stratum cor-
neum and living cells having the capacity to form keratin.  
 epididymis .  Th e largely convoluted tubule that drains the 
eff erent ducts of the testis into the urethra. Th is struc-
ture lies at the surface of the testis and functions to store 
sperm until they are released to the exterior.  
 epinephrine .  See  catecholamines . 
 esophagus .  Th e region of the gut located between the 
mouth and stomach, functioning to transport ingested 
food to the region of digestion. 
 estrogens .  A family of sex steroids synthesized primarily 
in the  ovary , but some are produced in the adrenal cor-
tex, brain, and testis. Th ese hormones play a central role 

Glossary of Terms  |  217 
in stimulating the female system during reproductive 
cycles and the development of  secondary sexual charac-
teristics . Th ey also function to prepare the reproductive 
system for fertilization, and are essential for  vitellogen-
esis and egg development. 
 evaporative cooling .  Removal of body heat attributable 
to evaporation of water, whether passive or actively en-
hanced by  panting . 
 exhalation .  See  expiration . 
 expiration .      Active or passive movement of air out of 
the lung (to the external environment).  Exhalation . Cf. 
 Inspiration . 
 external respiration .  See  ventilation . 
 extraembryonic membranes .  Structures formed around 
the embryo that eliminate wastes ( allantois ), provide 
food (yolk sac) and oxygen, and protect the embryo ( am-
nion and  chorion ). 
 eyecap .  See  spectacle . 
 facial pit .  See  pit organ . 
 facultative endothermy .  Endothermic heat production 
by an animal that is not obligatory, but may or may not 
occur depending on circumstances. 
 fang .  A grooved or tubular tooth that is used to inject 
venom. 
 fascia .  A band of connective tissue that forms a sheath, as 
around a muscle or blood vessel. 
 faveolus ( pl . -i).   A functional unit of reptilian lung  parenchy-
ma , consisting of an individual membranous compartment 
bounded by neighboring units in the form of a honeycomb.  
 fenestra ( pl . -ae) .      A large opening, usually within or be-
tween bones. 
 fi tness .  Th e ability of an organism to contribute its genes 
to the next generation; roughly expressed as the number 
of off spring contributed to the next generation weighted 
by the probability of surviving to reproduce. 
 fl ow .  Movement of fl uid, or the quantity of fl uid moving, 
usually expressed as volume per time. 
 footplate .  Th e expanded base of the  columella providing 
contact with the  oval window of the  inner ear . 
 foramen .   A hole or opening that allows passage through a 
tissue wall. 
 friction .  Mechanical resistance to relative motion between 
two solid surfaces that are in contact.  Static friction is the 
force that has to be overcome in order to  induce forward 
motion of an object along a surface that it contacts. 
 Sliding friction is the force that has to be overcome in or-
der to keep one of two contacting objects moving at a 
constant velocity. 
 frontal .      Of, or pertaining to, the front of the head or skull 
of an animal, especially the large and prominent dermal 
bone on the dorsal roof of the skull, lying between the 
eye orbits.  
 fusiform .  Spindle-shaped, with tapering toward each end. 
 gas exchange .  In context of physiology, the exchange of 
respiratory gases (O 2  and CO 2 ) between an organism and 
its environment.  
 gas exchanger .  Any permeable organ that exchanges res-
piratory gases with the environment: lung, gills, or skin. 
 gastric glands .      Glands in the wall of the stomach that se-
crete mucus, acid, and proteolytic enzymes. 
 gastrointestinal tract .  A hollow, tubular cavity extending 
through an animal and open at both ends. Th is structure 
functions in ingestion, digestion, and absorption of food 
materials. Also called  alimentary canal ,  digestive tract , or 
simply  gut . 
 genetic drift .  Evolutionary change due to random fl uctua-
tions of gene frequencies, independent of selection and 
most evident in small populations. 
 genotype .  Th e genetic makeup of an individual, which 
along with other factors such as the environment deter-
mines the organism’s  phenotype . Cf.  phenotype . 
 gliding .  A form of aerial locomotion involving largely pas-
sive but controlled movement through air. In snakes, a 
fl attened body is used as an airfoil to reduce the angle of 
descent after launching from an elevated site. 
 glottis .  Th e opening from the pharynx (throat) to the  tra-
chea or  larynx . 
 glycolysis ( adj .  glycolytic) .  Pertaining to the enzymatic con-
version of glucose to the simpler compound of  lactate (or 
pyruvate), resulting in production of energy as ATP with-
out a requirement for oxygen. Th is constitutes the princi-
pal route of carbohydrate breakdown and oxidation and is 
an important aspect of activity metabolism in snakes (and 
other reptiles) that utilize glycolysis for ATP production in 
muscle during short but intense bursts of activity.  
 gonad .  A reproductive organ in which either eggs ( ovary ) 
or sperm ( testis ) are produced. Th e  ovary or  testis is a pri-
mary sexual character. 
 gonadotropin, gonadotropic hormone .  Hormones that 
infl uence the activity of the  gonads , particularly those 
secreted by the anterior pituitary-follicle stimulating 
hormone and luteinizing hormone. 

 218  | Glossary of Terms
 gonadotropin-releasing hormone .  A hormone secreted 
from the  hypothalamus  and which stimulates the release 
of  gonadotropins from the  pituitary . 
 gravitational pressure .  Th e component of pressure in 
a fl uid that is attributable to gravity. Also called  hydro-
static pressure . 
 gut .  See  gastrointestinal tract . 
 hair cells .  Mechanosensory epithelial cells bearing minute 
hairlike structures that are bent by sound or vibrational 
stimuli, which alters the membrane properties and creates 
bioelectric “signals” that are transmitted to the  auditory 
nerve. Th ese cells are arrayed along the  basilar membrane 
of the  inner ear .  
 harmonic.   In bioacoustics, an overtone whose frequency 
is an integral multiple of a fundamental frequency. 
 head pits.   Structures similar to  apical pits and having vari-
able appearances and distribution on the head scales of 
snakes. Also called  parietal pits . 
 heart .  Th e central muscular pump of the cardiovascular 
system, consisting of two atria and a single ventricle in 
snakes. 
 heart rate .  Th e frequency of heart contractions that pro-
vide the force to move blood through the circulation. 
Heart rate is typically measured as the number of heart-
beats (or contraction cycles) per time. 
 hematocrit .  Th e percentage of total blood volume occu-
pied by red blood cells, typically measured in a sample 
of whole blood.  
 heme .  Th e ringlike molecular component of hemoglobin 
containing iron that is responsible for binding oxygen 
within a structural surrounding of carrier protein. 
 hemipenis ( pl . -es) .  Either of paired copulatory organs ly-
ing in a cavity at the base of the tail in squamate reptiles. 
 hemoglobin .  Th e pigment inside red blood cells responsi-
ble for the reversible binding and transport of oxygen. 
 hemotoxic .  A property of snake venoms that impairs blood 
vessels and lymphatic vessels. 
 hertz (Hz) .  Cycles per second (a derived unit of frequency). 
 hinge .  Th e softer, pliable region of skin between overlap-
ping scales of reptiles, especially squamates. 
 homology .  Similarity of characters due to common ancestry.  
 homoplasy, homoplastic .  Reference to similarity of  char-
acter states , or function, attributable to  convergent or 
parallel evolution and not due directly to inheritance 
from common ancestry.  
 horizontal undulatory progression .  See  lateral undulation . 
 hormone .  A chemical messenger that is secreted into the 
blood circulation or intercellular space and aff ects target 
tissues. Cf.  endocrine . 
 hydrophobic .  Repelling water; nonwettable. 
 hydrostatic indiff erent point .  Th at point in a con-
tained horizontal fl uid where the pressure does not 
change when the contained volume (say a tube) is tilted 
upright. 
 hydrostatic pressure .  See  gravitational pressure . 
 hypothalamus .  Th at part of the brain that forms the fl oor 
of the median (third) ventricle. 
 inertia .  Th e tendency of an object to remain at rest or in 
uniform motion in a straight line unless acted upon by 
external forces.  
 inhalation.   See  inspiration . 
 inner ear .  Th e internal part of the ear, comprising a senso-
ry organ responsible for balance and equilibrium sense 
in addition to the sense of hearing. 
 inner epidermal generation .  See  epidermal generation . 
 inspiration .  Active movement of air into the lung.  Inhala-
tion . Cf.  expiration . 
 integument .  A covering. Th e skin and its derivatives.  
 interaortic foramen .  A small opening between the left 
and right  aortic arches , located at their base near the 
 ventricle . 
 interstitial fl uid.   Liquid within the spaces surrounding 
(outside of) cells, generally similar to blood plasma but 
with lower content of protein.  
 interventricular canal .  A space within the ventricle of non-
crocodilian reptiles that allows communication (fl ow of 
blood) between the  cavum arteriosum  and  cavum venosum .  
 intracardiac shunt .  See  shunt . 
 iridescent color .  Bright and changing color attributable to 
refl ection due to structural properties of a surface (and 
not due to pigments). 
 iris .  A muscular disc with a contractile hole situated in 
front of the eye lens that acts as an adjustable aperture. 
 Jacobson’s organ .  See  vomeronasal organ . 
 keeled scale .      A scale that bears a prominent central keel 
or protruding midline, detectable by touch or by eye. Cf. 
 smooth scale . 
 keratin .  A hard or tough, fi brous, nonsoluble protein 
produced by the epidermis and forming the outermost 

Glossary of Terms  |  219 
 stratum corneum .  Alpha ( α ) keratin  consists of helical, 
hairlike molecules, whereas  beta ( β ) keratin is a pleated 
sheet and feather-like. Th e latter is more rigid and gener-
ally tougher than is alpha keratin. 
 keratinocyte .      An epidermal cell that has capacity to syn-
thesize keratins. 
 kinematics .  Th e study of animal motion, its course and 
patterns. 
 kinesis .  Generally, reference to physical movement. Th is 
word is descriptive of movements between parts of the 
skull ( cranial kinesis ), usually in contexts related to feed-
ing of snakes.  
 labial pit .  See  pit organ . 
 lactate, lactic acid .  A product of the incomplete oxidation 
of carbohydrate via the pathway of  glycolysis in the ab-
sence of oxygen. Lactate is a salt of lactic acid, typically 
produced in muscle during very intense activity. 
 lacunar cells .      A cell type present in the epidermis of sq-
uamates during the shedding cycle, located between   α -
keratin  above and the  clear layer below, and characterized 
by misshapen nuclei that appear to lie in a vacuole. 
 lamellar granules .  Discreet lipid-enriched secretory or-
ganelles that are present in the epidermis and from 
which lipids are released to the extracellular spaces 
where they become part of the epidermal  permeability 
barrier . 
 large intestine .  Th e posterior segment of the intestine, 
usually a comparatively straight tube of large diameter 
passing to the  cloaca . 
 larynx .   A complex of cartilaginous elements, fi bers, and 
muscles at the pharyngeal opening of the  trachea that 
functions to protect the opening and, in some species of 
reptiles, permits vocalization. 
 lateral undulation (or horizontal undulatory pro-
gression).   Th e most commonly used mode of terres-
trial locomotion in snakes, involving horizontal waves 
that travel down alternate sides of the body axis and 
generate a reaction force at fi xed points in the animal’s 
physical environment—usually surface irregularities in 
the substrate. 
 left aortic arch .  See  aortic arches . 
 left-to-right (L-R) shunt.   See  shunt . 
 lepidosaur .  Any member of a clade of reptiles (Lepidosau-
ria) inclusive of snakes, lizards, amphisbaenians, and 
tuatara. 
 lens .  Th e principal light-focusing structure in the eye. 
 litter size .  Th e collective number of animals that are born 
at one time in a viviparous species. Cf.  clutch size . 
 loreal pit .  See  pit organ . 
 lymph, lymphatic fl uid .  Clear plasma-like fl uid that is 
carried in lymphatic vessels. 
 mandibular raking .  An unusual feeding mechanism in 
which the tooth-bearing elements of the lower jaw rotate 
synchronously in and out of the mouth, thereby drag-
ging prey into the esophagus. Th is has been described in 
small, burrowing thread snakes.  
 mating ball .  A mating phenomenon seen in some snake 
species, especially garter snakes, in which males out-
number females in breeding aggregations; from 10 to 
100 or more males surround and simultaneously court a 
single receptive female.  
 mean selected temperature .  See  preferred body tempera-
ture . 
 melanin .  A dark pigment derived from oxidation products 
of tyrosine and dihydroxyphenol compounds, present in 
skin and internal  peritoneum . 
 melanism .  Excessive pigmentation or blackening of the 
skin or other tissues, usually of genetic origin. 
 melanophore .  A chromatophore that contains  melanin , 
which is generally dark brown to black in color. 
 melanophore stimulating hormone (MSH) .  A hormone 
formed in, and secreted from, the pituitary gland and 
which acts on melanocytes to stimulate the dispersion 
of melanin granules within these cells and thereby cause 
darkening of the skin. 
 melatonin .  A predominant hormone associated with the 
pineal gland, but also found in the brain and eyes of ec-
tothermic vertebrates. Synthesis of melatonin is largely 
under light control, and levels fl uctuate rhythmically 
with light cycles. Melatonin is an important communi-
cator between environmental cues of light and tempera-
ture and aff ects both physiology and behavior, including 
reproduction in snakes. 
 mesos layer .  A stratum of diff erentiated cells within the 
 stratum corneum , consisting of  α -keratinized cells that 
are alternately sandwiched between lamellar lipids in 
many species. Th is layer comprises the  permeability bar-
rier to fl ux of water across the skin.  
 metabolic water .  Water that is formed during oxidative 
cellular metabolism. 
 microarchitecture .  See  microsculpture . 
 microdermatoglyphics .  See  microsculpture . 

 220  | Glossary of Terms
 microornamentation .  See  microsculpture . 
 microsculpture, microsculpturing .  Reference to micro-
scopic features of surface morphology that are present 
on scales of squamate reptiles. Also called  microarchitec-
ture ,  microdermatoglyphics , and  microornamentation . 
 microstructure .      In context of scale morphology, see  mi-
crosculpture . 
 microvasculature .  Th e small peripheral blood vessels that 
distribute blood within tissues, including arterioles, cap-
illaries, and venules. 
 microvillus ( pl . -i) .  A minute, cylindrical projection of a 
cell membrane that increases the surface area of absorp-
tive epithelia, as in the intestine. 
 mimicry .  Th e phenomenon where organisms resemble one 
another in context of gaining an advantage in avoiding 
predators.  
 modality .  Th e state or quality of a stimulus or sensation 
(light, sound, etc.). 
 molecular clock .  Reference to a constant rate of nu-
cleotide substitutions in DNA when averaged across 
the entire genome of a species. A  phylogenetic tree 
that is constructed on the assumption of a molecular 
clock has all the terminal taxa equidistant from the 
root.  
 monophyletic, monophyletic lineage .  Reference to a 
condition in which a group of species have all been de-
rived from a single common ancestor.  
 morphological color change .  Color changes that occur 
over days, weeks, or longer due to developmental, on-
togenetic, or seasonal changes in chromatophore pat-
terns. Cf.  physiological color change . 
 MSH .  See  melanophore stimulating hormone . 
 muscular ridge .      A muscular septum in the ventricle of 
noncrocodilian reptiles that partially divides the ventri-
cle by separating the  cavum pulmonale from the  cavum 
arteriosum and  cavum venosum . 
 nanoscale .   Reference to a scale of measurement on the 
order of a billionth (10 −9 ) of a meter. 
 naris ( pl . -es).   Th e nostril or nasal opening, usually paired.  
 neck sacs .  See  tracheal air sac . 
 nerve .  A bundle of neurons, or processes of neurons that 
are enveloped by connective tissue. Cf.  neuron . 
 net cost of transport .  Th e amount of energy that is used 
to transport a given mass of an animal a given distance. 
 neuro-.   A prefi x meaning nerve or  neuron . 
 neuromodulator .  A chemical messenger that alters the 
function or actions of neurons.  
 neuron .      An individual nerve cell and fundamental unit of 
the nervous system. Cf.  nerve . 
 neurotoxic .  A property of snake venoms that is destruc-
tive to the nervous system, including neuromuscular 
junctions. 
 neurotransmitter .  A “chemical messenger” that is re-
leased from nerve terminals to aff ect other nerves or 
cells on which the nerve terminals act. 
 node .  A branching point in a  phylogenetic tree . 
 norepinephrine .  See  catecholamines . 
 oberhautchen .  Th e outermost layer of  β -keratin that 
forms the external  microsculpturing overlying the  epider-
mis of lepidosaurs. Th e original spelling of this term is 
Öberhautchen. However, Ernest Williams pointed out in 
1988 that the term was now appearing in the English lit-
erature so frequently that capitalization with an umlaut 
was unnecessary.  
 ontogeny ( adj . ontogenetic) .  Reference to complete de-
velopment of an organism, from fertilized egg to adult. 
 opisthoglyph ( adj . -ous).   A condition in venomous 
snakes where the posterior pair of teeth on each maxilla 
are enlarged or grooved to function as fangs.  
 outer epidermal generation .  See  epidermal generation . 
 oval window .  Th e membranous area on the lateral or ven-
tral wall of the  inner ear , adjoining the  footplate of the 
 columella . 
 ovarian follicle .  Th e structure of the  ovary that contains 
the developing egg. 
 ovary ( pl. –  ies).   Th e female reproductive organ ( gonad ) 
that produces ova or eggs. 
 oviduct .  Th e tube that conveys eggs from the  ovary to the 
 uterus or to the exterior via the  cloaca . 
 oviparity ( adj .  oviparous) .  A mode of reproduction 
in which underdeveloped eggs are laid by the female. De-
veloping embryos are encased within membranes over-
lain by a shell, and these are deposited in the environment 
outside the body before hatching. Cf.  viviparity, viparous .  
 oviposition, oviposit .  Th e act of laying or depositing eggs 
in the environment. Cf.  ovulation . 
 ovulation .  Th e release of an ovum or egg from the  ovary . 
Cf.  oviposition . 
 pant, panting .  Increased breathing frequency that in-
creases the rate of ventilated air movement and hence 

Glossary of Terms  |  221 
evaporation of water and removal of heat from mem-
branes associated with the upper respiratory airways, 
throat, and mouth. 
 parenchyma .  Th e essential and distinctive functional tis-
sue of an organ.  
 parietal .  Either of a pair of dermal bones forming a prin-
cipal part of the braincase at the roof of the skull (lo-
cated between the frontals and occipitals). Generally, 
this term is used in reference to the dorsal part of the 
head.  
 parietal pits .  See  head pits . 
 parthenogenesis ( adj .  parthenogenetic) .  Reproduction 
in which an egg develops into an embryo without fertili-
zation by a sperm.  
 passage time .    With reference to the gut, the time elapsed 
from ingestion to defecation  
 PBT.   See  preferred body temperature . 
 performance .  Th e relative measure of key tasks or func-
tions such as feeding, digesting, moving, growing, etc., 
that are important for survival and reproduction. 
 performance breadth .  Reference to some measure of the 
thermal range over which  performance has some subjec-
tive value to the organism.  
 peripheral resistance .  Th e resistance to blood fl ow attrib-
utable to the smaller peripheral blood vessels. 
 peristalsis .  A traveling wave of constriction (followed by 
relaxation) in tubular tissue such as the gut, produced by 
constriction of circular muscle. In the gut, these move-
ments serve to move objects through the lumen. 
 peritoneum .   A membrane that lines the body cavity and 
invests internal organs therein. 
 perivascular lymphatic .  A lymphatic vessel that sur-
rounds and is concentric with a blood vessel. Th ese 
structures are common in snakes. 
 permeability barrier .  In this book, reference to the spe-
cialized layer of lipids that is located in the stratum cor-
neum of the epidermis, limiting the fl ux of water across 
the skin. 
 phenotype .  Th e physical characteristics of an organism, re-
lated to its genetic expression and sometimes modifi ed 
by environment. Cf.  genotype . 
 phenotypic plasticity .  Variation of phenotype attrib-
utable to environmental infl uence on the phenotype, 
caused by environment interaction with genetic expres-
sion related to the particular phenotype in question. See 
also  reaction norm . 
 pheromone .      A chemical substance produced by an individ-
ual and released into the environment for the purpose 
of signaling a social response between (among) individu-
als of the same species. 
 photoperiod .  Th e period of light in 24 h. 
 phylogeny, or phylogenetic tree .  A diagram that depicts 
the relationships of groups of organisms according to 
their evolutionary history. Th e diagrammatic tree repre-
sents hypothesized genealogical ties and sequence of his-
torical, ancestor-dependent relationships that link taxa.  
 physiological color change .  Color changes that occur 
quickly due to nervous, hormonal, or local control mech-
anisms. Cf.  morphological color change . 
 pigment .  In biological usage, a molecular substance in cells 
or tissues that imparts color.  
 pineal gland .  An organ formed from the roof of the fore-
brain that acts to measure light, produces  melatonin , 
and regulates the hormonal output of other  endocrine 
structures.  
 pit organ .  Specialized infrared receptors having evolved 
independently several times within the Boidae and once 
within Colubroidea (Crotalinae). Boid pit organs are 
located in upper and lower labial scales (and/or rostral 
scales) and called  labial pits , whereas crotaline pit organs 
are present as single structures between the eye and 
nostril on either side of the head and called  facial pits 
or sometimes  loreal pits . Pit organs consist of a thin, in-
nervated membrane stretched across an open cavity in 
pit vipers, permitting rapid and sensitive detection of 
changes in infrared radiation. Th e labial pits of boids are 
similar except the membrane lines the inner recess of a 
labial pocket. 
 placenta .  A vascular, nutritive connection between fetal 
and maternal tissues, through which the developing em-
bryo exchanges nutrients, respiratory gases, and meta-
bolic waste products. Th e wall of the  uterus is typically 
the maternal connection in placental reptiles. 
 pleurodont .  Reference to an anchoring condition of teeth 
in which rootless teeth are attached to the inner side of 
the jawbone, set in a shelf-like inner, lingual wall. Th is is 
a common mode of  ankylosis in lizards and snakes. 
 polymorphism .  Th e sustained occurrence of two or more 
distinct and genetically determined forms (e.g., color 
pattern) in a single species. Th is usually represents two 
or more genetically distinct classes in the same inter-
breeding population.  
 postprandial calorigenic response, metabolic response, 
or thermogenesis .  See  specifi c dynamic action .  

 222  | Glossary of Terms
 power.   Th e rate of doing work, equal to work per time. 
 prebutton .  Th e small, fi rst segment on the tip of the tail of 
rattlesnakes, present at birth and lost at the fi rst ecdysis. 
Cf.  button . 
 predatory strike .  A strike by a snake that is made with 
intention of capturing prey. Cf.  defensive strike . 
 preferred body temperature (PBT) .  Th e mean selected 
temperature that is maintained by an ectothermic ani-
mal in a gradient or mosaic of thermal environments. 
 pressure .  Force per unit area. 
 pressure shunting .  See  shunt . 
 prey transport .  Reference to swallowing a prey item, in-
cluding manipulation by various active elements of the 
jaws and mouth. 
 prezygapophyses .      See  zygapophysis . 
 primitive, or primitive character .  Reference to a char-
acter or feature that is basal or of ancient evolutionary 
origin. Opposite to  derived . 
 progesterone .  A steroid  hormone secreted from the  ovary 
and  corpus luteum , essential for egg retention and preg-
nancy in  viviparous species. It has many eff ects that sup-
port egg and embryo development. 
 prokinesis .  A condition of cranial kinesis in which the line 
of movement is located between the nasal and frontal 
elements, anterior to the orbit. 
 proprioceptors .    Sensory receptors located primarily in 
muscles, tendons, or joints that sense tension and pro-
vide information about the position and relative motion 
of body parts. 
 propulsive force .  A force exerted against the environment 
that results in a  reaction force that is equal and opposite 
in direction. Th e reaction force is equal to  thrust  and ena-
bles forward movement of the object or animal exerting 
the propulsive force. 
 proteroglyph ( adj .-ous).   A snake or condition in which 
a relatively long maxilla bears a single, hollow, venom-
conducting fang on its anterior end. Th e fang is fi xed and 
followed posteriorly by non-venom-conducting teeth 
(characteristic of elapids). 
 pulmonary.   Reference to the lung. 
 pulmonary circulation.   See  circulation . 
 punctuated equilibrium or evolution .  Reference to rela-
tively brief episodes of speciation, followed by long peri-
ods of stability of species. 
 pupil .  Th e aperture in the center of the iris through which 
light enters the eye. 
 push point .  See  resistance site . 
 pyloris .  Th e distal aperture of the stomach, opening into 
the small intestine. 
 radio telemetry .  Study of the location, movements, be-
havior, or physiology of animals using remote detection 
and transmission equipment involving radio signals. 
 RCM.   See  relative clutch mass . 
 reaction force .  See  thrust  and  propulsive force . 
 reaction norm .  Th e variability of  phenotypic  traits exhib-
ited by a given  genotype under a range of natural con-
ditions common to the habitat of the species, or under 
standard experimental conditions. See also  phenotypic 
plasticity . 
 reaction zone .  See  resistance site . 
 receptor .  A nerve or modifi ed sensory cell that receives 
and  transduces a  stimulus . 
 rectilinear locomotion .  A mode of snake locomotion in 
which the animal moves forward in a straight line, with 
no lateral movement. Muscles act bilaterally to pull the 
skin forward relative to the ribs, following which the 
ventral scales anchor the body to the substrate. Other 
muscles then pull the ribs and vertebral column forward 
relative to the stationary ventral skin. 
 refraction .  Th e bending of light rays when they pass be-
tween two media of diff ering density (e.g., air to water). 
 relative clutch mass (RCM) .  Th e ratio of the total mass 
of a clutch to the body mass of the associated female, 
expressed as a decimal fraction or a percentage. Cf. 
 clutch size .  
 resistance .  Generally, a property or aggregate properties 
that impede the movement or fl ow of something in a cir-
cuit or fl ow system. In context of locomotion, the forces 
that resist forward movement. 
 resistance site (site of resistance) .  In context of snake 
locomotion, any physical point in the environment 
against which the body can apply force either to “an-
chor” a position, or to enable forward movement. Also 
called  contact zone ,  reaction zone ,  push point . 
 resonance (resonate, resonating) .  A physical process 
whereby an oscillating phenomenon is amplifi ed. 
 respiration .  Strictly, the intracellular oxidation of or-
ganic substrates by molecular oxygen, resulting in the 
 generation of ATP energy and the by-products of CO 2 
and H 2 O. 
 retina .  Th e innermost, light-sensitive, multimembrane 
layer of the eye, containing the sensory cells that  trans-
duce light into vision. 

Glossary of Terms  |  223 
 rhinokinesis .  A condition of  cranial kinesis in which mo-
bility of the nasal elements (four snout bones) enables 
unusual rotations of the snout tip during swallowing 
movements made by natricine snakes. 
 right aortic arch .  See  aortic arches . 
 right-to-left (R-L) shunt.   See  shunt . 
 rod .  A photoreceptor cell of the  retina that is sensitive to 
light because of cellular properties responding to low 
light intensities. Cf.  cone . 
 ruga ( pl . -ae) .  A ridge or fold. 
 saccular lung .  Th e segment of lung that consists of thin, 
membranous tissue with only nutritive blood supply and 
nonfunctional in gas exchange. Typically, this segment 
terminates at the blind posterior end of the lung. Cf. 
 vascular lung . 
 sacculus .  Th e smaller and more ventral of two saclike divi-
sions of the fl uid system of the  inner ear , and part of the 
 vestibular apparatus . 
 salt glands .  Extrarenal glands that secrete highly concen-
trated solutions of salt. In snakes, these are located in 
sublingual or premaxillary locations in marine species. 
 sand swimming .  Reference to rapid burial and burrowing 
movements of sand-dwelling snakes. 
 scansorial .  Proclivity, or adaptation, for climbing. 
 sclera .  Th e tough, fi brous outer coat of the eye. 
 scutes .  Th e ventral scales of a snake. 
 SDA .  See  specifi c dynamic action . 
 secondary sexual characteristics .  Reference to pheno-
typic diff erences between sexes other than the reproduc-
tive organs. 
 semicircular canals .  One of the equilibrium organs in the 
 inner ear , which functions to sense acceleration of the 
head with respect to the gravitational fi eld. See  vestibu-
lar system . 
 seminal plug (also copulatory plug) .  Dried semen that 
obstructs the female’s reproductive tract or genitalia. 
 seminal receptacle.   In general, a cavity or structure for 
storage of sperm. In snakes this is a branched glandular 
sac in the lumen of the oviduct. 
 seminiferous tubules .  Long, convoluted structures with-
in the testis that support developing sperm. 
 septum ( pl . -a).   A dividing wall or partition. 
 shaker muscle .      Specialized muscle in the tail of rattle-
snakes, used to shake the rattle. Th is muscle is charac-
terized by having numerous mitochondria, a rich supply 
of blood vessels, and biochemical properties that confer 
rapid twitch cycles. 
 shedding, skin shedding .  See  ecdysis . 
 shunt .  An alternate pathway. With respect to  intracardiac 
shunts (within the heart), a  right-to-left shunt ( R-L shunt ) 
results in partial or complete pulmonary bypass (blood 
normally intended for the pulmonary artery enters the 
systemic vessels), and a  left-to-right shunt ( L-R shunt ) re-
sults in partial or complete systemic bypass (blood nor-
mally intended for the systemic vessels instead enters 
the pulmonary artery). Increases in pressure within ei-
ther of these circuits (whether active or passive) can cre-
ate shunting, and these mechanisms are called  pressure 
shunting . Alternatively, a passive mechanism that also 
creates shunting occurs when blood that is located in a 
space of the ventricle common to both pulmonary and 
systemic circulations at diff erent phases of the heart cy-
cle is subsequently “washed” into the “wrong” circulation 
by infl owing or outfl owing blood moving in the “correct” 
direction. Th is mechanism is called  washout shunting .  
 shuttling .  A thermoregulatory behavior, which involves 
active movement between contrasting warm and cooler 
parts of the environment.  
 sidewinding locomotion .  A mode of locomotion in 
snakes while moving over low-friction or shifting sub-
strates such as desert sands. Th e movement is character-
ized by alternate lifting of sections of the body, which 
are moved forward and then placed down to “roll out” 
on the substrate, producing a series of separate, paral-
lel tracks, each oriented at an angle to the direction of 
travel. During these movements the snake is in static 
contact with the ground at two points. 
 sinus venosus .  Th e fi rst heart chamber to receive blood 
from systemic veins and convey it to the  atrium . 
 sister taxon .  Reference to two taxa having the same im-
mediate common ancestor. Th ese appear on a phyloge-
netic tree as lineages or branches that arise from a single 
divergence node. 
 site of resistance .  See  resistance site . 
 slide-pushing .  See  slipping undulation . 
 sliding friction .  See  friction . 
 slipping undulation (also slide pushing) .  A mode of snake 
locomotion employed on low-friction substrates, whereon 
backward moving body waves (undulations) are propa-
gated rapidly and generate a sliding friction suffi  cient to 
produce a reaction force that propels the snake forward. 
Alternating waves of body motion are similar to those in 
lateral undulation, but the forward reaction forces are gen-
erated without the use of fi xed points on the substrate.  

 224  | Glossary of Terms
 small intestine .  Th e anterior segment of intestine and the 
principal site of digestion, extending between the stom-
ach and large intestine.  
 smooth scale .  Reference to a scale of squamate reptiles 
that lacks prominent keels or central ridges, detectable 
by touch or by eye. Cf.  keeled scale . 
 snakebot .      A robot modeled or fashioned after a snake.  
 solenoglyph ( adj . -ous) .  A snake, or condition, in which 
each fang is erected by rotation of a reduced maxilla 
on the prefrontal bone, characteristic of viperid and 
 atractaspidid snakes. 
 specifi c dynamic action (SDA) .    Increase of metabolic 
rate that follows ingestion of a meal. 
 spectacle .  Th e fi xed and transparent eye covering of a 
snake, consisting of epidermis that is fused with the 
 sclera  of the eye. Also called  brille or  eyecap . 
 spermatogenesis .  Th e development of mature spermato-
zoa in the male  testis . 
 spur .      A corneous spine projecting from either side of the 
cloacal opening in certain species of snakes representing 
basal lineages.  
 static friction .  See  friction . 
 stimulus .      A quality of the environment that stimulates a 
 receptor . 
 stratum corneum .  Th e keratinized, outermost layers of 
the  epidermis . 
 stratum germinativum .  Th e basal or innermost layer of 
living cells of the  epidermis , which by means of cell divi-
sion gives rise to the cell layers of the epidermis above it. 
 streptostyly .  A condition of  cranial kinesis in which the 
quadrate forms a mobile joint with the squamosal ele-
ment, resulting from the evolutionary loss of the lower 
temporal arch. 
 structural color .  A color seen on the surface of an animal, 
attributable to physical or structural attributes that dif-
ferentially refl ect light in various ways, not due to the 
presence of pigment. 
 supercooling .  Reference to cooling below the physical 
freezing (= melting) point of body fl uids without forma-
tion of ice crystals. 
 supranasal sac .   A recess formed by invaginated skin be-
neath the supranasal scale, having an inconspicuous slit-
like opening between the supranasal and nasal scales. 
Th is structure is present in many snake species of the 
subfamily Viperinae and the related Causinae. Th ese 
structures are innervated and possibly function as heat 
detectors, similarly to the  facial pits of pit vipers. 
 systemic circulation .  See  circulation . 
 systole .  Contraction of the ventricle to eject blood into the 
arterial system. Cf.  diastole . 
 temporal arches .  Reference to the upper or lower arch-
es or bars formed by skull bones as a consequence of 
 fenestration. 
 tendon .  A band or cord of fi brous connective tissue that 
is continuous with muscle fi bers and attaches muscle to 
bone or cartilage. 
 testis ( pl. -  es).   Th e male  gonad in which sperm are 
 produced. 
 testosterone.   A steroid  androgen synthesized in the  testes 
and responsible for the appearance and maintenance of 
male  secondary characteristics . 
 thermal intertia .  A tendency to slow the gain or loss of 
heat due to the contribution of an animal’s mass to its 
capacity for heat. Larger objects (or animals) heat and 
cool more slowly than do smaller objects (or animals), 
and they are said to exhibit greater thermal inertia. 
 thermal preferendum .  See  preferred body temperature . 
 thermoreceptor .  A sensory nerve ending specifi cally re-
sponsive to temperature changes. 
 thermoregulation .  Regulation of temperature. See  behav-
ioral thermoregulation . 
 thrust .  A forward-acting force that produces forward mo-
tion. Cf.  propulsive force . 
 topology .  Th e branching order of a  phylogenetic tree . 
 trachea.   A membranous and cartilaginous tube that con-
ducts air between the throat and lung. See also  tracheal 
lung ,  tracheal air sac . 
 tracheal air sac .  Membranous diverticula that are acces-
sory outgrowths of the tracheal airway and function in 
defensive displays or sound production in various Asian 
species of snakes. 
 tracheal chambers or diverticula .  See  tracheal air sac . 
 tracheal lung .  Vascular, functional lung that arises along 
an expanded tracheal membrane, anterior to the heart in 
certain species of snakes. See  vascular lung . 
 trailing behavior.   Reference to one individual following 
another (usually conspecifi c) individual, largely by means 
of a chemical trail that results from adherence of skin 
 pheromones to the substrate over which a snake moves.  

Glossary of Terms  |  225 
 transducer .  A device that changes the form of energy that 
impinges on it or is an input signal. 
 truncus arteriosus .  Literally arterial trunk, with refer-
ence to the three outfl ow tracts ( right and  left aortic 
arches , and  pulmonary artery) where they are joined by 
common elements of fi brous  fascia near their origins at 
the  ventricle  of the heart. 
 undulation .  Reference to movement in waves, or sinusoi-
dal movement from side to side. 
 up-regulation .  Control of a physiological activity by an in-
crease in receptor density in a target cell membrane. Cf. 
 down-regulation . 
 urates, uric acid .  Th e crystalline waste product of nitro-
gen metabolism. Urates are salts of uric acid, which is 
poorly soluble in water and can be excreted in a precipi-
tated form with minimal loss of water. 
 uterus .  A glandular part of the oviduct (middle region in 
snakes) responsible for the production of fi brous and 
calcium components of the  eggshell in reptiles. 
 utriculus .  Th e larger of two saclike divisions of the fl uid 
system of the  inner ear , associated with the sense of 
equilibrium. See  vestibular system . 
 vascular lung .  Th e functional segment of the lung, char-
acterized by a spongy appearance and rich blood supply. 
Cf.  saccular lung . 
 vasoconstriction .  Constriction of smooth muscle in blood 
vessels, usually smaller arteries. 
 vasodilation .  Relaxation of smooth muscle in blood ves-
sels, usually smaller arteries, which results in dilation of 
the vessel(s) in question. 
 vein .   A blood vessel that returns blood from tissue capil-
lary beds toward the heart. Cf.  artery . 
 venom .  A toxic or potentially toxic substance normally 
secreted by an animal and injected by a stinger, fang, 
or bite. 
 venom delivery system .  With reference to snakes, this 
term refers to venom, associated glands for production 
and storage, and the muscles and specialized teeth that 
are used for delivery. 
 vent .  Th e cloacal opening from cloaca to exterior.  
 ventilation .  In respiration physiology, the process of mov-
ing air or water between the gas exchanger (lung or gill) 
and the ambient medium (= breathing and sometimes 
called  external respiration ). 
 ventricle .  Th e muscular chamber of the heart that receives 
blood from the two  atria and pumps it via outfl ow tracts 
to tissues of the body.  
 venule .  A smaller blood vessel that connects a capillary bed 
with a vein.  
 vertebral column .  Th e spinal skeleton consisting of a se-
ries of articulating vertebrae extending from the skull to 
the tip of the tail. 
 vertical septum .  An incomplete septum in the ventricle 
of noncrocodilian reptiles that partially separates the 
 cavum arteriosum from the  cavum venosum . 
 vestibular system .  Th e collective organs of equilibrium in 
the  inner ear . 
 villus ( pl . -i) .  One of numerous small, fi ngerlike projec-
tions of tissue that function as absorptive structures in 
the intestine. 
 viscosity .  A physical property of a fl uid that impedes the 
tendency for adjacent layers of the fl uid to move past 
each other. Th e internal friction of a fl uid causing resist-
ance to fl ow. 
 vitellogenesis .  Th e production of yolk, or “yolking” of an 
egg in the ovary. 
 viviparity ( adj .  viviparous) .  Th e retention of embryos 
within the oviduct until development is complete, thus 
giving birth to developed young instead of laying eggs. 
Cf.  oviparity ,  oviparous . 
 vomeronasal organ .  A specialized chemosensory cham-
ber that forms a major sense organ above the roof of 
the mouth in snakes (and other reptiles). It is lined with 
sensory epithelium that detects odorant particles that 
are brought into the mouth on the tongue. Also called 
 Jacobson’s organ . 
 washout shunt .  See  shunt . 
 zygapophysis ( pl . -es) .  Each of four processes on the bor-
der of the neural arch, which articulates with its oppo-
site member on adjacent vertebrae, providing additional 
strength to the articulation and preventing undue tor-
sion. Anterior zygapophyses (called  prezygapophyses ) are 
directed upward and somewhat inward, whereas poste-
rior zygapophyses (called  postzygapophyses ) are directed 
downward and slightly outward.  

This page intentionally left blank 

 | 227
 I N D E X  
 abdominal cavity ,  192 
 abduction ,  186 
 absorption (digestive) ,  65 ,  68 
 Acalyptophis peronii ,  fi g. 3.8 
 Acanthophis ,  57 ,  188 
 Acanthophis antarcticus ,  48 ,  189 , 
 fi gs. 1.42, 8.7 
 Acanthophis rugosus ,  fi g. 6.18 
 acceleration ,  81, 84 ,  85 ,  99 ,  fi g. 3.12 
 accelerometer ,  85 
 accessory venom gland ,  60–61 ,  fi g. 2.27 
 acclimation ,  110 ,  114 ,  fi g. 4.14 
 acclimatization ,  110 ,  fi g. 4.14 
 accommodation ,  165 
 acetylcholine ,  58 ,  149 
 acetylcholinesterase ,  58  
 acoustic signal or profi le ,  182–183 
 Acrantophis dumerili ,  fi gs. 2.34, 5.4–5.5 
 acrochordid (Acrochordidae) ,  13 ,  17 ,  18 ,  34 , 
 47 ,  71 ,  fi g.  1.23 
 Acrochordoidea ,  17 ,  34 
 Acrochordus ,  44 ,  85 ,  120 ,  147–148 ,  155 ,  157 , 
 159 ,  167 ,  177 
 Acrochordus arafurae ,  18 ,  108 ,  195 ,  209 , 
 fi g.  1.23 
 Acrochordus granulatus ,  18 ,  42 ,  71 ,  124 , 
 145 ,  155 ,  157 ,  169 ,  177 ,  fi gs. 1.23, 
5.15, 6.8, 6.10 
 Acrochordus javanicus ,  18 
 action potential ,  58 ,  117 ,  127 ,  149 ,  164 ,  168 , 
 171 ,  175 ,  181 
 active foraging, forager ,  See  behavior 
 adaptive radiation ,  See  evolution 
 adder ,  20–21 ,  169 ,  182 
 adduction ,  186 
 adrenal gland ,  149 
 advanced snakes or lineage ,  42 ,  46 , 
 See also  Alethinophidia and 
 Caenophidia 
 African Bush Viper,  fi g. 1.27 
 African egg-eating snake ,  30 
 African garter snakes ,  26 
 African Horned Adder ,  95 
 African house snakes ,  200 
 African Rock Python ,  16 
 age, aging ,  62 ,  110 ,  210 
 aggregation ,  See  behavior 
 Agkistrodon ,  22 
 Agkistrodon contortrix ,  135 ,  fi g. 1.32 
 Agkistrodon piscivorus ,  21 ,  48 ,  53 ,  135 , 
 182 ,  fi g. 3.2 
 Agkistrodon piscivorus conanti ,  46 ,  137 , 
 208 ,  fi gs.  1.3, 1.5, 1.32, 2.2, 2.13, 
2.33, 2.35, 2.38, 5.24, 6.2, 6.13, 
7.11, 7.13, 9.3, 9.18–9.19  
 aglyphous ,  57 ,  60 
 Ahaetulla ,  167 
 Ahaetulla prasina ,  167 ,  fi gs. 3.3, 7.5 
 Aipysurus laevis ,  177 
 air sac ,  See  tracheal air sac 
 albino ,  137 
 alethinophidian (Alethinophidia) ,  12–13 ,  34 
 algae,  fi g. 2.38 
 alimentary canal ,  See  gastrointestinal 
tract 
 allele ,  137 
 “all-or-none,”  183 
 alpha ( α ) keratin ,  See  keratin 
 altitude ,  See  high altitude 
 Amazon Tree Boa,  fi g. 2.16 
 ambush foraging, forager ,  See  behavior 
 amelanistic partial albinism ,  137 
 ammonium ,  70 
 amniote ,  51 
 amphibian ,  5 ,  113 ,  148 
 amphibious ,  See  aquatic 
 amphisbaenian, amphisbaenid ,  4 ,  10 ,  34 , 
 99 ,  fi g. 1.4 
 amplitude 
 of fl exions or undulations ,  81 ,  83 , 
 85–86 ,  90 ,  98 
 of sound ,  185 ,  188 
 anaconda ,  14 ,  16 ,  169 
  Green Anaconda ,  14 ,  fi gs. 1.18–1.19, 
2.1, 2.12 
 ancestral trait or lineage ,  See  basal trait or 
lineage 
 androgens ,  See  hormone: sex steroids 
 anguilliform swimming ,  81 
 angular bone ,  41 
 Aniliidae ,  13–14 
 Anilius scytale ,  13 ,  fi g. 1.14 
 ankylosis ,  54 
 Anomalepididae ,  11 
 Anomochilidae ,  13 
 Anomochilus ,  13 ,  fi g. 1.13 
 antifreeze proteins ,  113 
 antivenin ,  62 
 aortic arch ,  143–146 ,  fi gs. 6.3, 6.5 
 Aparallactinae ,  19–20 
 Aparallactus ,  19 
 Aparallactus jacksoni ,  19 
 Aparallactus modestus ,  57 
 apical pit ,  177 ,  fi gs.  7.11, 7.13 
 Aplopeltura ,  33 ,  42 
 apnea ,  156 
 aposematism ,  131–132 
 aquatic ,  See  habitat, habits 
 aquatic locomotion ,  See  behavior: 
locomotion: swimming   
 Arafura File Snake ,  195 
  arboreal ,   See  habitat, habits 
 Arizona Black Rattlesnake ,  134 ,  fi g. 5.22 
 arteriole ,  146 ,  148–149 
 artery ,  145–146 ,  148 
 arthropod ,  99 
  Aruba Island Rattlesnake,   fi g. 1.29 

 228  | Index
 Asclepius, rod of,   fi g. 5.1 
 Asian coral snake ,  26 ,  fi g. 1.41 
 Asian fl ying snake ,  30 
 Asian pipe snakes ,  See  pipe snakes 
 Asian sunbeam snakes ,  13 
 Aspidites ,  17 
 Aspidites melanocephalus ,  fi g. 7.8 
 Aspis ,  182 
 assimilation ,  69 
 Asthenodipsas ,  33 
 Astrotia stokesii ,  27 ,  fi g. 1.45 
 Atheris ,  21 ,  155 
 Atheris squamigera ,  fi gs. 1.27, 5.8 
 ATP ,  141 ,  184 
 Atractaspididae ,  19 
 atractaspidine (Atractaspidinae) ,  19–20 , 
 56 ,  60–61 
 Atractaspis ,  19 – 20 ,  56 ,  fi g. 1.24
 Atractaspis microlepidota ,  fi g 1.24 
 atrioventricular valves ,  143–144 
 atrium, atria ,  143–144 ,  147 ,  fi gs. 6.2–6.3, 6.5 
 Atropoides ,  22 ,  95 
 Atropoides mexicanus ,  fi g. 1.36 
 auditory nerve ,  168–169 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 auditory system ,  175 
 Australian Red-bellied Black Snake ,  25 
 axial muscle ,  See  epaxial muscle 
 axial skeleton ,  See  skeleton 
 Azemiopinae ,  24 
 Azemiops feae ,  22 ,  fi g. 1.37 
 
 background color match ,  See  color 
 bacteria ,  65–66 ,  68 
 ballast ,  69 
 Ball Python ,  16 ,  166 ,  168 ,  210 
 Barbados Th readsnake,   fi g. 1.12 
 barnacle,  fi g. 5.16 
 baroreceptor ,  See  receptor 
 basal trait or lineage ,  9 ,  12–13 ,  24 ,  38 , 
 41–42 ,  46 ,  55 ,  58 ,  143 ,  155 ,  166 , 
 204 ,  fi g. 2.4 
 basement membrane ,  118 ,  fi gs. 5.3–5.4 
 basilar membrane ,  168–169 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 bask, basking ,  See  behavior: 
thermoregulation 
 bat ,  186 
 Bearded Dragon lizard,  fi g. 2.5 
 behavioral thermoregulation ,  See 
 behavior: thermoregulation 
 behavior ,  10 
 activity (general) ,  203 ,  fi g. 4.15 
 aggregation ,  11 ,  94 ,  108 ,  112 ,  173 ,  198 , 
 208 ,  fi g. 4.7 
 aggressive behavior ,  26 ,  129 ,  136 ,  204 
 “blocked-fl ight aggression,”  96 
 bellowing ,  187 
 biting, bite force ,  49 ,  51 ,  206 
 brooding ,  12 ,  16 ,  110–112 ,  208 ,  fi g. 4.12 
 burrow, burrowing ,  7 ,  11–13 ,  19–21 ,  26 ,  47 , 
 55–56 ,  78 ,  90 ,  94–95 ,  107–108 , 110 , 
 121–122 ,  157 ,  164 ,  166–167 ,  189 , 
 210 ,  fi gs. 1.4, 1.24, 3.15, 1.49, 3.11 
 cannibalization,  fi g. 2.33 
 cantilever ,  88 ,  96–97 ,  fi g. 3.17 
 caudocephalic waves ,  206 
 cloacal popping ,  188 
 coil, coiling ,  95 ,  108 ,  111 ,  129 ,  131 ,  135 , 
 158 ,  182 ,  185 ,  208 ,  fi gs. 5.15, 9.14 
 combat behavior or dance ,  205–206 , 
 fi g. 9.19 
 communal nesting ,  198 
 constriction ,  13 ,  37 – 38 ,  45–46 ,  49 ,  50 , 
 78–79 ,  149 ,  fi gs. 2.3, 2.7, 2.12 
 cratering ,  95 ,  fi g. 3.16 
 crepuscular ,  165–166 
 defensive behavior, display, or posture , 
 11 ,  13 ,  20 ,  22 ,  48 ,  61 ,  160 ,  185 , 
 188 ,  fi gs.  1.48,  1.50 , 6.19, 7.10 
 den, denning ,  94 ,  108 ,  112 ,  118 ,  189 , 
 200 ,  205 ,  fi g. 4.7 
 dispersal ,  208 
 diurnal ,  114 ,  166–167 
 diving ,  29 ,  77 ,  145 ,  147–148 ,  156 ,  159 , 
 fi g. 6.14 
 drinking ,  66 ,  70 ,  72 
 incidental drinking ,  70 
 “sponge model” of drinking ,  72 
 escape behavior ,  95–96 ,  130 ,  135 
 feeding ,  37–62 ,  66–67 ,  69–70 ,  72 ,  111 , 
 173 ,  196 ,  fi g. 2.4,
 periodic (discontinuous, 
intermittent) feeding ,  66 
 fl attening or compression (of body) ,  13 , 
 18 ,  29 ,  78 ,  85 ,  96–98 ,  107–108 , 
 159 ,  fi gs. 3.1, 3.6, 3.19, 4.2, 5.7, 
5.20, 6.18
 hood ,  26 ,  78 
 neck,  fi gs. 1.48, 5.20 
 tail ,  See  tail 
 foraging ,  48 ,  53 ,  66 ,  69 ,  96 ,  115 ,  173 ,  176 , 
 210 
 active foraging ,  46 ,  47 ,  67 
 ambush foraging ,  26 ,  47 ,  66–67 ,  95 , 
 170 ,  fi gs. 1.28, 1.42, 3.16 
 caudal luring ,  26 
 “fl oat-and-wait,”  44 ,  fi gs. 1.44, 2.8 
 gaping ,  See  gape 
 growling ,  187 
 head swaying ,  167 
 hiss, hissing ,  22 ,  26 ,  48 ,  61 ,  158 ,  160 , 
 181 ,  185–187 
 nasal hissing ,  187 ,  fi g. 8.6 
 infl ating neck or body ,  61 ,  155 ,  158–160 , 
 fi gs. 6.17, 6.19 
 jumping ,  95–96 ,  98 
 knotting ,  124 ,  fi g. 5.15 
 locomotion ,  29 ,  69 ,  77–101 ,  114 ,  147 , 
 149 ,  210 ,  fi g. 3.3
 climbing, scansorial ,  16 ,  96–98 , 
 149–153 ,  fi gs. 3.4, 3.18 
 concertina ,  88–90 ,  94 ,  96 ,  99 ,  fi g. 3.11 
 gliding ,  77 ,  98 
 lateral undulation ,  86–90 ,  92–93 ,  96 , 
 98–99 ,  fi gs. 3.9–3.10 
 rectilinear ,  90–91 ,  96 ,  fi g. 3.12 
 sidewinding , 89–90, 92–93,  99 , 
 fi gs. 3.13–3.14 
 slide-pushing ,  92–94 
 “sprint,”  89 
 swimming ,  18 ,  77–78 ,  80–86 ,  92 ,  132 , 
 fi gs. 3.1, 3.5, 3.8–3.9, 5.7 
 anguilliform swimming ,  81 
 nest attendance ,  198 ,  fi g. 9.14 
 nocturnal ,  19–20 ,  26 ,  33 ,  107 ,  109 , 
 114–115 ,  135 ,  165–166 ,  fi g. 1.5 
 pair bonding ,  209 
 parental care ,  208 
 posture, postural control ,  98 ,  108–109 , 
 151–152 ,  fi g. 6.18 
 predator, predation, predatory 
behavior ,  95–96 ,  115 ,  129–132 , 
 134–135 ,  138 ,  167 ,  173 ,  177 ,  184 , 
 209–210  
 reproductive behavior ,  200 ,  203–204 , 
 206 
 courtship ,  123–124 ,  173 ,  201–202 , 
 204–208 
 mating, coitus, copulation ,  173 , 
 192–195 ,  200–201 ,  203–204 ,  206 , 
 208 ,  fi g. 9.17
 mating “ball,”  208 
 postmating behavior ,  208–209 
  precourtship behavior ,  204–205   
 rubbing scales ,  182 
 sand swimming ,  94 
 spitting venom ,  See  venom 
 strike, striking ,  20–21 ,  48–53 ,  62 ,  69 , 
 95–96 ,  129 ,  169–170 ,  173 ,  175 , 
 177–178 ,  184–185 ,  187 ,  fi gs. 1.36, 
2.16, 2.20 
 tail 
 caudal luring ,  26 ,  188–189 
 curling or elevated ,  26 ,  129 ,  132 ,  188 , 
 fi g. 1.50 
 prehensile ,  53 ,  78 ,  fi g. 2.20 
 rattling, shaking, vibration ,  22 ,  158 , 
 181–185 ,  fi g. 8.4 
 thermoregulation (behavioral) ,  105–110 , 
 134 ,  136 ,  173 ,  176 ,  196 ,  203 ,  210 
 basking ,  96 ,  109 ,  111 ,  173 ,  196 ,  fi gs. 
4.2, 4.8–4.9 
 “set point” (for regulation) ,  110 
 shuttling ,  107–108 
 tongue fl icking ,  See  tongue 
 trailing behavior ,  49 ,  60 ,  173 ,  205–206 
 chemical trails ,  118 
 bellowing ,  See  behavior 
 belly plates ,  See  scale 
 bends ,  See  decompression illness 
 beta ( β ) keratin ,  See  keratin 
 bicarbonate ,  157 
 bile (from liver) ,  65 
 binocular vision ,  See  vision 
 biochemical reaction rate ,  114 
 bird ,  5 ,  10 ,  26 ,  66 ,  71 ,  80 ,  103 ,  106 ,  112 ,  132 , 
 138 ,  143 ,  200–201 ,  209 

Index  |  229 
 birth (and hatching) ,  126 ,  198 ,  fi g. 9.15 
 Bitia hydroides ,  33 
 biting, bite force ,  See  behavior 
 Bitis ,  21 ,  22 
 Bitis arietans ,  21 ,  176 ,  186–187 
 Bitis caudalis ,  95 
 Bitis gabonica ,  21 ,  69 ,  170 ,  fi gs. 1.6, 1.28, 
2.25, 8.6 
 Bitis nasicornis ,  21 ,  fi gs. 1.28, 2.25 
 Black-headed Python,  fi g. 7.8 
 Black-headed Sea Snake,  fi g. 3.6 
 Black Mamba,  fi g. 2.6 
 Black Milk Snake,  fi g. 5.19 
 black peritoneum ,  135 
 Black Racer,  fi g. 5.8 
 Black Rat Snake,  fi gs. 1.48, 2.37, 9.13, 9.15 
 Blacktail Cribo ,  45 ,  fi g. 1.48 
 Black-tailed Rattlesnake,  fi g. 1.29 
 Black Th readsnake,   fi g. 1.12 
 Black Tiger Snake,  fi g. 4.15 
 blind snakes ,  4 ,  13 ,  90 ,  127 ,  192 
 Braminy Blind Snake,  fi g. 1.11 
 dawn blind snakes ,  11 
 “Blocked-fl ight aggression,”  See  behavior 
 blood ,  59 ,  70 ,  127 ,  142–144 ,  147–148 ,  155–157 , 
 160 ,  202 ,  fi gs. 2.26, 6.1, 6.6, 6.15
 blood circulation ,  63 ,  65–66 ,  97 ,  113 , 
 141–153 ,  156 ,  203 ,  fi gs. 6.1, 6.9
 pulmonary circulation ,  143 
 systemic circulation ,  143 
 blood fl ow ,  46 ,  113 ,  147 ,  149 ,  151 ,  159 , 
 175 ,  184 
 blood oxygen capacity ,  See  oxygen 
capacity 
 blood plasma ,  70 ,  113 ,  142 ,  147 ,  151 , 
 156–157 
 “blood pooling,”  See  pooling 
 blood pressure (arterial) ,  58 ,  145 ,  
147–153 
 diastolic pressure ,  149 
  systolic pressure ,  149  
 venous pressures ,  149 
 blood supply ,  See  vasculature 
 blood vessel ,  58 ,  143 ,  145–149 ,  151–152 , 
 197–198 ,  fi g. 6.5 
 blood volume ,  147–148 ,  157 
 Blotched Palm Viper ,  See  palm viper 
 Blue-banded Sea Krait,  fi g. 1.43 
 Bluestriped Garter Snake,  fi g. 1.46 
 Blunt-headed vine snake ,  32 
 Blunt-headed Tree Snake,  fi g. 1.51 
 boa ,  5 ,  12 ,  15–16 ,  34 ,  50 ,  55 ,  67 ,  78 ,  91 ,  97 , 
 107 ,  120 ,  173–174 ,  176 
 Boa Constrictor,  Boa constrictor ,  16 ,  53 ,  96 , 
 107 ,  136 ,  fi gs. 1.21, 2.31, 9.11 
 body, body wall ,  19–20 ,  26 ,  37 ,  48 ,  77–78 , 
 81 ,  83 ,  85 ,  87–95 ,  97 ,  99 ,  103 ,  
106–109 ,  112 ,  123 ,  152 ,  155–156 , 
 158 ,  168 ,  174 ,  181 ,  185–186 ,  193 , 
 196 ,  199 ,  206 ,  210 ,  fi gs. 1.20, 
1.22, 1.30, 1.31, 1.36, 1.42, 2.32, 
3.1, 3.6, 3.11–3.13, 4.10, 5.15
 body cavity ,  78 ,  147 ,  156 ,  159 , 
 fi gs. 6.12, 9.5,  See also 
 abdominal cavity 
 body fl uids ,  71 ,  fi g. 6.8 
 body size, length or mass ,  78 ,  88 ,  91 , 
 92–93 ,  98 ,  163 ,  186 ,  192 ,  196 ,  199 , 
 205 ,  209 
 body temperature ,  See  temperature 
 fl attening, compression ,  See  behavior 
 trunk ,  86 ,  88 ,  92–93 ,  95 ,  fi g. 3.3 
 Bogertophis subocularis ,  fi g. 9.15 
 boid (Boidae) ,  16 ,  68 ,  123 ,  136 ,  155 ,  175 ,  177 , 
 199 ,  205 
 Boiga ,  30 ,  57 
 Boiga irregularis ,  30 ,  60 ,  96 
 Bolyeria multocarinata ,  16 
 bolyeriid (Bolyeriidae) ,  15 ,  136 
 bone ,  54 ,  fi g. 2.23 
 Booidea ,  12 
 Boomslang ,  58 
 Bothriechis ,  22 
 Bothriechis supraciliaris ,  fi g. 1.34 
 Bothriopsis ,  22 
 Bothrochilus boa ,  fi g. 4.12 
 Bothrops ,  22 
 Bothrops asper ,  fi g. 5.11 
 Bothrops jararaca ,  62 
 Boulengerina ,  26 
 boundary layer ,  84–85 ,  123 ,  fi g. 3.7 
 Brahminy Blind Snake ,  195 ,  fi g. 1.11 
 branch (of phylogenetic tree) ,  9 ,  12 ,  34 , 
 fi g. 1.9 
 brain, braincase ,  38 ,  40–41 ,  46 ,  50 ,  51 , 
 57 ,  78 ,  112 ,  117 ,  149 ,  151–152 , 
 163–164 ,  169–170 ,  172 ,  175 ,  178 , 
 202 ,  205 ,  fi g. 2.6 
 Brazilian Coral Snake,  fi g. 5.19 
 Brazilian Hawkmoth caterpillar,  fi g. 5.21 
 Brazilian Rattlesnake ,  203 
 breathing ,  See  ventilation 
 brille ,  See  spectacle 
 Broghammerus reticulatus ,  14 ,  16 ,  fi gs. 1.17, 
2.23, 9.6 
 bronchus, bronchial airway ,  153 ,  fi gs. 6.4, 
6.11 
 brooding ,  See  behavior 
 brown snake ,  26 ,  89 
 Brown Tree Snake ,  30 ,  96 
  Brown Vine Snake,   fi gs. 1.48, 2.18, 5.18 
 buff er, buff ering ,  157 
 Bull Snake ,  47 ,  111 ,  182 ,  186 
 Bungarus ,  26 
 Bungarus multicinctus ,  fi g. 1.40 
 buoyancy ,  84 ,  86 ,  155 ,  159 ,  fi g. 6.14 
 Burmese Python ,  16 ,  67 ,  69 ,  111 ,  175 ,  199 , 
 fi gs.  2.36, 4.10, 6.4 
 burrow, burrowing ,  See  behavior 
 Burton’s Snake Lizard,  fi g. 1.4 
 bushmaster ,  22 ,  47 
 South American Bushmaster,  fi g. 1.33 
 bush vipers ,  21 
 button (of rattle) ,  182 ,  fi g. 8.3 
 caduceus,  fi g. 5.1 
 caecilian ,  3,  19 
 caenophidian (Caenophidia) ,  12–13 ,  15 ,  17 , 
 146 ,  205 
 Caisson disease ,  See  decompression illness 
 calcium ,  193 ,  195 
 calcium carbonate ,  197 
 California King Snake ,  111 ,  126 ,  138 ,  fi gs. 
2.7, 5.26 
 Calliophis ,  26 
 Calliophis sauteri ,  fi g. 1.41 
 Calloselasma rhodostoma ,  22 ,  62 
 camoufl age ,  See  crypsis 
 cannibalization ,  See  behavior 
 cantilever ,  See  behavior 
 capillary ,  141–143 ,  145–148 ,  155–157 ,  183 , 
 fi gs. 5.3, 6.4, 6.12, 6.15 
 capitulum,  fi g. 3.2 
 captive breeding ,  200–201 ,  fi g. 5.25 
 carbohydrates ,  66 
 carbon dioxide ,  See  respiratory gases 
 Carboniferous period ,  5 ,  fi gs. 1.7–1.8 
 cardiac muscle ,  See  muscle 
 cardiac output  ,  149 ,  151 
 Caretta caretta ,  fi g. 2.14 
 carotene ,  See  pigment 
 carotid artery ,  146 ,  151 ,  fi g. 6.5 
 Carphophiinae ,  32 
 Carphophis ,  32 
 carrion ,  See  prey 
 cartilage,  fi g. 6.11 
 Casarea dussumieri ,  15 
 catecholamines ,  149 
 Cat-eyed Snake,  fi gs. 2.17, 3.3 
 cat snake ,  30 
 caudal luring ,  See  behavior 
 caudocephalic waves ,  See  behavior 
 causine (Causinae) ,  176 
 Causus ,  21 ,  155 
 Causus maculatus ,  fi g. 1.26 
 caval vein ,  147 ,  fi g. 6.5 
 cavum arteriosum ,  144 ,  fi gs. 6.2–6.3 
 cavum pulmonale ,  144 ,  fi gs. 6.2–6.3 
 cavum venosum ,  144 ,  fi gs. 6.2–6.3 
 Central American Coral 
Snake,  fi g. 5.19 
 Central American Indigo Snake,  fi g. 1.48 
 Central American Jumping Pit Viper ,  See 
 jumping pit viper 
 Central American Rattlesnake,  fi g. 2.39 
 Central American Speckled Racer, 
 fi g. 1.48 
 central nervous system ,  See  nervous 
system 
 centrifugal acceleration ,  84 
 Cerastes cerastes ,  169 
 Cerberus rhynchops ,  34 ,  167 
 chameleon ,  117 
 character, character state ,  9–11 
 character evolution ,  9–10 
 Charina ,  16 
 Charina bottae ,  110 

 230  | Index
 chemical cues or signals ,  See 
 chemoreception 
 chemoreception ,  49 ,   118 ,  169–173 , 
 205 
 chemosensory receptors ,  See  receptor 
 Chinese Cobra,  fi g. 2.26 
 Chinese Green Tree Viper ,  115 ,  fi gs. 1.31, 
5.6 
 Chinese Moccasin ,  22 ,  fi gs. 7.11–7.12 
 Chinese Sea Krait,  fi gs. 1.43, 6.14, 6.16 
 Chionactis occipitalis ,  94 
 chorioallantoic placenta ,  See  placenta 
 chorioallantois ,  See  extraembryonic 
membranes 
 chromatophore ,  See  pigments 
 Chrysopelea ,  30 ,  98 
 Chrysopelea paradisi ,  98 ,  fi g. 3.19 
 chyme ,  64–65 ,  67  
 ciliary muscle ,  See  muscle 
 circadian rhythm ,  110 ,  202 
 circannual cycle ,  201 
 circulatory system ,  142–153 ,  160 
 clade ,  10 ,  27 
 cladogram ,  See  phylogenetic tree 
 classifi cation (taxonomic) ,  4–5 ,  10 ,  27 
 clear layer (of skin) ,  126 ,  fi g. 5.4 
 climatic change ,  210 
 climbing ,  See  behavior 
 cloaca ,  See  gastrointestinal tract 
 cloacal gland ,  See  gland 
 cloacal popping ,  See  behavior 
 clock (season or rhythm) ,  201 
 Cloudy Snail Sucker,  fi g. 2.8 
 clutch, clutch and litter size ,  199–200 ,  
210 ,  fi gs. 9.8, 9.12 
 CO 2 ,  See  respiratory gases 
 Coachwhip ,  67 
 coagulation ,  58 
 cobra ,  19 ,  24–26 ,  46 ,  56 ,  59 ,  61 ,  96 ,  108 , 
 187 ,  191 ,  fi gs. 1.39, 2.26
 King Cobra ,  26 ,  159–160 ,  187 ,  198 , 
 fi gs. 1.39, 2.11, 4.5, 9.1, 9.14 
 cochlear duct ,  168 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 coeffi  cient of friction ,  See  friction 
 coelomic cavity ,  See  body 
 coil, coiling ,  See  behavior 
 coitus ,  See  behavior: reproductive 
behavior 
 collagen ,  118–119 ,  155 
 Collared Lizard,  fi g. 4.2 
 color, coloration ,  3 ,  5 ,  10 ,  12 ,  16 ,  19 ,  22 ,  26 , 
 61 ,  117 ,  127–140 ,  167 ,  192 ,  fi gs. 
1.22, 1.31, 1.34, 5.24–5.25, 6.18, 
 See also  pigments 
 background color match,  fi g. 6.18 
 color change ,  135–136 
 morphological color change ,  136 
  ontogenetic color change ,  136 ,  138  
 physiological color change ,  136 
 color polymorphism ,  138 , 
 fi gs. 5.26–5.27 
 color vision ,  166 
 genetics ,  136–139 
 structural color ,  123 ,  127–128 ,  fi g. 5.12 
 Coluber ,  30 
 Coluber constrictor ,  99 ,  135 ,  fi g. 5.8 
 Coluber constrictor constrictor ,  137 
 Coluber constrictor fl aviventris ,  208 
 colubrid (Colubridae) ,  10 ,  12 ,  17 ,  19 ,  26 , 
 29 ,  32 ,  34 ,  42 ,  47 ,  54–55 ,  57 ,  61 , 
 67 ,  85 ,  98 ,  113 ,  120 ,  131 ,  136 ,  151 , 
 159 ,  166–167 ,  173 ,  199 ,  205–206 , 
 208–209 ,  fi g.  31 
 Colubrinae ,  29 ,  32 ,  fi g.  1.48  
 colubroid, (Colubroidea) ,  12–13 ,  17 ,  29 ,  34 , 
 56–58 ,  60 
 columella ,  168–169 ,  181 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 combat behavior or dance ,  See  behavior 
 Common Death Adder ,  48 ,  189 ,  fi gs. 1.42, 
8.7 
 Common Garter Snake ,  201 ,  203 
 communal nesting ,  See  behavior 
 compound bone ,  51 
 compression (body or tail) ,  See  behavior 
 compressor glandulae ,  See  muscle 
 compressor muscle ,  See  muscle 
 concertina locomotion ,  See  behavior: 
locomotion 
 cones (of eye) ,  See  receptor: visual 
receptors 
 connective tissue ,  54 ,  78 ,  118 ,  155 ,  173 
 constriction ,  See  behavior 
 constrictor laryngis ,  See  muscle 
 contact zone ,  See  resistance site 
 Contia ,  32 
 conus arteriosus ,  143 
 convection ,  141–142 ,  158 ,  fi g. 6.1 
 convergence 
 convergent evolution ,  10 ,  26 ,   33 ,  
48 ,  132 ,  195 ,  fi gs. 1.22, 1.53, 1.42, 
3.8 
 convergence in neural circuits ,  173 
 copperhead ,  22 ,  49 
 Northern Copperhead,  fi g. 1.32 
 copulation ,  See  behavior: reproductive 
behavior 
 copulatory organ ,  See  hemipenes 
 copulatory plug ,  See  seminal plug 
 coral snake ,  24–26 ,  46 ,  131–132 ,  188 , 
 fi g. 5.19 
 Corallus 
 Corallus caninus ,  17 ,  fi gs. 1.22, 7.4 
 Corallus grenadensis ,  fi gs. 2.20, 3.17 
 Corallus hortulanus ,  fi g. 2.16 
 “corkscrew,” (of portal vein) ,  147 ,  fi g. 6.6 
 cornea ,  See  eye 
 corneous, cornifi ed ,  119 
 Corn Snake ,  96 ,  fi g. 9.5 
 coronary arteries,  fi g. 6.2 
 corpus luteum ,  193 
 “costal pump,”  186 
 costocutaneous muscle ,  See  muscle 
 Cottonmouth ,  21–22 ,  48 ,  50–51 ,  53 ,  95 , 
 135–136 ,  182 ,  fi g. 3.2
 Florida Cottonmouth ,  46 ,  53 ,  66 ,  137 , 
 208–209 ,  fi gs. 1.3, 1.5, 1.32, 2.2, 
2.13, 2.33, 2.35, 2.38, 5.24, 6.2, 
6.13, 7.11, 7.13, 9.3, 9.18–9.19 
 cotylosaur ,  5 ,  fi g. 1.8 
 countercurrent heat exchanger ,  110 
 courtship ,  See  behavior: reproductive 
behavior 
 cranial kinesis ,  See  streptostyly 
 cratering ,  See  behavior 
 Crayfi sh Snake ,  29 ,  fi g. 2.22 
 Cretaceous period ,  6 ,  12 
 cricoid cartilage ,  186 
 critical thermal maximum (CTMax) ,  113 
 critical thermal minimum (CTMin) ,  113 
 crocodile, crocodilian ,  5 ,  10 ,  80 ,  118 ,  143 , 
 145 ,  197 
 Cross-barred Tree Snake,  fi g. 5.12 
 crotaline (Crotalinae) ,  20 ,  22 ,  24 ,  50 , 
 173–176 
 Crotalus ,  22 ,  49 ,  173 ,  182–185 
 Crotalus adamanteus ,  22 ,  80 ,  187 ,  211 , 
 fi gs. 1.29, 2.5, 5.9, 5.17, 8.3 
 Crotalus atrox ,  22 ,  66 ,  176 ,  182–183 ,  187 , 
 fi gs. 6.17, 8.3–8.4 
 Crotalus catalinensis ,  22 
 Crotalus cerastes ,  67 ,   92 ,  99 , 
 fi gs.  3.13–3.14, 3.16, 7.10 
 Crotalus cerberus ,  134 ,  fi g. 5.22 
 Crotalus durissus ,  111 ,  208 ,  fi gs. 4.1, 
4.13, 7.12
 Crotalus durissus unicolor ,  fi g. 1.29 
 Crotalus durissus terrifi cus ,  203 
 Crotalus horridus ,  50 ,  66 ,  fi gs. 1.29, 
2.32, 7.2 
 Crotalus lepidus ,  fi g. 1.29 
 Crotalus mitchellii ,  136 
 Crotalus mitchellii pyrrhus ,  134 , 
 fi g. 5.23 
 Crotalus molossus ,  fi g. 1.29 
 Crotalus oreganus ,  173 
 Crotalus oreganus helleri ,  134 , 
 fi gs. 2.25, 4.6 
 Crotalus ruber ,  80 ,  185 
 Crotalus ruber lorenzoensis ,  22 
 Crotalus simus ,  fi g. 2.39 
 Crotalus viridis nuntius ,  fi g. 1.29 
 Crotaphytus collaris ,  fi g. 4.2 
 crypsis, cryptic ,  22 ,  26 ,  129–132 ,  134–136 , 
 167 ,  204 ,  fi gs. 1.25, 1.28, 1.31, 
1.36, 3.16, 5.17, 5.22–5.23,  See also 
 background color match 
 CTMax ,  See  critical thermal maximum 
 CTMin ,  See  critical thermal minimum 
  cutaneous evaporative water loss ,   See 
 evaporation 
 cutaneous gas exchange ,  See  gas exchange 
 cutaneous receptor ,  See  receptor 
 Cylindrophiidae ,  13 

Index  |  231 
 Daboia 
 Daboia palaestinae ,  fi g. 7.2 
 Daboia russelli ,  176 ,  187 ,  fi g. 5.10 
 Dasypeltis ,  30 ,  54 ,  56 ,  182 
 dawn blind snakes ,  11 
 death adder ,  26 ,  57 ,  188 
 decline (of snakes) ,   See  extinction 
 decompression illness ,  29 ,  145 
 defecation ,  67–69 
 defense ,  See  behavior 
 degenerated ,  13 ,  165–166 ,  fi g. 1.4 
 dehydration ,  66 ,  70–72 ,  113 ,  197 ,  209 
 Deinagkistrodon acutus ,  22 ,  fi gs. 6.1, 7.11–7.12 
 den, denning ,  See  behavior 
 Dendrelaphis ,  30 
 Dendroaspis ,  26 ,  55 
 Dendroaspis jamesoni ,  fi g. 1.38 
 Dendroaspis polylepis ,  fi g. 2.6 
 dendrogram ,  See  phylogenetic tree 
 dentary bone ,  51 ,  55–56 ,  fi g. 2.23 
 dentition ,  See  teeth 
 deoxygenated blood ,  143–144 
 derived trait or lineage ,  4 ,  9 ,  55 
 dermal melanophore process ,  136 
 dermis ,  See  skin 
 Desert Horned Viper ,  169 
 development ,  7 ,  111 ,  115 ,  135 ,  158 ,  170 , 
 192–193 ,  196–198 ,  210 
 developmental plasticity ,  See  plasticity 
 Diadophis ,  32 
 Diadophis punctatus ,  fi g. 1.50 
 diagnostic character ,  3 ,  121 ,  192 
 Diamondback rattlesnake ,  22 
 Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake ,  80 , 
 187 ,  211 ,  fi gs. 1.29, 2.5, 5.9, 5.17, 8.3 
 Western Diamondbacked Rattlesnake , 
 176 ,  182 ,  187 ,  fi gs. 6.17, 8.3–8.4 
 Diamond Python ,  111 ,  fi g. 6.12 
 diapsid ,  39 ,  fi g. 2.4 
 Diard’s Blindsnake ,  12 
 diastole ,  144 ,  149 ,  fi g. 6.2 
 dichromatic color vision ,  See  vision 
 diet ,  See  prey 
 dietary water ,  See  water 
 diff raction, diff raction grating ,  123 ,  128 
 diff usion ,  141 ,  156–158 ,  fi g. 6.1, 6.15 
 digesta ,  See  chyme 
 digestion ,  59 ,  62–70 ,  109 ,  111 ,  114–115 , 
 209 ,  fi gs. 2.31, 2.37, 4.13
 digestive effi  ciency ,  68–69 
 rate of ,  67–68 ,  fi g. 2.37 
 digestive tract ,  See  gastrointestinal tract 
 digging ,  See  burrow 
 Dinodon semicarinatum ,  47 
 dinosaur ,  5 ,  fi g. 2.4, 
 Dipsadaboa fl avida ,  fi g. 5.12 
 dipsadine (Dipsadinae) ,  32 ,  56 
 Dipsas ,  32 ,  42 
 discontinuous feeding ,  See  periodic feeding 
 disintegrin ,  58 
 Dispholidus typus ,  58 
 Display (defensive) ,  See  behavior 
 “dissociated reproductive cycle,”  203 ,  fi g. 
9.17 
 Disteria major ,  fi g. 5.16 
 dive, diving ,  See  behavior 
 diversity (of characters or species) ,  11–12 , 
 20 ,  22 ,  29 ,  58 ,  129 ,  136 ,  150 ,  166 
 DNA ,  5 ,  7 ,  9 ,  59 ,  191–192 
 Dog-faced Water Snake ,  34 
 dormancy ,  66 ,  200 ,  202 ,  204 ,  208 
 dorsal aorta ,  146 ,  fi g. 6.5 
 down-regulation ,  67 ,  70 
 drag force ,  See  resistance 
 drink, drinking ,  See  behavior 
 drought ,  201 
 Drymarchon ,  30 
 Drymarchon corais corais ,  fi g. 9.12 
 Drymarchon melanurus ,  45 ,  fi g. 1.48 
 Drymobius ,  30 
 Drymobius margaritiferus ,  fi gs. 1.5, 1.48 
 Dryophis ,  167 
 Duberria ,  42 
 duct ,  60 ,  192 ,  195 ,  See also  eff erent duct 
 Dumeril’s Ground Boa ,  fi gs. 2.34, 5.4–5.5 
 duplex retina ,  166 
 Dusky Pygmy Rattlesnake,  fi g. 4.3 
 Duvernoy’s gland ,  60 
 dwarf boas ,  15 
 dwarf pipe snakes ,  12–13 
 
 ear ,  3 ,  7 ,  34 ,  167–169 ,  181 ,  189 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 Eastern Coachwhip ,  47 ,  77 ,  fi g. 2.14 
 Eastern Coral Snake ,  188 ,  fi g. 5.19 
 Eastern Corn Snake,  fi g. 7.9 
 Eastern Diamondback Rattlesnake ,  See 
 diamondback rattlesnake 
 Eastern Glass Lizard,  fi g. 1.4 
 Eastern Garter Snake ,  137 
 Eastern Hognose Snake ,  137 ,  187 
 Eastern Racer ,  See  Black Racer 
 Eastern Rat Snake,  fi gs. 2.19, 2.30 
 Eastern Yellow-bellied Racer ,  208 
 ecdysis ,  4 ,  11 ,  22 ,  72 ,  110 ,  115 ,  117 ,  122–127 , 
 166 ,  182 ,  205 ,  208 ,  fi gs. 1.6, 
5.3–5.4, 5.12, 5.15, 5.24, 7.4, 9.18
 frequency ,  126 
 “renewal stage,”  125 
 “resting stage,”  125 
 Echis ,  182 ,  fi g. 8.1
 Echis carinatus ,  fi g. 8.1 
 ecomorph ,  138 
 ectoparasite ,  fi gs. 5.15–5.16 
 ectopterygoid bone ,  40 ,  50 
 ectotherm, ectothermy ,  10 ,  103–116 ,  173 
 edema ,  58 ,  151 
 eel ,  3 ,  86 ,  fi g. 1.4 
 eff erent duct (of testis) ,  192 
 effi  ciency ,  51 ,  63 ,  67–68 ,  85 ,  93 ,  138 ,  184 
 egg ,  16 ,  32 ,  71 ,  111 ,  126 ,  193–200 ,  203 , 
 208 ,  210 ,  fi gs. 4.12, 5.25, 9.7, 
9.12, 9.13
 avian egg ,  197 
 egg follicle ,  193 ,  203 ,  210 ,  fi g. 9.6, 
 See also  vitellogenic follicle 
 eggshell ,  193 ,  195 ,  197–199 , 
 fi gs.  9.12–9.13, 9.15
 “fl exible-shelled egg,”  197 
 “rigid-shelled egg,”  197 
 egg yolk ,  See  yolk 
 egg-eating snakes ,  56 ,  182 
 African egg-eating snakes ,  30 
 egg tooth ,  199 ,  fi g. 9.15 
 Elachistodon ,  54 
 Elachistodon westermani ,  fi g. 2.1 
 Elaphe ,  30 ,  151 ,  fi g. 6.5
 Elaphe quadrivirgata ,  169 ,  173 
 elapid (Elapidae) ,  12 ,  17 ,  19–20 ,  24–25 , 
 27 ,  30 ,  34 ,  46 ,  54–58 ,  60–61 ,  67 , 
 109 ,  113 ,  120 ,  131 ,  151 ,  166 ,  199 , 
 208–209  
 Elapsoidea ,  26 
 elastin ,  155 
 elastic fi bers or tissue ,  145 ,  197 
 electromagnetic radiation ,  See  radiation 
 electromyography (EMG) ,  88 ,  fi g. 3.9 
 electroreception, electric fi eld ,  177 
 elephant trunk snakes ,  18 ,  fi g. 1.23 
 embryo, embryogenesis ,  8 ,  54 ,  71 ,  109 , 
 120 ,  192–193 ,  195–198 ,  201 ,  203 , 
 fi gs.  9.8, 9.10
 embryonic membranes ,  25 ,  195 ,  197 
 chorioallantois ,  195 ,  fi g. 9.10 
 Emerald Tree Boa ,  17 ,  fi gs. 1.22, 7.4 
 emergence ,  107 ,  200–201 ,  204–205 , 
 fi g. 9.17 
 EMG ,  See  electromyography 
 Emydocephalus ,  56 
 Emydocephalus annulatus ,  205 ,  fi g. 2.15 
 endocrine, endocrines ,  See  hormone 
 endotherm, endothermy ,  20 ,  103 
 facultative ,  111 
 thermogenesis ,  111 ,  fi g. 4.13 
 endurance ,  90 ,  97 ,  99 
 energy ,  66–70 ,  89 –90, 92 ,  99 ,  103 ,  114–115 , 
 148 ,  164 ,  168 ,  181 ,  183–185 ,  199 , 
 209–210 ,  fi g. 3.10 
 Enhydris ,  34 
 Enhydris jagorii ,  fi g. 7.6 
 Enhydris plumbea ,  fi g. 7.6 
 envenomation ,  See  venom 
 enzyme, enzymatic activity ,  58 ,  61 ,  63–67 , 
 110 ,  113 ,  126 
 Eocene epoch ,  20 
 epaxial muscle ,  78 
 Epicrates cenchria ,  fi g. 5.12 
  epidermal appendage ,  182 ,  fi g. 8.7 
 epidermal generation ,  124 
 inner epidermal generation ,  125–126 , 
 fi gs. 5.3–5.4 
 outer epidermal generation ,  11 ,  125 , 
 fi gs. 5.3–5.4 
 epidermis ,  See  skin, epidermal generation 

 232  | Index
 epididymis ,  192 
 epiglottal keel ,  186–187 
 epinephrine ,  149 
 epithelium, epithelial cells ,  54 ,  64 ,  
67 ,  153 ,  169–173 ,  176 ,  fi gs. 2.34, 
7.9 
 equilibrium sense ,  167 ,  169 
 Erpeton tentaculatum ,  34 ,  44 ,  177–178 ,  fi gs. 
2.10, 7.14 
 Erycidae (Erycinae) ,  16 
 erythrophore ,  See  pigment 
 Eryx ,  16 
 Eryx colubrinus ,  fi g. 1.20 
 escape behavior ,  See  behavior 
 esophagus ,  See  gastrointestinal tract 
 estrogens ,  See  hormone: sex steroids 
 estuarine ,  See  habitat, habits 
 Eunectes ,  16 
 Eunectes murinus ,  14 ,  fi gs. 1.18–1.19, 
2.1, 2.12 
 European Adder or Viper ,  131–132 ,  134 , 
 200 ,  fi g. 1.25 
 evaporation ,  70–71 ,  112 ,  121–122 ,  158 
 evaporative cooling ,  See  heat exchange 
 evaporative water loss ,  70–72 ,  115 ,  126 , 
 208 
 resistance to ,  See  resistance 
 evolution, evolutionary history ,  4–5 ,  7–11 , 
 34 ,  63 ,  67 ,  132 ,  136 ,  139 ,  163 ,  185 , 
 188 
 evolutionary (adaptive) radiation or 
shifts ,  7 ,  16 ,  20 ,  26–27 ,  38 ,  55 ,  59 , 
 85–86 
 excretion ,  65 ,  70–71 
 exhalation ,  94 ,  185–186 ,  fi g. 6.14 
 expiration ,  See  exhalation 
 extinction and decline ,  11 ,  138 ,  191 
 extracellular fl uid ,  113 
 extraembryonic membranes ,  See  embryo 
 eye ,  3 ,  7 ,  11 ,  16 ,  19 ,  22 ,  33 ,  122 ,  127 ,  164–167 , 
 175 ,  fi gs. 1.4, 1.11, 1.14, 1.20, 
1.23, 3.16, 7.1–7.6, 7.12
 color,  fi g. 1.53 
 cornea ,  164–165  
 eyelid ,  7 ,  35 
 iris ,  164–165 
 lens ,  164–165 ,  167 ,  fi g. 7.3 
 pigment,  fi g. 7.1 
 pupil ,  21 ,  164–166 ,  fi gs. 1.5, 7.1–7.2
 horizontal pupil ,  167 ,  fi g. 7.5 
 “keyhole,”  167 ,  fi g. 7.5 
 retina ,  164–167 ,  202 ,  fi g. 7.3 
 sclera ,  164 
 vitreous fl uid ,  165 ,  fi g. 7.3 
 eyecap ,  See  spectacle 
 Eyelash Pitviper,  fi g. 1.34 
 
 facial pit ,  16 ,  22 ,  173–176 ,  fi gs. 1.5, 7.4, 
7.11–7.12 
 facultative endothermy ,  See  endothermy 
 False Coral Snake ,  32 ,  fi g. 1.14 
 False Fer-de-Lance,  fi g. 7.8 
 fang ,  19–22 ,  24 ,  26–27 ,  33 ,  49–51 ,  53–57 ,  61 , 
 170 ,  fi gs. 1.24, 1.28, 1.42, 2.5–2.6, 
2.17, 2.24, 2.25, 2.27
 fang sheath ,  61 
 rear-fang ,  29 ,  30 
 Farancia abacura ,  32 ,  fi g. 1.50 
 fasting ,  67 ,  69–70 
 fat ,  See  lipids 
 fatigue ,  184 
 faveolus, faveoli (of lung) ,  155 ,  158 ,  fi gs. 
6.4, 6.11, 6.13, 6.15 
 Fea’s Viper ,  22 ,  fi g. 1.37 
 feces ,  63 ,  65–70 ,  72 
 blockage or compaction ,  66 ,  69–70 
 feeding (discontinuous, intermittent or 
periodic) ,  See  behavior 
 fenestra ,  39 ,  fi g. 2.4 
 Fer-de-Lance ,  199 ,  fi g. 5.11 
 fertilization ,  194–195 
 fetal membranes ,  See  embryo 
 Ficimia ,  188 
 fi le snakes ,  18 ,  42 ,  85 ,  108 ,  120 ,  124 ,  145 , 
 147–148 ,  152 ,  155 ,  157 ,  167 ,  169 , 
 177 ,  209 ,  fi gs. 1.23, 6.8 
 fi ltration  (at capillaries) ,  147 ,  151 
 fi sh ,  77–78 ,  135 ,  177 ,  181 ,  See also  prey 
 fi tness ,  114 ,  199 
 fl attening (of body) ,  See  behavior 
 fl exible-shelled egg ,  See  egg: eggshell 
 fl oat ,  80 ,  84 
 “fl oat-and-wait” foraging ,   See  behavior 
 Florida Banded Water Snake,  fi g. 1.47 
 Florida Cottonmouth ,  See  cottonmouth 
 Florida Green Water Snake,  fi gs. 4.8, 5.8 
 Florida Redbelly Snake,  fi g. 1.48 
 Florida Worm Lizard,  fi g. 1.4 
 fl ow (of blood) ,  See  blood 
 Flowerpot Blind Snake, Flowerpot Snake , 
 12 ,  195 ,  fi g. 1.11 
 fl uorescence ,  127 
 fl ying snake ,  30 ,  98 
 “focal point” (of eye) ,  165 
 folklore ,  59 ,  124 ,  169 ,  184 ,  191 
 follicle ,  See  egg 
 follicle stimulating hormone ,  See  
hormone 
 food ,  See   prey 
 food supplementation ,  66 
 foraging ,  See  behavior 
 foramen ,  159 ,  fi g. 6.19 
 force ,  183–184 ,  fi g. 8.4
 propulsive force ,  51 ,  78 ,  81 ,  83 ,  85–87 , 
 89 ,  93 ,  fi gs. 2.16, 3.4–3.5 
 reaction force ,  87 ,  89 ,  fi gs. 2.16, 3.4–3.5, 
3.10
 thrust ,  83–85 ,  87 ,  fi g. 3.5 
 force vector ,  See  vector 
 Fordonia ,  33 
 forest pit viper ,  22 
 fossil, fossil record ,  5–7 ,  11 ,  185 ,  fi g. 1.19 
 fossorial ,  See  habitat 
 fovea centralis ,  167 
 free nerve ending ,  See  nerve 
 free stream velocity ,  84 ,  fi g. 3.7 
 freeze tolerance ,  113 
 freezing ,  113 
 frequency (of sound) ,  181 ,  183–186 ,  188 
 frequency modulation ,  187 
 friction ,  85–86 ,  88–90 ,  92–93 ,  123 ,  See also 
 resistance 
 frog ,  113 ,  135 ,  186 ,  210 ,  See also  prey 
 frontal bone ,  40 ,  50 ,  fi g. 2.6 
 
 Gaboon Adder or Viper ,  21 ,  69 ,  170 , 
 fi gs. 1.6, 1.28, 2.25, 8.6 
 gall bladder ,  65 ,  192–193 
 gape ,  38 ,  41 ,  48–53 ,  61 ,  96 ,  fi gs. 2.9, 2.16, 
2.18, 2.25, 2.28 
 garter snake ,  29 ,  45 ,  56 ,  66 ,  89 ,  109 ,  113 , 
 118 ,  134 ,  166 ,  199–202 ,  204–205 , 
 208 
 gas exchange (respiratory) ,  123 ,  141 ,  153 , 
 159 ,  fi gs. 6.1, 6.11, 6.16
 cutaneous gas exchange ,  123 ,  145 
 gas exchanger ,  141 
 gas transport ,  See  respiratory gas 
transport 
 gastric ,  64 
 gastrointestinal tract ,  37 ,  62 ,  66–68 ,  70 , 
 109 ,  111 , 210 ,  fi gs. 2.2, 2.35
 cloaca ,  63 ,  65–66 ,  70 ,  188 ,  192–193 ,  195 , 
 208 ,  fi gs. 2.35, 9.3, 9.7 
 esophagus ,  38 ,  62–64 ,  72 ,  fi g. 6.12 
 intestine (small, large) ,  62 ,  64–67 ,  70 , 
 202 ,  fi gs. 2.33–2.37, 9.5 
 stomach ,  38 ,  62–64 ,  fi gs. 2.31–2.34, 2.37  
 gene ,  113 ,  132 ,  137 ,  138 ,  170 ,  191 ,  199 
 generation ,  191 
 genetic drift ,  62 
 genetics and genomics ,  9 ,  132 ,  136–138 , 
 See also  color 
 genotype ,  114 
 geologic table or time scale,  fi g. 1.7 
 Gerarda ,  33 
 Gerarda prevostiana ,  38 
 Gerard’s Water Snake ,  38 
 gland ,  11 ,  58 ,  193 ,  195 
 gastric gland ,  64 
  postcloacal, cloacal, or musk gland ,  13 , 
 205 
 venom ,  See  venom 
 gliding ,  30 
 glossary ,  213 
 glottis ,  153 ,  156 ,  185 ,  187 ,  fi gs. 2.18–2.19, 8.5 
 Gloydius blomhoffi   ,  22 
 glucose ,  113 
 glycolysis ,  184 
 goanna ,  See  lizard: varanid 
 gonad ,  192–193 ,  201 ,  203–204 
 ovary, ovaries ,  192 ,  fi g. 9.6 
 testis, testes ,  78 ,  192 ,  195 ,  fi g. 9.5 

Index  |  233 
  gonadotropic hormones ,  See  hormone 
 gonadotropin, gonadotropins ,  See 
 hormone : gonadotropic 
hormones 
 gonadotropin-releasing hormones ,  See 
 hormone 
 Gonyosoma oxycephalum ,  132 ,  159 ,  187 , 
 fi gs. 5.18, 6.19 
 Gopher Snake ,  182 ,  186 
 granular scales ,  See  scale 
 gravid ,  109 ,  208 
 gravitational pressure ,  150–152 , 
 fi gs. 6.7–6.8 
 gravity ,  86 ,  96 ,  99 ,  147 ,  150–153 , 
 fi gs. 6.6–6.9 
 Green Anaconda ,  See  anaconda 
 Green Tree Python ,  17 ,  fi gs. 1.22, 7.1 
 Grenada Bank Tree Boa,  fi gs. 2.20, 3.17 
 ground snake ,  26 
 growling ,  See  behavior 
 growth ,  66 ,  114–115 ,  126 ,  135 ,  182 ,  193 ,  198 , 
 209–210 
 growth rate ,  210 
 guanine ,  128 
 Gulf Salt Marsh Snake ,  44 
 gut ,  See  gastrointestinal tract 
 gut passage time ,  See  passage time 
 Gyalopion ,  188 
 Gyalopion canum ,  188 
 
 habitat, habits, 
 aquatic ,  6 ,  18 ,  19 ,  29 ,  32–33 ,  44 ,  71 ,  78 , 
 80 ,  84–86 ,  108 ,  117 ,  122 ,  124 ,  141 , 
 145 ,  147–148 ,  150–153 ,  155–158 , 
 160 ,  164 ,  166–168 ,  170 ,  177–178 , 
 189 ,  196 ,  199 ,  205 ,  210 ,  fi gs. 6.8, 
7.14
 amphibious or semi-aquatic ,  29 ,  83 , 
 86 ,  122 ,  158 ,  fi g. 3.8 
 estuarine ,  34 ,  fi g. 8.8 
 freshwater ,  34 
 marine ,  7 ,  18 ,  29 ,  34 ,  71–72 ,  84 ,  86 , 
 108 ,  120 ,  123 ,  126 ,  148 ,  159 ,  196 , 
 199 ,  205 ,  fi gs. 1.43, 3.8, 6.8 
 arboreal, semiarboreal ,  16–17 ,  22 ,  26 ,  30 , 
 32 ,  33 ,  50 ,  53 ,  56 ,  69 ,  78 ,  89–90 , 
 95–98 ,  132 ,  150–153 ,  159 ,  164 , 
 166–167 ,  199 ,  fi gs. 1.22, 1.31, 
1.34, 1.38, 3.18–3.19, 6.19, 7.5 
 fossorial ,  12 ,  32 ,  90 ,  108–109 ,  166 ,  168 , 
 188 ,  199 ,  204 ,  See also  behavior: 
burrowing   
 pelagic ,  27 ,  84 ,  124 
 terrestrial ,  6 ,  86 ,  89–90 ,  97 ,  108 ,  123 , 
 143 ,  151–153 ,  156 ,  160 ,  166 ,  170 , 
 199 ,  205 
 Habu ,  22 ,  fi g. 1.30 
 hair cell receptors ,  See  receptor 
 harmonic ,  186 ,  188 
 hatching (of eggs) ,  See  birth 
 hatchling ,  See  neonate 
 head ,  11 ,  13 ,  19–20 ,  22 ,  26 ,  33 ,  37–38 ,  
42 ,  50–51 ,  53–54 ,  60 ,  85 ,  87 , 
 92–95 ,  98 ,  109–110 ,  112 ,  124 ,  
146 ,  151–152 ,  163 ,  167–168 ,  181 , 
 fi gs. 1.11, 1.15, 1.24, 1.30, 1.42, 
2.16, 3.5–3.6, 7.4, 7.6, 8.6
 head swaying ,  See  behavior 
 head pit ,  See  parietal pit 
 hearing ,  167–169 ,  183 ,  189 
 heart ,  78 ,  113 ,  142–145 ,  147–148 ,  150–152 , 
 155 ,  fi gs. 6.1–6.3, 6.5, 6.9 
 heart rate ,  149 
 heat ,  22 ,  103 ,  106 ,  108–109 ,  111 ,  142 ,  173 , 
 175 ,  209 
 heat exchange ,  108–109 ,  122 ,  129 ,  158 , 
 fi gs. 4.1, 4.6
 conduction ,  103 ,  158 ,  173 ,  fi g. 4.1 
 convection ,  103 ,  fi g. 4.1 
 evaporative cooling ,  112 ,  158 , 
 fi gs.  4.1, 4.13 
 radiation ,  103 ,  107 ,  121–123 ,  158 , 
 173–175 ,  fi gs. 4.1, 4.9 
 heat stress ,  112 
 hematocrit ,  148 
 heme ,  156 
 Hemeroplanes ornatus ,  fi g. 5.21 
 hemipenis, hemipenes ,  192 ,  208 , 
 fi gs. 9.3, 9.4 
 hemodynamics ,  148–149 
 hemoglobin ,  127 ,  142–143 ,  148 ,  156 
 hemorrhage ,  147 
 hemotoxic ,  58 
 henophidian (Henophidia) ,  12–13 ,  34 ,  166 
 hepatic portal vein ,  147 ,  fi gs. 6.5–6.6, 
6.16 
 herpetoculture ,  191 ,  200 
 hertz (Hz) ,  181 
 Heterodon ,  32 ,  132 
 Heterodon nasicus ,  fi g. 1.49 
 Heterodon platyrhinos ,  187 
 Heterodon platyrhinos platyrhinos , 
 137 
 hibernation ,  See  dormancy 
 high altitude ,  196 
 Hill Death Adder,  fi g. 6.18 
 hinge (of scale) ,  See  scale 
 hinged teeth ,  54 
 hiss, hissing ,  See  behavior 
 H 2 O ,  See  water 
 hog-nosed pit viper ,  22 ,  fi g. 1.35 
 hognose snake ,  32 ,  132 
 homalopsid (Homalopsidae) ,  12 ,  17 ,  
33–34 ,  44 ,  47 ,  70 ,  92 ,  167 , 
 fi gs. 7.6, 7.14 
 Homalopsis buccata ,  fi g. 1.54 
 homology ,  10 
 homoplasy ,  10 
 hood ,  See  behavior 
 hook-nosed snakes ,  188 
 Hopi Rattlesnake,  fi g. 1.29 
 horizontal pupil ,  See  eye 
 horizontal undulatory progression ,  See 
 behavior: locomotion: lateral 
undulation 
 hormone ,  136 ,  142 ,  149 ,  193 
 gastrointestinal hormones ,  66 
 gonadotropic hormones, 
gonadotropins ,  203 
 follicle stimulating hormone ,  203 
 leutinizing hormone ,  203 
 gonadotropin releasing hormones ,  
203  
 reproductive hormones ,  201 
 sex steroids ,  204 
 androgens ,  204 ,  208 ,  fi g. 9.17
 testosterone ,  203 
 estrogens ,  203 ,  208 
 progesterone ,  203 
 horn (over eyes),  fi g. 3.16 
 house snakes ,  20 
 Hox genes ,  7–8 
 humans ,  78 ,  80 ,  127 
 humming bird ,  103 
 hump-nosed pit vipers ,  22 
 hyaluronic acid ,  58 
 hyaluronidase ,  58 ,  63 
 hydration ,  121 
 hydrochloric acid ,  64 
 hydrophiine (Hydrophiini) ,  27 ,  29 ,  71 ,  85 , 
 170 
 Hydrophis ,  27 ,  29 ,  85 
 Hydrophis donaldi ,  fi g. 8.8 
 Hydrophis elegans ,  fi g. 3.6 
 Hydrophis melanocephalus ,  fi g. 3.6 
 Hydrophis ornatus ,  fi g. 1.45 
 hydrophobic ,  121–122 ,  136 ,  fi g. 5.11 
 hydrostatic indiff erent point ,  150 
 hydrostatic pressure ,  See  gravitational 
pressure 
 Hypnale ,  22 
 hypothalamus ,  112 ,  202–203 
 Hz ,  See  Hertz 
 
 ice-nucleating proteins ,  113 
 iconography,  fi g. 5.14 
 iliocostalis ,  See  muscle 
 Imantodes ,  32 
 Imantodes cenchoa ,  fi g. 1.51 
 immune response ,  115 
 incidental drinking ,  See  behavior: 
drinking 
 incubation (of eggs) ,  198 ,  fi gs. 9.13, 9.14 
 Indian Egg-eating Snake,  fi g. 2.1 
 indigo snake ,  30 ,  45 
 inertial force ,  See  resistance 
 infl ammation ,  58 
 infl ation ,  159–160 
 infraorder ,  11 
 infrared receptor ,  See  receptor 
 infrared radiation ,  See  radiation 
 infrared thermometer,  fi g. 4.4 
 ingestion ,  See  prey transport 

 234  | Index
 inhalaton ,  94 ,  156 ,  185–187 
 inheritance ,  192 
 inner ear ,  See  ear  
 inner ear cells ,  See  hair cells 
 inner generation (of epidermis) ,  See 
 epidermal generation 
 insect ,  184 ,  See also  prey 
 inspiration ,   See  inhalation 
 integration (sensory) ,  173 
 integrin ,  58 
 integument ,  See  skin 
 interaortic foramen ,  143 
 intercostal muscle ,  156 
 intermittent feeding ,  See  behavior: 
feeding 
 internal organs ,  See  viscera 
 interstitial fl uid ,  145 ,  147 
 interventricular canal ,  144 
 intestine ,  See  gastrointestinal tract 
 intracardiac shunt ,  See  shunt 
 invasive (wildlife) ,  210 
 ions ,  117 
 iridescence ,  13 ,  123 ,  127 ,  fi g. 5.12 
 iridophore ,  128 
 iris ,  See  eye 
 island, insular ,  48 ,  53 ,  62 ,  210 
 
 Jacobson’s organ ,  See  vomeronasal organ 
 Jagor’s Water Snake,  fi g. 7.6 
 Jameson’s Mamba ,  See  mamba 
 jaw ,  4 ,  11 ,  16 ,  19 ,  35 ,  37–42 ,  50–51 ,  54 ,  57 , 
 168 ,  fi gs. 1.8, 1.20, 2.1, 2.7–2.9, 
2.16, 2.23, 3.15 
 Jerdon’s Pit Viper,  fi g. 1.30 
 joints ,  169  
 jugular vein ,  147 ,  fi g. 6.5 
 jump, jumping ,  See  behavior 
 jumping pit viper ,  22 ,  95 
 Central American Jumping Pit Viper, 
 fi g. 1.36 
 Jurassic period ,  6 
 
 keel ,  13 ,  120 ,  186 ,  fi gs. 3.1, 5.7, 5.10 
 Keel-bellied Watersnake ,  33 
 keeled scale ,  See  scale 
 keratin ,  4 ,  22 ,  71 ,  119 ,  126–128 ,  182 
 alpha ( α ) ,  4 ,  71 ,  119–120 ,  125–126 , 
 fi gs. 5.3–5.5 
 beta ( β ) ,  4 ,  119 ,  124–126 ,  fi gs. 5.3–5.5 
 keratinization ,  125 
 keratinocyte ,  119 ,  128 
 kidney ,  65 ,  70–71 ,  78 ,  192 ,  fi gs. 2.2, 2.35 
 kinematics ,  88 
 kinesis ,  38–40 ,  42 ,  51 
 kinetic skull ,  See  streptostyly 
 King Cobra ,  See  cobra 
 king snake ,  30 ,  fi g. 6.11 
 krait ,  24 ,  26 ,  See also  sea krait 
 Kukulkan,  fi g. 5.14 
 
 labial pits ,  See  facial pit 
 labial scales,  fi g. 7.4 
 labyrinthodont ,  5 
 Lachesis muta ,  fi g. 1.33 
 lactate, lactic acid ,  184 
 lacunar cells or tissue ,  125–126 ,  fi g. 5.4 
 lamellar granules ,  71 
 Lampropeltis ,  30 
 Lampropeltis californiae ,  126 ,  138 , 
 fi gs. 2.7, 5.26 
 Lampropeltis elapsoides ,  fi g. 5.19 
 Lampropeltis getula ,  fi g. 6.11 
 Lampropeltis campbelli ,  fi g. 9.7 
 Lampropeltis triangulum gaigeae , 
 fi g. 5.19 
 lamphrophiid (Lamprophiidae) ,  12 ,  17 ,  19 , 
 20 ,  34 
 Lamprophis ,  20 ,  200 
 Lamprophis fulginosus ,  200 
 lancehead ,  22 
 Lanthanotus borneensis ,  7 
 Lapemis curtus ,  169 ,  fi gs.  5.9, 6.10 
 large intestine ,  See  gastrointestinal tract 
 larynx ,  185–186 
  laryngeal septum ,  186–187   
 lateral resistance ,  80 
 lateral undulation locomotion ,  See 
 behavior 
 Laticauda ,  71 ,  85 ,  198 ,  210 
 Laticauda colubrina ,  48 ,  50 ,  fi gs. 1.43, 
2.15, 3.8, 6.8, 7.8 
 Laticauda laticaudata ,  fi gs. 1.43, 3.8 
 Laticauda semifasciata ,  85 ,  fi gs. 1.43, 3.8, 
5.11, 6.14, 6.16, 9.4  
 laticaudine (Laticaudini) ,  27 ,  29 ,  71 ,  170 , 
 fi g. 1.43 
 “Law of Pascal,”  150 ,  fi g. 6.7 
 Left-to-right shunt (L-R shunt) ,  See  shunt 
 leg ,  6 
 length (body length) ,  See  body 
 lens ,  See  eye 
 lepidosaur (Lepidosauria) ,  4 ,  34 ,  119 ,  124 , 
 fi g.  1.10 
 Leptodeira 
 Leptodeira annulata ,  fi g. 3.4 
 Leptodeira nigrofasciata ,  fi g. 3.4 
 Leptodeira septentrionalis ,  fi g. 2.17 
 Leptotyphlopidae ,  11 ,  41 ,  fi g. 1.11 
 Leptotyphlops ,  55 ,  192 
 Leptotyphlops ater ,  90 ,  fi g. 1.12 
 Leptotyphlops carlae ,  11 ,  fi g. 1.12 
 Leptotyphlops dulcis ,  12 
 Leptotyphlops humilis ,  127 
 Leucorampha ornatus ,  See  Hemeroplanes 
ornatus 
 leutinizing hormone ,  See  hormone 
 Lialis burtonis ,  fi g. 1.4 
 Liasis fuscus ,  111 
 Lichanura trivirgata ,  16 
 “lie-and-wait” foraging ,  See  behavior 
 lift ,  98 
 ligament ,  40 
 light ,  See  radiation: visible 
 light receptor ,  See  receptor: photoreceptor 
 limb, limb girdle ,  5–8 
 forelimb ,  8 
 limbless lizard ,  89 
 lingual ,  54 ,  fi g. 2.21 
 lipids ,  65–66 ,  71 ,  118–119 ,  124 ,  126 ,  205 , 
 fi g. 5.4
 lamellar lipids (of permeability barrier) , 
 125 
 reserves ,  193 
  litter, litter size ,   See  clutch 
 Little File Snake ,  42 ,  157 ,  177 ,  fi gs. 5.15, 
6.10 
 liver ,  65 ,  67 ,  78 ,  147 ,  193 ,  fi gs. 6.6, 6.12, 6.16 
 lizard ,  3–7 ,  10 ,  34 ,  39 ,  40 ,  54 ,  58 ,  77 ,  80 ,  89 , 
 99 ,  104–105 ,  110 ,  112 ,  134–135 , 
 145 ,  158 ,  195–197 ,  199 ,  202 ,  209 , 
 fi gs. 1.4, 2.4,  See also  prey 
 Earless monitor ,  7 
 Gila Monster ,  4 
 legless lizard,  fi g. 1.4 
 skink ,  7 
 varanid ,  4 ,  7 ,  211 ,  fi g. 1.8 
 locomotion ,  See  behavior 
 Loggerhead Sea Turtle,  fi g. 2.14 
 longevity ,  210 
 longissimus dorsi ,  See  muscle 
 loreal pit ,  See  facial pit 
 Loxocemidae ,  13 
 Loxocemus bicolor ,  13 ,  fi gs. 1.16, 3.15 
 lubrication ,  124 
 lumen ,  60 ,  65 
 lung ,  78 ,  80 ,  141–145 ,  147–148 ,  153–160 , 
 185–186 ,  fi gs. 6.1, 6.4–6.5, 6.9, 
6.11–6.13, 6.15–6.17,  See also 
 tracheal lung 
 volume of ,  155 ,  158–159 ,  185 
 Lycodon omorphus ,  20 
 lymph, lymphatic fl uid ,  147–148 
 lymphatic vessel ,  147 
 
 malacophagy ,  See  prey: gastropods 
 Malayan Pit Viper ,  22 ,  62 
 mamba ,  24–26 ,  55 ,  89 ,  96 
 Jameson’s Mamba,  fi g. 1.38 
 mammal ,  5 ,  26 ,  62 ,  64 ,  66 ,  70 ,  78 ,  81 ,  99 , 
 103 ,  106 ,  111–112 ,  137 ,  143 ,  145 , 
 149 ,  151 ,  155 ,  158 ,  167–169 ,  177 , 
 192–193 ,  201 ,  209 
 Mamushi ,  22 
 mandible ,  42 ,  50 ,  51 ,  fi gs. 2.8, 2.18–2.19, 
2.23 
 mandibular raking ,  41 ,  42 
 mangrove snake ,  30 
 Many-banded Krait,  fi g. 1.40 
 marine (form or habits) ,  See  habitat, 
habits 
 mass (of snake) ,  See  body 
 Masticophis ,  30 
 Masticophis fl agellum ,  47 ,  67 ,  fi g. 2.14 
 Maticora ,  26 
 mating ,  See  behavior: reproductive 
behavior 

Index  |  235 
 mating “ball,”  See  behavior: reproductive 
behavior 
 maxilla, maxillary bone ,  16 ,  19 ,  40–42 ,  
50 ,  51 ,  54–57 ,  61 ,  fi gs. 2.5–2.6, 
2.24 
 mean selected temperature ,  See  preferred 
body temperature 
  measurement of temperature,   fi g. 4.4 
 mechanical cues or signals ,  See 
 mechanoreception 
 mechanical work ,  183–184 
 mechanoreception ,  49 ,  123 ,  177–178 ,  189 , 
206 
 mechanoreceptor ,  See  receptor 
 melanin ,  See  pigment 
 melanism ,  132 ,  134–135 ,  138 
 melanocyte ,  See  pigment 
 melanophore ,  See  pigment 
 melanophore stimulating hormone 
(MSH) ,  136 
 melatonin ,  136 ,  202–203 
 membrane ,  22 ,  65 ,  70 ,  163 ,  168 ,  173 ,  175 , 
 185 ,  193–195 ,  fi g. 7.11
 eggshell membrane ,  195 ,  fi g. 9.11 
 mesos layer (of skin) ,  119 ,  125 , 
 fi gs. 5.3–5.5 
 metabolic water ,  See  water 
 metabolism ,  70 ,  209 
  rate of (metabolic rate) ,  46 ,  66–67 ,  69 , 
 103 ,  106 ,  114–115 ,  135 ,  157 ,  200 , 
 fi g. 2.36 
 metabolic heat production ,  105–107 , 
 111–112 ,  fi g. 4.1, 4.13 
 metabolic wastes ,  197 
  methyl ketone ,  118 ,  205  
 Mexican Burrowing Python ,  13 , 
 fi gs. 1.16, 3.15 
 Mexican Vine Snake ,  See  Brown Vine 
Snake 
 microarchitecture ,  See  microsculpturing 
 microbe ,  117 
 microdermatoglyphics ,  See 
 microsculpturing 
 “microfacets,”  172 
 microfi bril ,  See  microsculpturing 
 microgravity ,  169 
 “micro-hairs,”  See  microsculpturing 
 microornamentation ,  See 
 microsculpturing 
 micropit ,  174–175 
 micropore ,  124 
 microsculpturing (of scales) ,  
121–125 ,  127 ,  136 ,  177 , 
 fi gs. 5.10, 5.13
 microfi bril ,  123 
 “micro-hairs,”   123  
 nanoscale structure ,  123 
  microstructure ,   See  microsculpturing 
 microvasculature ,  148 
 microvilli ,  172 
 Micruroides ,  131 ,  188 
 Micruroides euryxanthus ,  188 
 Micrurus ,  131 ,  188 
 Micrurus decoratus ,  fi g. 5.19 
 Micrurus fulvius ,  188 ,  fi g. 5.19 
 Micrurus nigrocinctus ,  fi g. 5.19 
 midbrain ,  169 
 milk snake ,  30 
 mimicry ,  132 ,  189 ,  fi gs. 5.19, 5.21 
 mineralized shell ,  See  egg: eggshell: 
“rigid-shelled egg” 
 mitochondria ,  141 ,  156 ,  182 
 mobility of jaw or joints ,  78 ,  See also 
 behavior ,  kinesis ,  streptostyly 
 modality (of stimulus) ,  163 
 “mode,” of locomotion ,  See  behavior 
 “mode,” reproductive ,  See  reproduction 
 moisture ,  198 
 molecular data, methods, properties, or 
studies ,  4 ,  9 ,  13 ,  24 ,  34 ,  62 ,  166 , 
 fi g. 1.9 
 mole vipers ,  19–20 ,  fi g. 1.24 
 momentum ,  95 ,  fi g. 3.12 
 monitor lizard ,  See  lizard: varanid 
 monophyletic lineage ,  7 ,  10 ,  11 ,  17 ,  32 ,  34 
 monotypic ,  27 ,  fi g. 1.14 
 Morelia 
 Morelia amethystine ,  17 
 Morelia spilota ,  111 ,  fi g. 6.12 
 Morelia viridis ,  17 ,  fi gs. 1.22, 7.1 
 morphology ,  34 
 morphological color change ,  See  color: 
color change 
 mortality ,  196 
 mosasaur ,  7 ,  fi g. 1.8 
 motor sensory system ,  175 
 mouth ,  11 ,  20 ,  37 ,  49 ,  51 ,  56 ,  61–62 ,  72 , 
 172–173 ,  fi gs. 2.16, 2.19, 2.25, 
5.18, 8.5 
 MSH ,  See  melanophore stimulating 
hormone 
 mucosa, mucosal cells ,  60 ,  65 ,  67 ,  72 , 
 fi g. 2.34 
 mucus ,  56 ,  64 ,  176 
 mucous cells, glands or secretions ,  62 , 
 172 ,  193 
 Mud Snake ,  32 ,  fi g. 1.50 
 muscle, musculature ,  13 ,  22 ,  40 ,  51 ,  57–58 , 
 60–62 ,  72 ,  77–78 ,  80 ,  85 ,  87–91 , 
 96 ,  111 ,  113–114 ,  118 ,  143 ,  146 , 
 156 ,  158 ,  160 ,  165 ,  169 ,  182 ,  183 , 
 185–186 ,  188 ,  195 ,  fi gs. 3.5, 6.16, 
7.10
 axial muscle ,  78–79 ,  87 ,  92 ,  fi gs. 3.3, 3.9 
 cardiac muscle ,  143–144 ,  148–149 
 ciliary muscle ,  165 
 costocutaneous muscle ,  91 ,  fi g. 3.12 
 compressor glandulae ,  60 
 compressor muscle ,  60 
 constrictor laryngis ,  186 
 epaxial muscle ,  78 ,  88 ,  97 
 M. iliocostalis ,  78 ,  183 ,  fi g. 3.3 
 M. longissimus dorsi ,  78 ,  183 ,  fi g. 3.3 
 M. sphincter cloacae ,  188 
 M. spinalis-semispinalis ,  78 ,  183 ,  fi g. 3.3 
 M. supracostalis lateralis ,  183 
 smooth muscle ,  65–66 ,  145 ,  149 , 
 158 ,  175 ,  187 ,  192–193 , 
 fi gs. 2.34, 6.11 
 tension ,  111 
 twitch ,  183–184 
 muscular ridge,  fi g. 6.3 
 musk ,  182 
 musk gland ,  See  gland 
 mutation (genetic) ,  9 ,  62 ,  138 ,  189 ,  191 
 Myrichthys colubrinus ,  fi g. 1.4 
 mythology ,  117 ,  124 ,  191 ,  fi gs. 5.1, 5.14, 
9.1–9.2  
 
 Naja 
 Naja atra ,  fi gs. 1.39, 2.26 
 Naja shrionegrina ,  6 
 nanopit ,  174 
 nanoscale ,  See  microsculpture 
 narial or nasal valve ,  See  valve 
 naris, nares ,  See  nostril 
 nasal bone ,  40 
 nasal cavity or passages ,  169–170 ,  187 , 
 fi g. 7.9 
 nasal hissing ,  See  behavior 
 “nasal pore,”  176 
 nasal receptors ,  See  receptor 
 natricine (Natricinae) ,  29 ,  40 ,  42 ,  46–47 , 
 122 ,  199 ,  fi g. 9.10 
 Natrix ,  29 
 natural history ,  204 
 natural selection ,  10 ,  59 ,  62–63 ,  130 ,  136 , 
 152 ,  189 
 neck ,  62 ,  87 ,  92–93 ,  fi gs. 3.5–3.6 
 neck sac ,  See  tracheal air sac 
 necrosis ,  58 
 neonate or hatchling ,  126 ,  198 ,  201 ,  208–
209 ,  fi gs. 9.9, 9.11–9.12, 9.15 
 Neotropical Bird Snake ,  See  Puffi  ng Snake 
 Neotropical racer,  fi g. 1.48 
 Nerodia ,  29 ,  40 ,  fi gs. 1.3, 1.47
 Nerodia clarkii ,  44 
 Nerodia fasciata ,  85 
 Nerodia fasciata pictiventris ,  fi g. 1.47 
 Nerodia fl oridana ,  fi gs. 1.47, 4.8, 5.8 
 Nerodia sipedon ,  48 ,  205 
 nerve or neuron ,  66 ,  111 ,  113 ,  117 ,  127 ,  163 , 
 168 ,  172 ,  175–177 ,  201 
 free nerve ending ,  173 ,  177 
 nerve growth factor ,  58 
 nerve signal ,  See  action potential 
 nervous control ,  145 ,  201 ,  fi g. 6.9 
 nervous system ,  149 ,  177 ,  201 
 central nervous system ,  78 ,  110 ,  149 , 
 163 ,  173 ,  177 ,  181 ,  203 
 nest ,  198 ,  fi g. 9.14 
 net cost of transport ,  99 
 neural arch,  fi g. 3.2 
 neuroendocrine regulation ,  201–202 , 
 fi g. 9.16 
 neuromodulator ,  201 ,  203 

 236  | Index
 neuromuscular control ,  98 
 neuron ,  See  nerve 
 neurotoxic ,  58 
  neurotransmitter ,  149  
 night adders ,  21 ,  176 
 Nina sebae ,  fi g. 5.20 
 nitrogen ,  145  
 nitrogenous wastes ,  See  urates, uric acid 
 nocturnal ,  See  behavior 
 node (of phylogenetic tree) ,  9 ,  34 
 norepinephrine ,  149 
 Northern Black Racer ,  137 
 Northern Copperhead ,  See  copperhead 
 Northern Rubber Boa ,  110 
 Northern Water Snake ,  199 ,  205 
 Northwestern Garter Snake ,  130 
 Nose-horned Viper,  fi g. 1.25 
 nostril ,  16 ,  19 ,  22 ,  33 ,  94 ,  153 ,  176 ,  187 , 
 fi gs. 1.23, 6.10, 7.4, 7.11, 8.6 
 Notechis ,  27 ,  53 
 Notechis ater niger ,  fi g. 4.15 
 Notechis scutatus ,  85–86 
 nutrient ,  62 ,  66–67 ,  69 ,  142 ,  145 ,  195 ,  197 
 nutritional status ,  62 ,  148 
 
 oberhautchen ,  119 ,  121 ,  123–124 ,  126 , 
 fi gs. 5.3–5.5, 5.10 
 odor ,  11 ,  49 ,  170 ,  172–173 ,  fi g. 2.38 
 olfaction ,  169–173 ,  205 
 olfactory bulb (of brain) ,  171 
 olfactory epithelium ,  169–171 
 olfactory receptors ,  See  receptor 
 Olive-headed Sea Snake,  fi g. 5.16 
 Olive Sea Snake ,  177 ,  210 
 omphalallantoic placenta ,  See  placenta 
 ontogeny, ontogenetic ,  48 ,  53 ,  136 ,  
148 
 ontogenetic color change ,  See  color 
 Opheodrys ,  30 
 Ophidia ,  11 ,  34 ,  35 
 ophiophagous ,  45 
 Ophiophagus hannah ,  26 ,  159 ,  187 ,  198 , 
 fi gs. 2.11, 4.5, 9.14 
 Ophisaurus ventralis ,  fi g. 1.4 
 opisthoglyphous ,  57 , 61 
 opossum ,  62 
 opsin ,  166 
 optic tectum ,  175 
 oral secretions or tissues ,  172 
 Oriental Coral Snake,  fi g. 1.41 
 Oriental Whipsnake,  fi g. 7.5 
 orientation ,  169 
 Orsini’s Viper ,  21 
 oscillator ,  183 
 osmosis, osmotic fl ux ,  70–71 
 osmotic concentration ,  113 
 osteoderm ,  54 
 outer generation (of epidermis) ,  See 
 epidermal generation 
 oval window ,  168 
 ovarian follicles ,  193 
 ovary, ovaries ,  See  gonad 
 overwintering ,  94 ,  108 ,  118 ,  122 ,  fi g. 4.7, 
 See also  behavior 
 oviduct ,  192–195 ,  197 ,  203 ,  fi g. 2.35 
 oviparity, oviparous ,  12–13 ,  16 ,  19 ,  21 ,  
25 ,  27 ,  29 , 32–33 ,  71 ,  195 ,  197 , 
 199–200 
 oviposit, oviposition ,  195 ,  197–198 ,  208 , 
 fi gs. 9.7, 9.12 
 ovulation ,  193–194 
 oxidation ,  127 ,  141 
 Oxybelis aeneus ,  fi gs. 1.48, 2.18, 5.18 
 oxygen ,  See  respiratory gases 
 oxygen affi  nity ,  148 ,  157 
 oxygen capacity (of blood) ,  148 ,  156 
 Oxyuranus ,  26 
 
 “pacemaker,”  143 
 Pacifi c Rattlesnake ,  See  Southern Pacifi c 
Rattlesnake 
 paddle ,  See  tail 
 pair bonding ,  See  behavior 
 palate, palatine bone ,  41 ,  51 ,  55–56 ,  171 , 
 173 ,  fi g. 2.6 
 palatomaxillary bones (arch or bar) ,  40 , 
 50 ,  61 
 palatopterygoid bar, bones ,  41 
 Paleozoic era ,  5 
 Palestine Viper,  fi g. 7.2 
 palm viper ,  22 
 Blotched Palm Viper,  fi g. 1.34 
 pancreas ,  65 
 Pantherophis ,  30 ,  151 ,  fi g. 6.5
 Pantherophis alleghaniensis ,  fi gs. 2.19, 
2.30 
 Pantherophis guttatus ,  86 ,  96 ,  fi gs. 7.9, 
9.5 
 Pantherophis obsoletus ,  111 ,  fi gs. 1.48, 
2.37, 3.3, 3.18, 9.13, 9.15 
 panting ,  See  physiological 
thermoregulation 
 papilla, papillae (sensory) ,  172–173 
 Paradise Tree Snake ,  98 ,  fi g. 3.19 
 Pareas ,  33 ,  42 
 Pareas formosensis ,  fi g. 1.53 
 pareatid (Pareatidae) ,  12 ,  17 ,  33–34 ,  42 ,  56 , 
 fi g. 1.53 
 parenchyma ,  153 ,  155–158 
 parental care ,  See  behavior 
 parietal bone ,  40 ,  60 ,  fi g. 2.6 
 parietal (head) pit ,  177 
 parthenogenesis ,  12 ,  195 
 partial pressure (of gas) ,  141 ,  145 ,  149 , 
 156–157 ,  fi g. 6.15 
 parturition ,  See  birth 
 passage time (ingestion to defecation) , 
 68–69 
 PBT ,  See  preferred body temperature 
 peg (as resistance site) ,  88–89 , 
 fi gs. 3.9–3.10 
 pelagic ,  See  habitat, habits 
 Pelamis ,  71 
 Pelamis platurus ,  27 ,  44 ,  81 ,  84 ,  124 ,  138 , 
 159 ,  169 ,  177 ,  fi gs. 1.44, 2.9, 2.24, 
3.1, 3.5, 5.7, 5.9, 5.15, 5.27, 6.10, 
7.1, 9.8–9.9 
 pelvis, pelvic girdle ,  5 ,  6 ,  11 ,  fi g. 1.14 
 pelvic spur ,  5 ,  11 ,  206 ,  fi g. 1.14 
 peptide ,  58 
 performance ,  85–86 ,  96 ,  110 ,  114–115 ,  151 , 
 173 
 performance breadth ,  114 ,  fi g. 4.14 
 performance curve ,  110 ,  114 ,  fi g. 4.14 
 periodic feeding ,  See  behavior: feeding 
 peripheral resistance ,  See  resistance 
 peristalsis ,  38 ,  65 ,  fi gs. 2.14, 2.30 
 peritoneum ,  135 
 permeability ,  117 ,  121 ,  197 
 of capillaries ,  147 
 permeability barrier (to water) ,  71–72 , 
 126 ,  fi gs. 5.3–5.4 
 Permian period ,  5 ,  fi gs. 1.7, 1.8 
 pH ,  61 ,  64 ,  157–158 
 pharynx ,  62 ,  153 
 phenogram ,  See  phylogenetic tree 
 phenotype ,  5 
 phenotypic plasticity ,  See  plasticity 
 phenotypic trait ,  9 ,  114 
 pheromone ,  118 ,  205 ,  208 
 “sexual attractiveness pheromone,”  205 , 
 fi g. 9.18 
 phospholipase ,  58 
  photoperiod ,  200 ,  202  
 photoreceptor ,  See  receptor 
 phylogeny, phylogenetic tree ,  4–5 ,  8 ,  9–10 , 
 19 ,  34 ,  55 ,  fi gs.  1.8–1.10, 1.55 
  physiological color change ,   See  color 
 physiological thermoregulation ,  110–112 
 panting ,  112 ,  158 
 pigments ,  11 ,  122 ,  127 ,  136 ,  142 ,  See also 
 hemoglobin and iridophore (not 
a true pigment)  
 carotenes ,  128 
 chromatophores ,  127–128 ,  136 
 erythrophore ,  128 
 melanin ,  127–128 ,  135 ,  137 
 melanocytes, melanophores ,  127–128 ,  136 
 pteridine ,  128 
 xanthophores ,  128 
 pineal gland ,  202–203 
 Pine Snake ,  186 
 pipe snakes ,  12 ,  13 ,  fi g. 1.13
 Asian pipe snakes ,  13 
 Red Pipe Snake ,  13 ,  fi g. 1.14 
 piscivorus ,  See  prey: fi sh 
 pit (of scale surface) ,  177 
 pit organs ,  See  facial pit 
 pituitary gland ,  136 ,  203 
 pituitary hormones ,  136 
 Pituophis 
 Pituophis catenifer ,  182 ,  186 
 Pituophis melanoleucus ,  111 ,  186–187 

Index  |  237 
 pit viper ,  20 ,  22 ,  24 ,  47–48 ,  56 ,  120 ,  126 ,  158 , 
 173 ,  175–176 ,  208 ,  fi gs. 1.33, 7.11 
 placenta, placentation  ,  195 ,  197 ,  fi gs. 9.8, 
9.10
 chorioallantoic placenta,  fi g. 9.10 
 omphalallantoic placenta,  fi g. 9.10 
 placental membranes,  fi g. 9.10 
 Plains Gartersnake ,  199 
 plants ,  68 
 plasma ,  See  blood plasma 
 plasticity (developmental, ontogenetic, 
physiological, phenotypic) ,  53 , 
 86 ,  114 ,  fi g. 4.14 
 pleurodont ,  54 ,  fi g. 2.21 
 “Plumed Serpent,”  fi g. 5.14 
 Pogona vitticeps ,  fi g. 2.5 
 point of force application ,  See  resistance 
site 
 poison ,  57–58 
 polymorphism ,  132 ,  See also  color 
 polypeptide ,  58 
 polyphyletic ,  34 
 pooling (of blood) ,  151–152 ,  fi gs. 6.7–6.8 
 pore ,  172 ,  174 ,  176 ,  fi gs. 5.13, 9.13 
 portal vein ,  See  hepatic portal vein 
 Porthidium ,  22 
 Porthidium nasutum ,  fi g. 1.35 
 postcloacal musk gland ,  See  gland 
 postmating behavior ,  See  behavior: 
reproductive behavior   
 postprandial calorigenic response ,  See 
 specifi c dynamic action 
 postprandial metabolic response ,  See 
 specifi c dynamic action 
 postprandial thermogenesis ,  See  specifi c 
dynamic action 
 posture ,  See  behavior 
 power ,  80 ,  85 
 power spectrum ,  187 
 Prairie Rattlesnake,  fi g. 1.29 
 Prairie Ringneck Snake,  fi g. 1.50 
 prebutton (of rattle) ,  182 
 precourtship behavior ,  See  behavior: 
reproductive behavior   
 predator, predation ,  See  behavior 
 preferred body temperature (PBT) , 
 109–110 ,  113 ,  148 
 preferred range ,  See  preferred body 
temperature 
 prefrontal bone ,  40 ,  50 ,  56 
 prehensile tail ,  See  behavior 
 premaxilla, premaxillary bone ,  55 ,  71 ,  198 
 pressure 
 blood pressure ,  See  blood 
 in fl uids ,  150 ,  169 ,  fi g. 6.7 
 in lung ,  156 ,  186 
 oxygen ,  See   partial pressure 
 transmural pressure,  fi g. 6.7 
 water vapor ,  See  water 
 pressure shunting ,  See  shunt: intracardiac 
shunt 
 prey ,  3 ,  20 ,  22 ,  25 ,  33 ,  37–38 ,  40–41 ,  46 ,  48–
51 ,  53–54 ,  56 ,  59 ,  61–63 ,  66–68 , 
 95–96 ,  115 ,  120 ,  152 ,  167 ,  173 ,  175 , 
 188 ,  200 ,  209–210 ,  fi g. 1.24
 amphibians ,  33 ,  48 
 anurans (frogs, toads) ,  21 ,  32 ,  38 , 
 45–46 ,  48 ,  50 ,  53 ,  62 ,  66–67 
 birds ,  16 ,  20 ,  38 ,  45–46 ,  48 ,  50 ,  53 , 
 67–68 ,  97 ,  fi g. 2.37 
 caecilians ,  19 
 carrion ,  21 ,  45 
 eggs ,  37 ,  45 ,  47 ,  97 ,  fi gs. 2.1, 2.14, 2.19, 
2.30, 3.15 
 fi sh or fi sh eggs ,  13 ,  19 ,  26–27 ,  33 ,  38 , 
 45–48 ,  50–51 ,  54 ,  56 ,  64 ,  67 ,  84 , 
 178 ,  fi gs.  1.44, 2.10, 2.13, 7.14
 eel ,  13 ,  27 ,  46 ,  50 
 invertebrates ,  33 ,  38 ,  45 ,  189 
 crabs ,  33 ,  38 
 centipedes ,  19–20 
 crustaceans ,  19 ,  33 ,  67 ,  fi g. 2.22 
 earthworms ,  13 ,  20 ,  32 ,  38 
 gastropods (slugs, snails) ,  32–33 ,  42 , 
 56 ,  fi g. 2.8 
 insects ,  12 ,  21 ,  37–38 ,  45 ,  67 ,  167 
 larvae or pupae ,  41 
 mammals ,  13 ,  16 ,  20 ,  38 ,  46 ,  48 ,  50 , 
 67–68 ,  fi g. 2.32
 deer,  fi g. 2.1 
 rodents ,  20 ,  49–50 ,  176 ,  fi gs. 2.36, 3.16
 mice ,  13 ,  38 ,  45 ,  50 ,  53 ,  63 ,  169 , 
 fi gs.  2.7, 2.16, 4.13  
 shrews ,  20 
 reptiles ,  13 ,  20–21 ,  25 
 lizards ,  13 ,  32 ,  45–46 ,  48 ,  62 ,  167 ,  189 , 
 fi g. 3.16
 geckos ,  16 
 skinks ,  16 ,  19 ,  54 
 snakes ,  13 ,  19 ,  fi g. 2.11 
 turtles ,  47 ,  fi gs 2.12, 2.14 
 vertebrates ,  20 
 prey handling time ,  59 
 prey transport ,  38–42 ,  45 ,  66–70 ,  fi gs. 
2.11. 2.13–2.14, 2.19, 2.37–2.38 
 primitive trait or lineage ,  See  basal 
 progesterone ,  See  hormone: sex steroids 
 prokinesis ,  40 
 proprioceptors ,  169 
 propulsive force ,  See  force 
 protease ,  58 ,  65 
 protein ,  4 ,  62 ,  65–67 ,  69–70 ,  113 ,  166 ,  182 
 proteolytic enzymes ,  58 ,  64 
  proteroglyph ,  57 ,  61  
 Protobothrops 
 Protobothrops fl avoviridis ,  22 ,  fi g. 1.30 
 Protobothrops jerdoni ,  fi g. 1.30 
 protraction  ,  41 
 Psammophis ,  20 
 Psammophis subtaeniatus ,  fi gs.  5.10, 5.13  
 Pseudechis porphyriacus ,  25 ,  27 ,  108 ,  211 , 
 fi g. 4.9 
 Pseudonaja 
 Pseudonaja nuchalis ,  26–27 
 Pseudonaja textilis ,  27 
 Pseustes poecilonotus ,  fi gs. 1.48, 2.18 
 pteridine ,  See  pigment 
 pterygoid bone ,  41 ,  42 ,  50 ,  55 ,  fi g. 2.5 
 Pueblan Milksnake,  fi g. 9.7 
 Puff  Adder ,  21–22 ,  176 ,  186–187 
 Puff -faced Water Snake,   fi g. 1.54 
 Puffi  ng Snake,   fi gs. 1.48, 2.18, 8.5 
 pulmonary artery or trunk ,  143–147 , 
 fi gs. 6.3, 6.5, 6.16 
 pulmonary circulation ,  147 
 pulmonary vein ,  147 ,  fi g. 6.5 
 pupil ,  See  eye 
 purine ,  128 
 push point ,  See  resistance site 
 pygmy rattlesnake ,  22 
 pylorus ,  64 
 pyloric valve ,  64 
 python ,  5 ,  8 ,  12–16 ,  34 ,  50 ,  55 ,  67 ,  69 , 
 91 ,  108–111 ,  120 ,  172–174 ,  176 , 
 208–210 
 Python brongersmai ,  fi g. 5.25 
 Python curtis ,  69 
 Python molurus ,  16 ,  67 ,  69 ,  111 ,  175 , 
 fi gs.  2.36, 4.10, 6.4 
 Python regius ,  16 ,  166 ,  168 
 Python reticulatus ,  14 ,  16 ,  fi g. 1.17 
 Python sebae ,  16 
 pythonid (Pythonidae) ,  16 ,  205 
 
 quadrate bone ,  6 ,  39–40 ,  51 ,  168–169 , 
 fi gs. 2.5–2.6 
 quadratojugal bone ,  6 
 quadrupedal ,  77 
 Queen Snake ,  29 
 
 racer ,  26 ,  30 ,  45–46 ,  77 ,  89 ,  96 ,  99 ,  135 ,  
181 ,  205 
 radiation (electromagnetic) 
 infrared ,  22 ,  173–176 
 solar ,  107 ,  117 ,  158 ,  fi g. 4.11 
 ultraviolet ,  135 ,  174–175 
 visible ,  163–165 ,  174–175 ,  201 
 radiation (evolutionary) ,  See  evolution 
 radiotelemetry, radio transmitter ,  47 ,  105 , 
 109 ,  fi gs. 4.4–4.5, 4.9 
 Rainbow Boa,  fi g. 5.12 
 “Rainbow Serpent” (of mythology) ,  191 
 Ramphotyphlops braminus ,  fi g. 1.11 
 rat snake ,  30 ,  46–47 ,  78 ,  96–97 ,  111 ,  151 , 
 169 ,  fi gs. 2.26, 3.3, 6.5, 6.9, 6.19 
 rattle (of rattlesnake) ,  182–185 ,  188–189 , 
 fi gs. 5.14, 8.2–8.4 
 rattling ,  See  behavior 
 rattlesnake ,  22 ,  47–49 ,  51 ,  56 ,  63 ,  66 ,  80 , 
 112 ,  136 ,  173 ,  175–176 ,  182–185 , 
 187–189 ,  200 ,  208 ,  fi gs. 1.29, 
5.14, 6.9, 8.2 
 RCM ,  See  relative clutch mass 

 238  | Index
 reabsorption ,  54 
 reaction force ,   See  force 
 reaction norm ,  114 
 reaction site ,  See  resistance site 
 rear-fanged ,  50 
 receptor ,  58 ,  127 ,  149 ,  163 ,  168 ,  172–175 , 
 177 ,  fi g. 1.5
 baroreceptor ,  149 
 chemosensory receptors ,  173 
 cutaneous receptors ,  177 ,  189 
 hair cell receptors ,  168–169 ,  177 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 infrared receptors ,  173–175 ,  fi g. 1.5,  See 
also  facial pits 
 mechanoreceptor ,  45 ,  176–178 ,  fi g. 2.10 
 nasal receptors ,  170 
 olfactory receptors ,  170 
 photoreceptor ,  166 ,  177–178 ,  fi g. 7.3 
 stretch receptor ,  149 ,  See also 
 baroreceptor 
 thermoreceptors ,  173–177 
 visual receptors ,  127 ,  164 
 cones ,  164 ,  166–167 
 rods ,  164 ,  166 
 vomeronasal receptors ,  172–173 
 rectilinear locomotion ,  See  behavior: 
locomotion 
 Red-bellied Black Snake ,  25 ,  27 ,  108 ,  211 , 
 fi g. 4.9 
 red blood cell ,  142 ,  148 ,  156–157 
 Red Blood Python,  fi g.  5.25 
 Red Coff ee Snake,   fi g. 5.20 
 Red Diamond Rattlesnake ,  80 ,  185 
 Red-sided Garter Snake,  fi gs. 4.2, 4.7, 9.17 
 Red-spotted Pit Viper,  fi g. 1.30 
 Red-tailed Rat Snake ,  132 ,  159–160 ,  187 , 
 fi gs. 5.18, 6.19 
 refl ectance (of light) ,  128 
 refraction ,  165 
 Regina ,  29 
 Regina rigida ,  fi g. 2.22 
 relative clutch mass (RCM) ,  199 
 renal vein ,  147 
 renewal stage (of shedding cycle),  See  
ecdysis 
 replacement (teeth) ,  55 ,  fi g. 2.23 
 reproduction ,  66 ,  115 ,  135 ,  191–212 ,  fi g. 9.16
 reproductive cycles ,  201 ,  203–204 , 
 fi g. 9.17 
 reproductive mode ,  195–197 
 reproductive tract ,  65 
 reptile (Reptilia) ,  5 ,  10 ,  39–40 ,  71 ,  80 , 
 114 ,  145 ,  156 ,  173 ,  194 ,  196 ,  200 , 
 203–204 ,  fi gs. 1.8, 1.10
 non-avian reptile ,  10  
 resistance 
 forces ,  87 
 to blood fl ow ,  143–145 
 peripheral resistance ,  148–149 
 to evaporative water loss ,  124 ,  126 
 to thrust in locomotion ,  84–85 ,  87 
 drag ,  84–85 
 friction ,  87 ,  93 ,  99 
 gravitational vertical force ,  84 
 inertial ,  84–85 ,  89 
 viscosity ,  84 
 resistance site ,  80 ,  87–88 ,  93–94 ,  96 , 
 fi gs. 3.4, 3.9, 3.12 
 resources ,  200–201 
 respiration  ,  114 ,  141 ,  143 ,  156 ,  158 
 respiratory gases  117 ,  145 ,  148 ,  153 , 
 155–157 ,  185 ,  195 ,  197 
 exchange ,  See  gas exchange 
 carbon dioxide ,  117 ,  141 ,  146 ,  153 , 
 156–158 ,  185 ,  fi g. 6.1 
 oxygen ,  46 ,  113 ,  117 ,  141–142 ,  145–146 , 
 148 ,  153 ,  156–158 ,  160 ,  185 ,  195 , 
 197 ,  fi gs. 6.1, 6.15 
 respiratory gas transport,  fi g. 6.1 
 resting stage (of shedding cycle) ,  See 
 ecdysis 
  Reticulated Python ,  14 ,  16 ,  199 ,  fi gs. 1.17, 
2.23, 9.6 
 retina ,  See  eye 
 retraction, retractor muscle ,  192 
 Rhamphotyphlops braminus ,  12 ,  195 , 
 fi g. 1.11 
 Rhineura fl oridana ,  fi g. 1.4 
 Rhinoceros Viper ,  21 ,  fi gs. 1.28, 2.25 
 rhinokinesis ,  40 
 rib ,  3 ,  6 ,  78–79 ,  85 ,  88 ,  91 ,  97–98 ,  156 ,  159 , 
 186 ,  fi g. 3.12 
 ribbon snake ,  29 
 Rice Paddy Snake,  fi g. 7.6 
 right-to-left shunt (R-L shunt) ,  See  shunt 
 rigid-shelled egg ,  See  egg: eggshell 
 Ringed Python,  fi g. 4.12 
 ringneck snake ,  26 ,  32 
 robotics ,  99–100 ,  fi g. 3.20 
 Rock Rattlesnake,  fi g. 1.29 
 rod (of eye) ,  See  receptor: visual receptors 
 rodent ,  94 ,  103 ,  210 
 rostral scale ,  11 ,  94 ,  fi gs. 1.11, 1.20 
 Rosy Boa ,  16 
 Rough-scaled Bush Viper,  fi gs. 1.27, 5.8 
 Round Island Boa ,  16 
 rubber boa ,  16 
 rugae ,  64 
 Russell’s Viper ,  176 ,  187 ,  fi g. 5.10 
 
 sacculus ,  168–169 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 salamander ,  77 ,  99 
 salivary gland ,  59 
 salivary secretions ,  62 
 salt ,  71 
 salt gland ,  71 
 sand boa ,  16 
 Kenya Sand Boa,  fi g. 1.20 
 San Diego Gopher Snake ,  104 
 sand snake ,  20 
 sand swimming ,  See  behavior 
 San Lorenzo Island Rattlesnake ,  22 
 Santa Catalina Island Rattlesnake ,  22 
 Saw-scaled Viper ,  182 ,  fi g. 8.1 
 scale ,  3 ,  10–11 ,  13 ,  51 ,  54 ,  89 ,  93 ,  117 , 
 119–124 ,  126–127 ,  175 ,  177 ,  188 , 
 fi gs. 1.6, 1.23, 5.6, 5.8–5.12, 7.11
 granular ,  18–19 ,  120 
 head plates or scales ,  11 ,  21–22 ,  51 ,  120 , 
 177 ,  fi g. 1.15 
 hinge ,  120 
 keeled ,  19–20 ,  44 ,  120 ,  182 , 
 fi gs.  5.9–5.10, 8.1, 8.8 
 labial ,  16 
 scute or ventral ,  11 ,  18 ,  78 ,  87 ,  89–91 ,  120 , 
 fi gs. 3.1, 3.12, 5.6–5.7, 5.9, 5.12, 9.3 
 smooth ,  11 ,  13 ,  19 ,  21–22  120 ,  fi gs. 1.11, 
5.8 
 spine or spinous ,  18 ,  121 ,  177 , 
 fi g. 5.8–5.9, 8.8 
 tuberculate ,  18 ,  fi g. 5.9 
 scanning electron microscopy (SEM) ,  121 , 
 174 ,  fi g. 5.10 
 scansorial ,  See  behavior: locomotion: 
climbing 
 scattering (of light) ,  128 
 Schultheis thermometer ,  105 ,  fi g. 4.4 
 sclera ,  See  eye 
 scolecophidian (Scolecophidia) ,  11 ,  12 ,  34 , 
 41 ,  55 ,  173 
 Scrub Python ,  17 
 scute ,  See  scale 
 SDA ,  See  specifi c dynamic action 
 sea krait ,  27 ,  50 ,  71 ,  85 ,  198 ,  210 ,  fi gs. 3.8, 
5.11, 6.8, 9.4 
 sea snake ,  24–25 ,  27 ,  29 ,  46 ,  48 ,  56 ,  78 , 
 81 ,  83–85 ,  124 ,  126 ,  132 ,  145 , 
 152–153 ,  157–159 ,  169–170 ,  173 , 
 177 ,  189 ,  208–209 ,  fi gs. 1.4, 2.15, 
6.9–6.10, 8.8 
 season, seasonality ,  114 ,  193 ,  201 , 
 fi gs. 4.15, 9.17 
 sea turtle ,  47 
 secondary sexual characteristics ,  203 
 secretion ,  11 ,  57 ,  66 ,  71 
 segment (of rattle),  fi g. 8.2 
 selection pressure ,  See  natural selection 
 SEM ,  See  scanning electron microscopy 
 semiaquatic ,  See  habitat, habits 
 semicircular canals ,  168–169 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 seminal or copulatory plug ,  208 
 seminal receptacles ,  194 
 Seminatrix pygaea ,  29 
 seminiferous tubules ,  192 
 serous cells or gland ,  60 
 “serpent,”  191 
 Serpentes ,  See  Ophidia 
 sex ,  62 ,  110 ,  191–192 ,  205 
 sex steroids ,  See  hormone 
 “sexual attractiveness pheromone,”  See 
 pheromone 
 sexual maturation ,  209–210 
 shaker muscle (of rattlesnake) ,  182–185 , 
 fi g. 8.4 

Index  |  239 
 Shaw’s Sea Snake,  fi gs. 5.9, 6.10 
 shearing force ,  84 
 shed, shedding ,  See  ecdysis 
 shell ,  See  eggshell 
 shell glands ,  195 
 “she-male,”  208  
 shield-tail snakes ,  12–13 ,  fi g. 1.15 
 “shivering,”  12 ,  16 ,  111 ,  fi g. 4.12,  See also 
 endothermy 
 shunt ,  110 ,  143 ,  145 ,  157 
 intracardiac shunt ,  144–145 
 “pressure shunting,”  145 
 “washout shunting,”  145 
 shuttling ,  See  behavior 
 Sibon ,  32 ,  42 ,  fi g. 1.52
 Sibon nebulatus ,  fi g. 2.8 
 Sibynomorphus ,  42 
 Sidewinder Rattlesnake ,  66–67 ,  77 ,  92 , 
 94 ,  99 ,  fi gs. 3.13–3.14, 3.16, 7.10 
 sidewinding locomotion ,  See  behavior: 
locomotion 
 signaling 
 pathway ,  8 
 sexual signaling ,  136 
 sinus venosus ,  143 
 sister taxon (or group) ,  11–13 ,  17 ,  19 ,  24 , 
 32 ,  34 ,  fi g. 1.9 
 Sistrurus ,  22 ,  182 
 Sistrurus miliarius ,  fi g. 4.3 
 site of resistance ,   See  resistance site 
 size (body size) ,  See  body 
 skeleton, skeletal elements ,  6 ,  8 ,  77–78 , 
 80 ,  fi gs. 1.3, 3.11 
 skin ,  4 ,  10–11 ,  13 ,  18–19 ,  29 ,  37 ,  40 ,  71–72 , 
 85 ,  89–91 ,  111 ,  113 ,  117 ,  141 , 
 145–146 ,  152 ,  159 ,  173 ,  176 , 
 205–206 ,  208 ,  fi gs. 2.1, 3.1, 3.7, 
3.12, 5.2–5.3, 5.9, 5.24, 8.8, 9.18
 dermis ,  118–120 ,  124–125 ,  128 , 
 fi gs. 5.3–5.4 
 epidermis ,  4 ,  71 ,  118–126 ,  128 ,  136 ,  165 , 
 205 ,  fi gs. 1.6, 5.3–5.4, 5.11, 7.4 
 shedding ,  See  ecdysis  
 skull ,  4 ,  6–7 ,  10–11 ,  19 ,  38–40 ,  42 ,  51 ,  94 , 
 fi gs. 1.8, 2.4–2.5, 2.7, 2.23, 2.27 
 slide-pushing locomotion ,  See  behavior 
 sliding friction ,  See  friction 
 slipping undulation ,  See  behavior: 
locomotion, slide-pushing 
 “slithering,”  See  undulation and behavior: 
lateral undulation 
 slough ,  See  ecdysis  
 slug-eating snake (slug-eating snake, 
slugsnake, snail-eater) ,  33 ,  42 
 slugsnakes ,  42  
 small intestine ,   See  gastrointestinal tract: 
intestine 
 Small-scaled Burrowing Asp,  fi g. 1.24 
 smell ,  169–173 
 Smilisca baudinii ,  fi g. 2.17 
 smooth muscle ,  See  muscle 
 smooth scale ,  See  scale 
 snail-eating snake ,  32–33 ,  42 ,  fi g. 1.52 
 snakebite ,  62 
 snakebot ,  99–100 ,  fi g. 3.20 
 snout ,  11 ,  16 ,  21 ,  40 ,  50 ,  94 ,  124 ,  167 , 
 fi gs. 1.24, 1.49, 6.10, 7.5, 7.14 
 solenoglyph ,  56 ,  61 
 sound ,  183–190 
 South American Bushmaster ,  See 
 bushmaster 
 South American Rattlesnake ,  111 ,  208 , 
 fi gs.  4.1, 4.13, 7.12 
 Southern Black Racer ,  77 
 Southern Pacifi c Rattlesnake ,  77 ,  104 ,  134 , 
 fi gs. 2.25, 4.6, 5.23 
 Southwestern Speckled Rattlesnake ,  134 , 
 fi g. 5.23 
 speciation ,  9 ,  58 
 specifi c dynamic action (SDA) ,  69–70 ,  111 , 
 fi g. 4.13 
 Speckled Racer,  fi g. 1.5 
 Speckled Rattlesnake ,  134 ,  136 ,  fi g. 5.23 
 spectacle (of eye) ,  3 ,  7 ,  122 ,  165–166 , 
 fi gs. 1.5, 7.4 
 speed ,  See  velocity 
 sperm  ,  158 ,  192 ,  194–195 ,  203 ,  208 
 spermatogenesis ,  192 ,  203 ,  fi g. 9.17 
 sperm storage ,  194–195 
 spinalis-semispinalis ,  See  muscle 
 spine ,  11 ,  18 ,  177 ,  fi g. 8.7 
 spinule ,  177 
 spitting cobra ,  62 ,  fi g. 2.29 
 spitting (venom) ,  See  venom 
 splenial bone ,  41 
  Split-jawed Boa ,   See  Round Island Boa 
 “sponge model” (for drinking) ,  See 
 behavior: drinking 
 Spotted Night Adder,  fi g. 1.26 
 spreading factor ,  See  hyaluronidase 
 sprint, sprint speed ,  89 
 spur ,  See  pelvic spur 
 squamate (Squamata) ,  5 ,  10–11 ,  34–35 ,  117 , 
 120 ,  138 ,  143 ,  196 ,  201 ,  fi gs. 1.4, 
1.8, 1.10 
 static friction ,  See  friction 
 “stem reptiles,”  5 ,  fi g. 1.8 
 sterility ,  158 
 steroids (sex) ,  See  hormone 
 stiletto snake ,  19 ,  20 ,  56 ,  fi g. 1.24 
 stimulus ,  163 ,  175 
 Stoke’s Sea Snake ,  27 ,  fi g. 1.45 
 stomach ,  See  gastrointestinal tract 
 Storeria occipitomaculata obscura ,  fi g. 1.48 
 stratum corneum ,  71 ,  119 ,  174 ,  182 ,  fi g. 5.3 
 stratum germinativum ,  125 ,  fi gs. 5.3–5.5 
 streptostyly ,  40 
 stretch receptor ,  See  receptor 
 Stripe-bellied Sand Snake,  fi gs.  5.10, 5.13 
 strike, striking ,  See  behavior 
 structural color ,  See  color 
 stump heads ,  13 
 subterranean ,  See  behavior: burrow, and 
habitat: fossorial 
 sunbeam snakes ,  12 ,  13 ,  166 
 sunlight ,  See  radiation 
 supercooling ,  113 
 superfamily ,  11 
 supranasal sac ,  176 
 supratemporal bone ,  40 
 surface-to-mass ratio ,  107 
 survival, survivorship ,  115 ,  130 ,  199 , 
 209–210 
 swallowing ,  See  prey transport 
 Swamp Snake ,  29 
 swimming ,  See  behavior: locomotion 
 sympatric ,  26 ,  42 ,  132 ,  fi g. 5.19 
 synchrony of reproduction ,  203 
 systematics ,  12 
 systemic circulation ,  See  blood: blood 
circulation 
 systole ,  144 ,  149 ,  fi g. 6.2 
 
 tail ,  11 ,  13 ,  18–19 ,  22 ,  26 ,  37 ,  78 ,  81 ,  83 ,  85 , 
 89 ,  92 ,  94 ,  98 ,  146 ,  151–152 ,  177 , 
 182–183 ,  188–189 ,  192 ,  fi gs. 1.4, 
1.11, 3.5, 8.7, 9.3,  See also  behavior 
 paddle-shaped ,  10 ,  29 ,  85 ,  fi gs. 1.43, 
3.5–3.6, 3.8 
 spine,  fi g. 1.20 
 tail vibration ,  See  behavior 
 taipan ,  26 
 Taiwan Slug Snake,  fi g. 1.53 
 Tantilla ,  30 
 taste buds ,  173 
 taxon, taxa ,  10 
 taxonomic character ,  See  diagnostic 
character 
 taxonomy ,  34 
 teeth ,  11 ,  16 ,  37–38 ,  40–41 ,  50–51 ,  53–61 , 
 fi gs. 2.8, 2.17, 2.19, 2.21–2.22, 2.24 
 temporal arch, fenestra, or opening , 
 39–40 ,  fi gs. 2.4, 4.5 
 temperature ,  65 ,  66–68 ,  103–116 ,  122 ,  138 , 
 141 ,  148 ,  175 ,  177 ,  182 ,  200–202 , 
 fi g. 4.1, 4.14, 9.17
 body temperature ,  21 ,  64 ,  103–116 ,  129 , 
 134–136 ,  158–159 ,  173 ,  183–184 , 
 196–198 ,  200 ,  202–203 ,  fi gs. 4.1, 
4.2, 4.4, 4.9, 4.11, 4.13, 9.17 
 egg temperature ,  111 ,  fi g. 4.12 
 gradient ,  109 ,  fi g. 4.9 
 lethal limit ,  113 
 regulation ,  See  behavior 
 sensitivity ,  114 ,  fi g. 4.14 
 tolerance ,  113 
  temperature or thermal receptors ,   See 
 receptor: thermoreceptors and 
infrared receptors 
 tendon ,  78–80 ,  97 ,  169 ,  fi g. 3.3 
 tension ,  See  muscle 
 “tentacle,”  45 ,  fi gs. 2.10, 7.14 
 Tentacled Snake ,  34 ,  44 ,  178 ,  fi gs. 2.10, 7.14 

 240  | Index
 Terrestrial ,  See  habitat, habits 
 Terrestrial Snail Sucker,  fi gs. 1.52, 5.19 
 testis, testes ,  See  gonad 
 testosterone ,  See  hormone: sex steroids: 
androgens 
 tetrapod ,  5 ,  71 ,  151 ,  168 
  Texas Blindsnake ,  12  
 Th amnophis ,  29 ,  40 ,  56 
 Th amnophis elegans ,  67 ,  109 
 Th amnophis ordinoides ,  130 
 Th amnophis sirtalis ,  21 ,  113 ,  134 ,  166 , 
 201 ,  208 ,  fi g. 4.2
 Th amnophis sirtalis sirtalis ,  137 
 Th amnophis sirtalis parietalis , 
 fi gs. 4.2, 4.7, 9.17 
 Th amnophis sirtalis similis ,  fi g. 1.46 
 Th elotornis ,  30 ,  167 
 thermal conductivity ,  175 
 “thermal inertia,”  103 ,  111 
 thermal preferendum ,  See  preferred body 
temperature 
 thermal radiation ,  See  radiation: infrared 
 thermal sensitivity ,  114–115 
 thermistor ,  105 ,  fi g. 4.4 
 thermocouple ,  108 ,  fi g. 4.4 
 thermogenesis ,  See  endothermy and 
“shivering” 
 thermoreceptor ,  See  receptor 
 thermoregulation (temperature 
regulation) ,  See  behavior 
 thread snakes ,  11–12 ,  41 ,  fi g. 1.12 
 throat ,  See  pharynx 
 thrust ,  See  force: reaction force 
 tiger snake ,  27 ,  53 ,  85–86 
 Timber Rattlesnake,  fi gs. 1.29, 2.32, 7.2 
 tines (of tongue) ,  172 ,  fi g. 7.10 
 Titanoboa cerrejonensis ,  15 ,  fi g. 1.19 
 tolerance 
 tolerance to cold ,  113 ,  See also  “freeze 
tolerance” 
 tolerance to heat ,  113 
 tongue, tongue fl icking ,  3 ,  42 ,  46 ,  71 ,  114 , 
 167 ,  169–173 ,  205–206 ,  208 , 
 fi gs. 5.18, 7.5, 7.8, 7.10
 tongue sheath,  fi g. 8.5 
 topology ,  9 ,  fi g. 1.9 
 torsion ,  78 ,  83 ,  88 ,  93 ,  183 ,  fi gs. 3.2, 8.4 
 touch receptor ,  See  receptor: 
mechanoreceptor 
 toxicity ,  62 
 toxin ,  20 ,  57–58 ,  61–62 ,  66 ,  117 
 trachea ,  153 ,  159 ,  185–187 ,  fi g. 6.13
 tracheal air sac ,  159 ,  187 ,  fi g. 6.19 
 tracheal chamber ,  See  tracheal air sac 
 tracheal diverticulum ,  See  tracheal air 
sac 
 tracheal lung ,  155 ,  187 ,  fi gs. 6.9, 6.13 
 tracheal membrane ,  159 ,  185–187 , 
 fi g. 6.19 
 tracheal rings,  fi g. 6.19 
 tracks,  fi g. 3.14 
 trade-off  ,  97 ,  114–115 ,  183 
 trailing, trailing behavior ,  See  behavior 
 transducer ,  117 ,  163 ,  177 
 transmural pressure ,  See  pressure 
 Trans-Pecos Rat Snake,  fi g. 9.15 
 transporters (molecular) ,  67 
  “transport system,”    See  circulatory system 
 tree ,  See  phylogenetic tree 
 tree frog,  fi g. 2.17 
 tree snake ,  30 ,  42 ,  69 ,  129 
 trichromatic color vision ,  See  vision: color 
vision 
 trigeminal nerve ,  174 
 Trimeresurus ,  22 ,  176 
 Trimeresurus stejnegeri ,  115 ,  fi gs. 1.31, 
5.6 
 Tropidodipsas sartorii ,  fi gs. 1.52, 5.19 
 tropidophiid (Tropidophiidae) ,  15 ,  136 
 truncus arteriosus ,  146 
 tuatara ,  4–5 ,  10 ,  34 ,  fi g. 2.4 
 tuberculate scales ,  See  scale 
 tubule ,  60 ,  176 ,  192 
 turtle ,  5 ,  10 ,  39 ,  80 ,  113 ,  118 ,  143 ,  145 ,  197 
 Turtle-headed Sea Snake ,  205 ,  fi g. 2.15 
 twitch (of muscle) ,  See  muscle 
 tympanic membrane ,  167–168 
 Typhlops ,  55 
 Typhlops diardii ,  12 
 typhlopid (Typhlopidae) ,  11 ,  94 
 
 ultraviolet radiation (UV) ,  See  radiation 
 Ulva lactuca ,  fi g. 2.38 
 undulation ,  78 ,  80–81 ,  83–86 ,  89 ,  92–94 , 
 98 ,  206 ,  fi gs. 3.4–3.5,  See also 
 behavior: lateral undulation 
 up-regulation ,  67 ,  69 ,  fi g. 4.13 
 urates, uric acid ,  65–66 ,  70 
 urea ,  70 
 ureter,  fi g. 2.35 
 urine ,  70–72 ,  fi g. 2.35 
 Uromacer oxyrhynchus ,  69 
 uropeltid (Uropeltidae) ,  13 ,  55 ,  94 
 Uropeltis ,  155 
 uterus ,  193 ,  195 ,  fi g. 9.10 
 utriculus ,  169 ,  fi g. 7.7 
 UV ,  See  ultraviolet radiation 
 
 vagina, vaginal pouch ,  192 ,  fi g. 2.35 
 valve 
 narial ,  153 ,  fi gs. 6.10, 7.14 
 intravascular ,  147 ,  fi g. 6.6 
 vasculature ,  175 ,  177 
 vasoconstriction ,  149 ,  fi g. 6.9 
 vasodilation ,  149 
 vector, of force ,  83 ,  87–90 ,  fi gs. 3.4, 3.5 
 vein ,  145–146 ,  148 ,  152 
 velocity ,  84–86 ,  89 ,  96 
 air ,  186 
 blood ,  148 
 crawling (terrestrial) ,  89–93 ,  130 
 gliding ,  98 
 “free stream,”  84 ,  fi g. 3.7 
 swimming velocity ,  81 ,  85–86 
 venom, venomous ,  20 ,  25 ,  32 ,  38 ,  46 ,  48–50 , 
 56–63 ,  fi gs. 1.28, 1.30, 2.17, 2.24
 allocation of venom ,  61–62 
 envenomation ,  4 ,  37 ,  45–46 ,  49–50 ,  56 , 
 60 ,  62 ,  fi g. 2.17 
 spitting ,  26 ,  61 
  venom apparatus or delivery system , 
 19–20 ,  58–59 ,  61 ,  63 ,  196 ,  fi g. 2.27 
 venom composition ,  62 
 venom duct ,  55 ,  60 ,  fi g. 2.27 
 venom gland ,  21 ,  26 ,  59–62 ,  135 , 
 fi g. 2.27,  See also  accessory 
venom gland . 
 vent (cloacal opening) ,  66 ,  188 ,  192 
 ventilation (of lung) ,  58 , 94 ,  113 ,  141 , 
 156–159 ,  170 ,  fi gs. 6.1, 6.15
 ventilatory heat exchange ,  112 
 ventilatory rate ,  112 
 ventricle (of heart) ,  143–146 ,  148 ,  150 , 
 fi gs. 6.2–6.3, 6.5 
 venule ,  146 
 vertebra, vertebral column ,  3 ,  5–6 ,  78–79 , 
 85 ,  88 ,  91 ,  94 ,  97 ,  146 ,  fi gs. 1.3, 
1.19, 3.2, 3.12 
 vertebral artery ,  16 ,  fi g. 6.5 
 vertebrate ,  5 ,  7 ,  11–12 ,  77 ,  85–86 ,  99 ,  105 , 
 113 ,  141 ,  143 ,  148 ,  154 ,  156–158 , 
 163–166 ,  168–169 ,  173 ,  202–204 , 
 210 ,  fi g. 1.10 
 vertical force ,  84 
 vertical septum ,  144 ,  fi g. 6.3 
 vestibular system ,  169 
 vestigial (character or trait) ,  5 ,  11 ,  146 ,  154 , 
 fi g. 1.14 
 vibration (mechanical), vibration sense , 
 117 ,  167–169 ,  181 ,  185 
 villus ,  villi ,  65 ,  fi g. 2.34 
 vine snake ,  78 ,  89 ,  96 
 viper ,  See  viperid 
 Vipera ,  21 
 Vipera ammodytes ,  fi g. 1.25 
 Vipera aspis ,  67 
 Vipera berus ,  21 ,  113 ,  131 ,  134–135 ,  200 , 
 fi g. 1.25 
 Vipera ursinii ,  21 
 viperid (Viperidae), viper ,  12 ,  17 , 19–  21 , 
 24 ,  26 ,  34 ,  48–51 ,  54–58 ,  60 , 
 67–69 ,  91–92 ,  95 ,  97 ,  113–114 , 
 120 ,  129 ,  131 ,  135–136 ,  155 ,  173 , 
 176 ,  187 ,  199 ,  208–209 ,  fi gs. 1.25, 
1.42, 2.25 
 viperine (Viperinae) ,  20–21 ,  176 
 Virginia striatula ,  fi g. 9.10 
 viscera ,  13 ,  59 ,  78 ,  154–156 ,  fi gs.  2.2, 2.26, 6.8 
 viscosity ,  See  resistance 
 visible spectrum (of light) ,  127 
 vision ,  11 ,  45 ,  49 ,  164–167 ,  173 ,  175 ,  178 , 
 205–206 
 binocular vision ,  167 ,  175 ,  fi g. 7.5 

Index  |  241 
 color vision ,  166 
  dichromatic color vision ,  166  
  trichromatic color vision ,  166   
 visual system ,  175 
 visual cues or signals ,   See  vision 
 visual receptor ,  See  receptor 
 Vitamin D ,  117 
 vitellogenic follicle ,  193 ,  fi g. 9.6 
 vitellogenesis ,  193 ,  201 ,  203 
 vitreous fl uid ,  See  eye 
 viviparity, viviparous ,  12 ,  16 ,  19 ,  21 ,  25 ,  29 , 
 32 ,  126 ,  195–197 ,  199–200 
 “vocal cord,”  186–187 
 volume (of lung) ,  See  lung 
 vomeronasal organ or system ,  169–173 , 
 205 ,  fi g. 7.9
 vomeronasal nerve or receptors ,  173 , 
 See  receptor 
 
 washout shunting ,  See  shunt 
 water ,  65–66 ,  69–72 ,  84–85 ,  114 ,  117 ,  209 , 
 fi g. 6.7
 dietary water ,  70 ,  72 
 drinking ,  See  behavior 
 metabolic water ,  70 ,  72 ,  141 
 vapor pressure ,  197 
 water absorption ,  66 
 water balance ,  66 ,  70–72 ,  126 , 
 fi g. 2.39 
 water budget ,  70 
 water cobra ,  26 
 Water Python ,  111 
 water snake ,  20 ,  29 ,  48 ,  fi gs. 1.3, 1.47 
 Western Coral Snake ,  188 
 Western Diamondbacked Rattlesnake ,  See 
 diamondback rattlesnake 
 Western Hognose Snake,  fi g. 1.49 
 Western Shovel-nosed Snake ,  94 
 whipsnake ,  26 ,  30 ,  45–46 ,  77 ,  89 ,  96 
 wildfi re ,  134 ,  fi g. 5.23 
 work ,  See  mechanical work 
 worm ,  3 
 worm snakes ,  11–12 
 worship, of snakes ,  fi g. 5.1 
 
 xanthophore ,  See  pigment 
 xenodermatid (Xenodermatidae) ,  12 ,  17 ,  34 
 Xenodon rabdocephalus ,  fi g. 7.8 
 xenodontine (Xenodontinae) ,  32 ,  56 , 
 fi g. 1.50 
 xenopeltid (Xenopeltidae) ,  13 ,  54 ,  155 
 Xenopeltis ,  13 ,  54 
 Xenopeltis unicolor ,  166 
 Xenophidia ,  12 
 
 Yellow-bellied Sea Snake ,  27 ,  44 ,  81 ,  84 , 
 138 ,  159 ,  fi gs. 1.43–1.44, 2.9, 
2.24, 3.1, 3.5, 5.7, 5.9, 5.15, 5.27, 
6.10, 7.1, 9.8–9.9 
 Yellow-lipped Sea Krait ,  48 ,  fi gs. 2.15, 7.8 
 Yellow Rat Snake,  fi g. 3.18 
 Yellow-tail Cribo,  fi g. 9.12 
 yolk (of egg) ,  193 ,  195 ,  197 ,  209 
 yolk sac ,  197 
 YSI Tele-thermometer,  fi g. 4.4 
 
 zygapophysis ,  78 ,  fi g. 3.2 

