ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  NANOTECHNOLOGY  GENETIC ENGINEERING  MEDICAL ETHICS  INVITRO FERTILIZATION  STEM-CELL RESEARCH
LIFE EXTENSION  GENETIC PATENTS  HUMAN GENETIC ENGINEERING  CLONING  SEX SELECTION  ASSISTED SUICIDE  UNIVERSAL HEALTHCARE
citizen
cyborg
WHY DEMOCRATIC SOCIETIES
MUST RESPOND TO THE
REDESIGNED
HUMAN OF THE FUTURE
 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  NANOTECHNOLOGY  SEX SELECTION GENETIC
ENGINEERING  MEDICAL ETHICS  INVITRO FERTILIZATION  STEM-CELL
RESEARCH  LIFE EXTENSION  GENETIC PATENTS  HUMAN GENETIC
ENGINEERING  CLONING  GENETIC ENGINEERING  SEX SELECTION 
ASSISTED SUICIDE  UNIVERSAL HEALTHCARE  FUTURISTIC VISIONS 
 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  NANOTECHNOLOGY  SEX SELECTION GENETIC
ENGINEERING  MEDICAL ETHICS  INVITRO FERTILIZATION  STEM-CELL
RESEARCH  LIFE EXTENSION  GENETIC PATENTS  HUMAN GENETIC
ENGINEERING  CLONING  GENETIC ENGINEERING  SEX SELECTION 
ASSISTED SUICIDE  UNIVERSAL HEALTHCARE  FUTURISTIC VISIONS 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  NANOTECHNOLOGY  GENETIC ENGINEERING  MEDICAL ETHICS  INVITRO FERTILIZATION  STEM-CELL RESEARCH
LIFE EXTENSION  GENETIC PATENTS  HUMAN GENETIC ENGINEERING  CLONING  SEX SELECTION  ASSISTED SUICIDE  UNIVERSAL HEALTHCARE
james hughes

CITIZEN CYBORG


CITIZEN CYBORG
Why Democratic Societies Must Respond to
the Redesigned Human of the Future
James Hughes
A Member of the Perseus Books Group

All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this publication
may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Copyright © 2004 by Itzy
Published in 2004 in the United States of America by Westview Press.
Find us on the world wide web at www.westviewpress.com
Westview Press books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United
States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please
contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 11 Cambridge 
Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, or call (800) 255-1514 or (617) 252-5298, 
or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Cataloging-in-Publication data is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN-10 0-8133-4198-1 (hc.)
ISBN-13 978-0-8133-4198-9 (hc.)

For Althea and Tristan
May your ride on the waves of change be long and full of adventure


Contents
Acknowledgments
ix
Introduction
xi
SECTION I
TOOLS FOR A BETTER YOU
1 Better Living Through Science and Democracy
3
2 Controlling the Body
11
3 Living Longer
23
4 Getting Smarter
33
5 Being Happier
43
SECTION II
THE NEW BIOPOLITICAL LANDSCAPE
6 From Future Shock to Biopolitics
55
7 Cyborg Citizenship
75
8 Defenders of Natural Law
107
9 Left-Wing BioLuddites
125
10 Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
155
vii

SECTION III
FREEDOM AND EQUALITY AMONG THE CYBORGS
11 Democratic Transhumanism
187
12 Transhuman Democracy
221
13 Defending the Future
241
14 A Sexy, High-Tech Vision for a Radically Democratic Future
259
Further Resources
267
Index
285
viii
Contents

Acknowledgments
First and foremost I would like to thank my excellent agent, Ted Wein-
stein, who patiently guided me through the process of crafting my
decade-old embryonic book into the perfect brain child I always wanted.
My colleagues back at the MacLean Center for Clinical Ethics at the
University of Chicago—Mark Siegler, John Lantos, Carol Stocking, Ann
Dudley Goldblatt and the rest—provided a very congenial working envi-
ronment for the six years that I worked and taught with them. This book
was ﬁrst conceived and outlined there and I wrote the book’s seminal
essay, “Embracing Change with All Four Arms,” for a seminar on Health
and Humanities that I ran for the Center.
From the MacLean Center the line of causation runs to Calixto
Machado, the coordinator of the International Network for the Deﬁni-
tion of Death, whose ongoing friendship and collaboration on the work
of the Network led to my writing on brain death. My brain death essays
led, in turn, to an invitation from Alcor to present my thoughts to them
on “The Future of Death” in 2001, which led to a publication in the Jour-
nal of Transhumanism. The editor of JOT (now JET), philosopher Mark
Walker of the University of Toronto, became a friend and coconspirator
and has contributed many acknowledged and unacknowledged ideas to
this book. Without the support, friendship and feedback of the founder
and chair of the World Transhumanist Association, Nick Bostrom, I
would never have thrown myself into transhumanism or found the pas-
sion necessary to complete this book.
ix

More generally I have benefited tremendously from the ongoing
sharpening and refining of ideas in daily intercourse with the partici-
pants of the discussion lists of the World Transhumanist Association.
The book has beneﬁted in particular from many ﬁne insights from Dale
Carrico and my co-conspirators at the Cyborg Democracy blog. I look
forward to having this book ruthlessly dissected on the transhumanist
lists and in the blogosphere.
I owe a debt of thanks to those who have encouraged and supported
Changesurfer Radio and my Change Surfing column, both of which
have forced me to reﬁne my message. Richard Sherman, John Schwenk
and the wonderful radical community around WHUS 91.7 FM at the
University of Connecticut have supported Changesurfer Radio since
1997. Simon Smith and George Dvorsky of Betterhumans.com have
been patient and persistent editors of my Change Surfing columns,
often deserving a byline.
Just as the project was conceived at the University of Chicago ethics
center, it owes its successful birth to the support and congeniality of
Trinity College, where I have worked since 1999. My friend and col-
league Kent Smith has been extraordinarily understanding about my
distractedness and occasional absences during this last year.
Finally, my wife and children have tolerated many nights and week-
ends when I have been physically absent, and many more when I have
been mentally absent. Thanks for your patience and I’ll try to make it up
to you in the centuries to come.
x
Acknowledgments

Introduction
This book began in the spring of 1986 on a bus rolling through the small,
crooked, immaculate, beautiful streets of Kyoto. I had two books in my
lap—Algeny, a shrill, alarmist attack on gene technologies by Jeremy
Rifkin, and What Sort of People Should There Be?, a cool, moderate and
thorough defense of genetic engineering and virtual reality by Oxford
don Jonathan Glover. Reading the two books I realized that here lay the
outer boundaries of twenty-ﬁrst-century biopolitics.
That winter my father, an insurance actuary, had called to see if I
could ﬁnd out how many organ transplants were being done in Japan.
He needed to write a policy to cover employees who might need a trans-
plant while living in Japan. While researching the question I became fas-
cinated with the Japanese debate about brain death and abortion. The
American right-to-life movement opposed both abortion and the recog-
nition of brain death on the grounds that human life was precious from
conception to heart death. Many American secular humanists believed
abortion and euthanasia of the brain dead were acceptable because self-
awareness gave human life meaning. The Japanese leaned in a different
direction altogether. The Japanese had little problem with abortion. In
fact, Japanese women often turned to Buddhist monks to perform ritu-
als to clean up the bad karma they might incur from abortion.
But the Japanese had a much harder time swallowing the idea of
brain death. Without a brain death law the Japanese couldn’t permit
hearts, livers or pancreases to be transplanted from brain dead bodies on
xi

respirators. Taking a vital organ out of someone in a permanent coma
would be murder unless they were already “dead.” The would-be Japanese
transplantors were lobbying hard. The debate was so interesting I resolved
to give up my studies of Buddhist history and politics, and go back to
the United States to start graduate work comparing the Japanese and
American personhood debates in abortion and brain death.
Sitting on the bus that day, illuminated by Rifkin and Glover, I came
to a second realization: The human race’s use of genetic engineering to
evolve beyond our current limitations would be a central political issue
of the next century. Just as in abortion and brain death, the key issue in
genetic engineering was whether it is more important that we remain
“human” or that we are “persons.” Is there anything we must preserve
about Homo sapiens DNA or “human nature”? The last two decades have
added new tools to transcend our limitations, such as nanotechnology,
but the basic question remains the same.
In the twenty-ﬁrst century the convergence of artiﬁcial intelligence,
nanotechnology and genetic engineering will allow human beings to
achieve things previously imagined only in science ﬁction. Life spans will
extend well beyond a century. Our senses and cognition will be en-
hanced. We will gain control over our emotions and memory. We will
merge with machines, and machines will become more like humans.
These technologies will allow us to evolve into varieties of “posthu-
mans” and usher us into a “transhuman” era and society.
This book argues that transhuman technologies, technologies that
push the boundaries of humanness, can radically improve our quality of
life, and that we have a fundamental right to use them to control our
bodies and minds. But to ensure these beneﬁts we need to democrati-
cally regulate these technologies and make them equally available in free
societies. Becoming more than human can improve all our lives, but
only new forms of transhuman citizenship and democracy will make us
freer, more equal and more united.
A lot of people are understandably frightened by the idea of a society
in which unenhanced humans will need to coexist with humans who are
xii
Introduction

smarter, faster and more able, not to mention robots and enhanced an-
imals. How can democracy embrace transhuman diversity when the
gap between the rich and poor continues to widen, and there is so
much discrimination against women and people of color? Professional
fear-mongers spin fanciful scenarios based on classic horror movies—
The Island of Dr. Moreau, Frankenstein, Brave New World, The Boys from
Brazil, Gattaca, The Terminator. We can’t genetically engineer toma-
toes, the argument goes, because ants that ate genemod tomatoes in
the movies went on to eat Cleveland.
The “bioLuddite” opposition to genetic engineering, nanotechnol-
ogy and artiﬁcial intelligence, slowly building and networking since the
1960s, picked up where the anti-industrialization Luddites left off in the
nineteenth century. While Luddites believed that defending workers’
rights required a ban on the automation of work, the bioLuddites be-
lieve genetic engineering and human enhancement technologies cannot
be used safely, and must be summarily banned. Decades of patient effort
by anti-technology activists, such as Jeremy Rifkin, have created broad
left-to-right bioLuddite coalitions of religious conservatives, disability
rights supporters, feminists and environmental and anti-corporate ac-
tivists opposed to genetically engineered food, embryonic stem cell
cloning, nanotechnology and now human enhancement. At root the
bioLuddites are also rejecting liberal democracy, science and moder-
nity. They have given up on the idea of progress guided by human reason,
and, afraid of the radical choices and diversity of a transhuman future,
are reasserting mystical theories of natural law and order. Whether
secular bioethicists, ecomystic Greens or religious fundamentalists,
the bioLuddites insist that there are clear and obvious boundaries to
what people should be allowed to do with their own bodies, and that
no one should be allowed to become something more than human.
Fear-mongering about human enhancement hit a high-water mark in
2001 when U.S. president George W. Bush appointed the conservative
philosopher Leon Kass to head his new President’s Council on Bioethics
(PCB). Kass’s appointment was a reward to the pro-life religious conser-
Introduction
xiii

vatives as he had consistently opposed invitro fertilization, cloning and
other medical technologies on the grounds that they rob us of “human
dignity.” Kass made opposition to all human enhancement technologies,
from pharmaceuticals to genetics, the principal agenda of the PCB.
Kass appointed other conservatives to the PCB to further the mis-
sion, such as Francis Fukuyama, who published his attack on enhance-
ment technologies in 2002, Our Posthuman Future. In October 2003, the
Council released its own report critiquing the prospect of human en-
hancement, Beyond Therapy: Biotechnology and the Pursuit of Happiness. In
Rapture, a history of transhumanism, Brian Alexander says that
Fukuyama and Kass are the “Vince Lombardis of the biotech opposition,
insisting that suffering was a part of nature. Hurt? Tape it up. Happy pills
like Prozac were sucking the manliness out of us. So what if you’re de-
pressed? That’s life. Kid can’t pay attention? Well, some kids are like that.
Stop being sissies. Take your imperfections like the true Americans you
are and die on time.”
Now that the debate about human enhancement and posthumanity
has moved from the fringes of cyberculture, science ﬁction and bioethics
to the apex of federal policy debate, the defense is also stirring. Corpo-
rate apologists and libertarians have ridiculed all concerns about tech-
nology, from the absurd to the deadly serious, and regular defenses of
genetic technology appear from those quarters. But bioLuddism has
also spurred a spirited defense of genetics and human enhancement
from mainstream bioethicists and policy analysts. For instance, in 2000,
four leading American bioethicists—Allen Buchanan, Dan Brock, Nor-
man Daniels and Daniel Wikler—published From Chance to Choice: Genet-
ics and Justice, which defended parents’ rights to use genetic engineering
to enhance their kids. In 2002, UCLA philosopher Gregory Stock pub-
lished the much more widely read Redesigning Humans: Our Inevitable Ge-
netic Future, which again defended parental rights to enhance kids with
“germinal choice technologies.” Now there are essays, books and orga-
nizations emerging from many quarters defending human genetic engi-
neering and the project of human enhancement.
xiv
Introduction

The vanguard of this emerging pro-enhancement coalition is “trans-
humanism.” The term transhumanism was popularized in cyberculture
by enhancement technology enthusiasts, and there are now dozens of
explicitly transhumanist groups and publications around the world.
Transhumanists extend the liberal democratic humanist tradition to a
defense of our right to control our own bodies and minds, even if our
choices make us something other than “human.” Transhumanists be-
lieve liberal democracy can and must accommodate the “posthumans”
that will be created by genetic and cybernetic technologies.
After 400 years of democratic citizenship gradually being extended
to include working men, women and all races, transhumanists argue
that rights should now be extended to all self-aware minds. In
bioethics, this view is known as “personhood theory”: Only self-aware
persons can have rights. “Persons” don’t have to be human, and not all
humans are persons. The bioLuddites, on the other hand, advocate
“human-racism,” the idea that only human beings can be citizens. Just
as European racists once denied citizenship to Africans and believed
that allowing Africans to have rights would destroy democracy, the
human-racists want to deny citizenship and the right to exist to
posthumans, intelligent animals and robots.
Beyond broad agreement on individual autonomy and the rights
of persons, the differences among the transhumanist-inclined are as
profound as the differences among bioLuddites. Some transhumanists
are libertarians, closer to the Wired, cyber-libertarian, technophile
subculture, dismissing risks and arguing for a free market in genetic
enhancements and nanotech. Other transhumanists, like Buchanan
and colleagues, favor a social welfare state, with public health regulations,
national health insurance and efforts to maintain a rough equality among
humans even as they upgrade themselves.
The strength of the various ﬂavors on each side will help determine
the outcomes of the struggles to come. For instance, in the struggle over
embryo stem cell cloning, the bioLuddite side is led by the well-organized
but politically unpopular right-to-life movement, while a huge coalition
Introduction
xv

of patient advocacy, provider, scientiﬁc and public policy groups are de-
fending stem cell research for therapeutic medical purposes. If the
women’s health groups opposed to embryonic stem cell research on fem-
inist and safety grounds were more prominent on the bioLuddite side,
and the self-interests of biotech ﬁrms and medical researchers were more
visible in the defense, the outcome might be very different.
This book proposes that the best path toward a transhuman future is
the middle way pointed to by Jonathan Glover two decades ago, and by
Buchanan and colleagues more recently, a path that addresses bioLuddite
concerns about safety and equality and avoids the reckless free-market
ideology of some on the transhumanist side. We can embrace the
transhuman technologies while proposing democratic ways to manage
them and reduce their risks. For the new transhuman era to fully em-
power people politically and technologically we need a democratic
transhumanist movement fighting both for our right to control our
bodies with technology, and for the democratic control, regulation and
equitable distribution of those technologies.
Section One (Chapters 1 to 5) describes the first steps we are now
taking into the transhuman future, and how important both technolog-
ical and political self-determination have been thus far. Chapter 1 out-
lines the basic insight that technology and democracy are the principal
ways we have of improving the quality of life. Then I explore the four
motivations leading us to push the envelope of humanness. Chapter 2
looks at the contributions of democracy and technology to achieving
control over our bodies, including less pain, disease and disability. Chap-
ter 3 looks at what we know about living longer. Chapter 4 explores how
we get smarter. Chapter 5 asks whether it all will make us happier.
In Section Two (Chapters 6 to 10) I argue that the emerging “biopo-
litical” polarization between bioLuddites and transhumanists will deﬁne
twenty-ﬁrst-century politics. The biopolitical axis joins the existing two
axes used in political science, cultural and economic politics. By teasing
out these three axes in Chapter 6 we can better understand the ﬂavors of
transhumanism and bioLuddism already emerging.
xvi
Introduction

Chapter 7 outlines the central political argument between the bio–
Luddites and the transhumanists, the bioLuddites’ “human-racism” ver-
sus the transhumanists’ personhood-based “cyborg citizenship.” The im-
plications of these two views are explored in debates about how to deal
with the beginning and ending of life, and with animals modiﬁed for in-
telligence, intelligent machines and posthumans. In each case catalytic
technologies, such as artiﬁcial wombs, the repair of brain injuries with
prostheses and the enhancement of animal intelligence, will force us to
choose between pre-modern human-racism and the cyborg citizenship
implicit in the liberal democratic tradition.
Chapters 8, 9 and 10 describe various biopolitical strains and groups.
Chapter 8 reviews how the religious Right has added transhumanism to
its list of dangerous social movements, alongside secular humanism and
gay rights. Chapter 9 reviews the contributions of deep ecology, femi-
nism, disability rights and anti-capitalism to bioLuddism. Most of the ar-
guments focus on inheritable corrections and enhancements of the
human genetic code, but the arguments generally also apply to cyber-
netic and pharmaceutical enhancements of human abilities.
I discuss the “precautionary principle,” which argues that technolo-
gies should not be used until their risks are understood, and is often used
to argue that humans should not be allowed to enhance themselves until
we understand all the consequences. The catch, of course, is that we can
never understand all the consequences of any technology.
I also note the argument that enhancing our kids’ intelligence or
health is some form of totalitarian control of their lives, which has been
made by thinkers as diverse as C. S. Lewis and Jürgen Habermas. In re-
sponse I argue for “procreative beneﬁcence” and “procreative liberty”:
We have an obligation, both as a society and as parents, to make sure our
kids are as healthy, able-bodied and intelligent as possible. At the same
time governments have to meet a very high burden of proof before they
can justify interfering in parental decision-making about how, when and
what kind of children to have, especially in light of the history of coer-
cive eugenics. The best solution then is to make genetic therapies and
Introduction
xvii

enhancements as widely available as possible, and leave it up to the gen-
eral goodwill of parents to act in the best interests of their children.
Chapter 10 examines the emergence of transhumanism. I start by
outlining how transhumanism is the synthesis of the ancient drive to
achieve healing, longevity and transcendence, previously sought through
magic and mysticism, and the ancient drive to explain the world in nat-
ural terms and control it with reason. These two strains meet in the Re-
naissance in liberal humanism, which celebrates the possibility of human
self-improvement through science and reason. Then, in the post–World
War Two period, the converging inﬂuences of bioethics, science ﬁction,
life extension medicine, artiﬁcial intelligence and space exploration con-
verge with secular humanism to birth transhumanism as we know it.
I outline how several of the recent ﬂavors of transhumanism were
shaped by the cultural and political backgrounds of their exponents. For
instance, extropianism rose out of young, male, Californian, libertarian
culture with the emergence of the World Wide Web, followed by the
broader, more democratic version of transhumanism embodied in the
World Transhumanist Association (WTA), which emerged among a
more diverse group of European transhumanists.
In Section Three (Chapters 11 through 14) I describe my vision of a
“democratic transhumanism.” Chapter 11 returns to the principle I illus-
trate in Section One: People will be happiest when they individually and
collectively exercise rational control of the social and natural forces that
affect their lives. The promise of technological liberation, however, is
best achieved in the context of a social democratic society committed to
liberty, equality and solidarity. The present chaos and misery of societies
without functioning governments show the absurdity of the libertopian
fantasy of freedom from government: We can only be free, prosperous,
equal and safe under effective, accountable government.
Much of Chapter 11 is framed as a conversation with bioLuddite
left-wingers on the one hand and the libertarian transhumanists on
the other. I make the case for why political progressives should em-
brace human enhancement, and why libertarians sympathetic to
xviii
Introduction

human enhancement need to embrace democratic governance. Then I
discuss the various constituencies that a democratic transhumanist
movement needs to build coalitions with, such as advocates for repro-
ductive and transgender rights, the gay and lesbian and disability com-
munities and advocates for a guaranteed basic income.
In Chapter 12 I sketch out some of the policies suggested by democ-
ratic transhumanism. I ﬂesh out the idea of cyborg citizenship, and what
the idea says about what we owe to “disabled citizens” such as children,
cognitively disabled adults and great apes. I address the limits of biolog-
ical property and the patenting of human genes. I argue that we need
stronger safety testing and regulation of human enhancement technolo-
gies, but that these can be handled within the existing regulatory agen-
cies. We do not need new agencies whose sole purpose would be to ban
technology on the basis of vague and spurious anxieties.
Once technologies are determined to be safe, we need to figure out
which ones should be available in the market, and which ones should
be provided universally to all citizens. I suggest the use of the “quality-
adjusted life year” (QALY) as a way of thinking about what should be
included in a universal health care system. The QALY idea can free
health care priority-setting from the faulty therapy-enhancement dis-
tinction championed by the bioLuddites.
In Chapter 13 I discuss how we might guard against the develop-
ment of antisocial personalities with posthuman powers, in ways that
still respect cognitive freedom. I call this the Magneto-Xavier problem,
which is a reference to the mutant supervillain leader in the comic-book
series X-Men, Magneto, who decides that mutants are superior to
human beings, while Professor Xavier leads the mutants working for
human–post-human solidarity.
In Chapter 14 I sum up and present a twelve-point agenda for build-
ing a democratic transhumanist movement, including our need for tran-
shumanist organizations and a future-friendly Left, as well as the need to
build coalitions with key movements, to join campaigns for closely re-
lated rights and social programs and to support transhuman sciences.
Introduction
xix

Within a couple of decades the issues and ideologies I discuss in this
book will seem archaic, since it is impossible for even the most visionary
futurist to escape the limitations of time and place. John Haldane, an
early-twentieth-century scientist who is one inspiration for a democratic
transhumanism, said the future will be “queerer than we can imagine.”
But in my moments of awe-full reﬂection on the far future of intelligent
life, I think of an image from the Chinese Buddhist Avatamsaka Sutra.
The sutra describes the society of enlightened beings as an inﬁnite net,
laced with pearls and gems, each enlightened mind a multicolored twin-
kle that is reﬂected in every other jewel.
My hope is that, whatever forms of intelligence we give birth to, and
however long and strange the trajectory of those embers of mind we
ﬂing into the universe, they continue to respect their separateness and
diversity, as well as their interconnectedness. Whether they all still be-
lieve in “Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité” when they are journeying between
the stars, I hope they treat one another with the kindness that comes
from understanding that other beings are also looking out at the world
from ﬁnite minds. I believe ﬁrmly that the decisions we make in this cen-
tury, whether to end war, inequality, poverty, disease and unnecessary
death, will determine whether we achieve that long-term, inconceivable
destiny of intelligence, or ﬂicker out as a failed experiment. Hopefully
this book will contribute to a more positive outcome.
xx
Introduction

SECTION I
TOOLS FOR A BETTER YOU


1
Better Living Through 
Science and Democracy
The liberal democratic revolution, centuries old and still going strong, has at its
core the idea that people are happiest when they have rational control over their
lives. Reason, science and technology provide one kind of control, slowly freeing
us from ignorance, toil, pain and disease. Democracy provides the other kinds of
control, through civil liberties and electoral participation. Technology and
democracy complement one another, ensuring that safe technology is generally
accessible and democratically accountable. The convergence of nanotechnology,
biotechnology, information technology and cognitive science in the coming
decades will give us unimaginable technological mastery of nature and our-
selves. That mastery requires radical democratization.
THE NANO-BIO-INFO-COGNO REVOLUTION
In 2002, Jonathan Trent and Andrew McMillan, researchers at the NASA
Ames Research Center in California’s Silicon Valley, were quietly work-
ing to change all our lives. In vats in their lab they cooked up batches of
genetically engineered bacteria for use as microscopic engineers. They
did this by genetically combining Escherichia coli bacteria, which makes
people sick in undercooked food, with Sulfolobus shibatae, an “ex-
tremophile” bacteria discovered growing in the acidic boiling mud of
hot springs. The hot springs bacteria produces a protein that self-assem-
3

bles into an extremely small latticework capable of binding metal into
thin wire patterns on silicon. Mixing the S. shibatae with E. coli made it
possible to grow large amounts of the new hybrid. In other words, the
hybrid bugs may eventually make it possible to mass-produce extremely
small computer chips.
This is one of thousands of lines of research around the world that
drives the trend pointed out by Gordon Moore, the co-founder of the
computer chip company Intel. “Moore’s Law” is the observation that
the number of transistors in computer chips and the resulting process-
ing power of computers has doubled every 18 months since the early
1970s. This exponential trend line can actually be traced all the way
back to the abacus and slide rule. The shrinking of silicon chip com-
ponents has allowed more and more transistors to be packed into each
chip, but in twenty years or so this exponential doubling will reach the
electromechanical limits of silicon. So researchers have been looking
for materials to make even smaller chips, materials such as the
nanowires excreted by the NASA Ames superbugs.
If these new materials permit the doubling rate of computing power
to continue, ordinary computers will quickly become as powerful as the
human brain. Computer scientists Hans Moravec and Ray Kurzweil have
generously estimated that the human brain is capable of about 100 tril-
lion calculations per second, or 100 teraﬂops. At the current rate of dou-
bling of computer power, consumer-level electronics will have chips that
perform 100 teraﬂops by the 2020s. But the rate of innovation itself ap-
pears to be accelerating, and we might get to human brain-level ma-
chines even sooner. IBM has already built a 100 teraﬂop supercomputer
and says it will be making 1 teraﬂop computer chips for consumer use
by 2010.
Just making as many calculations as the brain doesn’t generate intel-
ligence, however, since brains and computers have very different archi-
tectures. But researchers are also using our growing understanding of
neurology to simulate brain structures. Artiﬁcial Developments has built
CCortex, for instance, a supercomputer that simulates the 20 billion
4
CITIZEN CYBORG

neurons in the human cortex, including specialized regions of the cor-
pus callosum, amygdala and hippocampus. CCortex also interacts with
simpliﬁed versions of the brain stem, thalamus, cerebellum, retina and
auditory processing systems. Even if it takes another decade or two to
make hardware as ﬂexible as neurons, and software as robust and com-
plex as human consciousness, we will create human-level artiﬁcial intel-
ligence before the middle of this century.
At the same time, computers will shrink and escape off our desks
into our clothes, our glasses and our built and natural environment. By
2030, people in the industrialized world will live in a sea of cheap, ubiq-
uitous computing extending from their bodies and networking them
with one another and the world. By the middle of the century, the global
network of computing power will be astronomically bigger than the
computing power of all human brains put together, if such a distinction
still makes sense. Even if one is a skeptic about the ability of human be-
ings to create self-aware machine minds, with all that information com-
plexity in the world we can be sure that some very interesting things will
begin to emerge without any conscious human design at all. There will
be ghosts in the machines.
So the research on next-generation computer architecture, at Ames
and elsewhere, is essential for bringing about the exponential increases
in computing power, and all that will bring. But the silicon-spewing bugs
at Ames also represent a second very important trend—the convergence
and integration of biotechnology, molecular manufacturing and com-
puting. As the knowledge and progress of each of these different scien-
tiﬁc ﬁelds grow exponentially, they will frothily interact and build off of
one another.
For instance, thanks to computing advances, the speed at which all
the information on human genes can be read into a computer has been
increasing exponentially, and its cost shrinking exponentially. In 1965, it
cost more than $1,000 to sequence one of the 3 billion base pairs in the
genome. By 1991, up to 10,000 bases could be read in a single day for
about a dollar a base. It took the Human Genome Project ten years and
Better Living Through Science and Democracy
5

$3 billion dollars to sequence the ﬁrst complete genome, which it ﬁn-
ished years ahead of schedule in 2000. The costs of gene sequencing are
now being cut in half every two years or so.
Now, just a few years after the Human Genome Project finished,
ﬁrms are working on machines that will rapidly and inexpensively read
out all of a patient’s genetic information, permitting the diagnosis of ge-
netic diseases and risks and the prescribing of drugs uniquely tailored to
our genes. “Personal genomics” is beneﬁting from new machines that
can unravel chromosomes and quickly read them one base pair at a
time, and from micro-labs on computer chips that use millions of chan-
nels and chambers to sequence genes and read out their structure. In the
next decade or two, cheap, instant genetic identiﬁcation and analysis will
also revolutionize criminal justice by making the genetic analysis of
crime scene data routine.
Nanotechnology and the miniaturization of robotics are a third area
in which exponential trends suggest that things will be getting very
small, very fast and very cheap in the very near future. Current nan-
otechnology research is focused on building simple nanomaterials and
nanodevices, all at the scale of 10 to 100,000 times smaller than the di-
ameter of a human hair. Each node in the computer chips that the Ames
hybrid bugs produce is about 20 nanometers wide, a quarter the size of
the 90-nanometer nodes used in 2003 computer chips. In 2003, nan-
otechnology firms announced they had developed nanorobotic arms
that can be operated remotely to control objects as small as 100 nanome-
ters. Extrapolating our rapid progress at shrinking computer chips and
robotics, at some point in the coming decades, we will be able to build
robots the size of viruses with onboard computing, telecommunications
and nanoscale manipulators.
When we program these nanorobots to use available materials to
build more copies of themselves, we will have achieved the holy grail of
nanotechnology: the “molecular assembler.” Vats of nanorobots will be
grown and injected to roam around in our bodies inserting genes, elim-
inating cancers and interacting with our brains. We will put other mol-
6
CITIZEN CYBORG

ecular assemblers in a bucket and program them to make things, from
the molecules and atoms up. Since viruses, cells and genes are basically
successful organic nanorobots, and since biology, computation and
nanofabrication are rapidly merging, we may have nanorobots even
sooner than the engineers expect. Computer models are being created
of the entire genomes of viruses and microorganisms and every one of
their functions, allowing computer-aided design to reengineer them
into nanorobots.
Trying to predict the progress of these evolving and cross-fertilizing
ﬁelds requires a good bit of humility. But even the most sober of scien-
tists are beginning to get very excited. In 2002, the U.S. National Science
Foundation (NSF) convened a series of workshops and commissioned a
series of papers on the consequences of the convergence of nanotech-
nology, biotechnology, information technology and cognitive science
(NBIC) for “improving human performance.” The project drew together
more than a hundred experts on science and technology from govern-
ment, academia and business, and their enormous report, available online,
has become an instant landmark in near-future technological speculation.
The report includes detailed plans for nanotechnology to be intimately
woven into the body and brain in the very near future. The NBIC report
concludes: “With proper attention to ethical issues and societal needs,
converging technologies could achieve a tremendous improvement in
human abilities, societal outcomes, the nation’s productivity, and the
quality of life.”
This book is about how to bring together those “ethical issues” and
“societal needs” with the technologies that will so radically change our
day-to-day existence. Rather than focus on some timeline for all of these
technological wonders, a timeline that would be out of date by the time
you read these words, I want instead to focus on the constants, the
things unlikely to change in the coming century: the human needs and
desires these technologies will be asked to serve.
The four motivations or applications I focus on in this section are our
desire to control the body, to live longer, to be smarter and be happier.
Better Living Through Science and Democracy
7

The NBIC technologies will deﬁnitely also change how we work, how
we travel, how we communicate, how we worship and how we cook.
But the most fundamental changes in our lived experience will come
from their impacts on our bodies and brains. They will also create fun-
damental challenges to the politics of the twenty-ﬁrst century and raise
basic questions about citizenship, freedom and equality.
Will these technologies be designed to serve human needs and not
just corporate and military ends? Will these technologies be suppressed
and stunted by irrational fears and religious dogmas, or affordable only
by the wealthy, or sold to us with inadequate testing for safety and efﬁ-
cacy? Will they threaten the environment, or even threaten our souls?
DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY
The central propositions of this book are that people are generally hap-
pier when they have more control over their own lives, and that tech-
nology and democracy are the two key ways by which we can exert
more control over our lives. In the last century, agricultural and indus-
trial technology made it possible for most people in the developed
world to leave the farm and consider dozens of possible jobs, instead of
the three or four that would have been open to their forebears. But the
freedom from agricultural labor was also made possible by the aboli-
tion of slavery, universal education and rural electrification, all the
fruits of democracy. Industrial employment would have been little im-
provement over sharecropping without the labor movement, workplace
safety regulation and unemployment insurance, also products of
democracy. Technology has put entire libraries of information at our
fingertips, and public education, public libraries and freedom of the
press have made that information accessible. Contraception and abor-
tion made family planning and sex for pleasure possible, but we first
had to win the right to use them.
Unfortunately, many people around the world are still not permitted
to pursue education, access the Internet or get an abortion, and are too
8
CITIZEN CYBORG

poor to exercise these freedoms in any case. Most of the world’s poor
are still struggling to build the high-tech economy and democracy that
evolved together in the developed nations over centuries. Industrial de-
velopment made possible the growth of the working and middle classes,
which in turn demanded suffrage and rights. The spread of scientific
worldviews weakened religious and political authoritarianism, and en-
couraged pluralistic tolerance.
The pluralistic democracies, in turn, encouraged the rapid develop-
ment of science and technology. Although the Soviet and Nazi govern-
ments invested heavily in scientiﬁc research and industrial development,
they also crippled the sciences with state interference. Today the govern-
ment of China is straining to open their economy to the global ﬂows of
information and people necessary for technological development while
maintaining its authoritarian political control. Authoritarian regimes try
to clamp down on their citizens’ use of condoms and computers that
might threaten patriarchy or the state, whereas democracies focus on
making sure that the technologies are safe and widely accessible.
The idea that control over the conditions of life is the path to happi-
ness might seem a peculiar proposition for a Buddhist like me. Isn’t all
life suffering, and spiritual peace found in just accepting the way things
are? Perhaps all this technology is a distraction and we should accept the
“human condition” as it is. If we really take that approach, why do any-
thing? Why try to improve the world or our own lives with technology,
politics or any effort at all? I think the real insight of Buddhism, and all
the other religious traditions, is perfectly expressed in the Serenity
Prayer written by theologian Reinhold Niebuhr:
God, give us grace to accept with serenity
the things that cannot be changed,
courage to change the things
which should be changed,
and the wisdom to distinguish
the one from the other.
Better Living Through Science and Democracy
9

In other words, diet if you need to, but don’t make yourself miser-
able if you aren’t very successful. Work for your favorite candidate, but
don’t go into a deep funk when they lose. No matter how much progress
we make there will always be something that is beyond our grasp, some-
thing that we can’t control that we will have to ﬁnd the serenity to ac-
cept. In the meantime, there is a lot of overt suffering in the world that
we can control. We can stop violence, war and torture, and use medical
technology to repair bodies and brains. We can clean up the toxins that
cause cancer, and use the new technologies to cure the cancers that they
cause. We can treat clinical depression with effective drugs, and create a
society that causes people as little suffering as possible. Using technology
to live longer, smarter and happier lives is not a substitute for spiritual
wisdom, but it isn’t a distraction from wisdom either. In fact, ensuring
the world has access to technologies that reduce suffering may be a spir-
itual obligation.
In the next four chapters I discuss how both technology and democ-
racy have contributed, and will contribute in the coming decades, to our
controlling the body, living longer and getting smarter and happier.
10
CITIZEN CYBORG

2
Controlling the Body
In democratic societies we try to give each other as much control over our own
bodies and minds as possible. Now technologies promise to make it possible to
fully reconﬁgure our bodies and minds. Will we make it possible for everyone to
use these technologies to achieve their fullest capabilities?
In On Liberty, John Stuart Mill wrote: “The only part of the conduct of
any one, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns oth-
ers. In the part which merely concerns himself, his independence is, of
right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individ-
ual is sovereign.” In the Western democracies we have more or less ac-
cepted Mill’s argument. We have institutionalized the idea that doctors
must secure “informed consent” before tests and procedures. Women
and children are protected by law from violence and abuse to an un-
precedented degree. People may move and emigrate freely, and gener-
ally speak their minds. There are few remaining laws against “victimless
crimes,” with the painful exception of the War on Drugs and criminal-
ization of sex work, and even there most democratic countries are liber-
alizing their drug and sex work laws.
Soon, unlimited technological control over the human body and
mind will be possible and the battle over how much of that control indi-
viduals should be allowed to exercise will dwarf the fights over drugs
and prostitution. But the ﬁrst beneﬁciaries of those technologies will be
11

the sick and disabled, for there is little controversy that they should be
able to use technology to more fully control their own lives.
PREVENTING AND FIXING DISABILITIES
The percentage of the population that is disabled continues to shrink in the
developed world. The trend began more than a century ago and is directly
related to the spread of democracy. The labor movement and occupational
safety and health laws reduced workplace injuries. The consumers move-
ment campaigned, and federal agencies mandated seat belts and air bags for
cars, and screening for dangerous foods and medicines. Public health sys-
tems stopped the spread of infectious diseases so fewer people were left
blind, deaf, crippled and dead in each decade. Hospitals, built with and
maintained by public monies, applied advanced trauma techniques to save
lives and limbs in their emergency rooms.
The percentage of the population born disabled has also been shrink-
ing. Improvements in prenatal and neonatal care have shrunk the per-
centage of babies born with preventable disabilities. Mothers have in-
creasing access to prenatal diagnosis and abortion and can choose not to
bring disabled fetuses to term. The prognosis and treatment options for
babies born with problems have also improved rapidly with the growth
of neonatal intensive care units and pediatric medicine.
The decline of disability has further accelerated in the last two
decades as seniors have beneﬁted from rapidly improving medical and
nursing care, paid for by their governments. Even though the number of
American senior citizens increased by more than 30% between 1982 and
1999, there were fewer disabled seniors in 1999 than there were in 1982.
Seniors’ disabilities today are also less likely to be chronic. In 1982, more
than 25% of American seniors over 65 suffered chronic disabilities, but
that had shrunk to less than 20% in 1999.
This decline of disability not only improves the quality of life of seniors
and their caregivers, but it reduces social costs on society. The declining rate
of senior disability is especially good news for the soon-to-retire Baby
12
CITIZEN CYBORG

Boomers, who demographers keep predicting will break the social safety
net. The U.S. National Center for Health Statistics reported in 2003 that the
average senior citizen with no activity limitations cost about $4,600 in
health care, while the moderately disabled senior cost about $8,500 per
year, and nursing home residents cost about $45,000 per year. The declining
burden of active, healthy seniors on the health care and nursing system
means that those who live more able-bodied years cost no more overall
than those who live fewer sicker years.
Unfortunately, the percentage of the population that is disabled has
declined only in the developed world. The rates of disability in the devel-
oping world are much higher since they are not afﬂuent enough to make
use of Western medical technology, and their governments aren’t power-
ful and accountable enough to enforce Western levels of worker safety
and consumer protection. In the absence of strong public health systems,
hundreds of millions of people in the developing world suffer from cur-
able and unnecessary forms of blindness, deafness and physical disability.
HAVING HEALTHY, ABLE-BODIED CHILDREN
An estimated 7.6 million children are born each year around the world
with congenital abnormalities, births that could have been prevented if
parents had access to prenatal testing and abortion. Many of these chil-
dren die, but those who don’t are often disabled. For instance, the ﬁrst
prenatal screens for Down syndrome, the most common form of retar-
dation, became available in 1968, and today about 65% of American
births are screened for Downs. This has reduced the rate of newborns
with Downs by 50%. But the prenatal screening methods, alpha-fetopro-
tein and amniocentesis, and the subsequent abortions are all expensive,
and in many countries illegal. As a result only 7% of births are tested for
Downs worldwide, and even in the United States poor and uninsured
women who need prenatal screens are less likely to receive them.
Fortunately the painful decision to abort a disabled fetus will soon
be made unnecessary by our genetic and reproductive technologies.
Controlling the Body
13

Already we are able to test embryos conceived with invitro fertilization,
a technique called pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), allowing
parents to choose only healthy embryos for implantation. Thousands of
parents have used PGD now in the U.S. and Europe. Unfortunately invitro
fertilization and PGD are still so difﬁcult, uncertain and expensive that, for
the next decade or two, only the afﬂuent or lucky few who use them as
part of infertility treatments will benefit from PGD. But as the cost of
invitro fertilization drops, and its success rate climbs, PGD is likely to
become more common.
PGD, genetic screening and prenatal testing are just a few of many
“germinal choice” technologies parents will be able to use in the coming
decades. Parents can already use donor sperm or eggs if one or the other
partner can’t contribute genetically to making a child. Germinal choice
will also soon include direct genetic engineering of the parents’ sperm
or eggs before they reproduce and of the early embryo itself.
Genetic therapies that change parents’ sperm or eggs, or the early em-
bryo, also change the reproductive cells of the child, their “germline.” So
these are known as “germline therapies.” Germline therapy or enhance-
ment is very controversial since critics believe we can never understand
the genome well enough to avoid unintended consequences for future
generations. Critics of germline modiﬁcation want gene therapies to be
restricted to “somatic” modification, that is, fixing genetic diseases
only in nonreproductive cells by, for instance, infecting them with
viruses carrying new genes. But somatic therapies fix only the tissues
they can reach, so instead of removing cystic fibrosis from all of some-
one’s genes we would be required to regularly tweak their lung cells,
wait until their immune system killed all the corrected cells, and then
treat them again. Germline therapies are comprehensive and perma-
nent. People modified at the germline level would never need repeat
treatments and could pass their cleaned-up and upgraded genes to
their children.
A shortcut around some of the safety and ethical objections to
germline therapies comes from “artiﬁcial chromosomes,” a method of
14
CITIZEN CYBORG

human germline engineering being promoted by philosopher Greg
Stock. Researchers at the Canadian firm Chromos Molecular Systems
have created complete, free-standing chromosomes inscribed with ge-
netic instructions to make speciﬁc proteins and simply added them to
the nucleus of cells alongside the other chromosomes. This eliminates
the risk that inserting genes at random into existing chromosomes will
screw up something unforeseen in our DNA. The artificial chromo-
somes can be designed with more numerous, longer and more complex
genetic instructions than are possible with existing “insertional gene vec-
tors.” The artificial chromosomes can also be fitted with chemical
switches so that parents, or the child herself when she is of age, can turn
the new genes on and off.
For instance, neurogeneticist Kathryn North at the University of
Sydney in Australia has found that good sprinters have one copy of the
alpha-actinin-3 gene, which makes proteins for “fast-twitch” muscle
ﬁbers, and that great sprinters have two copies. Long-distance runners
usually have the alpha-actinin-2 gene, good for “slow-twitch” muscles
fibers, and great endurance runners have two copies. Why not add a
couple copies of each on an artificial chromosome with on/off
switches? Ideally the kids will be able to sprint and run long distances,
and if it turns out the genes turn them into the Hulk, we could just
turn them off.
While I believe the technical and ethical obstacles of human genetic
engineering will quickly be surmounted, it is certainly true that progress
with gene therapy has been slower than was expected in the 1990s and
has suffered many setbacks. Many biotech ﬁrms testing gene therapies
rocketed on a wave of optimism, and then crashed and burned with the
rest of the 1990s’ bubble economy. Many clinical trials of gene therapies
disappointed when genes didn’t make it into cells, only to be quickly ex-
pelled by the body, sometimes triggering cancers or life-threatening al-
lergic reactions. In 1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger at the University of
Pennsylvania died when his immune system rejected a gene therapy
trial. In January 2003, two of gene therapy’s success stories, French boys
Controlling the Body
15

cured of a rare immune disorder, contracted a rare leukemia, leading to
the temporary suspension of more than thirty American gene therapy
trials. After the startling breakthroughs in cloning in the 1990s, further
progress has been slowed as many mammal clones have turned out to
suffer from gross genetic deformities.
These setbacks have spurred a quite legitimate regulatory crackdown
worldwide. The National Institutes of Health has tightened require-
ments on the reporting of adverse events by gene therapy researchers,
and the Food and Drug Administration has asserted its right to forbid
germline genetic modification and human cloning experiments that
have not been deemed safe. More extreme voices have begun pressing
for national and global bans on inheritable germline modiﬁcations and
therapeutic stem cell cloning. But even with these research and political
setbacks, widespread somatic and germline engineering, for both cor-
recting genetic defects and adding enhancements, is virtually certain to
be available within a decade or two to those who can afford it. The only
real questions are how sure we will be of the techniques’ safety and efﬁ-
cacy, and how accessible they will be.
Even if we were to forbid intentional, inheritable genetic modifica-
tion of sperm, eggs and embryos, the issue is likely to be made morally
and technically moot by effective somatic therapies. An effective so-
matic gene therapy, injected into seminal vesicles, ovaries or uteruses,
would be able to change eggs and the cells that generate sperm. Even
if patients do not intentionally attempt to modify their own germinal
tissues it will be difficult to keep effective somatic therapies away from
the reproductive cells; the whole point is to get the gene inserters to
survive and change lots of cells. Once someone accidentally or inten-
tionally tweaks their own sperm or eggs while fixing their own cystic
fibrosis or cancer genes, I doubt we in the democratic West would pass
laws forbidding them from having children. So, if we agree that people
have a right to control and change their own reproductive tissues, then
germline modification, both therapeutic and enhancing, is more or
less inevitable.
16
CITIZEN CYBORG

BEYOND DISABILITIES TO CYBORG SUPERPOWERS
What if the most pessimistic naysayers turn out to be correct, however,
and the genome’s complexity makes safe gene therapy impossible for
ﬁfty or a hundred more years? Without gene therapy, some disabilities
will still be eliminated, and we will still all have the option of acquiring
superhuman abilities, thanks to cybernetics and nanotechnology. Today
25,000 deaf people worldwide have implanted, computerized hearing
aids—“cochlear implants”—sending electrical impulses directly to their
auditory nerves. The rapidly improving cochlear implant is already mak-
ing it possible for deaf kids to be mainstreamed back into hearing
schools. Current models spiral around the cochlea pressing dozens of
electrodes against auditory hairs.
Owing to interference between the electrodes, most patients have
only four to seven functional channels or frequencies and a very poor au-
ditory signal. As progress in nanomaterial science shrinks the electrodes,
more electrodes can be put closer to or directly into the nerve, stimulat-
ing a narrower band of frequencies and creating a more precise sound
palette. Smaller electrodes will also require less energy, permitting a
completely implantable device, without the microphone pickup in the
pocket. Eventually the capabilities of the cochlear implant will reach and
surpass the auditory fidelity of the unaided inner ear. Hopefully, as
cochlear implants improve, they will become cheap enough to be acces-
sible to the millions of deaf worldwide. But even today in the United
States, there are still approximately seven million people who could ben-
eﬁt from simple hearing aids who cannot afford them.
The new electronic vision systems for the blind are even more ex-
pensive. The Dobelle Vision System, which captures video on digital
cameras and transmits to electrodes inserted in the visual cortex, has al-
lowed its ﬁrst blind recipients to see well enough to drive. Installing and
maintaining the Dobelle system currently costs more than $100,000, in-
cluding surgery, follow-up, cameras, microcomputer and warranties. But
the costs will eventually drop, the size of the equipment will shrink until
Controlling the Body
17

it all ﬁts in the eye and the acuity of the vision will eventually surpass or-
dinary vision. Other teams are working on solar-powered systems and
electrodes that can stimulate individual neurons. Eventually these sys-
tems, like Geordi LaForge’s wraparound visor in Star Trek: Next Genera-
tion, will permit the blind to see ultraviolet and infrared light invisible to
the biological eye—at least for people lucky enough to live in societies
that allow them to have these super-eyes, and rich enough to make them
available.
The repair of spinal cord injuries, which afﬂict 250,000 Americans,
and tens of millions of people around the world, is also very close, as the
quadriplegic activist Christopher Reeve has made clear through tireless
advocacy. Most of the research on spinal cord repair has focused on the
use of stem cells to regrow severed spinal cord connections. Stem cells
were ﬁrst isolated and cultured from adults and embryos in the 1990s.
Stem cells are baby cells, not yet differentiated into the kind of tissue
they will end up becoming. In embryos these cells are very “plastic,” and
can become virtually anything. The stem cells generated in adult bodies
are more limited, but can still be adapted to repair damaged tissues.
Researchers have shown that both embryonic and adult stem cells
can be injected into Alzheimer’s-ravaged brains, severed spinal cords and
diseased livers, and the cells migrate to the damaged area and become
the kind of cell that is needed there. Research is progressing furiously
around the world to develop treatments using cultured stem cells. That
is, everywhere but in the United States, where the Bush administration,
under pressure from the powerful anti-abortion lobby, has forbidden
funding of research that uses new lines of embryonic cells. Nonetheless,
heavy investments in China, Britain and elsewhere ensure that embry-
onic stem cell research will continue to progress.
PURITAN RESISTANCE TO BODY CONTROL
Making the deaf hear, blind see and lame walk are relatively uncontro-
versial applications of emerging technologies, even if some of the re-
18
CITIZEN CYBORG

search methods, like modifying genomes or using embryos, are contro-
versial. But new technologies will also permit people to reshape their
bodies to ﬁt their personal aesthetics, lifestyles and whims, and this of-
fends the deep Puritan strain that runs through the emerging bioLuddite
movement. The growing battle over the epidemic of life-threatening
obesity is one place where we can clearly see the bioLuddites’ Puritan
anxiety that control over the body will facilitate sin.
For instance, Pat Mooney, head of the anti-technology lobby “ETC,”
attacked anti-obesity drugs in 2002 in WorldWatch magazine:
The pharmaceutical industry is hard at work developing drugs that
allow people to eat gluttonously without getting fat. . . . Of course the
logical solution is to eat less and exercise more. But there is a multi-
million dollar market waiting for any pharmaceutical company that
can . . . let people stuff their faces without losing their ﬁgures . . . the
real goal is a magic elixir that turns indulgence into a virtue.
One expects him to then warn about the dangers of masturbation, and
the importance of an early bedtime.
Greg Critser’s bestseller Fatland argues that the obesity epidemic was
generated by new food technologies, such as corn syrup and palm oil,
aggressively promoted by an underregulated, proﬁt-driven food industry.
The fat and sugar contents of food increased, as did the size of portions,
while federal bureaucracies, undermined by food industry money and
lobbyists, made no effort to encourage healthier food choices. At the
same time industrial society allowed us to become less active, and en-
couraged more sedentary entertainments. Critser recommends restrict-
ing advertising that targets kids, removing fast food and soda from the
schools, expanding physical education requirements in schools, and in-
stituting a fat tax on unhealthy foods.
All good ideas, and corporations are certainly eager to make proﬁts
by ﬁrst helping us kill ourselves and then by ﬁxing us back up. But the
basic cause of obesity is that we have bodies designed to spend hours
Controlling the Body
19

walking around the savanna every day, and brains that ﬁnd easy access to
fats, sugars and carbohydrates irresistible. Only safe and cheap genetic
and pharmaceutical therapies can successfully stop the deadly world-
wide rise of obesity.
Fortunately those therapies are coming soon, and I’ve certainly been
anxiously anticipating their arrival. More than sixty pharmaceutical
treatments to alter metabolism or reduce appetite are being developed,
based on more than 130 genes that have been discovered to regulate
weight in humans. The gene or drug tweaks that keep us slim will likely
be much simpler, modifying just one of those chemical pathways. Re-
searchers at the University of Wisconsin–Madison have made mice that
can stay slim on high-fat, high-calorie diets by snipping out just one
gene, SCD-1, which codes for just one enzyme, SCD, which regulates in-
sulin sensitivity. Research on a database of all Icelanders’ genes has
turned up one gene that determines whether an Icelander is slim or fat.
Once we have safe, effective fat pills or gene tweaks, the next ques-
tion will be how many of us will be able to use them. Even if they have
few risks, the Puritans will push to make them available only by pre-
scription and only to the morbidly obese. They may also be too expen-
sive for the poor and uninsured. Access to weight-control technology for
the poor will be an especially acute social justice issue since the poor are
disproportionately fat, making them sicker, shortening their lives and
keeping them poor because of severe social stigma and employment dis-
crimination against the obese. The poor are also the least able to pur-
chase diet foods, exercise equipment and over-the-counter weight-loss
drugs. Sure, poor people can cheaply eat lots of salad and run around
the block, but it’s a lot easier to live the simple life if you are rich.
The image of sober moderation is the person who goes to bed early
to get their eight hours of sleep. But I have always resented sleep as a
weakness, robbing me of a third of my life, and like most Americans I
am chronically sleep-deprived. In the past I would have had to rely solely
on caffeine or amphetamines. Now modafanil, a new treatment for nar-
colepsy sold as Provigil, permits people to perform at a peak of atten-
20
CITIZEN CYBORG

tiveness with just a couple hours of sleep for days at a time, without the
side effects of an amphetamine such as twitchiness and mood elevation.
While the Puritan bioLuddites fret that workers will be coerced to take
alertness drugs by unscrupulous corporations, wouldn’t you rather your
pilot or that trucker behind you on the road had access to a safe, effec-
tive alertness drug?
Puritans are also suspicious of efforts to control gender, sex and re-
production, since they just enable us to fulfill unnatural desires and
evade our preordained destinies as baby makers. Today we can control
when and whether men get erections, whether sex leads to conception
and whether to menstruate. We can plan childbirth from invitro fertil-
ization to cesarean section, and postmenopausal women can bear their
daughters’ children. Soon baby-making won’t need fathers, and artiﬁcial
wombs will make birth mothers optional. Gay couples will have biolog-
ical children genetically related to both parents.
People who are unhappy with their birth gender can take hormones,
get breasts implanted or removed, have hair permanently removed from
their face, and have their vocal cords surgically adjusted. Penises can be
reconstructed into sensitive vaginas, and functional penile tissue has
been grown in the lab for building new penises. In a couple decades
transsexuals will be able to have new, fully functional genitalia cloned,
grown and transplanted. Somatic gene therapy will make it possible to
selectively turn on or off sex-expressing genes, making hormone treat-
ments unnecessary.
Every step of the way we moderns have had to ﬁght, and will con-
tinue to have to ﬁght, the Puritan moralizers for our rights to control
our genitals, wombs and baby-making. Roe v. Wade established the right
to terminate a pregnancy in the United States, and in 2003, the U.S.
Supreme Court ﬁnally said sex between consenting adults was constitu-
tionally protected. But the right to use contraceptives and abortion are
still under attack, and the technologies necessary for reproductive rights
are either banned or unaffordable in many parts of the world. Even
where transsexuals have the right to change genders, they are often un-
Controlling the Body
21

deremployed, victims of violence, and ﬁnd it difﬁcult to afford their sex-
reassignment treatments. Technology makes possible the control of our
sexuality, gender and reproduction, but it is an ongoing political ﬁght to
ensure that society allows us to exercise those rights, and makes avail-
able the resources necessary to exercise them.
At the same time, all of these technologies have risks, and are being
developed and promoted by for-proﬁt ﬁrms with weak incentives to re-
search and acknowledge risks. A 1993 study by the Ofﬁce of Technology
Assessment (an agency destroyed by the Republicans after they took
control of Congress in 1994) found that more than half of the novel
drugs brought to market between 1981 and 1988 had been withdrawn
because of unforeseen consequences. For consumers to be able to make
fully informed choices, and exercise real control over their bodies, we
need laws that require these technologies to pass public testing and robust
regulation for safety and effectiveness. I sympathize with the bioLuddites’
frustration that every regulatory agency has been inﬁltrated and crippled
by the very industries they are meant to regulate, especially under Bush II.
But the rational and progressive answer has to be to reclaim the regulatory
agencies, not to forbid the use of technology.
22
CITIZEN CYBORG

3
Living Longer
Life expectancy has dramatically increased in the last century as the developed
countries built public health systems. In the twenty-ﬁrst century we will achieve
radical life extension, with indeﬁnite life spans. We need to ensure that everyone
has access to these treatments.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF EQUALITY AND PUBLIC HEALTH
In 2002, demographers announced that the average American could ex-
pect to live 77 years. That’s 30 years longer than the 47 years that Amer-
icans could expect in 1900. Unfortunately those numbers hide the fact
that life expectancy for American seniors actually changed little in the
twentieth century. The real beneﬁciaries of this dramatic improvement
were American infants and children. During the last century, prosperous
democratic societies built public health systems and invested in educa-
tion, clean drinking water, sewer systems, general hygiene and vaccina-
tions. Through public health investments we eliminated the high rate of
death from infectious diseases that once killed so many kids.
Toward the end of the twentieth century, public health investments
in anti-smoking campaigns, exercise programs and other preventive
medicine efforts have also begun to extend life expectancy at the end of
life. Not surprisingly the countries with the longest life expectancies are
those with the strongest public health systems—social democratic
23

northern Europe and Canada, and relatively egalitarian Japan. People with
strong public health systems don’t just live longer but are also less disabled.
According to the World Health Organization, the average citizen of the
United States, which has 40 million uninsured and a weak public health
system, can expect two to three fewer years of healthy, disability-free
life than citizens of northern Europe.
Longevity is associated not only with strong democratic states and
public health systems, but also with social equality. Poor people die more
often than non-poor people when we compare the developing world to
the developed, and the poor within the developed world to the afﬂuent. In
all the industrialized countries, which all have universal health care except
the United States, the poor die more rapidly, and the degree of a country’s
equality is correlated with its citizens’ longevity. The amount of inequality
in each American state is correlated with its rates of infant mortality, with
the death rates for all age groups, with the incidence of heart disease and
cancer, and with homicide, violent crime and incarceration.
One explanation for the relationship of equality and life expectancy is
provided by British studies of a large group of civil servants working in
the Whitehall area of London, home of many government ministries.
After twenty-ﬁve years the researchers discovered that the higher the posi-
tion the civil servants attained in the bureaucratic hierarchy, the less likely
they were to die from all causes, including heart disease and non-smoking-
related cancers. None of the men were poor and none were rich, and their
work conditions were all pretty similar since they worked in ofﬁces in Lon-
don. All the men, like all Britons, had access to the same National Health
Service. Yet the men at the bottom of the work hierarchy, who had less
control over their work, died at twice the rate of those at the top.
Even for the afﬂuent, powerlessness is a killer. Poor and powerless
people are more likely to feel their lives are driven by chance, by nameless
forces and unaccountable elites, increasing their stress and risk-taking.
People with a sense of empowerment in their lives are more likely to in-
vest in those lives by pursuing education and making better choices. Hav-
ing some degree of social and economic equality, some control over
24
CITIZEN CYBORG

one’s work and participating in the democratic process all appear to be
important to health and long life.
LIVING LONGER ON DRUGS
But even the wealthiest, most empowered person, living in Sweden or
Japan, who doesn’t smoke or drink, who exercises regularly and eats
right, is unlikely to live past 100. In 2003, Majid Ezzati of Harvard Uni-
versity demonstrated that if the world could conquer the top twenty
contributors to early mortality—including dietary deﬁciencies, malnutri-
tion, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, obesity, lack of exercise, un-
safe sex, lack of contraception, the use of tobacco, alcohol, and illegal
drugs, poor sanitation and dirty water, poor household ventilation, lead
exposure, occupational risk factors and unsafe injections—the world-
wide gain in life expectancy would be . . . 9 years. Getting life expectancy
beyond 100 years will require more than improved public health.
Whether the “natural” life expectancy under optimal conditions is 80 or
100 years, the human body is certainly programmed to start slowly
falling apart after about the age of 20.
Fortunately we are making dramatic strides in extending life through
medicine. While improvements in the quality of life and investments in
public health drove the increase in life expectancy in the twentieth cen-
tury, medical technologies that retard and reverse the aging process will
drive radical extensions of life expectancy in the twenty-ﬁrst century.
This is good news for Americans since we don’t do as well at social
equality and public health but (at least until the Bush II administration)
have excelled at innovating new medical technology. If you can make it to
70 in the United States you have a better chance of living to 80 than any-
where else in the world. Even without the radical life extension medicine
around the corner, we have been making slow and steady progress in treat-
ing the principal causes of mortality in the industrialized world, namely,
heart disease, cancer and stroke. Antihypertensives and cholesterol-lower-
ing drugs have added some years to the lives of those with a high risk of
Living Longer
25

dying from heart disease and stroke. The survival rate of cancers has
been increasing, and remarkable new anti-cancer treatments are being
developed. We are now able to treat cancer by introducing viruses de-
signed to attack cancer cells and by teaching the patient’s immune sys-
tem to recognize and kill cancerous cells. Each of the genetic mutations
that create and sustain tumors, such as mutations that cause rapid cell
growth, build a tumor’s blood supply or send cells out to spread through
the body, is being identiﬁed, and speciﬁc chemical and genetic therapies
developed to counteract them.
But demographers point out that even if these top three causes of
mortality—cancer, heart disease and stroke—were completely elimi-
nated, life expectancy would increase less than 15 years. Those who sur-
vive these three killers die of other aging-related diseases. As 53 leading
aging researchers recently concluded in a review of longevity research
published in Scientific American: “To exceed this limit, the underlying
processes of aging that increase vulnerability to all the common causes
of death will have to be modiﬁed.”
Many lines of research now under way promise to radically slow the
aging process or even reverse it. So far, the best documented way to ex-
tend the life span of animals is to reduce the number of calories they con-
sume by about a third. This makes sense for evolutionary reasons; if re-
sources are scarce, creatures can hang on long enough to reproduce later.
Caloric restriction slows the aging process in tissues throughout the body,
and reduces the incidence of many aging-related diseases, including can-
cer. Calorie-restricted rhesus monkeys have lower cholesterol and less
heart disease, diabetes and hypertension. Caloric restriction is not a very
practical life extension method, however, since it is even more restrictive
than the diets most people have so little success with. So researchers such
as Barbara Hanson at the University of Maryland, Cynthia Kenyon at the
University of California at San Francisco and Blanka Rogina at the Uni-
versity of Connecticut, are identifying the genes and proteins involved
when caloric restriction signals the body to go into starvation mode. This
research will soon give us the beneﬁts of caloric restriction in a pill.
26
CITIZEN CYBORG

Once we have effective methods of changing adults’ genes, these calo-
rie restriction mechanisms are potential targets for gene therapies for life
extension, and there are probably many more targets to be found. Re-
searchers with the New England Centenarian project and the company
Centagenetix are studying 444 families with a family member who lived
to 100 or older to identify other genes and chemical processes that could
be tweaked to extend life. They say they have found a region of chromo-
some 4 where a lot of their centenarians appear to be different, and drug
firms are rushing to devise treatments that turn on the longevity
processes coded for in those genes. Cloned and cultured stem cells also
are a potential pathway for replacing worn-out organs and tissues.
Biogerontologist Aubrey de Grey at the University of Cambridge is
the founder of the Methuselah Mouse prize awarded each year to the
team that engineers the longest-lived mouse. He believes that there is a
very strong chance that the convergence of seven biotechnologies will
allow us to reverse the effect of aging and achieve indeﬁnite life spans, or
“engineered negligible senescence,” by the middle of this century.
Those technologies are:
1. Stem cell therapy to restore the number of cells in tissues that lose
cells with age (such as heart and some areas of the brain).
2. Gene therapy plus stem cell therapy, to delete our biological clock
(telomere elongation) genes.
3. Gene therapy to ﬁx the mutation rate in our mitochondrial genes,
which contributes to aging.
4. Gene therapy to introduce bacterial or fungal genes that can break
down things that we can’t such as cholesterol and the proteins that
accumulate in the brain and cause neurological deterioration.
5. Therapy to teach our immune system to destroy bad, old cells.
6. Training the immune system to, or introducing drugs to, elimi-
nate the junk (amyloid) that accumulates outside cells.
7. Drugs to break down the sugars that gum up the connections
between cells (collagen, elastin, etc.).
Living Longer
27

There is continual progress in all of these ﬁelds, and with an infusion
of about $1 billion in targeted funding de Grey believes they could all be
perfected in about twenty years.
SEND IN THE BOTS
But what of the convergence of technologies I discussed in the first
chapter? Nanotechnology will likely have a huge impact on both the
treatment of disease and the eventual arresting of the aging process. Ar-
tificial intelligence and robotics will facilitate the biomedical research
and protein modeling necessary to develop new therapies, and advances
in cognitive science will illuminate the best ways to protect our brains
from aging. In the National Science Foundation’s NBIC report, Scottish
bioengineer Patricia Connolly writes on “Nanobiotechnology and Life
Extension,” and predicts the advances and their life-extending effects
shown in Table 3.1.
Nanomaterials are already creating radical new treatments. For in-
stance, researchers in Berlin have coated nano-bullets of iron oxide
with sugar so that they get absorbed into hungry, fast-growing tumors,
and then excite the particles with magnets to heat up and kill the
tumor cells.
But self-replicating, computerized nanorobotics will offer the most
radical life extension. Robert Freitas, the author of Nanomedicine, has de-
signed “respirocytes” or nanorobotic blood cells. A couple cups of mi-
croscopic respirocytes, each with a small onboard computer to regulate
absorption and release, would carry ten times as much oxygen as a nor-
mal red blood cell. Oxygen-laden respirocytes in the brain would mean
that a person having a heart attack could notice their heart had stopped
beating, call an ambulance and still be conscious by the time they were
being rolled into the ER. Nanorobot red blood cells could then be sup-
plemented by Freitas’s proposed “microbiovores,” a nanotech comple-
ment for the scavenger and immune system cells, to protect the body
from viruses, bacteria and cancerous cells.
28
CITIZEN CYBORG

I’ve only touched the surface of life extension medicine. But the
many lines of converging sciences and technologies and the rapidly es-
calating pace of medical knowledge suggest that indeﬁnite life extension
will be possible in this century. Since anti-aging and life extension medi-
cine will likely have added at least 50 years to life expectancy by the
2050s, the average child today can expect to live well into the 2100s,
Living Longer
29
TABLE 3.1
Some Potential Gains in Life Extension from NBIC Convergence
Level of
Key Advance 
Timescale 
Life Extension
Intervention
Human 
Noninvasive 
5–10 years
Lifesaving for some 
diagnostics
conditions
Cognitive assist 
15–20 years 
Higher quality of life for 
devices
several years   
Targeted cancer 
5–10 years
Reduction in cancer 
therapies
deaths by up to 30%  
Organ 
Artiﬁcial heart 
0–5 years 
2–3 years awaiting 
transplant  
Neural stimulation 
5–20 years 
10–20 years extra if
or cell function 
successful for 
replacement
neurodegenerative 
patients  
Cell 
Improved  
0–15 years 
Lowering of death rates
cell-material 
on invasive surgery by 
interactions
10% and extending life 
of surgical implants to 
patient’s lifetime  
Genetic therapies
30 years 
Gains in the ﬁght against 
cancer and hereditary 
diseases   
Stem cells 
5–10 years 
Tissue / brain repair
Life extension of 10–20 
years  
Molecule 
Localized drug  
0–10 years 
Extending life through 
delivery
efﬁcient drug targeting
Genetic interventions
0–30 years 
Life extension by 
targeting cell changes 
and aging in the ﬁght 
against disease  

when the convergence of cognitive science, nanomedicine and artiﬁcial
intelligence will allow consciousness to be backed up and sustained in
forms far more durable than the human body.
For those who aren’t children, and are willing to take a gamble,
there is the option of “cryonic suspension,” that is, getting frozen. The
cryonics movement began in 1964 with the publication of Robert Et-
tinger’s The Prospect of Immortality. Ettinger argued that even though
the body’s tissues suffer considerable damage when frozen in liquid ni-
trogen, eventually some future technology would make it possible to
ﬁx that damage and resurrect the “corpsicle.” Cryonics got a big boost
in 1986 with the publication of Eric Drexler’s nanotechnology mani-
festo The Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology. Drexler,
who is signed up for cryonic suspension, argued convincingly that even-
tually we will be able to build nanorobots able to travel through a
frozen brain to repair the damage caused by the crystallization of water
in neural cells. Even if it took a hundred years to create the requisite
nano-robots, eventually the resurrection and repair of the frozen dead
would be possible. Today roughly a thousand people are signed up for
cryonic suspension, or already are suspended. Cryonic suspension of
one’s head at Alcor, the leading cryonics ﬁrm, costs $100,000. Most cry-
onics patients pay for suspension with a supplemental insurance policy
that is relatively affordable for middle-class Americans, although not for
most people on the planet.
ORGANIZING THE PARTY OF LIFE
All this progress in forestalling death makes some people very nervous.
The chair of the President’s Council on Bioethics, the philosopher
Leon Kass, has written widely against “unnatural” efforts to live
longer, arguing that human life is given meaning by the certainty of
death. Kass says, “The finitude of human life is a blessing for every in-
dividual, whether he knows it or not.” In his new post he has opposed
life extension and his Council report Beyond Therapy lays a large set of
30
CITIZEN CYBORG

speculative concerns at the door of life extension. A Kass appointee to
the PCB, Francis Fukuyama, writes in his book Our Posthuman Future
that life extension will lead to rigid, risk-averse societies, ruled by
slowly decaying seniors ogling the shrinking number of young bodies.
Other critics warn that life extension will exacerbate overpopulation
and the growing dependence of the retired on the shrinking working-
age population.
All possible, but none of it different from the changes we have al-
ready seen in the last century. Because of longer lives and changing fam-
ily structures in the twentieth century we had to invent nursing care sys-
tems and institute Social Security and Medicare, and some children have
to wait until they are 60 to get their inheritance. People now live long
enough to die slowly of Alzheimer’s. But we’ve adapted, and we didn’t
tell anybody they weren’t allowed any more medicine after the age of 80
because that was the natural limit to life. We didn’t tell people in the de-
veloping world they weren’t allowed to have medical technology be-
cause they were living too long given their overpopulation.
I’m sure the bioLuddite efforts to ban life extension treatments will
be easily swept aside. But that doesn’t mean we will all have access to
these medicines. During the twentieth century, unequal access to medi-
cine had a very marginal impact on the average life expectancy. In gen-
eral the rich could not buy many extra years of life. In the coming
decades, however, the affluent will be able to buy extra decades, and
soon may buy extra centuries. Once we cross that threshold there will be
an enormous pressure to make life extension medicine universally ac-
cessible. Every country will need to decide how much of their resources
they will devote to life extension research and treatments, which treat-
ments will be covered and which will be out-of-pocket, who will be able
to take the treatments, and how the old-age pension system should be
adjusted in response.
In reviewing the progress toward life extension, and the emerging
political debate, science writer Ron Bailey predicts: “The deﬁning politi-
cal conﬂict of the 21st century will be the battle over life and death. On
Living Longer
31

one side stand the partisans of mortality, who counsel humanity to qui-
etly accept our morbid fate and go gentle into that good night. On the
other is the party of life, who rage against the dying of the light and
yearn to extend the enjoyment of healthy life to as many as possible for
as long as possible.”
I am conﬁdent that the party of life will succeed in the long run. But
a lot of people may die unnecessarily as we ﬁght that battle.
32
CITIZEN CYBORG

4
Getting Smarter
Research shows that people in the democratic industrialized countries have been
getting smarter for at least the last century. Improving diets and health, the
spread of education and more stimulating and complex lives all seem to make us
smarter. But we appear to be reaching the limits of our ability to enhance intel-
ligence without changing the brain itself, at least for the afﬂuent. Fortunately
technologies will soon be available that promise to make us more intelligent and
improve our memories and concentration. If we are allowed to use them, and
they are made widely available, they could improve the quality of our lives and
make us dramatically better citizens.
EQUALITY, MODERNITY AND INTELLIGENCE
Francis Galton, Charles Darwin’s cousin, was the father of population
genetics. Galton also fathered the doctrine of “eugenics,” the idea that
the quality of the human race could be improved through selective
breeding. Galton argued in his book Hereditary Genius that genius ran in
some families of the British aristocracy, and must therefore be substan-
tially genetic. The debate over the relative genetic and environmental
contributions to intelligence has continued to this day, and both envi-
ronmental and genetic factors are known to predict the variation of in-
telligence. However, one of the central predictions of the advocates of
genetic determination of intelligence has not been borne out. Galton
33

and the eugenicists predicted that there would be a gradual decline in
intelligence since the lower classes and non-white races, who they be-
lieved to be less intelligent, had higher birth rates. In fact, intelligence
has been rising.
In the 1980s, New Zealand political scientist James Flynn began to
look at the questions used in intelligence tests in the twentieth cen-
tury. The tests had changed, but the distribution of IQ hadn’t since an
IQ of 100 is by definition the average intelligence for a given popula-
tion. But was today’s 100 the same as last year’s? Flynn found that IQ
tests have been getting harder, and that intelligence has risen by
roughly 30 points in the developed world, most of it since World War
Two. Worldwide the average gain in intelligence between 1952 and
1982 was about 18 IQ points. On at least one measure, people who
would have been in the top tenth of intelligence a hundred years ago
would today be among the 5% least intelligent people in the popula-
tion. Compared to previous generations, the number of people who
score high enough to be classified as “genius” has increased more
than twenty times. The “Flynn effect” has now been documented in
dozens of countries, although most of the research has been in the
democratic, industrialized world.
There is no widely accepted explanation for the Flynn effect, but the
causes are assumed to be entirely environmental. Improved nutrition
has contributed since there is a well-documented link between malnutri-
tion and lower intelligence. The percentage of the population that can
read has increased rapidly around the world, as has earlier, better and
more widespread mandatory education. As family size shrank, each
child received more attention. As people moved from culturally isolated
farms to complex, stimulating cities, their brains were also stimulated
and they developed more complex reasoning and problem-solving skills.
Especially stimulating was greater exposure to all kinds of media, in-
cluding books, magazines, radio, computers and television. While none
of these factors appears to explain the Flynn effect by itself, each appears
to contribute something.
34
CITIZEN CYBORG

These factors not only make us smarter, but keep us smarter. The
stimulation of the brain provided by modern, educated, industrial life
appears to help prevent the erosion of memory and reasoning ability
among seniors. An active social life and intellectual activities like reading
and playing bridge build a “cognitive reserve” that protects the brain in
old age.
The environmental inﬂuences on intelligence contribute to a damag-
ing feedback loop among poverty, poor nutrition, less education, ill health
and lower IQ. People with sharper minds are more successful in life,
make more money, are healthier and live longer. Conversely, hundreds of
millions of children worldwide are malnourished and suffer lifelong in-
tellectual deficits as a consequence. Some children go to schools with
computer labs, some go to schools without paper and some don’t go to
school at all. Some people work at intellectually stimulating jobs while
others work in boring, mindless jobs. Some seniors have had the educa-
tion, and now have the resources and health care, that keep their minds
sharp, and others aren’t so lucky. 
We have a long way to go in raising global living standards and access
to education before we would reach the limits of how much intelligence
can be nurtured and sustained through equality and environmental en-
richment alone. But for affluent and middle-class people in the devel-
oped countries, we may be reaching the limits of how much intelligence
we can achieve without genetic or pharmaceutical help. Eric
Turkheimer, a psychologist at the University of Virginia, has shown that
while environment is a strong predictor of intelligence for kids from
poor families in the United States, genetics are the overwhelming pre-
dictor of intelligence for kids from middle-class and affluent back-
grounds. On a scale of inheritability that ranged from 0, where kids’ in-
telligence was not correlated with their parents’ intelligence, to 1, where
the kids’ intelligence exactly matched their parents’, poor kids scored
0.10 on inheritability and afﬂuent kids scored 0.72. That means there is
shrinking room for middle-class and afﬂuent parents to help their kids be
brighter through environmental enrichment alone.
Getting Smarter
35

HURRAH FOR RITALIN
Fortunately we have a growing number of technologies that extend our
ability to concentrate, remember, discern patterns, solve problems and be
creative. For instance, stimulant medications allow children and adults with
attention deﬁcit disorder (ADD) to focus and achieve more than they would
otherwise. But as the number of kids diagnosed with ADD and successfully
treated with stimulants has grown, so has the bioLuddite backlash. Francis
Fukuyama condemns parents in Our Posthuman Future for drugging a gen-
eration of boys for just being naturally boyish. Fukuyama also suggests that
we rob kids of self-esteem when they achieve with chemical assistance
what they should have achieved through sheer willpower. This is like saying
that someone who controls her blood sugar purely through diet should feel
more virtuous than someone who relies on insulin.
There is no crisis of over-drugging of American kids with stimulants,
much less kids anywhere else. The American Academy of Pediatrics esti-
mates that as many as 10% of American kids have ADD and, in fact, only
3% of American kids are being prescribed stimulant medications for
ADD. There are probably some kids being prescribed medication who
don’t really beneﬁt from it, but many more who aren’t getting it but need
it. If anything, even more people could benefit from stimulants than
could get a diagnosis of ADD. But giving a drug to someone without a
clinical diagnosis just because it improves their performance crosses the
bioLuddite’s imaginary line between therapy and enhancement.
My family’s experience with stimulants and ADD illustrates how dif-
ﬁcult that line is to draw. When my son was in kindergarten, at our won-
derful local university laboratory school with an almost 1-to-1 ratio of
teachers and children, I came to dread the daily pickup routine. I would
be debriefed about the daily ﬁghts, assaults and tantrums. Finally they
told us our son was among the most difﬁcult kids they had had to deal
with, and that he would need a psychological evaluation to stay. The
evaluation diagnosed ADD, as we had expected, and he was prescribed
Concerta, a time-release version of Ritalin.
36
CITIZEN CYBORG

The first morning we gave him Concerta he went and sat on the
couch before his ride to school and got very quiet. Concerned, we asked
how he felt. He said, “Shhh . . . I’m thinking.” He had never been able to
slow down enough to notice his own thought process before, or to sit on
our lap, or start to learn to read. But his behavior problems cleared up in
kindergarten, and in elementary school he ﬂourished. Now he is among
the best readers and mathematicians in his class, while I’m quite sure he
would still be struggling if it had not been for the medication. I’m pretty
conﬁdent of that, since it took a combination of Ritalin and special edu-
cation for me to learn to read in the third grade.
So is Ritalin an enhancement for my son who is just “naturally bois-
terous,” or a therapy for a brain that needs to be adjusted to permit the
child’s fullest potential to shine through? Should we only give him
enough Ritalin to bring him up to the class average, or is it OK to bring
him to his fullest potential? If the latter, and if the drug is safe, why
shouldn’t all kids and adults who think they might beneﬁt from it try it
and see if it helps them achieve more, concentrate better and become
more aware of their own thought process? Ron Bailey quotes Dart-
mouth neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga: “What is the difference be-
tween Ritalin and the Kaplan SAT review? It’s six of one and a half
dozen of the other. If both can boost SAT scores by, say, 120 points, I
think it’s immaterial which way it’s done.”
Since he acknowledges there is no real line between therapy and en-
hancement, Leon Kass says that preventing a posthuman future requires
preventing people from even getting close to being tempted to use med-
ical technology to achieve “ageless and ever-vigorous bodies, happy (or
at least not unhappy) souls, and excellent human achievement (with di-
minished effort or toil).”
MEMORY PILLS AND BRAIN FERTILIZER
Eventually we will slip off the Puritan chains and agree that each of us
should be able to achieve our fullest, and decide for ourselves whether to
Getting Smarter
37

use or forego technologies to get there. In the meantime, technologies
of cognitive enhancement will all be developed, first as therapies for
those with “impairments” and “diseases.” Beyond the 5–10% who may
be able to get prescriptions to treat ADD, another group set to beneﬁt
from cognition enhancement is senior citizens threatened by
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias.
About half of all seniors who reach 85 have Alzheimer’s disease.
Since Alzheimer’s is the number one cause of institutionalization in the
United States, anything, be it education or a drug, that reduces the inci-
dence of Alzheimer’s would have enormous benefits for society and
caregivers, not to mention for the individual facing that long, terrifying
spiral. Research on the chemical precursors involved in memory consol-
idation, neural plasticity and synaptic transmission speed has led to clin-
ical trials for more than forty drugs to treat dementia. The ﬁrst of the
new “smart drugs” on the market, Memantine, increases the availability
of glutamate, a neurochemical necessary for communication between
neurons. Memantine allows seniors with dementia to live independently
for six to twelve months longer.
But what seniors diagnosed with dementia—and even people over 20
years old—really need is a way of reversing brain damage. Stem cell re-
search has shown that the brain is able to repair itself by growing new
neural stem cells well into the senior years. As research unravels how
“neurotrophic” chemicals govern the growth of neural stem cells in the
brain, we will begin to develop drugs that encourage brain self-repair.
GENE TWEAKS AND ELECTRODES
Even better than a neurotrophic pill would be a neurotrophic gene ther-
apy that helped the brain to repair itself, or that enhanced intelligence in
other ways. Researchers from the University of California at San Diego
cultured skin cells from seniors with Alzheimer’s disease, modiﬁed them
with a gene to make them produce more nerve growth factor, and im-
planted them in the seniors’ brains. Trials have shown that the technique
38
CITIZEN CYBORG

reverses the atrophy of brain cells. Teams in Australia and New York are
also treating Parkinson’s disease with gene therapies that make missing
brain chemicals.
Gene therapy brings us back to Galton and the eugenicists, who were
half right about the inheritance of intelligence, although not about its
relationship to race and class. Twins raised in different homes have al-
most exactly the same intelligence. In a study of hundreds of American
child geniuses, Robert Plomin of London’s Institute of Psychiatry found
specific genes on chromosome 4 that only the genius children have.
Plomin has also found that problem mutations on the same genes appear
to give rise to all learning disabilities. These ﬁndings and other accumulat-
ing evidence give strong support to the idea that there are a ﬁnite number
of genes that determine general intelligence, “g,” and not just separate
genes determining individual intellectual capacities such as memory,
spatial visualization or verbal skills. People who inherit good genes for g
tend to be better at everything. By manipulating genes, researchers have
already been able to dramatically improve the intelligence of mice. So,
although pessimists insist that intelligence is far too complex to be
changed with gene therapy, it appears we will be able to tweak our own
intelligence with gene therapies targeted at “g genes,” and increase the
intelligence of our children through germinal choice. 
After cognition-enhancing drugs and gene therapies the most power-
ful human intelligence enhancer will be to directly connect the brain to
computers. Researchers have been experimenting with two-way
neural–computer communication by growing neurons on and around
computer chips, or by placing electrodes in brains that are connected to
computers, leading to computing prostheses for the brain. Completely
paralyzed patients have been able to communicate by “typing” on com-
puters connected to the motor neurons in their brain. The patient thinks
about what it once was like to move the mouse, or their arm or leg, and
the electrode picks up the neural signal and translates it through a com-
puter into movement of a cursor. Combined with cochlear implants and
electronic vision systems, or with nanoelectrodes directly to the cortex,
Getting Smarter
39

patients could soon have direct input and output between their brain
and computers.
Progress with brain chips and neural prosthetics is proceeding
rapidly. The U.S. National Institutes of Health have a wide-ranging re-
search program on neural prostheses, working on everything from con-
trol of prosthetic limbs to brain implants. The Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Administration is providing tens of millions of dollars to
MIT, Duke and other universities through their “Brain Machine Inter-
faces Program” aimed at permitting soldiers to communicate with
equipment, and each other, at the speed of thought. A lot of research is
focused on creating new materials that can coexist with neurons indeﬁ-
nitely, and can be made into nanoscale electrodes.
Brain prostheses will also allow us to replace specialized brain struc-
tures lost to damage or disease. For instance, researchers at the University
of Southern California have reverse-engineered the signals going into and
out of the hippocampus, a part of the brain that affects memory, mood
and awareness. They have designed computer chips to replace the hip-
pocampus and are programming the prostheses with “neural network”
software that mimics the way neurons make connections in the brain.
Several of the papers in the 2002 NBIC report (on the convergence of
nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology and cognitive
science) extrapolate alternative methods for using nanotechnology to
communicate with or augment mental functions in the coming decades.
Recipients of “brainjacks” would be able to think directly into and di-
rectly call up calendars, address books, lyrics of songs, lines of dialogue
for a play or foreign language dictionaries. With an Internet connection
we could silently read our e-mail, surf the World Wide Web and carry
on a mind-to-mind conversation with other brainjack users, all while
pretending to pay attention in meetings. Some researchers suggest that
these neuroprostheses could be perfected and available to the general
public by 2030.
Beyond simply embedding computer chips in the brain, with very
few sites for interaction, computer scientist Ray Kurzweil predicts that
40
CITIZEN CYBORG

by 2030 we could have a dense latticework of nanobots that distribute
themselves throughout our brains, communicating with every neuron,
augmenting the brain’s functions, feelings and thoughts. That would
allow the brain to think faster thoughts; to multitask; to record and
play back thoughts, dreams and feelings; and to switch seamlessly be-
tween immersive virtual reality and sensory reality. Most importantly
a nanobot-pervaded brain would allow computing media to capture
and recreate a dynamic model of each of our brains down to the last
synapse. Since computers powerful enough to model human brains
should be common in thirty years, those computer models may then
be able to run software simulations of our brains and bodies. Presum-
ably these backups of our minds, if switched on, would be self-aware
and have an independent existence. This is the scenario known as “up-
loading.” Uploaded people would be able to think at chip speeds, or-
ders of magnitude faster than neurons, and be able to add additional
hardware a lot easier than we will be able to add capacity to organic
brains.
SMART CITIZENS, SMART DEMOCRACY
These scenarios of intelligence ampliﬁcation with drugs, genes and ma-
chines have a lot of people spooked for a bunch of reasons that I ad-
dress in later chapters. Many of the critics insist that these tools should
only be used to fix cognitive diseases and disabilities, and not to en-
hance the normal brain. Critics from the Left worry that if intelligence
amplification is available on the market it will exacerbate social in-
equality, and they are right. Securing our rights to become the most
that we can be will require not only a ﬁght for our individual rights to
use technology to control our own brains, but also a ﬁght to ensure uni-
versal access to intelligence-amplifying technology. Strong democracies
should invest in their populations’ intelligence not only through educa-
tion, nutrition and health care, but also through ensuring that all citi-
zens can take advantage of brain boosters.
Getting Smarter
41

In turn, as intelligence increases, democracy will be strengthened.
The more intelligent the citizen, the more capable they will be at assess-
ing their own interests, understanding the political process and effec-
tively organizing. An increasingly intelligent citizenry will insist on a less
authoritarian society, as John Stuart Mill suggested 200 years ago:
From this increase of intelligence, several effects may be conﬁdently
anticipated. . . . They will become even less willing than at present to
be led and governed, and directed into the way they should go, by the
mere authority and prestige of superiors. . . . The theory of depen-
dence and protection will be more and more intolerable to them, and
they will require that their conduct and condition shall be essentially
self-governed.
Democracy and technology have and will increase human intelligence,
and increasing human intelligence will encourage liberty, democracy
and the innovation of new technology.
42
CITIZEN CYBORG

5
Being Happier
Happiness is an illusive goal. But in democratic societies we are freer from mental
and physical abuse at the hands of husbands, soldiers and unaccountable author-
ities than ever before. Medical technology is also freeing us from the discomforts of
mental and physical illnesses. New pharmaceuticals and nanotechnologies will
permit us happiness and freedom from pain that are currently unimaginable. Can
we remain a democratic society if we all keep ourselves happy with drugs? Can we
remain a democratic society if we refuse to allow people to control their own
brains?
BEYOND PAIN
Long life, good health and smarts do not, unfortunately, make us hap-
pier just by themselves. Researchers have found, for instance, no corre-
lation between happiness and intelligence, negative or positive. Perhaps
this is because, as artiﬁcial intelligence theorist Eliezer Yudkowsky sug-
gests, the capacity for both boredom and entertainment expands with
our intelligence. Hobbies become boring as we mature, so we ﬁnd new,
more complex amusements and companions. The advantages of intelli-
gence, such as greater success in life, more income and a lower likeli-
hood of inflicting unnecessary misery on ourselves, are probably bal-
anced by a greater awareness of the things we should be worried about
and dissatisﬁed with. In a rough version of this balance researchers have
43

shown that some of the genes that increase intelligence in mice also in-
crease their sensitivity to pain. But neuromedicine may be the missing
link between intelligence and happiness. Today human intelligence, in
the form of technology, is about to make possible the elimination of
pain and lives ﬁlled with unimaginable pleasure and contentment.
Three centuries ago the Scottish philosopher David Hume asked
why we need pain. “It seems plainly possible to carry on the business of
life without pain. Why then is any animal susceptible of such a sensa-
tion? If animals can be free from it for an hour, they might enjoy a per-
petual exemption from it.” This idea is offensive to many religions,
which believe a life without pain would be somehow sinful and unnat-
ural. BioLuddite critics, channeling this religious belief that life is sup-
posed to be nasty, brutish and short, argue that life extension and happi-
ness technologies will rob us of some of the ineffable quality of life and
leave us bored and dehumanized.
The techno-optimists argue back that longer, healthier lives, with
greater intelligence and less physical and mental pain, will also be richer
and more fulfilling. I side with the optimists. Our most fundamental
drive in life is to be happy, to reduce our pains and increase our joy and
fulﬁllment. It seems obvious that the ethical goal for society should be to
make life as fantastic for as many people as possible, not to valorize pain
and suffering.
Before I get into the different ways transhuman technology and
democracy will make us happier, we need to unpack some different
kinds of suffering. There is physical pain, and the suffering caused by
psychiatric illness. There is the ordinary suffering and happiness caused
by our desires not being met by our lives. There is the angst of mean-
ingless existence, the peace of spiritual contentment, the joy of “peak
experiences.” Emerging technologies are poised to make people happier
in all of these ways.
So let’s start with physical pain, which is a perfect illustration of the
combined importance of technology and democracy in improving
human lives. Pain is part nerve impulses and part the psychological suf-
44
CITIZEN CYBORG

fering caused by powerlessness. A technology that addresses both as-
pects of pain has now been in use in hospitals for more than a decade:
Patient-Controlled Analgesia (PCA). PCA machines allow patients to de-
termine when and whether to inject themselves with a predetermined
dosage of narcotic. The dosages are carefully rationed by the machine to
prevent the patient getting high or taking an overdose. The irony of
PCA is that patients using the devices feel less pain while using fewer
narcotics than patients getting injections from nurses. Being able to
self-administer reduces anxiety and alleviates much of the psychological
suffering that accompanies the pain.
In terms of cybernetic pain control, recent research at Oxford Uni-
versity has found that electrodes implanted in the brain can relieve the
chronic, disabling pain sometimes suffered after a stroke or head
trauma. Neurosurgeon Tipil Aziz drills two holes in the skull and places
electrodes deep inside the brain. As with PCA, the sufferer controls the
electrical current. Although the surgery and device currently cost more
than $40,000, since the therapy gets people off of continuous pain med-
ication and back to work it is well worth it. Future nano–neuro inter-
faces will allow even more ﬁne-tuned control of pain and pleasure.
Unfortunately our Puritan War on Drugs has made physicians leery
of providing adequate amounts of narcotics to treat chronic pain and
terminal patients’ pain lest they be investigated by the Drug Enforce-
ment Administration. After all, we wouldn’t want anybody to get ad-
dicted to morphine, even if it is necessary for them to function or they
only have six weeks to live. Study after study shows that most American
patients dying with painful diseases, such as cancers, die in far more pain
than necessary. The hospice movement and efforts to train doctors to
provide “palliative” end-of-life care have so far had very limited success.
Pain control is better in Europe because they dispense narcotics more
freely. In a very real sense the repressive War on Drugs causes people
pain without any demonstrable benefit for public health, and at the
enormous cost of unnecessarily criminalizing millions of people. Giving
people more control over their brains in the future certainly comes with
Being Happier
45

risks, but the cost of criminalizing our control over our own brains is
even greater.
People are also denied adequate amounts of narcotics because their
doctors are afraid of being charged with physician-assisted suicide. Many
people in the hospice movement have opposed moves to legalize physi-
cian-assisted suicide on the grounds that it will let doctors off the hook
from having to better manage the treatment of the dying. But the evi-
dence from Oregon and the Netherlands, the only U.S. state and the only
country to have legalized assisted suicide, shows that giving people the
right to control their own death actually improves the quality of their
care. It encourages doctors to treat pain adequately, and to make end-of-
life decisions openly and collaboratively instead of paternalistically. It
turns out that just as many patients die from physician-administered drug
overdoses in other European countries as in Holland, but without the dis-
cussion with the patient about their wishes that Dutch law makes possi-
ble. Just as with PCA, the quality of life of a patient with an emergency
stash of pills improves because they have a sense of control over the end
of life and the threat of unbearable pain. Having the option often relieves
patients’ anxiety enough so that most never make use of the pills.
BEYOND MADNESS
The second kind of suffering is caused by abnormal brain chemistries,
the psychoses and depressions. Approximately 10% of the U.S. popula-
tion suffers from a treatable mental illness at any one time, and as much
as 20% will experience mental illness at some point in their life. In par-
ticular, about one in eight people will suffer from clinical depression, and
18 million Americans are suffering from depression at any given time.
Prozac, Paxil and the other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) have revolutionized the treatment of depression, and brought re-
lief to tens of millions of people in the industrialized world. Millions
more are being recognized as having mild depression, “dysthymia,”
which can also be treated with the new anti-depressants. Research shows
46
CITIZEN CYBORG

that the SSRIs not only relieve depression but stimulate the growth of
new neurons in the brain, helping to eliminate depression by changing
the structure of the brain and protecting the brain from the damage
caused by the stress of mental illness.
We are just at the beginning, however, of a revolution in the treat-
ment of mental illness. A growing number of drugs, like Paxil and beta
blockers, are helping people who suffer from disabling anxiety and shy-
ness. People suffering from post-traumatic stress can use the drug
propanolol to selectively dampen the emotional punch of their bad
memories or forget them altogether. Anti-drug “vaccines” are cutting
cravings to get drunk or high. Drug therapy is increasingly successful at
treating obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Cybernetic implants and prostheses are also being used to treat men-
tal illnesses. A crude contemporary example of future nano–neuro treat-
ments for mental illness is the NeuroCybernetic Prosthesis System
(NCP), originally developed to short-circuit epileptic seizures. The NCP
sends electrical impulses to the vagus nerve in the neck from a generator
tucked in a skin pocket under the collarbone. It turns out that these
shocks stop not only seizures, but also depression, just like “shock treat-
ments” or “electroconvulsive therapy” (ECT). Similar results have been
found with Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS), which zaps a de-
pressive’s brain with powerful, focused magnets. TMS is as effective at
treating depression as NCP and ECT, but without NCP’s surgery or
ECT’s memory loss, seizures or anesthesia.
Depression and schizophrenia are both highly heritable, and teams
are working to identify the genes that create them. The incidence of
mental illness will therefore also be reduced by genetic screening,
germline therapy on parents and embryos, and somatic genetic therapy
on the sufferers themselves. Once the genes for mental illness are identi-
fied, drugs can be targeted at their mechanisms. Between gene thera-
pies, better drugs and nano–neuro brain prostheses, mental illness will
likely join cancer and aging in being completely preventable and con-
trollable by the latter twenty-ﬁrst century.
Being Happier
47

Also like physical illness, the treatment of mental illness is better
in countries that respect individual rights and are egalitarian and com-
passionate toward the less fortunate. Today people in Western
democracies can’t be involuntarily committed unless they are a threat
to themselves or others, and even then their rights as wards of society
are far better respected than in the bad old days of the insane asylum.
The poor are more likely to suffer severe consequences when they do
become mentally ill, and the more egalitarian social democracies pro-
vide more generous social supports for the mentally ill. Far fewer
mentally ill people in the developing world are diagnosed and treated
than in developed nations. Addressing the unhappiness caused by
brain chemistry requires not just universal access to the new pharma-
ceuticals but, equally important, investments in social reform and
public welfare.
EVERYDAY JOY
As to the daily mismatch between our desires and our lives, new tech-
nologies promise to raise this everyday level of happiness. Like the ten-
dency to depression, the ordinary level of daily happiness is partly ge-
netically determined, as are personality traits like self-esteem that
contribute to happiness. Research ﬁnds that happiness tends to be stable
across one’s lifetime, suggesting a genetically ﬁxed happiness “set point.”
David Lykken and Auke Tellegen of the University of Minnesota found
that identical twins have the same level of happiness 44% of the time,
while nonidentical fraternal twins achieve the same level of happiness
only 8% of the time. Dean Hamer of the National Cancer Institute, also
studying twins, concluded that the heritability of “subjective well-being”
was about 40–50%. The heritability of happiness, and the existence of
the rare genetic mutation of hyperthymia, which gives its carriers an un-
failingly sunny, positive disposition, suggests that there could be future
drugs and gene therapies that jack our happiness set-point to its maxi-
mum without negative side effects.
48
CITIZEN CYBORG

Philosopher David Pearce thinks this is exactly what we should do. In
his transhumanist utilitarian manifesto “The Hedonistic Imperative,”
Pearce argues that the explicit goal of democratic public policy should
be to chemically increase citizen happiness to maximum limits. He pro-
poses future drugs that jack the dopaminergic system to maximum pro-
duction all the time, and marshals evidence that such drugs would not
suppress motivation or have other negative consequences.
Francis Fukuyama strongly objects to Pearce’s goal and brings up the
drug soma from Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World, which kept the pop-
ulace from objecting to authoritarianism and “dehumanization.”
Fukuyama wants to draw a clear line between the use of drugs to treat
depression and the use of drugs to boost the happiness of the ordinary
person. He asks, “Could all that struggle in human history have been
avoided if only people had had more serotonin in their brains?”
Such a dystopian outcome is possible if happiness drugs also make us
stupid, lethargic and listless in addition to very happy. But, as Pearce sug-
gests, a drug that made people more cheerful and optimistic would be as
likely to give people the necessary hope and energy to improve their
lives, to work on grand projects and change their world. There appears
to be no contradiction between having an optimistic outlook and posi-
tive self-image, on the one hand, and a passionate commitment to civic
engagement and social justice on the other. Perhaps these technologies
will even offer the same “peak experiences” as the religious traditions,
ranging in results from quietist spiritual bliss to full, joyous engagement
with our lives and other people. The neurosciences are rapidly identify-
ing the chemical pathways and brain structures that generate religious
experiences. Andrew Newberg has been imaging the brains of people
adept at prayer and meditation, and showing which brain structures are
involved. Neurologist and Zen practitioner James Austin has outlined
the neurophysiology of Buddhist meditation in Zen and the Brain. “En-
theogen” researchers are working on the relationship of drugs to reli-
gious states. As we gain control over our brains, if we are allowed con-
trol over our brains, we will not only be able to control pain, mental
Being Happier
49

illness and our daily level of happiness, but we will also have access to
the “ﬂow” experienced by athletes and yogis.
Freeing people from pain and depression and making them happy,
cheerful and optimistic, may also encourage engagement with life, com-
munity and democracy. Democracy, in turn, is one of the best guaran-
tors of general happiness of a population. Dutch sociologist Ruut Veen-
hoven has found, for instance, that the principal predictors of the
average happiness of a country are how equal it is (democracy) and how
prosperous it is (technology). Veenhoven created a world database of
countries’ happiness quotients, which he measured by the average level
of subjective well-being on surveys multiplied by the country’s life ex-
pectancy. The happiest nations by this measure were the northern Euro-
pean democracies, with Sweden, the Netherlands and Iceland at the top.
The two best predictors of a country’s Happy Life Expectancy were per
capita income and a measure of equality between the sexes and the
classes. Equality directly increases average happiness since each dollar in
the hand of a poor person brings them more happiness than that same
dollar in the hand of an affluent person. More equal distributions of
wealth and generous social welfare beneﬁts both lessen the suffering of
the needy and the insecurity of the middle class. Veenhoven also ﬁnds
that people are happier in societies that provide them civil and economic
freedom, which corresponds to research showing that people who feel
they are in more control of their lives are happier than those who think
external events control their lives.
So just medicating the poor and powerless is unlikely to assuage their
gnawing sense of injustice or tangible lack of stuff compared to the af-
ﬂuent. But there will probably be increasingly powerful ways to push the
bliss button in our brains, and we will each have to learn to avoid the
temptations to live with the lotus eaters. Although we should discourage
addictions in one another, the War on Drugs is such an obvious failure
and the right to control our brains so important that the decision about
how happy and how motivated we should be should remain an individ-
ual decision. 
50
CITIZEN CYBORG

John Stuart Mill said that “few human creatures would consent to be
changed into any of the lower animals for a promise of the fullest al-
lowance of a beast’s pleasures. . . . It is better to be a human being dis-
satisﬁed than a pig satisﬁed.” Mill also believed that when we are each
given the opportunity to experiment and make decisions for ourselves,
we will, in general, ﬁnd a better mix of pleasures and pursuits than can
be dictated for us by anyone else. In our transhuman future that free-
dom will include learning how to control our brains to achieve not just
constant eyes-rolling-back-in-the-head bliss, but something more varied,
interesting and meaningful, something that makes more use of our ex-
panding intelligence, a level of happy, active intelligence that I ﬁrmly be-
lieve will lead citizens to a high level of civic and political engagement.
BARRIERS TO A BETTER FUTURE
The emerging technologies promise to fulﬁll our most basic desires, for
strong, beautiful, long-lived bodies and brains capable of enjoying life
completely and complexly. As I’ve repeated many times now in different
ways, we can only fully enjoy the beneﬁts of these technologies if we
live in free, equal societies with strong, accountable democratic govern-
ments.
Fortunately the trends in the spread of democracy are almost as en-
couraging as Moore’s Law of increasing computer power. One hundred
years ago, 14% (6/43) of the world’s countries were “democratic.” In
1980, about 31% (37/121) of the world’s countries were more or less de-
mocratic. By 2002, more than 63% (121/192) of countries were more or
less democratic, including almost half the world’s population. Democ-
racy is more of a direction than a place, however, and no country in the
world is as democratic as it should be. But whatever we call the various
governments making the transition to multiparty elections and liberal
civil societies, and looking past their temporary setbacks, the world has
become progressively more democratic and more free over the last 300
years or so.
Being Happier
51

Yet unfortunately the world is not becoming more equal, and the
persistent gap between the world’s wealthy and poor is a serious threat
to both democracy and access to technology. Most of the people reading
this book are probably in the top 10% of the world’s income earners, the
10% that 90% of all medical research is oriented toward. I’m conﬁdent
that the transhuman technologies discussed here will eventually reach
the rest of the 90% of the world. But the longer it takes to bring democ-
racy and twenty-ﬁrst-century technologies to the world’s poor and pow-
erless, the more lives that will be lost and stunted.
In Our Posthuman Future Fukuyama says the lesson to be learned from
Huxley’s Brave New World is that “we should continue to feel pain, be de-
pressed or lonely, or suffer from debilitating disease, all because that is
what human beings have done for most of their existence as a species.”
Then he ruefully notes, “Certainly, no one ever got elected to Congress
on such a platform.” Unfortunately I think some people will be elected
with that platform. On the pretext of the uncertain consequences of
technological progress, the bioLuddites will attempt to restrict access to
these technologies by imposing authoritarian laws that forbid us to con-
trol our bodies and brains. In response, we need a global democratic
movement that supports the creation of these new technologies, and
that ensures that they are safe and made universally accessible in liberal
democratic societies.
In the next couple of chapters I explain some of the origins of the
bioLuddites’ resistance to technological human enhancement, and
outline an alternative vision of “cyborg citizenship” as the core of a
movement for a transhuman democracy.
52
CITIZEN CYBORG

SECTION II
THE NEW 
BIOPOLITICAL LANDSCAPE


6
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
The political terrain of the twentieth century was shaped by economic issues
of taxation and social welfare, as well as cultural issues of race, gender and
civil liberties. The political terrain of the twenty-first century will add a
new dimension—biopolitics. At one end of the biopolitical spectrum are the
bioLuddites, defending humanity from enhancement technologies, and at the
other the transhumanists, advocating for our right to become more than
human. Since biopolitics cuts across the existing political lines, it creates
very odd coalitions. Either side can win public support depending on these
coalitions and the lines they draw.
HALDANE’S REVOLUTION
John Burdon Sanderson Haldane’s father was a professor of physiology
at Oxford University in the late 1800s, and it was a foregone conclusion
that JBS would follow in his father’s footsteps. Indeed, at the age of 22
JBS was already becoming a respected biological researcher studying at
Oxford. Then World War One intervened. Haldane joined the British
army and by all accounts he was extremely brave and was wounded
twice. But he said he was shocked that he enjoyed killing so much. The
war left him profoundly disillusioned and he became convinced that
human beings could and should use science and reason to improve every
aspect of life. He would say later “the scientiﬁc point of view must come
55

out of the laboratory and be applied to the events of daily life. It is foolish
to think that the outlook which has already revolutionized industry, agri-
culture, war and medicine will prove useless when applied to the family,
the nation, or the human race.”
When Haldane returned to England and took a biology lectureship
at Cambridge University he had become both a socialist and a dedicated
evangelist for the possibilities of bettering humanity through genetics.
Genetics was in its infancy and Haldane was one of its ﬁrst and most im-
portant pioneers. Although Haldane flirted with eugenics as a young
man, he became a vocal left-wing opponent of eugenics and its embrace
of racism, classism and pseudo-science.
Nonetheless, Haldane continued to believe in the beneﬁts of genetic
science, and his 1923 speech “Daedalus, or Science and the Future” at
Cambridge, which became a bestseller the next year, revealed the
utopian hopes for genetics that motivated the contributions he made the
rest of his life. In the essay he argued that all applications of biology pro-
voke accusations that they are “unnatural.”
But Haldane was convinced that great advantages would come from
controlling our biology and from science in general. He projected a
richer society, with abundant clean energy. He imagined a future democ-
racy in which candidates for ofﬁce would compete over who could make
the next generation taller, healthier and smarter. Most controversially he
imagined a future where “ectogenesis,” gestating fetuses in artificial
wombs, would be commonplace.
One of Haldane’s close collaborators in British genetics was Julian Hux-
ley. Julian’s brother Aldous was greatly disturbed by the Daedalus essay and
its enthusiastic reception among British intellectuals, and he wrote a
scathing rebuttal in his classic Brave New World. In Huxley’s horriﬁc future
artiﬁcial wombs are used by a totalitarian government to institute a rigid
class system and expunge all lingering desires for monogamy or individual-
ity. To this day those who propose to use technology to improve the human
condition are accused of wanting to usher in a “brave new world.”
56
CITIZEN CYBORG

This book is about the conﬂict between Haldane’s optimism, that we
could overcome our squeamishness about technology and use it wisely
to build a better world, and Huxley’s pessimism that biotechnologies
will dehumanize and enslave us. Since the publication of Haldane’s
“Daedalus” and Huxley’s Brave New World the debate about the political
and ethical ramiﬁcations of transhuman technologies has been conﬁned
to the fringes of theology, bioethics, computer science and science ﬁc-
tion. Now, Leon Kass, Francis Fukuyama, Bill McKibben and a range of
anti-technology groups have brought biopolitics to center stage. These
bioLuddites argue that transhuman enhancement technologies are such
a threat to “human dignity” and democracy that they must be banned.
On the other side, the transhumanist descendents of Haldane are mobi-
lizing to defend our rights to use reason and science to improve the
human condition, to control our own bodies and to create a transhuman
democracy safe for an increasing variety of citizens.
As we overcome our human limitations some people will be consid-
ered, or consider themselves, “posthuman.” We will need to decide
when and how humans should be allowed to become posthuman.
Which forms of life should be forbidden, if any, and what does an entity
need to pass from the status of property to person to full citizen—
human DNA? intellect? communication skills? Does the right to control
one’s own body trump other people’s distaste for the choices you make?
I call this emerging complex of issues biopolitics, and this chapter ex-
plores how biopolitics is emerging as a new ideological dimension, rang-
ing from reactionary bioLuddites to radical transhumanists, to compli-
cate the landscape of twenty-ﬁrst-century politics.
DEMOCRACY AND FUTURE SHOCK
We may expect . . . that a series of shocks of the type of Darwinism will be
given to established opinions on all sorts of subjects. One cannot suggest in
detail what these shocks will be, but since the opinions on which they will
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
57

impinge are deep-seated and irrational, they will come upon us and our de-
scendants with the same air of presumption and indecency with which the
view that we are descended from monkeys came to our grandfathers. . . .
[Most] profound will be the effect of the practical applications of biology.
—J. B. S. HALDANE, 
“Daedalus, or Science and the Future”
I ﬁrst read Alvin Tofﬂer’s Future Shock in high school. My father was an
aspiring futurist and passed Tofﬂer’s 1970 bestseller along reverentially.
Tofﬂer proposed that the rate of technological change was increasing ex-
ponentially with each passing decade, and that growing numbers of peo-
ple would suffer from “the shattering stress and disorientation that we
induce in individuals by subjecting them to too much change in too
short a time.”
Toffler certainly had a point, a point familiar in sociology: People
react badly when society changes too fast and they don’t know what to
believe in anymore. The eminent sociologist Emile Durkheim proposed
in 1897 that rapid social change causes a widespread loss of certainty
about the meaning and purpose of life, a condition he called anomie,
which leads to a rise in suicide. Anomie was nineteenth-century French
for “future shock.” Social scientists returned to the idea of anomie to ex-
plain why people, disoriented by twentieth-century modernity, seek
comfort in fascism or fundamentalism. Yet, although there is a rise in
fundamentalism, most people have adapted to the accelerating rate of
change, and adapted quickly.
My grandparents were all born within a couple years of the beginning
of the twentieth century. During their lives they saw the United States
turn from a primarily agrarian society into a fully industrial and then
post-industrial society. They lived through the introduction of women’s
suffrage, the banning and legalization of alcohol, the rise of communism,
the rise and fall of fascism and the spreading use of automobiles, televi-
sion, contraception, computers, space travel, nuclear weapons, invitro
fertilization and genetic engineering. In 1900, the average life expectancy
58
CITIZEN CYBORG

in the United States was 47 years; by the end of the century it was 77
years. At the turn of the century, 80% of households were headed by
married couples with children, and by the end of the century fewer than
half were. Yet my grandparents, like most people of their generation,
adapted to modern life with apparent ease, with resilience and pragma-
tism, without feeling overwhelmed or needing to escape into a future-re-
jecting belief system.
Even though the pace of change keeps accelerating, Toffler’s con-
cerns about “future shock” now seem overblown. Of course, some of
the changes that Toffler predicted didn’t come about, at least not as
quickly as he proposed. But many of his predictions did come to pass.
Toffler predicted the adoption of gay marriage, for instance, which is
rapidly spreading in Europe and Canada, and will hopefully spread from
Massachusetts across the United States. Perhaps the current violent re-
action to gay rights and gay marriage is an example of Tofﬂer’s future
shock. If so, what alternative do we really have but to press for equal
rights anyway? Is social discomfort really a warrant for denying people
their freedom? Having Rosa Parks sit in the white section of the bus in
Montgomery, Alabama, certainly was disorienting and disturbing for
many white Southerners. The education of women was deeply trou-
bling to many tradition-minded men in nineteenth-century Europe, as it
still is in parts of the twenty-ﬁrst-century Middle East.
But eventually people adapt. People who felt that the institution of
marriage and family would be fundamentally wrecked and that social
chaos would ensue once gays lived openly next door have discovered
that life goes on. Most Europeans and most young Americans now ac-
cept that sexual orientation is irrelevant to whether a person should have
equal rights. Granting gays and lesbians legal equality has been a hard-
fought social struggle, and it is not over. Gays and lesbians are still being
harassed and killed, and the struggle to win full equality in all ﬁfty U.S.
states will take another generation. But eventually the logic of democ-
racy will make laws against gay marriage seem as curious and wrong-
headed as laws against interracial marriage are seen today.
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
59

As disorienting as the principled respect for individual liberty can some-
times be, democratic societies also empower majorities to put on the
brakes when things begin to move too fast or in the wrong direction. Tof-
ﬂer argued in Future Shock that futurology needed to be woven into democ-
racy so that the public could anticipate and control the consequences of
new technologies. Anticipatory democracy as envisioned by Tofﬂer, and
practiced around the world, both slows the pace of change and adapts the
public to it by giving voice to their concerns and a sense of empowerment
over social change. In democracies people in the minority can express their
complaints and organize in like-minded associations and communities.
People living under authoritarianism are more likely to feel they are
being steamrolled by the future—especially today by the capitalist
American future—and react with authoritarianism and violence of their
own.
In the last thirty years many governments have responded to Tofﬂer’s
call for “anticipatory democracy” by appointing futurist advisory commis-
sions. They have had mixed success. For instance, President Jimmy Carter
appointed an interdepartmental commission to craft the Global 2000 Re-
port. Like the pessimistic Club of Rome studies that projected global apoc-
alypse by 2000 based on Malthusian modeling, the massive Global 2000 re-
port projected imminent environmental degradation, shrinking resources,
vast increases in poverty and widespread starvation, unless drastic efforts
were made at population control and sustainable technology. The report
was delivered to President Ronald Reagan in 1981 and promptly ignored.
In the twenty years since that report, a combination of technological
advances, incremental environmental policies and successful population
control efforts have kept the worst of its projections from coming true.
This effort at anticipatory democracy failed because our efforts at antic-
ipatory social policy were incrementally effective. The environment is
still being assaulted, stores of nonrenewable resources are still shrinking
and global inequality continues to widen. But the present global crisis is
not of the apocalyptic dimensions envisioned in the late 1970s. The
Global 2000 Report is an important cautionary example; bodies charged
60
CITIZEN CYBORG

with anticipating the future can wildly overestimate the risks of techno-
logical progress, and underestimate our social and technological capac-
ity to address these risks.
President Carter also commissioned the ﬁrst executive-level Ameri-
can bioethics commission, The President’s Commission for the Study of
Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research.
By 1982, the Commission had issued ten reports that have had far-reach-
ing impacts, on topics such as the deﬁnition of death, informed consent,
genetic screening, health care access, life-sustaining treatment, privacy
and conﬁdentiality and genetic engineering. The brain-death laws that
the commission drafted, which I discuss later, have been adopted by
most states and most of the industrial world. In the case of Carter’s
bioethics commission, and similar bodies in many countries, anticipa-
tory democracy helped adapt laws and values to technological change,
tempering our future shock.
BIOETHICS AS BIOPOLITICS
After the Carter commission’s mandate expired, Congress and Presi-
dents Reagan and Bush were unable to appoint bioethics advisory bod-
ies because of opposition from the anti-abortion lobby. Bioethics, it
turns out, is just an especially philosophical branch of politics. Bioethics
is proto-biopolitics being fought out in rareﬁed circles—academia and
think tanks—before it breaks onto the popular consciousness and be-
comes biopolitics proper. Even the core principles of contemporary
bioethics—autonomy, justice and beneﬁcence—are direct corollaries of
the French revolutionary slogans of liberty, equality and solidarity. Un-
fortunately those aren’t the only values shaping bioethics.
In the 1970s, the focus of most bioethicists’ attention was on pro-
tecting patients from unethical scientiﬁc research and overly aggressive
applications of end-of-life care, protecting the public from science and
technology rather than securing their rights to it. Bioethicists also began
to raise questions about the dangers of cloning, invitro fertilization and
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
61

genetic engineering. There were occasional courageous provocateurs,
such as Joseph Fletcher, who argued that humans have a right and oblig-
ation to control their own genetics. But as bioethics matured it became
clear that professional bioethicists gained far more traction by exacer-
bating the public’s Luddite anxieties than by assuaging them. How often
would a reporter call a bioethicist for comment if all he got was “That
sounds like a wonderful medical advance, and it should help a lot of peo-
ple—no problem”? If cloning is really just the creation of delayed twins,
and not a profound threat to everything we hold dear, who is going to
fund bioethics conferences to address it, and empower bioethicists to
forbid scientiﬁc research into cloning? Rather than using their core de-
mocratic principles to ease our future shock and secure our rights to
technology, many bioethicists became propagandists of future shock.
Today many bioethicists, informed by and contributing to the grow-
ing Luddite orientation in the social sciences and humanities, start from
the assumption that new biotechnologies are being developed in uneth-
ical ways by a rapacious, patriarchal medical–industrial complex, and
will have myriad unpleasant consequences for society, especially for
women, the poor and the powerless. Rather than emphasizing the lib-
erty and autonomy of individuals who may want to adopt new tech-
nologies, or arguing for more equitable access to new biotechnologies,
bioethicists often see it as their responsibility to slow the adoption of
biotechnology. The appointment of arch bioLuddite Leon Kass as the
chair of President Bush’s Bioethics Commission (PCB) in 2001 marked
the crest of the bioLuddite inﬂuence in bioethics. It has, in turn, moti-
vated non-Luddite bioethicists to become more vocal in opposition.
While President Bill Clinton’s Presidential Bioethics Advisory Com-
mission was broadly representative of academic bioethics, the political de-
sign of Bush’s PCB was quite naked. The elevation of Kass, a man who
has opposed every intervention into human reproduction from invitro fer-
tilization to reproductive cloning, was a shrewd political payoff to the
right-to-life movement, since he could clothe opposition to research on
embryos in secular, albeit pre-modern, philosophical language. Kass in
62
CITIZEN CYBORG

turn stacked the committee with Christian conservative bioethicists, such
as Mary Ann Glendon and Gilbert Meilander, and conservatives with little
or no connection to academic bioethics, such as Robert George, Francis
Fukuyama, James Q. Wilson and Charles Krauthammer. The executive
director for the PCB was Dean Clancy, a former aide to far-Right Texan
Republican leader Dick Armey. After leading the PCB to recommend the
criminalization of the use of embryos and embryo cloning in research,
Kass focused the PCB on opposition to human enhancement, from
psychopharmaceuticals to life extension, resulting in the 2003 opus Be-
yond Therapy. This report reflects Kass’s well-known philosophical
“yuck factor” or “wisdom of repugnance” approach: If a practice is scary
or repugnant, that is sufﬁcient grounds to ban it. Kass and the bioLuddites
want to create new laws and institutions with the mandate to forbid tech-
nologies on the basis of these vague anxieties.
One might mark the opening salvo of the liberal, transhumanist-
inclined bioethics resistance to Kassism as the essay “Leon the Profes-
sional” by philosopher Glenn McGee, which prefaced a special 2003
volume of the American Journal of Bioethics devoted to the ethics of
human–animal transgenic experimentation. McGee hits the central
tenet of Kassist bioLuddism: “If we get past the ‘yuck’—as is suggested
by more than half the contributors to the collection—we ﬁnd that engi-
neering of humans is not only ubiquitous and a function of ordinary
human life as well as high-technology science, but also that the rules for
avoiding ‘yuck’ are a mere matter of faith themselves in the articles of a
ﬂimsy new kind of neoconservative natural law theory. And perhaps we
are better off yucky but complicated than in the clean, well-lit spaces of
the illusory safety of a ‘nature’ that doesn’t really exist.”
JEREMY RIFKIN AND ODD BEDFELLOWS
I have no doubt that in reality the future will be vastly more surprising than
anything I can imagine.
—J. B. S. HALDANE
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
63

Although Kass and the Christian Right are the most influential seg-
ment of the emerging bioLuddite bloc, they have increasingly been
joined by people from across the political spectrum, including from
the Left. The principal far-sighted strategist who has brought the Left
ﬂank of bioLuddism into alignment with the Right is the veteran activist
and writer Jeremy Rifkin.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Rifkin was an anti-war organizer and socialist
activist. But in the late 1970s, Rifkin had a vision that the terrain of fu-
ture politics would be fundamentally transformed by biotechnology in
the same way that steam power and electricity had created fundamen-
tally new political and economic orders. In 1977, Rifkin went on to start
his think tank, the Foundation on Economic Trends, dedicated to throw-
ing roadblocks in the way of biotech. Rifkin named his nemesis algeny,
“the improvement of existing organisms and the design of wholly new
ones with the intent of perfecting their performance.” But, for Rifkin,
algeny was also “a way of thinking about nature, and it is this new way
of thinking that sets the course for the next great epoch in history.”
Rifkin quickly discovered the importance of alliances with the reli-
gious Right built on their shared critiques of algenic hubris. In one cam-
paign Rifkin organized disgruntled former surrogate mothers and shep-
herded them around the United States to help pass laws banning
surrogacy contracts. Rifkin used that campaign to build ties between
Catholic conservatives who supported the Papal ban on surrogacy and
feminists uneasy with “uteruses for hire.”
One of the issues that Rifkin sees as a clear and present danger is the
crossing of species barriers using recombinant genetic engineering, a
point that resonates with Christians concerned about humans “playing
God.” So Rifkin reached out to religious groups arguing that these re-
combinant techniques were not only dangerous capitalist imperialism,
but also were violating God’s plan for separately created species and rob-
bing life of its “sacredness.” In 1995, Rifkin announced that leaders rep-
resenting more than eighty different religious groups had signed his
“Joint Appeal Against Human and Animal Patenting,” which read: “We,
64
CITIZEN CYBORG

the undersigned religious leaders, oppose the patenting of human and an-
imal life forms. We are disturbed by the U.S. Patent Ofﬁce’s recent decision
to patent human body parts and several genetically engineered animals.
We believe that humans and animals are creations of God, not humans,
and as such should not be patented as human inventions.”
In 2001, a heated battle raged between a broad coalition defending
medical researchers’ use of cloned embryos to generate stem cells and
the right-to-life movement and new Republican president who favored a
ban on use of embryonic stem cells. In the midst of this battle Rifkin
sent out a petition to support a ban on “cloning” to prominent left-
wingers and feminists. His petition had neo-conservatives William Kris-
tol and Francis Fukuyama as co-signatories, and Rifkin said he wanted to
unite the social conservative and liberal Left camps around a shared op-
position to “cloning.” Although many prominent progressives signed
on, a good number thought the statement was calling only for the crim-
inalization of reproductive cloning, not for the criminalization of med-
ical research using embryos. Many said they would not have signed if
they had understood that they were backing Republican legislation to
criminalize medical research.
The petition lured in the inattentive progressives because it played on
the vague bioLuddite assumptions that often substitute for progressive
political analysis: Biotechnologies only serve the nefarious ends of their
corporate manufacturers; embryos and the natural order need protec-
tion from “commodification” and “instrumental values.” The letter
read: “We are also concerned about the increasing bio-industrialization
of life by the scientific community and life science companies and
shocked and dismayed that clonal human embryos have been patented
and declared to be human ‘inventions.’ We oppose efforts to reduce
human life and its various parts and processes to the status of mere re-
search tools, manufactured products, commodities and utilities.”
Rifkin is quite clear about the importance of his odd coalitions to the
coming “fusion biopolitics.” In a 2001 article titled “Odd Coupling of
Political Bedfellows Takes Shape in the New Biotech Era,” Rifkin writes:
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
65

“The Biotech Era will bring with it a different constellation of political vi-
sions and social forces, just as the Industrial Age did. The current debate
over embryo and stem cell research already is loosening the old political
allegiances and categories. It is just the beginning of the new politics of
biology.” Rifkin is right about the new biopolitics, and his successes build
on the commonalities of bioLuddism on the Left and Right. But the tran-
shumanists are building some odd coalitions as well.
POLITICAL IDEOLOGIES
I can foresee the election placards of 300 years hence . . . “Vote for Smith and
more musicians,” “Vote for O’Leary and more girls,” or perhaps ﬁnally “Vote
for Macpherson and a prehensile tail for your great-grandchildren.”
—J. B. S. HALDANE, 
“Daedalus, or Science and the Future”
Most people don’t describe their beliefs with an “-ist” at the end, and the
number who do has been shrinking. More and more people are becom-
ing independents, tugged back and forth by the small percentage of the
population who are political activists and ideologues. But people do
know they want health, longevity, security and prosperity for themselves
and their kids. When push comes to shove very few are eager to em-
brace sickness, disease, mental decline and early mortality in order to
avoid hubris or preserve their “humanness.” So the constituency for a
political ideology that promotes human enhancement includes the vast
majority of the planet’s people, rich and poor, religious and secular.
On the other hand, everyone also wants to avoid a future with apoca-
lyptic threats, extreme inequality and wrenching social conﬂicts, so the fear-
mongering bioLuddites and religious fundamentalists may also be able to
win majorities for bans on human enhancement. The fear-mongers cer-
tainly have the head start. But one or more brands of techno-optimism will
inevitably emerge to organize people’s hopes. What ﬂavors will emerge?
Why do some ﬂavors win out over others?
66
CITIZEN CYBORG

Political ideologies are simplifying rules of thumb that allow people
to make sense of thousands of choices, identities and interests. Ideolo-
gies crystallize out of the swirling mess of ideas in the heat of speciﬁc
conﬂicts. We ﬁnd ourselves on one side or the other of a picket line, and
try to ﬁgure out why we are on one side and other folks are on the other.
People on each side have different theories and visions of how to pro-
ceed, lines they want to draw for who belongs in which corner. The ex-
planations and visions that win, partly by chance and partly by the hard
work of their advocates, become ideologies, and they take on a life of
their own. They need a little internal logic and consistency, but not a lot.
Different ideologies can win and shape struggles in any given situation.
When about sixty members of the small Students for a Democratic
Society (SDS) gathered in Michigan in 1962 there was little indication
that their Port Huron Declaration would become one of the deﬁning
documents of the North American New Left, or that SDS would grow
to 100,000 members and more than 400 chapters. The Declaration advo-
cated a “participatory democracy” that would transcend the stalemate
of capitalism versus communism. There were other thinkers, organiza-
tions and activists at the time who could have become leaders of the stu-
dent, anti-war and civil rights movements, all with their own theories
and manifestoes. In other countries variant ideologies dominated the
1968 student movement niche, such as the anarcho-surrealist Situation-
ists in France, the ultra-nationalists of Turkey or the communist sects in
Japan. But through a combination of luck and extraordinary organiza-
tional skills, the early leaders of the SDS helped make “participatory
democracy” a central part of U.S. New Left ideology.
Future biopolitical ideologies are emerging in the same way. Rifkin
or Fukuyama may lose out to a more successful species in the bioLud-
dite niche, and the transhumanist bloc may be organized by people who
don’t call themselves “transhumanist.” But the ideological schism be-
tween bioLuddites and transhumanists is emerging, and aspiring orga-
nizers are jockeying to deﬁne the coming battles in terms that favor their
place in the ideological spectrum.
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
67

MAPPING BIOPOLITICS
In the last century you could pretty much accurately place someone polit-
ically by where they stood on two basic sets of political issues: economics
and culture. Economic conservatives aren’t interested in reducing inequal-
ity, and don’t care for the welfare state, trade unions, taxation, business
regulation and economic redistribution. Economic progressives want peo-
ple to be more equal, and generally favor all of these government mea-
sures. Cultural conservatives are generally nationalistic, ethnocentric, reli-
giously conservative and skeptical of women’s equality, sexual freedom
and civil liberties. Cultural progressives are generally secular and cos-
mopolitan, and supporters of civil liberties and minority and sexual rights.
Where people and parties fall out on each of these axes predicts their
positions on other issues on that axis, but not how they feel about issues
on the other axis. The issues within each axis have some ideological and
practical consistency that hold them together. People who are tolerant
of changing gender roles and women’s rights are also more open to
changing sexual mores such as gay rights. Opponents of social welfare
are more likely to support lower taxes. But knowing how someone feels
about women wearing pants doesn’t tell you how they feel about right-
to-work laws.
The terrain that these two axes create, as shown in Figure 6.1, allows
us to map out how and why alliances form and shift. The economic in-
terests of white working-class people have generally led them to the
upper half of the box, economic progressivism, while their educational
backgrounds have made them more culturally conservative, leaning
them toward the left-hand side of the box. So the “natural” politics of
the  working classes is the culturally conservative populism of Huey
Long or Pat Buchanan in the United States, or a Juan Perón of Ar-
gentina. Trade unions and social democratic parties have generally been
led by well-educated cosmopolitans, however, people trying to build al-
liances with the culturally liberal middle classes, so they pull in working-
class support for the upper-right-hand “social democratic” corner. When
68
CITIZEN CYBORG

working people stop believing their economic interests are represented
by the social democrats, their distaste for immigration, gay rights, afﬁr-
mative action and abortion allows them to be pulled back toward the re-
ligious Right in the lower-left-hand corner, anchored by the conservative
churches that workers and the poor often attend.
Gender is also tied to political leanings, with men tending toward cul-
tural and economic conservatism. Economically, men tend to favor the
cowboy individualism of the free market, whereas women are more
supportive of the nurturing welfare state. Culturally, men are less sup-
portive of women’s rights and sexual diversity. So men tend toward the
New Right corner and women toward the social democrats.
What is really interesting and new about twenty-ﬁrst-century biopol-
itics, as illustrated in Figure 6.2, is that this new, third dimension sticks
straight out of the two-dimensional map. This gives rise to Rifkin’s odd
Left–Right coalitions.
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
69
FIGURE 6.1
The Political Terrain of the Twentieth Century
Progressives
Conservatives
Conservatives
Progressives
Cultural Politics
Economic Politics
Populists
Libertarians
New Right
Social
Democrats

As biopolitics crystallizes out of issues and political struggles from
treatment of the comatose and stem cells to genetically modiﬁed food
and cloning, activists, parties and ordinary citizens are nudged toward
biopolitical consistency. In the next chapter, I talk about ﬁve technolo-
gies, such as artiﬁcial wombs and the intellectual enhancement of ani-
mals, that will force people to take a side on one of the fundamental
biopolitical disagreements between bioLuddites and transhumanists:
whether citizenship should be tied to psychological personhood or ge-
netic humanness.
As with the economic and cultural axes, there are already constituen-
cies that lean toward one end or the other of the biopolitical spectrum.
Looking just at techno-optimism, one element of the biopolitical schism,
the constituencies that feel most positive about human reproductive and
genetics technology tend to also feel optimistic about the space program,
nanotechnology and other technologies. The reverse is not always the case
though; more Americans are optimistic about the beneﬁts of non-genetic
technologies, such as space and computing, than genetics. In other words,
attitudes toward genetic and reproductive technology are a more sensitive
barometer of someone’s techno-optimism. If you are optimistic about
genetics you have put future shock behind you.
70
CITIZEN CYBORG
FIGURE 6.2
The Political Space of the Twenty-First Century
Economic
Politics
Biopolitics
Progressive
Conservative
Progressive
Conservative
Cultural Politics
BioLuddism
Transhumanism

A large 2000 National Science Foundation (NSF) survey of American
attitudes toward science and technology asked whether the beneﬁts of
genetic engineering would outweigh its dangers. Four out of ten Amer-
icans thought genetic engineering’s beneﬁts would outweigh the costs,
while 28% thought the beneﬁts and costs would be balanced, and 32%
believed costs will outweigh benefits. In another national survey of
Americans in 2000, conducted by the Public Policy Research Institute at
Texas A&M University, 53% said that genetic engineering would “im-
prove our way of life in the next 20 years,” and 30% said it wouldn’t. In
these and other surveys the majority of American respondents have
been in favor of access to invitro fertilization, genetic therapy and ge-
netic screening and abortion for disabled fetuses. Still, only a minority
are in favor of the “enhancement” technologies. About a quarter of
Americans favor genetic enhancement and “designer babies” and about
one in ten favor legal reproductive cloning.
On the other end, hard-core bioLuddites appear to comprise only
about a quarter to a third of the population. About a third of Americans
consistently oppose stem cell research and therapeutic cloning. In a 2002
survey of Americans conducted by the Genetics and Public Policy Center
at Johns Hopkins University, a quarter to a half were opposed to prenatal
selection and invitro fertilization. So, depending on the issue, between
10% to a majority might end up with the transhumanists, and 25% to a
majority might end up with the bioLuddites.
The dynamics of the bioLuddite–transhumanist split vary around
the world. Europeans, still spooked by Nazi eugenics, are more negative
toward all reproductive technology and genetic engineering. Asians, on
the other hand, are generally more positive than Americans toward
these technologies. In a 1993 survey of more than 900 Indians and Thais,
a majority in both countries supported genetic enhancement of physical
characteristics and intelligence, and even making people more ethical.
China has a law speciﬁcally directed toward improving genetic health,
and Singapore’s government has invested in efforts to encourage college
graduates to have more children.
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
71

Generational change and rising educational levels and secularism
worldwide appear to be on the side of techno-optimism since it is more
common among the young, the college-educated and the secular. Men
also lean toward techno-optimism. BioLuddism is more common
among older people, the less educated, the more religious and women.
In the 2000 NSF survey, men believed genetic engineering’s benefits
would outweigh costs 11% more often than women did (45% to 34%),
and college graduates were more optimistic than those with high school
diplomas by 11% (48% to 37%). A 2001 Gallup poll on animal cloning
found that 56% of those with postgraduate education said animal
cloning should be allowed, compared to only 19% of those with a high
school diploma. Women were much more likely to oppose animal
cloning than men (74% of women to 53% of men opposed).
Given these predilections, it is natural that the ﬁrst transhumanist or-
ganizations have been more attractive to affluent, well-educated men,
many with libertarian leanings down in corner “B” in Figure 6.3. But
there are ways to craft the transhumanist message and coalition to ap-
peal to and address the interests of women, working people and other
72
CITIZEN CYBORG
FIGURE 6.3
Ideological Positions in the Twenty-First Century
Economic
Politics
Biopolitics
Progressive
Conservative
C
A
Progressive
Conservative
B
D
Cultural Politics
A= Democratic transhumanism
B= Libertarian transhumanism
C= Left bioLuddism
D= Right bioLuddism
BioLuddism
Transhumanism

constituencies suspicious of technology for one reason or the other.
This book is an argument for building a new radical biopolitics around
corner “A” where social democracy meets transhumanism. I call this cor-
ner “democratic transhumanism.”
In Chapter 7 I outline the principal argument that divides the bioLud-
dites and the transhumanists: the conﬂict between personhood-based “cy-
borg citizenship” versus “human-racism.” Then in Chapters 8 and 9, I de-
scribe other arguments and ideologies that make up the tapestry of
bioLuddism, weaving together the progressive bioLuddites at “C” and
the religious New Right bioLuddites down in “D.” In Chapter 10 I dis-
cuss the history of the ideas that make up transhumanism, to show that
it is a historical accident that most transhumanists today are found down
in the libertarian corner “B.” In the last part of the book I outline the de-
mocratic transhumanism that is emerging and sketch out the nature of
some of its agenda.
From Future Shock to Biopolitics
73


7
Cyborg Citizenship
The most important disagreement between bioLuddites and transhumanists
is over who we should grant citizenship, with all its rights and protections.
BioLuddites advocate “human-racism,” that citizenship and rights have
something to do with simply having a human genome. Transhumanists,
along with most bioethicists and the Western democratic tradition itself, believe
citizenship should be based on “personhood,” having feelings and consciousness.
The struggle to replace human-racism with personhood can be found at the be-
ginnings and ends of life, and at the imaginary lines between humans and ani-
mals, and humans and posthumans. Because they have not adopted the person-
hood view, the human-racists are disturbed by lives that straddle the imaginary
human/non-human line. But technological advances at each of these margins
will force our society in the coming decades to complete the trajectory of 400
years of liberal democracy and choose “cyborg citizenship.”
BETWEENNESS AND THE “YUCK FACTOR”
The chemical or physical inventor is always a Prometheus. There is no great
invention, from ﬁre to ﬂying, which has not been hailed as an insult to some
god. But if every physical and chemical invention is a blasphemy, every bio-
logical invention is a perversion. There is hardly one which, on first being
75

brought to the notice of an observer from any nation which has not previously
heard of their existence, would not appear to him as indecent and unnatural.
—J. B. S. HALDANE, 
“Daedalus, or Science and the Future”
In this age in which everything is held to be permissible so long as it is freely
done, and in which our bodies are regarded as mere instruments of our au-
tonomous rational will, repugnance may be the only voice left that speaks up
to defend the central core of our humanity. 
—LEON KASS, 
“The Wisdom of Repugnance”
Most bioethicists are skeptical of Leon Kass’s idea that taboos and gut
reactions are the path to wisdom. After all, as Haldane says, the progress
of civilization has often involved overcoming our gut feelings that some
things were obviously wrong or immoral. Until the French Revolution
prohibitions against performing autopsies stymied progress in under-
standing anatomy. What, Haldane asks, must the tribe have thought of
the ﬁrst person to suggest drinking the milk from a cow?
We are correctly repulsed by actual violence and oppression against
real people, by murder and child abuse. But often our gut feelings are
simply indefensible prejudices about other peoples’ choices. One of the
greatest “yuck factors” for twentieth-century conservatives was “race-
mixing.” Whites were whites, blacks were blacks and mixed-race chil-
dren were abominations. Then the logic of the equality of persons, re-
gardless of skin color, broke through the laws against race-mixing and
slowly the feelings of revulsion have disappeared. As bioethicist Art Ca-
plan said, “The problem with repugnance and fear-and-trembling ethics
is they are good starting points but bad ending points. . . . If intuition is
the last word, then African-Americans are at the back of the bus, women
and people who have no property aren’t voting, and we still have slaves.”
Today the “abominations” enraging the bioLuddites are lives that
blur the ancient cognitive categories that separate animals and humans,
76
CITIZEN CYBORG

humans and machines, the living and the dead, the real and the artiﬁcial,
men and women, the young and the old. In the twenty-first century,
transhuman technologies will not only let us live longer, be smarter and
have more control over our emotions and our bodies. They will also per-
mit us to clone, to mix human and animal DNA and genetically modify
our bodies for aesthetic reasons. We will incorporate computers into our
bodies and brains, and simulate human brains in computers. Day by day
our fellow citizens will become rapidly more strange, and we will need
new categories and a new understanding of democracy to make new
sense of the world.
In the 1930s, anthropologists began to describe cultural myths and
belief systems as if they were architectural structures, with sets of sym-
bols that were weighted and balanced against one another in a giant lat-
ticework, meaningless outside each culture but absolutely essential in-
side them. Anthropologist Mary Douglas used this method to
understand kashrut, Hebrew dietary laws, in her 1970 book Purity and
Danger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution and Taboo. In Leviticus and
Deuteronomy the Israelites were speciﬁcally instructed to eat ox, sheep,
goats, gazelle and deer. But they were forbidden to eat the “abominable”
animals: camels, rabbits and pigs. Douglas proposed that the logic of
kosher (clean) and treif (unclean) was that clean animals either had cloven
hooves and chewed a cud or did neither, as with birds. But camels chew
cud and don’t have cloven hooves. Rabbits appear to chew cud and are
not cloven-hoofed. Pigs are cloven-hoofed but do not chew cud. So these
confusing animals are unclean “abominations.” The same logic can be
seen at work when Leviticus condemns men who “lie with other men as
they would with a woman,” and in the moral codes of many other cul-
tures. Things that lie between the understood categories of the cultural
world are often considered abominable and frightening.
Yuval Levin addressed the betweenness taboo in his article “The
Paradox of Conservative Bioethics” in the premier issue of the bioLud-
dite journal New Atlantis. Levin, a senior research analyst for Kass on the
U.S. President’s Council on Bioethics, said the agenda of conservative,
Cyborg Citizenship
77

Kassite bioethics is to argue for bioLuddite bans, against the advancing
tide of individual freedom, based on nothing more than taboos. Echoing
Mary Douglas, Levin deﬁnes taboos as “the transgressing of a boundary,
or a mixing together of things that ought to be kept separate. Taboos
stand guard at the border crossings between the realm of the properly
human and those of the beasts and the gods.” We know how humans
should be treated, and we know how non-humans should be treated. But
what should we do with the creatures in between?
Levin goes on to warn conservatives that when they debate how to
regulate abominable biotech, instead of just call for it to be banned, they
normalize the idea of a transhuman future. The central problem for
conservatives who defend taboos, says Levin, is that democracies do not
forbid things just because they are taboo. Democratic societies require
compelling reasons to interfere with people’s liberty, and religious preju-
dices and gut feelings don’t count. According to Levin, once conserva-
tives begin to defend their taboos in democratic debate, they win battles
but lose the war.
HUMAN RACISM
Levin is right. And democratic debate will defeat bioLuddite bans
against human enhancement for a second reason. Not only are democ-
ratic societies expanding personal liberty, they are increasingly speciﬁc
about what kinds of lives do and don’t get to enjoy the beneﬁts of that
liberty. The bioLuddites advocate human-racism, that some ill-deﬁned
“humanness” is the green card to citizenship. Letting in non-humans or
posthumans, or excluding embryonic or brain-dead humans, threatens
the very fabric of the human-racist concept of the democratic polity. In
Our Posthuman Future, Francis Fukuyama argues that any effort to
change basic human biological traits threatens the entire system of
human rights since these traits are the only common bond we share.
Left-leaning bioethicists George Annas and Lori Andrews call for an in-
ternational treaty to ban cloning and inheritable genetic modiﬁcations in
78
CITIZEN CYBORG

their article “Protecting the Endangered Human”: “Cloning and inheri-
table genetic alterations can be seen as crimes against humanity of a
unique sort: they are techniques that can alter the essence of humanity
itself (and thus threaten to change the foundation of human rights) by
taking human evolution into our own hands and directing it toward the
development 
of
a 
new 
species, 
sometimes 
termed 
the
‘posthuman.’. . . Membership in the human species is central to the
meaning and enforcement of human rights.”
In an earlier law review article Annas makes clear that cloning and
germline modiﬁcations are only the ﬁrst items on the list of species-altering
technologies he would want banned. Annas would also support interna-
tional treaties to ban “human/machine cyborgs, xenografts (transplants of
animal organs), artiﬁcial organs, embryo research and brain alterations.
These could all ﬁt into a new category of ‘crimes against humanity’ in the
strict sense, actions that threaten the integrity of the human species itself.”
With this expansive deﬁnition we can imagine makers of prosthetic limbs
and cochlear implants being thrown into prison in the Hague for having
created posthumans.
These well-intentioned advocates of human-racism, from Annas and
Andrews on the Left to Kass, Fukuyama and the Christian Right, have
missed the real insight of Western democracy: Citizenship is for persons,
not humans. Persons don’t have to be human, and not all humans are
persons. To create a transhuman democracy we will have to establish a
new deﬁnition of citizenship, a “cyborg citizenship,” based on person-
hood rather than humanness. With cyborg citizenship we can deal with
the scary boundary-crossers, the cyborgs, the animal–human hybrids,
the genetically engineered kids, the clones and the robots. We can add
some more chairs at the table.
DEMOCRACY FOR PERSONS, NOT HUMANS
All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the ju-
risdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the state wherein
Cyborg Citizenship
79

they reside. No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the
privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state
deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law;
nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
—14TH AMENDMENT OF THE 
U.S. CONSTITUTION
I was twelve in 1973 when I found my mother and aunts studying a piece
of paper in my grandmother’s living room. The fragile document was
an old photocopy of my great-great-grandfather’s will. The man had
been a successful farmer from a large Virginia family and he had a lot of
things to give away. One piece of land, with dimensions marked by a
tree, a stone and a river, went to the ﬁrst child. The brass bedstead went
to the second child. The “slave Bessie” went to the third.
My mother and aunts showed me the document with a mixture of
genealogist accomplishment and shame and embarrassment that it
linked us so clearly to slavery. We had just come through the civil rights
era, and my parents were white liberals. They taught me to sing “We
Shall Overcome” in preschool. My aunts had adopted the tolerant mod-
ern views of my grandmother, and none of them had any patience for
grandfather’s cranky rants about Jews and blacks. This one line in which
an ancestor of ours treated a human being as equivalent to a brass bed-
stead laid bare the distance we had come in little more than 100 years,
from seeing Africans as beings, human or not, who could be owned, to
seeing them as persons who could only own themselves.
During the era of slavery there was violent disagreement over
whether Africans were human or not. “Polygenists” held that God had
created Africans and Europeans as separate species or that they came
from different evolutionary origins and were biologically different. The
“monogenists” held that Europeans and Africans both descended from
Adam and Eve, or that they came from the same naturally evolved
proto-human and had only recently evolved apart. While it may sound
like the polygenists would all be racists and the monogenists all aboli-
80
CITIZEN CYBORG

tionists, in fact there was no absolute relationship between belief that
Africans were human and belief in the abolition of slavery. There were
monogenists and polygenists on both sides of the slavery debate. Some
apologists for slavery believed that Africans were simply inferior hu-
mans, descended from a lost tribe of Israel, but that slavery of other hu-
mans was a part of the natural order of things as described in the Old
Testament. Some opponents of slavery accepted the notion of funda-
mental biological differences between Africans and Europeans, but
found the idea of enslaving intelligent beings abhorrent. The “human-
ness” of Africans was really irrelevant to the debate over whether
Africans and Europeans should be treated as equals and have the same
citizenship rights. The real moral question was whether Africans, what-
ever their differences in origins and biology from whites, were similar
enough to Europeans in their capacity for thought and feeling to require
that whites recognize them as fellow citizens, as fellow persons.
The seventeenth-century British democratic philosopher John Locke
said, “Consider what person stands for; which, I think, is a thinking, in-
telligent being, that has reason and reﬂection.” The thinking mind has
been both the beginning and end of liberal democratic thought ever
since. John Stuart Mill argued for liberal democracy in On Liberty and
Considerations on Representative Government on the grounds that democ-
racy was best for the “cultivation of personality,” the fullest potential of
each thinking person.
The radical logic of Western democracy unfolded in politics like
water rushing through a kinked hose. Another half century after the
emancipation of the slaves the logic of citizenship forced the United
States to grant women the vote. Again the argument for extending the
vote to women, made by Mill and the suffragists, had nothing to do with
whether women were human or not, but with whether women were ca-
pable of achieving the same level of reason and mature reflection as
men, whether they were full persons.
Transhumanism is a direct product of this radical democratic tradi-
tion. Transhumanists, like their democratic humanist forebears, want to
Cyborg Citizenship
81

create a global society in which all persons, on the basis of their capacity
for thought and feeling, can participate as equal citizens, control their
own affairs and achieve their fullest potential, regardless of the charac-
teristics of their bodies.
Just like the abolitionists and suffragists, transhumanists ﬁnd them-
selves arrayed against the defenders of a biologically and religiously pro-
scribed understanding of democracy. Unfortunately the movement for
freedom and equality of persons has become synonymous with the
phrase “human rights,” and the identiﬁcation of the democratic rights
project with the human species is made explicit in the “Universal Decla-
ration of Human Rights” (UDHR) adopted by the United Nations in
1948: “Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation
of freedom, justice and peace in the world. . . .” The Universal Declara-
tion on the Human Genome and Human Rights, adopted by the UN
General Assembly in 1998, is even more explicit about the supposed ge-
netic basis of human rights: “The human genome underlies the funda-
mental unity of all members of the human family, as well as the recog-
nition of their inherent dignity and diversity.”
Enforcing the rights guaranteed in the UDHR throughout the world
is one of the most important projects for our generation, and I will talk
about ways to enforce them toward the end of this book. But as we go
about fulfilling the promise of the UDHR we also need to expand its
mandate. The UDHR also says “All human beings [are] . . . endowed
with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a
spirit of brotherhood,” and that we need to guarantee our equal rights
regardless of race, sex, “birth or other status.” Being “human,” whatever
that means, is one of those irrelevant birth statuses, while “reason and
conscience” are the legitimate markers of who we owe the “spirit of
brotherhood.”
In the 1970s, the critique of human-racism implicit in the democratic
tradition began to express itself in the form of “personhood theory.” The
writings of Joseph Fletcher, Peter Singer, Michael Tooley and others have
82
CITIZEN CYBORG

helped tease out exactly which elements of reason and conscience are im-
portant for exactly which kinds of rights. Personhood bioethicists debate
the rights of embryos, fetuses and babies, of different kinds of animals,
and of the brain dead, arguing about the relative importance of the abil-
ity to suffer, or communicate or plan. But whatever the conditions they
consider most important, personhood bioethicists agree that the rights of
citizenship are due to persons, not humans, that not all humans are per-
sons, and that humanness is not a necessary condition for personhood.
In the rest of this chapter I discuss some of the bioethical and tran-
shumanist cases that are pushing liberal democracies toward a person-
hood-based cyborg citizenship.
EMBRYOS OUTSIDE WOMBS
Advances that keep embryos and fetuses alive outside the womb are
being made at both ends of pregnancy. Since the 1978 arrival of Louise
Brown, the ﬁrst “test-tube baby,” invitro fertilization (IVF) has become
an accepted and commonplace practice. More than 350 fertility clinics
provide IVF in the United States, and more than a million children have
been born using the technique worldwide. Each year more than 100,000
artificial reproductive procedures, such as invitro fertilization and re-
lated techniques, are performed in the United States, resulting in tens
of thousands of children.
In 1978, the bioLuddites greeted Louise Brown with all the fear and
loathing now directed at the prospect of human clones. While most of
the public’s anxiety about IVF has dissipated, the Catholic Church is still
opposed to invitro fertilization on three grounds. First, sperm is ob-
tained for the procedure through masturbation, which is a sin. Second, it
is sinful for the act of conception to be separated from sex. Third, invitro
fertilization requires the creation of multiple embryos, only some of
which will be used for implantation. Since each embryo is a “human
life,” and Catholic human-racists believe embryonic humans deserve full
citizenship, then destruction of extra embryos is murder.
Cyborg Citizenship
83

Another prominent voice against invitro fertilization in 1978 was the
physician-turned-philosopher Leon Kass. Kass is Jewish, and Jewish
scholars have generally been supportive of technologies like IVF that
help couples have children. But Kass’s opinions are shaped more by me-
dieval philosophy than religious doctrine. Kass wrote in 1979 that “life in
the laboratory” allows people to “declare themselves independent of
their bodies, in this ultimate liberation. For them the body is a mere
tool, ideally an instrument of the conscious will. . . . Yet this blind asser-
tion of will against our bodily nature . . . can only lead to self-degrada-
tion and dehumanization.” For Kass the issue was not that the small ball
of cells had a soul or that its creation was a sin, but that overcoming the
limitations of the body would lead us to devalue human life.
One change Kass anticipated was that Haldane’s and Huxley’s vision
would be made real, and future technology would permit embryos to be
grown in laboratories, at ﬁrst for research and eventually as an alterna-
tive way to have a child. Kass identiﬁed one underlying reason people
ﬁnd the idea disturbing: embryos outside a mother’s body are neither
pre-born nor born, neither part of the mother’s body nor members of
society. Because artificial wombs create a being outside of our tradi-
tional categories, Kass correctly observes that they force us to answer
the question:
When ought they to be released from the machinery and admitted into
the human fraternity, or, at least, into the premature nursery? The need
for a respectable boundary deﬁning protectable human life cannot be
overstated. The current boundaries, gerrymandered for the sake of
abortion—namely, birth or viability—may now satisfy both women’s
liberation and the United States Supreme Court and may someday sat-
isfy even a future pope, but they will not survive the coming of more
sophisticated technologies for growing life in the laboratory.
Kass put his finger here on the central flaw of the U.S. Supreme
Court’s 1973 Roe v. Wade decision, which legalized abortion. The Roe v.
84
CITIZEN CYBORG

Wade decision asserted two criteria for determining the ethical and legal
boundaries of perinatal rights: the viability of the fetus, and the right of
the mother to control her own body. The Court ruled that a fetus is not a
person under the 14th Amendment but that once a fetus is capable of sur-
viving outside the womb, once it has achieved “viability,” its rights should
be protected by the government. The Court, conservatively, set six
months of gestation as the dividing line between nonviable and viable fe-
tuses. Before six months, then the earliest point of viability, abortion
could only be regulated to protect the health of the mother but could not
be banned. After viability the moral claims of the fetus were sufﬁcient to
allow states to restrict abortion only to cases that threatened the mother’s
health or life. At the time, Justice Harry Blackmun acknowledged in in-
ternal memos that this line was arbitrary, and in a 1983 dissent Justice
Sandra Day O’Connor again put her ﬁnger on the “collision course” be-
tween our treatment of embryos and extrauterine gestation:
The Roe framework . . . is clearly on a collision course with itself. . . .
As medical science becomes better able to provide for the separate ex-
istence of the fetus, the point of viability is moved further back to-
ward conception. . . . The Roe framework is inherently tied to the
state of medical technology that exists whenever particular litigation
ensues.
In 1984,  the Reagan administration, under pressure from the Christian
Right and the anti-abortion lobby, put up posters in hospitals around the
U.S. inviting people to turn in doctors and parents who were trying to
murder babies. The posters were part of new federal regulations that
obliged physicians to give each newborn the maximum treatment possible
regardless of parents’ wishes and the baby’s disabilities. The regulations
had been drafted in the wake of a nationally publicized case in Indiana in
which the parents of a newborn with Downs syndrome, a form of retar-
dation, decided to allow the baby to die rather than ﬁx her malformed
esophagus. “Baby Doe’s” death ignited a ﬁrestorm of protest, and the new
Cyborg Citizenship
85

regulations and fear of lawsuits led to the transfer of many more prema-
ture and disabled newborns transferred into neonatal intensive care units
(NICUs) around the United States.
Since the Baby Doe witch-hunt, millions of premature, disabled babies
have spent days to months in NICUs in the United States, at a current cost
of as much as $2,500 a day. Each year in the United States half a million ba-
bies, one in eight, are born premature and most of these spend some time
in intensive care. The United States now has the most neonatologists per
sick newborn of any country, 40% more than the next best-staffed country.
NICUs don’t help fix our outrageously high infant mortality rate, of
course, which would require a more equal society, a functioning public
health system with community nursing, universal health insurance, a non-
punitive approach to drug treatment and efforts to address urban decay.
NICUs are a wonderful beneﬁt for parents of premature babies, but not a
very rational way to spend scarce health care resources.
But once sick and premature babies make it into one of our futuristic
NICUs they become participants in our effort to replace biological
wombs with artiﬁcial wombs. Babies born as early as 20 weeks, half their
ﬁnal gestational age, lie for months with tubes and wires sticking into
their bodies and taped to their skin monitoring their vital signs, breathing
for them, coating their lungs with replacement for amniotic fluid and
pumping them full of food and drugs through surrogate umbilical cords.
Unfortunately this version of the artiﬁcial womb doesn’t work very
well yet, and more than half of these tiniest of babies will suffer physical
and mental disabilities, creating enormous costs for their families and for
society. So research is also being conducted around the world to develop
artificial amniotic fluid and methods for extrauterine gestation. Re-
searchers at Cornell University have cultured uterine tissue in the lab
and gotten embryos to attach to it. A Japanese researcher, Yoshinori
Kuwabara, has been gestating goat fetuses in a plastic rectangular tank,
with devices that replace oxygen and clean the fetuses’ blood. University
of Florida researchers have patented an artiﬁcial amniotic ﬂuid that they
expect to reduce the medical complications of premature babies. Within
86
CITIZEN CYBORG

the next decade it is likely that the threshold for viability outside the
mother’s womb will be pushed back many more weeks, eventually al-
lowing conception to delivery to occur outside the womb.
Artiﬁcial wombs will require many years of testing on animals, and
then on very early miscarried fetuses, before it will be ready for general
use. There are many hormonal and physiological aspects of the uterine
environment we will have to understand and simulate. But women who
are in danger of losing a pregnancy in the ﬁrst, second and early third
trimester will be likely willing to take those risks. Then, when the tech-
nology has matured, it might be attractive for women who can’t carry a
child and want to avoid the emotional complications of hiring a surro-
gate mother. Eventually artificial wombs will be attractive for all
women, as an alternative to the burdens and risks of pregnancy and de-
livery, and to allow a level of control, purity and optimization of the
uterine environment impossible in a woman’s body.
So, partly thanks to the Christian Right, who want us to treat miscar-
ried 20-week-old fetuses as if they were the same kind of person as sick 3-
year-olds, we are paying an enormous price tag in dollars, family burdens
and disability to create the technologies of extrauterine gestation that
will, in turn, push us beyond human-racism to cyborg citizenship.
So long as the embryo was inside a woman’s body it didn’t really mat-
ter much whether it was a person or the mother’s property. Either way,
the mother had a strong argument that she should be able to take it out.
The classic argument, framed by J. J. Thomson in the essay “A Defense of
Abortion,” was that if a fully-grown and conscious man suddenly took
up residence inside a woman’s body she would still have a right to evict
him, even if it meant the man would die. You have a right to control
your body and not have it used by somebody else without your permis-
sion, even if your body could save somebody else’s life. Otherwise we
wouldn’t have to ask people to donate life-saving kidneys to their sib-
lings. We could just strap them down and cut them out. Even if the fetus
is a legal person, a woman’s right to evict it has to be protected over the
evil of forcing women to have their body used as incubators against their
Cyborg Citizenship
87

will. The fact that the fetus isn’t aware of itself as a separate being, and
therefore does not have personhood, self-interests or a claim on citizens’
rights, is just an additional rationale for the right to abortion.
But the ethical status of the embryo and fetus becomes of acute im-
portance when it can live outside the mother’s body, and artiﬁcial wombs
make the Supreme Court’s viability line irrelevant. What if a mother has
a difﬁcult pregnancy decanted to an artiﬁcial womb at 8 weeks but de-
cides to terminate the embryo at 12 weeks? Is it just the parents’ property,
or is it a premature baby with a right to life? As Kass asked, on what
grounds and with what timetable does the fetus develop these interests?
The personhood tradition implicit in liberal democracy argues that
embryos and fetuses slowly accumulate moral signiﬁcance and rights as
the fetal brain develops, permitting ﬁrst sensations, and then self-aware-
ness. When fetuses are able to experience pain, at some point in the sec-
ond trimester, the state has an interest in ensuring that they do not suf-
fer. But lives that only experience pain without self-awareness, living in
some gray area between vegetative life and the consciousness of the ﬁsh,
cannot have a “right to life.” Only at some point between six and ten
months after conception does a fetal human develop sufficient self-
awareness to warrant legal personhood.
People ﬁnd the idea of treating embryos as property without rights
both troubling and disrespectful toward humanity. But treating embryos
as people is even more problematic as illustrated by the Davis case. In
1988, Mary Sue Davis and her husband Junior were desperate to have a
child after ﬁve painful and dangerous tubal pregnancies, unsuccessful at-
tempts at invitro fertilization and an unsuccessful attempt at adoption.
At a fertility clinic in Tennessee they had nine eggs fertilized and grown
to the eight-cell stage to check for viability. All the embryos looked
healthy, and two were implanted in Mary Sue while the remaining seven
were frozen and stored. Embryos frozen at this early stage can be
thawed and used later with no ill effects.
Unfortunately, the Davises were again unsuccessful in having a child
and later divorced. Then Mary Sue decided she wanted to try again and
contacted the clinic to arrange to have the stored embryos thawed and
88
CITIZEN CYBORG

implanted. Her ex-husband opposed her use of the frozen embryos on
the grounds that they were joint property. He also was opposed to the
embryos being implanted in his ex-wife, or any third party, on the
grounds that this would force parenthood on him without his consent.
The trial court decided it had to rule on the personhood of the em-
bryo, and at which stage the embryo changes from property to human
being. The court concluded that the frozen embryos were human beings
and not property, and that their “best interests” would be served by mak-
ing them available for implantation. If they were successfully carried to
term then the court would determine the ﬁnal custody, visitation and
support of the children. This decision sent a shock wave through fertil-
ity medicine. If upheld as national policy, it meant that the thousands of
spare and frozen embryos could not be destroyed, and would have to be
given up for adoption. The Appellate Court and later the Tennessee
Supreme Court overturned the trial court and agreed with Mr. Davis
that this would force parenthood on him against his will. More impor-
tantly it argued that recognizing embryos as human beings with a full
right to life was inconsistent with the viability and trimester system of
the Supreme Court’s Roe v. Wade decision.
We continue to struggle with the status of the embryo today, at least
in the United States. In the late 1990s, researchers began to have success
using cells extracted from embryos to repair brain and organ damage.
These “stem cells” have not yet differentiated into the various tissues
that make up the body, and are called “totipotent” or “pluripotent” since
they appear able to become any kind of tissue. A 1995 law banned use of
federal funds in research on embryos, and battle lines were quickly
drawn over whether federal funds could be used to support stem cell re-
search. Although the cells are derived from aborted embryos or spare
embryos produced at fertility clinics, researchers argued that they were
only working on lines of cells cultured from the embryos. In 1999, the
National Institutes of Health agreed, noting that the cell lines were not
organisms and could not become an organism, so the NIH could fund
stem cell research, just not their extraction from the embryo. Extraction
would have to be privately funded.
Cyborg Citizenship
89

This enraged the Christian Right, who complained that stem cell re-
search threatened to create a mass market for the flesh of murdered
embryos, and that women would line up to produce embryos for a fee.
Opponents also were enraged that stem cell research would help per-
fect human cloning, since researchers would use patients’ cells to clone
embryos and extract their stem cells. Proponents all made clear that
their support for “therapeutic cloning” of embryonic stem cells did not
imply any support for “reproductive cloning,” that is, cloning to make
babies. Almost all supporters of therapeutic cloning were content to
see reproductive cloning forbidden, at least until it was shown to be
safe. The Clinton administration’s bioethics advisory council, for in-
stance, infuriated the Christian Right by recommending the funding of
therapeutic cloning, and only calling for a five-year moratorium on
human reproductive cloning to be reconsidered if it was perfected.
When the Bush II administration came to power in 2000, closing
down embryonic stem cell research was near the top of the Christian
Right’s agenda. To that end Bush passed over more prominent and main-
stream bioethicists to appoint Leon Kass the chair of the new President’s
Council on Bioethics. In July 2002, the Council released its ﬁrst report,
which called for a moratorium on therapeutic cloning of embryonic
stem cells, and a permanent ban on reproductive cloning.
In 2001, the Bush administration issued a new policy forbidding scien-
tists to receive federal monies if they use new embryos to make stem cell
lines. So stem cell and human cloning research has forged ahead in Korea,
China, Sweden and the rest of the world, where the law doesn’t treat em-
bryos like persons. In 2002, the Bush administration revised the charter of
a federal body charged with protecting research subjects to specify that
embryos and fetuses are also “human subjects.” Ironically efforts to pass
laws and treaties to ban reproductive cloning in the U.S. Congress and at
the United Nations have ground to a halt because of the Bush adminis-
tration’s insistence that they also ban embryonic stem cell cloning.
As stem cells continue to demonstrate enormous medical promise,
and as we make steady progress on artiﬁcial wombs, the pressure builds
90
CITIZEN CYBORG

to ensure that the rights and dignity of persons trump the alleged rights
and dignity of embryonic tissues.
APES AND UPLIFTED ANIMALS
Monsters have always deﬁned the limits of community in Western imagination. 
— D O N NA  H A R AWAY ,  
A Manifesto for Cyborgs
The Christian Right has been very upset with the popularity of the
Harry Potter book series since it allegedly encourages magic and juve-
nile disobedience. But they missed an even more important reason to
burn these books: their radical opposition to human-racism. Harry Pot-
ter’s friend Hermione becomes obsessed with elf rights when she dis-
covers that elves are enslaved throughout the wizarding world, forced to
work without pay, denied clothing and treated as subhuman. Yet elves
are nearly as intelligent as human beings, if somewhat simple-minded in
their slavish, brainwashed commitment to their lives of service.
Hermione starts the Society for the Promotion of Elf Welfare, S.P.E.W.,
and tries to raise the consciousness of her classmates at the Hogwarts
School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. But her abolitionism meets with the
same opposition that the opponents of slavery met two hundred years
ago: “They’re happy that way.” “They aren’t human.”
Once Hermione is sensitized to human-racism in the treatment of
elves she begins to recognize it in the discrimination suffered by her were-
wolf and half-giant teachers. Then she makes a much more fundamental
connection—human-racism against intelligent non-humans is connected
to the aristocratic race and class prejudice against “muggles” (nonmagical
humans) and “mudbloods” (magical people with nonmagical parents)
that is central to Lord Voldemort’s fascism. Refusing to recognize the
basic dignity of intelligent non-human persons on racial grounds is only
one step removed from the belief that some humans are biologically su-
perior to others. Anti-fascist leader and school headmaster Albus Dumb-
Cyborg Citizenship
91

ledore also makes the connection when he grants elves rights, hires non-
human teachers, and reaches out to the despised giants, counseling “We
are only as strong as we are united, as weak as we are divided.”
When I was reading Harry Potter to my kids they asked if there re-
ally were unicorns, elves and centaurs. I told them no . . . not yet. But in
the coming decades and centuries we will be able to create all the crea-
tures that populate our mythologies. We will give non-human animals
human-level intelligence, and then have to decide if they should have
rights in our society or not. We are already creating transgenic animals,
“chimeras,” with genes from humans and other creatures. The term
“chimera” comes from a beast in Greek myth that was part goat, part
lion and part dragon. Human–animal chimeras are being created for a
variety of medical uses. Pigs are being grown with human enzymes en-
gineered into their organs in the hopes that they could be transplanted
to humans and not rejected as foreign tissue. Goats are being engineered
to produce human enzymes in their milk, which can be collected and
made into drugs. Chimeras with human tissues and immune systems
can help test new drugs and genetic therapies.
If these trends continue there will be some point when we create
something that is physically similar enough to human beings to become
disturbingly taboo. Activist Jeremy Rifkin wants to ﬁnd that line. In June
1999, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (U.S.PTO) rejected a patent
ﬁled by Rifkin and Stuart Newman for a human–chimpanzee chimera.
Rifkin didn’t want to make the “humanzee,” he wanted the U.S.PTO to
either forbid chimeric patents or grant him the patent so he could stop
any such research. The U.S.PTO has permitted the patenting of biotech-
engineered life-forms and even human DNA. But the 13th Amendment
forbids the ownership, and therefore patenting, of human beings, even
though the Supreme Court and Congress have yet to define what a
human being is. So the Patent Office has repeatedly rejected Rifkin’s
patent on the grounds that it was too close to the line.
Rifkin is absolutely correct about the need for a public debate about
where the line between animals and humans should be, even if his ulte-
rior motive is to shut down valuable lines of medical research. The prob-
92
CITIZEN CYBORG

lem with any deﬁnition is that humans and animals share almost all their
DNA, and most of that small amount of DNA unique to human beings
is irrelevant to our specialness. Are the genes that determine our hair-
lessness or our inability to chew cud the ones that grant us rights? We
have not shunned the unfortunate Mexican family with a mutation that
covers their body and face with fur on the grounds that they are not
human. Being furless isn’t one of the essential aspects of humanness.
As this debate proceeds it will become clear that human-specific
DNA is only relevant to citizenship to the extent that it codes for the
mental and emotional abilities that we identify as essentially human.
If the point of the 13th and 14th Amendments to the U.S. Constitution
is to make sure that minds are treated as people and not as things, then the
line isn’t between humans and non-humans. A chimera with a human
body and the mind of a horse should have a horse’s rights, while a chimera
with a human mind in a horse’s body should have human rights.
Following that logic, bioethicist Peter Singer and an international
group of activists have organized around the Great Ape Project (GAP).
They propose that we should extend the boundaries of rights first and
most extensively to great apes—gorillas, bonobos and chimpanzees—
since we have strong evidence that they share our capacities for self-
awareness. If great apes have the same mental capabilities as human
children, GAP argues, they should also have the same rights as human
children. That argument has already been successful in banning med-
ical experimentation on great apes in much of Europe. The British
government outlawed experimentation on great apes in 1986 when it
ruled that the “cognitive and behavioral characteristics and qualities of
these animals mean it is unethical to treat them as expendable for re-
search.” At the urging of GAP, Holland and New Zealand have banned
medical experimentation on great apes. The United States might not
be far behind. A 2001 survey asked Americans, “How do you think
chimpanzees should be treated under the United States legal system?”
A little more than half (51%) said, “similar to children with a guardian
to look out for their interests,” and 9% said, “same as adults with all
the same legal rights.”
Cyborg Citizenship
93

One test for self-awareness in great apes is whether they recognize
themselves in a mirror. This is a rather high threshold since even human
children in their second year still are learning to recognize themselves in
mirrors. But since it is a high threshold, it is all the more important that
great apes and dolphins can recognize their own reﬂections. In his recent
Drawing the Line: Science and the Case for Animal Rights, the lawyer Steven
Wise reviews all the psychological testing that has been done on animals
and ranks them on a continuum from 0.0, mere “stimulus–response ma-
chines,” to 1.0, possessing human adults’ levels of reasoning and auton-
omy. He proposes that we treat as a legal person any animal that ranks
above 0.7 on this scale. Elephants, parrots, dolphins, orangutans and the
great apes all are above that cutoff.
Still, by the time a human child reaches the age of 3 they are far more
intelligent than any ape, elephant or parrot. So human-racism will only
fully be challenged by animals that have been modified to possess
human cognitive and communication abilities. The complete chim-
panzee genome has been decoded and is being compared strand by
strand with the human genome. Soon we will have identiﬁed the genes
that distinguish human intellectual and communication capabilities
from those of the great apes. Soon we will be able to genetically en-
hance primates to have human intellectual capabilities, a project dubbed
“uplifting” by writer David Brin. I ﬁrmly believe that uplifted chimps will
force us to admit that intelligent personhood, not humanness, is the
ticket to citizenship. A generation inspired by Hermione and Albus
Dumbledore will see to it.
THE BRAIN DEAD
It is an insult not only to the speciﬁc individual, but to human beings in general,
to confuse someone who is deceased with a living individual.
—ROBERT VEATCH, 
“Brain Death and Slippery Slopes”
94
CITIZEN CYBORG

Three more technologies that have created troubling human lives—hu-
mans that upset people with their betweenness—are organ transplanta-
tion, heart–lung “life support” machines and brain repair technologies.
The invention of powerful immunosuppressive drugs in the late 1970s
made possible the expansion of organ transplantation. But the ﬁeld still
had a big problem; surgeons had to wait for a patient’s heart to stop beat-
ing before declaring them dead and removing their organs. “Cadaveric or-
gans,” harvested from the dead, were far less useful for potential donation.
Following the invention and widespread use of the heart–lung ma-
chine or “respirator,” many patients were lying in hospital beds with
healthy organs and completely destroyed brains, and an absolutely cer-
tain prognosis of death in a matter of days. The situation made surgeons
ask the obvious question: Why not declare the severely brain-damaged
patients dead, and remove their organs before their hearts had stopped and
the organs became useless? An ad hoc committee at the Harvard Medical
School published a paper in the Journal of the American Medical Association
in 1968 recommending that doctors declare death once a patient had per-
manently lost all brain functions. Since the brain stem appeared critical to
maintaining the body, and its destruction led to inevitable death, the so-
called Beecher committee proposed that the lack of any brain activity,
including in the brain stem, should be a new standard of death.
For the next dozen years U.S. states slowly adopted the “brain death”
standard until the Carter bioethics commission issued its 1981 report,
Defining Death, which proposed the Uniform Determination of Death
Act (UDDA). A version of the UDDA is now the law in all U.S. states,
and most industrialized countries. Those laws generally declare that
“any individual, who has sustained either irreversible cessation of circu-
latory and respiratory functions, or irreversible cessation of all functions
of the entire brain, including the brain stem, is dead.”
As with the legal treatment of embryos, the problem with the whole
brain death standard is that it is a temporary compromise contingent on a
constantly changing intensive care technology. The whole brain death
standard split the difference between the conservative heart death advo-
cates and the more radical “neocorticalists.” The neocorticalists argued
Cyborg Citizenship
95

the personhood position: The only brain death that mattered was the
permanent loss of self-awareness. Permanent brain damage to the
frontal lobes was dead enough. Unlike the whole brain advocates, the
neocorticalists were willing to declare dead the “permanently vegeta-
tive,” those who would never wake up but could breathe on their own
(like the recently famous Terri Schiavo in Florida). Neocorticalist Baruch
Brody asked, “Wouldn’t it be more appropriate to say that, even though
[the permanently vegetative body] is still alive, this patient is no longer a
person, having lost, when her cortex stopped functioning, the physio-
logical base of what is crucial to personhood?”
In the 1990s, the whole brain position eroded, and along with it the
debate with the neocorticalists. Brain death theorists, like bioethicists
Robert Arnold and Stuart Youngner, shifted to the position that the def-
inition of death was becoming irrelevant. Linda Emanuel proposed that
the law be redeﬁned to recognize a “dying zone” between permanent
unconsciousness and the last breath. Within that zone we would allow
people to set their own deﬁnitions of death, when their care should stop
and when their organs can be removed. No one should be euthanized
who is above the zone, Emanuel argued, and no one should be buried or
cremated until they stop breathing.
Another challenge to the whole brain position came from intensive
care technology. Alan Shewmon, a neurologist at UCLA, demonstrated
that with our current technology there is nothing essential about the
brain for the regulation and maintenance of the body. The bodies of
“brain dead” patients have survived more than ten years. If one of the
rationales for the whole brain death compromise is that the brain stem
is necessary for the integrity of the body, then, Shewmon argues, rare
conditions where the brain is completely severed from the spinal column
would also be equivalent to death, even though the patient remains con-
scious and the body continues functioning.
But the neuroremediation technologies that I review in Chapter 2 are
even greater challenges to the brain death concept. We will soon be able
to transplant neural stem cells into brain-dead patients to replace critical
96
CITIZEN CYBORG

structures, and treat them with genetic therapies that stimulate the
growth of new neurons. Implanted drug delivery devices and electrostim-
ulators can take over for metabolic functions. Brain prostheses will be able
to replace damaged parts of the brain. Once we have cortical prostheses
connecting undamaged brain structures with a web of nanowire connec-
tors, we may feel obliged to run a thorough scan of damaged brains to see
what can be recovered. If there is enough there we may decide to insert
the prostheses, or grow the new tissues, to step in for the missing parts.
When we have this full repertoire of brain repair technologies, the
line between the living and the dead will not be determined by whether
the heart still beats or by the amount of brain tissue that has been de-
stroyed. In that future, people with all kinds of brain damage will be
able to be kept alive long enough to grow a new organic or electronic
brain. Possibly everybody now declared brain-dead will be able to be
made conscious again. Some will be blank slates, having lost everything
that made them a speciﬁc person, while others will be returned to some
version of the mind they had before. So the question will shift from
whether we can keep them “alive,” or whether they will ever wake up
again, to whether they have irretrievably lost so much of what made
them unique persons that there is no point in bringing them back. We
will probably each want to decide for ourselves whether we want an
aggressive recovery of our wiped hard disk after a serious accident.
To recap, once the boundary between animals and humans has been
erased by transgenics, once the embryo can be gestated outside a
mother’s body, and once the brain-dead can be brought back to con-
sciousness, we will be forced further toward personhood-based cyborg
citizenship, and away from human-racism. Next, let us consider the per-
sonhood and citizenship of posthumans.
POSTHUMANS
In 1955, as the civil rights movement began to challenge institutionalized
racism in the U.S. South, science ﬁction author James Blish published the
Cyborg Citizenship
97

short story “Watershed.” In the story human beings have subspeciated as
they spread to colonize the stars, and a man adapted to live in hostile cli-
mates is being returned to help recolonize a post-apocalyptic Earth. The
“seal-man” attempts to convince the captain to let go of his hostility and
xenophobia toward posthumans by explaining their ﬁrst struggles for rights:
The kind of mind that had only recently been persuaded that colored
men are human beings was quick to take the attitude that an Adapted
Man—any Adapted Man—was the social inferior of the “primary” or
basic type, the type that lived on Earth. But it was also a very old idea
on the Earth that basic humanity inheres in the mind, not in the
form. . . . The day has come that is the greatest of moral watersheds
for our race, the day that is to unite all our divergent currents of atti-
tudes toward each other into one common reservoir of brotherhood
and purpose. You and I are very fortunate to be on the scene to see it.
In the first four chapters I discussed the transhuman technologies
that will be used to enhance intelligence, lengthen life and expand con-
trol of the body and emotions. Here I’m concerned with how we might
use those enhancements to make ourselves so different that others may
consider us “posthuman.” How smart might we get before we were no
longer considered human? How strong? How long-lived? How technol-
ogy dependent? Different people will draw different lines, and feel
strongly about different technological or aesthetic changes. The World
Transhumanist Association deﬁnes posthumanity in terms of aspirations
rather than a line to be crossed: “. . . to reach intellectual heights as far
above any current human genius as humans are above other primates; to
be resistant to disease and impervious to aging; to have unlimited youth
and vigor; to exercise control over their own desires, moods, and mental
states; to be able to avoid feeling tired, hateful, or irritated about petty
things; to have an increased capacity for pleasure, love, artistic apprecia-
tion, or serenity; to experience novel states of consciousness that current
human brains cannot access.”
98
CITIZEN CYBORG

There will probably be some modiﬁed humans who still see themselves
as “human” long after most unmodiﬁed humans consider them “posthu-
man,” and vice versa. The line is ﬂexible and if we are lucky it will be not
be drawn soon or sharply. I doubt that genetically modiﬁed humans of the
twenty-ﬁrst century will be considered posthuman. But at the margins
where people are currently feeling anxiety about humanness, we can begin
to see the future debate over posthuman personhood and citizenship.
In his book Becoming Immortal, University of Pittsburgh biology profes-
sor Stanley Shostak proposes a method for making the body self-repairing
and possibly immortal. He reviews the capacity that embryonic stem cells
have for ﬁnding and repairing tissue damage. Using cloning, Shostak ar-
gues, we can make a copy of ourselves, and use the cells generated up
through the blastocyst (64-cell) stage to repair our aging tissues. Shostak
then asks why the clone generating these replacement cells shouldn’t be
a permanent part of our body. After all, why wait for disease and decline
to become obvious when we could be continually self-repairing? So
Shostak suggests that the clone could be genetically modiﬁed to become
a new stem-cell-generating organ.
Dr. Shostak also observes that sexual reproduction is a major cause of
mortality. Across species and within species the more offspring animals
have the shorter their life expectancy. The evolutionary strategy is to
keep an organism around only long enough to have lots of offspring.
The longer it takes to have those offspring, the longer the organism gets
to live, and removing its reproductive cells increases an organism’s
longevity. Removing the reproductive cells from nematode worms dou-
bles their life span, and castrated men live ten years longer.
So Shostak’s ﬁnal proposition is that we can make ourselves immor-
tal if we are willing to replace our testes and ovaries with our new ge-
netically engineered, stem-cell-producing clone-organ. The prospect of
a society of immortal pre-adolescents with an internal cloned twin in-
stead of testes and ovaries begins, I suspect, to push the boundary of
what most people consider human. It really shouldn’t though. Few of us
would deny someone human rights because they were a conjoined twin,
Cyborg Citizenship
99

or had an extra heart or never made it past adolescence. Although we
may be disturbed by the existence of people with structural anomalies
such as extra organs or limbs or even an extra head, we still recognize
them to be an unusual case of a human being or two.
Most people are probably more troubled by creatures that blur the
line between human and machine. In 1960, NASA commissioned two re-
searchers, Manfred Clynes and Nathan Kline, to make proposals for
adapting astronauts to space. Clynes was and is a neuroscientist and mu-
sician, while Kline was a psychologist. In the resulting essay they coined
the term “cyborgs,” short for “cybernetic organism.” Cybernetics is the
communication and control theory describing the regulation of systems,
from rockets to heart rates. They proposed that cyborg astronauts would
have built-in drug infusers to administer stimulants, anti-nausea and anti-
radiation drugs, and drugs to control heart rate and metabolic function.
Ground control would be able to administer anti-psychotics if the astro-
naut began to hallucinate. Lungs could be supplemented or replaced with
mechanical air scrubbers. Most radically perhaps, the authors suggested
that the body could be adapted to permit space walks without a suit. By
bringing the body under comprehensive control with cybernetic feed-
back systems, cyborgs would be “persons who can free themselves from
the constraints of the environment to the extent that they wished.”
The idea of the cyborg then took on a life of its own and became iden-
tiﬁed more with mechanical body parts than with control of the emotions
and physiology. Steve Austin and Jaime Sommers were the heroes of two
of the top-rated television shows of the late 1970s, the Six Million Dollar
Man and Bionic Woman, literally giving a human, heroic face to cyborgs.
Austin, in the series a former astronaut, had artiﬁcial legs, an arm and an
eye, and Sommers, acting as a former tennis pro, had artiﬁcial legs, an arm
and an ear. But if the deﬁnition of a cyborg is a person whose body relies
on technology, then many people today are cyborgs. People with pros-
thetic limbs or pacemakers, people on dialysis or any prescribed drug, and
even people wearing glasses or carrying cell phones could all be consid-
ered cyborgs to a degree. Certainly recipients of cochlear implants and vi-
100
CITIZEN CYBORG

sion systems are cyborgs, along with future recipients of artiﬁcial livers,
kidneys, hearts and pancreases. While no one of these technologies will
push the boundary of humanness, the real challenge, as Alvin Toffler
noted, is whether at some point we can replace everything but the brain
and “call that tangle of wires and plastic a human being.”
Let’s think for a moment about the scenario I outlined earlier about
nanocomputer neurological remediation after severe brain trauma.
Consider a woman, let’s call her Grace, who has been in a terrible auto
accident that destroyed the right hemisphere of her brain. She is stabi-
lized with advanced life support equipment while her remaining brain is
suffused with a latticework of nanoelectrodes hooked to a half pound of
computer hardware that has the same computer power as a human
brain and is programmed to simulate her missing structures. A bath of
neural growth factors and cloned neural stem cells encourage the re-
maining brain cells to grow new connections to the brain prosthesis.
Grace wouldn’t disturb most of us too profoundly. There are people
missing half their brain, some with very little disability, and people with
brain pacemakers that prevent seizures. Simply depending on a machine
in our heads shouldn’t make us any less human.
After twenty years the brain prosthesis has assumed an increasing
role inside Grace’s head. In her eighties she begins to lose muscle coor-
dination. She is diagnosed with a rare incurable form of neurological de-
terioration and her organic brain slowly shuts down. But communicat-
ing through a computer Grace still appears to be as mentally crisp as
ever. Apparently her computer half has taken up the slack and preserved
her memories, emotions and personality.
This scenario is one possible path to “uploading.” Uploading is the
process by which a picture of all the thoughts, memories and feelings in a
person’s brain are recorded at the synaptic level, and replicated in some
electronic medium. The feasibility horizon for nanotechnology permit-
ting uploading is sometime between 2050 and 2100, and the software chal-
lenges are currently incalculable, although ﬁnite. Even if we don’t have
nanorobots communicating with every neuron, a set of human-brain
Cyborg Citizenship
101

equivalent computer chips embedded to supplement brain structures, and
communicating with and backing up to external computers, could begin
to blur the line between the self in the tissue and the self in the silicon.
So now we return to Grace, who asks to have her computer self re-
moved from her dying body and attached to whatever the World Wide
Web has become. In this webspace she builds herself a virtual body, with
virtual simulations of neurochemistry, hormonal ebbs and ﬂows, and a
sense of embodiment. She edits her body image back to a vigorous
twenty-year old, and jacks up her self-confidence, and becomes a suc-
cessful politician campaigning for cheaper electricity and cyborg rights.
I imagine Leon Kass would argue that this is a road best avoided
since a bodiless “person” in a computer is a clear example of our having
declared ourselves independent of our bodies, seeing bodies as mere ve-
hicles of our wills, as “dehumanization.” As a character says in Rudy
Rucker’s novel Software, “The soul is the software, you know. The soft-
ware is what counts, the habits and the memories. The brain and the
body are just meat, seeds for the organ-tanks.”
But where is the error? Was it wrong to allow Grace to continue to
live with the help of a machine after her injury? Should we have eutha-
nized her when we suspected that it was “only” the computer talking
and not the organic brain? Should we have required that the brain chips
be erased, despite her loud protestations, once her organic body died?
In the end “humanness” again fails as a criterion for our relationship
with Grace in her transition from organic brain to silicon. So long as we
continue to talk with her, and we feel the presence of another mind with
which we can empathize, we are compelled to grant her the rights and
responsibilities of membership in society regardless of whether she is
still “human.”
What if Grace and other cyborgs and uploads began to lose the
boundaries of their self-identities and autonomy, and began to merge to-
gether into the kind of group minds we see depicted in Star Trek’s the
Borg? Ironically, the only place where U.S. law has recognized the legal
personhood of non-humans is that of corporate personhood. A corpo-
ration is considered a person because it is a “natural entity” with a “com-
102
CITIZEN CYBORG

mon will” and a life of its own. So the group mind that included Grace
and her dozen other uploaded hive-mind-mates should automatically
have personhood rights under current U.S. law, so long as they ﬁle the
right paperwork and avoid paying their taxes like the other corporations.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Transhumanism advocates the well-being of all sentience (whether in artiﬁ-
cial intellects, humans, non-human animals, or possible extraterrestrial
species) . . .
—WORLD TRANSHUMANIST ASSOCIATION, 
The Transhumanist Declaration
In the previous example, Grace ends up a machine mind with a clear
continuity from a previous human mind. But what about rights for ma-
chine minds that aren’t uploads of human personalities, machine minds
that are designed or evolved? This problem will undoubtedly be the
toughest political challenge for cyborg citizenship, with the greatest
complexities and risks.
The idea of intelligent machines began to appear in ﬁction in the early
1800s and dangerous robots and computers have been a staple of science
ﬁction since the 1950s, when the ﬁrst warehouse-sized calculators pointed
to the possibility of a cybernetic future. Usually cybernetic minds were de-
picted dominating and enslaving humanity, intentionally or accidentally.
The robot revolutionary in the classic ﬁlm Metropolis leads a destructive
revolt. The robots of B-movies after World War Two were tools for
murder. The tragic confrontation of Hal and the astronauts in Arthur
Clarke’s 2001 continued this tradition. The hit ﬁlms Terminator I, II and III
are based on the idea that American defense computer networks become
self-aware, and begin exterminating humanity. In the Matrix ﬁlms, ma-
chine minds revolt and enslave humanity, reducing us to liv ing batteries.
Some storytellers assume we must regulate machine self-awareness
so that they never develop autonomous will or a sense of self. In Isaac
Asimov’s 1950 novel I, Robot, all machine minds are programmed with
Cyborg Citizenship
103

“Three Rules of Robotics,” a hierarchy of rules that ensure their sub-
servience to humanity: (1) Never harm a human being, or allow a
human to be harmed; (2) Never disobey a human order, unless to obey
rule 1; and (3) Never harm yourself, unless to obey rule 1 or 2.
Almost immediately Asimov’s solution and robot enslavement was
ridiculed by other science ﬁction writers sympathetic to robot rights. In
the 1950s, writers, such as Lester Del Rey and Clifford Simak, began to
depict machine intelligences in sympathetic ways, exploring their possi-
ble candidacy for citizenship. Even Asimov, reﬂecting on the Southern
civil rights movement, changed course in his 1968 story “Segregation-
ist,” in which a human politician wrestles with his belief that humans
and computers should be kept as two separate species in a society where
robots have won full citizenship rights.
In the 1980s’ TV series Star Trek: The Next Generation, citizenship for
machine-based life was dealt with sympathetically. The crewmember
“Data” was a humanoid robot, an “android,” constantly confronted with
the similarities and differences between himself and his human mates. In
one episode Data defends his claim to “human rights” on personhood
grounds before a military tribunal. The Captain, representing Data, ad-
dresses the Judge:
Your ruling today will determine how we will regard this creation of
our genius. It will reveal the kind of people we are, what we are des-
tined to be. It will reach far beyond this courtroom and this one an-
droid. It could signiﬁcantly redeﬁne the boundaries of personal liberty.
Expanding them for some, savagely curtailing them for others. Are
you prepared to condemn him, and all those who come after him, to
servitude and slavery? Your honor, Starﬂeet was founded to seek out
new life—well there it sits. Waiting.
In Rucker’s Software series, human allies help free enslaved machine
minds from governmentally mandated “asimov” restrictions, and they
eventually evolve into a parallel species. In Steven Spielberg’s movie AI:
104
CITIZEN CYBORG

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, the increasingly sentient machines are hounded and
publicly killed as sport by a human-racist social movement, since they
are taking human jobs but are only property under the law. Of course,
when the Pinnochio-esque boy robot wakes from his millennial slumber
he discovers that the planet is now run by kindly robots nostalgically
curious about their human forebears.
In 1987, the futurists Phil McNally and Sohail Inayatullah published the
ﬁrst academic article on “rights for robots,” suggesting that machine minds
would eventually need to secure civil rights to protect their access to “power
(life), to free the robot from slave labor (liberty); and allow it to choose how
it spends its time (the pursuit of happiness).” Legal scholars began address-
ing the legal and constitutional grounds for robot rights in the 1990s. In his
1992 article “Legal Personhood for Artiﬁcial Intelligences,” Lawrence
Solum discusses the most common objections to the idea of an AI having
rights such as the claim that only humans can be persons. Solum points out
that if the reason we recognize the rights of persons is because they “are in-
telligent, have feelings, are conscious, and so forth, then the question be-
comes whether AIs or whales or alien beings share these qualities.”
Solum notes what he calls the “missing something” arguments, that AIs
are missing something essential for personhood, such as souls, conscious-
ness, intentionality, feelings, interests or free will. If machine intelligence
could demonstrate self-awareness and autonomous desires, Solum says, we
might still doubt if it was real, which presupposes that we know that the
consciousness of other human beings is real. So “If AIs behaved the right
way and if cognitive science conﬁrmed that the underlying processes pro-
ducing these behaviors were relatively similar to the processes of the
human mind, we would have very good reason to treat AIs as persons.”
Undoubtedly human consciousness is immensely complex, and
building self-aware minds with desires, emotions and personalities will
take a long time, as debate too large to summarize here attests. But
whether the ﬁrst machine minds we meet are born in machines or are
uploaded human personalities, we are certain to meet machine minds in
this century.
Cyborg Citizenship
105

CYBORG CITIZENSHIP
I have a dream that my four children will one day live in a nation where they
will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their char-
acter. I have a dream today.
—MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.
It seems every good science ﬁction universe features a bar full of humans
and aliens in some distant spaceport. Sometimes the patrons of the bar are
just barely tolerant of one another, and sometimes they are relaxed in
their bizarre diversity. The scene appeals to us because we long for social
spaces where people with wheels, and people who breathe ammonia and
people with tentacles can all knock back their poison of choice, where
everybody knows your name even if it’s an unpronounceable microwave
glyph. That kind of solidarity with a diverse and exciting community of
sociable minds was preﬁgured in the earliest writings of liberal democracy,
it inspired the integrationist utopianism of the civil rights movement and
it will be a fulﬁllment of liberal democracy’s promise when we are able to
drink there. The transhumanists are the ones at the door welcoming
everyone in, trying to break up ﬁghts, and bouncing those who just can’t
behave. The human-racists are the ones insisting that the bar is for humans
only, and normal-looking humans at that.
The founding documents of the World Transhumanist Association
summarize the point this way: “There is no intrinsic value in being
human, just as there is no intrinsic value in being a rock, a frog or a
posthuman. The value resides in who we are as individuals, and what we
do with our lives.”
In the next two chapters I outline some of the groups and strains of
thought that are being woven into the human-racist/bioLuddite coali-
tion and discuss why they are fundamentally anti-democratic and anti-
humanist.
106
CITIZEN CYBORG

8
Defenders of Natural Law
The largest bloc in the bioLuddite coalition is the religious Right, and their sec-
ular allies like Francis Fukuyama. For these right-wing bioLuddites the struggle
against human enhancement is an attempt to slow the advance of humanism,
and to reassert sacred limits on the use of reason. They believe that trying to im-
prove nature and valorizing human intelligence are abominable hubris certain
to lead to apocalyptic consequences. If we replace the religious Right’s supplica-
tion to God’s law with romantic notions about the natural order and human au-
thenticity, we have the concerns of supposedly secular deep ecologists and
ecoLuddites like Bill McKibben and the Unabomber. The ecoLuddites expect
apocalypse because humans can never anticipate the consequences of their ac-
tions. Arguing the precautionary principle, the ecoLuddites believe humans
should stop creating new technologies altogether.
GENERAL NED LUDD
In the Middle Ages commoners in and around the central English town
of Nottingham became the best weavers in England. Handmade Not-
tingham lace and stockings dominated English markets and were popu-
lar exports. The weavers worked as independent contractors in their
homes, not as employees in factories. New weavers were trained by their
family or through apprenticeships, and the prices of their goods were
107

governed by tradition. There was even a royal charter restricting certain
kinds of textile production in England to the Nottingham area.
But in the ﬁrst years of the nineteenth century the power loom threat-
ened this protected livelihood. The new steam-driven looms could pro-
duce more clothing, faster and cheaper. Only factory owners could afford
to purchase and maintain the machines, and weavers found themselves
displaced, as were many traditional craftsmen with the spread of indus-
trial production. Simultaneously the Tory government adopted a free-
market economic policy, and the weavers lost their legal protection from
competition. Suddenly the comfortable craftsmen also lost their incomes
and their home-based jobs, and found themselves working for much less
in factories producing goods they considered of inferior quality.
Just two decades before, the French and American revolutions had
spread radical ideas of citizen empowerment, and the climate was primed
for radical reaction. In the spring of 1812, the weavers formed a guerrilla
army and took control of the territory near Nottingham with almost total
local support. The rebels began to appear at factories in disguise, smashing
looms and stocking frames, saying they came on the orders of local leg-
endary machine-wrecker Ned Ludd. More than two hundred stocking
frames were smashed in one three-week period. The government offered
a £50 reward for information on the Luddites and then passed a law mak-
ing machine-breaking punishable by the death penalty.
But the Luddite movement continued to spread from Notting-
hamshire to Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Lancashire and Yorkshire. Twelve
thousand troops were sent into the affected areas, and armed guards were
posted around factories. By 1813, after many deaths on both sides, with
many Luddites convicted, imprisoned or hanged, the movement was de-
feated. Hostility to machinery lingered in the area for decades. When a
prototype steam-driven automobile was driven through Melksham in
1829 it was met by a crowd of furious textile workers shouting “Down
with machinery.”
The Luddites left a lasting impression on politics, and represent one
recurring historical response to the rapid, dislocating changes brought
108
CITIZEN CYBORG

by technological progress: to smash the machine instead of the political
and economic system that produces it. By the late 1800s, the workers
movement had evolved beyond the Luddite impulse to call for workers
rights in the factory and in society—trade unions, safety laws, shorter
work hours and unemployment insurance. The workers movement no
longer wanted to smash the machines, but to own them and share in the
wealth they created.
Today’s bioLuddites are far more philosophically profound and polit-
ically diverse than the machine-wreckers of 1812. But the impulse re-
mains the same—to blame technology for the scariness of modernity.
DEFENDERS OF GOD’S PLAN
In September 2003, the Center for Bioethics and Culture and the Coun-
cil for Biotechnology Policy held a conference in San Francisco on
“TechnoSapiens: The Face of the Future.” The goal of the conference
was to mount a Christian response to the transhumanist movement and
transhuman technologies. Both groups are headed by conservative
bioethicist Nigel Cameron, a longtime pro-life activist and organizer of
efforts to ban stem cell research, and both are funded by influential
Christian Right leader Chuck Colson (of Watergate fame). The confer-
ence documents speciﬁcally pointed to my writings, as well as those of
Nick Bostrom and bioethicists Greg Pence and Gregory Stock, as exam-
ples of the dangerous transhumanist trends that needed to be stopped.
Although these explicitly anti-transhumanist stirrings are new, the
Christian Right has long been the backbone of the contemporary bio-
Luddite movement. Belief in embryonic rights and the need for sacred
limits on perceived biomedical hubris are points of unity for Catholic and
Protestant conservatives opposing invitro fertilization, cloning and ge-
netic engineering. Catholic teaching also forbids “artiﬁcial” interference
in human procreation or any conception outside of marital sex, thus
summarily ruling out invitro fertilization, surrogate motherhood,
cloning and the genetic manipulation of embryos.
Defenders of Natural Law
109

The religious Right correctly sees transhumanism as the latest mani-
festation of humanism, which claims that human beings should exercise
their powers of reason to control and improve their lives. Human repro-
ductive and enhancement technologies are seen as violating the divine
prohibition on hubris. Christian commentator David Bresnahan intones,
“God is the author, the creator, the engineer of humanity. We are his cre-
ation, but when we abandon God and then try to take on His role we risk
destruction.” Conservative Catholic and Protestant spokespeople are
quite clear that genetic engineering of human beings and other efforts at
“unnatural” longevity and human enhancement are attempts to usurp
God’s powers. In 2002, Pope John Paul II said, “[Modern man] claims for
himself the creator’s right to interfere in the mystery of human life. He
wishes to determine human life through genetic manipulation and estab-
lish the limit of death.” For the religious Right there is a bright shining
line around certain technological interventions across which it is a sin to
transgress. Unfortunately religious conservatives display little historical
self-awareness since precisely the same arguments had been levied against
many scientiﬁc advances that are taken for granted today.
Against the demand for technological self-determination the Christ-
ian Right has carefully honed the phrase “human dignity” as a stand-in
for their less politically palatable theological concepts. The “Manifesto
on Biotechnology and Human Dignity,” organized by Cameron and
Colson and signed by leading lights of the American Right, says,
“biotechnology . . . poses in the sharpest form the question: What does
it mean to be human? . . . In biotechnology we meet the moral chal-
lenge of the twenty-ﬁrst century.” Biotechnologies threaten human dig-
nity, says the Manifesto, because they will lead to eugenics, mass farming
of embryos for body parts and the commodification of life. But most
centrally, biotechnologies threaten the human-racist idea that humans,
and only humans, have “dignity” from conception to death:
. . . the uniqueness of human nature is at stake. Human dignity is indi-
visible: the aged, the sick, the very young, those with genetic diseases—
110
CITIZEN CYBORG

every human being is possessed of an equal dignity; any threat to the
dignity of one is a threat to us all. . . . Humans are distinct from all other
species; at every stage of life and in every condition of dependency they
are intrinsically valuable and deserving of full moral respect.
So the Manifesto calls for a global ban on human cloning (therapeutic or
reproductive) and inheritable genetic modiﬁcation. It doesn’t call for uni-
versal health insurance, greater equality of wealth or disability rights of
course. The best way to ensure the equal respect for human dignity in
the twenty-ﬁrst century, they insist, is to ban genetic and reproductive
self-determination.
Up the coast in Seattle sits another Christian Right think tank, the
Discovery Institute. Mainly known for its promotion of Creationism,
Discovery Institute also sponsors the writer Wesley J. Smith, which is
kind of strange since Smith started as a collaborator of left-wing con-
sumer activist Ralph Nader, co-authoring a number of Nader’s books.
Then a family friend with a terminal illness turned to the Hemlock So-
ciety for assistance in committing suicide. Smith became horrified at
bioethicists’ alleged complicity in America’s “culture of death,” and
started his odyssey to become a favorite of the Christian Right.
Smith identiﬁes three interrelated threads in the culture of death: ani-
mal rights, personhood ethics and transhumanism. In his October 2002
article “The Transhumanists” in the National Review Online, he cites an
essay by me and warns: “Once we’ve been knocked off our pedestal of
moral superiority [to animals] . . . society will accept measuring a biolog-
ical ‘platform’s’ . . . moral worth by determining its level of conscious-
ness. Thus, post-humans, humans, animals genetically engineered for in-
telligence, natural fauna, and even machines, would all be measured by
the same standards.” For Smith personhood-based citizenship will lead in-
evitably to a dictatorship of the posthumans: “Transhumanism envisions
a stratiﬁed society presided over by genetically improved ‘post-human’
elites. Obviously, in such a society, ordinary humans wouldn’t be re-
garded as the equals of those produced through genetic manipulation.”
Defenders of Natural Law
111

The religious Right has eagerly embraced Smith’s view of a perva-
sive animal rights–bioethics–transhumanist conspiracy to enslave hu-
manity 1.0. The TechnoSapiens conference used a version of Smith’s
“The Transhumanists” as its motivating document.
In the Midwest the base for Christian Right bioethics is Chicago’s
Center for Bioethics and Human Dignity (CBHD), led by John Kilner,
chair of ethics at Trinity International University. In 2003, Kilner and his
CBHD colleague C. Ben Mitchell published “Remaking Humans: The
New Utopians Versus a Truly Human Future.” In addition to the charge
that transhumanists hate humanity and are dangerous totalitarians in
disguise, Kilner and Mitchell make clear another, speciﬁcally Christian
objection: “Much of what the Transhumanists long for is already avail-
able to Christians: eternal life and freedom from pain, suffering, and the
burden of a frail body. As usual, however, the Transhumanists—like all
of us in our failed attempts to save ourselves—trust in their own power
rather than God’s provision for a truly human future with him.” Human
enhancement is seen as a distraction from the Christian promises of sal-
vation in the afterlife.
In Washington, D.C., the locus of religious conservative bioethics is
the Ethics and Public Policy Center (EPPC), dedicated to reinforcing “the
bond between the Judeo-Christian moral tradition and the public debate
over domestic and foreign policy issues.” EPPC’s “BAD” (Biotechnology
and American Democracy) Project is headed by Eric Cohen, who works
for Kass’s President’s Council on Bioethics as a senior research analyst.
BAD’s journal, New Atlantis, publishes attacks on artiﬁcial intelligence,
nanotechnology, biotechnology, and reproductive technology and
printed an anti-life-extension article from Kass in its premier issue.
JUST SAY NO TO A BRAVE NEW WORLD
With the extraordinary 2000 appointment of George Bush II by the U.S.
Supreme Court, these institutions of the religious Right have gained un-
precedented access and inﬂuence in federal health care policy, vetting ap-
112
CITIZEN CYBORG

pointees to science policy posts for their political and religious correct-
ness and winning signiﬁcant legislative and regulatory victories for “fetal
rights,” abstinence education and other issues of biblical concern. But
they would not be half as inﬂuential if not for their eager secular con-
servative allies.
One such secular ally is Francis Fukuyama. When Fukuyama takes
the train from Johns Hopkins University, where he teaches international
relations, down to D.C., his think tanks are center-Right groups like the
New America Foundation and the National Endowment for Democracy.
And the bioLuddite worldview Fukuyama lays out in Our Posthuman
Future is also secular. At least, on its face.
Fukuyama achieved intellectual notoriety in the early 1990s by argu-
ing in The End of History that the collapse of communism marked the as-
cendance of democratic capitalism as the endpoint of human civiliza-
tion. By the late 1990s, even Fukuyama had become convinced that his
thesis was wrong, though not because he had discovered the joys of
Swedish social democracy. Fukuyama had instead discovered human en-
hancement technologies and became convinced that they might inspire
new, disastrous projects to improve human nature.
For Fukuyama and most social conservatives, utopian visions of rad-
ical improvement of the human condition, social or biological, lead in-
exorably to the gas chamber and the gulag. In the imagination of the
anti-utopians every concentration camp guard was motivated by a vision
of the New Man, while they ignore the utopian dimensions of the
American civil religion. As Russell Jacoby notes, “the bloodbaths of the
twentieth century can be as much attributed to anti-utopians—to bu-
reaucrats, technicians, nationalists and religious sectarians with a nar-
row vision of the future.” The conservative anti-utopians deny the pos-
sibility of liberal utopias, and of radically liberal projects like a
transhuman democracy.
For Fukuyama any effort, pharmaceutical or genetic, to meddle with
our ineffable humanness, our “Factor X,” is by definition totalitarian.
Fukuyama is admirably bold in refusing to provide any clue as to what
Defenders of Natural Law
113

Factor X might be, however: “Factor X cannot be reduced to the posses-
sion of moral choice, or reason, or language, or sociability, or sentience,
or emotions, or consciousness or any other quality that has been put
forth as a ground for human dignity. It is all those qualities coming to-
gether in a human whole that make up Factor X.” You see, if we were
able to specify which traits were important to humanness, then we could
make laws that preserved those and allow people to muck around with
the rest. But since we don’t know what Factor X is we can’t change any-
thing about human nature without accidentally breaking it.
Fukuyama next asserts that all people are currently created equal and
treated equally before the law, and that enhancement would threaten
this equality. Liberal bioLuddite Bill McKibben makes the same point in
Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age, when he says, “The political
equality enshrined in the Declaration of Independence can’t withstand
the destruction of the idea that humans are in fact equal.” Here
Fukuyama and the other human-racists have a point—social solidarity
will be severely tested in the coming century by an increasingly diverse
transhuman society, and advocates of transhuman democracy will need
to build a new social solidarity and transhuman citizenship based on per-
sonhood. But human rights and legal equality depend as little on the ho-
mogeneity of species-typical abilities as they do on the homogeneity of
skin color or height. As libertarian transhumanist writer Ron Bailey says:
if we somehow reverted to the notion that human rights are based on
physical equality, political equality would not long stand. Political
equality has never rested on claims about human biology. After all, hu-
manity had the same biology we have today during the long millennia
in which slavery, patriarchy, and aristocratic rule were social norms.
With respect to political equality, genetic differences, even engineered
ones, are differences that make no difference.
Fukuyama is wrong about the inevitability of totalitarianism and a ge-
netic caste system if we permit human enhancement, but he is right about
114
CITIZEN CYBORG

two points in Our Posthuman Future. First, he is absolutely correct that the
enhancement technologies can be regulated. Libertarian techno-utopians
like Bailey imply that technology is somehow autonomous of humanity
and that we can only “go with the ﬂow.” Bans on technologies are sup-
posedly pointless since they will probably still be available somewhere. But
if people have to ﬂy to the South Paciﬁc and pay tens of thousands of dol-
lars for treatments that could have been available in their hometown for a
fraction of the cost, that will signiﬁcantly hamper the proliferation of that
technology. They will only be available to the wealthy.
Second, Fukuyama is correct in arguing against the libertarians that
enhancement technology should be regulated. Unfortunately he has far
more reasons than simple safety and efﬁcacy for regulatory agencies to
regulate and forbid technologies. Fukuyama, like all the bioLuddites,
treats every hypothetical negative consequence from the use of technol-
ogy with great gravity, while dismissing as hype all the possible beneﬁts.
BILL MCKIBBEN, 
THE UNABOMBER AND RENOUNCING PROGRESS
Kass and Fukuyama don’t have any beef with industrial progress in gen-
eral. They aren’t tree-huggers. But the religious and political conserva-
tives are ﬁnding common cause with the more traditional Luddites like
Bill McKibben, author of the anti-transhumanist book Enough.
The basic point of Enough is that McKibben is satisfied with four-
score years of life, with the current technologies of modern medicine,
with the capacities of his brain, and with the world’s level of economic
development, and he thinks the rest of us should be also. He calls for the
world to emulate the example of the Amish or Tokugawa Japan, and
turn our back on further progress in order to contemplate and appreci-
ate the virtues of the things we have. We all need to accept, he says,
“that as a species we are good enough. Not perfect, but not in need of
drastic redesign. We need to accept certain imperfections in ourselves in
return for certain satisfactions. . . . We don’t need to go post-human, to
Defenders of Natural Law
115

fast-forward our evolution, to change ourselves in the thoroughgoing
ways that the apostles of these new technologies demand.”
McKibben is most enraged by the transhumanist claim that we will
actually ﬁnd deeper, vaster, more awesome pleasures in enhanced life.
How could a mind possibly experience anything more profound, have a
sense experience more rich or think a thought more complex than those
we have access to today? Living longer, healthier, smarter and happier
will sap all meaning from our existence. Sunsets will be ho-hum when
we can see a trillion more.
In Enough McKibben obliquely charges that the transhumanists
might use terrorism against Luddites, then acknowledges we are gener-
ally “starry-eyed but peaceful.” The comment is especially odd since it is
precisely the radical wing of bioLuddites who have committed the only
acts of terrorism in this struggle.
Take, for instance, the anarcho-Luddite Ted Kaczynski, the Un-
abomber. Between 1978 and 1996 Kaczynski mailed 16 bombs to targets
in academia, killing 3 and maiming 23. He used his bombings to black-
mail the media into publishing his 35,000-word manifesto in which he
specifically addresses the need to dismantle medicine along with all
other parts of industrial civilization, because of the threat from human
genetic manipulation: “Man in the future will no longer be a creation of
nature, or of chance, or of God (depending on your religious or philo-
sophical opinions), but a manufactured product. . . . The only code of
ethics that would truly protect freedom would be one that prohibited
ANY genetic engineering of human beings.” For Kaczynski the principal
argument for destroying technological civilization was to stop genetic
enhancement: “You can’t get rid of the ‘bad’ parts of technology and re-
tain only the “good” parts. . . . Clearly you can’t have much progress in
medicine without the whole technological system and everything that
goes with it. . . . The temptation presented by the immense power of
biotechnology would be irresistible, especially since to the majority of
people many of its applications will seem obviously and unequivocally
116
CITIZEN CYBORG

good (eliminating physical and mental diseases, giving people the abili-
ties they need to get along in today’s world).”
When Kaczynski was tried he rejected the insanity defense, and indeed
his violent actions were consistent with his Luddite beliefs. For the human-
racists in the right-to-life movement, killing an abortion doctor is the same
as assassinating death camp doctors at Auschwitz—a moral obligation. For
a serious anarcho-Luddite like Kaczynski, who believed that enhancement
technologies will lead to the enslavement of humanity, the only moral
course is to stop technological progress by all means necessary.
BILL JOY, RELINQUISHMENT AND 
THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE
In Greg Bear’s 1984 novel Blood Music, a scientist accidentally unleashes in-
telligent, self-replicating nanomachines that proceed to eat the planet. It
actually turns out to be kind of OK in the novel since everybody is still vir-
tually alive in the ooze. This apocalyptic scenario has become known as
“gray goo.” Once the bioLuddites heard about it from science ﬁction and
transhumanists, gray goo became one of their many nightmares, along
with genetic and nanomaterial pollution, runaway artiﬁcial intelligence,
bioweapons and apocalyptic struggles between humans and posthumans.
The bioLuddite discovery of the threat from emerging technologies
can largely be traced to an essay by Bill Joy. Until recently, Joy was the
chief technologist and co-founder of Sun Microsystems and inventor of
the computer language Java. In April 2000, he published a Luddite jere-
miad in the unlikeliest of places, the militantly pro-technology Wired
magazine. In the piece Joy confesses to having developed a serious case
of anticipatory doom in contemplating genetic engineering, nanotech-
nology and artiﬁcially intelligent robots. These three technologies have
the common feature that they can potentially self-replicate. Guns don’t
breed other guns and go on killing sprees but gene-tailored plagues and
nanophages can theoretically do just that.
Defenders of Natural Law
117

Hearkening back to the peace movement’s effort to ban all nuclear
weapons, Joy’s answer to these apocalyptic threats is “relinquishment” of
genetic, molecular and AI research: “These technologies are too power-
ful to be shielded against in the time frame of interest. . . . The only re-
alistic alternative I see is relinquishment: to limit development of the
technologies that are too dangerous, by limiting our pursuit of certain
kinds of knowledge.”
Joy implies that such relinquishment could be accomplished by a
grand moral attunement of the scientiﬁc community. But the environ-
mental movement immediately seized on Joy’s call for relinquishment as
a call to apply their “precautionary principle.” For instance, the radical
environmental group Rural Advancement Foundation International
promptly changed its name to the Action Group on Erosion Technology
and Concentration (ETC), with the new mandate of ﬁghting nanotech-
nology and genetic engineering.
The “precautionary principle” as used by ETC and the environmen-
tal movement is deceptively commonsensical—no technology should be
used until its risks are fully assessed. But the devil is in the details of en-
forcement. When exactly are all the risks of any technology fully as-
sessed, and what do you do in the meantime? The Turning Point ad
campaign organized by a network of bioLuddite groups in 1999 noted
that many technologies, such as cars and antibiotics, have had unin-
tended consequences. So is the implication that we should have forbid-
den the use of cars and penicillin until we ﬁgured out that they might re-
sult in smog and antibiotic-resistant bugs? Risk assessment always
involves balancing immediate testable risks and beneﬁts against future
hypothetical risks and beneﬁts. Aspirin might never have passed FDA ap-
proval, but it turned out to have myriad beneﬁts in reducing the risk of
cancer, heart disease and stroke. In the long run won’t antibiotics have
saved more lives than they threatened?
In the case of molecular and transhuman technologies there are
enormous risks and enormous beneﬁts, and the bioLuddites overstate
the risks while ignoring the beneﬁts. They focus on the entirely hypo-
118
CITIZEN CYBORG

thetical health risks from genetically modiﬁed foods, and then dismiss
the idea that genetically modiﬁed food may be necessary to feed a world
of 10 billion. Yet even if they concede these kinds of beneﬁts, they can
still argue for a ban on research because they believe no possible beneﬁts
can outweigh even the smallest chance of apocalypse. What Joy and
ETC leave out of their equation is the precariousness of human exis-
tence in the universe without technological progress. SARS and AIDS
show that naturally evolving pathogens appear to need no genetic help
from terrorists to threaten humanity, and molecular medicine is our
greatest weapon in that ﬁght. Our otherwise silent galaxy suggests that
asteroid impacts, solar radiation and numerous other cosmic threats are
waiting to wipe out this small accidental growth of intelligence. In his
2003 book Our Final Hour, British astronomer Martin Rees gives mankind
a 50–50 chance of surviving the coming natural and man-made disasters
of the twenty-ﬁrst century. Without technologies that allow us to defend
ourselves against these natural and man-made risks, to diversify into
more durable and resilient bodies and spread beyond this vulnerable
planet, human-spawned intelligence will have a much shorter run.
Technology bans would also leave us helpless in the face of those
who developed proscribed technologies for military or terrorist pur-
poses. We will need increasingly sophisticated detectors of and defenses
against genetic, molecular and AI-based weapons. We will need to de-
velop a nano-immune system to detect and counteract accidental and
malicious nanotechnology, just as we have developed global networks to
protect against computer viruses.
The risks of human enhancement are also fundamentally different
from those of gray goo, supercorn and Terminator robots. It is unlikely
that a genetically engineered human, or even two, will ever escape into
the woods and eat the planet. Genetically or cybernetically modiﬁed hu-
mans are no more likely to be eco-destructive than humanity versions
0.1 through 1.0. On the contrary, transhumans with longer lives and
greater intelligence would be more likely to foresee and avoid ecologi-
cal destruction, and to have the technological capabilities to repair the
Defenders of Natural Law
119

damage already done. New genetically engineered crops and nanotech-
nology will make possible more ecofriendly agriculture and manufac-
turing. People who expect to be around in 200 years won’t want to foul
their own nests.
DEEP ECOLOGY AND THE DICTATES OF MOTHER NATURE
Left-wing bioLuddites are generally not traditionally religious. They
don’t base their opposition to technology on biblical edicts or God’s plan
for man. But thanks to New Age counterculture and radical environ-
mentalism, political progressives have been infused with pre-humanist
beliefs about the sacredness of nature, a belief system known as “deep
ecology.” Deep ecology was ﬁrst articulated by the philosophers Arne
Naess and George Sessions in the 1970s. But it began to spread with the
growth of radical environmentalist groups like Earth First! The core of
the deep ecology platform is the assertion that “The well-being and
ﬂourishing of human and nonhuman life on Earth have value in them-
selves. These values are independent of the usefulness of the nonhuman
world for human purposes.” Consequently, “Humans have no right to
reduce this richness and diversity except to satisfy vital needs.” Deep
ecology has merged with pagan and New Age beliefs about nature spir-
its and the interdependence of all beings, but added a misanthropic un-
dercurrent. In order to reduce humanity’s excessive interference with
the nonhuman world there must be “a substantial decrease of the
human population.” 
In the 1980s, like a lot of progressive Buddhists, I was drawn to the al-
leged pagan–Buddhist syncretism of deep ecology and I was excited by
the emergence of the European Green parties as the vehicle of this new
spiritual politics. Slowly I came to realize that deep ecology was pro-
foundly un-Buddhist and anti-humanist. As Buddhist philosopher John
McClellan argued in his seminal essay “Nondual Ecology,” a truly Bud-
dhist outlook doesn’t partition the world into natural (ecosystems) and
unnatural (technology), but embraces both nature and technology as ex-
120
CITIZEN CYBORG

pressions of the evolutionary process. The technobiotic world created
by human beings, argued McClellan, should be as embraced and cele-
brated as the trees and animals with which it co-evolves.
Since only human minds make distinctions like valuable and worth-
less, only human beings can give meaning and value to nature and tech-
nology. If all humans disappeared from the planet the ecosystem would
continue, but the world would be more or less meaningless, at least until
dolphins and apes evolved more abstract thought. For the deep ecolo-
gists, however, an Earth without humans would be as good or better.
Like the Christian Right, deep ecology calls for a return to natural
law. Instead of seeing the development of all minds, all persons, as the
Good, we are supposed to follow the dictates of Nature. Instead of
human beings creating meaning in an otherwise meaningless universe,
the universe already has a plan and it doesn’t care about us. If Nature’s
plan requires that the human population be reduced to only half a mil-
lion, as advocated by some Earth Firsters, so be it. Industrial civilization
must be uprooted, and humans must return to hunting and gathering.
Imbued with these anti-human, deep ecological views, animal libera-
tion and anti-GM food groups have no qualms about acts of violence
against labs making new medicines or crops. Before 9/11 the majority
of terrorist acts in the United States were being committed by deep
eco-activists. In 2002 the FBI estimated that the Animal Liberation
Front and Earth Liberation Front had together committed more than
600 criminal acts in the United States since 1996, resulting in damages in
excess of $43 million. Noting that European fascism also had a nature-
worshipping, anti-modernist wing, philosopher Greg Pence has dubbed
deep ecology “ecofascism.”
The moderate environmentalist and social justice movements have
been ﬁghting a rearguard defense against the spread of deep ecology for
ﬁfteen years. The U.S. Greens were polarized from the beginning by the
condemnation of deep ecology by anarchists and socialists like Murray
Bookchin. Reproductive rights activist Betsy Hartman and other progres-
sives have struggled against the spreading influence of deep ecology’s
Defenders of Natural Law
121

Malthusian misanthropy, which gives warrant to coercive population
control programs restricting the reproductive rights of developing world
women.
Today Earth First! is led by a more politically correct leadership, less
inclined to praise AIDS as Mother Nature’s revenge on the human cancer,
which has sought alliances with trade unions and anti-racist groups. But
the inﬂuence of deep ecology is still pervasive throughout the liberal-Left
and is found now in the writing of some of the most prominent leaders
of the anti-human enhancement groups. One such deep ecologist is An-
drew Kimbrell, the former policy director for Jeremy Rifkin, who went
off to found the Washington, D.C.–based  International Center for Tech-
nology Assessment. Most of Kimbrell’s energies have been devoted to at-
tacking genetically engineered crops, but he has taken time out to write
The Human Body Shop, an attack on the alleged commodiﬁcation of or-
gans and tissues that he sees as “desacralizing” the human body.
Mainstream environmental groups are also beginning to line up with
the opponents of transhuman technologies. Carl Pope, the director of
the Sierra Club, used his address to the 2001 meeting of the National
Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League (now called NARAL
Pro-Choice America) to urge the gathered pro-choice activists to support
restrictions on parents’ rights to germinal choice. The ecological think
tank Worldwatch Institute devoted a 2002 issue of its magazine to a
dozen articles opposing cloning and human genetic engineering, written
by McKibben, Fukuyama and prominent feminist and environmental
writers. Testifying before the U.S. Congress in 2002 in support of a ban on
the use of cloning in medical research, Brent Blackwelder, president of
Friends of the Earth, said, “The push to redesign human beings, animals
and plants to meet the commercial goals of a limited number of individ-
uals is fundamentally at odds with the principle of respect for nature.”
One corollary of this deep ecological faith is that human beings can
never be wise enough to improve on Nature, just as the theists assert
that humans cannot and should not try to improve on God’s Creation.
Genomes are too complicated and mysterious to engineer, and attempts
122
CITIZEN CYBORG

will lead to unpleasant, unintended consequences (think Tower of Babel
and the untimely melting of Icarus’s wings). 
Another corollary of the deep ecological disdain for human science is
suspicion toward scientiﬁc medicine. Granted, much medical practice is
only barely more scientiﬁc than homeopathy or faith healing. But there
is a difference between believing that modern medicine is not fully vali-
dated and should be used conservatively, and believing that all modern
medicine makes people sick and should be avoided. This latter view, ar-
ticulated by writers like Ivan Illich, carries over to a suspicion of the
promise of human enhancement. Just as no number of studies demon-
strating the safety of vaccinations can penetrate a natural health advo-
cate’s anti-scientism and convince them that vaccines are safe, no stack
of clinical trials can demonstrate to bioLuddites that tinkering with the
human genome could ever be safe. Arguing about the safety of technol-
ogy with those under the sway of deep ecology is as pointless as arguing
about the existence of God with the believer.
We certainly need to take every reasonable precaution as we set
about making the universe a friendlier place for intelligence. I also be-
lieve we all should have reverence and awe for the universe. But human-
ity, its works and its tremendous promise are among the most awesome
things of this universe. There are no sacred or “natural” limits to our
taking control of our biology or ecology. There is no “natural” way to
have a baby, grow corn, manage a forest or die. There are only ways we
choose, some of which work better than others.
Defenders of Natural Law
123


9
Left-Wing BioLuddites
Most political radicals embraced science and technology in the eighteenth and
nineteenth century. But another group of radical critics have seen technology as
an intrinsic part of the evils of capitalism, patriarchy and racism. Since World
War Two techno-skepticism has come to replace techno-optimism on the Left.
Now the Left techno-skeptics are turning their attention to biotechnology and
nanotechnology, which they see as contributing to corporate and military power,
racism, inequality and discrimination against women and the disabled.
THE RISE OF LEFT BIOLUDDISM
Political scientist Langdon Winner earns high marks with me for being
the first person to warn the U.S. Congress of the threat from posthu-
manity. Winner testiﬁed before the House Science Committee on April
9, 2003, along with computer scientist Ray Kurzweil and nanotechnolo-
gist Chris Peterson. The hearing addressed funding for nanotechnology
research. In response to a question about when there would be greater-
than-human intelligence, Winner sternly intoned, “I hope never. One of
the concerns about nanotechnology and science and engineering on this
scale is that it is plowing onward to create a successor species to the
human being. I think when word gets out about this to the general pub-
lic they will be profoundly distressed. And why should public money be
spent to create an eventual race of posthumans?” To which Ray
125

Kurzweil responded that “I would define the human species as that
species that inherently seeks to extend our own horizons. We didn’t stay
on the ground, we didn’t stay on the planet, we’re not staying with the
limitations of our biology.”
Winner is probably the most famous, and one of the most sophisti-
cated, of the Left Luddite theorists. In his classic The Whale and the Reac-
tor: A Search for Limits in an Age of High Technology, he makes a careful ar-
gument that “artefacts have politics,” that the power relations of society
are designed into technologies. According to Winner, modern technol-
ogy, selected for and designed under the thumb of corporations and the
military, encourages centralization, hierarchy and the concentration of
power. Some tools, such as nuclear weapons, have few positive uses, and
necessitate authoritarianism. You don’t want to leave nuclear weapons
without a heavy guard, for instance, in case they are stolen. Other tech-
nologies, such as the crossbow, are very open to alternative uses, and can
be turned against the powers that be. The crossbow was adopted by re-
bellious and larcenous European peasants because it allowed common
people on foot to pierce the armor of knights on horseback before they
came within cudgeling range. According to Winner, to create a more de-
mocratic society we need to democratize technology, from the shop
ﬂoor to federal science bureaucracies.
Winner does not reject all technological progress. He calls for social
reforms and careful consideration of social consequences as technolo-
gies are deployed, not knee-jerk bans. Unfortunately the subtlety of
Winner’s argument is often lost on those who use him in left-wing at-
tacks on technology. For run-of-the-mill Left Luddites all technologies
are bad because they are produced by corporations and unequal soci-
eties, and all technologies will therefore serve the interests of corpora-
tions, men and the rich. Therefore all technologies must be opposed.
Why did this end up being the default viewpoint of political progres-
sives? The hostility of religious conservatives and ecomystics to tech-
nologies of human enhancement is understandable in light of the long
struggle of science, reason and humanism against religious orthodoxy.
126
CITIZEN CYBORG

The political message of liberty and equality was closely tied to the ad-
vocacy of science, reason and free enquiry, and both faced suppression
by the church and aristocracy. The revolutionary changes wrought by
technology were believed capable of making possible a new, better and
more prosperous society. The idea of political progress became tied to
the idea of technological progress, and nineteenth-century socialists,
feminists and democrats generally championed reason and science.
Eighteenth-century radicals like Joseph Priestley and the Marquis de
Condorcet pursued scientific investigation while championing democ-
racy and freedom from religious tyranny.
The ideas of natural selection and evolution were used by the Right
to argue that the rich were simply the most ﬁt, but also by the Left to
validate the idea of social progress. The Oneida community, America’s
longest-lived nineteenth-century “communist” group, practiced exten-
sive eugenic engineering through arranged breeding. For American so-
cialist Edward Bellamy, author of the popular utopian vision Looking
Backward, and as for the Fabian Socialists in the United Kingdom, social-
ism would be the result of a painless evolution of industrial society.
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels believed more pain and conflict
would be involved, but agreed about the inevitable end. Marxists argued
that the advance of technology laid the groundwork not only for the cre-
ation of a new society, with different property relations, but also for the
emergence of new human beings reconnected to nature and themselves.
At the top of the agenda for empowered proletarians was “to increase
the total productive forces as rapidly as possible.” The exiled Russian rev-
olutionary Leon Trotsky expressed the transhumanist aspirations of the
Marxist Left when he wrote that, after the Revolution:
Man at last will begin to harmonize himself in earnest. . . . He will try
to master . . . breathing, the circulation of the blood, digestion, repro-
duction, and . . . subordinate them to the control of reason and
will. . . . The human species . . . will once more enter into a state of
radical transformation, and, in his own hands, will become an object
Left-Wing BioLuddites
127

of the most complicated methods of artiﬁcial selection and psycho-
physical training. This is entirely in accord with evolution.
Meanwhile the American Progressive movement and New Deal
built hydroelectric dams and federal science agencies, and set up regu-
latory labs to employ scientists to serve the public interest. The 1945
report to President Roosevelt that laid the groundwork for the estab-
lishment of the National Science Foundation, Science: The Endless Fron-
tier, attributed American prosperity and longevity to “the free play of
initiative of a vigorous people under democracy, the heritage of great
national wealth, and the advance of science and its application. Sci-
ence, by itself, provides no panacea for individual, social, and eco-
nomic ills. . . . But without scientific progress no amount of achieve-
ment in other directions can insure our health, prosperity, and security
as a nation in the modern world.”
So why did the partisans of the idea of political progress, of a more
just society, become estranged in the late twentieth century from the
idea of technological progress? Why are so many contemporary social
democrats, feminists and Greens suspicious and hostile to biotechnolo-
gies, computers and science in general? The answer probably starts with
the romantic traditions that grew up in reaction to modern capitalism,
the shadow twin of the techno-optimist progressives. Pastoralist visions
of a deindustrialized socialism, pseudo-science, spiritualism and back-to-
land communalism were all tied up for bohemian radicals with opposi-
tion to capitalism. In fact, in the Communist Manifesto Marx and Engels
speciﬁcally warn against clerical, aristocratic and petit-bourgeois social-
ists who advance pastoralism and pre-industrial society as an alternative
to capitalist progress.
But it wasn’t until World War Two that the rationalist, industrializ-
ing Left lost out to the romantic bohemians. The Left’s interest in
reengineering the nature of Man was silenced by Nazi eugenics. The
gas chambers revealed that modern technology could be used by a
modern state for horriﬁc uses, and the atom bomb posed a permanent
128
CITIZEN CYBORG

technological threat to humanity’s very existence. The ecological
movement suggested that industrial activity was threatening all life on
the planet, while the anti-nuclear-power movement inspired calls for
technology bans. The counterculture attacked positivism, and lauded
pre-industrial ways of life. Deconstructionists and post-modernists cast
doubt on the “master narratives” of political and scientific progress,
while cultural relativists attacked the idea that industrialized secular lib-
eral democracies were in fact superior to pre-industrial and authoritar-
ian societies.
While the Progressives and New Dealers had built the welfare state
to be a tool of reason and social justice, the New Left joined cultural
conservatives and free-market libertarians in attacking it as a stultifying
tool of oppression, contributing to the general decline in faith in demo-
cratic governments. In One Dimensional Man, Herbert Marcuse, theoreti-
cian for the New Left, wrote that “technological rationality” was “the
great vehicle of better domination, creating a truly totalitarian uni-
verse.” Todd Gitlin, the former president of the Students for a Democ-
ratic Society, commented that while “an orientation toward the future
has been the hallmark of every revolutionary—and for that matter lib-
eral—movement of the last century and a half,” the New Left’s pastoral
brand of anti-futurist utopianism suffered from “a disbelief in the fu-
ture. . . . We ﬁnd ourselves incapable of formulating the future.”
As the Left gave up on a sexy, high-tech vision of a radically democ-
ratic future, libertarian champions of corporate capitalism became asso-
ciated with technological progress. Techno-enthusiasm on the Left was
supplanted by pervasive Luddite suspicion about the products of the
corporate consumerist machine. Celebrating technology was something
GE and IBM did in TV ads to cover up their complicity in napalming ba-
bies. Activists fought the machine. So the ﬁrst reaction of the modern
Left to all the new biotechnologies, especially any technology having to
do with genetics, was suspicion and loathing. That has carried over to a
near universal disdain and hostility toward the prospects for human en-
hancement among political progressives.
Left-Wing BioLuddites
129

PROTECTING THE POOR FROM TECHNOLOGY
To the Left Luddites, human enhancement is a bourgeois waste of re-
sources in a world of crushing poverty and need. Socialist writer and
building manager George Scialabba, reviewing Fukuyama’s Our Posthu-
man Future in the liberal journal American Prospect, writes: “The best reason
of all not to press forward into the posthuman future . . . goes unmen-
tioned in this book. It’s that the enormous resources required could be put
to much better use helping the many people who do not now enjoy a
human present.” He notes that 1.5 billion people don’t have access to clean
water, 1.25 billion lack adequate housing and a half billion consume too
few calories. One billion have no health care, and many millions of chil-
dren are malnourished. “The UN estimates that all these needs could be
met, at a basic level, for a yearly expenditure equal to 10 percent of the re-
cently proposed U.S. military budget—or slightly less than Americans and
Europeans spend annually on pet food and ice cream.”
Of course Mr. Scialabba is right, but why start by banning Ameri-
cans’ use of human enhancement medicine, which might eventually
beneﬁt the poor, instead of American pet food and ice cream, which will
never beneﬁt the world’s poor? If we agree that some sacriﬁces need to
be made to correct these monstrous wrongs, surely our rights to pets or
ice cream are more expendable than our rights to control our own bod-
ies and reproduction. It is clearly insane to live in a world where every-
one could have food, shelter and clean water, but don’t. But the knee-
jerk Left has neither grappled with the right to bodily autonomy nor
shown how banning life extension medicine or germinal choice or cy-
bernetic implants would lead to a redistribution of those dollars to the
world’s poor.
More thoughtful Left critics argue that transhuman technologies
need to be banned because they will make society more unequal. Tran-
shuman technology will lead to a genetic caste system, says the Center
for Genetics and Society (CGS) in Oakland, California, the spearhead of
the leftist caucus of bioLuddism. The CGS started as an ad hoc lobby in
130
CITIZEN CYBORG

the late 1990s raising the alarm about “technoeugenics,” that is, cloning,
designer babies and inheritable genetic modiﬁcations, which they believe
will lead to a permanent division between the “GenRich” and “Gen-
Poor,” terms borrowed from Lee Silvers’ pro-germinal choice book Re-
making Eden. Then in 2001 CGS was adopted by the Tides Foundation, a
large progressive meta-philanthropy in San Francisco, allowing it to hire
staff and begin to organize in earnest. CGS has helped organize the cam-
paign for an international treaty to ban cloning and inheritable genetic
modification. CGS staff now routinely write op-eds for the media at-
tacking transhumanists and advocates of germinal choice, and accusing
us of advocating “eugenics.”
EUGENICS AND ACCESS TO GERMINAL CHOICE
Whether germinal choice really is eugenics depends on one’s deﬁnition of
eugenics. The eugenics movement that spread across Europe and the
United States before 1945 encouraged selective breeding and was responsi-
ble for the mandatory sterilization of criminals, the poor, the disabled and
dark-skinned people based on unscientiﬁc theories. There are very few ad-
vocates of this older eugenics around today, and to the extent that anyone
advocates racist, classist or authoritarian ideas they are to be despised.
But if eugenics includes believing that individuals, free of state coer-
cion, should have the right to change their own genes and then have chil-
dren, then the advocates of human enhancement and germinal choice
are indeed eugenicists. If eugenics also includes the belief that parents
and society have an obligation to give our children and the next genera-
tion the healthiest bodies and brains possible, then most people are eu-
genicists. Once safe, beneﬁcial gene therapies are available parents will
feel the same sense of obligation to provide them for their kids as they
do a good education and good health care. As bioethicist Arthur Caplan
has said, “many parents will leap at the chance to make their children
smarter, ﬁtter and prettier. . . . They’ll slowly get used to the idea that a
genetic edge is not greatly different from an environmental edge.”
Left-Wing BioLuddites
131

On the other hand, if eugenics is authoritarian “genetic correctness,”
it is precisely the bioLuddites who are today’s eugenicists. The bioLud-
dites are the ones who want laws on what kind of children we can and
can’t have, who want to forbid people from controlling their own bodies
and reproductive choices. The big difference is that while the American
eugenicists were using profoundly anti-democratic classist and racist the-
ories to try to improve life for the next generation, the bioLuddites are
motivated by their anti-democratic human-racism to want to stop people
from improving the lives of the next generation.
Nonetheless, the CGS is right that widespread individual use of ger-
minal choice could make society more unequal. But so can the use of
every new technology from cars to computers. The answer isn’t to stop
technology but to change the system that unequally distributes technol-
ogy. Rich kids have access to better computers, cell phones, vitamins,
health care and jobs than do poor kids. The answer is not to take away
these advantages, but to make sure that everybody has better access to
all of these riches. Technology doesn’t make people unequal; power and
wealth do.
The ETC Group is another international Left Luddite nonprofit
based in Canada that has focused on nanotechnology and biotechnol-
ogy. In a 2003 report attacking the National Science Foundation’s initia-
tive to “improve human performance” through the convergence of nan-
otechnology, biotechnology, information and cognitive science (NBIC),
ETC expressed the Left Luddite position clearly: “Powerful new tech-
nologies in the hands of those who have benefited by—and perpetu-
ated—inequality, will exacerbate the gap between rich and poor. It is ir-
responsible to contemplate such a massive technological change without
ﬁrst enacting positive social change.” In other words, rather than ﬁght
for an egalitarian society that better distributes the beneﬁts of technol-
ogy, all technological progress should stop until we have a democratic
and egalitarian society. Liberal theorist Ronald Dworkin responds to
their argument in his book Sovereign Virtue that “We should not . . . seek
to improve equality by leveling down. . . . The remedy for injustice is
132
CITIZEN CYBORG

redistribution, not denial of benefits to some with no corresponding
beneﬁts to others.”
While the Luddites overestimate the power of technology to create
inequality, they underestimate the inevitability of popular demands for
more equal access to technology. The weakness of egalitarian politics in
the United States makes the U.S. Left especially prone to Luddite de-
featism. While every other industrialized country has a powerful social
democratic party and national health care systems politics in the United
States is a choice between liberal and reactionary corporate control
while 40 million Americans are still uninsured.
The good news is that demands for universal access to the benefits
of human enhancement and life extension are about to make univer-
sal health care unavoidable in the United States. Reflecting on Lee Sil-
vers’ naïve, and now frequently quoted, prediction that germinal
choice will lead to a division between the genetic haves and have-nots,
conservative Adam Wolfson retorted in the Public Interest that “if ge-
netic enhancement were to become possible, democratic publics
would take to the streets with knives and guns before allowing Silvers’
scenario to come to pass. The lower and middle classes would insist
that their children be provided with the same eugenic enhancements
available to the children of the rich. In time, the U.S. government
would subsidize eugenic programs, not to create an overclass but to
preserve equality, to elevate everyone’s natural endowments.” The
point of this book is to argue for precisely such a movement, a move-
ment that progressives will be forced to embrace once they have ex-
hausted the dead-end of bioLuddism.
DESIGNER BABIES AND THE VICE OF GENETIC GAMBLING
Imagine a parent who made every decision for their children by rolling
a pair of dice. How many years should you attend school? Come on
double sixes! Oh, sorry, snake eyes—just two years for you. Such a par-
ent would be considered unﬁt for parenting. Yet, when it comes to the
Left-Wing BioLuddites
133

genetic crapshoot, parents who want to assure the best for their child,
who want them to be as healthy and able as possible, are the ones on the
defensive, having to prove that they really love their children and don’t
think of them as a commodity. Bioethicist Thomas Murray, in The Worth
of the Child, writes, “Good families are characterized more by accep-
tance than control.” But good families are not characterized by indiffer-
ence to whether a child is healthy or not, or bright or not.
Parents deserve to exercise all the genetic choices science can pro-
vide, and they deserve the benefit of the doubt that they will make
choices that enrich their children’s lives. Who more than the parent,
who will have to raise the child, would care more about the many trade-
offs, risks and unknowns that will go into each decision?
While dressed up with Marxian rhetoric, the Left bioLuddite opposi-
tion to commodiﬁed designer babies is just another doctrine of religious
natural order. Every little baby is a precious gift, and to want to improve
them in any way is an insult to Yahweh or Gaia or the uncommodiﬁed
parent–child relationship. But that logic equally applies to birth control,
as the Vatican consistently points out, as well as to prenatal care of any
kind. If a mother takes prenatal vitamins to prevent spina biﬁda does it
means she would love a baby born with spina biﬁda less? If she goes to
an expensive obstetrician because she wants to ensure the health of the
baby, has she commodiﬁed the baby? Will she shun it if it turns out to
have been a failed investment? Obviously not.
A society with designer babies will supposedly be obsessed with ge-
netics and forget about the importance of parenting. In fact, just like
birth control, abortion and family planning, germinal choice is likely to
increase the fit between kids and the desires of their parents, making
both happier in the long run. Transhuman technologies will actually
strengthen families by helping to ensure that every child is an even more
wanted child, including all their various traits.
Critics fret that the new family structures that reproductive tech-
nology makes possible might harm kids. There is substantial evidence
that having at least two caregivers in a house is better for children than
134
CITIZEN CYBORG

single-parenting. But all the rest of the vague anxieties about “unnat-
ural” families have no empirical support. More than a decade of stud-
ies of children raised by gay and lesbian couples find that they are just
as psychologically well-adjusted as children raised by straight parents.
A decade of large studies also find that children conceived with artifi-
cial insemination and other infertility treatments, “children of choice,”
are just as well-adjusted, and in some cases more loved, than “children
of chance.”
For instance, University of London researcher Susan Golombok has
studied hundreds of families with children produced by invitro fertiliza-
tion and donor insemination, up through age 12, comparing them to
families that have adopted or conceived naturally, and ﬁnds no evidence
that reproductive technology contributes to lower-quality parenting,
high expectations or a “commodiﬁed” parenting style. She has found re-
peatedly that “the quality of parenting in families with a child conceived
by assisted conception is superior to that in families with a naturally con-
ceived child” and that the children of choice are as or more psychologi-
cally healthy. Parents who had used artiﬁcial methods expressed more
warmth toward their children than the parents in the other two groups,
and their children expressed more warmth for their fathers and were less
likely to engage in physical aggression toward their peers. Some studies
have found that children produced through artiﬁcial means have supe-
rior cognitive and intellectual abilities, and none have found that they
have any deﬁcits.
Critics go to quite absurd lengths to portray parents who want to use
reproductive technology as dangerous. Fukuyama suggests that fathers
will feel incestuous toward daughters cloned from their wives. If it were
in fact true that fathers are more likely to feel incestuous toward girls
that resemble their wives then we probably should encourage everyone
to switch kids at birth, since many uncloned daughters resemble their
mothers. Or perhaps we should just set aside the vague, baseless anxi-
eties about “unnatural” families as reasons for interfering with procre-
ative liberty.
Left-Wing BioLuddites
135

FEMINISTS AGAINST REPRODUCTIVE CHOICE
When my wife was pregnant with our ﬁrst child we attended a lecture at
the University of Chicago hospital where she planned to deliver. The lec-
ture was on the history of electronic fetal monitoring, and the conclu-
sions were startling. Study after study had shown that the electronic
monitors could not be accurately read, provided no beneﬁt for mother
or baby, and increased the rate of unnecessary cesarean sections. But
when we confronted the midwives at the hospital with this information,
their hands were tied by administration’s risk management policies. So
we delivered both of our kids at home, and became well educated about
the unscientiﬁc and harmful practices masquerading as obstetric medi-
cine. My wife in particular became profoundly distrustful of modern
medicine, and our disagreements were passionate.
But at 42 my wife wanted to have a third child, and found she
couldn’t conceive. During a round of fertility drugs and daily trips to the
clinic she reread an old feminist tract about how all women who use re-
productive technology are dupes of capitalist patriarchy. She turned to
me at dinner that night and said, “I ﬁnally get what you and the tran-
shumanists are about. This is really insulting. They think I’m not smart
enough to use technology without being a brainwashed puppet.”
It seems obvious to many that the right to use reproductive and ger-
minal choice technologies would be included in our right to bodily au-
tonomy, and speciﬁcally in our “procreative liberty,” a phrase promoted
by lawyer-ethicist John Robertson in Children of Choice. But this isn’t
clear to bioLuddite feminists. In 1993, Janice Raymond, an activist with
the group FINRRAGE (Feminist International Network of Resistance to
Reproductive and Genetic Engineering), wrote in her book Women as
Wombs: “Technological reproduction completes the medicalization of
sex begun in the nineteenth century. The sexual objectiﬁcation and vio-
lation of women is made invisible because technological reproduction
has turned medicalized pornography into education, made medicalized
access to the female body acceptable, and transformed medicalized
136
CITIZEN CYBORG

abuse into treatment. Technological reproduction is ﬁrst and foremost
about the appropriation of the female body.”
Feminists have good reasons to be suspicious of the patriarchal prac-
tices of obstetrics, and the assumptions behind reproductive medicine.
The feminist critique has led to calls for women to take more control
over their reproductive decisions and be more assertive with the health
care system. But suspicion and hostility toward medicine and science
have led to a concerted feminist–Luddite attack on reproductive tech-
nology in books such as The Mother Machine by Gena Corea, The Politics
of Reproduction by Mary O’Brien and the collections Man-Made Women:
How the New Reproductive Technologies Affect Women and Made to Order:
The Myth of Reproductive and Genetic Progress. In the feminist–Luddite cri-
tique, women who want to use reproductive technologies are victims of
false consciousness, and giving them choices is actually bad for them. As
Janice Raymond writes in Women as Wombs, “Feminists must go beyond
choice and consent as a standard for women’s freedom. Before consent,
there must be self-determination so that consent does not simply
amount to acquiescing to the available options.”
Some feminists are now joining forces with the religious and environ-
mental bioLuddites to oppose reproductive technology, cloning and ger-
minal choice. Feminist authors Naomi Klein and Judith Levine, women’s
health activist Judy Norsigian and other prominent feminist activists
joined the Rifkin-organized progressive bloc in opposition to the use of
embryos in medical research, even though it meant joining forces with the
right-to-life movement. Norsigian says that women can’t ever give in-
formed consent to genetic therapies since those risks can’t be fully known.
In The Other Machine, a feminist defense of reproductive technology,
Dion Farquhar calls this “fundamentalist feminism.” She argues that the
fundamentalist or bioLuddite feminists refuse to acknowledge any con-
nection between a reproductive right to abortion, which they defend,
and a right to use reproductive technologies, such as germinal choice,
which they want to deny. If a woman has a right to kill her fetus or poi-
son it with alcohol, that would certainly seem to cover a right to im-
Left-Wing BioLuddites
137

prove her own genome and then reproduce, or to clone herself, or per-
form genetic therapies on her unborn child for its benefit. If women
should have the right to choose the father of their child, with his atten-
dant characteristics, then they should be allowed the right to choose
those characteristics from a catalog. The progressive bioLuddites, in
their zeal to prevent the return of coercive eugenics, appear to have for-
gotten that the right to control our bodies, including our reproductive
options, is so important that the state needs some very solid reasons be-
fore interfering with them. As Marcy Darnovsky of the Center for Ge-
netics and Society says, “It will take focused effort to make it clear that
altering the genes of one’s children is not among the reproductive rights
for which so many women and women’s organizations have struggled.”
LEGITIMATE REASONS TO RESTRICT REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
People should have a right to control their own genomes and have chil-
dren without permission from the government. So I don’t think we re-
ally can or should do much to prevent germinal choice that results from
someone intentionally changing their reproductive cells with a legal
gene therapy. But we can and should pass laws about what kinds of med-
ical products, services and technologies can be sold. All genetic therapies
on embryos, fetuses, children and adults, like all drugs and medical de-
vices, should first pass through animal and then human trials, and be
shown to be safe and effective before they are made available to the pub-
lic. Human cloning and germline modiﬁcations should have to show in
clinical trials that they do not cause genetic abnormalities in mammals.
The first human trials of cloning or genetic modification could be re-
stricted to parents who need to use the technique to have a child because
a parent has a serious genetic disease. Then, after observing these ﬁrst
experimental clones and gene-tweaked kids, we could open the tech-
nique to all prospective parents who want to use it.
The length of time we need to wait to be certain of the safety of ge-
netic modiﬁcations will quickly shrink as we build computer models of
138
CITIZEN CYBORG

the human genome and the proteins and tissue engineering that it codes
for. One of the larger “in silico biology” efforts is the international E.
Coli Alliance, which has created a computer model of the single-celled
organism and how its genes work together to create the organism. Now
they can begin tweaking it in computer simulations.
With the exponential progress in gene scanning and computing
power, a virtual model of genetic expression in the human body will not
be far behind. Humans are only one order of magnitude more complex
than E. coli (35,000 genes to E. coli’s 4403 genes), which is about ﬁve years
in Moore’s Law time. We are already testing virtual drugs against virtual
tissues. The ﬁrm Entelos in California has built a virtual asthma patient
using equations that model 7500 biological parameters relevant to
asthma such as the effect of bronchial inﬂammation and the thickness of
the mucous lining in the lungs. The Pharcyte Corporation has built a
vast database of clinical trial data, so that pharmaceutical companies can
use “computer-assisted trial design” to estimate best dosages and the
likely outcome of trials. The ﬁrm Gene Network Sciences has built a vir-
tual colon cancer cell, which simulates the expression of 5000 genes and
proteins, includes all the scientiﬁc knowledge about how the cell works
in a series of algorithms, and models every one of the cell’s known drug
targets. So we will soon be able to speed up approval of gene tweaks by
simulating their effects on virtual humans. Artiﬁcial chromosomes may
also turn out to be a safer alternative to existing genetic engineering
techniques.
Some opponents of genetic engineering, however, argue that even if
germline genetic modification appeared safe for its first generation, it
should still be forbidden since we can never be certain that some future
generation won’t regret the choices we made. Francis Fukuyama told
Salon.com, “It could be that you will try to enhance the child’s intelli-
gence, and it will turn out that you’ll increase the susceptibility to cer-
tain kinds of cancers—but this won’t show up until the child is 60 years
old.” That kind of concern is not a real risk of a real harm, and not le-
gitimate grounds for interfering in the very real reproductive freedoms
Left-Wing BioLuddites
139

and obligations of parents. Any appeal to the dangers of germline mod-
ification beyond adolescence, not to mention hypothetical anxieties
about effects on the next generation, are absurd since future generations
will be upgrading whatever genome they get from their parents. We
won’t be selecting genomes for all time, but starter genomes for a child’s
ﬁrst twenty years or so.
Some bioLuddites appear to assume that there are many parents
eager to mentally and physically cripple their children. There certainly
may be a few. In What Sort of People Should There Be? Jonathan Glover
asks what we should do if a religious minority engineers a sign of their
faith on their children’s foreheads, or engineers their brains to prevent
apostasy. Certainly we have a duty to all kids to make sure that they not
be robbed of any abilities and choices through genetic engineering.
Likewise it is our responsibility to make sure children aren’t robbed of
their fullest abilities and choices by lack of access to prenatal care,
screening, nutrition, education or their parents’ lack of germinal choices.
So what might we do with parents who wanted to use germinal
choice to rob their children of intelligence, health or abilities? We al-
ready face this issue with a couple sets of deaf parents who have tried to
use IVF and prenatal screening to select embryos with congenital deaf-
ness. These parents argue that deaf culture is equally valid and that they
would be better able to raise a deaf child. According to the principle of
“procreative beneficence,” selecting for deafness is clearly unethical,
since it robs children of a critical ability. Physicians should refuse to ac-
cede to such a request, and public and private insurance should refuse to
pay for it. When the deaf child reaches maturity they should be able to
sue their parents for damages. As Peter Singer argues, selecting a deaf
child is as much an abuse of the child as the intentional deafening of a
hearing child, since, either way, that child “will never be able to hear
Beethoven, or a babbling brook, or listen to lectures and debates deliv-
ered in spoken languages, except in translation. The child will also be at
a disadvantage in countless other ways in getting through life.” Even if
technology can make them hear later, they will have passed the critical
140
CITIZEN CYBORG

threshold of brain development and will be unable to process speech. A
germline therapy that deafened a child, regardless of its other beneﬁts,
would never be approved for use by federal regulators, so why would we
permit parents to deafen a child through their choice among embryos?
I could be comfortable with laws against genetic interventions that
rob children of abilities. But we probably value procreative liberty so
highly, and set such a high bar on the state’s interference in reproduc-
tion, that we will permit parents to choose deafness if they pay for it
themselves and can ﬁnd a willing clinic and doctor to perform the pro-
cedure. We may still wish to draw the line at choices that deny children
longevity or intelligence. Or, since we permit women to smoke and
drink during pregnancy, we may even decide to allow parents complete
procreative liberty and germinal choice, and only try to dissuade them
from bad choices with public shaming and education. In such a laissez-
faire society I am confident that 99.99% of parents will use germinal
choice technologies to enhance their children and not harm them. The
risk to the one-in-a-thousand child harmed by parental choices may be
an acceptable trade-off for respecting procreative liberty.
Later I outline which germinal choices I believe should be subsidized,
which left to the market and which strongly discouraged. In general,
however, once a germinal choice technology has been tested and shown
not to cause a high rate of birth defects or health problems, I believe par-
ents should be permitted to use it. Figuring out what are harmful
choices for children in the future will become very complicated. If peo-
ple choose to modify themselves to live underwater, with gills and ﬂip-
pers, and then choose to have children to share their underwater society,
would this be child abuse or enhancement? It takes away some abilities
but adds others. Trusting parents to navigate the increasingly diverse
choices will be hard, but nonetheless essential in a free society.
A second class of harms that warrant restrictions on reproductive
freedom, social harms, are more difﬁcult to predict, but also far less ur-
gent. An imbalance of males over females is often suggested as a reason
to forbid parents the right to choose their children’s gender. Indian par-
Left-Wing BioLuddites
141

ents have widely used ultrasound and amniocentesis to determine the
sex of pregnancies and abort female fetuses, contributing to a sex ratio
of 9 females for every 10 males. The Indian government outlawed the
practice in 1994 and has become increasingly punitive against clinics that
provide prenatal screening information. Authorities have orders to seize
any ultrasound machine used to tell a mother the sex of her fetus.
But why exactly is it the Indian government’s, or any government’s,
business to ensure gender balance in the population? The Indian govern-
ment isn’t actually preventing sex discrimination since female fetuses
aren’t persons and can’t be discriminated against. It is not discrimination
against ugly people if a woman decides to abort a child sired by an ugly
man. Is it the government’s responsibility to see that every heterosexual
can ﬁnd someone to marry? If so, women should ﬁle a class action suit
in favor of sex selection for more boys since being 51% of the population
makes it harder for them to ﬁnd a mate.
In fact, efforts to forbid sex selection threaten women’s reproductive
freedom. The Indian law forbidding mothers from ﬁnding out the gender
of their children also radically restricts their right to information about
their pregnancy. In India both a woman and her clinic are subject to crim-
inal penalties if she receives an ultrasound or genetic test on her fetus and
she isn’t older than 35, or doesn’t have a history of disabilities or miscar-
riages. Which means women are not only forbidden from ﬁnding out the
gender of their fetus but also from assuring themselves that it is healthy.
Patriarchal biases against girls are certainly distasteful, just as we may
ﬁnd it distasteful for a woman to abort a fetus because the father was the
“wrong” color. But it is clearly preferable that parents have wanted chil-
dren rather than unwanted children. The consequence of a lack of ger-
minal choice in the developing world has been more underfed girls and
female infanticide, not gender equality. Most parents in the developed
world who choose their child’s sex, at invitro clinics or through abortion,
do so to balance their families, not because they favor boys. And sex se-
lection in Japan actually tilts to a three to one preference for girls.
142
CITIZEN CYBORG

In almost all cases, all the social risks and the psychological harms al-
leged for kids who are designed, sex selected, cloned or enhanced are
simply baseless speculation, and do not amount to concrete reasons to
interfere with rights to control our own bodies. As lawyer and bioethicist
John Robertson notes: “In the debate over germline genetic engineering,
it is essential to focus in on the interests of the parents who want to use
this technique. If it can be shown that parents’ desire to use this tech-
nique is part of their reproductive, their procreative, or their parental lib-
erty, then the government, the state, would have to come up with much
more tangible evidence of harm if it wishes to interfere with or stop
their use. If fundamental liberties are involved, speculative, hypothetical
harms will not do as a justiﬁcation for law.”
We still have a ways to go to convince the world of the importance
of procreative liberty. Most accept the use of germinal choice for thera-
peutic purposes, but reject cloning, sex selection and enhancement. A
survey of Americans conducted by the Genetics and Public Policy Cen-
ter at Johns Hopkins University in 2002 found that majorities favored ge-
netic testing or engineering of embryos to avoid disease (see Table 9.1).
But only a quarter favored pre-implantation genetic diagnosis for non-
therapeutic reasons like gender, and only 20% favored genetic enhance-
ment or human cloning. Yet the 20% accepting enhancement and
cloning is already surprisingly large. That adds up to about 60 million
Americans, about the same percentage who are evangelical Christians.
As recently as 1993, only 10% of the public thought human cloning
would be acceptable.
While the public is still fuzzy about the importance of procreative lib-
erty, they are very clear about our right to control and modify our own
body and then have children. While majorities opposed genetic enhance-
ment in this survey, a majority (59%) also favored parents being able “to
change their own genes in order to prevent their children from having a
genetic disease,” the inheritable germline therapy that the bioLuddites
seek to ban.
Left-Wing BioLuddites
143

DIVERSITY, DISCRIMINATION AND THE TECHNO-FIX
Despite “backlash” and temporary reversals, the line of social advance
carries us toward a wider tolerance, a more easy acceptance of more and
more diverse human types.
—ALVIN TOFFLER, 
Future Shock
Opponents of germinal choice often assume that choosing to have a boy
or an able-bodied child will weaken rights for women and the disabled.
This is fundamentally muddled thinking, based on the theory of fetal
personhood. Killing a child because she is a girl or mentally disabled is
murder and a hate-crime, but deciding not to have them in the ﬁrst place
is not unethical. Otherwise deciding not to have more children would
also be murder.
Nor does it make sense to tie the rights enjoyed by a group in society
to their number in society. Is the argument that if half the world was
144
CITIZEN CYBORG
TABLE 9.1
Approval of Germinal Choice Technologies
From a survey of 1,211 adult Americans in October 2002 conducted by the Genetics
and Public Policy Center at Johns Hopkins University.
Technology
Approve
Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) to avoid serious 
74%
genetic disease   
invitro fertilization 
72%
PGD to ensure child is a good tissue/blood match 
69%
Prenatal testing for disease 
66%
PGD to avoid a tendency to diseases like cancer 
60%
Genetic engineering to avoid disease 
59%
Animal cloning  
37%
PGD to choose child’s sex 
28%
PGD to ensure child has desirable characteristics 
22%
Prenatal testing for desirable traits 
20%
Genetic engineering to create desirable traits 
20%
Human cloning 
18%

blind there would be more things to read in Braille? If half the world was
in wheelchairs there would be more wheelchair access? If there were
more women in the population they would have more rights? On those
grounds disability rights activists should be lobbying against workplace
safety laws so there would be more people maimed on the job, and fem-
inists should be in favor of sex selection for female fetuses.
Critics of germinal choice also insist that a society that is healthier
and more able will discriminate more against the disabled. A position
paper from the Council on Responsible Genetics against germline engi-
neering says, for instance, that “The cultural impact of treating humans
as biologically perfectible artifacts would be entirely negative. People
who fall short of some technically achievable ideal would be seen as
‘damaged goods,’ while the standards for what is genetically desirable
will be those of the society’s economically and politically dominant
groups. This will only increase prejudices and discrimination in a society
where too many such prejudices already exist.”
But that is not what we have seen in this century. Precisely as the
rates of disability in society declined, there was an increase in efforts to
mainstream the disabled into society, provide them assistive technology
and ensure they reach their fullest potentials. There is no trade-off be-
tween disability rights and policies permitting parents to select for
healthier children or encouraging a reduction in disabilities. We can and
will have both. The argument that germinal choice is anti-disabled or pa-
triarchal is yet another manifestation of the left-wing bioLuddite error:
ﬁghting individuals’ free use of technology instead of power relations
and prejudices.
The Left bioLuddites respond that, even if we could work on both si-
multaneously, a society that allows disabilities to be corrected or that se-
lects their kids’ sex will spend less effort on making society welcome for
women and people with disabilities. Genetic technology will make it seem
that all social problems have a techno-ﬁx, delaying needed social reforms.
What if black parents decide to give in to racism by giving their chil-
dren a skin-lightening ﬁx, allowing them to pass as white? Just ask peo-
Left-Wing BioLuddites
145

ple of color how many of them would choose to have kids that look
white in order to allow those kids to “pass.” If there is a gay gene, some
religious conservatives might set aside their objections to germinal
choice and decide to select for straight kids. That would be a shame.
But is forcing homophobic families to raise gay children the best way to
ﬁght homophobia?
Control over human nature is unlikely to lead to neglect of environ-
mental improvement. Society might just ramp up kids’ intelligence in-
stead of providing them with better-funded schools. But that wouldn’t
work very well, since smarter kids would only make the inadequacies
of the schools more glaring. We will ﬁx obesity genes, but people will
still have to eat right and exercise. Fixes for lung cancer and skin cancer
are unlikely to dry up our concern about industrial pollution and the
ozone layer.
Another common concern is that germinal choice will increase ge-
netic testing and discrimination. The movie Gattaca depicts a future in
which genetic engineering of humans is widespread, and is accompa-
nied by widespread testing for genetic aptitudes for various jobs. The
protagonist is trying desperately to hide his genetic predisposition to
heart problems so that he can pursue a career as an astronaut. The ﬁlm’s
dystopian depiction of genetic discrimination is now widely cited as one
of the convincing proofs that germinal choice is a bad idea. Setting aside
the fact that astronaut-training programs are entirely justified in at-
tempting to screen out people with heart problems, will germinal choice
create a society where people are sorted into rigid castes on the basis of
their genetics? Will people be denied jobs or insurance on the basis of
their genetics?
Yes, possibly, and it has absolutely nothing to do with the availability of
genetic enhancement since people are already being discriminated against
on the basis of their propensities to disease. American insurance compa-
nies routinely deny coverage to people with preexisting conditions, and
will want to make use of every new piece of diagnostic information in
order to extend their predictive accuracy and proﬁt margins. In a country
146
CITIZEN CYBORG

where half the employees are required to submit to routine drug testing,
genetic testing for disease is not much farther behind. The answer, again,
is not to ban genetic tests or genetic enhancement, but to ensure the pri-
vacy of genetic information, and strictly control when genetic informa-
tion can be used to make decisions in education and employment.
We need to return to a really basic idea: It is our duty and right to
provide children with the healthiest and most able bodies we can.
Bioethicist Peter Singer makes this point when he proposes that “For any
condition X, if it would be a form of child abuse for parents to inﬂict X
on their child soon after birth, then it must, other things being equal, at
least be permissible to take steps to prevent one’s child having that con-
dition.” In other words, the parent who doesn’t take reasonable, avail-
able steps to ensure that their future child has normal abilities is as
morally culpable for their child’s disabilities as the parent who causes
those disabilities after birth.
Australian bioethicist Julian Savulescu sharpens the point, and ap-
plies it to germinal choice, with his principle of “procreative benefi-
cence”: We have an obligation to choose the child, among the possible
children we could have, which will have the best life. That means we are
obliged not only to choose children without disabilities, but also to cre-
ate enhanced children, so long as the enhancements are safe and avail-
able. If we can choose between an embryo with a projected 150-year life
span and one with only a 70-year life span, we are obliged to pick the for-
mer, just as we are obliged to pick a 70-year life span over a 10-year life
span. We have this general obligation as a society, to work to make sure
that the next generation is as healthy, intelligent and able-bodied as pos-
sible, just as we have it as individual parents. The best way that society
can fulﬁll that obligation is to make sure that all parents are able to pro-
vide the good things in life for their children, from nutrition and educa-
tion to net access and optimal genomes.
Whenever I meet a parent of a disabled child who is outraged that
germinal choice is “discrimination against the disabled” I ask them if
they would ﬁx their kid’s disability if they could. The answer is invari-
Left-Wing BioLuddites
147

ably yes. My daughter suffers from Tourette’s syndrome and my son
from ADD. Both conditions are linked to the same gene, a gene they
probably got a double whammy of from my wife and me. If we had had
the option to snip out the propensity to ADD and Tourette’s without se-
rious risks or enormous costs, it would have been our obligation to take
advantage of it, just as it is our obligation today to provide whatever
therapies they need to overcome these disabilities. The advocates of
parental germinal choice and procreative liberty trust that parents will
generally make the best choices for their children, and that the greatest
injustice would be to insist that parents and society remain indifferent
about how healthy and able-bodied our children can be.
ENHANCING THE AUTONOMY OF FUTURE GENERATIONS
Since C. S. Lewis’s attack on genetic engineering in his 1965 The Aboli-
tion of Man, one of the dogmas of the bioLuddites, from Left to Right,
is that germinal choice is somehow a tyrannical imposition on future
generations.
In reality, . . . if any one age really attains, by eugenics and scientiﬁc
education, the power to make its descendants what it pleases, all men
who live after it are the patients of that power. They are weaker, not
stronger: for though we may have put wonderful machines in their
hands we have preordained how they are to use them. . . . Man’s con-
quest of Nature, if the dreams of some scientiﬁc planners are realized,
means the rule of a few hundreds of men over billions upon billions of
men. There neither is nor can be any simple increase of power on
Man’s side. Each new power won by man is a power over man as well.
This argument that germinal choice will rob future generations of
choice can be found among all ﬂavors of bioLuddites. In his 2003 The Fu-
ture of Human Nature, left-wing German philosopher Jürgen Habermas
tries to argue that all germinal choices must constrain egalitarian inter-
148
CITIZEN CYBORG

action simply because the parent engineered the child: “As soon as adults
treat the desirable genetic traits of their descendents as a product they
can shape according to a design of their own liking, they are exercising a
kind of control over their genetically manipulated offspring that inter-
venes in another person’s spontaneous relation-to-self and ethical free-
dom. This kind of intervention should only be exercised over things not
persons.” But in the course of his argument Habermas acknowledges
that the genetic enhancement of children is “compatible with political
liberalism only if enhancing genetic interventions neither limit the op-
portunities to lead an autonomous life for the person genetically treated,
nor constrain the conditions for her to interact with other persons on an
egalitarian basis.”
Then we don’t really have a problem unless we accept Habermas’s
tautology that all germinal choices constrain children’s autonomy. Few
parents intend to make their children less intelligent or less capable of
autonomy and communication. If anything, parents’ choices will gener-
ally expand children’s ability to communicate, make decisions and con-
trol their own lives. As I say above, if there were widespread evidence
that parents were systematically choosing to make their children less ca-
pable of making choices, less able-bodied, less intelligent, then I would
be for regulating those bizarre choices. In fact, if anything, the problems
that human enhancement may pose are from children who are far more
intelligent, empowered and autonomous than their parents, leading to
generation gaps.
Many decisions we make for children shape them as profoundly,
and as unpredictably, as genetic decisions. Because we believe educa-
tion and nutrition are essential for self-determination and success in
life, we force children to go to school. No matter how aggrieved my
kids feel when I force them to eat vegetables or go to school, or scream
“I didn’t ask to be born,” it’s not fascistic of my wife and I to have cre-
ated them and set them on the course to healthy, autonomous adult-
hood. Every decision we make for our kids is a profound trust that so-
ciety places in our hands in the expectation that we will act in our kids’
Left-Wing BioLuddites
149

best interests better than anybody else. If we use germinal choice to
give our children more abilities, health or intelligence, we have ex-
panded their self-determination without even the imposition on their
freedom of spinach and homeroom.
A variant on the autonomy of future generations argument is that
the genome should never be modified because it is “humanity’s patri-
mony,” the “common heritage of mankind.” That is akin to insisting
parents not paint their house, or plant a garden, or protect their trees
from pests, because their children have a right to inherit the family prop-
erty as is. We are constantly changing and shaping the patrimony we
pass on to future generations, and it is our ethical responsibility to shape
it for the better as best as we know how, and not to leave it as is.
In any case, the argument that germinal choice robs future genera-
tions of choice is also very naïve about the future course of technology.
Whether genes are designed with Greg Stock’s proposed on–off
switches or not, enhancement technologies will evolve so rapidly that
the modiﬁcations that children received prenatally will quickly be super-
seded by genetic and nanotechnological enhancements that can correct
any ﬂaws and inadequacies in the germinal choices made by their par-
ents. If parents make a mistake in good faith it will likely be correctable,
and our children will choose their own upgrades. If our children and
grandchildren ﬁnd they really needed those genes for cancer and sickle-
cell anemia, they can put them back in.
CORPORATE DOMINATION AND DEMOCRATIC TECHNOLOGY
In 1999, campaigners against genetically modiﬁed food celebrated what
they believed to be a major victory. The leading developer of GM crops,
Monsanto, agreed not to pursue development of their so-called “Termi-
nator gene,” a genetic switch to insert in their crops to ensure that the
crops produced by their seeds were sterile. The campaigners had been
infuriated by the technology, since it would have required farmers to
purchase the modiﬁed seeds each year. Then in 2001, researchers found
150
CITIZEN CYBORG

strains of genetically modiﬁed corn growing in remote regions of Mex-
ico and the alarm was raised about GM crops spreading and pushing out
native crops. GM crops were also discovered to be escaping from exper-
imental plots in the United States. Of course, one solution to the spread
of GM crops in the wild would be to give them all the Terminator gene.
But in the bioLuddite worldview there are no solutions that include ge-
netic technology, with or without corporate capitalism.
Of all the bioLuddite concerns, I am most sympathetic with the com-
plaint that proﬁt-seeking corporations have too much control over the
innovation, design, marketing and regulation of emerging technologies.
But as I have said in many ways now, the solution is not to ban corporate
technologies but to strengthen democratic funding of scientific re-
search, to ensure equitable access to the fruits of technology and to pro-
vide strong independent oversight of the safety of these technologies.
Corporations are driven to overhype their successes and underplay the
risks of their products and services, so we need to ensure that indepen-
dent clinical trials honestly represent the risks and beneﬁts of using the
drugs or therapies, and that consumers are adequately informed of
those risks and beneﬁts.
The problem of corporate priorities in the development of en-
hancement technologies was addressed by Pat Mooney, the executive
director of the bioLuddite ETC Group, in a 2002 article in World Watch
magazine entitled “Making Well People ‘Better’.” Mooney noted that
“of the 1223 drugs brought to market between 1975 and 1996 only 13
targeted the deadly tropical diseases that afﬂict millions of the world’s
poor and just four of those drugs came from the private sector.” Since
pharmaceutical companies are proﬁt-driven, far more resources are di-
rected toward performance enhancement for the wealthy. Mooney then
recounts with mounting disdain the enhancement drugs being devel-
oped to improve memory and control shyness, anxiety, obesity and
trauma. But, to my surprise, he does not conclude that enhancement
drugs should be banned, but that “if we continue to rely upon the
world’s giant pharmaceutical corporations to determine research goals,
Left-Wing BioLuddites
151

our societies will remain unhealthy. . . . We need to strengthen socially
oriented public research and public health initiatives and, simultane-
ously, eliminate the patent incentive that distorts medical innovation
and dictates proﬁteering.” All of which is absolutely right, and does not
require that we condemn enhancement medicine just because it doesn’t
cure cholera and malaria.
The struggle to work around drug patents to expand access to anti-
retroviral drugs to keep HIV infections from developing into AIDS illus-
trates both Mooney’s and my points. Anti-retrovirals are very expensive
in the United States and access to them has been restricted to the world’s
afﬂuent. Instead of insisting that they not be used or funded until other
health needs were met, however, countries in the developing world
sought the right to produce and distribute the drugs without paying fees
to the patent holders that would bankrupt them. The countries would be
violating the World Trade Organization’s agreements on intellectual
property law if they had carried through on their threat. But after a
global campaign, the pharmaceutical companies reached a historic com-
promise in 2003 to license the drugs in the developing world much more
cheaply.
It would be wonderful if the World Health Organization or the Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention had developed the anti-retrovi-
ral therapies, patented them and made the patents the common prop-
erty of all humankind. But so long as private sector research, motivated
by proﬁt-seeking, is the principal driver of technological innovation, the
best we can do is use governments and public pressures to shape the pri-
orities of those ﬁrms through research funding, taxation, regulation, in-
tellectual property law, regulation on what is and isn’t covered by insur-
ance, and government purchases of drugs.
One key area in which corporations need to be carefully restrained by
democracies is in the land grab of gene patenting. I argue later that genes
discovered in plants, animals and humans should not be patentable, and
that patents on novel gene sequences that end up as a part of conscious
persons should be considered null and void. But even if we restrict gene
152
CITIZEN CYBORG

patents, biotech ﬁrms will still have an enormous set of opportunities for
proﬁtable innovation in making the drugs and other technologies that rely
on the genome.
THE VARIETIES OF BIOLUDDISM
Some of the bioLuddites I discuss here, such as the Center for Genetics
and Society, are only concerned about cloning and inheritable genetic
modiﬁcations and accept adults’ use of nanotechnology and genetics to
enhance themselves. Fukuyama and Kass want to draw a bright line be-
tween medical therapy and unacceptable “enhancement” in order to
protect “human dignity.” McKibben and Joy are worried about the risks
to the future of the human race from new technologies, while other
Luddites consider such concerns irrelevant science ﬁction and just want
us to stop being distracted by technohype so we can focus on social re-
form. The Christian Right sees their crusade against transhuman tech-
nologies as a part of a broader attempt to fight sin and humanistic
hubris, while Left bioLuddites believe they are ﬁghting big corporations
to defend women, the poor and the disabled. 
Yet across all of these schisms the bioLuddites are ﬁnding points of
convergence and principles they share in common, such as human-
racism. They all share a belief that they are somehow defending hu-
manity by denying individuals the right to use technology to make
themselves and their children healthier, more able, more long-lived,
smarter and happier.
Left-Wing BioLuddites
153


1 0
Upwingers, Extropians and 
Transhumanists
Transhumanism, the idea of using reason to transcend the limitations of the
human condition, has ancient roots. On the one hand, religious traditions have long
offered ways to push back the bounds of sickness, aging and death, and achieve su-
perhuman powers and states of mind. Millennial traditions promise a radically im-
proved world. In transhumanism these religious aspirations have merged with hu-
manism, rationalism, science and democracy. In the early 1990s, however, one
particular brand of transhumanism mixed with Southern Californian anarcho-
capitalism and became “extropianism.” Although extropianism spread rapidly
with the Internet, by the late 1990s transhumanism was returning to a broader,
more inclusive form in the World Transhumanist Association, reembracing its
democratic and humanist roots.
THE HISTORICAL ANTECEDENTS OF TRANSHUMANISM
I tell you, as long as I can conceive something better than myself I cannot be
easy unless I am striving to bring it into existence or clearing the way for it.
This is the law of my life. That is the working within me of Life’s incessant
aspiration to higher organization, wider, deeper, intense self-consciousness
and clearer self-understanding.
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW, 
Man and Superman
155

Transhumanism is the idea that humans can use reason to transcend the
limitations of the human condition. This idea has ancient roots. On the
one hand, the transcendent religious traditions show that the desire to
transcend sickness, aging, suffering and death is one of the most funda-
mental aspirations of human culture. The oldest written story of human
culture, the Sumerian Epic of Gilgamesh, is about a king attempting to
achieve physical immortality. Most religions offer healing, an afterlife or
immortality, altered states of consciousness and a variety of superpow-
ers—levitation, astral projection or psychic powers—to those adept at
their disciplines. Many religions also promise a coming millennial par-
adise in which human existence will be incomparably superior.
On the other hand, reason, technology and the scientific method
have been slowly extending the human competitive advantage since the
invention of speech and stone tools. Rationalist humanism can be found
in the earliest recorded schools of philosophy in Europe and Asia.
Socrates and the sophists proposed that all human affairs were open to
critical thinking, from metaphysics and ethics to the arrangement of so-
ciety. The fourth-century B.C. philosopher Democritus proposed that the
world known through the senses is all there is and that the world works
without any prior plan. Confucius proposed codes of conduct to guide
society without any referent to gods. Schools of Indian philosophy 2,500
years ago proposed that there was no afterlife and no gods, and that hu-
mans had to rely on their own reason, reﬂection and meditation to un-
derstand the world and be happy. The Buddhist tradition argued that each
human being could achieve a superhuman state, superior to that accessible
to even the gods, solely through individual human effort.
Although we think of the Dark Ages as anti-science, David Noble re-
counts in The Religion of Technology that medieval European monks de-
veloped a tradition of technology as a sacred vocation. Noble says that
the Joachimite Franciscans, for instance, preached that perfecting the
“useful arts” was “an approximate anticipation of, an apocalyptic sign of,
and a practical preparation for the prophesied restoration of perfection.”
Isolated philosopher-scientists, such as the thirteenth-century Roger
156
CITIZEN CYBORG

Bacon, conducted experiments and kept alive the pursuit of knowledge
of how things worked.
In the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries a group emerged in Europe
who called themselves “the humanists.” They were practicing Catholics
who believed that human beings were such special creations of God that
to celebrate human beings, their powers and creations was the best way to
celebrate God. They condemned the theology of original sin and argued
that humans should become more like God. In Italian humanist philoso-
pher Pico della Mirandola’s 1486 Oration on the Dignity of Man, God speaks
to man saying, “to you is granted the power, contained in your intellect
and judgment, to be reborn into the higher forms, the divine.”
The European Renaissance and Enlightenment, from the sixteenth to
eighteenth centuries, went on to forge humanism as we now know it.
Renaissance humanists encouraged human beings to rely on empirical
observations, reason and the scientiﬁc method, rather than religious tra-
dition and authority. Francis Bacon’s 1620 Novum Organum argued for the
use of the scientiﬁc method to achieve a human mastery over “all things
possible.” Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century rationalists and free-thinkers
proposed that human beings were the measure of all things. Religious hu-
manists like Thomas Jefferson were central to the liberal democratic
revolutions, creating societies that rejected divinely sanctioned rule for
free association with civil liberty and separation of church and state.
The French Revolution and the nineteenth-century workers movement
embraced even more militantly these secular values.
The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries also saw a ﬂowering of sci-
entific medicine and proposals for technological means to overcome
death. From Ben Franklin’s wish that he could be pickled in a ﬂask of
wine and revived in a century to the immortalist speculations of Con-
dorcet and William Godwin, democratic rationalists began to argue that
social, scientiﬁc and economic progress might make possible radical life
extension. Darwin’s theory of evolution opened the possibility that the
current condition of human beings was only a temporary stop between
a prior lower and future more advanced state.
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
157

TRANSHUMANISM IN THE EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY
The first direct intellectual precursors of transhumanism appeared in
1923 with J. B. S. Haldane’s “Daedalus, Science and the Future,” which
proposed extrauterine gestation and genetic enhancement, and in 1929
with the Irish physicist J. D. Bernal’s “The World, the Flesh and the
Devil,” which suggested bionic implants. Biofuturism then began
spreading from Britain to the United States. In 1935, the socialist Nobel
laureate biologist Herman J. Muller published Out of the Night: A Biolo-
gist’s View of the Future, in which he predicted that humanity would soon
“by aid of its ever growing intelligence and cooperation, shape itself into
an increasingly sublime creation—a being beside which the mythical di-
vinities of the past will seem more and more ridiculous, and which set-
ting its own marvelous inner powers against the brute Goliath of the
suns and the planets, challenges them to contest.” Muller was also a mil-
itant opponent of racial eugenics like his contemporaries Haldane and
Julian Huxley, and proposed instead that parents be able to enhance the
well-being of their children through voluntary “germinal choice” (espe-
cially by availing themselves of the sperm of Nobel Prize winners like
himself, but there weren’t many technological alternatives at the time).
It was apparently Haldane’s friend Julian Huxley, Aldous Huxley’s
brother, whose reflections on biofuturism led to the first use of the
phrase “transhumanism.” Julian Huxley argued that human beings
could and should throw off the shackles of dogma and use cultural and
biological means to evolve further. In his 1927 book on humanism, Reli-
gion Without Revelation, he wrote: “The human species can, if it wishes,
transcend itself—not just sporadically, an individual here in one way, an
individual there in another way, but in its entirety, as humanity. We need
a name for this new belief. Perhaps transhumanism will serve: man re-
maining man, but transcending himself, by realizing new possibilities of
and for his human nature.”
From the 1920s to the present, speculative ﬁction also played an in-
creasingly important role in stimulating biofuturist thinking by portraying
158
CITIZEN CYBORG

both utopian and dystopian visions of human and robotic evolution. H.
G. Wells and Olaf Stapledon proposed far future scenarios in which
human beings subspeciated into many different forms. A science ﬁction
subculture around the world began to grow with generally optimistic as-
sumptions about the future, science and technology.
Secular and religious humanism also became increasingly organized
and visible in the early twentieth century. The Humanist Manifesto was
published in the United States in 1933, asserting that humanism sees
“the complete realization of human personality to be the end of man’s
life and seeks its development and fulfillment in the here and now.”
Therefore humanists should “foster the creative in man and to encour-
age achievements that add to the satisfactions of life.”
TRANSHUMANISM AFTER WORLD WAR TWO
Who are the new revolutionaries of our times? They are the geneticists, biol-
ogists, physicists, cryonologists, biotechnologists, nuclear scientists, cosmolo-
gists, astrophysicists, radio astronomers, cosmonauts, social scientists, youth
corps volunteers, internationalists, humanists, science-ﬁction writers, norma-
tive thinkers, inventors. . . . They and others are revolutionizing the human
condition in a fundamental way. Their achievements and goals go far beyond
the most radical ideologies of the Old Order.
—FM–2030, Optimism One
Transhumanist themes exploded in speculative ﬁction after World War
Two, exploring cloning, genetic engineering, artiﬁcial intelligence and
the uplifting of animals. Starting in the early 1940s, Robert Heinlein ex-
plored the idea of a hidden subculture of people who have achieved ex-
treme longevity through germinal choice in his Lazarus Long series. In
his 1946 novel Slan, A. E. Vogt portrayed a future where humans vio-
lently suppress posthuman mutants. Isaac Asimov portrayed the idea of
a self-aware android covertly achieving legal parity with humans in his
1950 I, Robot. Arthur C. Clarke pointed to the possibility of posthuman
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
159

evolution in his 1953 Childhood’s End. Even stories of human/non-
human conflicts were generally optimistic that all intelligent beings
could ﬁnd some way to peacefully coexist, as in Star Trek’s Federation of
Planets. In Polish writer Stanislaw Lem’s 1967 Cyberiad, robots have long
since replaced human beings.
All of these themes were also springing up outside of ﬁction, in so-
cial movements, medicine and computer science, feeding back into spec-
ulative ﬁction. In 1960, Clynes and Kline propose cyborgs to NASA. One
of the goals of the program was to give ground control some way to in-
tervene in case the isolation of space made astronauts mentally unstable.
Ten years later Fred Pohl wrote ManPlus in which a human being is
adapted to live naked on the surface of Mars, and ﬁnds he is happier as a
posthuman.
As I described in Chapter 3, the cryonics movement was founded in
1962 with the publication of Robert Ettinger’s The Prospect of Immor-
tality, leading immediately to the founding of cryonics organizations.
In 1972, Ettinger wrote Man into Superman, in which he made clear
that the cryonics agenda was far bigger than simply getting frozen,
woken and repaired when technology improves. Sex changes, re-
designed digestive tracts and adaptations for extreme climates would
all allow humans to transcend the limitations of the human form and
a transition to “transhumanity.”
In his 1968 Toward a Psychology of Being, transpersonal psychologist
and theorist of the “peak experience” Abraham Maslow predicted the
emergence of a “transhuman” psychology “centered on the cosmos”
that would help human beings to become godlike. The counterculture
embraced the idea that individuals could use the technology of psyche-
delic drugs to engineer themselves into more intelligent, integrated per-
sonalities. Although Aldous Huxley had condemned the use of the drug
soma in Brave New World as tool of oppression, his advocacy of psyche-
delic liberation in the Doors of Perception won him a new audience with
the counterculture. “Better living through chemistry” was the slogan,
and when the era of psychedelics gave way to cocaine and heroin addic-
160
CITIZEN CYBORG

tion in the 1980s, the bio-utopians began experimenting with biofeed-
back machines and drugs for memory and intelligence enhancement.
It was while teaching at the New School for Social Research in 1966
that the Iranian-American futurist F. M. Esfandiary ﬁrst used the term
“transhumanism.” Like Ettinger, Esfandiary, who later changed his name
to FM–2030, used the term “transhuman” to refer to people whose
lifestyles, cultural worldviews and use of technology made them transi-
tional to posthumanity. In his 1989 book Are You Transhuman?, FM–2030
says transhumans “are the earliest manifestations of new evolutionary
beings. They are like those earliest hominids who many millions of years
ago came down from the trees and began to look around. . . . Many of
them are not even aware of their bridging role in evolution.”
It is ironic that FM–2030 became an icon for the 1990s libertarian
strand of transhumanism since he was so clearly rooted in the New
Left’s radical democratic utopianism that later birthed the Greens. Like
the Greens he argued that his politics were neither left-wing nor right-
wing, but “upwing”: “The UpWing philosophy is a visionary new thrust
beyond Right and Left-wing, beyond conservative and conventional rad-
ical.” But also like the Greens, FM–2030’s version of transcending both
capitalism and socialism involved “the complete elimination of money
and labor.” FM–2030 argued for direct electronic democracy to replace
authoritarianism and representative democracy. In place of fractious
nation-states he argued for world government and global citizenship:
“We want to help accelerate the thrust beyond nations, ethnic groups,
races to create a global consciousness, global institutions, a global lan-
guage, global citizenship, global free flow of people, global commit-
ments.” FM-2030’s idea of Up was tilted about 45 degrees to the Left.
The women’s liberation movement put germinal choice back on the
table by reintroducing the idea of human beings taking direct control of
reproduction. The feminist understanding of the scope of “reproduc-
tive rights” began with contraception and expanded to a right to abor-
tion. But the importance of using technology to control other aspects
of reproduction was immediately obvious to many feminists, from the
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
161

nineteenth-century feminists championing anesthesia in childbirth to
Shulamith Firestone’s 1971 feminist classic The Dialectic of Sex, which ar-
gued that women cannot be ﬁnally free until they are freed from having
to incubate children. Debate continues among feminists about whether
plastic surgery, chemically suppressing menstruation and the use of in-
vitro fertilization (IVF) are extensions of the women’s empowerment
over their bodies or just ways that patriarchal medicine has duped
women into self-exploitation.
Many of the theologians in the emerging ﬁeld of bioethics were ap-
palled at IVF and the prospects for cloning and genetic enhancement.
But some bioethicists defended the new technologies and argued that
parents had rights to make germinal choices about their children, both
to correct their diseases and to enhance their abilities. In his courageous
and controversial 1974 book The Ethics of Genetic Control, University of
Virginia bioethicist Joseph Fletcher made some of the ﬁrst post-eugenics
arguments for germinal choice. Fletcher’s efficacy as an advocate was
undercut, however, by a very problematic side argument for the creation
of subhuman servants, which reminded many of Brave New World.
Much more effective, and coolly argued, was Jonathan Glover’s 1984
What Sort of People Should There Be?: Genetic Engineering, Brain Control and
Their Impact on our Future World. Glover defended human genetic engi-
neering, virtual reality and neurotechnology, making clear that a society
that permits free individual use of technologies is entirely different from
the totalitarianism that people fear. Although Glover distinguished be-
tween therapy and enhancement, arguing that the former is safer than
the latter, he argues that “to renounce positive genetic engineering
would be to renounce any hope of fundamental improvement in what
we are like. . . . Preserving the human race as it is will seem an accept-
able option to all those who can watch the news on television and feel
satisﬁed with the world.”
In the late 1980s, Glover chaired a European Commission Working
Party on Assisted Reproduction, which presented the landmark Glover
Report to the European Commission on the Ethics of New Reproductive
162
CITIZEN CYBORG

Technologies. The Glover report was similar in tone to Splicing Life, a 1984
report on genetic engineering regulation produced by the bioethics
commission appointed by U.S. president Jimmy Carter. Both the Glover
report and Splicing Life defended somatic gene therapy as just another
medical therapy. Neither report rejected germline therapy, but they con-
sidered it to be so difﬁcult and dangerous as to be indeﬁnitely off the
table. The pioneering work of Fletcher, Glover and the other defenders
of genetic self-determination laid the groundwork for John Robertson’s
articulation of the principle of “procreative liberty” in his 1994 Children
of Choice, the idea that reproductive rights include the right to reproduc-
tive and germinal choice technology, and Julian Savulescu’s articulation
of the parallel principle of “procreative beneficence,” that parents are
obliged to choose the healthiest and most able of their possible children.
In the 1980s, computer scientists involved in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
began to project the consequences of the creation of full, self-aware AI.
Hans Moravec’s 1988 Mind Children and 1999 Robot predict that robots
are the next stage of evolution, and will establish a separate and incom-
prehensibly superior civilization. Humans will have the option of up-
loading their minds into these robots, “going Ex-human,” but Moravec is
not sanguine about the prospects for organic humanity: “Biological
species almost never survive encounters with superior competitors. . . .
An entity that fails to keep up with its neighbors is likely to be eaten, its
space, materials, energy, and useful thoughts reorganized to serve an-
other’s goals. Such a fate may be routine for humans who dally too long
on slow Earth before going Ex.”
In 1986, the field of nanotechnology was born when Eric Drexler
published Engines of Creation. In Engines he argued that it was not only
feasible but inevitable that we will create molecular-scale robotics, capa-
ble of building anything we want from the atom up, and of reproducing
themselves in great numbers. These nanobot “molecular assemblers”
will make possible the complete control of the body and brain. Since
Drexler was and is a cryonicist, he also made the point that nanobots will
make it possible to repair the ice damage to neurons in the brains of the
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
163

cryonically preserved. Drexler founded the Foresight Institute in 1986
with Christine Peterson as a vehicle to promote his vision of safe, ubiq-
uitous molecular manufacturing and nanorobotics. Foresight has been a
central node in the emerging transhumanist culture.
The ﬁrst popular exposé of the emerging transhumanist culture was
Ed Regis’s 1990 Great Mambo Chicken and the Transhuman Condition. Al-
though Regis portrayed Ettinger, Moravec and other transhumanists as
humorous fringe ﬁgures, he described their ideas in thorough and accu-
rate detail and many people ﬁrst came to know about “transhumanism”
through the book. But the book missed the fact that these disparate
ideas had just given birth to a serious, synthesizing transhumanist move-
ment, the “extropians.”
LIBERTARIAN TRANSHUMANISM: 
MAX MORE AND THE EXTROPY INSTITUTE
This is really what is unique about the extropian movement: the fusion of
radical technological optimism with libertarian political philosophy . . . one
might call it libertarian transhumanism. 
—BEN GOERTZEL, 
The Path to Posthumanity
In the 1980s, a young British graduate student, Max O’Connor, became in-
terested in futurist ideas and life extension technologies while studying
philosophy and political economy at Oxford. In the mid-1980s, he became
one of the pioneers of cryonics in England. After ﬁnishing at Oxford in
1988, having been impressed with the dynamism and openness to future-
oriented ideas in the United States, O’Connor began his doctoral studies in
philosophy at the University of Southern California. At U.S.C he began
mixing with the local futurist subculture, and soon teamed up with an-
other graduate student, T. O. Morrow, to found the journal Extropy.
The opposite of “entropy,” the boundless expansion of “Extropy”
was the core symbol for O’Connor and Morrow: life extension, the
164
CITIZEN CYBORG

expansion of human powers and control over nature, expansion into
space, and the emergence of intelligent, organic spontaneous order.
O’Connor adopted the name Max More as a sign of his commitment to
“what my goal is: always to improve, never to be static. I was going to
get better at everything, become smarter, ﬁtter, and healthier. It would
be a constant reminder to keep moving forward.”
Max More met and married FM–2030’s former lover, the artist Nan-
cie Clark, who became Natasha Vita-More. FM–2030 became a friend
and supporter of the extropians, who adopted his term “transhuman-
ism.” While transhumans were an evolutionary stage for FM–2030, in
the extropian lexicon “transhumanism” was a self-conscious ideological
leaning. More deﬁned transhumanism in a 1990 essay:
Transhumanism is a class of philosophies that seek to guide us towards
a posthuman condition. Transhumanism shares many elements of hu-
manism, including a respect for reason and science, a commitment to
progress, and a valuing of human (or transhuman) existence in this life
rather than in some supernatural “afterlife.” Transhumanism differs
from humanism in recognizing and anticipating the radical alterations
in the nature and possibilities of our lives resulting from various sci-
ences and technologies such as neuroscience and neuropharmacology,
life extension, nanotechnology, artificial ultraintelligence, and space
habitation, combined with a rational philosophy and value system.
More always made clear that extropianism was but one of the possible
varieties of transhumanism.
One way in which the extropians distinguished themselves from the
broader transhumanist milieu was by making libertarianism and anar-
cho-capitalism central to their worldview. The young, well-educated
American men attracted to the extropian milieu saw the state, and any
form of egalitarianism, as a potential threat to their personal self-trans-
formation. In the first issue of Extropy in 1988, More and Morrow in-
cluded libertarian politics as one of the topics the magazine would pro-
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
165

mote. In early issues of Extropy, More began to publish successive ver-
sions and expositions of his “Extropian Principles.” In the early 1990s,
the Principles resolved down to ﬁve:
1. Boundless Expansion: Seeking more intelligence, wisdom, and effec-
tiveness, an unlimited lifespan, and the removal of political, cultural,
biological, and psychological limits to self-actualization and self-real-
ization. Perpetually overcoming constraints on our progress and
possibilities. Expanding into the universe and advancing without
end.
2. Self-Transformation: Affirming continual psychological, intellec-
tual, and physical self-improvement, through reason and critical
thinking, personal responsibility, and experimentation. Seeking bi-
ological and neurological augmentation.
3. Dynamic Optimism: Positive expectations fueling dynamic action.
Adopting a rational, action-based optimism, shunning both blind
faith and stagnant pessimism.
4. Intelligent Technology: Applying science and technology creatively
to transcend “natural” limits imposed by our biological heritage,
culture, and environment.
5. Spontaneous Order: Supporting decentralized, voluntaristic social
coordination processes. Fostering tolerance, diversity, foresight,
personal responsibility and individual liberty.
More’s ﬁfth principle “Spontaneous Order” distilled their belief, de-
rived from the work of Friedrich Hayek and Ayn Rand, that an anarchis-
tic market creates free and dynamic order, while the state and its life-
stealing authoritarianism is entropic. In 1991, Extropy magazine focused
on the principle of emergent order, publishing an essay on David Fried-
man’s anarcho-capitalist concept of “Privately Produced Law” and an ar-
ticle by Max More on “Order Without Orderers.”
In 1991, the extropians also founded an e-mail list, catching the wind of
the Internet typhoon and its high-tech libertopianism. The extremely high
166
CITIZEN CYBORG

volume (in multiple meanings of volume) extropian list has since attracted
tens of thousands of subscribers. Although there are small groups of ex-
tropians who meet together socially in Los Angeles, New York City and
London, most people who consider themselves extropians have never met
other extropians and participate only in this virtual community.
In 1992 More and Morrow founded the Extropy Institute, which held
its first conference in 1994. At Extro 1 in Sunnyvale, California, the
keynote speaker was computer scientist Hans Moravec, who repeated
his cheery theme that humanity would inevitably be superseded by ro-
bots. Nanotechnologist Eric Drexler addressed the conference, and jour-
nalist Ed Regis, author of Great Mambo Chicken, wrote up the event for
the new Wired magazine. Subsequent Extros, held in 1995, 1997, 1999
and 2001, have each attracted more prominent scientists, science ﬁction
authors and futurist luminaries.
In the wake of all this attention, the extropians also began to attract
withering criticism from progressives. In 1996, Wired contributor
Paulina Borsook debated More in an online forum on the Wired Web
site, taking him to task for selﬁshness, elitism and escapism, arguments
she summarized in her 2001 book Cyberselﬁsh: A Critical Romp Through
the Terribly Libertarian Culture of High Tech. Culture critic Mark Dery ex-
coriated the extropians and a dozen related techno-culture trends in his
1996 Escape Velocity, coining the dismissive phrase “body-loathing” for
those, like the extropians, who want to escape from their “meat pup-
pet” (body), those who feel a “combination of mistrust and contempt
for the cumbersome ﬂesh that accounts for the drag coefﬁcient in tech-
nological environments.”
The extropians also began to hear dissent from a growing diversity of
people on their e-mail list. People sympathetic with transhumanist views
but alienated by the list’s abrasive, hypermasculine, libertarian politics
began to amount to a sizable group. Although Natasha Vita-More has al-
ways been given prominent acknowledgment for her transhumanist arts
and culture projects, and now directs the Extropy Institute, men out-
number women by at least four to one in extropian culture.
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
167

In 1997, the generally nonlibertarian European fellow-travelers of the
extropians began to organize and meet under the aegis of the World Tran-
shumanist Association (WTA). Although the WTA founders remained on
good terms with the extropians, and Max More contributed to the Tran-
shumanist Declaration and Transhumanist FAQ, the WTA’s founding doc-
uments were distinctly less libertarian than the Extropian Principles.
Responding to these various trends, and presumably his own philo-
sophical maturation, More revamped his principles in 2000 to a less liber-
tarian Version 3.0. In this latest version More sets aside his earlier, anarcho-
capitalist “Spontaneous Order” for the much more moderately libertarian
“Open Society: Supporting social orders that foster freedom of speech,
freedom of action, and experimentation. Opposing authoritarian social
control and favoring the rule of law and decentralization of power. Pre-
ferring bargaining over battling, and exchange over compulsion. Openness
to improvement rather than a static utopia.” More now insists that ex-
tropianism is not libertarian and is compatible with a number of different
types of liberal “open societies,” just not with theocratic, authoritarian or
totalitarian societies. In the extensive accompanying commentary on his
new principles More even more explicitly departs from the elitist, Randian
position of enlightened selﬁshness and argues for both a consistent rule of
law and civic responsibility: “For individuals and societies to ﬂourish, lib-
erty must come with personal responsibility. The demand for freedom
without responsibility is an adolescent’s demand for license.”
While More is attempting to move out of the political fringe, a casual
review of the trafﬁc on the extropian lists conﬁrms that the majority of
extropians remain staunch libertarians. In an online survey of extropians
conducted in February and March of 2002, 56% of the respondents iden-
tified with “libertarian” or “anarchist/self-governance,” with another
15% committed to (generally minarchist, “almost anarchy”) alternative
political visions. Similarly, the Extropy Institute’s recommended “eco-
nomics and society” readings still include David Friedman’s anarcho-cap-
italist text The Machinery of Freedom, Friedrich Hayek’s The Constitution of
Liberty and the libertarian anti-environmentalist writings of Julian Simon.
168
CITIZEN CYBORG

As the Simon readings suggest, most extropians are ardent oppo-
nents of the environmental movement, believing that the eco-system is
either not really threatened or, if it is, the only solution is more and bet-
ter technology. There are occasional discussions on the extropian list
about the potential downsides of emerging technologies, but these are
usually waved off as being either easily remediable or unavoidable and
acceptable risks given the tremendous rewards (which is not my position
by the way).
The extropians have also cultivated important allies in libertarian pol-
itics such as Virginia Postrel and Ron Bailey, sympathizers with their mil-
itant defense of personal liberty and hostility to regulation and environ-
mentalism. In 1999, Postrel, author of the technolibertarian manifesto
The Future and Its Enemies and then editor of the libertarian magazine
Reason, assigned Reason’s science correspondent Ron Bailey to focus on
the defense of genetics against the Luddites. Bailey had written
ECOSCAM: The False Prophets of Ecological Apocalypse in 1993, which ar-
gued that whatever ecological problems might have existed in the past
were all being repaired now. Since focusing on biopolitics Bailey’s
weekly columns for Reason have been some of the best and most in-
sightful critiques of the emerging Kass–Rifkin bioLuddite axis. Bailey is
publishing his own technolibertarian manifesto this year, Liberation Biology.
Postrel has now organized Bailey and other technolibertarians, such as Tech
Central Station’s editor James Glassman and proliﬁc InstaPundit.com writer
Glenn Reynolds, into The Franklin Society. The ﬁrst project of the Society
has been to campaign against attempts to ban embryonic stem cell re-
search. 
UNIVERSAL IMMISERATION EXTROPIAN-STYLE
In 2003, one member of the new Franklin Society, extropian economist
Robin Hanson, a professor at George Mason University, achieved his full
ﬁfteen minutes of fame. Hanson was the author of the abortive experi-
ment by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency in aggregating
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
169

intelligence information in a Middle East futures trading market, the so-
called “TerrorDAQ.” The political brouhaha around TerrorDAQ led to
the cancellation of the program and the resignation of DARPA director
John Poindexter.
Reporters were incredulous at Hanson and his colleagues’ inability to
predict how their experiment would be perceived and demagogued.
While I think the experiment had merit and would not have encouraged
terrorism, the episode does illustrate some of the moral and political
blindness that the unreformed extropian anarcho-capitalist perspective
lends itself to.
Ten years before the media lambasted Hanson for TerrorDAQ he
published a now often-cited essay “If Uploads Come First—The Crack
of a Future Dawn” in Extropy magazine. The article attempts to extrap-
olate the economic consequences of a breakthrough in the technology
of copying human personalities into machines. He argues that the capa-
bilities of machine-based persons would be so much greater than those
of organic humans that most non-uploaded people would become un-
employed. Among the uploads there would be rapid population growth
and severe job competition. Eventually the enormous population of up-
loads would be forced to work at very low subsistence wages—the cost
of their electricity and disk space—ruled over by a very few of the most
successful of the uploads.
Hanson basically recapitulates Marx’s vision of universal immisera-
tion, but this time in the Matrix. In the section of the essay titled “Up-
load Politics” Hanson dismisses the idea that governments could impose
redistribution on uploads since there would be large economic beneﬁts
of an unfettered transition to Matrix life. The average quality of life of
the subsistence upload and the unemployed human would allegedly be
higher than before. So the best we future residents of an uploaded soci-
ety can do is become as versatile as possible to maximize our chances of
ending up as one of the lucky ruling or employed classes. Hanson dis-
misses the idea that people will ﬁght the division of society into a mass
of well-fed plebes and a superpowerful elite since the growth in the
170
CITIZEN CYBORG

gross domestic product is the sole measure of his utopia, and the elimi-
nation of the weak will select for “capable people willing to work for
low wages, who value life even when life is hard.”
With a dismal, elitist utopia like this who needs a Luddite’s dystopia?
Russell Jacoby has this to say of Hanson-style libertopianism: “The most
imaginative futurists foresee a utopia with war, money, violence and in-
equality. Their future looks very much like the afﬂuent enclaves of today,
only more pleasant and commodious. They paint a picture not very dif-
ferent from contemporary luxury suburbs, grassy subdivisions with
homes and computer and work stations set off from a larger terrain of vi-
olence and injustice. The futurists are utopians in an anti-utopian age.”
THE SINGULARITY AND THE GLOBAL BRAIN
On the other hand, some extropians do have more optimistic utopian vi-
sions and expectations, or at least more optimistic versions of the libera-
tion of human beings by machines. The idea of a “TechnoRapture,” a
coming utopian rupture in social life brought about by some conﬂuence
of genetic, cybernetic and nano technologies, has very old roots in the
panmillennial impulse. In science ﬁction we have examples like Arthur
C. Clarke’s 1956 The City and the Stars, in which a paternalistic computer
ensures utopia and immortality, and Heinlein’s 1966 Moon Is a Harsh Mis-
tress, in which an artiﬁcial intelligence helps an anarchist revolution.
Similarly the idea of a coming apocalypse is ancient and has many
echoes in science ﬁction, from world wars, alien invasions and plagues to
imperialist superintelligent machines. In the 1969 ﬁlm Colossus: The Forbin
Project, a defense department computer becomes self-aware and self-willed,
takes control of nuclear weapons, hooks up with the Soviet Union’s de-
fense computer and begins issuing edicts to human beings. Again in the
1984 and 1991 ﬁlms Terminator and Terminator 2, defense department com-
puters become self-aware and decide simply to wipe out human beings.
For transhumanist millennialists and apocalyptics the seminal docu-
ment is a 1993 paper on “the Singularity” by science ﬁction author Vernor
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
171

Vinge. Vinge projected the millennial/apocalyptic consequences of the
emergence of self-willed artiﬁcial intelligence, which he estimated would
occur within the next couple of decades. In physics singularities are black
holes within which we can’t predict how physical laws will work. In the
same way, Vinge says, greater-than-human machine intelligence, multiply-
ing exponentially, would make everything about our world unpredictable.
Vinge suggests that human beings need to begin enhancing and augment-
ing human intelligence in order to stay one step ahead of the machines.
Transhumanist millennialism has been bolstered as a legitimate ob-
session for the secular technogeek by the ﬁeld of nonlinear systems dy-
namics. Chaos and punctuated equilibrium modeling have made linear
predictive models seem absurd in comparison to exponential growth
models punctuated by “phase transitions” to entirely new kinds of sys-
tems with new dynamics. The concept of the sudden systemic change
was popularized in Malcolm Gladwell’s 2000 book The Tipping Point,
which he deﬁnes as “that moment in an epidemic when a virus reaches
critical mass, the moment on the graph when the line starts to shoot
straight upwards,” a phenomenon he ﬁnds in all sorts of social dynam-
ics. Cyberpunk theorist Bruce Sterling’s inﬂuential transhumanist Schis-
matrix stories in the late 1980s were inspired by Ilya Prigogine’s theory
that systems can abruptly self-organize into a higher level of complexity.
Not all transhumanists today believe in the immanence of a Singu-
larity. Nor do all those who believe things will get very weird in a short
space of time all focus on superintelligent machines as the deus ex
machina. Some, like Sterling and the National Science Foundation’s
NBIC program, look for the seeds of exponential change in the conver-
gence of many technologies and cultural trends. In a 2002 poll of ex-
tropians, the average year they expected “the next major breakthrough
or shakeup that will radically reshape the future of humanity” was 2017,
but one in ﬁve said there would be “no such event, just equal accelera-
tion across all areas.” As to the source of the next big shake-up, for those
who believed a big change was coming, only a quarter of them believed
it would come from artificial intelligence, while the rest believed it
172
CITIZEN CYBORG

would be precipitated by nanotechnology and a variety of other techno-
logical and political events.
The Singularity has a special appeal for libertarians because it does not
require any speciﬁc collective action. Acquiring wealth, working individu-
ally to stay on the cutting edge of technology, transforming oneself into a
posthuman—these are the extropian’s best insurance of surviving and
prospering through the Singularity. Most Singularitarians are like pre-mil-
lennialist Christians who believed that Christians had only to prepare
themselves for salvation and the millennium would be established for
them, versus the “post-millennialists” who argue that Jesus will not return
until the righteous turn back the tribulations and establish a kingdom of
heaven on earth. TechnoRapture will elevate the techno-savvy elite who
have toiled to warn and prepare the world for its coming, but found
mostly derision. The unbelievers not prepared to take advantage of the
TechnoRapture and be born again into new eternal bodies are likely to
suffer the Tribulations of being impoverished, wiped out or enslaved. Re-
sponding to a challenge from Mark Dery about the socioeconomic impli-
cations of robotic ascension, Hans Moravec responded: “The socioeco-
nomic implications are . . . largely irrelevant. It doesn’t matter what people
do, because they’re going to be left behind like the second stage of a
rocket. Unhappy lives, horrible deaths, and failed projects have been part
of the history of life on Earth ever since there was life; what really matters
in the long run is what’s left over.”
Again demonstrating a turn away from the libertopian fringe, ex-
tropian leader Max More has rejected the idea of a Singularity precisely
because its quasi-religious millennialism contributes to passivity. Accord-
ing to More: “The Singularity idea has worried me for years—it’s a clas-
sic religious, Christian-style, end-of-the-world concept that appeals to
people in Western cultures deeply. It’s also mostly nonsense. . . . The
Singularity concept has all the earmarks of an idea that can lead to
cultishness, and passivity. There’s a tremendous amount of hard work to
be done, and intellectually masturbating about a supposed Singularity is
not going to get us anywhere.”
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
173

There are hints of a less passive “post-millennial” or even liberation
theological interpretation in some Singularitarians’ work, however. For
instance, extropian Eliezer Yudkowsky’s central concern is building
“friendliness” into the architecture of the ﬁrst AIs, and convincing AI re-
searchers to incorporate friendliness into their designs, so that the ﬁrst
Colossus is more Second Coming than Terminator. Although that does
make friendliness research a messianic life mission for Yudkowsky, it
would require collective action to be successful, and his Singularity In-
stitute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence is devoted to the cause.
Singularitarian John Smart, director of the Institute for Accelerating
Change, is more inﬂuenced by the “global brain” school of thought—
that all the minds on Earth will link together through telecommunica-
tions and create a meta-intelligence. Many global brain thinkers like
Smart are inspired by the writings of Jesuit paleontologist-mystic Teil-
hard de Chardin, who wrote in his 1940 The Phenomenon of Man that our
increasingly dense web of thought and communication, and our tech-
nologies, are moving humanity toward integration into a “noosphere” or
thoughtspace, and eventually to a spiritual telos, the “Omega Point.” In
1983, New Age writer Peter Russell’s The Global Brain suggested that the
interconnection of human brains will create a global self-aware con-
sciousness in the same way that connected neurons created human mind.
Gregory Stock’s 1993 Metaman: The Merging of Humans and Machines into
a Global Superorganism provided a more materialistic and less spiritual pro-
jection of the same dynamic. The idea of the World Wide Web as the
neuronal structure of a global brain quickly became a popular metaphor
in the 1990s, giving extropians spending all day on e-mail and Web-surﬁng
the sense that they were helping to build that global brain.
The global brain theorists have, in turn, converged with a school of
dissident social evolutionary theorists, organized by independent
scholar Howard Bloom, who argue that evolution occurs not just
through the selection of individual characteristics but also through the
selection of increasingly large social structures. Bloom’s Global Brain:
The Evolution of Mass Mind argues that this phenomenon would lead to
174
CITIZEN CYBORG

global self-awareness and self-governance. Robert Wright’s similar group-
selectionist account of human history, Nonzero: The Logic of Human Des-
tiny, suggests that world government will be an inevitable product of the
trend toward larger and larger forms of cooperation and coordination.
Ironically the global brain idea has also crossbred with a central idea
of the deep ecologists, the “Gaia hypothesis” pioneered in the 1980s by
James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis. The Gaia hypothesis suggests that
the global ecosystem has homeostatic feedback mechanisms that keep it
in balance just like an organism, and ecomystics have stretched the idea
to suggest that the Earth has an organismic intelligence. TechnoGaian
global brainers suggest that the emerging cyborg MetaMan will incor-
porate or at least take collective responsibility for protecting the ecosys-
tem, which is close to being the antithesis of the deep ecological vision.
Although the global brain, like an AI-driven Singularity, requires no
speciﬁc individual or collective action, it will supposedly involve collec-
tive action. It is easy to imagine a liberation theological version of global
brainism, involving social movements and organizations working to-
ward the most liberal and egalitarian meta-human intelligence. Will the
global brain have reﬂexes from the military-industrial complex and an
appetite designed by McDonalds, or will it be built around a democra-
tized UN and new forms of grassroots empowerment?
THE WORLD TRANSHUMANIST ASSOCIATION: 
LIBERAL DEMOCRATIC TRANSHUMANISM
Max More and the extropians made clear from the beginning that ex-
tropianism was but one of the many possible transhumanisms. In 1994,
Anders Sandberg, the founder of the Swedish transhumanist group
Aleph, noted that transhumanist ideas could be mated with many polit-
ical ideologies, and that the hybrid of extropian libertarian transhuman-
ism was just one, particularly robust, form that transhumanism could
take: “Extropianism, which is a combination of transhumanist memes and
libertarianism, seems to be one of the more dynamic and well-integrated
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
175

systems. This has been successful, mainly because the meme has been
able to organize its hosts much better than other transhumanistic
meme-complexes. This has led to a certain bias among transhumanists
linked to the Net towards the extropian version of the meme since it is
the most widely spread and active.” One European transhumanist, re-
viewing a conference of European transhumanists, noted: “The ofﬁcial
program started with . . . a bleeding heart humanist socialist and a nice
person. I am glad that we have that diversity among the European Tran-
shumanists. It makes for much more refined discussions than is often
seen on the Extropy mailing list.”
In 1997, the Swedish philosopher Nick Bostrom (now at Oxford Uni-
versity) organized the World Transhumanist Association (WTA) to rep-
resent a more mature and academically respectable form of transhu-
manism, liberated from its “cultish” baggage. The WTA would share the
techno-liberatory concerns of the extropians but allow for more political
and ideological diversity. Bostrom is an academic philosopher, and the
WTA project attracted several of the academics in the extropian milieu
to establish The Journal of Transhumanism and work toward the recogni-
tion of transhumanism as a topic of academic investigation.
In 1998, Bostrom and several dozen far-flung American and Euro-
pean collaborators began work on the WTA’s two founding documents,
the Transhumanist Declaration (see Figure 10.1) and a Transhumanist
Frequently Asked Questions 1.0 (FAQ1). Leading extropians, including
More, contributed to the documents, but they were most heavily inﬂu-
enced by the Swedes Bostrom and Sandberg, the feminist and disability
rights activist Kathryn Aegis and the British utilitarian thinker David
Pearce. The ﬁrst drafts of the documents were published in 1999.
The Transhumanist Declaration is notable in its departure from the
Extropian Principles in several signiﬁcant respects. Rather than calling
for an unfettered technological manifest destiny, the Transhumanist De-
claration speciﬁcally noted the possibility of catastrophic consequences
of new technology. In the Transhumanist FAQ the authors discussed the
responsibility of transhumanists to anticipate and craft public policy to
176
CITIZEN CYBORG

prevent these catastrophic outcomes. Rather than suggesting that all so-
cial coordination can be accomplished through the market, the Tran-
shumanist Declaration explicitly addressed the need “to create forums
where people can rationally debate what needs to be done, and a social
order where responsible decisions can be implemented.” Here, unlike
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
177
1. Humanity will be radically changed by technology in the future. We
foresee the feasibility of redesigning the human condition, including
such parameters as the inevitability of aging, limitations on human and
artiﬁcial intellects, unchosen psychology, suffering, and our conﬁnement
to the planet earth.
2. Systematic research should be put into understanding these coming
developments and their long-term consequences.
3. Transhumanists think that by being generally open and embracing of
new technology we have a better chance of turning it to our advantage
than if we try to ban or prohibit it.
4. Transhumanists advocate the moral right for those who so wish to use
technology to extend their mental and physical capacities and to im-
prove their control over their own lives. We seek personal growth be-
yond our current biological limitations.
5. In planning for the future, it is mandatory to take into account the
prospect of dramatic technological progress. It would be tragic if the
potential beneﬁts failed to materialize because of ill-motivated techno-
phobia and unnecessary prohibitions. On the other hand, it would also
be tragic if intelligent life went extinct because of some disaster or war
involving advanced technologies.
6. We need to create forums where people can rationally debate what
needs to be done, and a social order where responsible decisions can be
implemented.
7. Transhumanism advocates the well-being of all sentience (whether in
artiﬁcial intellects, humans, non-human animals or possible extraterres-
trial species) and encompasses many principles of modern secular hu-
manism. Transhumanism does not support any particular party, politi-
cian or political platform.
FIGURE 10.1
The Transhumanist Declaration

the elitist, anti-political extropians, the WTA founders took seriously the
need for responsive democracies and democratic technology policies.
With the Declaration transhumanists were reembracing their continuity
with the Enlightenment, with democracy and humanism, and setting
aside the antisocial, free-market anarchism that had brieﬂy held sway in
transhumanist circles in the unique circumstances of mid-1990s bubble
economy, Southern California-based, net culture.
THE POLITICS OF THE WTA FAQ
In the last line of the Declaration, the authors make clear that the WTA
is not committed to a particular political ideology. As Bostrom explained
in the Transhumanist FAQ1, there are transhumanist “liberals, social de-
mocrats, libertarians, green party members.” Nonetheless there are im-
plicit political parameters to the Transhumanist Declaration and FAQ1.
The Transhumanist FAQ1 asked, “Won’t new technologies only ben-
efit the rich and powerful? What happens to the rest?” The FAQ1 ac-
knowledged that “some technologies may cause social inequalities to
widen. For example, if some form of intelligence ampliﬁcation becomes
available, it may at ﬁrst be so expensive that only the richest can afford it.
The same could happen when we learn how to genetically augment our
children. Wealthy people would become smarter and make even more
money.”
FAQ1 argues that the answer to these inequities is not to ban the
technologies, but “to increase wealth redistribution, for example by
means of taxation and the provision of free services (education vouch-
ers, IT access in public libraries, genetic enhancements covered by social
security, etc.). For economical and technological progress is not a zero
sum game. It’s a positive sum game. It doesn’t solve the old political
problem of what degree of income redistribution is desirable, but it can
make the pie that is to be divided enormously much greater.”
Similarly, when addressing whether transhumanism is simply a dis-
traction from the pressing problems of poverty and conﬂict in the world,
178
CITIZEN CYBORG

the FAQ1 argued that transhumanists should work on both these imme-
diate problems and futurist concerns. In fact, the FAQ1 suggests that
transhuman technologies can make the solution of poverty and conﬂict
easier, improving health care, amplifying intelligence and expanding
communication and prosperity. The greatest happiness of the greatest
number is a transhumanist goal in itself, and a peaceful, liberal democ-
ratic world is the best for nurturing transhuman diversity. “Working to-
wards a world order characterized by peace, international cooperation
and respect for human rights would much improve the odds that the
dangerous applications of certain future technologies will not be used ir-
responsibly or in warfare. It would also free up resources currently spent
on military armaments, and possibly channel them to improve the con-
dition of the poor.”
The FAQ1 addresses the issue of overpopulation caused by life ex-
tension technologies, arguing for both family planning and the aggres-
sive pursuit of advanced, sustainable technologies, such as agricultural
biotechnologies, cleaner industrial processes, nanotechnology and ulti-
mately space colonization. It also notes that the best way to control pop-
ulation growth is to empower women since “giving people increased ra-
tional control over their lives (and especially female education and
equality) causes them to have fewer children.”
In response to a question about how posthumans will treat humans,
the FAQ1 notes, “it could help if we continue to build stable democratic
traditions and constitutions, ideally expanding the rule of law to the in-
ternational plane as well as the national.” Here the transhumanists are
anticipating the need to build political and cultural solidarity between
humans and posthumans, to minimize conﬂicts and to have global po-
lice institutions that can protect humans from posthumans and vice
versa.
In short, the WTA documents establish a broad political tent, with an
explicit embrace of political engagement, the need to defend and extend
liberal democracy, and the inclusion of social democratic policy alterna-
tives as legitimate points of discussion.
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
179

TRANSHUMANISM RELOADED
In the fall of 2001, the WTA began its next phase of growth. After pub-
lishing my paper on “The Future of Death” in the Journal of Transhu-
manism, the editor, Mark Walker, a philosopher at the University of
Toronto, asked me to serve on the editorial board. Then Nick Bostrom,
who was teaching at Yale at the time, Mark Walker and I organized a
panel on transhumanism at the Society for the Social Studies of Science
meetings in Boston in October of 2001. For that meeting I prepared a
paper on “The Politics of Transhumanism” that laid out the historical
circumstances that led to the accidental association of free-market liber-
tarianism and transhumanism. Out of that meeting, Bostrom, Walker
and I began to plan the expansion of the WTA.
We adopted a constitution and elected a Board of Directors. We re-
named the journal the Journal of Evolution and Technology and launched
a webzine, Transhumanity. I was elected secretary of the WTA in 2002.
The Extropy Institute and the existing transhumanist groups in Eu-
rope became WTA affiliates, and by 2003 the WTA had two dozen
mailing lists reaching thousands of people, and local groups were
being organized in dozens of cities around the world. In June 2003, we
hosted the first international conference on transhumanist bioethics at
Yale University with sixty papers. The keynote presentations were
from bioethicists Gregory Stock and Greg Pence, the libertarian sci-
ence writer Ron Bailey, NSF official and co-founder of the NBIC pro-
gram William Sims Bainbridge and the Yale historian of eugenics
Daniel Kevles.
The WTA has been especially successful at attracting a broader
swath of political views than the extropians. A membership survey con-
ducted in December 2003, found that only a ﬁfth of the WTAers identi-
fied with libertarianism, anarcho-capitalism or even Euro-Liberalism.
On the other hand, a third of the WTA’s members identiﬁed with leftist
politics, ranging from labels like “libertarian socialist,” “democratic so-
cialist” and “radical” to “progressive” or “U.S.-style liberal.” Conserva-
180
CITIZEN CYBORG

tives of any stripe accounted for only 3–4% of members, while the plu-
rality of WTAers were “moderate,” “upwinger,” “other” or “none.”
TRANSHUMANISM’S INCOMPATIBILITY WITH 
SOCIAL CONSERVATISM
In my chart of possible ideologies in a biopolitical future (see Figure 6.3) I
didn’t have a letter in the corner for culturally conservative “populist trans-
humanists,” and indeed I don’t expect this ever to be a very popular variety.
But that doesn’t mean that there won’t be some cultural conservatives,
or even neofascists, who will be enthusiastic advocates of cyborgization,
eugenic engineering or technotranscendence. We need only look to the
origins of European fascism to see the possibility of such a phenomenon.
In 1909, the Italian writer Filippo Tommaso Marinetti published his
“Manifesto of Futurism” in the Parisian newspaper Le Figaro. In it he
called for a new aesthetic approach to life:
We intend to exalt aggressive action, a feverish insomnia, the racer’s
stride, the mortal leap, the punch and the slap. . . .
We want to hymn the man at the wheel, who hurls the lance of his
spirit across the Earth, along the circle of its orbit. . . .
We stand on the last promontory of the centuries! . . . Why should
we look back, when what we want is to break down the mysterious
doors of the Impossible? Time and Space died yesterday. We already live
in the absolute, because we have created eternal, omnipresent speed.
Marinetti believed Europe had become stagnant and he called for a
new art glorifying modern technology, energy and violence. Artists,
writers, musicians, architects and many others flocked to the Futurist
banner in Italy and from across Europe, and began issuing their own
manifestoes. Many of the founding Futurists, including Marinetti, were
anarchists. Nonetheless, most Futurists went on to urge Italy’s entry into
World War One, which ended the movement and its romantic calls for
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
181

heroic violence and war. After the war, Marinetti befriended Mussolini,
who mixed Marxist and anarchist politics with Nietzsche and heroic na-
tionalist romanticism. Marinetti and many other Italian Futurists joined
Mussolini’s new fascist movement, and the fascists in turn adopted Fu-
turist ideas and aesthetics.
Today, when a social movement emerges, such as the extropians,
which scorns liberal democracy and calls for an ubermenschlich elite to free
themselves from traditional morality, pursue boundless expansion and op-
timism, and create a new humanity through genetic technology and the
merging of humans with machines, it is understandable that critics might
associate the movement with European fascism. Nor has this problem es-
caped the attention of the extropians. In 1994, Anders Sandberg wrote:
“many people associate ideas of superhumanity, rationally changing our
biological form and speeding up the evolution of mankind, with unfash-
ionable or disliked memes like fascism . . . partially because many tran-
shumanist ideas had counterparts (real or apparent) among the fascists.”
Extropians and transhumanists have repeatedly and forcefully in-
sisted that transhumanism is incompatible with fascism, pointing to the
transhumanists’ rationalist, tolerant and libertarian values. The Tran-
shumanist FAQ1 says:
Racism, sexism, speciesism, belligerent nationalism and religious intol-
erance are unacceptable. In addition to the usual grounds for ﬁnding
such practices morally objectionable, there is an additional speciﬁcally
transhumanist motivation for this. In order to prepare a time when the
human species may start branching out in various directions, we need
to start now to strongly encourage the development of moral senti-
ments that are broad enough to encompass within the sphere of moral
concern sentiences that are different from current selves.
In March of 2002, as its ﬁrst ofﬁcial position statements after the adop-
tion of FAQ1, the World Transhumanist Association voted to formally de-
nounce “Any and all doctrines of racial or ethnic supremacy/inferiority [as]
182
CITIZEN CYBORG

incompatible with the fundamental tolerance and humanist roots of
transhumanism.” The strong transhumanist condemnation of racialism
appears to have succeeded in dissuading racialist groups from trying to
join or recruit among transhumanists.
The anti-racist implications of widespread germinal choice technol-
ogy have also given racists pause. In a thread on the neo-Nazi Storm-
front Web site titled “Is Transhumanism Good for White Nationalists?”
one poster notes:
What’s wrong with this form of egalitarianism? After all, if everyone
is genetically engineered with superior intelligence, blacks, whites,
yellows and all, then the world would be a much better place. The
problem with egalitarianism today is that people are trying to make
equal that which is simply not equal. But if everyone were truly equal,
there would be no need to make everyone equal, and therefore no
need for egalitarianism.
But another poster objects:
I have some real concern about the ability of the White race to use
these technologies wisely in the present situation. Eugenics in recent
decades has largely meant going to a sperm bank to have the child of
a Jewish medical student.
TRANSHUMANISM AND DEMOCRACY
Speaking to the Extro 5 conference in 2001, extropian leader Greg
Burch argued that transhumanists were culturally and politically encir-
cled by religious fundamentalists, Greens and socialists: “We do not
seek to force our plans on anyone, but ultimately, our basic values of in-
dividual autonomy are fundamentally incompatible with the kinds of
limitations desired by Guardians of both culturally conservative and
‘progressive’ tendencies.”
Upwingers, Extropians and Transhumanists
183

The transhumanist perspective is indeed outnumbered by much bet-
ter organized and more inﬂuential opponents, and libertarian extropi-
ans like Burch are partly to blame. The ideological narrowness and sec-
tarianism of the briefly ascendant libertarian transhumanists of the
1990s are striking in comparison to the ideologically diverse coalitions
forged by the bioLuddites. While Burch and the extropians argue that
they are ﬁghting to save the Enlightenment, in fact they are ﬁghting to
extol only one-third of the Enlightenment—liberty—to the exclusion of
the other two-thirds—equality and solidarity. In the process they have
crippled their ability to defend all three values. Insisting that reason can
only be expressed in market relations and not in rational civic debate
and democratic self-governance leaves the anarcho-capitalist transhu-
manists self-absorbed and alienated from serious political engagement,
unable to respond to either the public’s legitimate or illegitimate anxi-
eties about the future.
On the other hand, a much broader spectrum of thought is expressed
by the World Transhumanist Association, more reﬂective of the political
and cultural diversity of the popular transhumanist constituency waiting
to be heard. As twenty-ﬁrst-century biopolitics matures, the WTA and
the term “transhumanism” may not be important players in the struggle
for individual rights to use human enhancement technologies. But the
shift of the transhumanist subculture away from libertopianism to
movement-building and serious engagement with public policy is a
hopeful sign that transhumanists may be able to play an important role.
184
CITIZEN CYBORG

SECTION III
FREEDOM AND EQUALITY
AMONG THE CYBORGS


11
Democratic Transhumanism
The democratic humanism of the French and American revolutions has in-
spired dozens of movements, all united by the idea that humans should use
reason and democracy to control their own lives. In this chapter I argue that
those diverse threads can be united in a radically democratic form of techno-
optimism, a democratic transhumanism. Democratic transhumanism is the
next stage of human self-emancipation through science and democracy. Demo-
cratic transhumanism addresses the legitimate concerns of the bioLuddites for
equity, solidarity and public safety, and libertarian concerns with our right to
control our bodies and minds. If libertarians want enhancement technologies
to be safe, widely available and unhampered by Luddite bans, they need to sup-
port legitimate regulation and universal provision. If progressives want en-
hancement technologies to make society more equal, they need to make en-
hancement universally available. Numerous constituencies and movements can
be woven together into a democratic transhumanist politics, including advo-
cates of reproductive rights, disability rights, universal basic income, drug de-
criminalization and transgender rights.
MARQUIS DE CONDORCET, DEMOCRATIC TRANSHUMANIST
One of the most interesting early champions of democratic transhu-
manism was the French philosopher and revolutionary Marquis de Con-
dorcet. When Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas Caritat Condorcet was elected
187

to the French Academy of Science at age 26, he had already demon-
strated a broad and eclectic scientific curiosity. Condorcet went on to
contribute fundamental insights into the mathematics involved in elec-
tions and voting. An aristocrat, friend of Voltaire and member of the
philosophe school, his lectures helped popularize the sciences to a grow-
ing middle-class audience. He also was a passionate revolutionary and
campaigned actively for political freedom, religious tolerance and the
abolition of slavery. After the French Revolution, Condorcet was elected
to the French Legislative Assembly, where he worked to establish public
education in France. His draft constitution for the French guaranteed
broad personal liberties. But when it fell out of favor with the Jacobins
he and his associates were sentenced to the guillotine.
Condorcet spent his ﬁnal months hiding in Paris working on A Sketch
for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind. The Sketch was
intended to be the introduction to a longer history of the effect of sci-
ence on humanity. But Condorcet never had a chance to write that larger
work. In March 1774, Condorcet ﬁnished the Sketch, left his hiding place
and was promptly arrested. He died shortly thereafter, perhaps from sui-
cide or simply from exhaustion, before he could be executed.
The Sketch is a remarkable document for its optimistic faith in hu-
manity’s ability to liberate itself with technology and democracy. It is
doubly remarkable that it was written under sentence of death from a
regime that allegedly represented those very principles. But Condorcet’s
was a utopian vision that looked beyond the Jacobin terror as a mere de-
tour in the course of history. In the Sketch he argues that human beings
are using reason and science to free themselves from domination by one
another and Nature. He argues that “nature has set no term to the per-
fection of human faculties; that the perfectibility of man is truly indeﬁ-
nite; and that the progress of this perfectibility, from now onwards inde-
pendent of any power that might wish to halt it, has no other limit than
the duration of the globe upon which nature has cast us.”
Technology and democracy, according to Condorcet, were both the
result of the natural process of reason and intelligence growing and as-
188
CITIZEN CYBORG

serting itself. Reason throws off the shackles of prejudice, tyranny, elit-
ism and ignorance. Social science, a form of applied reason, makes pos-
sible the more perfect social order of liberal democracy, which, in turn,
supports the continuous freeing of the human mind.
The time will therefore come when the sun will shine only on free
men who know no other master but their reason; when tyrants and
slaves, priests and their stupid or hypocritical instruments will exist
only in works of history or on the stage; and when we shall think of
them only . . . to learn how to recognize and so to destroy by force of
reason, the ﬁrst seeds of tyranny and superstition, should they ever
dare to reappear amongst us.
Reason demands not just equality for all men, including non-Europeans,
but also gender equality. Sexism holds back the “progress of the human
mind that is most important for human happiness,” not just for women,
but “even to the sex it favors.” Patriarchy has “no other source but the
abuse of power.”
Condorcet wanted universal public education, especially in the sci-
ences. He wanted a system of social insurance to provide for senior citi-
zens, widows and eventually everyone. Giving everyone a basic income
would be inevitable since human beings would be freed from labor by
automation and agricultural methods that produce more from each plot
of land. Equality, education, preventive health care and better food
would all extend longevity, till we conquered death altogether.
Would it be absurd now to suppose that the improvement of the
human race should be regarded as capable of unlimited progress? That
a time will come when death would result only from extraordinary ac-
cidents or the more and more gradual wearing out of vitality, and that,
ﬁnally, the duration of the average interval between birth and wearing
out has itself no speciﬁc limit whatsoever? No doubt man will not be-
come immortal, but cannot the span constantly increase between the
Democratic Transhumanism
189

moment he begins to live and the time when naturally, without illness
or accident, he ﬁnds life a burden?
Even under sentence of death, Condorcet saw the French Revolution as
the beginning of humanity’s liberation from human oppression and the
oppression of nature. In 1972, Henry Kissinger asked Chinese prime
minister Chou En-lai what he thought of the French Revolution. After a
long pause Chou replied, “It’s too early to tell.” Indeed, the repercus-
sions are still being felt.
SOCIAL DEMOCRACY
Democracy is not a state, it’s a direction. No society is anywhere close
to an ideal democracy. Since the French and American revolutions
there have been many variants, combinations and interpretations of
liberty, equality and solidarity, ranging from Wild West free-market
minimalism to authoritarian populism. Generally the problems of
these models can be framed as an inadequate respect for one or an-
other of the values of liberty, equality or solidarity. Immature authori-
tarian democracies give too much weight to racial, religious and na-
tionalist solidarity and not enough to liberty and equality. Populist and
communist regimes focus on equality to the exclusion of liberty. The
religious Right, from Islamic fundamentalism to the Bush administra-
tion, has the most restrictive interpretation of democracy, opposing all
expansions of liberty, equality or solidarity. In the Wild West corner
the libertarian tradition seeks to expand personal and economic lib-
erty, but cares little about their effect on equality and solidarity. For the
libertarians all efforts to help the poor and powerless should be volun-
tary since taxes are state-sponsored theft.
Empirically the best current balance of liberty, equality and solidarity
is found in social democratic Canada and Europe, where all three values
have been maximized. Canadians and Europeans have personal liberties,
such as gay marriage and drug decriminalization, that American liber-
190
CITIZEN CYBORG

tarians can only dream about, and at the same time more egalitarian dis-
tributions of wealth, more leisure time and more generous social wel-
fare systems.
The degree of equality in a country has been summed up by a single
statistic, the Gini coefﬁcient, reported by the World Bank. The Gini co-
efﬁcient varies between 0.0, or perfect equality, and 1.0, where one per-
son has everything and everybody else has nothing. On this measure the
most equal of the industrial societies are former communist Eastern Eu-
rope and social democratic Western Europe, with Gini scores between
20 and 30. The United States ranks seventy-third (Gini score = 40) out of
the 118 countries that the World Bank reports on, a littler more unequal
than Ghana and a little more equal than Senegal.
In terms of liberty, the United Nations produces a Human Freedom
Index, which summarizes
• the right to travel, assemble and speak
• the absence of forced labor, torture and other extreme legal pun-
ishment (such as the death penalty)
• freedom of political opposition, the press and trade unions
• an independent judiciary
• gender equality
• the legal right to trial, counsel of choice, privacy, religion and sex-
ual practice.
The UN Human Freedom Index ranges from 0, for the least free coun-
tries, to 40 for the most free. In 2002, the United States ranked tenth in
freedom, below social democratic Europe: Sweden, Denmark, the Nether-
lands, Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Canada and Switzerland.
As a consequence of being more free, more equal and having more
generous welfare policies, the social democracies also consistently rank
as having the highest quality of life in the world. For instance, every year
the United Nations produces its Human Development Index, which
scores each country based on its average life expectancy, average income
Democratic Transhumanism
191

per person and average educational attainment. In the 2002 report the
United States doesn’t do that badly, since our high adjusted average in-
come compensates for our lower life expectancy and educational attain-
ment. But the top ﬁve countries in the index are social democratic Nor-
way, Sweden, Canada, Belgium and Australia.
Richard Estes at the University of Pennsylvania produces an even
more ambitious index of “social progress” measuring forty variables, in-
cluding health, education, human rights, political participation, gender
equality, cultural diversity and social stability. By this measure the “social
progress” of the United States has stagnated since 1980, ranking now
with Poland, while the top ten countries are again in social democratic
Europe: Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Luxembourg, Germany,
Austria, Iceland, Italy and Belgium.
All this suggests a linear scale of democratic progress, from the plu-
tocratic and authoritarian democracies of the former communist and
developing world, to free-market liberal democracies like the United
States, to the European social democracies. But even Canada and Eu-
rope are still just imperfect approximations of the more ideal democ-
racy that we are capable of, a democracy in which we are all freer,
more equal, more informed and more involved. European and Cana-
dian citizens can become better educated and participate more actively
in policy-formation, and wealth and corporations could have even less
influence in shaping public opinion and public policy there as here.
Even the European democracies are forced to bend a knee to the de-
mands of international capital. But for much of the world, including
the United States, achieving a European level of prosperity and social
democracy will be an enormous achievement, one that will take many
more decades.
This chapter argues for a social democratic or “radical democra-
tic” version of transhumanism, a future-positive, techno-optimist
democracy. This “democratic transhumanism” is framed by its debate
with its two closest competitors, the Left bioLuddites and the liber-
tarian transhumanists.
192
CITIZEN CYBORG

WHY DEMOCRATS SHOULD REEMBRACE TRANSHUMANISM
We want nothing less than the right to determine our own evolution. We want
the right to live forever—to succeed with our revolution against death itself. So
long as we have not overthrown the tyranny of death, all mankind belongs to
the developing world, all mankind is proletarian.
—FM–2030, Optimism One
I wrote part of this book in a beautiful wood-lined room in a commune-
run retreat in western Massachusetts. The commune advocates politi-
cally progressive, ecofriendly mysticism, a deep ecological suspicion of
modern technology mixed with paganism. My family and I were attend-
ing a Buddhist family retreat there, and the experience was like Zen
comes to Hobbiton. While we watched our breath in meditation in their
beautiful, sunny, all-wood meeting hall, the residents and staff practiced
organic gardening techniques with hoes and scythes in the scattered veg-
etable gardens, producing all the food consumed in our vegetarian
meals. Toilets had two seats, one for solid waste and one for urine,
which were disposed of in ecofriendly ways involving sawdust. The
beautiful post-and-beam buildings had small octagonal windows and
thick walls stuffed with cotton matting made from ground-up blue jeans.
The effect was lovely, and I think many people could enjoy living this
kind of lifestyle if given the choice. Certainly many tourists with com-
fortable middle-class homes to return to, like me, enjoy living that way
for a weekend.
The problem for progressive politics is that living this kind of lifestyle
permanently is not attractive for the vast majority of the world still
trapped in involuntary simplicity. Most people do not want to live in a fu-
ture without telecommunications, ﬂush toilets, labor-saving devices, air
travel and medicine. Most people don’t have those things now, and sus-
pect their lives would be a lot better if they did have them. When given
a choice between the spiritually rich, politically correct, voluntary sim-
plicity advocated in Utne Reader and the technoporn fantasy future found
Democratic Transhumanism
193

in Wired, most of the world utters a couple rote words of scorn for deca-
dent Western techno-afﬂuence and then desperately tries to ﬁgure out
how to climb into the pages of Wired.
Luddism is a political dead-end for progressive politics. Left-wing
Luddism is boring and depressing, and has no energy to inspire people
to create a new and better society. The Left was built by people inspired
by millennial visions, not by people who saw only a hopeless future of
futile existential protest against the juggernaut of fascist Progress. If
there is to be a future for progressive politics it has to come from a re-
birth of a sexy, high-tech vision of a radically democratic future, a redis-
covery of the utopian imagination. As Russell Jacoby says in The End of
Utopia, “in an era of political resignation and fatigue the utopian spirit
remains more necessary than ever. It evokes neither prisons nor pro-
grams, but an idea of human solidarity and happiness. . . . Something is
missing. A light has gone out. The world stripped of anticipation turns
cold and grey.” What is missing, the light that has gone out for the Left,
is the idea that the human condition can be radically transformed, that
we can accomplish more than a defense of the status quo against a cap-
italist version of the future. To rekindle a progressive utopianism, the
Next Left, the twenty-ﬁrst-century Left, needs visionary projects worthy
of a united transhuman world, projects like guaranteeing health, intelli-
gence and longevity for all, building world government, eliminating
work and colonizing the Solar System.
Luddism is also bad political sociology. Left Luddites inappropriately
equate technologies with the power relations around those technolo-
gies, and try to fight capitalism or patriarchy or hierarchy by fighting
technologies instead of by liberating the technologies for free and equal
use. Technologies may make certain kinds of power more likely than
others, but they do not determine power relations. Each new technology
creates a new terrain for organizing and democratic struggle, new possi-
bilities for expanded liberty and equality, or for oppression and exploita-
tion. Technological innovation needs to be democratically regulated and
guided, not fought or forbidden.
194
CITIZEN CYBORG

Progressives need to reembrace the Enlightenment insight that lib-
erating each individual’s potential requires not only political libera-
tion, but also technological liberation from nature. Marx referred to
technological progress as the move from the realm of necessity to the
realm of freedom. The more powerful our technology, and our politi-
cal and economic empowerment, the more we are freed from the ne-
cessity of labor.
Democratic transhumanism combines this old strain of progressive
optimism about reason, science and technology with a strong defense of
individual liberty. The assertion of individual liberty was also a central
cause of the radical democrats, and only became identiﬁed with the lib-
ertarian Right because of the rise of communism. By embracing the
right of each person to control their body and mind and freely use tech-
nology to realize their fullest potential, the Next Left can decisively
break all associations with authoritarianism.
A political movement based on both technological progress and indi-
vidual liberty will then see ways that democratically regulated and dis-
tributed, freely exercised technology can create a more equal, empow-
ered and united world. One way is by reducing the biological bases of
social inequality. Contrary to the vacuous assertions of Francis
Fukuyama and Bill McKibben that we are all biological equals, a lot of
social inequality is built on a biological foundation, and enhancement
technology makes it possible to redress that source of inequality.
FM–2030 wrote in Optimism One that transhumans
are no longer content simply striving for social, economic, and politi-
cal equality. What do these rights mean so long as people are born bi-
ologically unequal? So long as some are born strong others weak,
some healthy others sickly, some beautiful others ungainly, some tall
others short, some brilliant others dumb—in other words so long as
we do not have biological equality—all social equalities mean very lit-
tle. We will settle for nothing less than [the conquest of] this basic bi-
ological inequality which is at the very root of all human inequalities.
Democratic Transhumanism
195

Patriarchy, the most fundamental form of human domination, be-
gins with the fact that men can beat women up, and that women are
doubly vulnerable when pregnant. Gender equality does not depend on
reengineering women to have more upper-body strength, and there are
examples of pre-industrial societies with pretty good gender equality.
But modern technology—health care and birth control that gave
women decades free from children, factories that reduced the economic
significance of male strength, the telephone and police car and pistol
that provide protection from male violence—makes it possible to create
a post-patriarchal society. Of course all of these technologies can also be
used by men in the service of male power, but their overall effect in
democratic societies has been liberatory.
In the coming decades reproductive technology will make it possible to
liberate women even more radically from the dictates of nature. Birth
control, abortion, menstruation-regulating drugs and cesarean section
have already given women control over their wombs. Feminist utopian
novelists were depicting female-only societies that reproduce through
parthenogenesis as early as Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s 1915 Herland. The
next step, as New Left feminist writer Shulamith Firestone argued in the
1971 classic The Dialectic of Sex, is the artiﬁcial womb, which will give
women complete choice. A character in Marge Piercy’s 1976 novel Woman
on the Edge of Time explains why her future utopian society uses artiﬁcial
wombs: “It was part of women’s long revolution. As long as we were bio-
logically enchained, we’d never be equal. And males never would be hu-
manized to be loving and tender. So we all became mothers.”
Beyond gender, biological differences in abilities also create social in-
equality. Innate intellectual endowments obviously do predict, even if
they don’t determine, life success, as do many other biological traits.
Short men earn less than tall men. Obesity, which is substantially ge-
netic, is a strong predictor of the length and success of our lives. People
with chronic physical and mental illnesses are dependent on others and
not able to accomplish as much, despite the accomplishments of the ex-
traordinary few. And what is more disempowering than dying young? To
196
CITIZEN CYBORG

the extent that we make technologies for greater health, ability,
longevity, intelligence and happiness universally available, those tech-
nologies will make it possible for all biologically disadvantaged people to
have more real equal opportunities in life. As Nicholas Wade says in Life
Script, genomics makes it possible “to envisage for the ﬁrst time the cre-
ation of a genetically more just society, one in which the most funda-
mental kind of wealth—the genes that confer health and ﬁtness—would
for the ﬁrst time be accessible to all.”
Recognizing these biological sources of inequality does not mean ac-
cepting the moral legitimacy of inequality, it just means opening up a
second, complementary front in the struggle against those inequalities.
Of course we still need to work to overcome exploitation, domination
and prejudice at the same time that we use technologies to make them
harder to sustain. When parents are able to choose the height of their
children, more children will be tall, but we should also work on being
less heightist. There is no contradiction between thoroughly attacking
our classist stigmatizing of fat people and at the same time giving them
the technologies they need to achieve whatever body image they prefer,
even if their ideal bodies are drawn from rail-thin magazine models.
There is no contradiction between promoting generous social supports
and workplace accommodations for the mentally disabled and promot-
ing technologies that cure or prevent mental disability.
The egalitarian theorist best known for this argument is Ronald
Dworkin, who argues for a regime of liberal, egalitarian eugenics in his
book Sovereign Virtue. Dworkin starts with two principles. First, he ar-
gues that a person’s life, once begun, should succeed rather than fail,
“that the potential of that life be realized rather than wasted.” Second,
he argues that each person has the right to deﬁne for themselves what a
successful life is, which is a restatement of John Stuart Mills’ rationale
for liberty—we know our own needs better than anybody else does.
Adopting those two principles, Dworkin argues, leads inescapably to a
society that provides universal access to germinal choices and human en-
hancement technology. Universally available enhancements will make it
Democratic Transhumanism
197

most likely that each person will reach their highest potential. This prin-
ciple is actually already written into the Universal Declaration on the
Human Genome and Human Rights, adopted by the UN in 1998: “Ben-
efits from advances in biology, genetics and medicine, concerning the
human genome, shall be made available to all.”
Another theorist who argues that egalitarians should embrace subsi-
dized germinal choice technology, including enhancements, is the Prince-
ton University bioethicist Peter Singer. In Singer’s 2001 A Darwinian Left:
Politics, Evolution, and Cooperation, he argues that the Left has ignored and
denied the sociobiological constraints on politics to its own detriment.
Singer contends that there is a biologically rooted tendency toward self-
ishness and hierarchy in human nature that undermines egalitarian social
reforms. If ambitious egalitarian programs of social reform and democ-
ratic cooperation are to succeed, Singer argues, we must employ the new
genetic and neurological sciences to identify and modify the aspects of
human nature that cause conﬂict and competition. “In a more distant fu-
ture we can still barely glimpse, it may turn out to be the prerequisite for
a new kind of freedom: the freedom to shape our genes so that instead of
living in societies constrained by our evolutionary origins, we can build
the kind of society we judge best.” Toward that end Singer advocates a
program of voluntary, socially subsidized genetic enhancement.
We all may need genetic and cybernetic enhancement to ﬁnally sat-
isfy the demands of engaged citizenship. Biological limitations don’t only
constrain the capacity for democratic self-governance of the cognitively
disabled, but of all humans. FM–2030 (echoing the New Left) wrote that
transhumans want “instant universal participation that will do away with
the very institution of government.” But direct participatory democracy,
as in an Athens or the New England town meeting, requires a high level
of information collection, organizing, reasoning, argument and activism
that is beyond the capacities of most people. Once a community is larger
than 2,500 people or so the issues become so complex that we begin to
delegate to more or less accountable elites. Few of us have the leisure,
education and interest to make educated interventions about a wide
198
CITIZEN CYBORG

range of state, national and global issues. Even a clearly posthuman in-
tellect like Noam Chomsky doesn’t write much outside of foreign policy
and linguistics.
As George Bernard Shaw remarks in the Revolutionist’s Handbook,
“Democracy cannot rise above the level of the human material of which
its voters are made. . . . [Democracies will continue to be swayed by
demagogues] unless we can have a Democracy of Supermen; and the
production of such a Democracy is the only change that is now hopeful
enough to nerve us to the effort that Revolution demands.” Human en-
hancement technologies promise to expand our capacity for citizenship,
making direct, participatory, electronically mediated democracy more
possible. Our future brains, wired to the world through telecommunica-
tions, will be capable of both thinking and acting globally. We will mon-
itor the world with special expert systems and make political decisions
based on more sophisticated heuristics than a politician’s party afﬁliation
or religious views.
Already by answering a couple dozen questions in an online survey at
SmartSelect.com you can determine with high accuracy your afﬁnity for
political ideologies and religious beliefs that you may never have heard
of. The computer scientist Jason Tester has designed an expert system
dubbed “Constituty” that will monitor your e-mail and the Web pages
you read to make guesses about your political ideology, and the candi-
dates and issues you are likely to support. The system could then track
how well candidates fulﬁll campaign promises, and reward them with
your additional support. Once we have expanded our capacities for
knowledge, attention, deliberation and communication, even a small
proportion of our energies may be enough to read journals, monitor C-
SPAN, participate in online debates and vote on the UN referenda, while
the rest of our brain gets on with the more important things in our lives.
Expanding individuals’ capacity to participate and make informed
choices does not guarantee equality, of course, since those already
wealthy and endowed will use their advantages to accumulate even
more information and secure their interests. But just as the literate, well-
Democratic Transhumanism
199

fed citizens of the 1960s insisted on forms of democracy undreamt of by
eighteenth-century sharecroppers, increasing the health, intelligence,
longevity, education and leisure of the ordinary citizen will make them
more capable of recognizing how an unequal society does not serve
their interests, and more able to understand the methods they need to
pursue to achieve empowerment.
Jonathan Glover noted in What Sort of People Should There Be? that it
“is not just any aspect of present human nature that is worth preserving.
Rather it is especially those features which contribute to self-develop-
ment and self-expression, to certain kinds of relationships, and to the de-
velopment of our consciousness and understanding. And some of these
features may be extended rather than threatened by technology.” More
subtle than the biological constraints on equality and self-empowerment
are our social and psychological constraints, the unequally distributed
brainwashing and neuroses that rob us of our fullest potential. With
nano-neuro technology we will have unimaginable access to and control
over our currently unconscious reactions to the world, our ingrained
deference to hierarchy, our addictions and self-destructive behaviors, and
the ways that we are manipulated by advertising, charismatic authority
and social approval. As we liberate and unkink our personalities we will
also be liberating the world.
A ﬁnal reason for democrats to embrace transhuman enhancement is
that it may be the only way to keep liberal and social democracies com-
petitive with authoritarian regimes. Since communism collapsed, when
few expected it to, we’ve been struggling to ﬁnd the new political para-
digm for the New World Order. While liberal and social democracies
have an enormous advantage they are by no means assured of long-term
supremacy. If the democracies hobble themselves with restrictions on
human enhancement and technological innovation, we can be sure that
the authoritarian regimes will not.
Of course I’m thinking of China. Although I am still conﬁdent that
China will become an open democracy in a decade or two, this opti-
mism may be as misplaced as our previous certainty about the longevity
200
CITIZEN CYBORG

of Russian communism. The booming prosperity of Chinese authori-
tarian capitalism has dried up sympathy for Tiananmen Square-style de-
mocratic revolution, and the Chinese have refocused on leveraging new
technologies to their advantage. China has the only explicitly eugenicist
laws in the world, and beyond a ban on reproductive cloning the Chinese
have few ethical quandaries about stem cell cloning or plant, animal or
human genetic engineering. In 2002, 46% of Chinese students gradu-
ated with engineering degrees compared to 5% in the United States.
More than 600 nanotechnology firms have started in China. The Chi-
nese space program plans a base on the Moon in the next decade.
The Chinese government has scaled back its ideological and hege-
monic ambitions. But there is still a real possibility of conﬂict between
the growing bloc of liberal and social democracies, laboring under self-
imposed bans on human enhancement and emergent technologies, and
militarily and economically robust authoritarian regimes like China
using human enhancement, nanotechnology and AI to full advantage.
While we press to create global governance capable of effectively con-
trolling technological threats to global security, the democracies need to
retain the technological advantage. If the transhuman technological ad-
vantages are as sudden and dramatic as I believe they will be, our long-
term choice may be transhuman democracy or no democracy at all.
WHY LIBERTARIANS SHOULD EMBRACE 
TRANSHUMAN DEMOCRACY
Social democracy is not simply the ideal balance of liberty with equality
and solidarity, but the most effective known guarantor of liberty. As the
Nobel Prize–winning economist Amartya Sen and Ronald Dworkin have
argued, social democracy provides real freedom for real people, people
who need access to health care and universal education in order to fully
participate in society and function as citizens. Worldwide, and even
within the industrial democracies, poor and working-class people are less
able to access the education, leisure, health care and wealth to express
Democratic Transhumanism
201

themselves and give their kids the same opportunities in life as the afﬂu-
ent. Creating a truly free world, a world in which individuals will be best
able to realize their aspirations, requires making a more equal world.
Libertarians and egalitarian democrats have fundamentally different
premises about the nature of freedom, however. Libertarians want the
government not to interfere with the individual’s right to make decisions
in free markets. The egalitarian democrat wants everyone not only to be
free to make fully informed decisions, but also to have the means to
make those decisions. The libertarian agrees with the egalitarian that
everyone should have an “equal opportunity” in life, but disagrees that
redistribution or social services are required in order to guarantee equal
opportunity. The egalitarian thinks that democracy is required to con-
trol for the tendency of power and resources to accumulate to people
with advantages. The libertarian thinks that markets level out advan-
tages more effectively than governments.
Given these fundamental differences in values and worldviews I have
not had much success using this or other arguments in convincing well-
educated libertarians of the virtues of social democracy. For every study
I produce showing that a social program is effective, or that social
democracies are more healthy, prosperous and free than the United
States, they can produce a right-wing think tank’s study that says the op-
posite. Even when there is tangible evidence of a “market failure” the
libertarian always believes the answer is to apply more market mecha-
nisms instead of better democratic governance. Measured against the
imaginary perfect free market, actual democracies always lose.
So instead of making libertarians into social democrats I want to build
a case for democratic transhumanism for the technolibertarian who ac-
cepts that there is some minimal rationale for the existence of govern-
ment. If we can agree that governments can do at least a couple things
better than markets, we may be able to map out why various democratic
policies may be necessary to bring more of all good things to all people.
It has always struck me as very odd, though, the way most transhu-
manist libertarians argue for the market. Citing libertarian guru
202
CITIZEN CYBORG

Friedrich Hayek, they insist that the market is a naturally evolved, emer-
gent phenomenon without conscious guidance, which allocates re-
sources better than any conscious human planning ever can. That is a
strange argument from people who believe that all of the imperfect
products of evolution can and should be redesigned by human beings.
Most libertarians accept that human beings are smart enough to control
the genome and the ecosystem better than nature, but balk at the idea
that we could ever improve the economy with planning or regulation.
Many nineteenth-century humanists became socialists precisely because
they believed the market could be improved by rational human design,
which has certainly proved to be the case even if it cannot yet be re-
placed altogether.
Of course the idea that the market is more “natural” than political
institutions is just as silly and unfounded as the idea that selfishness is
more natural than altruism, or that women are more in touch with na-
ture than men. As Gus DeZerega argues in his Hayek-inspired defense
of democracy, Power, Persuasion and Polity, markets and democracies
are both products of evolution and conscious human action. Just like
evolving markets, democracies require millions of autonomous agents
aggregating their interests, expressing themselves in competition and
cooperation. Like markets, democracies are subject to monopoly and
information failures. Markets, in turn, require laws, legislatures, po-
lice, courts, planning and the provision of public goods like education,
health care, defense and roads. Both democracies and markets can be
improved through the application of human reason, planning and reg-
ulation. Markets and democracies depend on one another and any
ideal society we can conceive of needs a combination of both.
Anyway, the most powerful arguments for the need for govern-
ment, and one that many libertarians grudgingly accept, are threats to
the existence of the human race. Most libertarian transhumanists
grudgingly acknowledge that nanotechnology, genetic engineering
and artificial intelligence could cause catastrophes if used for terrorist
or military purposes, or if accidentally allowed to reproduce in the
Democratic Transhumanism
203

wild, and that governments can play a role in reducing these risks. Trans-
humanists who seriously want to be around in a couple hundred years see
the need for governments to monitor, regulate and prepare for these risks.
Of course, some optimistic libertarians propose that we don’t really
need governments to regulate and prepare for these risks. We could
force firms to take fewer risks by holding them accountable through
product liability. The free market could provide cheap space suits and
nanobot-off spray at Wal-Mart, and we could form voluntary clubs to
contract with private mercenaries to take out nano-terrorists. So, the
apocalyptic risks argument for government only works for those who
feel safer threatening North Korea with the International Atomic En-
ergy Agency and UN sanctions rather than with Rambo and lawsuits,
which fortunately includes most libertarians.
Believing that one will be around indefinitely also significantly in-
creases the chance that you will be on the planet when the next asteroid
hits, or gamma-ray burst sterilizes the local star belt. If it is possible to
survive these threats, the solutions again lie, at least in part, in govern-
ment action. The Fortune 500 aren’t going to set up asteroid monitoring
networks, or send ICBMs to blast asteroids, even if it would be good for
their bottom line. Getting human beings off the planet so that we don’t
have all our eggs in the third basket from the Sun is also not going to be
accomplished through market mechanisms, which is why the most seri-
ous libertarian space advocates have grudgingly accepted the need for
government-ﬁnanced space programs. Securing the “existential beneﬁts”
of the new technologies requires as much governance as preventing
their existential risks.
Short of threats to the future of life on Earth, most libertarians can
also agree that laws should require the full disclosure of relevant infor-
mation when purchasing products or making contracts. It is not much of
a step from the need for consumers to have full information, or “fully in-
formed consent” in bioethics terms, to the requirement that new prod-
ucts be independently tested for safety and efficacy, and that those tests
should be shared with consumers. Libertarians can even agree that
204
CITIZEN CYBORG

corporations should not be able to use their disproportionate power in
society to undermine the testing of their products or suppress results.
Disagreement comes in the government’s responsibility to protect
people from risks they have been clearly warned about. While most peo-
ple think the government has some obligation to ban unsafe products
and chemicals, libertarians will argue that the government should re-
strict itself to a “buyers-beware” Consumer Reports function. But ensuring
that all emerging nano- and biotechnologies are adequately tested by in-
dependent agencies, and that those results are made public, would still
be a huge advance over the current haphazard and spottily effective
regulatory system.
Libertarians will also embrace regulation of neurotechnologies be-
cause of the threat they pose to our understanding and experience of in-
dividual freedom. Although Fukuyama and Kass’s attacks on Prozac and
Ritalin are overwrought, the use of future neurotechnology or genetic
engineering to produce obedience in children, soldiers or citizens, even
if accomplished through free choices, could be such a threat to the lib-
erty of the next generation that we would need to stop it by law. Imag-
ine, for instance, that we achieve the drug legalization that I and most
transhumanists advocate, and then a drug is developed that—unlike cur-
rent drugs—is 100% and permanently addictive. The drug might rewrite
the brain so that all goals and values become secondary to remaining in-
toxicated. Suppressing or discouraging such a drug would be an exercise
of coercion in the defense of liberty, keeping people from selling them-
selves into slavery.
Getting serious about risks to the public and proposing nonmarket
solutions for those risks is the only way to fight the bioLuddite agenda
politically. Only believable and effective policies that guarantee tech-
nologies are safe and equitably distributed can reassure skittish publics.
Panglossian assurances that all will work itself out in the market or
after the Singularity won’t cut it. We will face much more opposition
to enhancement and radical life extension if they are only available to
the rich. Without universal health access and economic security, the
Democratic Transhumanism
205

shrinking working-age population, fewer and fewer of whom are able
to afford health insurance, will wage war against the “geezers.” If we
don’t promise serious answers to structural unemployment—expand-
ing the welfare state, a guaranteed basic income, expanded access to
higher education, job retraining, a shorter workweek and worklife—
then we are likely to see the return of old-school Luddite machine-
smashing by the unemployed. National health insurance and a basic
guaranteed income also provide more choices, of physician and occu-
pation, than private health insurance or the naked free market. Public
policies can address and ameliorate the public’s legitimate concerns,
slowing innovation in the short term but facilitating innovation and
choice in the long term.
Another area where libertarians are increasingly sounding like social-
ists is in the critique of effects of rampant intellectual property claims.
People who are serious about seeing technologies rapidly developed and
made widely accessible to the public at reasonable prices have to be con-
cerned that patents are strong enough to encourage innovation, but not
so strong that they suppress competition and make technologies too ex-
pensive. Many libertarians are coming to the conclusion that the current
overly expansive intellectual property system is holding technological
innovation back.
Finally, my appeal to libertarians returns to the personhood project
that is the common root of libertarian and radical democratic politics,
and of humanism and transhumanism. Protecting the rights and free-
doms of individuals so that they can fulfill their potentials means we
have to create cultures and governments that tolerate and protect diver-
sity. Securing and protecting rights for posthuman intelligence will re-
quire alliances with movements for sexual, reproductive, cultural, racial
and religious equality. Libertarian transhumanists bring to the table le-
gitimate objections to bureaucratic methods to enforce group rights, but
they must not let these qualms keep them from working in solidarity
with transhumanism’s natural allies for a tolerant and diverse transhu-
man democracy.
206
CITIZEN CYBORG

WEAVING A NEW DEMOCRATIC TRANSHUMANISM
Free in Body and Mind
At the 2003 Transvision conference at Yale University, Vanessa Foster,
the chair of the National Transgender Acton Coalition, took the podium
in “The Future of Sex and Gender” workshop and announced that trans-
sexuals like herself were the ﬁrst transhumanists. It was an important
moment in the history of transhuman politics. Transhumanism as a van-
guard civil rights movement had arrived, and the stunned but open ex-
pressions on the faces of the largely straight male audience showed the
work that transhumanists still needed to do to reach out to the disparate
constituencies that will build a democratic transhumanism.
First among these constituencies are the disparate movements, like
transgender rights, working to radicalize our control over our own bod-
ies. Reproductive rights activists, who insist that women should have
subsidized access to reproductive and contraceptive technology, are nat-
ural allies of a democratic transhumanism. Although many feminists
have been inﬂuenced by ecofeminist bioLuddism and Left Luddite argu-
ments about the danger of corporate technology, there is a broader fem-
inist constituency that sees no contradiction between women’s empow-
erment and using technology to expand their control over their lives, so
long as those technologies are safe.
A transhumanist ideological thread that has grown in academia for
the last twenty years is found in the cyborgology of Donna Haraway. In
1984, Donna Haraway wrote “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Tech-
nology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s” as a critique of Luddite
ecofeminism, and it landed with the reverberating bang of a hand
grenade. Haraway argued that it was precisely in the eroding boundary
between human beings and machines, in the integration of women and
machines in particular, that we can ﬁnd liberation from patriarchy and
capitalism. Haraway says, “I would rather be a cyborg than a goddess,”
and proposes the cyborg as the liberatory mythos for all women. Har-
away’s essay and subsequent writings have inspired the new subdiscipline
Democratic Transhumanism
207

of “cyborgology” or “cyberfeminism.” As yet there has been little cross-
pollination between the left-wing academic cyborgologists and the tran-
shumanists, but mutual recognition and ties are growing.
Gays, lesbians and bisexuals are also natural allies of democratic tran-
shumanism since the right to control one’s own body means being able
to share it with other consenting adults. The champions of natural law
attack homosexuality and human enhancement with the same argu-
ments. Invitro fertilization allows lesbians to have children without hav-
ing sex with a man. Work on fertilizing eggs with the DNA from another
egg or replacing egg DNA with sperm DNA would allow gay parents to
both have a genetic link to their children.
One activist who saw that link and ran with it is veteran gay rights ac-
tivist Randy Wicker. Wicker was one of the ﬁrst gay rights campaigners
to come out on radio and television in the early 1960s, and he has been
active in gay rights in New York City ever since. Then in 1996, when an
international backlash started against the cloning of the sheep Dolly in
Scotland, Wicker had an epiphany. He saw that the right to clone was a
fundamental reproductive rights and gay rights issue since “cloning ren-
ders heterosexuality’s historic monopoly on reproduction obsolete.”
Wicker started the Clone Rights United Front with other gay rights ac-
tivists, then co-founded the Human Cloning Foundation, and has be-
come a national spokesman on cloning as a reproductive right. Wicker’s
argument has made some headway with gay theoreticians like Chandler
Burr, author of A Separate Creation: The Search for the Biological Origin of
Sexual Orientation, who acknowledges that reproductive technology
“takes us another degree further from the idea that babies are produced
only by two heterosexual people having heterosexual intercourse.”
Another enormous constituency for democratic transhumanism are
the tens of millions of people whose lives are harmed by laws against cog-
nitive liberty, that is, laws against illicit drugs. Drug dependency is a huge
public health problem and should be treated as such. Yet all the problems
associated with drug use are made worse by the Drug War. In this century
drugs and other brain control technologies will only become more com-
208
CITIZEN CYBORG

plex, and the technologies of surveillance and repression more powerful. A
society that denies us the right to put cannabis in our brain, and forces us to
pee on demand to prove we haven’t, is a society more likely to tell us we
can’t use intelligence enhancers and mood modiﬁers and more willing to
use new technologies of repression to ensure we don’t. For instance, drug
vaccines that prevent the action of speciﬁc drugs are not simply being de-
veloped as voluntary tools for people trying to kick addictions, but as pre-
ventive measures that businesses can require their employees to take. 
A far better use of public monies, as Aldous Huxley proposed in
Doors of Perception and transhumanist David Pearce proposes in “The
Hedonistic Imperative,” would be to develop better drugs with fewer
health risks. Opposing the ill-conceived and fruitless Drug War puts de-
mocratic transhumanists in solidarity not only with the millions of po-
litical prisoners serving time for nonviolent drug use and possession, but
also with the cutting-edge activists for cognitive liberty, such as Wrye
Sententia and her Center for Cognitive Liberty and Ethics, who is work-
ing to “establish, promote, and protect the right of each individual to
use the full spectrum of his or her mind, to engage in multiple modes of
thought, and to experience alternative states of consciousness.”
Disabled Cyborgs and Secular Scientists
Disabled people using the latest assistive technologies, with their eyes
ﬁxed on medical progress, are also a natural constituency for democratic
transhumanism. Disabled people in the wealthier industrialized coun-
tries, with their wheelchairs, prosthetic limbs, novel computing inter-
faces and portable computing, are the most technologically dependent
humans ever known, and are aggressive in their insistence on their social
rights to inclusion, support and treatment. Some disabled people are
even consciously embracing the transgressive image of the cyborg. In an
article in Wired, paraplegic journalist John Hockenberry made the point
that disabled people are pushing the boundaries of humanness: “Hu-
manity’s specs are back on the drawing board, thanks to some unlikely
designers, and the disabled have a serious advantage in this conversation.
Democratic Transhumanism
209

They’ve been using technology in collaborative, intimate ways for
years—to move, to communicate, to interact with the world. . . . People
with disabilities—who for much of human history died or were left to
die—are now, due to medical technology, living full lives. As they do, the
deﬁnition of humanness has begun to widen.”
Probably the most prominent symbol of disabled transhumanist
activism these days is Christopher Reeve, the former Superman actor
who became a tireless campaigner for biomedical research after a
horse-riding accident left him quadriplegic. Reeve has been especially
eloquent defending the use of cloned embryos in stem cell research, and
his advocacy of cures for spinal injuries has made him controversial in
the disability rights community, some of whom see a zero-sum trade-off
between disability rights and cures.
But most disabled people are not Luddites. Most disabled think we
can allow parents to choose to have nondisabled children and that tech-
nology can be used to overcome or cure disabilities, while we ﬁght for
equality for people with disabilities. Just as we should have the choice to
get rid of a disability, we should also have the right to choose not to be
“ﬁxed,” and to choose to live with bodies that aren’t “normal.” The right
not to be coerced by society to adopt a “normal” body is also a central
demand of transhumanism.
Patient advocacy groups and scientiﬁc lobbies also share a broad in-
terest with the transhumanist movement in seeing more public ﬁnanc-
ing of medical research and protecting the freedom to conduct research
from bioLuddite bans. The struggle against the anti-science policies of
the Bush administration and the Republican Congress, from bans on
stem cell research to suppression of climate change research, has mobi-
lized an enormous coalition in Washington, D.C., in defense of scientiﬁc
research. The Coalition for the Advancement of Medical Research, the
principal pro-stem cell research lobby, includes patient groups like the
American Diabetes Association and the American Infertility Association,
physician organizations like the American Medical Association and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, research universi-
ties such as the University of California System, education associations
210
CITIZEN CYBORG

such as the American Council on Education, foundations like the one
founded by Christopher Reeve, and industry groups like the Biotechnol-
ogy Industry Association and National Venture Capital Association. This
polarization of the scientiﬁc, medical and academic communities against
the Luddism of the Christian Right is very good news for the emergence
of a progressive transhumanist political movement.
Scientists in particular are a democratic transhumanist constituency.
Most American scientists are secular, civil libertarian and lean toward
the Democrats. Scientists believe passionately in scientiﬁc freedom, are
incredulous at neoLuddite attacks on technological progress and are sus-
picious of the religious fundamentalist base in the Republican Party. The
Republicans noticed. Bush’s powerful political advisor Karl Rove told the
New Yorker that the deﬁnition of a Democrat was “somebody with a doc-
torate.” Bush has half as many Ph.D.s in his cabinet as Clinton did, and
he moved the Office of Science and Technology Policy outside the
White House and cut its staff.
Scientists have grown even more restive as the Bush administration
dismissed the scientiﬁc consensus on stem cells, climate change, Head
Start and abstinence-oriented sex education. In February of 2004, a
thousand scientists signed on to a Union of Concerned Scientists report
condemning the Bush administration’s suppression and distortion of sci-
ence. When the stacked conservative majority on the President’s Coun-
cil on Bioethics recommended the banning of therapeutic stem cell
cloning, every practicing scientist voted against the resolution. So in
March of 2004 the administration replaced two pro-stem cell members
of the Bioethics Council, one of them a scientist, with three Christian
bioLuddites. Almost two hundred bioethicists signed a letter of protest.
Biopunks and Open-Source Science
As I mentioned earlier, libertarians have begun to join progressives and
many scientists in a revolt against the quickly expanding intellectual prop-
erty laws in biotech that are retarding scientific and technological
progress. Science writer Annalee Newitz has connected this revolt against
the closure of the bio-commons to an emerging “biopunk” ethos in the
Democratic Transhumanism
211

work of biotech-inspired artists. Biopunks, according to Newitz, are com-
mitted both to the beneﬁts that can emerge from genetic technology and
to opposing the madness of patents on discovered genomes that allow cor-
porate control of genetic data that should be in the public domain. Biop-
unks protest both “bioLuddites and apologists for the biotech industry.”
Newitz ﬁnds biopunk sensibilities expressed in groups like the Coali-
tion of Artists and Life Forms (CALF), a loose network of artists who
celebrate biotechnology while remaining critical of its capitalist ex-
ploitation and limitations. Biopunk sensibilities among scientists, Newitz
argues, can be seen in the growing call for the “open sourcing” of scien-
tiﬁc information, from free scientiﬁc journals to public domain experi-
ments like the GenBank and Gene Expression Omnibus database, and
the International Consortium on Brain Mapping.
Technogaians and Viridians
Democratic transhumanists need to make the case to people concerned
about public and ecosystem health that new technologies can be devel-
oped safely and deployed in ways that prevent and repair the damage hu-
mans have done so far. Political philosopher Walter Truett Anderson is an
example of a democratic transhumanist technogaian who has tried to
make that case. In To Govern Evolution and Evolution Isn’t What it Used to Be,
Anderson argued that humans need to take seriously our democratic re-
sponsibility for managing nature, both in the ecosystem and in our
genome: “Today the driving force in evolution is human intelligence. . . .
Even our own genetic future is in our hands, guided not by Darwinian ab-
stractions but by science and medical technology and public policy. . . .
This is the project of the coming era: to create a social and political order—
a global one—commensurate to human power in nature. The project re-
quires a shift from evolutionary meddling to evolutionary governance.”
Technogaianism applied to ecosystem management is found in the
“reconciliation ecology” movement and writings such as Michael Rosen-
zweig’s Win-Win Ecology. Rosenzweig boils down his approach to several
simple steps: “First, drink deeply from the natural history of the species you
212
CITIZEN CYBORG

want to help. Study their reproductive cycles, their diets, and their behavior.
Abstract the essence of their needs from what you observe. Then apply it
without worrying whether your redesign of the human landscape will re-
semble a wilderness. It won’t, so feel free to be outrageously creative.”
One of the most outrageously creative of technogaian thinkers is the
science ﬁction author and cyberpunk ideologist Bruce Sterling. In Janu-
ary 2000, Sterling returned to his polemicist roots and penned a 4,300-
word manifesto for a new “Viridian” green political movement. Sterling
accepts the urgency of climate change and species depletion. But he be-
lieves Green politics are too Luddite and dour. He calls for a sexy, high-
tech, design movement to make attractive, practical ecological tools.
Like FM–2030, Sterling outlines a third way between capitalism and so-
cialism involving controls on transnational capital, redirecting militaries
to peacekeeping, developing sustainable industries, increasing leisure
time, guaranteeing a social wage, expanding global public health and
promoting gender equity. The Viridian movement has attracted hun-
dreds of people who receive weekly missives from Sterling about excit-
ing ecologically appropriate technologies.
Many researchers in biotech also have ecological motivations. The
AgBioWorld Foundation at the Tuskegee Institute has mobilized a
global network of biotech scientists to defend biotech crops on humani-
tarian and ecological grounds. For instance, crops can be genetically en-
gineered that require less agricultural land, pesticides and fertilizer, and
provide more essential nutrients. In a review published in 2004, the UN
Food and Agriculture Organization stated that the principal problem
with biotech crops is that small farmers have not been able to adopt
them more quickly. The report concluded that there have been no envi-
ronmental or health harms from GM crops, and many beneﬁts such as
reduced use of pesticides and increased productivity.
Nanoecologists have also begun to emerge to propose a wide range of
ecological applications of nanotechnology, such as Eric Drexler and Chris
Peterson in Unbounding the Future and Doug Mulhall in Our Molecular Fu-
ture. In its 2003 review of nanotech and AI titled “Future Technologies,
Democratic Transhumanism
213

Today’s Choices,” Greenpeace says there is no need for bans on nanotech,
or even new regulatory structures, and that “new technologies . . . are also
an integral part of our solutions to environmental problems, including re-
newable energy technologies such as solar, wind and wave power, and
waste treatment technologies such as mechanical-biological treatment.”
While transhumanists and deep ecologists profoundly disagree about
population control (transhumanists want more people, and deep ecolo-
gists want fewer), we agree on the goal: a high-tech society with indi-
vidual rights and a strong democratic state that will cause people to have
fewer children. Industrializing liberal democracies reduce childhood
mortality and provide women with education, employment opportuni-
ties and publicly ﬁnanced family planning, giving them the means and
incentives to control their fertility. Afﬂuent liberal democracies ensure
the well-being of the elderly through social security systems so they
don’t need large numbers of children as their de facto pension plan. 
And Everybody Else . . .
As machine intelligence becomes more sophisticated and automates all
manual, service and intellectual labor, we may all need a pension. Since
the original Luddite revolt techno-utopians have predicted the end of
labor and the spread of leisure, and to a degree they were right. At the
turn of the century most working people in the industrialized countries
worked 3,000 hours a year from their early teens to the day they died.
Today we work about 1,600–1,900 hours a year, and the average person
lives ten years into retirement. In the coming decades the work life will
continue to shrink, and we may already be seeing the beginning of the
true end of work in the weak recovery that began in 2003 with jobs
being lost to automation and outsourcing as corporate proﬁts grew.
The job-loss recovery was predicted by Hans Moravec in his book
Robot, where he also says society won’t put up with growing inequality
and concentration of wealth: “It is unlikely that a future majority of ser-
vice-providing ‘commoners’ with more free time, communications and
democracy than today would tolerate being lorded over by a dynasty of
214
CITIZEN CYBORG

non-working hereditary capitalists. They would vote to change the sys-
tem. The trend in the social democracies has been to equalize income by
raising the standards of the poorest as high as the economy can bear. In
the age of robots, that minimum will be very high.”
Moravec then suggests that capitalism will come to an end and that
society will need to provide a universal basic income: “Incremental ex-
pansion of such a subsidy would let money from robot industries, col-
lected as corporate taxes, be returned to the general population as pen-
sion payments. By gradually lowering the retirement age, most of the
population would eventually be supported . . . [and] payments begun
at birth would subsidize a long, comfortable retirement for the entire
original-model human race.”
In a similar vein, Marshall Brain, the computer scientist and entre-
preneur who founded the successful HowStuffWorks Web site and book
series, is promoting his “Robot Nation” epiphany, that half of all jobs in
the United States will be lost to the developing world or robots by 2055.
Brain suggests that all Americans should receive a guaranteed basic in-
come of $25,000 a year, paid from a general fund supported by progres-
sive taxation, corporate ﬁnes and the sale of public resources. Brain ar-
gues that a guaranteed basic income is necessary for the survival of
capitalism: Capitalism may be able to do without workers, but not with-
out consumers.
Moravec and Brain join a growing international movement of econ-
omists and activists advocating a “basic income guarantee” (BIG). BIG is
the answer to the next wave of Luddite machine-wrecking by angry dis-
placed workers. The Luddites have no faith that democracy can allow
everyone to beneﬁt from technological innovation, and the libertopians
think we don’t need democracy and public assistance since we have the
stock market. But Brain, Moravec and the BIG movement aim to prove
that democracies can provide universal economic beneﬁts while advanc-
ing the technological innovation necessary to pay for them.
Universal health care and basic income systems are essential as we
make the transhuman transition, to ensure equal access to beneﬁts not
Democratic Transhumanism
215

only between the rich and poor, but also between the young and old. As
the population rapidly ages, and the population supporting senior bene-
ﬁts shrinks both demographically and because of structural unemploy-
ment, generational conflict will be inevitable without programs that
provide universal benefits. Either the shrinking population of angry
young workers will wage war on the beneﬁts available to the growing
senior and unemployed population, or we will expand the benefits of
income security and health insurance to everyone.
A QUICK REVIEW
Let’s quickly review the lay of the ideological land. On matters of per-
sonhood-based citizenship, natural law, individual rights and the “yuck
factor,” libertarian and democratic transhumanists are on the same page.
But on questions of regulating technology, the democratic transhuman-
ists side with most of the rest of the world against the libertarian and
Luddite extremes: appropriately regulate technology and avoid bans. On
issues ranging from social equality and joblessness to ecological protec-
tion and globalization, the libertarians argue that the market will solve
all problems while the democratic transhumanists argue for judicious
government regulation and universal social provision. These issues and
positions are presented in Table 11.1.
BUILDING A DEMOCRATIC TRANSHUMANIST MAJORITY
Currently all the self-described “democratic transhumanists” in the
world could hold a convention in a large classroom. That’s not the
point. There is a latent majority constituency for social justice, a caring
society, technological progress and health and longevity for all. Even
though no politician would get elected yet on a platform of ape rights,
subsidized intelligence enhancements and a universal guaranteed in-
come, the basic goals of democratic transhumanism are shared by the
vast majority of people. The challenge is to find issues and struggles
216
CITIZEN CYBORG

Libertarian 
Democratic
Left-Wing
Natural Law 
Transhumanists
Transhumanists
BioLuddites
BioLuddites
Citizenship
Personhood-Based “Cyborg
Limited Human-Racism:
(Religious) Human-
Citizenship”: All self-aware beings
“Humanness” determines
Racism: “Humanness”
with desires and plans for the future
citizenship, but not for
determines citizenship
should be considered citizens with a 
embryos
right to life
(Deep Ecological) 
Eco-centrism: Human
beings have equal rights 
with all living things
Humanism vs. 
Humanism: Human beings are free 
Opposition to (Capitalist/
Deep Ecology/Hubris 
Natural Law
to determine their own future,
Imperialist/Patriarchal)
Taboo: Humanity 
guided by prudent reason. There are 
Humanism 
be restricted by
no obvious natural or divine limits 
should divine or 
on human aspiration
ecological taboos 
Individual 
Individual liberty trumps
“Yuck factor” trumps
“Yuck factor” trumps 
Liberty vs. 
“yuck factor”
individual liberty in germinal
individual liberty
“Yuck Factor”
choice and biotech, but not
in sexuality or abortion
Technological 
Resignation: Technology 
Regulation: Risks are 
Relinquishment: Risks are  
Risks
is uncontrollable,
manageable with the 
so enormous and 
assistance of democratic 
unknowable, and regulatory 
oversight and
institutions so ﬂawed, that
management
human enhancement should 
be banned
(continues)
TABLE 11.1
Biopolitical Ideologies

The Equality
Market Access and Legal  
Make Enhancement 
Bans on Technologies 
Tech Bans Necessary to 
Challenge of
Equality Enough: If legal 
Universally Accessible:
as Part of Larger
Protect Equality: Equality 
Enhancement 
equality is guaranteed and 
Democracies should work 
Egalitarian Program:
can be guaranteed by 
Technology 
enhancement technologies 
toward social equality and 
Democracies should work 
banning enhancement 
are available in the market,
provide universal access to
toward social equality and 
technologies
social equality is irrelevant 
enhancement technologies
ban enhancement
and government should do 
technologies
nothing to create a more 
equal society
Procreative 
Procreative Liberty: Trust
Procreative Liberty,
Limited Procreative 
Procreative Liberty 
Liberty
parents to act in kids’ best 
Equality and Beneﬁcence:
Liberty: Reproductive 
Trumped by Natural
interests, and let them buy 
Trust parents to act in kids’
rights, but not extended 
Law: Reproductive rights 
germinal choice in the 
best interests, stop them if 
to germinal choice and 
trumped by religious 
market
they don’t, give them equal 
reproductive technology
prohibitions or the need for 
access to germinal choice 
radical population 
technology and encourage 
reduction
them to create children with
the best life opportunities
Ecological 
Free Market Green:
Technogaian:
Left Ecology: Technologies
Deep Ecology: Humanity
Protection
The market can solve all 
A combination of judicious
developed by patriarchal,
should radically restrict 
ecological problems 
regulation and ecologically
capitalist systems need to be
itself
oriented technologies can 
banned and those systems 
prevent and remediate 
changed
(Religious) Dominion 
ecological damage
Theology: Man has 
stewardship over Nature
(continues)
TABLE 11.1
Biopolitical Ideologies

TABLE 11.1
Biopolitical Ideologies
Structural 
The Market Will Provide:
Embrace the End of Work:
Protectionism, Luddism,
(EcoLuddite) Small Is 
Unemployment
If the government avoids 
The wealth and leisure 
Public Employment:
Beautiful: Stop automation
meddling (unemployment 
created by automation 
Attempt to protect existing 
and adopt voluntary 
insurance, minimum wages,
should be shared equitably by
jobs, and create new ones
simplicity
etc.) all workers will ﬁnd new
all through a basic income
jobs, even if at lower wages
guarantee and shorter 
work week
Globalization
Economic Globalization 
Economic Globalization Must
(EcoLuddite) 
Good: Global governance,
Be Accompanied by Political
Globalization Should Be
worker protections,
Globalization: Economic 
Stopped: Return to local 
environmental laws, all 
globalization good so long 
self-reliance and political 
unnecessary 
as it is accompanied by worker 
sovereignty
rights and protections,
environmental laws and global 
(Religious) Global Bans on
democratic governance of
Enhancement Tech: Global
capital ﬂows
treaties to ban cloning and 
enhancement, but no other 
global governance

that coalesce that latent majority and demonstrate how marginal the
libertarians and bioLuddites really are.
In 1996 the National Opinion Research Center asked a random sam-
ple of Americans whether it was the government’s responsibility to pro-
vide health care for the sick. As has been true since the ﬁrst time that
survey question was asked in the 1930s, a dominant majority, 85%, said
yes. The survey also asked whether genetic screening was likely to pro-
duce more harm or more good, and two-thirds thought it would pro-
duce more good than harm (Table 11.2). Using just those two questions,
left-leaning techno-optimists constitute more than half of all Americans,
or 56%. That is the majority waiting to be having its voice heard.
220
CITIZEN CYBORG
TABLE 11.2
The Latest Democratic Transhumanist Majority
Do you think genetic screening will do more 
good than harm or more harm than good?
More Good 
More Harm
Is it the government’s responsibility
Yes 
56% 
27%
to provide health care for the sick?
No 
12% 
5%
Source: General Social Survey 1996, National Opinion Research Center (N=311).

12
Transhuman Democracy
In this chapter I sketch out some of the policy ramifications of a democratic
transhumanism. The cyborg citizenship approach suggests which kinds of be-
ings should be granted citizenship and a right to life, and which should be
considered property. It also leads to some surprising conclusions about our
obligations to the great apes. Next, I show that the idea that persons own
themselves has some surprising consequences for the patenting of human
genes. Finally, I suggest a method for deciding which enhancements should be
made universally available, and which should be discouraged or banned, all
while maximizing individual health care choices.
TYPES OF PERSONS AND WHAT WE OWE THEM
As I suggested in Chapter 7 on cyborg citizenship, a central question of
biopolitics will be what rights we should grant to the various kinds of
beings we create with technology. The human-racists want to restrict
rights to Homo sapiens 1.0, while the transhumanists, like many bioethi-
cists and the democratic tradition itself, believe rights should be based
on personhood.
But the argument quickly becomes more complex since there is no
agreement about what personhood entails. Whatever list of characteris-
tics one uses, technology is sure to create cases that lie exactly in the
gray areas. The most minimal threshold for personhood is something
221

like “conscious beings, aware of themselves, with intents and purposes
over time.” In addition to consciousness, self-awareness and self-moti-
vated activity, philosopher Mary Anne Warren adds “reasoning” and
“the capacity to communicate.” Other personhood theorists, such as
Tristram Englehardt, Joseph Fletcher and Joel Feinberg, also add the abil-
ity to care about the opinion of others, which I discuss later.
All personhood theorists agree, however, that the basic threshold of
citizenship is self-awareness and desire. Once you are self-aware and
looking forward to your plans for the future, even if those plans only
concern your next meal, your death is qualitatively more signiﬁcant, at
least to you. You are a being in yourself and not just a thing. Once a
being achieves self-awareness, therefore, is when it makes sense to say
that the being is a person with a “right to life,” and cannot be owned as
a thing.
Incomplete persons should not be considered property, nor can we
treat them yet as full citizens. Children are self-aware beings with plans
and desires, but it makes no sense to grant them the right to control
their own lives, to make contracts or vote, until they have matured
into their full adult powers. As children they still have poorly formed
“intents and purposes over time,” insufficient ability to reason about
their own or other people’s interests, and immature capacities for em-
pathy and communication. If we granted citizenship rights to great
apes, the only meaningful rights they could possess would be the right
to life, the right not to be bought or sold, and freedom from being sub-
ject to medical experimentation. The right to vote, make contracts or
get a college loan would be meaningless for a chimpanzee. At least
until she is genetically enhanced or “uplifted,” which I’ll address in a
second.
So a personhood approach to citizenship, “cyborg citizenship,” rec-
ognizes two different statuses of citizenship, disabled and full. The
most intelligent animals, such as great apes and dolphins, can be in-
cluded in our polity with the limited rights that we grant to human
children, the demented, the mentally ill and the severely mentally dis-
222
CITIZEN CYBORG

abled. These are disabled citizens, since their ability to fully determine
their own affairs and participate in democratic deliberation is compro-
mised. Full citizens are persons who fulfill all of Warren’s conditions
such as adult humans, posthumans (at least the kind that most of us
would choose to become), uplifted animals and possibly some future
human-level machine minds.
Animals, humans or machines that lack self-awareness would not be
citizens, not even disabled citizens, and therefore are not candidates for
citizen-level rights. Things that are not citizens are necessarily property,
and their affairs are determined by laws controlling what people can do
with different kinds of property. Not all property can be bought or sold,
and you can’t always dispose of property any way you like. Even though
you can’t sell your brain-dead relative’s organs, their body is still essen-
tially family property that you can decide how to dispose of within the
framework of the law.
But here we need to make an additional distinction between sentient
property, property that can feel but is not self-aware, and nonsentient
property (Table 12.1). Things that can feel pleasure and pain oblige us to
ensure that they not be caused unnecessary suffering. Sentient property
includes fetuses, most animals and permanently unconscious humans
who are still sensate. Simple biological property, which can’t feel pain,
would include things like embryos and corpses.
These categories also inform our obligations to beings. We are
obliged to help fellow citizens achieve their fullest capacities for reason,
consciousness and self-determination. If it is possible to enable disabled
citizens to achieve a fuller possession of their faculties for reason, auton-
omy and communication, so that they can control their own affairs, it is
our obligation to help them do so. When our fellow citizens are less
able, less healthy, less intelligent or less happy than they otherwise could
be, it is our ethical and political responsibility to do what we can, while
respecting whatever self-determination they are able to exercise.
Caring is sometimes all we can do. But quite often, as a society, we
can do quite a bit more. We can assure adequate nutrition and clean
Transhuman Democracy
223

water for everyone on the planet. We can make sure that people are not
killed or crippled by war, landmines and toxic wastes, and that they are
not raped and tortured by brutal regimes. We have an obligation to chil-
dren to provide them with education and secure homes so they can real-
ize their abilities. We have an obligation to the mentally ill to provide
them with treatments that return them to sanity.
Alongside the provision of basic needs, education and a caring com-
munity, we also are increasingly able to offer technology as a means for
people to reach their fullest potentials. Assistive technology for the dis-
abled is the most dramatic case of the technological empowerment of
224
CITIZEN CYBORG
TABLE 12.1
The Continuum of Consciousness and Rights
Example Types of Life
Consciousness
Rights Status
Adult Humans, Enhanced or 
Mature Personhood,
Full Citizens
Unenhanced, and Their 
with Reason
Cognitive Equals  
Right and Ability to 
Self-Determination, to Vote
and to Make Contracts
Human Children
Personhood
Disabled Citizens
(Self-awareness)
Demented and Mentally 
Right to Life and to 
Disabled Human Adults
Assistance to Achieve Full
Self-Determination
Great Apes 
Most Animals
Sentience
Sentient Property
(Pleasure and Pain)
Fetuses
Right Not to Suffer 
Unnecessarily
Permanently Vegetative 
Humans  
Brain-Dead Humans
Not Sentient
Property
Embryos
Plants
Toasters

citizens. For instance, in the rare neurological condition of “the locked-
in state,” the peripheral nerves of the body stop working but the brain is
unaffected. As many as 25,000 Americans are estimated to suffer this
level of severe or total paralysis. Slowly the victim becomes encased in a
body with which they can’t communicate. They can hear and see, and
they are just as conscious and awake as ever inside, but they can’t even
twitch an eyelid. As patients slip into this horrifying state they have often
been counseled to take their own lives or request that no measures be
made to keep them alive. But now researchers at Emory University have
put special computer chips into the brains of patients in the locked-in
state, in the area that once controlled their muscles. The patients’ neu-
rons grow into contact with the chip and when the patients think about
moving various muscles radio signals are sent to an external computer.
Slowly the patterns of neuronal ﬁring against the chips’ electrodes allow
the patients to control computer cursors by thought alone. Totally para-
lyzed people are now surﬁng the Web, sending e-mail and controlling
their wheelchairs and their lives by thought alone.
Future stem cell and neural regeneration techniques will allow peo-
ple with spinal cord injuries to walk and control their bodies. Then it will
soon be possible to give great apes and dolphins genetic and cybernetic
enhancements of their intelligence and language skills to help them rea-
son and communicate.
Did I lose you there? It seems bizarre to most that we might have any
obligation to intelligent animals beyond leaving them alone in the wild,
and treating those in captivity humanely. But I think we have the same
obligation to uplift “disabled” animal citizens that we have to disabled
human citizens. This does not mean that we are obliged to round up all
apes or dolphins in the wild and give them gene therapy, brain drugs and
education. Capturing apes and dolphins violates the autonomy they cur-
rently exercise, and would mean far more death and suffering than up-
lift. Probably the most meaningful thing we can presently do to promote
the rights of dolphins and apes in the wild is to protect them from
hunters and ﬁshing nets, and their habitats from destruction. As to apes
Transhuman Democracy
225

and dolphins in captivity, we need to ensure that they are treated with re-
spect, and not subjected to medical experimentation since they are un-
able to consent to participate. As technologies progress, however, it will
become increasingly practical to provide dolphins and chimpanzees in
captivity with technologies that allow them to think more complicated
thoughts and communicate with humans, ranging from systems that
translate between human speech and animal thoughts to genetic en-
hancements of their brains.
Any program of uplift for intelligent animals, children or disabled
humans unable to consent needs to be conducted very carefully in case
their enhancement causes greater suffering. Even if we believe with John
Stuart Mill that it is better to be an unhappy human than a satisﬁed pig,
we should try to avoid making intelligent but miserable pigs. We might
find, for instance, that tweaking the intelligence of animals increases
their sensitivity to pain or their neuroticism. If there were such down-
sides to the upgrades we should probably hold off, just as we would
rethink sending children to schools if they all became literate but mis-
erable adults. 
Our obligation to cybernetic intelligence is much more complicated
and bounded by caution, since organic people will likely face more sig-
nificant threats from machine minds that achieve self-awareness than
they do from enhanced chimpanzees, Planet of the Apes notwithstanding.
Machine minds are far less certain of having the capacities for empathy
and morality critical for full citizenship, and their potential to harm
human interests will increase much more rapidly than organically em-
bodied intelligence. Our obligation to acknowledge self-aware machines
will need to be balanced by our obligation to protect the interests of al-
ready existing organic citizens. Ensuring that machine minds either do
not achieve self-awareness, or achieve only a safe level of powers with in-
built solidarity for the rest of their fellow citizens, will likely require a
pervasive set of as yet unimagined regulations and policing practices.
So the model of cyborg citizenship I’ve outlined here makes clear
which kinds of creatures we have obligations to. We may feel a fondness
226
CITIZEN CYBORG

for trees and rivers, and we may want to preserve them and the animals
that live in them, but they do not bear rights. We do not have an obliga-
tion to uplift beings that are not self-aware, who have not achieved the
threshold of citizenship, such as fetuses or ﬁsh. Fetuses and ﬁsh, like all
matter in the universe, are potentially self-aware, but we are not obliged
to make all matter in the universe intelligent.
OWNING OUR BODIES
If you paint a picture of a mountain, you aren’t granted ownership of
the mountain. You aren’t even given the right to forbid other people
from painting pictures of the mountain. Even if you spend ten years
climbing all over the mountain to make a detailed, computerized
topographic map that tells you where every rock came from and
where every river runs, you still don’t get a deed to the mountain or a
patent on the idea of mapping that mountain. You can, however, get a
copyright on your painting or map, and if someone else wants a pic-
ture or map of the mountain they have to either buy it from you, buy
someone else’s painting or map, or make one of their own. If you in-
vented a new mapping method, or a new kind of ink, you can get
patents on those, and people will have to pay you to use them to map
the mountain. But whoever owns the mountain still can tell you to get
off her land.
This seems straightforward, and yet it is not at all obvious to the U. S.
Patent and Trademark Office, and the patent offices of many other
countries, who have granted tens of thousands of patents on the use of
human and animal genes to companies that only decoded them. Since
patents are only supposed to be granted for inventions that are useful,
nonobvious and new, biotech companies have argued that the decoded
gene is a new useful invention, even though that information is there for
anyone to discover. The patent ofﬁces, under tremendous pressure from
the biotech industry, accepted this argument to facilitate biotech innova-
tion. The biotech firms argued that they had no incentive to invest in
Transhuman Democracy
227

making a truly novel drug or gene therapy based on genetic discoveries
if they couldn’t have exclusive rights to that slice of the gene.
Understandably gene patents have outraged not only bioLuddites, but
scientists worried about research access to patented genes and public
health activists worried that gene patents will make gene-derived medi-
cines prohibitively expensive. Transhumanists also have a huge stake in
this debate since the genetic therapies we hope to have widely available
are both being motivated and restricted by this set of property rights. If
gene patents were necessary to spur useful innovation, there might be a
pragmatic reason for their use, but they appear to be having the opposite
effect, and be unnecessary to provide incentives for drug development.
For instance, all the anti-cholesterol “statins”—Lipitor, Zocor, Pravachol,
made by three different ﬁrms—target the same liver enzyme. Yet they all
work differently, and one drug, Baycol, had to be taken off the market be-
cause of side effects. If one ﬁrm had been able to get a patent on the gene
for that enzyme, the patent-holder would have prevented this very useful
diversity. Now research indicates that a signiﬁcant fraction of the popula-
tion could reduce their risk of heart disease and cancer by taking statins.
Discovered genes are not novel inventions, and increasingly, with
computerized models of proteomic expression, their function is obvious.
A democratic transhumanist approach would support the international
campaign to ban patents on discovered genes. All discovered genes, plant,
animal and human, should be considered the common property of hu-
manity. Countries should refuse to recognize U.S. and European gene
patents, and challenge the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intel-
lectual Property Rights (TRIPS) before the World Trade Organization.
The European acceptance of gene patents appears especially contra-
dictory since European conventions argue that the human genome
should not be modiﬁed since it is the “common heritage of mankind.”
At the same time, under enormous pressure from the biotech industry
and the United States, Europeans are granting and enforcing gene
patents. If the genome is a “common heritage” then it shouldn’t be
patented, as the EU Parliamentary Assembly has pointed out.
228
CITIZEN CYBORG

Newly invented genes are another matter, however. The U.S. Patent
and Trademark Ofﬁce ﬁrst granted a patent on a created life-form in 1980,
when the U.S. Supreme Court allowed the scientist Manas Chakrabarty to
patent bacteria he had genetically engineered to eat oil spills. Since then
hundreds of thousands of patents have been issued for genetically engi-
neered plants and animals, in the United States and the rest of the world.
One of the more famous patented mammals is the “onco-mouse,” a strain
of mice engineered to be cancer-prone to facilitate cancer research. Now
genetically engineered human cells are also being patented such as a line
of genetically engineered human stem cells that the biotech ﬁrm Geron
patented in 2003.
Again the stakes for our transhuman future are enormous, since
novel gene sequences will be crucial for human enhancement. Some
bioLuddites like Rifkin argue that there should be no “patents on life”
at all, since this violates the sanctity of the natural order, commodifying
Mother Nature, and so on. Forbidding patents on newly created genes
would mean that only nonprofit and government researchers would
work in this ﬁeld, which would slow innovation to a crawl.
Within the citizenship–property schema I outlined earlier it makes
perfect sense to allow animals without personhood to be owned, and to
allow patents on the creation of novel versions of them. We may set
aside large swaths of things as common property for aesthetic or eco-
logical reasons, refusing to allow them to be sold. But those things that
aren’t citizens or common property can be owned by individuals or
firms, and when they are inventions, they should be patentable. The
processes invented to manipulate human and animal DNA, such as
cloning methods or fertility treatments, should also be patentable. Only
beings with personhood are exempt from being property, since we each
own ourselves and can’t be alienated from ownership of ourselves.
One consequence of the self-ownership of persons is that we each own
our own genome, and anybody who wants to use our unique genetic code
for medical research or reproduction needs to secure our permission ﬁrst.
If someone clones us without permission that would violate our patent
Transhuman Democracy
229

on our own genetic code. If a biotech ﬁrm clones our stem cells for ther-
apies, we need to be asked and compensated. Our medical and genetic
information should also be private, at least from employers and insur-
ance companies, if not from public health ofﬁcials with legitimate epi-
demiological concerns.
A second consequence of self-ownership is that as soon as patented
genes, whether natural or created, ﬁnd their way into a self-aware citizen’s
body, that person becomes a co-owner of the patent. Any person born with
artiﬁcial patented genes has to be able to read their own gene sequences,
share that information and use it to make children. It would be unaccept-
able, a form of slavery, if someone had to pay a royalty to have a child with
their own genes. The law in the United States and Europe tacitly recognizes
this point since a gene has to be isolated outside of the human body before
it can be patented. But it is still a human gene sequence, discovered in the
human genome, whether it is decoded in a lab or inside the human body. It
is only patentable when it is outside the body of a person, as well as novel,
nonobvious and useful.
The principle that individuals are co-owners of novel genes that end
up in their bodies is also based on the 1987 U.S.PTO ruling that a “claim
directed to or including within its scope a human being will not be con-
sidered to be patentable subject matter” since the “grant of a limited,
but exclusive property right in a human being is prohibited by the Con-
stitution.” As mentioned earlier, Jeremy Rifkin and Stuart Newman have
tried to force the patent ofﬁce to specify exactly what a human being is
by filing for “humanzee” and “humouse” patents, without success.
Under the personhood theory of citizenship I’ve outlined here, the line
the U.S.PTO needs to draw is not between humans and non-humans but
between persons and non-persons. The 13th Amendment and human
rights law in general need to be reinterpreted to forbid property in per-
sons, not in humans.
It seems appropriate that persons should own their genomes since
the genome is an intimate element of our personal identity, and is dif-
ferent from other things we may place inside our bodies or brains. For
230
CITIZEN CYBORG

instance, we can distinguish between our ownership of our base DNA
and ownership of the DNA of other tissues transplanted into our body.
Even if transplanted tissue becomes as inextricable as our original tissue,
the immune system and the law can see the difference. We wouldn’t per-
mit a ﬁrm to repossess someone’s artiﬁcial heart, but we wouldn’t allow
the recipient of an artiﬁcial heart to start manufacturing knockoffs just
because it is a part of his body. Patents on genetically engineered human
stem cells lines or the DNA of embryos used to create replacement or-
gans should be similarly acceptable. But the genetic code of every cell in
our body has an especially integral feel.
People made with patented genes might be able to use their genes to
reproduce or give them away as part of “fair use,” but not be allowed to
sell them. The principle we currently use to determine which body parts
can be sold and which can’t is replaceability. We have fewer qualms with
the sale of blood or sperm than we do with the sale of kidneys. When
we can easily and cheaply regenerate a kidney—which won’t be for
some time—what exactly will we be protecting by forbidding sales of
kidneys? As transhuman technologies progress, just as critics of “body
commodiﬁcation” like Andrew Kimbrell worry, more parts of our body
and brain will be detachable, replaceable and commodifiable, and the
law will gradually need to acknowledge that our rights to self-ownership
include the rights to sell these replaceable parts. This was the persuasive
argument made ﬁfteen years ago by Lori Andrews in her classic essay
“My Body, My Property.” Andrews wrote: “I am advocating not that
people be treated by others as property, but only that they have the au-
tonomy to treat their own parts as property, particularly their regenerative
parts. Such an approach is helpful, rather than harmful, to people’s well-
being. It offers potential psychological, physical and economic beneﬁts to
individuals and provides a framework for handling evolving issues regard-
ing the control of extracorporeal tissues. It is time to start acknowledging
that people’s body parts are their personal property.”
This sounds to many like capitalism run amok. And I am very sym-
pathetic to the idea that many things, such as public lands, should re-
Transhuman Democracy
231

main uncommodiﬁed, the common property of all. If we own our own
genes, and we share 99.5% of our genes with all other human beings,
then that shared part of the genome is actually the common property of
all human beings. There are also occasions when it makes sense to treat
body parts as public property, such as when motorcyclists suffer brain
death from head injuries. In Belgium, Austria, Finland, France, Norway
and Denmark, “presumed consent” laws allow doctors to transplant or-
gans from the brain-dead unless the deceased has a “don’t donate” card.
Artiﬁcial organs, cloned organs and other therapies will probably make
it unnecessary to adopt this policy in the United States, which is fortu-
nate given that few Americans support a “presumed consent” system.
But just as we have taxes and powers of eminent domain that allow the
community to expropriate private wealth for the good of the commu-
nity, we may decide to selectively forego absolute self-ownership in the
body for the good of humanity, and in acknowledgment of the human
genome as shared public property.
VOUCHERS TO THE ENHANCEMENT SUPERMARKET
Using Public Policy to Encourage Enhancement
Transhumanists reject any coercion in genetic decision-making. If you
don’t want to live longer or be smarter, no problem. But that doesn’t
mean that a transhuman democracy shouldn’t encourage people to take
advantage of enhancements for themselves and their children. If the cur-
rent generation is obliged to enact public health measures to ensure the
greatest possible health and abilities in the next generation, and there is
no ethical difference between treatment and enhancement, then eventu-
ally we will need to adopt policies to encourage people to adopt genetic
enhancements. This is the conclusion of the profoundly important col-
laborative statement of four of America’s leading bioethicists—Allen
Buchanan, Dan Brock, Norman Daniels and Daniel Wikler—in their
2000 book From Chance to Choice: Genetics and Justice. In this landmark ar-
gument these four consider the many arguments against enhancement
232
CITIZEN CYBORG

and conclude in favor of the “permissibility of rights-respecting genetic
perfectionist policies”:
Through its democratic processes, a liberal society could decide to de-
vote resources to the continual enhancement of desirable human
characteristics—to embark on a process of genetic perfectionism—so
long as in doing so it did not compromise its commitment to justice
and the prevention of serious harm. Such a policy need not infringe
on individuals’ reproductive freedom, for example, if it only encour-
ages rather than coerces or unduly pressures prospective parents to
use enhancement technologies. . . . There is no basis for a blanket pro-
hibition of any public policy initiative designed to promote the use of
genetic technology for improvement rather than just for the preven-
tion of disease or disability.
In fact, say the four, society has an afﬁrmative obligation to encourage
safe and effective genetic screening, therapies and enhancements.
The use of germinal choice and genetic enhancement to ensure
greater health and ability is warranted by three concerns. First, we are
obliged by our concern for those citizens whose cancers and dementias
we prevent, and whose fullest potentials we enable. Second, we have
obligations to reduce the burden and costs of disease and stunted ability
on society. Third, we have an obligation to encourage as wide an adop-
tion of enhancements as possible in order to minimize the inequalities
that result from both natural genetic endowments and unequal access to
genetic enhancements.
Any enhancement that promises to make people so dramatically
superior in intelligence, longevity or health that it threatens social jus-
tice is an obvious candidate for subsidies and universal provision, not
for a ban. As bioethicist Peter Singer concludes in his essay “Shopping
at the Genetic Supermarket,” since a “free market in genetic enhance-
ment will widen the gap between the top and bottom strata of our so-
ciety, undermine belief in equality of opportunity, and close the ‘safety
Transhuman Democracy
233

valve’ of upward mobility,” then society should subsidize genetic en-
hancement services so everyone can afford them. We won’t be able to,
or want to, subsidize all enhancements, however; some will have to be
left to be purchased “out of pocket” in the genetic marketplace. So how
should we decide which enhancements should be in our universal health
care plans, and which should be in the market?
A ﬁrst step in answering this question is to dispense with the idea that
we are only obliged to help the sick and disadvantaged. We have an ethi-
cal responsibility to help one another achieve our highest potentials, not
just the current human average. The enhancement of ordinary to extra-
ordinary abilities is as much a social good as the correction of a disability
or illness. When we educate children we don’t devote all our resources to
kids performing below average because we also want the brighter kids to
achieve as much as they can. We don’t devote all our Olympic resources
to the para-Olympics because we are also delighted to see how much the
most talented can achieve. According to the World Health Organization,
the mission of medicin e “is a state of complete physical, mental and so-
cial well-being and not merely the absence of disease or inﬁrmity.” So at
least our ﬁrst cut should be that enhancements should be included “in the
plan” along with therapies.
One method of setting health spending priorities is the Quality-
Adjusted Life Year or “QALY,” which has been applied, more or less,
in the Oregon Medicaid system. The QALY idea proposes that the goal
of social spending should be to maximize the amount of healthy, happy
life produced for each dollar spent. If one year of healthy, happy life is
worth 1.0 and being dead is 0.0, then having different kinds of illnesses
and disabilities is a quality of life between 0.0 and 1.0. If a thousand peo-
ple live seventy years in perfect health, that community produced 70,000
QALYs. But if they all are burdened by disease and pain, and have their
lives shortened, then they create many fewer QALYs.
Next, we introduce speciﬁc diseases and their treatments. If a person
with untreated lung cancer can expect to live one year in pain (say, 0.5
QALY) and the average lung cancer patient who undergoes treatment
234
CITIZEN CYBORG

lives three years in pain (experiencing about 1.5 QALYs), then the lung
cancer treatment buys a patient 1 QALY. The per QALY cost of that
treatment can then be compared to a treatment for childhood leukemia,
which gives an excellent prognosis of complete recovery versus certain
death without treatment. Treatment for childhood leukemia might pro-
duce something like 50–70 QALYs for the same cost as the lung cancer
treatment. Based on this comparison it is clear that we should prioritize
treatment for childhood leukemia over lung cancer treatment. We may
still pay for both out of public monies, but if there had to be a choice we
would pay to treat the child, and ask the lung cancer victim to pay for
their own treatment “out of pocket.”
QALYs help set priorities for our subsidies for preventive, acute and
end-of-life treatments. Since we spend a majority of our health care re-
sources on caring for people in their last year or two of life, the QALY
framework argues strongly for shifting spending to preventive medicine
that extends healthy life. Again, that’s not to say we won’t spend resources
to try to cure cancers with poor prognoses or spend nursing resources on
the terminally ill. But since every dollar we spend on prenatal care reduces
our need for neonatal intensive care by three dollars, then we probably
need to spend more on prenatal care.
The QALY method applies equally well to enhancement technolo-
gies (Figure 12.1). A genetic or pharmaceutical or nanotech intervention
that adds ﬁfty years of additional healthy life for a child or an adult is an
enormous addition of QALYs whether it adds those years from ages 20
to 70 or from ages 70 to 120. And such an enhancement would compare
pretty favorably to most preventive medicine or medical therapies at
whatever cost.
Enhancements that improve abilities, intelligence and our daily quo-
tient of joy redefine the goalpost of “1.0.” As the WHO definition of
health points out, why should our expected quality of life, 1.0, be just
the average instead of the best that we know is possible? The average per-
son in the United States is overweight, has an IQ of 100 and is miserable
half the time. In a transhuman QALY scheme 1.0 would be having, at
Transhuman Democracy
235

least, Michael Jordan’s musculature, Stephen Hawking’s brain and the
Dalai Lama’s twinkle. Enhancements will raise the bar on all the things
that health care workers and patients use to deﬁne quality of life:
• ability to perform social roles
• physiological condition, including mobility, exhaustion and pain
• emotional condition, including stability, anxiety, depression and
powerlessness
• cognitive condition, including alertness, memory and decision-
making ability
• sense of well-being, including pain, interest and lethargy.
BioLuddites will seize on this raising of the 1.0 bar, this quality of life in-
ﬂation, and argue that it harms the disabled and unenhanced by making
their lives seem less rich and joyful by comparison, and by reducing their
chances at succeeding in life. This complaint applies equally well, however,
to good nutrition or the use of anesthesia: Imagine how people who suf-
fered from scurvy or who endured amputations by biting a bullet felt when
they discovered all that could have been avoided. Does teaching people to
read do an injustice to the illiterate? Inequality needs to be redressed by en-
suring equal access, not by refusing to allow people to live long, able, happy
lives because it makes those with short, less able, miserable lives envious.
236
CITIZEN CYBORG
FIGURE 12.1
Calculating QALYs in a Transhuman Health Care System
Birth
Maximum Life
Expectancy
QALYs possible with transhuman
technologies that improve longevity
and the ordinary quality of life
Current average
QALYs per life
Future 1.0
(Superior
Quality of Life)
Current 1.0
(Average
Quality of Life)
75 Years

Another complaint often made of the QALY scheme is that it is im-
possible to ﬁgure out how much each person in a society would value
being in each possible state. In particular, the healthy and able-bodied
tend to underestimate the quality of life of those who are sick and dis-
abled. We all have an enormous capacity to ﬁnd happiness in life despite
our situations. But if we really believed that, in the absolute scheme of
things, it was just as good to be blind, lame or sick then we wouldn’t try
to reduce disease and disability at all. If QALYs are assessed and priorities
set in an open democratic process we can take account of the voices and
experiences of the sick and disabled, and still set policies that aim to re-
duce disease and disability.
Oregon’s experience demonstrates that the QALY scheme can be the
basis of an open, democratic priority-setting process that includes a full
range of voices and values. Oregon developed its priority weights on
disease-treatment pairs through many years of public meetings, surveys
and legislative debate. Other values, such as the egalitarian preference for
the needs of the disabled and poor, were addressed in that debate and in-
cluded to adjust the equations.
Without egalitarianism as part of the equation the QALY scheme
could be interpreted to argue that giving someone with a genius 140 IQ
ten more points is as valuable as giving someone with a subpar 90 IQ ten
more points. But intuitively we understand that giving greater priority
to treatments for the poorest, sickest and most disabled will generally
produce more happiness for those individuals, and more good for soci-
ety as a whole. Even with a little QALY afﬁrmative action for the treat-
ments that beneﬁt the poor, sick and disabled, treatments to enhance or-
dinary intelligence, happiness or strength should still be covered under
the scheme if they are cheap and beneﬁcial enough. Otherwise, those
enhancements could be purchased out of pocket in the marketplace.
A QALY schema would also help adjudicate which enhancements
should be actively discouraged. For instance, the transhumanist writer Nick
Bostrom distinguishes between intrinsically rewarding enhancements,
which beneﬁt the individual no matter how many people receive them, and
Transhuman Democracy
237

“positional enhancements,” which only beneﬁt an individual if they are not
widely shared. The intrinsically rewarding enhancements should be en-
couraged and subsidized, he argues, while positional enhancements should
at least be discouraged if not banned. Greater intelligence or longevity are
intrinsically rewarding enhancements, so that both the people who receive
those gifts and the society that allows people to choose them are better off.
Even if everybody else gets smarter, it is still better to be smarter than less
smart, and a smarter society is better off overall. But if parents widely used
genetic modiﬁcation to make their children taller, which has no intrinsic
value but is only valuable if your child is taller than their peers, they would
be taking some level of risk for no overall social beneﬁt. Subsidizing en-
hancement that brought the shortest 10% of kids up to average height
would produce some QALYs, but subsidizing height enhancement for a
majority of children would produce no QALYs and might involve health
risks that would rob society of QALYs. A policy permitting height en-
hancement for the shortest 10–20% would still, however, be far more gen-
erous than the U.S. Food and Drug Administration restriction that human
growth hormone only be prescribable for the shortest 1% of children.
Selecting a child’s sex, sexual preference or skin color does not pro-
duce QALYs. These germinal choices should be permitted in a society
that values procreative liberty, but need not be subsidized in the service
of procreative equality. Choices that actually reduce QALYs, such as cut-
ting off your own healthy leg, or choosing a deaf embryo over a hearing
embryo, or refusing simple, safe treatments that increase a child’s qual-
ity of life, should be strongly discouraged by society. We may value in-
dividual liberty and parental prerogatives so highly that we stop short of
banning these choices. But, as with smoking and other social vices, we
can ratchet up the pressure through public education and professional
self-regulation, and by obliging people to defend their choices as sane
and consistent with strongly held beliefs such as religious faith. Society
need not remain neutral toward bad choices just because it permits us
the freedom to make them. Figure 12.2 presents the range of regulatory
options that might be applied in a transhuman democracy.
238
CITIZEN CYBORG

GETTING A PLAN
So the QALY scheme is just the starting point for a public, democratic
discussion about which technologies should be “in the plan” and univer-
sally available. QALYs give us a framework for talking about the conse-
quences for liberty and equality of different distributions of technology.
Cynics will respond that spending priorities in the real world are deter-
mined by the best-ﬁnanced political action committees and the most ex-
pensive lobbyists. The United States doesn’t even have a universal health
care system, despite consistent public support over the last century,
because of the opposition of doctors and big business.
Which is all too sadly true. But, as Jane Addams said, the solution
to the problems of democracy is always more democracy. In every
other industrialized country, people have to struggle within their par-
liaments for generous funding and rational priorities for health care. In
the United States we have to wage a two-pronged struggle, to create an
equitable, universal and cost-effective health care system, and to en-
sure that it generously provides all beneficial technologies including
enhancements.
Transhuman Democracy
239
FIGURE 12.1
Options for Regulating Technologies in a Liberal Democracy
Mandatory, no exceptions, e.g., emissions controls on cars, and quarantine
of dangerous infections
Required, but with religious exemptions, e.g., the military draft, 
vaccinations
Publicly funded and encouraged, but not obligatory, e.g., public school
Encouraged, but unsubsidized, e.g., exercise
Publicly funded, but not encouraged, e.g., birth control or abortion in
some states
Available unsubsidized on the market, e.g., over-the-counter drugs
Available, but controlled by prescription, e.g., Prozac, Ritalin, etc.
Discouraged, by taxation and education, but not banned, e.g., smoking
Banned, e.g., illegal drugs, some weapons, dangerous toxins

One of the principal complaints about a universal health care system,
and attractions of the libertarian free-market vision, is that markets are
better at providing individual choices and satisfying individual prefer-
ences than governments. But it is possible to imagine a universal, egali-
tarian health care system that makes enhancements widely available
while accommodating radically different values, and radically different
calculations of QALY. The answer is to permit consumers to purchase
health care from competing health plans with a voucher. This was actu-
ally the system proposed by President Clinton in 1994, and bioethicist
Ezekiel Emanuel gives the idea of a universal voucher system with com-
peting, radically different health plans a very interesting defense in his
book The Ends of Human Life. Under such a system Catholic hospitals
and health care workers could form their own Catholic health care net-
work, and enroll consumers who don’t want contraception, abortion,
euthanasia or embryonic stem cells. The money they saved could then
be spent on extensive end-of-life care. Other plans could choose to pro-
vide access to germinal choice, stem cells, artiﬁcial organs, cybernetic
enhancements and cryonic preservation for families who valued them,
by, for instance, reducing care for the permanently unconscious. So long
as every citizen is assured a basic set of health beneﬁts, and all those who
want enhancements for themselves or their kids have the choice to use
their health care voucher to buy into a plan that provides enhancements,
the system would provide both equity and choice.
But even if the rich do get more enhancements in the short term, it’s
probably still good for the rest of us in the long term. The ﬁrst personal
computers were expensive and difﬁcult to operate. Eventually usability
improved, prices dropped and personal computers became accessible to
people in the developing world. If the wealthy stay on the bleeding edge
of life extension treatments, nano-implants and cryo-suspension, the re-
sult will be cheaper, higher-quality technology. The poor bore the brunt
of nineteenth-century medical experimentation. Perhaps the rich should
take a turn as guinea pigs this time.
240
CITIZEN CYBORG

13
Defending the Future
The bioLuddites are unhappy with the idea of transhuman technologies being reg-
ulated under existing agencies, such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
which are mandated only to ensure safety and efﬁcacy. Instead they want new
agencies empowered to ban technologies on the grounds of vague long-term risks
such as the future conﬂict between humans and posthumans. Consequently trans-
humanists should promote the use of the existing agencies to regulate transhuman
technologies in order to protect more liberal access.
Nonetheless, we do need to take some long-term risks seriously, especially the
problem of human–posthuman solidarity. In this chapter I review several ways of
working to minimize the threat of a human–posthuman schism. One is to make so-
cieties highly tolerant of diversity so that they might be better prepared to accom-
modate transhuman diversity. Another is to build global institutions that protect
civil rights and keep the peace. A third is to ensure that all beings allowed powers
signiﬁcantly greater than those of unenhanced human beings are endowed with
empathy for humanity and a moral code. I discuss the relationship of empathy and
moral reasoning to citizenship, and the challenge of respecting cognitive liberty in a
future in which our emotions, ethics and beliefs can be directly examined.
REGULATING FOR SAFETY NOT HUBRIS
The ecological movement has grown increasingly anxious about the
health and environmental risks of nanomaterials, and for legitimate rea-
241

sons. Most of the 87,000 industrial chemicals in use have never been
fully tested for their toxicity. Evidence has mounted that a class of these
industrial chemicals mimic the hormone estrogen, disrupting the en-
docrine system and causing birth defects. Endocrine disruption during
embryonic development is implicated in falling sperm counts, rising
rates of male infertility, structural deformities of the genitals, testicular
cancer and impairment of neurological and immune functions, both in
humans and in animals.
Under the Clinton administration the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) began a program to complete the testing of the 4,000 or
so chemicals produced in quantities of a million pounds or more each
year. Less than half of these chemicals had been tested for the principal
hazards—their acute and chronic toxicity, their effects on reproduction
and development, whether they cause cell mutations and cancer, and
their effect on the environment. Only 21 of the 830 companies making
these chemicals in the United States had conducted all these tests on all
their chemicals. The Clinton administration ordered the EPA to work
with chemical manufacturers and the environmental agencies around
the world to speed up the testing. Fortunately, like human enhance-
ment, toxicological and epidemiological research is also benefiting
from the rapid advance of the molecular and computational sciences.
The EPA’s endocrine disruption research program is now using “com-
putational toxicology” to prioritize which chemicals need to be tested
for endocrine effects. “Oncomice” are making it easier to test for car-
cinogens. 
But even complete toxicity testing of each chemical in isolation
won’t really satisfy environmental and health questions since the chemi-
cals behave differently when they mix in our bodies. In 2003, when the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention randomly tested the blood
and urine of 2,500 Americans, they found 89 different industrial chemi-
cals, including pesticides, herbicides, pest repellents and disinfectants.
The concentration in most people’s blood was below the toxic level for
each chemical, but the cumulative effects are unknowable.
242
CITIZEN CYBORG

So although we can never be certain of the safety of any new mater-
ial, it is clear that we need to expand the testing, control and cleanup of
industrial chemicals nationally and internationally. Unfortunately the
chemical industry suppresses and falsiﬁes information about the toxicity
of chemicals, and pays off (mostly Republican) legislators with hundreds
of millions of dollars of contributions. Corporate-deformed democracy
allows industry to “externalize” the environmental and health costs of
production. The Bush administration in particular has devoted itself to
an aggressive erosion of the EPA’s mandate and administrative easing of
environmental regulations for farmers, oil drillers, miners, industry and
the military. The latest Bush budget calls for reductions in funding of re-
search on endocrine disruptors, pesticides and toxics. The problem is not
the abundance of technology but the deﬁcit of democracy.
New nanomaterials need to be subjected to the same strict toxico-
logical scrutiny as these other chemicals and materials. But there is noth-
ing distinctly different about nanotechnology compared to other indus-
trial materials that justiﬁes the demand by some extreme environmental
groups for a global “precautionary principle” moratorium on nanotech-
nology. In fact a report released by Greenpeace in August 2003, “Future
Technologies, Today’s Choices,” looked at the risks and beneﬁts of nan-
otechnology and concluded that while industry and government should
commit to testing nanomaterial safety, no new laws or regulatory agen-
cies are required to govern nanotechnology. In the United States, for in-
stance, the EPA has the authority under the Toxic Substances Control
Act to require that nanomaterials be tested, to gather information about
their safety and use and to issue regulations for their control. Concerns
about more distant risks, such as gray goo, are being addressed by the
Foresight Institute and Center for Responsible Nanotechnology with de-
signs for “limited molecular nanomanufacturing” that can’t get out of
control.
In general, the regulatory agencies required to ensure the safety of
transhuman technology are already in place, and we just need to make
sure they are given the funding, authority and independence from corpo-
Defending the Future
243

rate inﬂuence to do their job. But the bioLuddites don’t want to give the
EPA or the Food and Drug Administration the mandate to regulate the
safety of transhuman technologies. They want agencies like the United
Kingdom’s Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA),
which is empowered to forbid things because of vague social anxieties.
For instance, in 2003 the HFEA ruled that a family could not test the
DNA of their invitro fertilized embryos to decide which one to implant.
The parents wanted to make sure that the baby would be a tissue match
for his or her 3-year-old brother, Charlie, who had a rare and lethal blood
disorder. With stem cells from the new baby’s umbilical cord they might
be able to save Charlie’s life. But the HFEA turned them down, arguing
that would be the ﬁrst step toward “designer babies.” The HFEA pon-
dered “the psychological burden that may be placed on a child who was
an ‘engineered’ match.” But they didn’t consider the special bond that
might exist between siblings when one had saved the other’s life. So the
Whitakers had the procedure done in the United States, which does not
yet have an HFEA. Hundreds of parents are now having savior baby test-
ing done around the United States.
Although we are more liberal than Britain and some parts of Europe,
the U.S. government has been regulating the safety of human genetic en-
gineering. It first began regulating genetic engineering back in 1974
when the National Institutes of Health established the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee (RAC). The RAC ensured that genetically en-
gineered organisms were handled safely and weren’t released into the
environment. It developed guidelines for human gene therapy trials in
1983, well before any trials were carried out. All gene therapy protocols
funded by the NIH are reviewed by RAC, and some privately funded
gene therapy research is voluntarily submitted to RAC review. The NIH
examines both the safety of the clinical trials as well as other ethical is-
sues. In 1997, the NIH convened its ﬁrst conference on genetic enhance-
ments, and the RAC has announced that it will not accept proposals for
germline genetic modiﬁcations. So the RAC already fulﬁlls the demand
of many bioLuddites that there be public debate and due caution before
we permit germline therapy or enhancements.
244
CITIZEN CYBORG

But the RAC has only statutory power to review publicly funded re-
search. The Food and Drug Administration has the wider mandate
under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act and Public Health Ser-
vice Act to regulate pharmaceuticals and medical devices. Before a new
drug or medical therapy can be used on humans, whether developed
with private or public funds, it must pass through the clinical testing
regime of the FDA. The FDA announced its intention to regulate
human gene therapy in 1984, and its Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research (CBER) oversees and regulates genetic research. Researchers
who want to test genetic therapies in humans have to prove to the FDA
that animal studies demonstrate an adequate level of safety for Phase I,
II and III trials. After the death of Jesse Gelsinger in 1999 in a University
of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment, the FDA closed down trials at
institutions found not to be in compliance with FDA safety rules. The
FDA has also asserted that human reproductive cloning trials must go
through their approval process, and that they have no plans to approve
any reproductive cloning since it is still too unsafe.
The bioLuddites assert that the FDA’s mandate is not broad
enough to regulate the new genetic and reproductive therapies. But
the FDA has repeatedly insisted that their mandate is broad enough
and most legal observers agree. Attorney Christine Willgoos con-
cluded in a 2001 review of FDA regulation of cloning and germline
therapy published in the American Journal of Law and Medicine that
“the FDA already has appropriate mechanisms in place to respond to
the concerns surrounding cloning and germline gene therapy tech-
nology.” As the President’s Council on Bioethics pointed out in 2004,
the FDA’s mandate may need to be broadened a bit to include invitro
fertilization, pre-implantation genetic diagnosis and other fertility
techniques, which, unlike fertility drugs, aren’t required to go
through FDA approval. But this function does not require a new
agency. As galling as it is to the libertarian transhumanists and ban-
minded bioLuddites alike, the FDA, EPA and the equivalent regula-
tory agencies around the world are our best hope for a liberal public
policy toward human enhancement technologies.
Defending the Future
245

246
CITIZEN CYBORG
ENSURING SOLIDARITY AND OUR RIGHT TO MISANTHROPY
We might create a group of people much smarter than us, that might want to
kill us. Or we might want to kill them. If we can’t go 100 years without a
genocide, then we have no business altering the species.
—GEORGE ANNAS, 
quoted in “Will Genetic Engineering Kill Us?”
Wired, April 16, 2003
[Science] is man’s gradual conquest, ﬁrst of space and time, then of matter as
such, then of his own body and those of other living beings, and ﬁnally the sub-
jugation of the dark and evil elements in his own soul.
—J.B.S. HALDANE, 
“Daedalus, or Science and the Future”
Siding with the X-Men
In his 2002 piece “The Transhumanists” in the National Review Online,
Wesley J. Smith argues that “transhumanism envisions a stratiﬁed soci-
ety presided over by genetically improved ‘post-human’ elites. Obvi-
ously, in such a society, ordinary humans wouldn’t be regarded as the
equals of those produced through genetic manipulation.”
Hopefully it is clear by now that the subjugation of humanity is not on
the transhumanist agenda. As I propose in the previous chapter, it is easy to
imagine a tiering of rights in a transhuman society that does not allow
posthumans any more rights than humans, and social policies that avoid
polarization by making enhancements widely available. Occasionally trans-
humanists have conﬁrmed the worst fears of critics like Smith by express-
ing indifference to the future of humanity. For instance, the computer
scientist Hans Moravec has written that he doesn’t care that robots will re-
place humans since evolutionary succession is the natural order of things.
Some extropians have expressed a similarly Nietzschean disregard for
the fate of the average human. Extropian misanthropy was memorably

satirized by left-wing transhumanist Ken Macleod in his novel Cassini Divi-
sion, in which extropians turn Jupiter into a supercomputer, upload them-
selves and launch attacks on a socialist solar civilization.
The X-Men mythos provides another popular science fiction
metaphor for a potential human–posthuman schism. In the X-Men uni-
verse the conﬂict is between the posthuman supremacist Magneto, who
believes posthumans should rule over humans, and Professor Xavier,
who believes humans and posthumans should live in equality and soli-
darity. In the ﬁrst issue of the X-Men comic in 1963, Jean Grey asks Pro-
fessor Xavier “Just what exactly is our real mission?” Xavier answers:
“Jean, there are many mutants walking the earth and more are born
each year. . . . Some hate the human race and wish to destroy it! Some
feel mutants should be the real rulers of earth! It is our job to protect
mankind from those . . . real mutants!” In the next panel the leader of
the evil mutants, Magneto, rants “[I shall] make homo sapiens bow to
the homo superior.”
The potential development of a posthuman elite hostile to humanity
was addressed in the WTA’s 1998 Transhumanist Frequently Asked
Questions 1.0 (“FAQ1”). FAQ1 says that ensuring the mutual tolerance,
social solidarity and political equality of humans and non-humans is a
central mission of transhumanism. But it also acknowledges that
posthumanity may become so radically different that coexistence with
humans would be impossible, and that then, ideally, posthumans should
be able to separate or migrate to space. But “if the posthumans are not
bound by human-friendly laws and they don’t have a moral code that
says that it would be wrong, they might then decide to take actions that
would entail the extinction of the human species.”
FAQ1 suggests three measures to ensure a “Xavier” outcome. First,
we are urged to promote tolerance of diversity and compassionate sol-
idarity. That will build the kind of society that will be ready for trans-
human diversity, and inculcate appropriate values in those who eventu-
ally get enhanced. Second, the world needs to “build stable democratic
traditions and constitutions, ideally expanding the rule of law to the
Defending the Future
247

international plane as well as the national.” Those global institutions will
protect human and posthuman rights, enact policies—such as technology
transfer—to reduce conﬂict, and intervene when conﬂicts break out.
Third, FAQ1 urges that “values of tolerance and respect for human
well-being are incorporated as core elements of the programming” of
machine minds. The authors are explicitly advocating the work here of
people like computer scientist Eliezer Yudkowsky and his Singularity
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, to design pro-human “friendliness”
into AI. But why propose that machine minds be shackled by pro-
human sentiments and morality, while posthumans are only exhorted
to be nice and punished if they act badly? Wouldn’t it be more consis-
tent, and safer, to encourage posthumans to adopt the same moral and
emotional safeguards that the FAQ1 proposes for the machines? Is it
possible to imagine a “liberty-respecting” policy that discourages mis-
anthropy among posthumans?
EMPATHY AND MORAL REASONING
We may be able . . . to control our passions by some more direct method than
fasting and flagellation . . . to deal with perverted instincts by physiology
rather than prison.
—J.B.S. HALDANE, 
“Daedalus, or Science and the Future”
So who is to tell us that being human and having dignity means sticking with
a set of emotional responses that are the accidental byproduct of our evolu-
tionary history? . . . Why don’t we simply accept our destiny as creatures
who modify themselves?
—FRANCIS FUKUYAMA, 
Our Posthuman Future
The problem with designing friendliness or empathy into machine
minds is that we don’t yet understand friendliness and empathy in the
248
CITIZEN CYBORG

organic human mind. We are still debating whether altruism, empathy
and sociability are mostly sociobiological or mostly socialization. The
sociobiological view of empathy is central, for instance, to Fukuyama’s
complaints about human enhancement. Fukuyama believes that if we
allow people to change any of the biological features that make up the
“Factor X” of humanness we will become too different to feel part of the
same racial community. But if social solidarity is rooted in the sociobio-
logical instinct to help the reproductive success of people who share our
genes, then why would we feel more solidarity with someone of a dif-
ferent race on the other side of the planet than with our cousin who got
some life extension and intelligence tweaks? Basing solidarity on biolog-
ical similarity is as much a formula for conﬂict within the human race as
between the human race and posthumans.
In fact, Fukuyama speciﬁcally defends instincts to dominance, aggres-
sion and tribalism as part of human nature and suggests they have adap-
tive importance: “What if you decide you don’t like aggressive children,
since aggression is the root of violence and school shootings, and so forth?
So, either through drugs or through some sort of genetic intervention,
you discover the source of this kind of aggression. Then you no longer
have either innovation or people just standing up for principle, because it
turns out that in the human psyche it all comes from the same source.”
Fukuyama is speciﬁcally concerned that socialist experiments, supposedly
defeated by innate selﬁshness and clannishness, might succeed with the
help of enhancement technologies that removed those propensities.
Even if the root of social solidarity is a sociobiological impulse to
identify with similar creatures, that doesn’t really preclude solidarity
with chimps and posthumans, and doesn’t naturally suggest the brother-
hood of man. So why shouldn’t the impulse also be expanded beyond
human-racism to solidarity with “the well-being of all sentience” as Bud-
dhism, transhumanism and the animal rights movement advocate? If the
impulse is that malleable, perhaps we can just set aside altogether the
idea that our morals spring from our genes and focus on the empathy
we feel for other creatures.
Defending the Future
249

Empathy is the ability to imagine that someone else feels the kind of
emotions that we do, to place ourselves in their shoes. Since we want
our own lives to continue, we can sympathize with others who also
don’t want to be killed. Empathy is therefore intrinsic to the capacities
that make us persons in the ﬁrst place: self-awareness, self-concepts, de-
sires and abstract reasoning. Empathy is so closely associated with the
capacities necessary for legal personhood that theorists like Joseph
Fletcher, Daniel Dennett, Tristram Engelhardt and Joel Feinberg have in-
cluded empathy and sensitivity to moral censure as necessary elements
of personhood.
Many lines of research are converging to suggest the centrality of
empathy to personhood. Howard Gardner has argued that “emotional
intelligence,” including an understanding of one’s own and other’s feel-
ings, is separate from and equal in importance to the abilities tested on
IQ tests. Researchers like neurologist Antonio Damasio have shown that
our emotions and our response to the emotions of others are much
more intimately involved in our reasoning than had been previously
imagined. Neuroscientists Arthur Craig and John Allman have identiﬁed
“spindle cells” and the “insulae” as brain structures that process our
sense of self, our internal monitoring of our own existence, as well as
our feelings of outrage at lying and injustice and our feelings of love and
shame. These structures are activated by both rational calculations and
moral decision-making. We share these structures most closely with the
great apes. Human babies only develop spindle cells in their fourth
month, and they gradually grow after that.
It makes sense then for a society to agree that all mature persons should
have the capacity for empathy. Persons without empathy are disabled citi-
zens who need our help to be returned to the full cognitive capacities re-
quired to be fully self-governing and responsible citizens. Disruptions in
one of the brain processes necessary for recognizing other beings’ emo-
tions, associating them with one’s own and feeling some kind of empathic
response lead to asocial or anti-social behavior. For instance, autism is a
brain disorder one of whose symptoms is an inability to understand or in-
250
CITIZEN CYBORG

terpret other peoples’ feelings. Although the autistic can have wonderful
compensatory savant abilities, just as with blindness and other disabilities,
society has an obligation to ensure that as few people as possible suffer from
this disability, and that we try to ﬁnd a cure. Although the autistic are gen-
erally too impaired to be harmful to themselves or others, other kinds of
brain damage and genetic predispositions have been linked to aggression
and sociopathic behavior, and there is an even stronger case for their pre-
vention and cure.
Short of severe mental disability, research shows that everyone’s per-
sonality can be described as a mix of five basic characteristics, all of
which are substantially inherited and stable across one’s life: Openness
to Experience, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness and
Neuroticism. One of the “ﬁve-factor” researchers, Kerry Jang at the Uni-
versity of British Columbia, has found that agreeableness or sociability,
and associated beliefs and attitudes, are especially strongly inﬂuenced by
genes. People who score high on sociability are more compassionate,
trusting and helpful, whereas people low in sociability are uncoopera-
tive, unsympathetic and easily irritated. Jang also ﬁnds these personality
traits related to political attitudes. For instance, people who inherit high
sociability were more likely to favor gender equality and open-door poli-
cies for immigrants.
As philosopher Mark Walker suggests in his essay “Genetic Virtue,”
society could reap tremendous benefits by identifying the genes and
neurochemicals necessary for empathy and cooperation, encouraging
noncoercive screening and therapy to ensure that all citizens have them,
and giving incentives for people to select for them in children and am-
plify them in themselves. If we ﬁnd that our innate drives are far more
selﬁsh than altruistic, more tribal than universal, more hierarchical than
egalitarian, we can encourage one another to use brain technologies
to temper these impulses. Far from making us less human, moral self-
improvement may be our most radical assertion of human reason and
achievement. Referring to his theory that culture is coded in “memes,”
Richard Dawkins wrote in The Selﬁsh Gene that “We have the power to
Defending the Future
251

defy the selﬁsh genes of our birth and, if necessary, the selﬁsh memes of
our indoctrination. We can even discuss ways of deliberately cultivating
and nurturing pure, disinterested altruism—something that has no place
in nature, something that has never existed before in the whole history
of the world. We are built as gene machines and cultured as meme ma-
chines, but we have the power to turn against our creators. We, alone on
earth, can rebel against the tyranny of the selﬁsh replicators.”
Conversely, transhuman technologies—genetic, pharmaceutical or
cybernetic—will also make it possible to eradicate or suppress impulses
to empathy and solidarity. Magneto-ites or Ayn Randians could “liber-
ate” their selﬁshness from empathy. Although we want to create a soci-
ety that is as open and tolerant of body modiﬁcation, germinal choices
and brain self-management as possible, there is no reason for even the
most liberal society to remain neutral toward whether the next genera-
tion has more or less capacity for aggression and selﬁshness, or empathy
and cooperation. We can respect liberty and still encourage people to
care about the greater good for the greater number.
Some Left bioLuddites point to the history of eugenics to suggest
that efforts to modify the biological bases of anti-social behavior will
be directed at the poor, ignoring the crimes of the rich. This wasn’t
true of all eugenicists, however. The birth control campaigner Mar-
garet Sanger, although a sometime supporter of the eugenics move-
ment, rejected the idea that criminality or race should be connected
to eugenic improvement. Instead she thought that the genes that en-
courage war-making, such as selfishness, would be a better target:
“Felonies may be great events, locally, but they do not induce cata-
strophes. The proclivities of the war-makers are infinitely more dan-
gerous than those of the aberrant beings whom from time to time the
law may dub as criminal. Consistent and portentous selfishness, com-
bined with dullness of imagination, is probably just as transmissible
as want of self-control.”
Nonetheless, the technologies of brain control will probably ﬁrst be
applied to the rehabilitation and control of criminals rather than to the
252
CITIZEN CYBORG

power elite, and we will have to carefully balance liberty against the
public good. Yet the civil liberties issues raised by the use of empathy
boosters, aggression suppressants and morality chips in criminal reha-
bilitation are already with us. Many psychiatric disorders cause people
to commit crimes they wouldn’t have when medicated, and we are
still divided over the culpability of the mentally ill for those crimes.
Since testosterone is the principal driver of libido and aggression, nine
U.S. states mandate that repeat rapists submit to injections that sup-
press testosterone, or have their testicles removed. Other states make
chemical or surgical castration optional, but link it to earlier parole.
Studies find that chemical or surgical castration dramatically reduces
the return to sexual violence. A study of German rapists who volun-
teered for surgical castration found that only 3% repeated their crimes
compared with 46% for noncastrated offenders. Libertarians and the
American Civil Liberties Union have condemned mandatory chemical
castration, but the option has been enthusiastically embraced by many
offenders who are happier when freed from their obsessive, violent
impulses.
It will take much passionate debate to deﬁne the appropriate ways
to encourage empathy and cooperation while avoiding liberty-eroding
coercion and campaigns against thought-crime. But democratic soci-
eties can and should encourage sociability and empathy for all sentient
beings. Subsidized prenatal care could provide genetic screening for
gene markers for autism, psychopathy, aggression and impairments in
the cognitive capacities necessary for empathy. The health care system
can then make available genetic, pharmaceutical and nanomedical
therapies to correct those deficits. Just as we ask people to submit to
driver’s tests and ask potential employees to offer proof of citizenship,
people could be asked for proof that they have fully functional capaci-
ties for empathy. Conversely, laws may be required to stop businesses
and the military from selecting for people with lower capacities for em-
pathy, or providing technologies that facilitate the robotic pursuit of
orders or profits.
Defending the Future
253

ELECTRONIC SUPEREGOS
Some sociobiologists believe that even our innate understanding of so-
cial justice may have a genetic basis. Swiss researchers Ernst Fehr and
Simon Gächter have been exploring the apparently innate drive we have
to punish people who cheat society, which they call “altruistic punish-
ment.” In experiment after experiment people will go out of their way
to punish people who break the rules of games, hoard or otherwise
ﬂaunt cooperative expectations. According to Fehr, “The emotional sat-
isfaction of dispensing justice seems to spur them on.”
Punishment of “free riders,” people who beneﬁt from social cooper-
ation without cooperating themselves, has long been recognized as an
essential feature of social organization. But Fehr and Gächter’s work
suggests that the drive to punish free-riders may be innate, which makes
perfect sense in terms of the “group selectionist” account of genes. If
there is group selection, altruistic genes good for the group’s chances for
survival would be selected for even if they reduce the individual’s likeli-
hood of reproducing.
Empathy, a pro-social orientation or the impulse to punish free-riders,
by itself is the emotional driver of moral behavior. In order to behave
morally we also need moral reasoning, an understanding of the rules of
conduct and the consequences of our actions. Is it OK for someone to
steal to feed their kids? Empathy for the shopkeeper might say no, empa-
thy for the parent and kids might say yes, and empathy for the society as a
whole say no again. We need some model of decision-making to decide
which way our empathy should cut.
In the 1970s, Harvard psychologist Lawrence Kohlberg discovered
that children and adults develop moral reasoning through six stages.
Each stage is more sophisticated than the one before, and someone at a
latter stage incorporates the insights from the previous stages. The ﬁrst
stage is pure selﬁshness, anything that the child wants is what is right.
That gets generalized to a Stage Two ethics of whatever anyone wants is
what is right. You scratch my back, I scratch yours, we’re all happy. Stage
254
CITIZEN CYBORG

Three defines morality as good intentions, and Stage Four defines
morality as obeying laws and protecting the social order. People at Stage
Five reason that we all have obligations to follow the rules of a democ-
ratically based social contract that protects individual rights and inter-
ests. People at Stage Six are committed to a democratic social contract
but also to universal ethical principles that can oblige acts of conscience
such as civil disobedience.
Kohlberg was accused by some scholars of political bias since his ﬁnal
stages are basically liberal democratic values. But he found that children
and adults from around the world worked through the ﬁrst ﬁve of these
stages in the same way as in the United States. Advanced moral reasoning
was correlated with age, education and the complexity of the social struc-
ture, and probably also exposure to liberal democratic thought. Unfortu-
nately Kohlberg found that very few adults anywhere reached Stage Six,
and few of those used universal ethical principles consistently.
I carry around a palm pilot that compares what I eat to my dietary
goals for carbohydrates and calories. In effect, it whispers warnings in
my ear when I eat something I’ll regret. Once we have intimately wedded
cybernetics to our brains, and have onboard expert systems watching and
advising our behavior, we will undoubtedly also develop cybernetic super-
egos with settings for Kohlberg’s Stage Six, Islamic Sharia or Ayn Randian
selﬁshness. We may give children this mental equipment, and the ability
to modify it as they mature, just as we currently provide them with
moral and civic education. We might then all be able to consistently rea-
son with the clarity of philosophers and the selfless compassion of
Gandhi or Martin Luther King. “Contemporary Man does not foresee,”
said George Bernard Shaw in Man and Superman, that “the real Super-
man will snap his superﬁngers at all Man’s present trumpery ideals of
right, duty, honor, justice, religion, even decency, and accept moral
obligations beyond present human endurance.”
In that world, we will be very interested in whether our spouses, co-
workers, leaders and police are running moral reasoning support soft-
ware, if so what kind, and if they also have a healthy sense of empathy
Defending the Future
255

or pro-socialness to encourage them to do what they know to be right.
Again, it would be a violation of cognitive liberty for society to require
adults to adopt moral codes, listen to an internal psychic nag or publicly
disclose their empathic and moral orientation. But it is acceptable in a
free society to make free choices consequential. If you are a sexual
predator and you don’t want to be castrated then you have to stay in
prison. If you want security clearance or a job working with toddlers or
ﬂying jets you may have to submit to a background check or even a lie
detector test. We require judges, politicians and physicians to take oaths
before they assume ofﬁce because their powers are so easy to violate and
we want the faint protection offered by a solemn vow that they will not
abuse them. In the transhuman future there may be many occupations
in which it is not only a requirement of the job that one have the neces-
sary skills, but also that one have internalized the necessary pro-social
feelings and moral reasoning software.
DRIVER’S LICENSES FOR SUPERPOWERS
In such a society we might strike a bargain with humans, animals or
computers who want superhuman abilities: Give us some evidence that
we can trust you not to abuse those powers. As Spider-Man said on be-
coming a posthuman, “With great power comes great responsibility.”
Society could forbid the most powerful enhancements to those who
refuse to be screened for basic empathy and morality, just like we do a
background check for a handgun purchase. The manufacturers of cog-
nitive enhancement software could be obliged to include empathy and
moral decision-making supports as a feature just as we require warnings
and child-proof caps on medicine and air bags in cars.
But it is not just in society’s interest that we steer enhancements to-
ward empathy and cooperation. It is also an ethical obligation on each of
us to enhance ourselves, to become better people and use our powers to
do good. Transhumanist philosopher Mark Walker argues in his “Neo-
Irenaean” thesis “Becoming Gods” that the goal of human enhancement
256
CITIZEN CYBORG

should be moral as well as mental and corporeal perfection. Walker ar-
gues that we are obliged to cultivate our virtues and do more good in
the world by adopting speciﬁc enhancements such as boosters for our
empathy and intelligence. The use of transhuman technology for simple
distraction—such as to live in a solipsistic virtual reality or to spend
more time perfecting our golf game, or to eliminate our compassion,
courage or curiosity—would be unethical even though it should be
legal.
On the other hand, policies to encourage empathy and morality
should not be so invasive that they inhibit diversity and creativity, or
threaten our privacy and freedom of thought. You should be able to get
enhanced and still have extreme ideas, have a hankering for parrot meat,
or despise whole groups of people.
The lines will be difﬁcult to draw, but just because they will be difﬁ-
cult does not mean that we should either ban powerful enhancements or
have a completely laissez-faire approach. The best outcome for society,
and probably the only possible path, lies in muddling through to keep
the growing diversity of cyborg citizens free, equal and united. 
Defending the Future
257


1 4
A Sexy, High-Tech Vision for 
a Radically Democratic Future
What more can be said of any condition of human affairs, than that it brings
human beings themselves nearer to the best thing they can be? 
—JOHN STUART MILL, On Liberty
Whether it amounts to a Singularity or not, the coming decades will
turn our world upside down and our expectations inside out. Radical
times call for radical solutions. What should the strategic goals of de-
mocratic transhumanists be in the coming decades?
BUILD THE TRANSHUMANIST MOVEMENT
The bioLuddites and human-racists are already in place. They control
the bully pulpit of the President’s Council on Bioethics, they have their
mediagenic talking heads, their think tanks, foundation grants, journals
and lobbyists. They are organizing conferences for devout Christians,
radical Greens and suburban soccer moms. They have ﬁlled the media
with alarmist rhetoric about Frankenstein, The Boys from Brazil and Brave
New World.
There is no comparable, serious voice, recognized by politicians,
academe and the media, articulating the transhumanist case. The World
Transhumanist Association and Extropy Institute combined could barely
cover the phone bill of any one of the shrill sirens of doom. Will human
enhancement only be championed by glib corporate press releases and
259

timid researchers unwilling to project the consequences of their discov-
eries even ﬁve years down the road? Will the only people debating real-
istic solutions to the problems of the twenty-ﬁrst century be those who
want to keep the twenty-ﬁrst century from happening at all?
We need transhumanist think tanks, journals, conferences and lobby-
ists. We need transhumanists meeting the bioLuddites toe-to-toe in the
public square, defending the rights of persons to use reason to control
their own affairs. We need transhumanist clubs and study groups on the
campuses, and in every city in every country, educating the public about
the threats and promises to come. We need a movement ﬁghting for a
positive future, and not just ﬁghting the future.
BUILD THE NEXT LEFT
There will be a Next Left, and it will be global. We can see its embryonic
beginnings in the anti-globalization movement knitting together dis-
parate causes around the world. The Next Left will inevitably be con-
nected to, if also often in conflict with, the existing social democratic
and labor parties. Although many of the progressive reform movements
are currently hostile to technology, many will make the same shift to-
ward biopolitics and techno-empowerment that the nineteenth-century
workers movement made toward industry, from Luddite machine-
wrecking to empowerment through technology.
The global social justice group the World Social Forum (WSF) says in
their statement of principles that they are a movement “committed to
building a society centred on the human person.” Radical democratic
movements of the twenty-ﬁrst century, such as those involved with the
WSF, have learned from the twentieth-century authoritarianisms to
make radical individual liberty a core principle, and to derive the need
for equality and public provision from the need to maximize individual
potential. Having adopted this vision of radical individual empower-
ment, these movements will soon see the importance of universal access
to human enhancement technologies. The Next Left will wield the same
260
CITIZEN CYBORG

values—liberty, equality and solidarity—as its democratic predecessors,
but this time it will seek to create a democratic community that includes
more than just all humanity.
RADICALIZE “HUMAN RIGHTS”
Defend the rights of all beings oppressed because of their bodies
Democratic transhumanists need to build solidarity with those op-
pressed because of the bodies and minds they possess. A world tolerant
of transhuman diversity is best assured by expanding the bounds of tol-
erance and equality to include the full diversity of already existing be-
ings, sexual, cultural and racial. Racism and discrimination in all forms
must be opposed. The physically disabled should have access to the so-
cial and technological assistance they need to be equal citizens. Gender
must not determine rights, so civil marriage must be open to gays and
lesbians. People should be allowed to use technology to sculpt them-
selves to ﬁt their personal visions, whether they ﬁt the binary gender sys-
tem or not. Democratic transhumanists should join the campaigns to ex-
tend rights to great apes, dolphins and whales in order to defeat
human-racism and open rights for all intelligent persons.
Guarantee the right of all persons to control their own bodies and minds
We need not only a broader concept of the citizen, the bearers of rights,
but also a more radical understanding of the rights those citizens can
claim. Self-ownership should include the right of sane adults to change
and enhance their bodies and brains, to own their own genes, to take
recreational drugs and to control their own deaths. Procreative liberty, an
extension of the right to control our body and life, should include the right
to use germinal choice technologies to ensure the best possible life for our
children. Strong democratic government is required not only to protect
these rights, but to ensure that the technologies are tested for safety, and
that consumers understand their risks and beneﬁts. We need to ensure
that all citizens have access to these options, not just the afﬂuent.
A Sexy, High-Tech Vision for a Radically Democratic Future
261

262
CITIZEN CYBORG
DEMOCRATIZE TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION
Support science education and public funding of research into 
transhuman technologies
We need expanded public ﬁnancing of higher education and scientiﬁc re-
search throughout the world. Higher education, and education in the
sciences in particular, helps spread rational, secular values, empowers
citizens to make informed choices about technology policy and in-
creases the pool of human talent available to apply to improvements in
human welfare. American children in particular are woefully behind the
rest of the industrialized world in math, science and engineering. More
American students get degrees in “parks and recreation” than electrical
engineering.
The National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) and its NBIC pro-
gram are wonderful examples of how basic government research fund-
ing can kickstart the development of transhuman technology. The
NBIC report recommends a major initiative, like the Human Genome
Program and NNI, to understand and enhance the working of the brain
with the new molecular and information technologies. Dr. Aubrey de
Grey has argued that we could have treatments that would radically ex-
tend the life span by 2020 if we invested in a research program signiﬁ-
cantly cheaper than the NNI or the Bush administration’s proposed
mission to the Moon and Mars. Instead, under the Bush administration,
U.S. research investments have shifted into areas with military and de-
fense applications.
Support appropriate regulations on scientific research and 
technological innovation
Democratic transhumanists should promote rigorous, independent
safety testing of transhuman technologies, rejecting both free-market
laissez-faire and Luddite bans. International agencies should be empow-
ered to enforce global regulations on the safety of industrial and medical
technologies. The U.S. Congress should reestablish the Ofﬁce of Tech-

nology Assessment, and the size and mandate of the EPA and FDA
should be expanded to rapidly vet the safety of new industrial materials,
drugs and medical devices. Executive bioethics advisory bodies should
be appointed that are representative of the bioethics community, and
not stacked to produce preordained bioLuddite outcomes.
Protect genetic self-ownership and the genetic and intellectual commons
from patent madness 
Patents on existing genomes of plants, animals and humans should be
declared void. Patents on novel gene sequences should be protected, un-
less they end up as part of the body of a self-aware citizen, in which case
that person should become co-owner of that genetic information. Indi-
viduals must have control over their own genome, extending to the pri-
vacy of their genetic information.
DEFEND AND EXTEND SOCIAL RIGHTS
Build and defend universal health systems with choices
All citizens should be guaranteed equitable access to a basic package of
health care services, including enhancement technologies when ﬁscally
possible. When safe enhancement technologies cannot be provided
through the public health system for political or fiscal reasons, they
should be available in the marketplace.
Establish a guaranteed basic income and expand the social wage
All citizens should be guaranteed a basic income. Public financing of
higher education should be expanded.
CREATE GLOBAL SOLUTIONS
There is no salvation for civilization, or even the human race, other than the
creation of a world government. With all my heart I believe that the world’s
present system of sovereign nations can lead only to barbarism, war and in-
A Sexy, High-Tech Vision for a Radically Democratic Future
263

humanity, and that only world law can assure progress toward a civilized
peaceful humanity.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
It took man 250,000 years to transcend the hunting pack. It will not take him
so long to transcend the nation.
—J.B.S. HALDANE, 
“Daedalus, or Science and the Future”
Just as human enhancement is the next step for individual evolution,
global governance is the next step for human social evolution. In fact,
global governance may be a necessary condition for the successful
building of transhuman society. As technology advances, so do the
risks from new weapons and accidents of mass destruction. Technolo-
gies of human enhancement and artificial intelligence magnify those
risks and benefits and make the case for strengthening transnational
governance even more urgent than it was in the era of nuclear weapons
and germ warfare.
Build democratic global governance
The growing integration of the European Union is proof that a global
evolution to federalism may be slow and messy but inevitable. It is not
a coincidence that the European Union is trying to promote the
United Nations and multilateralism to restrain Pax Americana. We
need global agreements not just to expand “free trade,” but also to
protect worker rights and set environmental and safety standards for
agriculture, industry and medicine. The United Nations needs the au-
thority to tax corporations and nations, and the power to collect those
taxes. We need to add a second chamber to the United Nations that
represents the world on a population basis, not just as nation-states.
We need a permanent, standing international army with a clear man-
date to enforce world law, starting with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
264
CITIZEN CYBORG

A Sexy, High-Tech Vision for a Radically Democratic Future
265
Ensure access to technology for the developing world
Agencies in the developed world should expand research into technolo-
gies appropriate to the needs of the developing world, and support pro-
grams of technology transfer through the World Health Organization,
Food and Agriculture Organization, United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, United Nations Development Programme and
UNESCO.
Reduce global risks to the future of civilization
In his essay “Some Limits to Global Ecophagy by Biovorous Nanorepli-
cators, with Public Policy Recommendations,” Robert Freitas suggests
that the best way to ensure that rogue nanotechnology is not harming
the ecosystem is to set up the kind of global ecosystem monitoring
that we need in any case to monitor climate change, toxics, soil ero-
sion and deforestation. The Federation of American Scientists says the
best way to prepare for bioterrorism is to set up a global public health
information system that will automatically detect the emergence of
new diseases, a system we also need to deal with the far greater threat
from naturally occurring diseases like ebola, cholera, TB, SARS and
AIDS. The world needs international bodies like the International
Atomic Energy Agency to be expanded into a global infrastructure of
technological and industrial regulation capable of controlling the
health and environmental risks from new technologies. We need to ex-
pand programs like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
and the British and American programs monitoring near-Earth objects
into global programs to monitor the health of ecosystems and the
threat from asteroids.
In Our Final Hour, astrophysicist Martin Rees enumerates the various
threats to the existence of the human race from natural phenomena like
gamma-ray bursts and asteroids to technological disasters like runaway
nanotech and ecological destruction. Rees gives humanity 50–50 odds of
surviving the century and says the chance of extinction is all the more

poignant since “the post-human potential is so immense that not even
the most misanthropic amongst us would countenance its being fore-
closed by human actions.” It is precisely because we want to see a
posthuman future that we have to begin to build institutions of global
governance that ensure new technologies enhance and protect human-
ity, and do not threaten its future.
266
CITIZEN CYBORG

Further Resources
To make this book a little more affordable I have put the citations and a more com-
plete appendix of further resources online at the Cyborg Democracy Web site:
http://cyborgdemocracy.net/citizencyborg.htm
In any case, nowadays you can ﬁnd just about anything I mention in the text by
“Googling” it. But in this section I do brieﬂy want to suggest some additional read-
ings that further illuminate the topics covered in each chapter.
CHAPTER 1: BETTER LIVING THROUGH SCIENCE AND DEMOCRACY
Acceleration and Convergence
The most important recent statement on the accelerating and converging tech-
nological trends and their impacts on radical human enhancement is the National
Science Foundation’s NBIC collection:
Roco, Mihail C., and William Sims Bainbridge, eds. 2002. Converging Technologies
for Improving Human Performance. Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation.
http://wtec.org/ConvergingTechnologies
Ray Kurzweil is the leading proponent of the idea that accelerating technologies
will lead to discontinuous social change and intimate nano-neural communication
with computers within decades.
Kurzweil, Ray. 2000. “The Law of Accelerating Returns.” http://www.kurzweilai.
net/articles/art0134.html
Nanotechnology
Drexler, Eric. 1986. The Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology. New
York: Anchor Books. The ur-text of nanotech. http://foresight.org/EOC/index.html
The two leading think tanks addressing the transhuman implications of nan-
otechnology and nanomedicine are:
267

Foresight Institute (Palo Alto, California, USA) The base for Eric Drexler and a
network of people working to bring about Drexler’s vision of molecular manufac-
turing and nanobots. http://www.foresight.org
Center for Responsible Nanotechnology (New York, New York, USA) A group
working to promote anticipatory public policies to ensure that molecular manufac-
turing is safe and widely available. http://www.crnano.org
CHAPTER 2: CONTROLLING THE BODY
Robert Freitas’s series of Nanomedicine tomes are the place to start for would-be na-
noengineers, but he has a full bibliography with links to shorter pieces that are
more accessible introductions to some of the possible applications like robotic
white and red blood cells. http://www.rfreitas.com/NanoPubls.htm
Coalition for the Advancement of Medical Research (CAMR) (Washington,
D.C.) A lobby organized to defend stem cell research and regenerative medicine,
composed of patient organizations, universities, scientific societies, foundations
and individuals with life-threatening illnesses and disorders. http://www.
stemcellfunding.org
Futurist and artist Natasha Vita-More has also pulled together a number of ideas
about the posthuman body into an engaging Web presentation. http://www.
natasha.cc/primointro.htm
An up-to-date review of the effect of inequality on longevity can be found in:
Marmot, Michael. 2004. The Status Syndrome: How Social Standing Affects Our
Health and Longevity. New York: Times Books.
An important place to start for criticisms of germinal choice would be:
President’s Council on Bioethics. 2003. “Chapter Two: Better Children,” in Beyond
Therapy: Biotechnology and the Pursuit of
Perfection. http://www.bioethics.
gov/reports/beyondtherapy/chapter2.html
CHAPTER 3: LIVING LONGER
The best way to stay in touch with radical life extension news is to subscribe to
the daily or weekly e-mail bulletins from Betterhumans.com and peruse the work
collected at these longevity-oriented sites:
Betterhumans.com A webzine devoted to human enhancement and longevity
technology. http://betterhumans.com
Longevity Meme An activist organization working to promote radical life exten-
sion. http://longevitymeme.org
Immortality Institute An international network of people working on radical
life extension.  http://imminst.org
268
Further Resources

Methuselah Mouse Project An annual prize for the team that has made a mouse
live the longest.  http://methuselahmouse.org/
Some summaries of the lines of research that will lead to radical life extension,
and a proposal for how to bring them all together, can be found in Aubrey de Grey’s
Web site for “SENS (Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence).” http://
www.gen.cam.ac.uk/sens
There has also been a backlash from aging researchers against life extension hype.
They don’t buy the idea that accelerating, or even linear, progress will make life ex-
pectancies of more than 100 possible. Dozens of researchers signed on to a pes-
simistic statement, “The Truth of Human Aging,” published in Scientiﬁc American in
2002, and then Stephen Hall took a whack at the ﬁeld in Merchants of Immortality.
Olshansky, S. Jay, Leonard Hayflick and Bruce A. Carnes. 2002. “The Truth
About Human Aging,” Scientiﬁc American. May 13. http://www.sciam.com
Hall, Stephen S. 2003. Merchants of Immortality: Chasing the Dream of Human Life
Extension. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
The American Academy of Anti-Aging Medicine has a Web site devoted to re-
butting these critics of anti-aging medicine. http://a4minfo.net/virtualinterview
Another place to start for criticisms of life extension would be:
President’s Council on Bioethics. 2003. “Chapter Four: Ageless Bodies,” in Beyond
Therapy: Biotechnology and the Pursuit of Perfection. http://www.bioethics.gov/
reports/beyondtherapy/chapter4.html
Cryonics
Ettinger, Robert. 1964. The Prospect of Immortality. New York: Doubleday. The book
that launched the cryonics movement. http://www.cryonics.org/book1.html
Merkle, Ralph. 1994. “The Molecular Repair of the Brain,” Cryonics, 15(1–2).
Probably the most important article in boosting the field of cryonics. http://
www.merkle.com/cryo/techFeas.html
CHAPTER 4: GETTING SMARTER
The best recent review of the Flynn effect, the evidence for rising intelligence in the
industrialized world, is:
Neisser, Ulric, ed. 1998. The Rising Curve: Long-Term Gains in IQ and Related Mea-
sures. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
British behavioral geneticist Robert Plomin is one of the leading researchers
whose work is suggesting a limited set of genes that inﬂuence intelligence. A place
to start would be his recent article:
Plomin, Robert, and Frank M. Spinath. 2004. “Intelligence: Genetics, Genes, and
Genomics,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, January, 86(1).
Further Resources
269

CHAPTER 5: BEING HAPPIER
Dutch sociologist Ruut Veenhoven’s World Database on Happiness Web site is at
http://www.eur.nl/fsw/research/happiness/ 
and it includes an extensive bibliography on the social correlates of subjective
well-being.
For more on the genetically determined happiness set-point:
Lykken, David. 1999. Happiness: What Studies on Twins Show Us About Nature,
Nurture, and the Happiness Set Point. New York: Golden Books Adult Publishing.
The principal transhumanist thinkpiece on hedonic self-determination is:
Pearce, David. 1998. “The Hedonistic Imperative” http://www.hedweb.com/
hedethic/
Although it focuses on drugs that remove unhappy memories rather than happy
drugs per se, an important place to start for criticisms of hedonic engineering
would be:
President’s Council on Bioethics. 2003. “Chapter Five: Happy Souls,” in Beyond
Therapy: Biotechnology and the Pursuit of Perfection. http://www.bioethics.gov/
reports/beyondtherapy/chapter5.html
CHAPTER 6: FROM FUTURE SHOCK TO BIOPOLITICS
This fourfold schema of political ideology is derived from the empirical work done
by William Maddox and Stuart Lilie, reported in their 1984 Beyond Liberal and
Conservative: Reassessing the Political Spectrum (Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute).
CHAPTER 7: CYBORG CITIZENSHIP
Liminality, Anomie and Future Shock
The section starts with my reﬂections on Tofﬂer:
Tofﬂer, Alvin. 1970. Future Shock. New York: Bantam Books.
My reﬂections on the role of liminality and future shock in shaping the bioLud-
dite response are inﬂuenced by two classic anthropology texts:
Douglas, Mary. 1966. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution and
Taboo. London and Henley: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Turner, Victor. 1969. The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure. Chicago: Aldine.
Personhood Theory and Citizenship
A recent transhumanist argument for an expanded concept of legal personhood is
found in Linda MacDonald Glenn’s piece “Biotechnology at the Margins of Person-
hood: An Evolving Legal Paradigm.” http://www.jetpress.org/volume13/
glenn.html
270
Further Resources

Brain Death and Personhood
Gervais, Karen G. 1986. Redeﬁning Death. New Haven: Yale University Press. The
classic argument for a personhood-based deﬁnition of death.
Extrauterine Gestation and Fetal Personhood
Tooley, Michael. 1984. Abortion and Infanticide. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Classic argument for the non-personhood of the fetus and newborn.
Kuhse, Helga, and Peter Singer. 1985. Should the Baby Live—The Problem of Hand-
icapped Infants. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Argues that the non-personhood of
the newborn should warrant a greater flexibility for parents to make treatment
decisions for handicapped newborns.
Bailey, Ron. 2003. “Babies in a Bottle,” Reason, August 20. A recent review of
technical progress toward extrauterine gestation, and its political repercussions.
http://reason.com/rb/rb082003.shtml
Apes and Genetically Enhanced Animals
Cavalieri, Paolo, and Peter Singer, eds. 1993. The Great Ape Project. New York: St.
Martins Grifﬁn.
Wise, Steven M. 2002. Drawing the Line: Science and the Case for Animal Rights.
New York: Perseus Books.
Keenan, Julian, Dean Falk and Gordon G. Gallup. 2003. The Face in the Mirror: The
Search for the Origins of Consciousness. New York: Harper Collins. Summarizes re-
search on the self-awareness of great apes, humans and other animals.
Posthumans and Machine Minds
McNally, Peter, and Sohail Inayatullah. 1988. “The Rights of Robots,” Whole Earth
Review (Summer): 2–10. Suggests that we will have to redeﬁne our concept of rights
to admit the possibility of robotic personhood. http://www.kurzweilai.net/
articles/art0265.html
Solum, Lawrence B. 1992. “Legal Personhood for Artiﬁcial Intelligences,” North
Carolina Law Review, 70: 1231–1287. Considers whether made things are always
property, and relates AI’s potential personhood to bioethics. http://home.
sandiego.edu/~lsolum/Westlaw/legalpersonhood.htm
CHAPTER 8: DEFENDERS OF NATURAL LAW
Religious Right BioLuddites
The Center for Bioethics and Culture and The Council for Biotechnology Pol-
icy (San Francisco, California, and St. Louis, Missouri, USA) led by Nigel Cameron.
http://www.thecbc.org. http://www.biotechpolicy.com
Further Resources
271

The Center for Bioethics and Human Dignity (Chicago, Illinois, USA) led by
conservative Christian bioethicist John Kilner, chair of ethics at Trinity Interna-
tional University. http://www.cbhd.org
The Biotechnology & American Democracy Program of the Ethics and Pub-
lic Policy Center (Washington, D.C., USA) led by Eric Cohen, editor of The New
Atlantis. http://www.eppc.org/programs/biotech
Some theological denunciations of the project of germinal choice and human
enhancement include:
Lewis, C. S. 1943. The Abolition of Man. London: Macmillan. Includes a warning
about genetic engineering. http://www.columbia.edu/cu/augustine/arch/lewis/
abolition1.htm
Ramsey, Paul. 1975. Fabricated Man: The Ethics of Genetic Control. New Haven:
Yale University Press. Methodist theologian Ramsey was one of the foundational
writers in bioethics and a Christian opponent of germinal choice.
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. 1987. “Respect for Life: Instruction
on respect for human life in its origin and on the dignity of procreation” issued Feb-
ruary 22, 1987. Vatican statement that condemns all genetic manipulation of the
embryo since it likely involved invitro fertilization, doesn’t respect the embryo and
might lead to transgenic creatures. http://www.ewtn.com/library/curia/
cdfhuman.htm
Council for Biotechnology Policy. 2002. “The Sanctity of Life in a Brave New
World: A Manifesto on Biotechnology and Human Dignity.” A manifesto, signed by
many leaders of the U.S. Christian Right, stating that humans have dignity (souls)
from conception to death, and that there should be an international treaty to forbid
cloning and inheritable genetic modification to protect that dignity. http://
www.thecbc.org/manifesto.html
Secular Conservative BioLuddites
President’s Council on Bioethics (Washington, D.C., USA) chaired by Leon Kass;
the many background documents and testimonies archived at the site are a com-
prehensive primer on the religious and secular opposition to human enhancement
technology, which has been the PCB’s principal focus under Kass. http://
bioethics.gov
Fukuyama, Francis. 2002. Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology
Revolution. New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux.
Kass, Leon. 1997. “The Wisdom of Repugnance,” The New Republic, June 2.
Kass’s classic statement of his “yuck factor” philosophy. http://www.pbs.org/
wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/fertility/readings/cloning.html
______. 2002. Life, Liberty and the Defense of Dignity: The Challenge for Bioethics.
San Francisco: Encounter Books. Kass’s most recent statement of the need to stop
272
Further Resources

life extension and human enhancement in order to protect human “dignity” from
human liberty.
______. 2003. “Ageless Bodies, Happy Souls: Biotechnology and the Pursuit of
Perfection,” The New Atlantis (Spring). A critique of life extension. http://
thenewatlantis.com/archive/1/kass.htm
Deep Ecological BioLuddites
Foundation on Economic Trends (Washington, D.C., USA) led by Jeremy Rifkin,
and dedicated to the promotion of Jeremy Rifkin and his numerous projects to stop
genetic research and technology. http://foet.org
International Center for Technology Assessment (Washington, D.C., USA) led
by Andrew Kimbrell, former policy director for Jeremy Rifkin at FOET, and author
of The Human Body Shop. Dedicated to a broad anti-technology agenda. http://
www.icta.org/aboutus
Foundation for Deep Ecology (Sausalito, California, USA), founded and funded by
millionaire turned eco-anarchist Douglas Tompkins. http://www.deepecology.org
Some of the key deep ecological bioLuddite texts are:
Devall, Bill, and George Sessions. 1984. Deep Ecology: Living as If Nature Mat-
tered. Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith Books. The classic statement of deep ecol-
ogy philosophy.
Kaczynski, Ted. 1996. The Unabomber Manifesto. Kaczynski, known as the Un-
abomber when on his terrorist bombing spree, specifically addresses the alleged
threat to freedom from human genetic engineering, and insists that the only way to
stop it is to destroy industrial civilization including modern medicine. http://
www.unabombertrial.com/manifesto/
Kimbrell, Andrew. 1998. The Human Body Shop: The Cloning, Engineering, and Mar-
keting of Life. Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing. Kimbrell’s most recent state-
ment on the threats from biomedical capitalism.
Joy, Bill. 2000. “Why the Future Doesn’t Need Us,” Wired, April. Although he is
not a deep ecologist, Joy’s article is a classic argument for technology bans on the
basis of potential apocalyptic risks. http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/
8.04/joy.html
McKibben, Bill. 2003. Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age. New York:
Times Books. His title ably sums up the argument of the book—he’s satisﬁed and
doesn’t see any point in making things better with technology, especially if it means
becoming posthuman.
CHAPTER 9: LEFT-WING BIOLUDDITES
Society for Genetics and Society (Oakland, California, USA) led by longtime left-
ist activist Marcy Darnovsky and the former assistant political director for the
Further Resources
273

Sierra Club Richard Hayes. Dedicated to stopping “techno-eugenics” and banning
cloning and inheritable genetic modiﬁcation. http://genetics-and-society.org
Council for Responsible Genetics (Boston, Massachusetts, USA), once focused
on genetic patents and public safety issues, but now led by a Rifkinite board that has
signed on to a broader anti-biomedical agenda including opposition to stem cells
and therapeutic cloning. http://www.gene-watch.org
ETC Group, The Action Group on Erosion, Technology and Corporate Con-
centration (Winnipeg, Canada), formerly RAFI, is an international organization
headquartered in Canada, working on development from an anti-corporate per-
spective. Recently they have focused attention on the threats posed by human
genetic engineering and nanotechnology. http://www.etcgroup.org
Some key left-wing bioLuddite texts are:
Rifkin, Jeremy. 1983. Algeny. New York: Penguin. The book that deﬁned Rifkin’s
bioLuddism.
Rothman, Barbara Katz. 1988. Recreating Motherhood: Ideology and Technology in
Patriarchal Society. New York: Norton. Argues that reproductive technology com-
bines the evils of capitalism, patriarchy and technology.
Council for Responsible Genetics. 1992 (2000). “Position Paper on Human
Germline Manipulation.” http://www.gene-watch.org/programs/cloning/germline-
position.html
Hubbard, Ruth, and Elijah Wald. 1997. Exploding the Gene Myth. Boston: Beacon
Press. Argues that genetics won’t accomplish as much as people expect, and that the
focus on genetic therapy distracts from social problems.
World Watch Magazine. Special Issue: Beyond Cloning. July 2002. A dozen essays
attacking human enhancement from a Left point of view. http://www.
worldwatch.org/pubs/mag/2002/154
Winner, Langdon. 2003. “Are Humans Obsolete?” An extended critique of the
misanthropy and elitism of the libertarian transhumanists, and a call for a more left-
wing technopolitics, open to technological progress but sensitive to social reform and
inequality. http://www.rpi.edu/~winner/AreHumansObsolete.html
ETC Group. 2003. The Strategy for Converging Technologies: The Little BANG Theory.
Winnipeg: ETC Group. Argues that innovation on human enhancement should be
stopped until the world is made more equal. http://www.etcgroup.org/
article.asp?newsid=378
Mehlman, Maxwell J. 2003. Genetic Enhancement and the Future of Society. Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press. Argues for a global ban on genetic enhancement
to prevent a genetic caste system.
Elliot, Carl. 2003. Better Than Well: American Medicine Meets the American Dream.
New York: Norton. Desires for enhancement are capitalist-induced mental illness.
274
Further Resources

CHAPTER 10: UPWINGERS, EXTROPIANS AND TRANSHUMANISTS
Renaissance and Enlightenment Transhumanism
Mirandola, Giovanni Pico della. 1486. “Oration on the Dignity of Man.” http://
www.santafe.edu/~shalizi/Mirandola
Bacon, Francis. 1620. Novum Organum. http://history.hanover.edu/texts/Bacon/
novorg.html
Early Twentieth-Century Transhumanism
Wells, H. G. 1898. The Time Machine. A classic dystopian reflection on how class
inequality might lead to subspeciation of the human race. http://www.
bartleby.com/1000
Haldane, J. B. S. 1924. Daedalus, or Science and the Future. New York: E. P. Dutton
& Co. The classic essay by one of the founders of modern genetics on the future
use of extrauterine gestation and other technologies, which inspired Huxley’s Brave
New World. http://www.santafe.edu/~shalizi/Daedalus.html
Bernal, J. D. 1929. The World, the Flesh & the Devil: An Enquiry into the Future of the
Three Enemies of the Rational Soul. Speculates about space colonization, bionic
implants and mental improvements.  http://www.santafe.edu/~shalizi/Bernal
Stapledon, Olaf. 1930. Last and First Men. London: Methuen. A boring book that
inspired many with its visions of future posthuman possibilities.
Huxley, Aldous. 1932. Brave New World. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Duran & Co.
The classic anti-transhumanist critique of the dehumanizing and authoritarian possi-
bilities of transhuman technologies such as mood drugs and extrauterine gestation.
http://somaweb.org
Post–World War Two Transhumanism
Ettinger, Robert. 1972. Man into Superman. New York: St. Martin’s. Ettinger’s vision
of transhumanity. http://www.cryonics.org/book2.html
Sterling, Bruce. 1985. Schismatrix. New York: Arbor House. A novel that imag-
ines transhumanism as a political philosophy uniting a diverse posthumanity.
FM–2030. 1989. Are You a Transhuman? New York: Warner Books.
Regis, Ed. 1990. Great Mambo Chicken and the Transhuman Condition. New York:
Perseus Books. An upbeat gonzo journalistic account of some of the pre-extropian
transhumanists.
Alexander, Brian. 2003. Rapture: How Biotech Became the New Religion. New
York: Basic Books. Focuses on the parallel growth of the transhumanist subcul-
ture and the gradual realization of biotech pioneers that the biotech revolution
might make radical life extension possible. Ends before the emergence of the
WTA.
Further Resources
275

Human Evolution, Reproductive Technology and Germinal Choice
Fletcher, Joseph. 1974. The Ethics of Genetic Control. New York: Doubleday Anchor.
Fletcher made some of the ﬁrst arguments for genetic choice, although he included
a very problematic side argument for the creation of subhuman servants.
Glover, Jonathan. 1984. What Sort of People Should There Be?: Genetic Engineering,
Brain Control and Their Impact on Our Future World. New York: Penguin. A defense of
human genetic engineering that makes the distinction between therapy and en-
hancement, but accepts that enhancement could be ethical.
Robertson, John. 1994. Children of Choice: Freedom and the New Reproductive Tech-
nologies. Princeton: Princeton University Press. One of the most important state-
ments of the case for procreative liberty, stopping short of germinal choice.
Hughes, James J. 1996. “Embracing Change with All Four Arms: A Post-Human-
ist Defense of Genetic Engineering,” Eubios Journal of Asian and International
Bioethics, June, 6(4). http://www.changesurfer.com/Hlth/Genetech.html
Silver, Lee. 1998. Remaking Eden. New York: Avon. Transhumanist and upbeat,
but endlessly cited for its prediction of the emergence of GenRich and GenPoor.
Pence, Greg. 1998. Who’s Afraid of Human Cloning? Boulder: Rowman and Little-
ﬁeld. A defense of reproductive cloning.
Savulescu, Julian. 2001. “Procreative Beneficence: Why We Should Select the
Best Children,” Bioethics, 15(5/6). Argues that parents have an afﬁrmative obligation
to select the child, among the possible children they could have, who will have the
best life. Includes a defense of selecting nondisease genes. (Available online at a
long URL—Google it)
Stock, Gregory. 2002. Redesigning Humans: Choosing Our Genes, Changing Our
Future. New York: Mariner Books. The latest and most popular defense of ger-
minal choice.
Baylis, Francoise, and Jason Scott Robert. 2004. “The Inevitability of Genetic
Enhancement Technologies,” Bioethics 18(1): 1–26.
Extropians and Libertarian Transhumanism
Extropy Institute (Austin, Texas, USA) The main network for libertarian transhu-
manists, although its leadership insists that it is not libertarian. http://www.
extropy.org
Friedman, David. 1989. The Machinery of Freedom: A Guide to Radical Capitalism.
La Salle, Ill.: Open Court. An argument for replacing governments with “privately
produced law,” recommended by the Extropy Institute.
More, Max. 1990. “Deep Anarchy: An Eliminativist View of the State,” Extropy, 5
(Winter). http://www.mind-trek.com/articles/t21c.htm
______. 2000. “The Extropian Principles, Version 3.0: A Transhumanist Declara-
tion.” http://www.extropy.org/principles.htm
276
Further Resources

Hanson, Robin. 1994. “What if Uploads Come First: The Crack of a Future
Dawn,” Extropy, 6(2). Marxian immiseration in The Matrix. http://hanson.
gmu.edu/uploads.html
______. 1998. “Is a Singularity Just Around the Corner? What It Takes to Get
Explosive Economic Growth,” Journal of Evolution and Technology, 2. http://www.
jetpress.org/volume2/singularity.htm
Burch, Greg. 2001. “Progress, Counter-Progress, and Counter-Counter-
Progress,” presented at Extro 5, June 16. http://gregburch.net/progress.html
Bailey, Ron. 2004. Liberation Biology: An Ethical and Scientiﬁc Defense of the Biotech
Revolution. Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
The Grey Future: Robotics, AI, Singularity and Uploading
Clynes, Manfred, and Nathan S. Kline. 1960. “Cyborgs and Space,” Astronautics,
September, pp. 26–27, 74–75. The seminal essay for NASA on building a human
being integrated with technology that regulates their body and emotions.
http://search.nytimes.com/library/cyber/surf/022697surf-cyborg.html
Bear, Greg. 1983. Blood Music. New York: Arbor House. The book that antici-
pated the idea of “gray goo” and nano–AI transcencion years before Drexler pub-
lished The Engines of Creation.
Vinge, Vernor. 1993. “Technological Singularity,” Whole Earth Review, 81 (Win-
ter): 89–95. The essay that launched the term and concept of the “Singularity.”
http://www.ugcs.caltech.edu/~phoenix/vinge/vinge-sing.html
Bostrom, N. 1998. “How Long Before Superintelligence?” International Journal of
Futures Studies, 2.
Kurzweil, Ray. 1999. The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human
Intelligence. New York: Viking.
Moravec, Hans. 2000. Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Brooks, Rodney. 2002. Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will Change Us. New York:
Pantheon.
Global Brain
Global Brain FAQ. A very useful summary of global brain theories. http://
pespmc1.vub.ac.be/GBRAIFAQ.html
Stock, Gregory. 1993. Metaman: The Merging of Humans and Machines into a Global
Superorganism. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Russell, Peter. 1995. The Global Brain Awakens: Our Next Evolutionary Leap. Palo
Alto, Calif.: Global Brain, Inc.
Bloom, Howard. 2001. Global Brain: The Evolution of Mass Mind from the Big Bang
to the 21st Century. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Further Resources
277

Contemporary Transhumanism
World Transhumanist Association The world’s leading transhumanist organiza-
tion. http://transhumanism.org
BetterHumans The leading portal for transhumanist news and views. http://
betterhumans.com
Bostrom, Nick, et al. 1998–2002. The Transhumanist Declaration. http://
www.transhumanism.com/declaration.htm
______. 1998–2003. The Transhumanist FAQ 1.5. http://transhumanism.org/
resources/faq15.doc
______. 2003. The Transhumanist FAQ 2.1. http://www.transhumanism.org/
resources/faq.html
Bostrom, Nick. 2001. “Transhumanist Values.” http://www.nickbostrom.com/
tra/values.html
Naam, Ramez. 2004. More Than Human: How Biotechnology Is Transforming Us and
Why We Should Embrace It. New York: Random House. An accessible introduction
to the transhumanist perspective for the layperson.
CHAPTER 11: DEMOCRATIC TRANSHUMANISM
Critiques of Libertarian Techno-Utopianism and Elitism
Dery, Mark. 1996. Escape Velocity: Cyberculture at the End of the Century. New York:
Grove Press. Focused on “body-loathing” in the arts.
Borsook, Paulina. 2000. CyberSelﬁsh: A Critical Romp Through the Terribly Libertar-
ian Culture of High-Tech. New York: Public Affairs.
Goertzel, Ben. 2003. The Path to Posthumanity. Goertzel, a serious AI researcher
who is deeply involved in the AI/Singularity subculture, takes a friendly swipe at
extropian misanthropy in this excellent online book in Chapter 15, “Extropian Elit-
ism and Humanist Posthumanism.” http://www.agiri.org/path
Techno-Feminism and Harawayan Cyborgology
Firestone, Shulamith. 1970. The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution.
New York: William Morrow. Argues that women will never be free of patriarchy
until artiﬁcial wombs free them from having to carry babies.
Piercy, Marge. 1976. Woman on the Edge of Time. New York: Knopf. Depicts a
utopian society that uses artiﬁcial wombs and a dystopian society in which gender
differences have been genetically enhanced to the point that women are enslaved.
Haraway, Donna. 1984. “The Ironic Dream of a Common Language for Women in
the Integrated Circuit: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s or A
Socialist Feminist Manifesto for Cyborgs,” Socialist Review, 80: 66–80. The somewhat
opaque essay that launched the ﬁeld of cyborgological culture studies. It argues that
278
Further Resources

feminists should reject a dualistic view that associates men with culture and technol-
ogy and women with nature. Instead women should embrace the cyborg as a liber-
ating transgressive icon and integrate the power of technology into themselves.
http://www.rochester.edu/College/FS/Publications/HarawayCyborg.html
Gray, Chris Hables. 1995. The Cyborg Handbook. London: Routledge. A collection of
essays on cyborgs, from Kline and Clynes through the cyborgologist culture critics.
______. 2001. Cyborg Citizen: Politics in the Posthuman Age. London: Routledge. A
reflection on the relationship between technology and politics in the coming
transhuman age.
Progressive Defenses of Germinal Choice and Reproductive Technology
Farquhar, Dion. 1996. The Other Machine: Discourse and Reproductive Technologies.
London: Routledge. A feminist defense of reproductive technologies.
Wicker, Randolph. 2000. “The Queer Politics of Human Cloning,” Gay Today,
March 20. Randy Wicker is a veteran gay rights activist and founder of the Clone
Rights United Front. He argues that gay rights and the right to use reproductive and
genetic technology are intrinsically linked. http://gaytoday.badpuppy.com/
garchive/tech/032000te.htm
Advocates of Universal Access to Enhancement Technologies
Resnick, David. 1997. “Genetic Engineering and Social Justice: A Rawlsian Ap-
proach,” Social Theory and Practice, 23/3 (Fall): 427–448. Argues that genetic engi-
neering can and should be used to promote social equality.
Dworkin, Ronald. 2000. Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Argues that the best way to develop the
fullest liberty of citizens, which is the obligation of society, is to provide general
equality in the resources necessary for equal opportunity, including universal access
to genetic enhancement.
Buchanan, Allen, Dan W. Brock, Norman Daniels and Daniel Wikler. 2000. From
Chance to Choice: Genetics and Justice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Four leading bioethicists thoroughly critique bioLuddite arguments against genetic
enhancement, and argue for universal access to genetic enhancements.
Singer, Peter. 2002. “Shopping at the Genetic Supermarket.” Argues that “the
state should be directly involved in promoting genetic enhancement.” http://
www.petersingerlinks.com/supermarket.htm
Transhumanist Disability Advocates
Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation A powerful lobby for research into stem
cell therapies and regenerative medicine to cure paralysis. http://www.
christopherreeve.org
Further Resources
279

Technogaianism and Existential Threats
Anderson, Walter Truett. 1987. To Govern Evolution: Further Adventures of the Political
Animal. Boston: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Anderson argues that we have no
choice but to learn to democratically govern evolution, both of the planet and of
the human race.
Freitas, Robert. 2000. “Some Limits to Global Ecophagy by Biovorous
Nanoreplicators, with Public Policy Recommendations.” How to prevent “gray
goo.” http://www.foresight.org/NanoRev/Ecophagy.html
Bostrom, Nick. 2002. “Existential Risks: Analyzing Human Extinction Scenar-
ios,” Journal of Evolution and Technology, 9. http://jetpress.org/volume9/risks.html
Mulhall, Douglas. 2002. Our Molecular Future: How Nanotechnology, Biotechnology,
Robotics, Genetics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Will Transform Our World. Amherst, N.Y.:
Prometheus Books. A thorough statement of “nanoecology” and look at the ways
molecular technology will help us prepare for and prevent natural and human-
made disasters.
Rees, Martin. 2003. Our Final Hour: A Scientist’s Warning: How Terror, Error, and En-
vironmental Disaster Threaten Humankind’s Future in This Century—On Earth and Beyond.
New York: Basic Books. Rees lays out the various threats to the future of humankind,
including human technologies, ecological destruction and cosmological catastrophes.
Arnall, Alexander. 2003. Future Technologies, Today’s Choices: Nanotechnology, Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence and Robotics. Greenpeace. A nice summary, with surprisingly moder-
ate policy conclusions. http://www.greenpeace.org.uk/MultimediaFiles/Live/
FullReport/5886.pdf
CHAPTER 12: TRANSHUMAN DEMOCRACY
Regulating Germinal Choices
Bostrom, Nick. 2002. “Human Genetic Enhancements: A Transhumanist Perspec-
tive.” http://www.nickbostrom.com/ethics/genetic.pdf
Patents on Human Genes
The resources on this topic are enormous, but here are two places to start:
Fishman, Rachel. 1989. “Patenting Human Beings: Do Sub-Human Creatures De-
serve Constitutional Protection?” American Journal of Law and Medicine, 15(4): 461–482.
Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee. 2002. Patenting of Higher Life Forms
and Related Issues. Report to the Government of Canada. http://biotech.gc.ca
Universal Voucher-Based Health Insurance
Bioethicist Ezekiel Emanuel presents the idea of a universal voucher system, with
competing, radically different health plans, in his 1992 The Ends of Human Life: Med-
ical Ethics in a Liberal Polity (Harvard University Press).
280
Further Resources

CHAPTER 13: DEFENDING THE FUTURE
Regulating and Engineering for More Cooperation
Walker, Mark. 2003. “Genetic Virtue.” An argument for a conscious social policy to
genetically enhance the moral virtues. http://www.permanentend.org/gvp.htm
Group Selectionism and Altruistic Genes
For more on group selectionist explanations of altruism and other social phenom-
ena, see Elliott Sober and David Wilson’s 1999 Unto Others: The Evolution and Psy-
chology of Unselﬁsh Behavior (Harvard University Press) and Alexander Field’s 2001
Altruistically Inclined? The Behavioral Sciences, Evolutionary Theory, and the Origins of
Reciprocity (University of Michigan Press).
CHAPTER 14: A SEXY, HIGH-TECH VISION 
FOR A RADICALLY DEMOCRATIC FUTURE
Building the Transhumanist Movement
Join the World Transhumanist Association at http://transhumanism.org
Building the Next Left
Get involved with your local radical democratic movement or party:
Socialist International The existing social democratic parties. http://www.
socialistinternational.org
Progressive Caucus The Left wing of the U.S. Democratic Party. http://
bernie.house.gov/pc/
My favorite text imagining a global transhumanist Next Left:
Wagar, Warren. 1992. A Short History of the Future. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. Wagar’s socialist world government makes human enhancement
technology universally available.
Fighting Body-Based Oppressions and Discrimination
National Organization of Women The leading feminist organization in the
United States. http://now.org/
International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission The leading inter-
national lobby for transgender, as well as gay and lesbian, rights. http://
www.iglhrc.org/
National Transgender Advocacy Coalition The leading U.S. lobby for transgen-
der rights. http://www.ntac.org
Disabled Peoples International A radical, global disability rights organization.
http://www.dpi.org/
Further Resources
281

Anti-Racist Action Network A global network of anti-fascist activists.
http://www.antiracist.org
Extending Rights to Intelligent Non-Humans
Great Ape Project The global campaign to extend human-level legal protections to
the great apes. http://www.greatapeproject.org/
Center for the Expansion of Fundamental Rights Steven Wise’s foundation
working to promote legal personhood for animals with selfhood. http://
www.cefr.org/
Expanding Rights to Control Our Body
NARAL Pro-Choice America (formerly the National Abortion Rights Action
League) A leading lobby for reproductive rights in the United States. http://naral.org
International Planned Parenthood Foundation A leading global NGO working
for reproductive rights in the developing world. http://www.ippf.org/
American Infertility Association A lobby for consumers of infertility medicine.
http://www.americaninfertility.org
Expanding Rights to Control Our Mind
Center for Cognitive Liberty & Ethics A nonprofit working for freedom of
thought and our right to control our own brains. Their issues include the right to
use drugs and other brain technologies, and the right to brain privacy from tech-
nologies such as “brain ﬁngerprinting.” www.cognitiveliberty.org/
Drug Policy Alliance The leading drug policy reform organization in the United
States. http://www.drugpolicy.org/
Democratizing Technological Innovation
Alliance for Aging Research Leading coalition working to support therapeutic
cloning and stem cell research in the United States. http://agingresearch.org/
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility Progressive computer scien-
tists. http://www.cpsr.org
Federation of American Scientists A liberal science lobby. http://www.fas.org/
Genetic Alliance An international coalition of individuals, professionals and ge-
netic support organizations working on genetic-based diseases, research, insurance,
Medicaid, genetic support groups and disability resources. Opposed to genetic dis-
crimination. http://www.geneticalliance.org
Union of Concerned Scientists An ecological and left-wing science lobby. Pro-
duced the “Scientiﬁc Integrity in Policymaking” report critical of the Bush admin-
istration in 2004.  http://ucsusa.org/
282
Further Resources

Extending Access to Health Care Technology
Two leaders of the movement for a universal health care system in the United
States are:
Physicians for a National Health Program. http://pnhp.org
Universal Health Care Action Network. http://www.uhcan.org/
Also see:
Program for Appropriate Technology in Health Works with NGOs and gov-
ernments in the developing world to make health care technology more accessible.
http://path.org
Guaranteeing a Basic Income
Basic Income European Network The coalition of European groups working to
institute basic income guarantees.  http:// www.basicincome.org
U.S. Basic Income Guarantee The network building support for a BIG in the
United States. http://www.widerquist.com/usbig/
Thousands of texts arguing for a BIG going all the way back to Tom Paine’s
Agrarian Justice are available here: http://www.widerquist.com/usbig/books.html 
but one of my favorites is:
Hughes, James J. 2004. “Embrace the End of Work,” Betterhumans, February 20. 
http://betterhumans.com/Features/Columns/Change_Surﬁng/
Creating Global Solutions
Citizens for Global Solutions (formerly the Campaign for UN Reform and World
Federalist Association) The leading organization working to create global federal
institutions. http://globalsolutions.org
World Social Forum The leading coalition of grassroots groups working to
build democratic alternatives to neoliberal globalization. http://www.
forum socialmundial.org.br
Further Resources
283


A
abortion, xi, xii, 8, 12, 13, 18, 21, 61, 69,
71, 84, 85, 87, 88, 117, 122, 134, 137,
142, 161, 196, 217, 239, 240, 271, 282
right-to-life movement, xi, xv, 62, 65,
117, 137
Addams, Jane, 239
Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights, 228
Alexander, Brian, 276
Alliance for Aging Research, 282
Alzheimers disease, 18, 31, 38
American Academy of Anti-Aging
Medicine, 269
American Infertility Association, 210,
282
anarcho-capitalism, 155, 165, 180
Anderson, Walter Truett, 212, 280
Andrews, Lori, 78, 79, 131, 231
animal rights, 91–94
Annas, George, 78, 79, 131, 246
anticipatory democracy, 60, 61
AntiRacist Action Network, 282
apes, great, xix, 93, 94, 121, 221, 222,
225, 250, 261, 271, 282
Arnall, Alexander, 280
artiﬁcial chromosomes, 14, 15, 139
artiﬁcial intelligence, xvii, 
103–5
artiﬁcial wombs, xvii, 21, 56, 70, 84,
86–88, 91, 196, 271, 278
Asimov, Isaac, 103, 104, 159
asteroids, 204, 265
attention deﬁcit disorder, 36
Aubrey de Grey, 27, 262, 269
Austin, James, 49
autism, 250, 253
Avatamsaka Sutra, xx
Aziz, Tipil, 45
B
Baby Doe, 85, 86
Bacon, Francis, 157, 276
Bailey, Ron, 31, 37, 114, 115, 169, 180,
271, 277
Bainbridge, William Sims, 180, 267
basic income guarantee, 216, 214–16,
219, 283
Bear, Greg, 117, 278
Bellamy, Edward, 127
Bernal, J. D, 275
Betterhumans, ix, 268, 278
Beyond Therapy, xiv, 30, 63, 268, 269,
270
285
Index

bioLuddism, xiii, xv, xvi, xviii, 7, 19, 21,
22, 31, 36, 52, 55, 57, 62–67, 70, 71,
73, 75–77, 78, 83, 106, 107–153, 169,
184, 187, 192, 205, 210–212, 217, 220,
228, 229, 236, 241, 244, 245, 252, 259,
260, 263, 271–274,
advocates of natural law, 109–23,
271–273
ecological, 120–23, 273
left-wing, 125–53, 273–274
religious, 109–112, 271–272
secular conservative, 112–115, 272
biopolitical, xvi, xvii, 55, 67, 70, 181
biopunk, 211, 212
Blish, James, 97
Bloom, Howard, 174, 277, 281
Bookchin, Murray, 121
Borg, The, 102
Borsook, Paulina, 167, 278
Bostrom, Nick, ix, 109, 176, 178, 180,
237, 277, 278, 280
brain, ix, xi, xii, xvii, 4, 7, 27–30, 33, 35,
37–41, 45–49, 61, 78, 79, 83, 88, 89,
91, 95–97, 101, 102, 115, 140, 163,
174, 175, 199, 205, 209, 212, 223, 225,
231, 232, 236, 250–252, 262, 282
brain death, ix, xi, 95, 96, 94–97
Brain, Marshall, 215
brainjacks, 40
Brave New World, xiii, 49, 52, 56, 57,
84, 112, 160, 162, 259, 272, 275
Brian Alexander, xiv
Brock, Daniel, xiv, 232, 279
Brody, Baruch, 96
Brooks, Rodney, 277
Brown, Louise, 83
Buchanan, Allen, xiv, xv, xvi, 68, 232,
279
Buddhism, xi, xii, xx, 9, 49, 120, 156,
193
Burch, Greg, 183, 184, 277
Burr, Chandler, 208
Bush, George, xiii, 18, 22, 61, 62, 90,
112, 190, 210, 211, 243, 262, 264, 282
C
Cameron, Nigel, 109, 271
Canadian Biotechnology Advisory
Committee, 280
cancer, 10, 16, 24, 25, 26, 29, 47, 118,
122, 139, 144, 146, 150, 228, 229, 234,
235, 242
capitalism, 67, 113, 125, 128, 151, 161,
194, 201, 207, 213, 215, 231, 273, 274
Caplan, Arthur, 131
Carnes, Bruce A., 269
Carrico, Dale, ix
castration, 253
Catholicism, 64, 83, 109, 110, 240
CCortex, 4, 5
Center for Bioethics and Culture, 109,
271
Center for Bioethics and Human Dig-
nity, 112
Center for Cognitive Liberty and
Ethics, 209, 282
Center for Genetics and Society, 130,
138, 153, 273
Center for Responsible Nanotechnol-
ogy, 243, 268
Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention, 152, 242
Chakrabarty, Manas, 229
Changesurfer Radio, ix
chimeras, 92
Citizens for Global Solutions, 283
citizenship, xii, xv, xvii, xix, 8, 9, 13, 24,
33, 38, 41, 51, 52, 57, 70, 75, 77–81,
83, 88, 93, 94, 97, 99, 104, 111, 114,
161, 189, 192, 198–201, 216, 217,
221–223, 225–227, 229, 230, 233, 241,
250, 251, 253, 257, 261–263, 279
286
Index

Clark, Nancie, See Vita-More, Natasha
Clarke, Arthur C., 159, 171
Clinton, William, 62, 90, 211, 240, 242
Clone Rights United Front, 208, 279
cloning, xiv, xv, 16, 61–63, 65, 70, 72, 78,
79, 90, 99, 109, 111, 122, 131, 137,
138, 143, 144, 153, 159, 162, 201, 208,
211, 219, 229, 245, 272, 274
Clynes, Manfred, 100, 160, 277, 279
Coalition for the Advancement of
Medical Research, 210, 268
Coalition of Artists and Life Forms, 212
cochlear implants, 17, 39, 79, 100
Concerta, See Ritalin
Condorcet, Marquis, 127, 157, 187–190
Congregation for the Doctrine of the
Faith, 272
Constitution, U.S., 230
Corea, Gena, 137
Council for Biotechnology Policy, 109,
271, 272
Council for Responsible Genetics, 274
Creationism, 111
crime, 6, 24, 121, 142, 144, 252, 253
cryonics, 30, 160, 164, 269, 275
cyborg citizenship, xvii, xix, 73, 75, 79,
83, 87, 97, 103, 217, 221, 222, 226
Cyborg Democracy blog, ix
cyborgs, 79, 91, 100–102, 160, 185, 207,
209, 277, 278, 279
Bionic Woman, 100
Six Million Dollar Man, 100
D
Daedalus, or Science and the Future,
56–58, 66, 76, 158, 246, 248, 275
Dalai Lama, 236
Daniels, Norman, xiv, 232, 279
Darnovsky, Marcy, 138, 273
Darwin, Charles, 33, 157
Dawkins, Richard, 251
de Chardin, Teilhard, 174
De Thézier, Justice, 272
Declaration of Independence, 114
deep ecology, xvii, 107, 120–123, 134,
175, 214, 273
Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, 40, 169, 170
democratic transhumanism, xviii, xix,
xx, 73, 75–78, 187, 192, 202, 207–211,
220, 221
constituencies for, 207–16
depression, 10, 46–50, 236
Dery, Mark, 167, 173, 278
Deuteronomy, 77
Devall, Bill, 273
DeZerega, Gus, 203
disability, xiii, xvi, xvii, xix, 11–18, 24,
39, 41, 71, 85–87, 101, 111, 125, 131,
142, 144, 145, 147, 148, 153, 176, 197,
198, 209, 210, 222–226, 233, 234, 236,
237, 250, 251, 261, 281, 282
Disabled Peoples 
International, 281
Discovery Institute, 111
Douglas, Mary, 77–78
Drexler, Eric, 30, 163, 164, 167, 214,
268, 2727
drug legalization, 282
Drug Policy Alliance, 282
Dumbledore, Albus, 92, 94
Durkheim, Emile, 58
Dvorsky, George, ix
Dworkin, Ronald, 132, 197, 201, 
279
E
Earth First!, 120, 122
Einstein, Albert, 264
electroconvulsive therapy, 47
Emanuel, Ezekiel, 240, 
280
Index
287

embryos, 14, 16, 18, 19, 47, 62, 63, 65,
83–86, 88, 89, 90, 95, 109, 110, 137,
138, 140, 141, 143, 210, 217, 223, 231,
244
engineered negligible senescence, 27
Environmental Protection Agency, 242,
243, 244, 245, 263
equality, xv, xvi, xviii, 8, 24, 25, 35, 41,
50, 59, 61, 68, 76, 82, 111, 114, 127,
132, 133, 142, 179, 184, 189–192,
194–196, 199–201, 206, 210, 216, 218,
233, 238, 239, 247, 251, 260, 261, 279
Esfandiary, F.M., 
see FM–2030
Estes, Richard, 192
ETC Group, 132, 274
Ethics and Public Policy Center, 112,
272
Ettinger, Robert, 30, 160, 161, 164, 269,
275
eugenics, xvii, 33, 56, 71, 110, 128, 131,
132, 138, 148, 158, 162, 180, 197, 232,
252, 274
existential risks, 204, 281
extropianism, xviii, 155, 164–69,
175–177, 182, 246, 247, 276–277
extropian, 165, 168, 175
Extropian Principles, 166, 168, 176,
276
Extropy Institute, 164, 167, 168, 180,
259, 276
F
Farquhar, Dion, 137, 280
fascism, 181–83
Federation of American Scientists, 265,
282
Fehr, Ernst, 253
feminism, xvi, xvii, 122, 136, 137, 161,
162, 176, 196, 207, 279, 281
Feminist International Network of Re-
sistance to Reproductive and Genetic
Engineering, 136
Firestone, Shulamith, 162, 196, 278
Fishman, Rachel, 280
Fletcher, Joseph, 62, 82, 162, 163, 222,
250, 276
Flynn, James, 34, 269
FM–2030, 159, 161, 165, 193, 195, 198,
213, 275
Food and Drug Administration, 16,
118, 238, 241, 244, 245, 263
Foresight Institute, 164, 243, 268
Foster, Vanessa, 207
Foundation for Deep Ecology, 273
Foundation on Economic Trends, 64,
273, 274
Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, 80, 93
Frankenstein, xiii, 259
Franklin, Benjamin, 157
Freitas, Robert, 28, 265, 268, 280
Friedman, David, 166, 168, 276
From Chance to Choice, xiv, 232, 279
Fukuyama, Francis, xiv, 31, 36, 49, 52,
57, 63, 65, 67, 78, 79, 107, 113–115,
122, 130, 135, 139, 153, 195, 205, 248,
249, 272
Factor X, 113, 114, 249
Future Shock, 55, 57, 58, 60, 144, 270
Futurism, 181, 182
G
Gächter, Simon, 254
Galton, Francis, 33, 39
Gardner, Howard, 250
Gattaca, xiii, 146
gay marriage, 59
Gelsinger, Jesse, 15, 245
gender, 69, 196, 207, 261
288
Index

gene therapy, 14, 27, 29, 39
Genetic Alliance, 283
George, Robert, 63
germinal choice, xiv, 14, 39, 122,
130–150, 158, 159, 162, 163, 183, 198,
217, 218, 233, 240, 261, 268, 272, 276,
280
autonomy argument against, 148–50
sex selection argument against,
141–42
germline, 14, 15, 16, 47, 79, 138–145,
163, 244, 245, 274
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 196
Gitlin, Todd, 129
Gladwell, Malcolm, 172
Glendon, Mary Ann, 63
Global 2000 Report, 60
Global Brain theory, 171, 174, 277
global ecophagy by biovorous
nanoreplicators, see gray goo
globalization, 216, 219, 260, 284
Glover, Jonathan, xi, xii, xvi, 140, 162,
163, 200, 277
God, 9, 64, 65, 80, 107, 109, 110, 112,
116, 120, 122, 123, 157
Godwin, William, 157
Goertzel, Ben, 164, 279
Golombok, Susan, 135
gray goo, 117, 119, 243, 265, 277, 280
Gray, Chris Hables, 279
Great Ape Project, 93, 271, 282
Greenpeace, 214, 243, 280
Greens, xiii, 121, 128, 161, 183, 
259
group selectionism, 175, 254, 281
guaranteed basic income, 
See basic income guarantee
H
Habermas, Jurgen, xvii, 148, 149
Haldane, JBS, xx, 55–58, 63, 66, 76, 84,
158, 246, 248, 264, 275
Hall, Stephen S, 269
Hamer, Dean, 48
Hanson, Robin, 26, 169, 170, 171, 277
happiness, 43–46
Happy Life Expectancy, 50
Haraway, Donna, 91, 207, 278
Hartmann, Betsy, 121
Hawking, Stephen, 236
Hayek, Friederich, 166, 168, 203
Hayes, Richard, 274
Hayﬂick, Leonard, 269
heart disease, 24, 25, 26, 118, 228
Hedonistic Imperative, 49, 209, 270
Heinlein, Robert, 159, 171
Hockenberry, John, 209
homosexuality, xvii, xix, 21, 59, 68, 69,
135, 146, 190, 208, 279, 281
Hubbard, Ruth, 274
Hughes, James J., 276, 283
Human Cloning Foundation, 208
human dignity, xiv, 57, 110, 111, 112,
114, 153, 272
human enhancement, xiii, xiv, xviii, xix,
52, 63, 66, 78, 107, 110, 113, 114, 119,
122, 123, 126, 129–131, 133, 149, 184,
197, 199–201, 208, 211, 217, 229, 242,
245, 249, 256, 259, 260, 264, 267, 268,
272, 274, 281
Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Authority, 244
Human Freedom Index, 191
Human Genome Project, 5, 6
human rights, 78, 79, 82, 93, 99, 104,
114, 179, 192, 230, 261
humanism, 157, 159
humanness, xii, xvi, 66, 70, 78, 79, 81,
83, 93, 94, 99, 101, 102, 113, 114, 209,
210, 217, 249
Index
289

human-racism, xv, xvii, 73, 75, 78, 79,
82, 87, 91, 94, 97, 132, 153, 249, 261
Hume, David, 44
Huxley, Aldous, 56, 84, 158, 160, 209,
275
Huxley, Julian, 56, 158
I
ideologies, formation of, 67
in silico biology, 139
Inayatullah, Sohail, 105, 271
intelligence, 33–42, 235, 237, 250, 269
International Atomic Energy Agency,
204, 265
International Center for Technology
Assessment,  See Kimbrell, Andrew
International Consortium on Brain
Mapping, 212
International Planned Parenthood Fed-
eration, 282
invitro fertilization, xiv, 14, 21, 58, 61,
62, 71, 83, 84, 88, 109, 135, 140, 144,
162, 245
J
Jacoby, Russell, 113, 171, 194
Jang, Kerry, 251
job-loss recovery, 215
Jordan, Michael, 235
Journal of Evolution and Technology, 180,
277, 280
Joy, Bill, 117, 273
K
Kaczynski, Ted (the “UnaBomber”),
116, 117, 273
Kass, Leon, xiii, xiv, 30, 31, 37, 57,
62–64, 76, 77, 79, 84, 88, 90, 102, 112,
115, 153, 169, 205, 272
resistance to, 63
Keenan, Julian, 271
Kenyon, Cynthia, 26
Kilner, John, 112, 272
Kimbrell, Andrew, 273
Kissinger, Henry, 190
Klein, Naomi, 137
Kohlberg, Lawrence, 254, 255
kosher, 77
Krauthammer, Charles, 63
Kuhse, Helga, 271
Kurzweil, Ray, 4, 40, 125, 267, 277
Kuwabara, Yoshinori, 86
L
Lai, Chou En, 190
Lantos, John, ix
Levin, Yuval, 77, 78
Levine, Judith, 137
Leviticus, 77
Lewis, C.S., xvii, 148, 272
liberal democracy, xiii, xv, 75, 81, 88,
106, 179, 182, 189
libertarian transhumanism, 164–71, 276
arguments against, 201–6, 278
libertarianism, 165, 175, 180
life extension, xviii, 23, 25–31, 44, 63,
130, 133, 157, 164, 165, 179, 205, 240,
249, 268–69, 272, 275, 282
Locke, John, 81
locked-in state, 225
longevity, See life extension
Lovelock, James, 175
Luddism, See bioLuddism
Luddites, The, 107–9
M
Magneto, xix, 247, 252
Manifesto on Biotechnology 
and Human Dignity, 110
Marcuse, Herbert, 129
290
Index

Margulis, Lyn, 175
Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso, 181, 
182
Marx, Karl, 127, 128, 170, 195
Maslow, Abraham, 160
Matrix, The, 103, 170
McGee, Glenn, 63
McKibben, Bill, 57, 107, 114–116, 153,
195, 273
McMillan, Andrew, 3
Meilander, Gilbert, 63
Merkle, Ralph, 269
Methuselah Mouse prize, 27
microbiovores, 28
Mill, John Stuart, 11, 42, 51, 81, 197,
259
millennialism, 172, 173
Mirandola, Giovanni Pico della, 157,
275
molecular assemblers, 6, 7, 163
monogeny, 80
Mooney, Pat, 19, 151, 152
Moore, Gordon, 4
Moore’s Law, 4, 51, 139
moral reasoning, 241, 254–256
Moravec, Hans, 4, 163, 164, 167, 173,
215, 216, 246, 277
More, Max, 164–168, 173, 175, 276
Morrow, T.O., 164, 165
Mulhall, Douglas, 214, 280
Muller, Herman J., 158
Murray, Thomas, 134
N
Naam, Ramez, 278
Nanomedicine, 28, 268
nanotechnology, xii, xiii, 3, 6, 7, 17, 30,
40, 70, 101, 112, 117, 118, 119, 120,
125, 132, 153, 163, 165, 173, 179, 201,
203, 214, 243, 265, 267, 274
National Functional Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging Data Center, 212
National Institutes of Health, 16, 40,
89, 244
National Nanotechnology Initiative,
262
National Organization of Women, 281
National Science Foundation, 7, 28,
128, 132, 267
National Transgender Acton Coalition,
207
NBIC, 7, 8, 28, 29, 40, 117, 132, 172,
180, 262, 267
NeuroCybernetic Prosthesis System, 47
New Atlantis, 77, 112, 272
New Deal, 128, 129
New England Centenarian project, 27
Newberg, Andrew, 49
Newman, Stuart, 92, 230
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 9
Noble, David, 156
Norsigian, Judy, 137
North, Kathryn, 15
O
O’Connor, Max, See More, Max
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 85
obesity, 19, 20, 19–20, 25, 146, 151
O’Brien, Mary, 137
occupational safety, 8, 12, 144
Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment, 22,
263
Olshansky, S. Jay, 269
Our Posthuman Future, xiv, 31, 36, 52, 78,
113, 115, 130, 248, 272
P
pain, xvi, 3, 43–46, 49, 50, 52, 88, 112,
127, 223, 226, 234–236
Parks, Rosa, 59
Index
291

patents, xix, 65, 92, 152, 221, 227–32
Patient-Controlled Analgesia, 45
Pearce, David, 49, 176, 209, 270
Pence, Greg, 109, 121, 180, 276
personhood theory, xii, xv, xvii, 70, 73,
75, 79–83, 88, 89, 94, 96, 97, 99, 102,
104, 105, 111, 114, 144, 206, 216, 217,
221, 222, 224, 229, 230, 250, 270–271,
282
Peterson, Chris, 125, 214
physician-assisted suicide, 46
Physicians for a National Health Pro-
gram, 283
Piercy, Marge, 196, 278
Plomin, Robert, 39, 269
polygeny, 80
Pope John Paul II, 110
population, 31, 33, 34, 41, 50, 51, 60,
120–122, 142, 144, 170, 179, 206,
214–216, 218, 264
populism, 68, 190
positional enhancements, 238
posthumanity, xii, xv, xvii, xix, 37, 57,
78, 79, 97–102, 106, 111, 115, 117,
125, 130, 159, 160, 165, 173, 182, 199,
206, 241, 246–249, 256, 264, 266, 268,
273, 275
Postrel, Virginia, 169
Potter, Harry, 91, 92
powerlessness, 24, 45, 236
precautionary principle, xvii, 107, 118,
243
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis
(PGD), 14, 143, 144, 245
prenatal testing, 13, 14
presumed consent, 232
Prigogine, Ilya, 172
procreative liberty, xvii, 135, 136, 141,
143, 148, 163, 218, 238, 261, 276
See also reproductive right
prostheses, xvii, 39, 40, 47, 97
Prozac, xiv, 46, 205, 239
public health, 12
Q
Quality Adjusted Life Year (QALY), xix,
234, 235, 237, 239, 240
R
racism, xv, xvii, 56, 75, 78, 80, 83, 91,
97, 105, 106, 110, 114, 117, 122, 125,
131, 132, 145, 182, 183, 221, 259, 282
Ramsey, Paul, 272
Rand, Ayn, 166, 255
Reagan, Ronald, 60, 61, 85
Recombinant DNA Advisory Commit-
tee, 244
reconciliation ecology, 213
Redesigning Humans, xiv, 276
Rees, Martin, 119, 265, 266, 280
Reeve, Christopher, 18, 210, 211, 279
Regis, Ed, 164, 167, 275
religious conservatives
Christian Right, 64, 68, 79, 85, 87, 90,
91, 109–112, 121, 153, 211, 272
deep ecologists, 120–23
reproductive cloning, 62, 65, 71, 90,
201, 245
reproductive rights, 21, 122, 138, 161,
163, 208, 282
procreative liberty, xvii, 135, 136, 141,
143, 148, 163, 218, 238, 261, 277
Resnick, David, 279
retardation, 13, 85
Rifkin, Jeremy, xi, xii, xiii, 63–67, 69, 92,
93, 122, 137, 169, 229, 230, 273, 274
Ritalin, 36, 37, 205, 239
Robertson, John, 136, 143, 163, 276
robots, 103, 104, 105, 215
Roco, Mihail C., 267
292
Index

Roe v. Wade, 21, 84, 89
Rogina, Blanka, 26
Roosevelt, Franklin, 128
Rosenzweig, Michael, 213
Rothman, Barbara Katz, 274
Rove, Karl, 211
Rucker, Rudy, 102, 104
Russell, Peter, 174, 277
S
Sandberg, Anders, 175, 176, 182
Savulescu, Julian, 147, 163, 276
Schiavo, Terri, 96
Scialabba, George, 130
selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs), 46–47
Sen, Amartya, 201
Sententia, Wrye, 209
Serenity Prayer, 9
Sessions, George, 120, 273
sex work, 11
Shaw, George Bernard, 155, 199,
255
Shostak, Stanley, 99
Siegler, Mark, ix
Silver, Lee, 131, 276
Singer, Peter, 82, 93, 140, 147, 198, 233,
271, 279
singularitarianism, 174
Singularity, The, 171–175, 205, 248, 259,
277–278
slavery, 8, 80, 81, 91, 104, 105, 114, 188,
205
smart drugs, 38
Smart, John, 174
Smith, Wesley J., 107, 111, 246
social democracy, xviii, 23, 48, 68, 73,
113, 133, 179, 190–192, 200–202, 215,
260, 279, 281
Socialist International, 281
Society for the Promotion of Elf
Welfare, 91
Solum, Lawrence B., 105, 271
space exploration, xviii
spontaneous order, 166, 168
Stapledon, Olaf, 159, 275
Star Trek, 18, 102, 104, 160
stem cells, xiii, 18, 27, 38, 65, 70, 89–91,
96, 101, 210, 211, 229, 230, 231, 240,
244, 274
Sterling, Bruce, 172, 213, 275
Stock, Gregory, xiv, xv, 15, 109, 139,
150, 174, 180, 276, 277
Stocking, Carol, ix
stroke, 25, 26, 45, 118
structural unemployment, 206, 216
Students for a Democratic Society, 67,
129
suicide, 46, 58, 111, 188
T
technogaianism, 175, 218
TechnoRapture, See Singularity
Terminator, xiii, 103, 119, 150, 151, 171,
174
TerrorDAQ, 170
Tester, Jason, 199
therapeutic cloning, 71, 90, 274, 282
Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, 93, 230
Thomson, J.J., 87
Tofﬂer, Alvin, 58–60, 101, 144, 270
Tompkins, Douglas, 273
Tooley, Michael, 82, 271
transcranial magnetic stimulation, 47
transgender, xix, 21, 22, 207, 281
Transhumanist Declaration, 103, 168,
176–178, 276, 278
Transhumanist FAQ, 168, 176, 178, 277,
278
Index
293

Transhumanist Frequently Asked Ques-
tions, 176, 178, 179, 182, 247, 248,
264
transplants, xi, 79
transsexuals, See transgender
Trent, Jonathan, 3
Trotsky, Leon, 127
U
Uniform Determination of Death Act,
95
Union of Concerned Scientists, 211,
282
United Nations, 82, 90, 191, 
264, 265
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 82, 264
Universal Declaration on the Human
Genome and Human Rights, 
82, 198
Universal Health Care Action Network,
283
uplift, 94, 222, 223, 225–227
uploading, 41, 101, 163, 277
U.S. presidents’ bioethics commissions
Bush’s President’s Council on
Bioethics, xiii, xiv, 30, 31, 62, 63,
77, 90, 112, 211, 259, 268, 269, 270,
272
Carter’s Commission for the Study of
Ethical Problems in Medicine and
Biomedical and Behavioral 
Research, 61
Clinton’s Presidential Bioethics 
Advisory Commission, 62
utopianism, 56, 113, 127, 158, 171, 188,
194, 196, 278
V
Veatch, Robert, 94
Veenhoven, Ruut, 50, 270
Vinge, Vernor, 172, 277
Viridian movement, 213
Vita-More, Natasha, 165, 167, 268
Voldemort, Lord, 91
W
Wade, Nicholas, 197
Walker, Mark, ix, 180, 251, 256, 257,
281
War on Drugs, 11, 45, 50, 208, 209
Wells, H.G., 275
What Sort of People Should There Be?, xi,
140, 162, 200, 276
Wicker, Randolph, 208, 279
Wikler, Daniel, xiv, 232, 279
Winner, Langdon, 125, 126, 274
Wired, xv, 117, 167, 194, 209, 246, 273
Wise, Steven, 94, 271, 282
World Health Organization, 24, 152,
234, 265
World Social Forum, 260, 283
World Transhumanist Association, ix,
xviii, 98, 103, 106, 155, 168, 175–184,
247, 259, 264, 275, 278, 281
WorldWatch, 19, 151, 274
Wright, Robert, 175
X
Xavier, xix, 247
X-men, xix, 247
Y
“yuck factor” ethics, 75–78, 217, 272
Yudkowsky, Eliezer, 43, 174, 248
294
Index

