See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/200086092
Human-centered design considered harmful
Article  in  interactions · July 2005
DOI: 10.1145/1070960.1070976
CITATIONS
319
READS
29,090
2 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Design View project
Donald Arthur Norman
University of California, San Diego
355 PUBLICATIONS   62,303 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Donald Arthur Norman on 17 May 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Human-centered design has become such a domi-
nant theme in design that it is now accepted by
interface and application designers automatically,
without thought, let alone criticism. That’s a danger-
ous state—when things are treated as accepted
wisdom. The purpose of this essay is to provoke
thought, discussion, and reconsideration of some of
the fundamental principles of human-centered
design. These principles, I suggest, can be helpful,
misleading, or wrong. At times, they might even be
harmful. Activity-centered design might be superior.
Know Your User
If there is any principle that is sacred to those in
the field of user-interface design and human-com-
puter interaction, it is “know your user.” After all,
how can one design something for people without a
deep, detailed knowledge of those people? The
plethora of bad designs in the world would seem to
be excellent demonstrations of the perils of ignor-
ing the people for whom the design is intended.
Human-centered design was developed to overcome
the poor design of software products. By emphasiz-
ing the needs and abilities of those who were to
use the software, usability and understandability of
products has indeed been improved. But despite
these improvements, software complexity is still with
us. Even companies that pride themselves on fol-
lowing human-centered principles still have com-
plex, confusing products.
If it is so critical to understand the particular users
of a product, then what happens when a product is
designed to be used by almost anyone in the world?
There are many designs that do work well for every-
one. This is paradoxical, and it is this very paradox
that led me to reexamine common dogma.
Most items in the world have been designed
without the benefit of user studies and the methods
of human-centered design. Yet they do quite well.
Moreover, these include some of the most success-
ful objects of our modern, technological worlds.
Consider two representative examples:
TThhee AAuuttoommoobbiillee..
People all over the world learn
to drive quite successfully with roughly the same
configuration of controls. There were no systematic
studies of users. Rather, early automobiles tried a
variety of configurations, initially copying the seat-
ing and steering arrangements of horse-drawn car-
riages, going through tillers and rods, and then vari-
ous hand and foot controls until the current scheme
evolved. 
EEvveerryyddaayy OObbjjeeccttss..
Just look around: kitchen
utensils, garden tools, woodworking tools, typewrit-
ers, cameras, and sporting equipment vary some-
what from culture to culture, but on the whole, they
are more similar than not. People all over the world
manage to learn them—and manage quite well.
AAccttiivviittyy--CCeenntteerreedd DDeessiiggnn..
Why do these devices
work so well? The basic reason is that they were all
developed with a deep understanding of the activi-
ties that were to be performed: Call this activity-
centered design. Many were not even designed in
the common sense of the term; rather, they evolved
with time. Each new generation of builders slowly
improved the product upon the previous generation,
based on feedback from their own experiences as
well as from their customers. Slow, evolutionary folk
design. But even for those devices created by for-
mal design teams, populated with people whose job
title was “designer,” these designers used their own
understanding of the activities to be performed to
determine how the device would be operated. The
: / 14
i n t e r a c t i o n s
/
j u l y  +  a u g u s t  2 0 0 5
Human-Centered Design Considered Harmful
BByy DDoonnaalldd AA.. NNoorrmmaann >> NNiieellsseenn NNoorrmmaann GGrroouupp >> nnoorrmmaann@@nnnnggrroouupp..ccoomm
I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I

: / 15
i n t e r a c t i o n s
/
j u l y  +  a u g u s t  2 0 0 5
fresh
users were supposed to understand the task and to
understand the designers’ intentions. 
Activities Are Not the Same as Tasks
Do note the emphasis on the word “activity” as
opposed to “task.” There is a subtle difference. I
use the terms in a hierarchical fashion. At the high-
est levels are activities, which are composed of
tasks, which themselves are composed of actions,
and actions are made up of operations. The hierar-
chical structure comes from my own brand of
“activity theory,” heavily motivated by early Russian
and Scandinavian research. To me, an activity is a
coordinated, integrated set of tasks. For example,
mobile phones that combine appointment books,
diaries and calendars, note-taking facilities, text
messaging, and cameras can do a good job of sup-
porting communication activities. This one single
device integrates several tasks: looking up numbers,
dialing, talking, note taking, checking one’s diary or
calendar, and exchanging photographs, text mes-
sages, and emails. One activity, many tasks.
What Adapts? Technology or People?
The historical record contains numerous examples
of successful devices that required people to adapt
to and learn the devices. People were expected to
acquire a good understanding of the activities to be
performed and of the operation of the technology.
None of this “tools adapt to the people” non-
sense—people adapt to the tools.
Think about that last point. A fundamental corol-
lary to the principle of human-centered design has
always been that technology should adapt to peo-
ple, not people to the technology. Is this really true?
Consider the history of the following successful
technologies.
TThhee CClloocckk ((aanndd WWaattcchh))..
An arbitrary division of
the year and day into months, weeks, days, hours,
minutes, and seconds, all according to physical prin-
ciples that differ from psychological or biological
ones, now rules our lives. We eat when our watches
tell us it is meal time, not when we are hungry. We
awake according to the harsh call of the alarm, not
when we are rested. University classes are taught in
one-hour periods, three times a week, in ten- to 15-
week sessions, not because this is good for educa-
tion, but because it makes for easier scheduling.
The extreme reliance on time is an accidental out-
growth of the rise of the factory and the resulting
technological society.
WWrriittiinngg SSyysstteemmss..
Consider printing, handwriting,
and typing. All are artificial and unnatural. It takes
people weeks, months, or even years to learn and
become skilled. One successful stylus-based text
input device for the Roman alphabet is graffiti—yet
another unnatural way of writing.
MMuussiiccaall IInnssttrruummeennttss..
Musical instruments are
complex and difficult to manipulate and can cause
severe medical problems. Musical notation is modal,
so the same representation on a treble clef has a
different interpretation on the bass clef. The usabili-
ty profession has long known of the problems with
modes, yet multiple staves have been with us for
approximately 1,000 years. It takes considerable
instruction and practice to become skilled at reading
and playing. The medical problems faced by musi-
cians are so severe that there are books, physicians,
Web pages and discussion groups devoted to them.
For example, repetitive stress injuries among violin-
ists and pianists are common. Neither the instru-
ments nor the notation would pass any human-cen-
tered design review.
Human-Centered versus Activity-
Centered: What’s the Difference?
What is going on? Why are such non-human-cen-
tered designs so successful? I believe there are two
reasons, one the activity-centered nature, and two
the communication of intention from the builders
and designers. Successful devices are those that fit
gracefully into the requirements of the underlying
activity, supporting them in a manner understand-
able by people. Understand the activity, and the
device is understandable. Builders and designers
often have good reasons for the way they construct-
ed the system. If these reasons can be explained,
then the task of learning the system is both eased

and made plausible. Yes, it takes years to learn to
play the violin, but people accept this because the
instrument itself communicates rather nicely the
relationship between strings and the resulting
sounds. Both the activity and the design are under-
standable, even if the body must be contorted to
hold, finger, and bow the instrument.
Activity-centered design (ACD) is actually very
much like human-centered design (HCD). Many of
the best attributes of HCD carry over. But there are
several differences, first and foremost that of atti-
tude. Attitude? Yes, the mindset of the designer.
The activities, after all, are human activities, so
they reflect the possible range of actions, of condi-
tions under which people are able to function, and
the constraints of real people. A deep understanding
of people is still a part of ACD. But ACD is more: It
also requires a deep understanding of the technolo-
gy, of the tools, and of the reasons for the activities.
Tools Define the Activity: 
People Really Do Adapt to Technology
HCD asserts as a basic tenet that technology
adapts to the person. In ACD, we admit that much
of human behavior can be thought of as an adapta-
tion to the powers and limitations of technology.
Everything, from the hours we sleep to the way we
dress, eat, interact with one another, travel, learn,
communicate, play, and relax. Not just the way we
do these things, but with whom, when, and the way
we are supposed to act, variously called mores, cus-
toms, and conventions.
People do adapt to technology. It changes social
and family structure. It changes our lives. Activity-
centered design not only understands this, but
might very well exploit it.
Learn the activity, and the tools are understood.
That’s the mantra of the human-centered design
community. But this is actually a misleading state-
ment, because for many activities, the tools define
the activity. Maybe the reality is just the converse:
Learn the tools, and the activity is understood.
Consider art, where much time is spent learning
the vagaries of the media. If you want to do oil
painting, then you need to understand oil, and
brushes, and painting surfaces—even how and
when to clean your brush. Is this the tool wagging
the dog? Yes, and that is how it always is, how it
always shall be. The truly excellent artists have a
deep and thorough understanding of their tools and
technologies. It isn’t enough to have an artistic
sense. So too with sports, with cooking, with music,
and with all other major activities that use tools.
To the human-centered design community, the
tool should be invisible; it should not get in the way.
With activity-centered design, the tool is the way.
Why Might HCD Be Harmful?
Why might a human-centered design approach ever
be harmful? After all, it has evolved as a direct
result of the many problems people have with exist-
ing designs, problems that lead to frustration, grief,
lost time and effort, and, in safety-critical applica-
tions, errors, accidents, and death. Moreover, HCD
has demonstrated clear benefits: improved usability,
fewer errors during usage, and faster learning times.
What, then, are the concerns?
One concern is that the focus upon individual
people (or groups) might improve things for them
at the cost of making it worse for others. The more
something is tailored for the particular likes, dislikes,
skills, and needs of a particular target population,
the less likely it will be appropriate for others.
The individual is a moving target. Design for the
individual of today, and the design will be wrong
tomorrow. Indeed, the more successful the product,
the more that it will no longer be appropriate. This
is because as individuals gain proficiency in usage,
they need different interfaces than were required
when they were beginners. In addition, the success-
ful product often leads to unanticipated new uses
that are very apt not to be well supported by the
original design.
But there are more-serious concerns: First, the
focus upon humans detracts from support for the
activities themselves; second, too much attention to
: / 16
i n t e r a c t i o n s
/
j u l y  +  a u g u s t  2 0 0 5
I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I

: / 17
i n t e r a c t i o n s
/
j u l y  +  a u g u s t  2 0 0 5
fresh
the needs of the users can lead to a lack of cohe-
sion and added complexity in the design. Consider
the dynamic nature of applications, where any task
requires a sequence of operations, and activities can
comprise multiple, overlapping tasks. Here is where
the difference in focus becomes evident, and where
the weakness of the focus on the users shows up.
Static Screens 
versus Dynamic Sequences
We find that work in the kitchen does not consist of
independent, separate acts, but of a series of inter-
related processes. (Christine Frederick, The Labor-
Saving Kitchen.1919.)
The methods of HCD seem centered around static
understanding of each set of controls, each screen
on an electronic display. But as a result, the sequen-
tial operations of activities are often ill-supported.
The importance of support for sequences has been
known ever since the time-and-motion studies of the
early 1900s, as the quotation from Frederick, above,
illustrates. Simply delete the phrase “in the kitchen”
and her words are still a powerful prescription for
design. She was writing in 1919: What has hap-
pened in the past 100 years to make us forget this?
Note that the importance of support for sequences
is still deeply understood within industrial engineer-
ing and human factors and ergonomics communities.
Somehow, it seems less prevalent within the human-
computer interaction community.
Many of the systems that have passed through
HCD design phases and usability reviews are
superb at the level of the static, individual display,
but fail to support the sequential requirements of
the underlying tasks and activities. The HCD meth-
ods tend to miss this aspect of behavior: Activity-
centered methods focus upon it.
Too Much Listening to Users
One basic philosophy of HCD is to listen to users,
to take their complaints and critiques seriously. Yes,
listening to customers is always wise, but acceding
to their requests can lead to overly complex
designs. Several major software companies, proud
of their human-centered philosophy, suffer from this
problem. Their software gets more complex and less
understandable with each revision. Activity-centered
philosophy tends to guard against this error
because the focus is upon the activity, not the
human. As a result, there is a cohesive, well-articu-
lated design model. If a user suggestion fails to fit
within this design model, it should be discarded.
Alas, all too many companies, proud of listening to
their users, would put it in.
Here, what is needed is a strong, authoritative
designer who can examine the suggestions and
evaluate them in terms of the requirements of the
activity. When necessary, it is essential to be able to
ignore the requests. This is the goal to cohesion
and understandability. Paradoxically, the best way to
satisfy users is sometimes to ignore them.
Note that this philosophy applies in the service
domain as well. Thus, Southwest Airlines has been
successful despite the fact that it ignores the two
most popular complaints of its passengers: provide
reserved seating and inter-airline baggage transfer.
Southwest decided that its major strategic advan-
tage was inexpensive, reliable transportation, and
this required a speedy turn-around time at each
destination. Passengers complain, but they still pre-
fer the airline.
Sometimes what is needed is a design dictator
who says, “Ignore what users say: I know what’s
best for them.” The case of Apple Computer is illus-
trative. Apple’s products have long been admired for
ease of use. Nonetheless, Apple replaced its well
known, well-respected human interface design team
with a single, authoritative (dictatorial) leader. Did
usability suffer? On the contrary: Its new products
are considered prototypes of great design. 
The “listen to your users” produces incoherent
designs. The “ignore your users” can produce horror
stories, unless the person in charge has a clear vision
for the product, what I have called the “conceptual
model.” The person in charge must follow that vision
and not be afraid to ignore findings. Yes, listen to

customers, but don’t always do what they say.
Now consider the method employed by the
human-centered design community. The emphasis is
often upon the person, not the activity. Look at
those detailed scenarios and personas: Honestly,
now, did they really inform your design? Did know-
ing that the persona is that of a 37-year-old, single
mother, studying for the MBA at night, really help
lay out the control panel or determine the screen
layout and, more importantly, to design the appro-
priate action sequence? Did user modeling, formal
or informal, help determine just what technology
should be employed?
Show me an instance of a major technology that
was developed according to principles of human-
centered design, or rapid prototype and test, or
user modeling, or the technology adapting to the
user. Note the word “major.” I have no doubt that
many projects were improved, perhaps even dra-
matically, by the use of these techniques. But name
one fundamental, major enhancement to our tech-
nologies that came about this way.
Human-centered design does guarantee good
products. It can lead to clear improvements of bad
ones. Moreover, good human-centered design will
avoid failures. It will ensure that products do work,
that people can use them. But is good design the
goal? Many of us wish for great design. Great
design, I contend, comes from breaking the rules,
by ignoring the generally accepted practices, by
pushing forward with a clear concept of the end
result, no matter what. This ego-centric, vision-
directed design results in both great successes and
great failures. If you want great rather than good,
this is what you must do.
There is a lot more to say on this topic. My pre-
cepts here are themselves dangerous. We dare not
let the entire world of designers follow their
instincts and ignore conventional wisdom: Most lack
the deep understanding of the activity coupled with
a clear conceptual model. Moreover, there certainly
are sufficient examples of poor design out in the
world to argue against my position. But note, many
of those bad designs are profitable products. Hmm.
What does that suggest? Would they be even more
profitable had human-centered design principles
been followed? Perhaps. But perhaps they might
not have existed at all. Think about that.
Yes, we all know of disastrous attempts to intro-
duce computer systems into organizations where
the failure was a direct result of a lack of under-
standing of the people and system. Or was it a
result of not understanding the activities? Maybe
what is needed is more activity-centered design;
Maybe failures come from a shallow understanding
of the needs of the activities that are to be sup-
ported. Note too that in safety-critical applications,
a deep knowledge of the activity is fundamental.
Safety is usually a complex system issue, and with-
out deep understanding of all that is involved, the
design is apt to be faulty.
Still, I think it’s time to rethink some of our funda-
mental suppositions. The focus upon the human
may be misguided. A focus on the activities rather
than the people might bring benefits. Moreover,
substituting activity-centered for human-centered
design does not mean discarding all that we have
learned. Activities involve people, and so any sys-
tem that supports the activities must of necessity
support the people who perform them. We can
build upon our prior knowledge and experience,
both from within the field of HCD, but also from
industrial engineering and ergonomics.
All fields have fundamental presuppositions.
Sometimes it is worthwhile to reexamine them, to
consider the pros and cons and see whether they
might be modified or even replaced. Is this the
case for those of us interested in human-centered
design? We will never know unless we do the
exercise.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Don Norman wears
many hats, including co-founder of the
Nielsen Norman Group, professor at
Northwestern University, and author; his lat-
est book is Emotional Design. He lives at www.jnd.org. 
: / 19
i n t e r a c t i o n s
/
j u l y  +  a u g u s t  2 0 0 5
fresh
I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I 
View publication stats
View publication stats

