Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique
of naturalism
Dermot Moran
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008
Abstract
Throughout his career, Husserl identiﬁes naturalism as the greatest
threat to both the sciences and philosophy. In this paper, I explicate Husserl’s
overall diagnosis and critique of naturalism and then examine the speciﬁc tran-
scendental aspect of his critique. Husserl agreed with the Neo-Kantians in rejecting
naturalism. He has three major critiques of naturalism: First, it (like psychologism
and for the same reasons) is ‘countersensical’ in that it denies the very ideal laws
that it needs for its own justiﬁcation. Second, naturalism essentially misconstrues
consciousness by treating it as a part of the world. Third, naturalism is the inevitable
consequence of a certain rigidiﬁcation of the ‘natural attitude’ into what Husserl
calls the ‘naturalistic attitude’. This naturalistic attitude ‘reiﬁes’ and it ‘absolutizes’
the world such that it is treated as taken-for-granted and ‘obvious’. Husserl’s
transcendental phenomenological analysis, however, discloses that the natural
attitude is, despite its omnipresence in everyday life, not primary, but in fact is
relative to the ‘absolute’ transcendental attitude. The mature Husserl’s critique of
naturalism is therefore based on his acceptance of the absolute priority of the
transcendental attitude. The paradox remains that we must start from and, in a
sense, return to the natural attitude, while, at the same time, restricting this attitude
through the on-going transcendental vigilance of the universal epoche´.
Keywords
Husserl  Naturalism  Natural attitude  Transcendental philosophy 
epoche´
D. Moran (&)
University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland
e-mail: dermot.moran@ucd.ie
123
Cont Philos Rev
DOI 10.1007/s11007-008-9088-3

1 Husserl’s life-long engagement with naturalism
Throughout his career, from the Logical Investigations (1900/1901 (hereafter LU),
where his speciﬁc target is named as ‘psychologism’)1 to the Crisis of European
Sciences (ﬁrst 2 sections originally published in Philosophia in 1936, hereafter
‘Crisis’),2 Husserl continually identiﬁes naturalism as the greatest threat to the
possibility of a genuinely grounded science and of genuine philosophy. Indeed, he
believed that naturalism was not just a philosophical error but even threatened the
preservation of genuine human values and the possibility of living a fully rational,
communal life.
In this paper, I shall outline Husserl’s overall diagnosis of naturalism and focus in
particular on the transcendental aspect of Husserl’s critique.3 This critique has three
phases. First, Husserl argues that naturalism (like psychologism and for the same
reasons) is ‘countersensical’ (widersinnig), i.e. it is involved in a performative self-
contradiction when it explicitly repudiates the very ideal laws that it requires for its
own articulation and justiﬁcation. Similarly, naturalism inevitably fails in its
attempt to reduce validity to factuality. Second, Husserl proposes that naturalism
essentially misconstrues and mischaracterizes the irreducibly intentional nature of
consciousness. The project of naturalistic objectivism (see Crisis § 14) and the
‘naturalization of consciousness’ (Naturalisierung des Bewusstseins, see ‘Philoso-
phy as a Rigorous Science’, hereafter ‘PRS’)4 misconstrue egoic consciousness by
treating it as a residue item or ‘tag-end’ (Endchen der Welt, Cartesian Meditations §
10)5 within the world, rather than recognising subjectivity as a transcendental
condition for the possibility of objectivity and worldhood as such. As Husserl writes
in the Crisis:
Only a radical inquiry back into subjectivity—and speciﬁcally the subjectivity
which ultimately brings about all world-validity, with its content and in all its
prescientiﬁc and scientiﬁc modes, and into the ‘‘what’’ and the ‘‘how’’ of the
rational accomplishments—can make objective truth comprehensible and
1 Husserl (1975b §§ 17–51). The second volume is published in two volumes as Husserliana XIX/1 and
XIX/2, ed. Ursula Panzer (1984), trans. John Findlay (2001). Hereafter ‘LU’ followed by the
Investigation number, paragraph number and pagination of English translation (vol. 1 = I; vol. 2 = II),
followed by Husserliana volume and page number.
2 The critical edition of the Crisis was published as Husserl (1954), trans. David Carr (1970). Hereafter
‘Crisis’ followed by English pagination and Husserliana (hereafter ‘Hua’) volume and page number.
3 Earlier versions of the paper were presented to the Philosophy Colloquia at Northwestern University
(27 January 06), The New School for Social Research (23 February 06), King’s College London
(15 March 06) and the 36th Meeting of the Husserl Circle, Wellesley College (22 June 06). I am grateful
to commentators for their comments including Cristina Lafont, Tom McCarthy, Steve Crowell and Tom
Nenon.
4 Husserl (2002a, pp. 249–295); originally Logos. Internationale Zeitschrift fu¨r Philosophie und Kultur 1
(1910–1911), pp. 289–341 (reprinted in Husserliana vol. XXV). Hereafter ‘PRS’ with Brainard
pagination, followed by German pagination of original.
5 Husserl (1931). The German text was not published until 1950 as Cartesianische Meditationen und
Pariser Vortra¨ge, hrsg. Stephan Strasser, Husserliana I (1950), trans. D. Cairns as Cartesian Meditations.
An Introduction to Phenomenology (1960). Hereafter ‘CM’ followed by page number of English
translation, and Husserliana volume and page number.
D. Moran
123

arrive at the ultimate ontic meaning (Seinssinn) of the world. Thus it is not the
being of the world as unquestioned, taken for granted, which is primary in
itself; … rather what is primary in itself is subjectivity, understood as that
which naı¨vely pregives the being of the world and then rationalizes or (what is
the same thing) objectiﬁes it. (Crisis § 14, p. 69; VI 70)
Husserl’s third strategy involves an even more explicitly transcendental move
that can only be understood within the context of his explicit adoption of
transcendental idealism around 1907/1908. According to this view, naturalism is
portrayed as an inevitable consequence of a certain rigidiﬁcation of the ‘natural
attitude’ (die natu¨rliche Einstellung, Ideas I § 27) into what he calls the ‘naturalistic
attitude’ (see for instance Ideas II § 49). Already in PRS Husserl acknowledges the
hold of naturalism on our intuitions:
It is not easy for us to overcome the primeval habit of living and thinking in
the naturalistic attitude and thus of naturalistically falsifying the psychical.
(PRS, p. 271; 314)
The ‘spell of the naturalistic attitude’ and ‘primeval naturalism’ prevent us
from grasping the psychical as such and indeed, in general, from seeing essences.
Husserl’s point is that ‘nature’ itself rather than being a brute given must rather be
understood as itself the correlate of a speciﬁc attitude—the natural attitude. The
natural attitude (called the ‘empirical attitude’ or the ‘attitude of experience’ in his
1910/1911 Basic Problems of Phenomenology, see §§ 7, 96), despite its
indispensability in everyday human life, is essentially ‘one-sided’ and ‘closed’
(Crisis, p. 205; VI 209) because it fails to recognise its own nature as an attitude
(Einstellung) which is much more than one psychological state among others. In
fact, as Husserl’s transcendental phenomenological analysis purports to disclose,
the natural attitude itself is, despite its omnipresence and everydayness, relative to
the ‘absolute’ transcendental attitude. The mature Husserl’s critique of naturalism
is therefore based on his acceptance of the absolute priority of the transcendental
attitude. This leads Husserl into some explicitly thematized paradoxes, speciﬁ-
cally: how human consciousness is both ‘in the world’ and ‘for the world’ as he
puts it in Crisis § 53.
A persistent trait of twentieth-century Continental philosophy has been its
resolute anti-naturalism. In this respect, Husserl must be credited with great
prescience for—very early on—diagnosing naturalism as the dominant philosoph-
ical position of the twentieth century, one that demands both careful descriptive
attention and also ‘radical critique’ (PRS, pp. 253, 293), which he interprets (as
Heidegger too will do in Being and Time) as a ‘positive critique in terms of
foundations and methods’. When Husserl speaks of naturalism, he speciﬁcally has in
mind late the nineteenth-century versions, espoused, for instance, by Auguste
Comte and Ernst Mach, but he also traces naturalism back to the beginnings of
6 See Husserl (2006).
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

modern philosophy, especially Hobbes, Locke, Hume (somewhat ambiguously since
Hume is also, for Husserl, a proto-transcendental philosopher),7 ‘and a naturalised
Kant’. Gradually he extended the term ‘naturalism’ to cover every ‘objectivistic
philosophy’ (Crisis, § 56, p. 194; VI 197) that had sprung up in response to the
extraordinary progress in the natural sciences. By 1912–1913 Husserl was explicitly
criticizing naturalism from an explicitly ‘philosophical’ and indeed ‘transcendental’
point of view, in that it is seduced by the spirit of unquestioning (‘naı¨ve’)
acceptance of the world that permeates the natural attitude, leading to the
‘reiﬁcation’ (Verdinglichung) of the world, and its ‘philosophical absolutizing’
(Verabsolutierung, Ideas I, § 55, p. 129; Hua III/1 107).8 Naturalism (and
‘objectivism’) which begins from the presumption of a given ‘ready-made world’ is
opposed to transcendentalism which Husserl characterizes as follows:
Transcendentalism, on the other hand, says: the ontic meaning (der Seinssinn)
of the pregiven life-world is a subjective structure (subjektives Gebilde), it is
the achievement (Leistung) of experiencing, prescientiﬁc life. (Crisis § 14,
p. 69; VI 70)
For Husserl, naturalism came about due to the success of modern science. It
embraces the view that the methods of the natural sciences provide the only road
to truth; as Husserl says: ‘the naturalist … sees nothing but nature and ﬁrst and
foremost physical nature’ (PRS, p. 253; 294). Interestingly, in Germany in
Husserl’s day, the debate about naturalism involved also the issue of whether the
methods of natural science were sufﬁcient or whether they needed to be
supplemented
by
the
separate
methodologies
of
the
cultural
sciences
or
Geisteswissenschaften (Dilthey, Rickert).9 Indeed Husserl, in his ‘Philosophy as
a Rigorous Science’ (1910/1911) paper, is not satisﬁed merely to criticise
naturalism in favour of embracing a cultural-sciences approach. In fact, he is
equally vigorous in criticising historicism (Dilthey—without naming him) as itself
being caught up in the same snare as naturalism, and as also leading to sceptical
relativism.10
7 Husserl speaks of Hume’s ‘naturalized sensualism, which could see only a collection of data ﬂoating in
an insubstantial void’ in Formal and Transcendental Logic § 100; see Husserl (1974a, p. 227); trans.
D. Cairns as Formal and Transcendental Logic (1969, p. 257). Hereafter ‘FTL’ followed by the page
number of the English translation and the volume and page number of the Husserliana edition. Husserl
also sees Hume as a transcendental thinker (Erste Philosophie I, Husserl (1965), Hua VII 176) and even
thinks the transcendental motif was kept alive in a strange way even in Mill, and especially in Avenarius
(Crisis, p. 195; VI 198).
8 See later Hua XXXIV 258, where Husserl (2002b) accuses anthropologism of ‘falsely absolutizing a
positivistic world’.
9 For an overview of naturalism in the twentieth century, see Keil (2008).
10 This technique of diagnosing a common failure under opposing intellectual systems is regularly
exploited by Hilary Putnam—who himself is a great admirer of Husserl in this regard. Putnam is one of
the most relentless critics of reductive naturalism, a position he formerly espoused (under the inﬂuence of
Quine among others). The project of a naturalistic scientiﬁc metaphysics is disastrous, for Putnam,
because it is in essence a reductive scientism, ‘one of the most dangerous contemporary tendencies’,
leading ultimately to scepticism and the destruction of the human point of view. This is almost an exact
repetition of Husserl’s views in the Crisis and Putnam like Husserl points to Galilean science as a major
culprit. See Putnam (1983, p. 211).
D. Moran
123

Already in the Logical Investigations, Husserl had been a critic of naturalism (in
the guise of psychologism) without actually naming it, but, when he moved from
Go¨ttingen to Freiburg—the home of Southwest Neo-Kantianism—he joined forces
with the Kantians in attacking the common enemy. Thus, for instance, in a letter
dated 20 December 1915, addressed to the leading Neo-Kantian Heinrich Rickert,
Husserl commented that he found himself in alliance with German idealism against
‘our common enemy’ (als unseren gemeinsamen Feind)—the ‘naturalism of our
time’.11 Similarly, and somewhat earlier, the Neo-Kantian Jonas Cohn had written
to Husserl in 1911, after his Logos article appeared, to emphasise their broad
agreement concerning their ‘battle-position (Kampfstellung) against naturalism and
historicism’.12
Husserl’s most extensive critique of naturalism is developed within an explicitly
transcendental idealist approach. Thus, in the Crisis, despite his former antipathy to
German idealism of a speculative kind, Husserl acknowledges that transcendental
idealism is the only philosophy to have successfully resisted the lure of naturalism
(Crisis, p. 337; VI 271). True phenomenology must become a resolutely anti-
naturalistic ‘pure’ or ‘transcendental’ (the terms are equivalent in Ideas I) science of
subjectivity, focusing on the essential nature of epistemic achievements, avoiding
mischaracterizing this subjectivity in ‘worldly’ or ‘mundane’ terms. Husserl insists
in the Fourth Cartesian Meditation: ‘phenomenology is eo ipso ‘‘transcendental
idealism’’, though in a fundamentally and essentially new sense’ (CM § 41, p. 86;
Hua I 118). And he continues:
The proof of this idealism is therefore phenomenology itself. Only someone
who misunderstands either the deepest sense of intentional method, or that of
transcendental reduction, or perhaps both, can attempt to separate phenom-
enology from transcendental idealism. (CM § 41, p. 86; Hua I 119)
This rigorous attempt to contain naturalism within transcendental idealism leads
the late Husserl into some paradoxes we shall explore towards the end of this paper.
2 Naturalism in Husserl’s ‘Philosophy as a Rigorous Science’
Although he addresses the subject in his 1906/1907 lectures entitled Introduction to
Logic and Theory of Knowledge (Husserliana XXIV), Husserl’s most extensive
treatment of naturalism—by far the strongest critique of it of the ﬁrst half of the
twentieth century—is to be found in his essay ‘Philosophy as a Rigorous Science’,
commissioned by the Freiburg Neo-Kantian Heinrich Rickert for his new journal,
Logos. On the positive side, Husserl recognised the aspiration of naturalism to
establish philosophy as a truly rigorous science:
11 E. Husserl, letter to Rickert, December 1915, in Briefwechsel, ed. K. Schuhmann in collaboration with
E. Schuhmann. Husserliana Dokumente, 10 Volumes (1994a), vol. 5, p. 178. See also Kern (1964, p. 35).
12 See Jonas Cohn’s letter of 31 March 1911 to Husserl, in Husserl, Briefwechsel, ed. K. Schuhmann and
E. Schuhmann, Vol. 5, p. 17.
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

From the very beginning naturalism has resolutely pursued the idea of a
rigorously scientiﬁc reform of philosophy and even believed at any given time,
both in its earlier and in its modern forms, that it had already realized this idea.
(PRS, p. 253; 293)
As such, naturalism will always be, in Husserl’s opinion, the most enduring
temptation for scientists.
In this essay, broadening his critique of psychologism, Husserl diagnoses
naturalism too as containing within it a ‘countersense’ (Widersinn, PRS, p. 254;
295), or a ‘countersensical circle’ (PRS, p. 259; 300). He repeats this assessment in
the Crisis: naturalism is ‘a countersensical circle’ (ein widersinniger Zirkel, Crisis,
p. 204; VI 208), assuming what it sets out to prove. ‘Countersense’ is a speciﬁc
technical notion in Husserl (carefully distinguished from Unsinn or nonsense in LU
I § 15), deﬁned as an ‘evident inconsistency’ (PRS, p. 254; 295).13 Naturalism then
has essentially the same fault that he had earlier (in LU) diagnosed in psychologism,
then the ‘dominant’ outlook in Germany (LU XVIII 261) ‘in our psychologically
obsessed age’ (LU, Prol. § 28).
In fact, in his 1910/1911 essay, Husserl refers back explicitly to the ﬁrst volume
of LU, Prolegomena to Pure Logic (1900), esp. §§ 25–29, and indeed thereafter he
cited these sections as an effective philosophical refutation of naturalism and
positivism.14 In these sections of the Prolegomena Husserl mounts a defence of the
a priori ideality of the Principle of Non-Contradiction (PNC) (‘the impossibility of
the joint truth of contradictory propositions’, LU Prol. § 25) against ‘psychologistic
empiricism’ (‘a` la Mill’, Hua XX/1 286), which, treats the principle as stating that
two mental states exclude one another, or that someone cannot think both
propositions at once. For Husserl, PNC is neither a generalisation from factual
experience, nor a natural law, nor even a norm of thinking, but it is a pure, a priori
ideal truth. To think otherwise is to betray the very essence of science by explaining
acts of knowledge in terms of naturally occurring temporal events in the world
(Prol. § 26).
Our capacity to ideate universals in singulars, to have a ‘seeing’ (schauend)
grasp of a concept in an empirical presentation, and to be assured of the
identity of our conceptual intentions in repeated presentation, is presupposed
by the possibility of knowledge. (LU, Prol. § 29, I, p. 69; XVIII 109)
An empiricism which denied this is simply confused. Indeed, ‘it is only
inconsistency that keeps psychologism alive: to think it out to the end is already to
have given it up …’ (LU Prol. § 25, I, p. 56; Hua XVIII 88). Empiricism fails to
give an adequate account of experience and chieﬂy our intuitive experience of the
13 Hilary Putnam explicates his internal, pragmatic or commonsense realism ‘with a human face’ in
terms of what stands counter to it, namely, metaphysical or scientiﬁc realism, on the one hand, and
various forms of conceptual relativism which involve a loss of world, on the other. Putnam’s emphasis is
on safeguarding our common-sense intuitions about the world, while resisting any move towards absolute
metaphysics, and while rejecting all forms of dualism, especially the dualism of the world in itself and the
world as it appears, and the dualism of facts and values. He does this by showing that each side of his
contrast pair is caught in a countersensical set of claims, see Moran (2000, pp. 65–104).
14 Husserl refers to LU in PRS, pp. 254, 295, and again in Ideas I, § 20, pp. 37–38; Hua III/I 37–38.
D. Moran
123

ideal (e.g. universals, mathematical entities, essences, categorial objectivities, and
so on). Empiricism fails to account adequately for the universals and ideal entities it
necessarily employs.
All forms of naturalism (or ‘naturalistic objectivism’) harbour an inbuilt
‘countersense’ (Widersinn):
What characterizes all forms of extreme and consistent naturalism, from
popular materialism on down to the most recent sensation-monism and
energeticism, is, on the one hand, the naturalization of consciousness,
including all intentionally immanent givens of consciousness, and, on the
other hand, the naturalization of ideas, and thus of all absolute ideals and
norms. (PRS, p. 254; 294–295)15
15 Incidentally, the ‘sensation-monism’ here is a reference to Mach’s phenomenalist theory in his
Analysis of Sensations (Mach, 1914, revised and expanded 1913). Bertrand Russell would later
acknowledge in his My Philosophical Development (1995, p. 134) that his ‘neutral monism’ was inspired
by Mach’s book and the view developed by William James (2003) in his Essays in Radical Empiricism.
Mach’s sensationalism is summed up in the following passage of his Analysis of Sensations:
We see an object having a point S. If we touch S, that is, bring it into connexion with our body, we
receive a prick. We can see S, without feeling the prick. But as soon as we feel the prick we ﬁnd S on the
skin. The visible point, therefore, is a permanent nucleus, to which the prick is annexed, according to
circumstances, as something accidental. From the frequency of analogous occurrences we ultimately
accustom ourselves to regard all properties of bodies as ‘effects’ proceeding from permanent nuclei and
conveyed to the ego through the medium of the body; which effects we call sensations. By this operation,
however, these nuclei are deprived of their entire sensory content, and converted into mere mental
symbols. The assertion, then, is correct that the world consists only of our sensations. In which case we
have knowledge only of sensations, and the assumption of the nuclei referred to, or of a reciprocal action
between them, from which sensations proceed, turns out to be quite idle and superﬂuous. Such a view can
only suit with a half-hearted realism or a half-hearted philosophical criticism.
Mach is advocating a kind of neutral monism of sensations. Mach is responsible for the term ‘sensation
complexes’ that appears in Husserl. Mach writes in the Analysis of Sensations:
Let us consider, ﬁrst, the reciprocal relations of the elements of the complex A B C…, without
regarding K L M … (our body). All physical investigations are of this sort. A white ball falls upon a bell;
a sound is heard. The ball turns yellow before a sodium lamp, red before a lithium lamp. Here the
elements (A B C…) appear to be connected only with one another and to be independent of our body (K L
M…). But if we take santonin, the ball again turns yellow. If we press one eye to the side, we see two
balls. If we close our eyes entirely, there is no ball there at all. If we sever the auditory nerve, no sound is
heard. The elements = A B C…, therefore, are not only connected with one another, but also with K L
M; To this extent, and to this extent only, do we call A B C… sensations, and regard A B C as belonging
to the ego. In what follows, wherever the reader ﬁnds the terms ‘‘Sensation,’’ ‘‘Sensation-complex,’’ used
alongside of or instead of the expressions ‘‘element,’’ ‘‘complex of elements,’’ it must be borne in mind
that it is only in the connexion and relation in question, only in their functional dependence, that the
elements are sensations. In another functional relation they are at the same time physical objects. We only
use the additional term ‘‘sensations’’ to describe the elements, because most people are much more
familiar with the elements in question as sensations (colours, sounds, pressures, spaces, times, etc.), while
according to the popular conception it is particles of mass that are considered as physical elements, to
which the elements, in the sense here used, are attached as ‘‘properties’’ or ‘‘effects.’’
Mach concludes:
Thus the great gulf between physical and psychological research persists only when we acquiesce in
our habitual stereotyped conceptions. A colour is a physical object as soon as we consider its dependence,
for instance, upon its luminous source, upon other colours, upon temperatures, upon spaces, and so forth.
When we consider, however, its dependence upon the retina (the elements K L M …), it is a
psychological object, a sensation. Not the subject matter, but the direction of our investigation, is different
in the two domains. (Mach, 1914, see also Chap. II., pp. 43, 44).
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

In fact, there is only one speciﬁc area where Husserl acknowledges naturalism
has got it right, namely, in recognizing that body and soul form an experiential unity
(see Ideas II § 46, p. 176; Hua IV 168).16
It is noteworthy that, in the ‘Philosophy as Rigorous Science’ essay (as often
elsewhere), Husserl slips, without signalling it, from talking about the natural
attitude to the naturalistic attitude, something he also does in Ideas II § 49,
written in draft the following year (1912). In fact, Husserl seems to have a rather
complex view of the relation between the ‘natural attitude’, the ‘naturalistic
attitude’ and indeed what he occasionally refers to as the ‘nature attitude’ (die
naturale Einstellung) something we need to address later in this paper. In Ideas II,
however, it appears that the ‘nature attitude’ (Hua IV 179) is precisely the attitude
that correlates with things understood as belonging within the causal nexus of
‘nature’.
3 The transcendental critique of naturalism
Now, while Husserl in LU had already established the central moves of his
critique of a cluster of related notions then labelled ‘psychologism’, ‘extreme
empiricism’, ‘empirio-criticism’, and ‘positivism’, it was another half-decade
before he expanded his critique to naturalism. More notably, this mature critique
of naturalism went hand-in-hand with his explicit adoption of transcendental
idealism (from around 1908). This deeper analysis of naturalism now sees it as
almost an inevitable consequence of our natural way of living in the world. Under
the inﬂuence of Richard Avenarius (see The Basic Problems of Phenomenology §
10), he now presents naturalism as a philosophical reiﬁcation of the experience of
the world ‘in the natural attitude’.17 The natural lived world is in fact the correlate
or objectiﬁed outcome of the ‘natural attitude’ and naturalism is the outcome of
the ‘naturalistic attitude’ (referred to in PRS, Ideas II § 49, and in FTL § 100,
p. 262).
The natural attitude tends to treat everything as ‘given’ and hence as ‘real’ in
the same way; hence it treats consciousness as a fact of nature, as a piece of the
world:
A univocal determination of spirit through merely natural dependencies is
unthinkable, i.e. as reduction to something like physical nature … Subjects
cannot be dissolved into nature, for in that case what gives nature its sense
would be missing. (Ideas II § 64, p. 311; Hua IV 297)
Husserl will argue this collapse of constituting subjectivity into a mere fact of
nature involves a ‘countersense’.
16 See Husserl (1952a); trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer as Ideas pertaining to a Pure
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, Second Book, Husserl Collected Works III
(1989). Hereafter ‘Ideas II’.
17 For a discussion of Husserl’s relation to Avenarius and other positivists, see Summer (1985).
D. Moran
123

4 Husserlian and Kantian claims on the priority of consciousness
The claim that consciousness cannot simply be treated as part of the constituted
objective world but is a necessary condition for the possibility of objective
knowledge has, of course, a distinctly Kantian ring. Yet, already, in Prolegomena
(1900) to LU, Husserl had criticised Kant and (at least some of) the Neo-Kantians—
speciﬁcally Cristoph Sigwart (1830–1904), professor at Tu¨bingen, and Benno
Erdmann (1851–1922), professor at Berlin—for interpreting the ‘conditions for the
possibility of knowledge’ as located in the nature of human consciousness:
[Sigwart] always talks of our thought and its functions, when he is trying to
characterise logical necessity. (LU Prol. § 39 I, p. 84; XVIII 133)
Husserl himself distinguishes between subjective conditions which are ‘real
conditions (reale Bedingungen) rooted in the individual judging subject, or in the
various species of judging beings’ from ‘ideal conditions that lie in the form of
subjectivity as such’, which he prefers to call ‘noetic conditions’ (LU Prol. § 32,
I pp. 75–76; Hua XVIII 119). In one sense, both in LU and later, Husserl
acknowledges that it is an obvious truism to insist that knowledge consists of a
relation to a knower (see Erste Philosophie II, Hua VIII 38). On the other hand, this
claim conceals a host of transcendental confusions.
One error is called ‘speciﬁc relativism’ or ‘anthropologism’. Husserl calls
treating the logical laws as describing the thinking processes of human beings a kind
of ‘species relativism’ (der speziﬁsche Relativismus) or ‘anthropologism’ (Anthro-
pologismus, LU Prol. § 36). Anthropologism maintains that truth is relative to the
human species and, hence without humans, there would be no truth:
On Sigwart’s view, it would be a ﬁction to speak of truths that hold in
themselves unknown to anyone, e.g. such truths as transcend men’s capacity
for knowledge. (LU Prol. § 39 I, p. 85; Hua XVIII 134)
On such an anti-realist view of truth, Husserl says, Newton’s law of gravitation
would not have been ‘true’ before Newton (Prol. § 39 I, p. 85; XVIII 134), but
Husserl regards this as countersensical because implicit in the assertion of Newton’s
law is what he terms ‘the unrestricted validity for all times’ (die unbedingte Geltung
fu¨r alle Zeit, Hua XVIII 134). Husserl at this point does consider that Kant’s account
of knowledge was guilty of this kind of anthropologism, since it deduces laws.
… in more or less a mythic fashion, from certain ‘original forms’ or ‘modes of
functioning’ of the (human) understanding, from consciousness as such,
conceived as generic human reason, from the psycho-physical constitution of
man …. (LU Prol. § 38 I, p. 83; Hua XVIII 130)
Husserl accuses Kant (and at least his then current generation of Neo-Kantians)
of misunderstanding the subjective domain as if it were something natural or ‘real’,
and hence of construing the a priori as if it were an essential part of the human
species (LU Prol. § 38). This is still absurd if it attempts to deduce logical and
formal necessity from certain facts about human experience. In later years, Husserl
will continue to repeat this critique of Kant whom he thinks was overly dependent
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

on naturalistic Lockean psychology (see FTL § 100, p. 257; Hua XVII 264; and
Crisis § 58).
In contrast, at least in LU, Husserl maintained a robustly realist view of truth:
What is true is absolutely, intrinsically true: truth is one and the same, whether
men or not-men, angels or gods apprehend and judge it. (LU Prol. § 36, I,
p. 79; Hua XVIII 125)
That certain facts are true independently of human beings’ consciousness of them
is not, for Husserl, even at this stage, ruling out that certain ‘noetic’ conditions still
have to be acknowledged in the constitution of objectivity. But there is undoubtedly
a tension to be felt in these formulations in the Prolegomena. In later formulations
Husserl will distinguish between real and ideal possibility, and between truths that
are correlated only to a possible mind thinking them and those correlated to actual
minds.
In LU, Husserl defends a typically Platonic realist view about truth and about the
nature of ideal, of logical entities under the inﬂuence of Hermann Lotze.18 Lotze’s
reading of Bolzano had inspired Husserl’s embrace of the timeless and unique
objectivity of ideal formations against the empiricist tradition (‘blind to the peculiar
objectivity of all ideal formations’, see Formal and Transcendental Logic § 56,
p. 151; Hua XVII 159). Indeed, in his Draft Preface to the 1913 revision of LU, he
says he regarded Bolzano’s truths in themselves as ‘metaphysical absurdities’ until
he read Lotze.19 Lotze’s interpretation of Platonic Ideas had helped him to
understand Bolzano’s ‘propositions in themselves’ (Sa¨tze an sich) as the ‘senses of
statements’ (Hua XXII 156)20 and not as mysterious kinds of things, occupying
some topos ouranios.21
18 In his letter of December 1915 to Rickert, Husserl says that even ‘in his naturalistic beginnings’ his
soul ‘was ﬁlled with a secret nostalgia (Sehnsucht) for the old Romantic land of German Idealism’
(Briefwechsel, vol. 5, p. 178, my trans.). Rickert inspired this longing as Windelband, ‘not a genuinely
creative thinker’ (ibid., p. 177) did not. Husserl likewise speaks of phenomenology as the secret nostalgia
of modern philosophy in Ideas I § 62, p. 142; Hua III/1 118.
19 Husserl also thought there was an unresolved ‘extreme empiricism in Bolzano’ which he criticizes in
his Draft Preface to the 1913 Revision of LU. See Husserl (1975a). See also Von Duhn (2003, pp. 21–33).
20 Mark Textor has indicated to me that that is actually a misrepresentation of Bolzano’s propositions in
themselves since some of them can never be instantiated or thought and hence cannot be exactly
equivalent to senses. According to Textor’s Bolzanos Propositionalismus (1996), Husserl misread
Bolzano on this point. Husserl turns Bolzano’s Sa¨tze an sich into species or types of assertoric or
judgemental contents. This may be a good idea, but it is not what Bolzano intended. For Bolzano, the Satz
an sich is one of his basic concepts, not reducible to anything like a ‘type’ or ‘species’ of assertoric
content , rather the Satz ﬁgures in the analyses of many (if not all) concepts. For example, Bolzano will
argue that a Satz an sich cannot be a judgemental content, for some Sa¨tze an sich cannot be judged. No
one cannot judge 1 = 2, it is manifestly incoherent. Perhaps one can say that a Satz an sich can be the
content of a judgement or its negation can be judged. But then there may contents which cannot be judged
at all: there will never be evidence that can determine our judgement. This is no conclusive argument
against Husserl, but makes the difﬁculties of reducing Satz an sich to something we already know and
accept clear.
21 Husserl, however, was unsatisﬁed with a certain ‘psychologising of the universal’ he detected in Lotze
(1888) Logic (1874) § 316. See Husserl (1994b, p. 1); Hua XXII 156. For his critique of Lotze, see LU II
§10 I 322, No. 5; Hua XIX/1 138.
D. Moran
123

5 An explanation of Lotze’s position
In his Logic Book Three Chapter Two (§§ 313–321), Lotze attempts a clariﬁcation
of the meaning of the Platonic ‘world of Ideas’ by arguing they are the predicates of
things in this world considered as general concepts bound together in a whole in
such a way as to ‘constitute an unchangeable system of thought’ (§ 314) and which
determine the limits of all possible experience (§ 315). Plato recognises that in the
Heraclitean world of change, black things become white, etc., but blackness does
not change, even if a thing only has a momentary participation in it. Even when a
momentarily appearing sound or colour is immediately replaced by another different
sound or colour, it still is the case that these two items stand in deﬁnite relations of
contrast with one another. These relations and indeed the intelligible contents of real
things and events may be said to have ‘validity’ (Geltung, § 316). According to
Lotze, the ascription to Plato of an absurd doctrine of the existence of Ideas
alongside the existence of things is due to the fact that the Greek language did not
have the capacity to express this validity but referred to them only as ousia. They
are ideal ‘unities’ (henades, monades). Plato is not trying to hypostasise the ideas by
saying they are not in space, rather he simply wants to say they are not anywhere at
all (§ 318). Plato’s Ideas have been misunderstood as having ‘existence’ (Dasein)
separate from things whereas, according to Lotze, in fact Plato intended only to
ascribe ‘validity’ (Geltung) to them.22
6 The ﬁrst objection to naturalist empiricism: Husserl’s defence of idealities
Husserl regularly defends ideality (and not just logical ideality) in terms of trans-
temporal ‘identity’ and re-instantiability across repeated thoughts. Husserl also had
a notion of eidetic singularities: there is only one Kreuzer sonata, only one
Pythagorean Theorem (‘Origin of Geometry’, Crisis, p. 357; VI 368), only one word
‘lion’ in the English language (Crisis, p. 357; VI 368), only one number 4, and so on
(see Ideas I § 12). The empiricists who place such an emphasis on sense data assign
to them a role they cannot play in terms of guaranteeing the ‘intertemporal and
intersubjective harmony of experiences’ as Husserl’s student Felix Kaufmann put
it.23 In other words, empiricism has no way of guaranteeing ﬁxed identities across
the ﬂux of sense data. Empiricism simply misses the intuitive givennesses of the
universal and the eidetic. Indeed, in Ideas I (1913) Husserl portrays his
phenomenology as an explicit attempt to overcome the empiricistic ‘psychologizing
of the eidetic’.24
22 A similar transcendental account of Platonic Ideas (as laws governing thoughts and not things) is to be
found in Paul Natorp, Platos Ideenlehre (1903, revised edition 1922), trans. Politis (2004). See also
Politis (2001, pp. 47–62).
23 See Kaufmann (1940, pp. 124–142).
24 Husserl (1977a, § 61, p. 116); trans. Kersten (1983, p. 139). Hereafter ‘Ideas I’.
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

7 Recognizing intentionality is not enough to overcome naturalism
Recognition of the intentionality of consciousness in itself does not avoid
naturalism. Great minds such as Brentano still managed a naturalistic misconstrual
of consciousness in his radical reform of psychology. In the Cartesian Meditations,
for instance, and elsewhere, Husserl criticizes Brentano for failing to exploit the true
potential of intentional analysis (CM § 20), as he remained imprisoned in
‘naturalistic prejudices’ that prevented him from understanding the roles of
synthesis and constitution.25
Unfortunately, in the most essential matters he remained bound to the
prejudices of the naturalistic tradition (in den Vorurteilen der naturalistischen
Tradition); these prejudices have not yet been overcome if the data of the soul
(die seelischen Daten), rather than being understood as sensible (whether of
outer or inner ‘‘sense’’), are [simply] understood as data having the remarkable
character of intentionality; in other words, if dualism, psychophysical
causality, is still accepted as valid. (Crisis, § 68, p. 234; Hua VI 236)
Husserl makes more or less the same claim concerning Brentano’s naturalism in
a number of works e.g. the 1928 Amsterdam Lectures.26 In the Fourth Cartesian
Meditation (CM § 40) also Husserl refers to Brentanian-style intentional psychology
as missing the meaning of genuine transcendental phenomenology (since it assumes
that intentional acts issue from an empirical I). Similarly, Husserl claims that
Brentano failed to recognize the role of synthesis in consciousness. He was too
atomistic and sensualistic in his construal of the nature of experience:
… Brentano’s discovery of intentionality never led to seeing in it a complex of
performances, which are included as sedimented history in the currently
constituted intentional unity and its current manners of givenness—a history
that one can always uncover following a strict method. (FTL § 97, p. 245; Hua
XVII 252)
The point, for Husserl, is that consciousness rightly understood (as an inter-
connected complex and streaming temporal unity) stands as the great stumbling
block to a naturalistic construal of the world and of knowledge.
8 The danger of transcendental psychologism
Even having recognized the role of constituting consciousness in the formation of
all objectivities real and ideal, actual and possible, there is still the danger of falling
back into a new error—one which again naturalizes constituting consciousness and
treats it as ‘a little tag-end of the world’ (ein kleines Endchen der Welt, CM § 10;
FTL § 93), as Descartes did with the ego cogito in his own Meditations. The danger
25 See Husserl’s draft Encyclopedia Brittanica article, Trans. Phen., p. 95; Hua IX 247. Husserl repeats
this criticism of Brentano in Crisis § 68 and elsewhere.
26 Husserl’s Amsterdam Lectures are translated in Husserl (1997, see especially, p. 219); Hua IX 310.
D. Moran
123

is that all this synthesising and anticipating, projecting, and recollecting function of
consciousness with all its horizonality, which produces ‘world as such’, will be
interpreted merely psychologically as ‘what humans do’. Rather consciousness has
to be explored not just as a fact but in terms of its essential possibilities and its
‘absoluteness’.
Naturalism is thus an ever-present danger even as we enter the transcendental
domain of pure consciousness. Already in his 1906/1907 lectures on Introduction to
Logic and Theory of Knowledge27 Husserl refers to naturalism (and psychologism) as
the ‘original sin’ (Hua XXIV 176), the ‘sin against the Holy Spirit of philosophy’
(Hua XXIV 177). It is the original fall from grace to misconstrue consciousness. In
the 1928 Amsterdam lectures, Husserl diagnoses this ‘prevailing naturalization of the
mental’ as an enduring prejudice which has its origins in Descartes, Hobbes and
Locke, and which continued to haunt even Brentano’s attempts at descriptive
psychology.28 In his posthumous Experience and Judgement (1938) Husserl
acknowledges that the ‘naturalization of the spirit’ is not an invention of philosophers
but is a totally expected outcome of our ﬁrst outgoing experience which encounters
objects as part of the world.29 Naturalism (viewed transcendentally) is the natural
product of the ‘natural attitude’, construed as the ‘naturalistic attitude’.
9 The discovery of the natural attitude as the breakthrough to the
transcendental
In his mature works, Husserl articulates in some detail the meaning of mundane life in
the ‘natural attitude’ (a term he uses from at least as early as 1906–1907) which
involves all aspects of human engagement with others and with the world as a whole,
the very experience of ‘being-in-the-world’ that Heidegger later explicitly thematizes
in Being and Time § 14 (1927). Indeed, the natural attitude has to count as one of
Husserl’s greatest and perhaps most misunderstood phenomenological contribu-
tions.30 It features prominently in his Idea of Phenomenology (1907)—under the title
‘the natural mode of reﬂection’, in his 1910/1911 lectures Fundamental Problems of
Phenomenology (Hua XIII 118) and, in ‘Philosophy as a Rigorous Science’, where it
is explicitly linked with naturalism as its accompanying outlook. It is ﬁrst thematized
in an admittedly sketchy form in Ideas I (1913) §§ 27–30, and continues as a major
theme into his late analysis of ‘worldly life’ and the ‘life-world’ (Lebenswelt).31
Husserl’s insight (inspired in part by Avenarius’ (2005) discussion of non-dualistic
experiential life in Der menschliche Weltbegriff) is that the ordinary, natural world
that surrounds us on all sides, in which we live and move and have our being, is
actually itself the correlate of a very powerful yet also quite speciﬁc and particular
27 Husserl (1985), trans. Claire Ortiz Hill, Husserl (2008).
28 Husserl (1997, p. 219); Hua IX 309–310 (hereafter: Trans. Phen.).
29 Husserl (1973b, § 8, p. 34).
30 On the natural attitude, see Luft (2002a, pp. 114–119) and idem, ‘Husserl’s Phenomenological
Discovery of the Natural Attitude’, in 1998, pp. 153–170; see also Bermes (2004).
31 See the texts in Husserliana Vol. XXXIV, and Luft (2002b, pp. 35).
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

attitude: the natural attitude.32 In his 1935 Vienna Lecture Husserl deﬁnes an attitude
as ‘a habitually ﬁxed style of willing life (Stil des Willenlebens) comprising directions
of the will or interests that are prescribed by this style, comprising the ultimate ends,
the cultural accomplishments whose total style is thereby determined’ (Crisis, p. 280;
Hua VI 326). In the First Cartesian Meditation, too, Husserl sets it down as a condition
for an absolutely grounded science that it does not simply take the being of the world
in naı¨ve acceptance but that it treats it merely as ‘acceptance phenomenon’ (CM § 7,
p. 18; Hua I 58).
The natural attitude is ‘the attitude of experience’ (Hua XIII 120).33 It has the
character of ‘pregiveness’ or ‘pre-found’ (vorgefunden).34 It is always ‘on’ in the
background (Ideas I § 31) as the primary attitude ‘of natural human existence’
(Einstellung des natu¨rlichen menschlichen Daseins, Crisis VI 154). It belongs to the
‘region of origin’ (Ursprungsgebiet). All activities of consciousness, including all
scientiﬁc activity, indeed all knowledge, initially take place within the natural attitude
(Hua XIII 112). Other attitudes, such as the objectivist, scientiﬁc attitude and the
formal mathematical attitude are one-sided abstractions from the natural attitude and
presuppose it. The natural attitude is as old as human history. As Husserl writes in his
1924 lecture ‘Kant and the Idea of Transcendental Philosophy,’ in Erste Philosophie:
The natural attitude is the form in which the total life of humanity is realized
in running its natural, practical course. It was the only form from millennium
to millennium, until out of science and philosophy there developed unique
motivations for a revolution.35
The natural attitude is, furthermore, what makes us human; it is the human
attitude. Husserl’s close collaborator Eugen Fink writes:
The natural attitude is the attitude that belongs essentially to human nature,
that makes up human being itself, the setting up of man (das Eingestelltsein
des Menschen) as a being in the whole of the world, or … the attitude of
32 An attitude, for Husserl, has a very broad range, it aims not just at individual things but at a whole
context or world or ‘ﬁeld’ of things and puts them in perspective in a particular light. It may be passively
in the background or actively adopted. The concept of ‘attitude’ is already to be found in both the
empirical psychology of Husserl’s day and in the Brentanian school. See the article ‘Einstellung,’ in
J.Ritter et al. (eds) Historisches Wo¨rterbuch der Philosophie Bd II, (Ritter, 1971), pp. 417ff.
33 Husserl has a broad range of terms for the natural attitude (die natu¨rliche Einstellung) including the
‘pre-scientiﬁc’ (VI 121, 152, 156) or ‘extra-scientiﬁc attitude’, the ‘natural theoretical attitude’ (Ideas I §
50, p. 113; Hua III/1 94), the ‘natural-naı¨ve attitude’ (V 148) and with the correlative discovery of the
notion of ‘world’ (die Welt), initially understood as ‘my natural surrounding world’ (meine natu¨rliche
Umwelt, Ideas I § 28), the world in which I ﬁnd myself all the time and which supplies the necessary
background for all intentional acts, and for all other worlds which it is possible to inhabit (e.g., the world
of science, the world of mathematics, the world of religious belief, and so on), my ‘natural worldly life’
(natu¨rliches Weltleben, Crisis VI 121, 152, 156), the ‘pregiven life of experience’ (die vorgebegene
Erfahrungswelt, Crisis VI 1).
34 See XIII 196–199 where Husserl discusses the inﬂuence of Avenarius’ conception of das
Vorgefundene. Husserl was also inﬂuenced by Mach (1903); English translation Mach (1914).
35 Husserl (1974b, pp. 9–56); Erste Philosophie (1923/1924). Erster Teil: Kritische Ideengeschichte.
Hrsg. R. Boehm, Hua VII (1965, pp. 230–287). The reference here is to p. 20 of the English translation
and Hua VII 244.
D. Moran
123

mundanized subjectivity: the natural being of man in and to the world in all his
modes (in und zur Welt in allen seinen Modis).36
Inherent in the natural attitude is a certain conception of reality, truth and
validity. The natural attitude has its own forms of veriﬁcation, reliability and
conﬁrmation.37 In it we experience the world as simply there, ‘on hand’
(vorhanden), occurrent. The driving force of the natural attitude is what Husserl
called the ‘general thesis’ (Generalthesis, Ideas I § 30), a general belief, doxa,
acceptance, involving the universal ‘positing’ of the world and everything in it as
objectively there. Normal questioning, doubting and other attitudes never abrogate
from this ‘general thesis’:
No doubt about or rejection of data belonging to the natural world alters in any
respect the general positing which characterizes the natural standpoint. (Ideas
I § 30 p. 57; III/1 53)
Every society begins within the natural attitude or some version of a primordial
attitude rooted in the natural attitude:
We speak in this connection of the natural primordial attitude (von der
natu¨rlichen, urwu¨chsigen Einstellung), of the attitude of original natural life,
of the ﬁrst originally natural form of cultures, whether higher or lower,
whether developed uninhibitedly or stagnating. All other attitudes are
accordingly related back to this natural attitude as reorientations [of it].
(Crisis, p. 281; Hua VI 326–7)
Husserl sometimes uses the natural attitude to focus only on nature and the
manner spatio-temporal ‘natural’ things are given in our immediate intuitive
experience (see XIII 196, for example).
Other attitudes may arise—if speciﬁcally motivated—only within or founded on
this natural attitude. The natural attitude then is not just the sum of all other
attitudes, but the context that allows and enables the speciﬁc attitudes to be adopted.
It is the base operating system as it were, the ‘default’ position (as Robert
Sokolowski calls it). It is the ‘always already’ attitude, die Geradehin-Einstellung,
as Fink calls it.38 It cannot as such be completely unplugged, although it can be
highlighted, foregrounded, thematized, through a special reﬂexive act of attention
that Husserl ﬁrst describes in print as the ‘radical alteration’ (radikale A¨nderung,
Ideas I § 31) of the natural attitude.
The ‘correlate’ (Korrelat)—a concept Husserl never explicitly thematized—of
the natural attitude is what Husserl calls the world (Ideas I § 50). The ‘world’ in
36 Fink (1966c, § 4, p. 11) (my translation).
37 Husserl greatly resented the Heideggerian accusation that his phenomenology was oriented to the
theoretical and ignored or undervalued the practical nature of our being-in-the-world. In fact, Husserl lays
great stress on the non-theoretical nature of the natural attitude. It is, however, only when we come to
recognise the natural attitude for what it is, that we break with it and adopt the philosophical, theoretical
attitude which, as Husserl says in Vienna Lecture (1935), is still a form of praxis, ‘theoretical praxis’ (see
Crisis, p. 111; VI 113).
38 Fink, Z-XIII, 1934, 2a (cited in Luft, op. cit., p. 90 n. 23).
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

Husserlian terms is the ‘horizon of horizons’, the permanently present yet always
receding background for all consciousness, the ‘inﬁnity (Unendlichkeit) of what is
taken for granted, what is indispensable for all objective sciences’ (Crisis § 58, p.
204; VI 208). In our natural experience, we live naively in this world, swimming
with the ﬂow of its givens, that have the character of being ‘on hand’ (vorhanden)
and ‘actual’ (wirklich, Ideas I § 50). The natural world has the character of actuality
and presence. It is simply there. This world is not just individual things or the
horizoning ‘world of things’ (Dingwelt, Hua XIII 27n1), but also living organisms,
bodies like ours, which we encounter as persons (see Hua XIII § 4 115) in the
surrounding world (Umwelt):
‘‘Surrounding world’’ is a term with personal signiﬁcation.39
Human life is always ‘worldly life’ (Weltleben, XXXIV 394–395). We are
‘world-children’ (Weltkinder). The world is always there as my ‘thematic ground’
(XXXIV 391) and included in it are my ‘co-subjects’ with whom I interact to form
joint projects and realise joint intentions.
Husserl himself speaks, especially in his later writings, of the peculiar hold the
natural attitude has over us; we are ‘infatuated’ (verschossen, lit. ‘shot at’, Crisis § 52,
p. 176; VI 179), captivated or seduced by it. In his 1934 essay, ‘What Does the
Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl Want to Accomplish?’,40 Husserl’s assistant
Eugen Fink employs the term Befangenheit (which can mean ‘shyness’ or ‘prejudice’
or ‘bias’, but is best translated as ‘captivation’ by the world, Weltbefangenheit).41 Of
course this is very close to Heidegger’s conception of Verfallen in Being and Time §
38, which too is a ‘falling for’ or ‘being seduced by’ the world. In his 1934 essay, Fink
makes use of Plato’s parable of the chained prisoners in the cave watching shadows to
illustrate this sense of captivation by the world.
The natural life of humans in the world is a mystery because of its ‘obviousness’
or ‘taken-for-grantedness’ (Selbstversta¨ndlichkeit), its stability, its ‘always already
there’ character that yet allows for novelty. It belongs to the essence of the natural
attitude not to interrogate or even recognise itself as such. Transcendental insight is
impossible for ‘common sense’ (Husserl uses the English term Crisis, p. 200; VI
203).42 This world is ‘constituted achievement’ (konstituierte Leistung, VI 208) but,
in the natural attitude, we are oblivious to that. We live in the natural world ‘blind’
(Crisis VI 209) to its nature, with ‘blinders’ or ‘blinkers’ (Scheuklappen) on. The
natural attitude for all its richness is, therefore for Husserl, ‘one-sided’ and ‘closed’
(die einseitig verschlossene natu¨rliche Einstellung, Crisis VI 209).
39 Husserl, Pha¨nomenologische Psychologie. Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1925, hrsg. W. Biemel, Hua
IX (1968), trans. J. Scanlon as Phenomenological Psychology. Lectures, Summer Semester 1925 (1977b).
Hereafter ‘Phen. Psych.’ followed by section number, page number of the English and then the
Husserliana volume and page number. The reference here is Phen. Psych. § 44, p. 168; Hua IX 2.
40 Fink (1966b, pp. 157–178); trans. Arthur Grugan (1972, pp. 5–28), see esp. p. 9 [German, p. 159].
41 See Bruzina (2004, p. 186).
42 The inability of the natural attitude to gain a critical stance on itself has echoes in similar to
Heidegger’s claim that common sense is the enemy of philosophy.
D. Moran
123

10 The transcendental turn
Transcendental phenomenology aims to break with this captivation with the world
by taking on the wholly ‘unnatural’ attitude of the epoche´. This break is described
by both Husserl and Fink as a kind of ‘dehumanising’ (Entmenschung) of the
accomplishment of cognition: in an ‘unnatural’ manner we have excluded human
beings, even ourselves (Ideas I § 50). Indeed, in Hegelian fashion, even to recognise
and identify the natural attitude as such is already to have moved beyond it. Husserl
speaks of performing a ‘Copernican 180-degree turn’ (Amsterdam Lectures, Trans.
Phen., p. 235; Hua IX 327) which brackets the assumption of a pre-given world.
To systematically reﬂect on the nature of the natural attitude itself requires a kind
of ‘bracketing’ (which Husserl calls the ‘universal’ epoche´ or ‘transcendental
reduction’) of all our commitments to the factual domain. We have to suspend all
commitments ‘in one blow’ (Crisis § 40, p. 150; VI 153). We can change its ‘index’.
This serves to ‘interrupt’ (unterbrechen, Crisis VI 154) the natural attitude: ‘all
natural interests are put out of play’ (Crisis VI 155). This leads inevitably to a kind
of ‘splitting of the ego’ (Ichspaltung). The meditating self leads a double life. On
the one hand, I continue to live naturally and yet, at the same time, I become aware
of the functioning of world-creating subjectivity within that natural life:
First the transcendental epoche´ and reduction releases transcendental subjec-
tivity from its self-concealment (Selbstverborgenheit) and raises it up to a new
position, that of transcendental self-consciousness. (Hua XXXIV 399, my
translation)
Husserl constantly emphasises the difﬁculty of the ‘transposition’ Umstellung
(VI 153), ‘reversal’ or ‘inversion’ (Umkehrung, VI 204), ‘transformation’
(Umwandlung), that is required to turn our perspective around:
The transcendental problem arises from a general turning around of the natural
focus of consciousness…. (Amsterdam Lectures § 11, Trans. Phen., p. 238;
Hua IX 331)
The phenomenological aim is to uproot from ourselves and from our ‘prejudices’,
which now means from all that is distinctively human in our way of being plugged-
in to the world.
An attitude is arrived at which is above (u¨ber) the pregivenness of the validity
of the world, above the inﬁnite complex (Ineinander) whereby, in conceal-
ment, the world’s validities are always founded on other validities, above the
whole manifold but synthetically uniﬁed ﬂow in which the world has and
forever attains anew its content of meaning and its validity of being
(Sinngehalt und Seinsgeltung). In other words, we have an attitude above the
universal conscious life (both individual subjective and intersubjective)
through which the world is ‘‘there’’ for those naively absorbed (fu¨r die naiv
Dahinlebenden) in ongoing life, as unquestionably present, as the universe of
what is there (als Universum der Vorhandenheiten, Crisis § 40, p. 150;
VI 153)
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

According to Husserl, taking up this transcendental stance is by no means a
temporary action but requires a ‘habitual attitude’ (eine habituelle Einstellung, VI
153) that we resolve to adopt once and for all. This of course is the ‘attitude of the
non-participating spectator’ (which Heidegger criticises as non-primordial). Hus-
serl, however, sees it as a ﬁrst-person attitude that has arrived at ‘clarity’ about its
own nature. Furthermore, for Husserl, the initiation of the reduction from within the
natural attitude is a matter of complete freedom of the will (akin to his
understanding of the initiation of Cartesian doubt). Transcendental reduction
requires an ‘act of will’ (Trans. Phen., p. 247; Hua IX 341).
The philosopher is situated ‘above his natural being and above the natural world’
(Crisis § 41). As Husserl puts it over and over, the world has become phenomenon.
It is not a mere ‘grasp’ (Auffassung) or ‘interpretation’ (Crisis VI 155) since those
are based on the world; it is a wholly new attitude and, although it had its ‘primal
founding’ (Urstiftung) in history with Descartes, it now becomes a permanent
acquisition of humankind. The new philosophical attitude reveals the ‘universal,
absolutely self-enclosed and absolutely self-sufﬁcient (eigensta¨ndig) correlation
between the world itself and world-consciousness’ (Crisis § 41, p. 151; VI 154).
Husserl always speaks of the transcendental attitude as ‘primary’ and ‘absolute’,
as opposed to the ‘relative’ nature of the natural attitude. Rather than seeing human
consciousness as rooted in the world, we must now see the world itself as ‘rooted’ in
transcendental subjectivity:
Natural being is a realm whose ‘being-validity’ is secondary; it continually
presupposes the realm of transcendental being. (CM § 8, p. 21; Hua I 61).
Husserl even speaks in his Cartesian Meditations of ‘the essential rootedness
(Verwurzelung) of any Objective world in transcendental subjectivity’ (CM § 59,
p. 137; Hua I 164).
Transcendental philosophy brings to awareness that
…conscious life is through and through an intentionally accomplishing life
(intentional leistendes Leben) through which the life world, with all its
changing representational contents (Vorstellungsgehalten), in part attains
anew (teils neu gewinnt) and in part has already attained (immer schon
gewonnen hat) its meaning and validity. All real mundane objectivity is
constituted accomplishment in this sense, including that of men and animals
and thus also that of ‘souls’. (Crisis §58, p. 204; VI 208)
For Husserl:
Every sort of existent itself, real or ideal, becomes understandable as a
‘‘product’’ of transcendental subjectivity, a product constituted in just that
performance. (CM § 41, Cairns, p. 85; Hua I 118)
Or as he writes in the Amsterdam Lectures:
Surely it is as something intended by us, and not from any other source, that
the world has acquired and always acquires its meaning and its validity.
(Trans. Phen., p. 240; Hua IX 334)
D. Moran
123

Of course, this transcendental attitude is very difﬁcult to maintain and there is
always the danger of relapse into naturalism. Conversely, from the natural point of
view, the transcendental attitude can only ever be understood in psychological
terms. This is inevitable. Husserl writes:
The complete inversion of the natural stance of life, thus into an ‘unnatural’ one,
places the greatest conceivable demands upon philosophical resolve…Natural
human understanding and the objectivism rooted in it will view every
transcendental philosophy as a ﬂighty eccentricity, its wisdom as useless
foolishness, or it will interpret it as a psychology which seeks to convince itself
that it is not psychology. (Crisis § 57, p. 200; VI 204)
Husserl’s key insight –later stressed also by Eugen Fink—is that the natural
attitude itself is the product, the ‘constituted result’ of a particular kind of
transcendental constitution.43 It is, as Fink puts it in overtly Hegelian terms, an
internal moment of transcendental life itself.44 Although in one sense the natural
attitude is the ‘base’ attitude, and we ascend from it to the transcendental attitude,
our aim is to return and understand the natural attitude for what it really is, namely,
a constituted attitude of the more primordial transcendental attitude. As Fink puts it,
Husserl ‘relativizes’ the natural attitude,45 or as Merleau-Ponty puts it in his
Phenomenology of Perception (1945), the natural attitude has to be ‘reinstated in the
transcendental ﬂow of a universal constitution in which all the world’ obscurities are
elucidated’.46
To appreciate this properly, we need to see that several directions of thinking are
involved at the same time. Naturalism treats human being as just one more natural
entity in a natural world. For Husserl, this is of course, true (‘empirical man …
belongs to the constituted world’ Crisis, p. 201; VI 205). I am ‘I-this man-in-the-
world-experiencing’ (Ich-dieser-Mensch-in-der-Welt-erfahre, V 147). It is true in
the natural attitude that we are ‘beings in the world’. The problem is—and which
naturalism ignores—is that human subjects are also subjects ‘for the world’ (Crisis
§ 57). I am a transcendental ego who constitutes the world and a human being who
lives in the constituted world. In Husserl’s full blown idealism only this
transcendental I is ‘absolute’ and a ‘being in and for itself’ prior to worldly being
(als absolut in sich und fu¨r sich seiendes ‘vor’ allem weltlichen Sein, Hua V 146).
But, if we stay with a more modest statement of transcendental idealism, we need
simply retain the a priori correlation between being and pure ego-centred
consciousness.
Fink and Merleau-Ponty represent two further responses going in two different
directions. On the one hand, Fink moves Husserl in the direction of the Hegelian
43 Fink (1966a, p. 14).
44 Ibid.
45 Fink, ‘What Does the Phenomenology of Edmund Husserl Want to Accomplish?’ Research in
Phenomenology, op. cit., p. 10.
46 Merleau-Ponty (1945), trans. C. Smith as Phenomenology of Perception (1962). Henceforth ‘PP’
followed by page number of English translation; then, pagination of French edition. The reference here is
to p. 419n; 365n.
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

march of absolute spirit, with its moments of self-alienation and overcoming of self-
alienation to arrive at self-recognition. On the other hand, Merleau-Ponty argues
that we can never escape the ‘upsurge’ (le jaillissement) or intrusion of world. Partly
inspired by Fink and by Husserl’s emphasis on the Urboden of the life-world,
Merleau-Ponty denies the possibility of a complete reduction:
There is probably no question over which Husserl has spent more time - or to
which he has more often returned, since the ‘problematic of reduction’
occupies an important place in his unpublished work. For a long time, and
even in recent texts, the reduction is presented as the return to a transcendental
consciousness before which the world is spread out and completely
transparent, quickened through and through by a series of apperceptions
which it is the philosopher’s task to reconstitute on the basis of their outcome.
(PP xi; v).
In a sense, this is the Cartesian conception of the reduction to the transcendental
ego, the one that Husserl admitted got us there too quickly (‘in one leap’, as he says
in Crisis § 43). Merleau-Ponty agrees with Husserl on the importance of unmasking
the natural attitude. As he puts it in his late essay, ‘The Metaphysical in Man’, the
aim of his philosophy is ‘to rediscover, along with structure and the understanding
of structure, a dimension of being and a type of knowledge which man forgets in his
natural attitude’,47 and in the Phenomenology of Perception he writes that ‘to see
the world and grasp it as paradoxical, we must break (il faut rompre) with our
familiar acceptance of it’, but he goes on to conclude that ‘from this break we can
learn nothing but the unmotivated upsurge of the world’ (le jaillissement immotive´
du monde, PP xiv; viii). For this reason Merleau-Ponty adds
The most important lesson which the reduction teaches us is the impossibility
of the complete reduction. If we were absolute mind, the reduction would
present no problem’ (PP xiv; viii).
In other words, the turn to the transcendental reveals nothing more than the
inescapable pull of the world on consciousness and its constant irruption into
consciousness (over against which consciousness is inevitably to be conceived, in
Sartrean terms, as a kind of nothing). We are witnessing not the constituting power
of the transcendental ego, but rather the pull of the world. Merleau-Ponty therefore
sees Husserl’s analysis of the life-world leading to a dilemma:
…either the constitution makes the world transparent, in which case it is not
obvious why reﬂection needs to pass through the lifeworld, or else it retains
something of that world and never rids it of its opacity. (PP 365n1; 419n1).
Merleau-Ponty’s own answer is to seize on the notion of ‘ambiguous life’ itself.
This leads him back in the direction of a kind of transcendental ‘naturalism’. The
world is the way it is because human embodiment is the way it is. But that is, of
course, is to raise the spectre of relativism, something Merleau-Ponty explicitly
47 Merleau-Ponty (1966), trans. as ‘The Metaphysical in Man,’ by Hubert Dreyfus and Patricia Allen
Dreyfus, Sense and Nonsense (1964, p. 92).
D. Moran
123

embraces in his later essays (there is only the ‘absolute for us’ as he says in Praise
of Philosophy).
We should not accept either Merleau-Ponty or Fink as giving us the deﬁnitive
word on the Husserlian project. In fact, we can think of Husserl as attempting to
steer a middle course between the options represented by Fink and Merleau-Ponty.
With Fink, he wants to celebrate phenomenology in quasi-Hegelian terms as that
which has made ‘spirit’ visible in a scientiﬁc manner for the ﬁrst time. Thus, in the
Vienna Lecture, he can write:
It is my conviction that intentional phenomenology has made of the spirit qua
spirit for the ﬁrst time a ﬁeld of systematic experience and science and has
thus brought about the total reorientation (Umstellung) of the task of
knowledge. The universality of the absolute spirit surrounds everything that
exists with an absolute historicity, to which nature as a spiritual structure is
subordinated. Intentional phenomenology, and speciﬁcally transcendental
phenomenology, was ﬁrst to see the light through its point of departure and its
methods. Only through it do we understand, and from the most profound
reasons, what naturalistic objectivism (der naturalistische Objektivismus) is
and understand in particular that psychology, because of its naturalism, has to
miss entirely the accomplishment, the radical and genuine problem of the life
of the spirit. (Crisis, p. 298–299; Hua VI 346–347)
Naturalism completely misses spirit; transcendental phenomenology tracks it, but
now in these later works, Husserl also recognises its intrinsic historicity (something
missing from Ideas I and earlier accounts) and facticity. The recognition of
embodiment, historicity and the correlation between consciousness and being,
brings Husserl closer to Merleau-Ponty. But Husserl never wants to surrender the
kind of self-consciousness and self-meditation (Selbstbesinnung) and self-reﬂection
(Reﬂexion) that will continue to insist that the unity of the world requires unity of
self and ‘self’ has to be understood always as ‘egoic’ life. Hence Husserl defends
transcendental subjectivity and intersubjectivity as an interlacing of personal, egoic,
I-centred ‘monads’ to use Husserl’s word for whole persons taken in their full
uniﬁed concreteness, including their histories and interrelations with others).48 How
can my ego also belong to transcendental intersubjectivity? This is the new
problem:
The consciousness of intersubjectivity, then, must become a transcendental
problem. (Crisis § 57, p. 202; VI 206)
Husserl’s transcendental idealism is more restrained than Fink’s. He never wants
to deny the validity of our world-acceptances and our natural engagements. Rather
he wants to gain a stance which illuminates all other stances. We gain a new stance
from which humans can come to view themselves from a different perspective—
akin to the way a person can review an action from the moral perspective. Our own
inner reﬂective life, the real meaning of the Brentanian ‘inner perception’, is a clue
48 See Zahavi (2001) for an exploration of the meaning of Husserl’s transcendental intersubjectivity as an
open ﬁeld between personal subjects.
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

to the fact that all higher consciousness is self-consciousness and self-involved.
Transcendental life is still ‘egoic’ life. We do not abandon the human but, by
attending to the ineliminably subjective and intersubjective, gain a ‘higher
humanity’. According to the Amsterdam Lectures, for Husserl, the transcendental
ego is not a second ego sitting alongside the ﬁrst natural ego (Trans. Phen., p. 247;
Hua IX 342), rather it is attained by an ‘alteration of focus’ (IX 342). It cannot be
considered to have the same existential status as the natural worldly ego (since this
would be to judge it in terms of the categories appropriate only for worldly life);
nevertheless it is the source of meaning and validity of our natural lives and therein
lies the puzzle.
Husserl tries to negotiate a way between the natural attitude and the
transcendental attitude but part of the problem is that the language and categories
of the natural attitude are the only ones available. Furthermore we always start
from the natural attitude and it remains ‘on’ in the background. Husserl ﬁnds
within
the natural reﬂection of everyday life
a springboard
from
which
transcendental reﬂection can spring. The historical breakthrough to the transcen-
dental attitude has an origin in a speciﬁc time and place and hence is mundane.
But the newly discovered theoretical attitude and then the self-reﬂective attitude
of the non-participating spectator allow the full meaning of the natural attitude to
manifest itself. From the standpoint of the transcendental attitude, the natural
attitude is one of its accomplishments; the transcendental attitude immanentizes
itself in the world, as Fink would put it (not wholly at variance with Husserl’s
own language). Husserl believes that the transcendental ego constitutes itself as
the mundane ego or Ich-Mensch in the natural attitude. The essence of the
transcendental attitude is its relentless self-reﬂective transparency. As he puts it in
Formal and Transcendental Logic, transcendental subjectivity is my ‘absolute
self’ (FTL § 103, p. 273; XVII 279). The transcendental life of reﬂection does not,
Husserl says, annul ordinary natural life, rather it allows it to be understood (FTL
§ 104). Ordinary life runs its course untroubled by all of that. Yet, paradoxically,
the ‘breakthrough’ (Durchbruch) to ‘free reason’ (as in Crisis § 3), suggests that
humanity has taken permanent possession of the transcendental attitude and with
that has made a new universal humanity possible. It seems impossible for Husserl
to negotiate the twin demands of the resolute persistence both of our worldly life
and our commitment to transcendental theoria.
To conclude, Husserl begins his wide-ranging critique of naturalism by showing
it to be ‘countersensical’. The attempted ‘naturalization of consciousness’ misses
the essential nature of consciousness itself. Finally, the transcendental phenome-
nological standpoint diagnoses naturalism as an ever-present tendency within the
self-effacing natural attitude itself. Only the self-critical vigilance of the transcen-
dental philosopher can keep the natural attitude from exercising its hold over even
our transcendental constructions such that we fall back into ‘transcendental
naturalism’ and ‘transcendental anthropologism’. I believe post-Husserlian phe-
nomenology (and indeed also the work of Karl-Otto Apel in particular) can be seen
as responding to this ambiguity concerning the all-encompassing reach of the life-
world and the natural attitude that correlates with it.
D. Moran
123

References
Avenarius, Richard. 1891. Der menschliche Weltbegriff. Leipzig: O. R. Reisland. Reprinted Elibron
Classics, 2005.
Bermes, Christian. 2004. Welt als Thema der Philosophie: Vom metaphysischen zum natu¨rlichen
Weltbegriff. Frankfurt: Meiner Verlag.
Bruzina, Ronald. 2004. Edmund Husserl and Eugen Fink. Beginnings and Ends in Phenomenology 1928–
1938. New Haven & London: Yale University Press.
Fink, Eugen. 1966a. Studien zur Pha¨nomenologie 1930–1939 (ed. Van Breda, L.). The Hague: Nijhoff.
Fink, Eugen. 1966b. Was Will die Pha¨nomenologie Edmund Husserls? In Studien zur Pha¨nomenologie
1930–1939, ed. E. Fink, and L. Van Breda, 157–178. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Fink, Eugen. 1966c. Vergegenwa¨rtigung und Bild I. In Studien zur Pha¨nomenologie 1930–1939, ed.
L. Van Breda, 157–178. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Fink, Eugen. 1972. What does the phenomenology of Edmund Husserl want to accomplish? (trans: Arthur
Grugan). Research in Phenomenology 2: 5–28.
Husserl, Edmund. 1913. Entwurf einer ‘Vorrede’ zu den Logischen Untersuchungen. Hrsg. Eugen Fink,
Tijdschrift voor Filosoﬁe, Vol. 1 No. 1 (February 1939), pp. 107–133 and No. 2 (May 1939),
pp. 319–339.
Husserl, Edmund. 1931. Me´ditations carte´siennes: introduction a` la phe´nome´nologie. Trans. G. Peiffer
and E. Levinas. Paris: Almand Colin.
Husserl, Edmund. 1938. Erfahrung und Urteil. Untersuchungen zur Genealogie der Logik. Redigiert und
hrsg. Ludwig Landgrebe. Prague: Academia-Verlag. 7. Auﬂ. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1999.
Husserl, Edmund. 1950. Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vortra¨ge. Hrsg. Stephan Strasser.
Husserliana Volume I. The Hague: Nijhoff. Reprinted 1991.
Husserl, Edmund. 1952a. Ideen zu einer reinen Pha¨nomenologie und pha¨nomenologischen Philosophie.
Zweites Buch: Pha¨nomenologische Untersuchungen zur Konstitution. Hrsg. Marly Biemel.
Husserliana Volume IV. The Hague: Nijhoff. Reprinted 1991.
Husserl, Edmund. 1952b. Ideen zu einer reinen Pha¨nomenologie und pha¨nomenologischen Philosophie.
Drittes Buch: Die Pha¨nomenologie und die Fundamente der Wissenschaften. Hrsg. Marly Biemel.
Husserliana Volume V. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1954. Die Krisis der europa¨ischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale
Pha¨nomenologie. Eine Einleitung in die pha¨nomenologische Philosophie. Hrsg. W. Biemel.
Husserliana Volume VI. The Hague: Nijhoff. Reprinted 1976.
Husserl, Edmund. 1960. Cartesian Meditations. An Introduction to Phenomenology. Trans. D. Cairns.
The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1965. Erste Philosophie (1923/24). Erster Teil: Kritische Ideengeschichte. Hrsg.
R. Boehm. Husserliana Volume VII. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1966. Zur Pha¨nomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins (1893–1917). Hrsg.
R. Boehm. Husserliana Volume X. The Hague: Nijhoff. Second Edition 1969.
Husserl, Edmund. 1968. Pha¨nomenologische Psychologie. Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1925. Hrsg.
W. Biemel. Husserliana Volume IX. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1969. Formal and Transcendental Logic. Trans. Dorion Cairns. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1970. The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. An
Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy. Trans. David Carr. Evanston: Northwestern U. P.
Husserl, Edmund. 1973a. Zur Pha¨nomenologie der Intersubjektivita¨t. Texte aus dem Nachlass. Erster
Teil. 1905–1920. Hrsg. I. Kern. Husserliana Volume XIII. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1973b. Experience and Judgment: Investigations in a Genealogy of Logic. Revised and
edited by L. Landgrebe. Trans. J.S. Churchill and K. Ameriks. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Husserl, Edmund. 1974a. Formale und transzendentale Logik. Versuch einer Kritik der logischen
Vernunft. Mit erga¨nzenden Texten. Hrsg. Paul Janssen. Husserliana Volume XVII. The Hague:
Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1974b. ‘Kant and the Idea of Transcendental Philosophy’, trans. Ted E. Klein and
William E. Pohl. Southwestern Journal of Philosophy 5(Fall):9–56.
Husserl, Edmund. 1975a. Introduction to the Logical Investigations. Draft of a Preface to the Logical
Investigations. Ed. Eugen Fink. Trans. P.J. Bossert and C.H. Peters. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1975b. Logische Untersuchungen. Erster Band: Prolegomena zur reinen Logik. Text
der 1. und der 2. Auﬂage. Hrsg. E. Holenstein. Husserliana Volume XVIII. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

Husserl, Edmund. 1977a. Ideen zu einer reinen Pha¨nomenologie und pha¨nomenologischen Philosophie.
Erstes Buch:Allgemeine Einfu¨hrung in die reine Pha¨nomenologie 1. Halbband: Text der 1–3.
Auﬂage. Hrsg. K. Schuhmann. Husserliana Volume III/1. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1977b. Phenomenological Psychology. Lectures, Summer Semester 1925. Trans. John
Scanlon. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund. 1983. Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological
Philosophy, First Book. Trans. F. Kersten. Husserl Collected Works I. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 1984. Logische Untersuchungen. Zweiter Band: Untersuchungen zur Pha¨nomenologie
und Theorie der Erkenntnis. In zwei Ba¨nden. Hrsg. Ursula Panzer. Husserliana Volume XIX.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 1985. Einleitung in die Logik und Erkenntnistheorie. Vorlesungen 1906/07. Hrsg.
Ullrich Melle. Husserliana Volume XXIV. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 1986. Aufsa¨tze und Vortra¨ge 1911–1921. Hrsg. H.R. Sepp und Thomas Nenon,
Husserliana Volume XXV. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 1989. Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological
Philosophy, Second Book. Trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer. Husserl Collected Works III.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 1994a. Briefwechsel. Ed. Karl Schuhmann in collaboration with Elizabeth Schuhmann.
Husserliana Dokumente. 10 Volumes. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 1994b. Early Writings in the Philosophy of Logic and Mathematics. Trans. Dallas
Willard. Husserl Collected Works V. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 1997. Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology and the Confrontation with
Heidegger (1927–31), The Encyclopaedia Britannica Article, The Amsterdam Lectures ‘‘Phenom-
enology and Anthropology’’ and Husserl’s Marginal Note in Being and Time, and Kant on the
Problem of Metaphysics. Trans. Thomas Sheehan and R.E. Palmer. Husserl Collected Works VI.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 2001. Logical Investigations. Trans. John Findlay. Ed. with a New Introduction by
Dermot Moran and New Preface by Michael Dummett. 2 Volumes. London & New York:
Routledge.
Husserl, Edmund. 2002a. ‘Philosophy as a Rigorous Science,’ trans. M. Brainard, New Yearbook for
Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy II: 249–295.
Husserl, Edmund. 2002b. Zur Pha¨nomenologischen Reduktionen. Texte aus dem Nachlass (1926–1935).
Hrsg. Sebastian Luft. Husserliana XXXIV. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 2003. Transzendentaler Idealismus. Texte aus dem Nachlass (1908–1921). Hrsg. Robin
Rollinger & Rochus Sowa. Husserliana Volume XXXVI. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Husserl, Edmund. 2006. The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. From the Lectures, Winter Semester,
1910–1911. Trans. James J. Hart. Husserl Collected Works Volume XII. Dordrecht: Springer.
Husserl, Edmund. 2008. Introduction to Logic and Theory of Knowledge. Lectures 1906/07. Trans. Claire
Ortiz Hill. Husserl Collected Works XIII. Dordrecht: Springer.
James, William. 2003. Essays in Radical Empiricism. New York: Courier Dover Publications. reprinted.
Kaufmann, Felix. 1940. Phenomenology and logical empiricism. In Philosophical Essays in Memory of
Edmund Husserl, ed. Farber Marvin, 124–142. Harvard U.P.: Cambridge.
Keil, Geert. 2008. Naturalism. In The Routledge Companion to Twentieth Century Philosophy, ed.
Dermot Moran, 254–307. London & NY: Routledge.
Kern, Iso. 1964. Husserl und Kant. Eine Untersuchung u¨ber Husserls Verha¨ltnis zu Kant und zum
Neukantianismus. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Lotze, Hermann. 1874. Logic of Thought, of Investigation and of Knowledge in Three Books. Trans.
Bernard Bosanquet, 2nd edition, 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon, Press, 1888.
Luft, Sebastian. 1998. Husserl’s Phenomenological Discovery of the Natural Attitude. Continental
Philosophy Review (formerly Man and World) 31:153–170.
Luft, Sebastian. 2002a. Husserl’s Notion of the Natural Attitude and the Shift to Transcendental
Phenomenology’. Analecta Husserliana LXXX: 114–119.
Luft, Sebastian. 2002b. ‘‘Pha¨nomenologie der Pha¨nomenologie’’. Systematik und Methodologie der
Pha¨nomenologie in der Auseinandersetzung zwischen Husserl und Fink. Phaenomenologica 166.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Mach, Ernst. 1903. Die Analyse der Empﬁndungen und das Verhaltniss des Physischen zum Psychischen.
Jena: Verlag von Gustav Fischer, 1922, 9nd edition.
D. Moran
123

Mach, Ernst. 1914. The Analysis of Sensations and the Relation of the Physical to the Psychical. Trans.
C.M. Williams and S. Waterlow. Chicago and London: The Open Court Publishing Company.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1945. Phe´nome´nologie de la perception. Paris: Gallimard.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1962. Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. C. Smith. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1964. Sense and Nonsense. Evanston: Northwestern U.P.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1966. Sens et non-sens. Paris: Nagel.
Moran, Dermot. 2000. Kant and Putnam: Two ‘Internal Realists’? Synthese 123(1): 65–104.
Natorp, Paul. 1903. Platos Ideenlehre. Leipzig: Meiner Verlag. Revised edition, 1922.
Natorp, Paul. 2004. Plato’s Theory of Ideas. An Introduction to Idealism. Trans. Vasilis Politis.
International Plato Studies, vol. 18. St. Augustin: Academia Verlag.
Politis, Vasilis. 2001. Anti-Realist Interpretations of Plato: Paul Natorp. International Journal of
Philosophical Studies 9(1): 47–62.
Putnam, Hilary. 1983. Realism and Reason. Philosophical Papers, vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge U.P.
Ritter, Joachim, et al. eds. 1971. Historisches Wo¨rterbuch der Philosophie. 10 vols. Basel, Stuttgart:
Schwabe.
Russell, Bertrand. 1995. My Philosophical Development. Ed. Thomas Baldwin. London & New York:
Routledge.
Summer, Manfred. 1985. Husserl und der fru¨he Positivismus. Frankfurt: Klostermann.
Textor, Mark. 1996. Bolzanos Propositionalismus. Berlin/New York: De Gruyter.
Von Duhn, Anita. 2003. Bolzano’s Account of Justiﬁcation. In The Vienna Circle and Logical
Empiricism. Re-evaluation and Future Perspectives, ed. Friedrich Stadler, 21–33. Vienna Circle
Institute Yearbook 10. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Zahavi, Dan. 2001. Husserl and Transcendental Intersubjectivity. Trans. Elizabeth A. Behnke. Athens,
Ohio: Ohio University Press.
Husserl’s transcendental philosophy and the critique of naturalism
123

