a Pion publication
dx.doi.org/10.1068/i0466aap
i-Perception (2011) volume 2, pages 1035 – 1062
ISSN 2041-6695
perceptionweb.com/i-perception
Putting reward in art: A tentative prediction error account of
visual art
Sander Van de Cruys
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium;
e-mail: sander.vandecruys@psy.kuleuven.be
Johan Wagemans
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium;
e-mail: johan.wagemans@psy.kuleuven.be
Received 8 July 2011, in revised form 28 November 2011; published online 15 December 2011
Abstract. The predictive coding model is increasingly and fruitfully used to explain a wide range
of ﬁndings in perception. Here we discuss the potential of this model in explaining the mechanisms
underlying aesthetic experiences. Traditionally art appreciation has been associated with concepts
such as harmony, perceptual ﬂuency, and the so-called good Gestalt. We observe that more often
than not great artworks blatantly violate these characteristics. Using the concept of prediction error
from the predictive coding approach, we attempt to resolve this contradiction. We argue that artists
often destroy predictions that they have ﬁrst carefully built up in their viewers, and thus highlight
the importance of negative affect in aesthetic experience. However, the viewer often succeeds in
recovering the predictable pattern, sometimes on a different level. The ensuing rewarding effect
is derived from this transition from a state of uncertainty to a state of increased predictability. We
illustrate our account with several example paintings and with a discussion of art movements and
individual differences in preference. On a more fundamental level, our theorizing leads us to consider
the affective implications of prediction conﬁrmation and violation. We compare our proposal to other
inﬂuential theories on aesthetics and explore its advantages and limitations.
Keywords: psychoaesthetics, Gestalt, art perception, predictive coding, reward, aesthetic emotion, perceptual
organization.
1 Introduction
It was the Gestalt psychologist Koffka who stated that violations of the law of the good Gestalt
“hurt our sense of beauty” (Koffka 1935, p 174). If we take “good Gestalt” (Prägnanz) to mean
having regular, clear, symmetrical, and simple forms, as it is conventionally deﬁned, this
seems to exclude an abundance of artworks (ranging from traditional to modern) from ever
being beautiful to human eyes. Why is it that artworks, prime instances of beauty, often
contain precisely these violations that are supposed to “hurt our sense of beauty”?
We will suggest a way out of this conundrum based on a view on visual art that is ﬁrmly
rooted in cognitive neuroscience. It will be less reductionistic than other proposals in that
art will not be explained by piecemeal activations in separate visual areas on a speciﬁc level
of visual processing but by taking into account the bidirectional, hierarchical nature of the
visual system as it is implemented in the predictive coding approach. The former approach
is doomed to fail for at least two reasons. First, an activation, however strong, of one or
more of the visual processing areas is clearly not sufﬁcient for an object or event to pass as
a work of art (Hyman 2010). Melcher and Bacci (2008, p 357) rightly remark: “A particular
artwork may indeed activate area V5/MT, but a passing bicycle would activate those motion-
processing areas even more strongly and would not be considered a work of art.” Second,
we are indeed never confronted with the isolated raw visual input; rather, our visual system
(and the brain as a whole) actively but effortlessly organizes it into surfaces, motions, three-
dimensional objects, and concepts. Our proposal will center on these processes of perceptual
organization (rather than the representational or symbolic meaning of their "end-products").
The rationale for this is found in Redies (2007, p 3), who calls for a broadly applicable theory

1036
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
(from cave art to Kandinsky) “as universal as aesthetic judgment itself.” He notes that since
almost any (visual) stimulus can be used to compose aesthetically pleasing objects, aesthetic
perception may rely on general aspects of information processing that are implemented in
all visual channels and regions. Redies adds that aesthetic perception requires the processing
of global features encompassing interactions between large amounts of receptive ﬁelds. By
grounding our proposal in the formal, organizational characteristics of visual information
processing as hypothesized by the predictive coding framework, we will attempt to meet
these requirements.
Perceptual processes alone would hardly give us aesthetic experiences, though. Together
with anthropologist Dissanayake, we claim that “much is overlooked when aesthetic cog-
nition is conceptualized simply as 'sensory' or 'perceptual'...” (Dissanayake 2009, p 163). A
one-sided emphasis on perception neglects the emotional aspects that are the motivating
drives for creating and enjoying art in the ﬁrst place. Artistic expressions attract and hold
attention and stir and shape emotion. Consequently, any theory of art must explicitly
elucidate the crucial interactions between perceptual and emotional processes. Luckily
for our purposes, recent data suggest vision may be intrinsically affective (Barrett and Bar
2009), in the sense that the processing of emotional relevance and value is not an afterthought
in the visual processing hierarchy but can actually drive object formation and recognition.
Our challenge will be to specify the emotional consequences of the formal, organizational
mechanisms of the predictive coding view, bracketing the emotional or symbolic content of
the representations involved.
2 Predictive coding
The predictive coding approach of perception holds that the brain actively anticipates
upcoming sensory input rather than passively registers it. On the basis of prior experience,
the brain actively makes predictions about what visual input to expect in the current context
of stimulation. At every level of the visual hierarchy predictions are generated and propagated
(top-down) to lower levels, where they are checked against incoming (bottom-up) evidence.
The idea is that these predictions suppress or explain away the activity in lower areas
that agrees with them (de-Wit et al 2010), while what remains and is sent upward are the
mismatches between these predictions and the current input, also called the prediction
errors. This way the processing resources (attention) can be directed to that part of the
stimuli that has not been sufﬁciently explained (predicted), and thus still has to be learnt.
Through constantly ﬁne-tuning predictions using the mismatches, the brain becomes tuned
to statistical regularities of our natural visual environment. These predictions structure
the perceptual input in patterns that allow for predictability both within and across visual
displays. Thus, the classic concept of Gestalt, traditionally deﬁned as a (experiential) whole
that is different from the parts, can be recast in terms of predictive coding (Van de Cruys and
Wagemans in press).
This framework is fruitfully adopted to explain several ﬁndings on visual processing
(but also auditory perception [cf Winkler et al 2009; Kumar et al 2011]). It can account for
extra-classical receptive ﬁeld effects measured with single-cell recordings in the primary
visual cortex (Rao and Ballard 1999) but also for fMRI patterns of activation across the
visual hierarchy. For example, Murray et al (2004) observed that perceptual grouping is
accompanied by an increase in activity in higher tier object-sensitive areas (LOC) and
concomitant decreases of activity in lower visual areas (V1), as predicted by a predictive
coding view. Furthermore, the well-known phenomenon of repetition suppression can
be explained by a reduction of neural activity for predictable stimuli (Summerﬁeld et al
2008). Similarly, Alink et al (2010) cleverly used an apparent motion path to generate strong

Prediction error in art
1037
predictions about when and where a visual stimulus will be, demonstrating that stimuli
evoke smaller responses in V1 when they have an onset time that matches these predictions.
The more traditional theory of (neural activity in) perception as the piecemeal accumulation
of evidence with visual neurons functioning primarily as feature detectors would have great
difﬁculties in explaining this series of evidence. In contrast, in predictive coding, perception is
an iterative matching process of top-down predictions checked against bottom-up evidence
along the visual hierarchy. Consequently, each level in the visual cortical hierarchy has a
twofold computational role: ﬁrst, it provides predictions (the conditional probability of a
stimulus) regarding expected inputs to the next lower level, and second, it encodes the
mismatch between predictions and bottom-up evidence (the prediction error or "surprise").
Egner et al (2010) explicitly set out to compare performance of a predictive coding model
with the traditional model. They found that when subjects strongly expected to see a face,
fMRI activity in the face-selective fusiform area was indistinguishable when actually viewing
a face versus a house, while maximally differentiated when the expectation of seeing a face
was low. Using computational modeling, the authors conclude that this pattern of results
can only be accounted for by the predictive coding model, which says that the total neural
activity in category-selective areas represents the sum of activity related to prediction (“face
expectation”) and that related to prediction error (“face surprise”).
At the heart of predictive coding is the concern for ease (efﬁciency) of processing. As
described earlier, neural resources needed for processing predictable stimuli are minimized,
as our system gradually becomes optimized to the statistics of our natural perceptual
environment. In addition to that, the predictive coding strategy is parsimonious because
different levels of the processing stream do not need to keep duplicates of information,
maintained in higher regions (de-Wit et al 2010). In light of evolution, being able to encode
and process sensory information in an efﬁcient way is vital for the costly organ the brain is.
Being able to successfully predict is another obvious evolutionary advantage, as it allows
animals not only to react after the fact to stimuli that change the internal milieu (homeostasis)
but also to prepare (anticipate and compensate) for those that are very likely to ensue. Thus,
homeostasis urges organisms that can walk around and manipulate their environment to
take a predictive stance. Friston's (2010a) generalization of the predictive coding framework
starts from homeostasis, or the realization that only a limited set of all the states an organism
can be in is compatible with its continued existence. The long-term goal of reducing the time
spent in "surprising" states translates into the short-term goal of reducing prediction errors.
This holds for single-celled organisms as well as for complex mammals, like humans, who
evidently can rely on a greatly enhanced predictive capacity (Cerra and Bingham 1998). Based
on statistical regularities in the environment, organisms form predictions on the where, when,
and what of future resources, compensating for the inherent variability in the availability of
these resources. Complete predictability implies that any disturbances of internal milieu are
fully compensated for (by plasticity or action). Propagated prediction errors tell our system
whether our current cognitive resources are up to the task of interpreting and coping with
incoming stimuli or whether extra effort is needed. This effort can take the form of learning,
when changing the predictions (our internal generative model of our environment), but it
can also be behavioral effort, when actions are executed to change the things predicted or
our sampling of it (Friston 2010a).
If we acknowledge that predictive coding is ultimately founded on homeostasis and the
vital maintenance functions of the body, it should be no surprise that we can link this view
to emotions. Indeed, to understand aesthetic emotion (appreciation), we need to make this
link explicit.

1038
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
3 Prediction and emotion
Emotions can be seen as motivational ampliﬁers (Huron 2006). They motivate organisms
to pursue behaviors that are normally adaptive and to avoid behaviors that are normally
maladaptive. When they form accurate predictions, organisms can efﬁciently react to
upcoming events, thereby increasing the likelihood of future positive outcomes. Hence,
it would be wise for evolution to reward cases in which predictions are conﬁrmed in actual
circumstances. Meanwhile, our failures in predicting situations may be characterized by
negative emotion, because they signal that there is something wrong with the mental model
we use to generate the predictions. It follows that prediction errors are always to some extent
negative in affective valence. Adopting a better-safe-than-sorry strategy, nature tends to
assume the worst because the cost of a false negative (type II error) is potentially much larger
than that of a false alarm (type I error). In a conservative reﬂex, the ﬁrst, quick reaction to
prediction violation or error is negative (Huron 2006). This is also reﬂected by the so-called
conﬂict theories of emotion (for a historical review see Mandler 2003), which claim that
emotions arise from interruptions or discrepancies between expected and actual situations.
Hebb (1949) and Mandler (2003) are the most well-known advocates of this view.
By studying the continuous intrinsic activity of the brain, Hebb realized that the brain was
proactively involved in processing incoming stimuli, rather than just passively responding
to them. According to him, thought consists of so-called phase sequences: sequential
activations of neural structures (cell assemblies) that are built up as a result of previous
experience and learning. Each assembly activation may be aroused by a preceding assembly,
by a sensory event, or by both. Negative emotions arise, then, from the interference with
(obstruction of) such an established phase sequence. Although the terms used may seem
quite peculiar to modern ears, Hebb’s view is consistent with the approach described earlier
of implicit formation of predictions and their conﬁrmation or obstruction.
Mandler (2003) elaborated on this theory, arguing that interruptions of ongoing response
tendencies and conﬂicts between expectations and actual circumstances create arousal
because they signal important changes in the environment that must be acted upon.
Depending on the cognitive context and the situation, the arousal is subsequently evaluated
as positive or negative. Two important differences must be noted between Mandler’s theory
and ours. First, the basis for the generated expectations in Mandler’s view are cognitive
schemata. We choose the broader term “predictions” because it can be used for both
sensory predictions (in predictive coding) and conceptual (high-level) predictions based on
cognitive schemata. Consequently, the term prediction is also more neutral with regard to
the conscious access to the predictions. Second, we described any discrepancy (prediction
error) as negatively valenced, while for Mandler discrepancies generate undifferentiated
arousal, which is later interpreted as either positive or negative. The same discrepancy may
produce differently valenced emotions depending on the circumstances and the cognitive
context. Instead, we argue that any discrepancy (surprise) is initially experienced as negative,
even when a situation is not accurately predicted but in fact better than expected. Instantly
afterward, a reappraisal will take place, converting this into a positive experience and actually
more positive than when it would not have been preceded by a negative one. This contrast
effect will be made more explicit in our discussions of visual art.
In general, the pleasure associated with visual conﬁgurations seems to be dependent
on the perceptual and emotional dynamics involved. In a similar view, Kubovy deﬁnes
the pleasures of the mind as “collections of emotions distributed over time whose global
evaluation depends on the intensity of the peak emotion and favorability of the end” (Kubovy
1999, p 138). Transitions, rather than static states of stimulation, are needed for these kinds
of pleasures. Applied to our context of predictions, positive emotions are experienced when

Prediction error in art
1039
we have succeeded in reinstating predictability (solving the prediction error). In slightly
provocative terms we could say that resistance (of prediction errors) breeds liking.
Another way of thinking about this is that gains in efﬁciency, the sparing use of resources,
are rewarded. If the visual system manages to ﬁnd a sparse explanation of previously
unpredictable stimuli, this genuinely appears to feel good. Similar thoughts have been
expressed in the literature on processing ﬂuency (Reber et al 2004). According to these
authors, stimuli are preferred more if they are processed more easily. Because of this, familiar,
symmetrical, clear-cut (high-contrast), or prototypical (average) stimuli are thought to be
liked most. The mere exposure effect (Zajonc 1968) is cited as evidence for this position,
seeing that improved processing of a stimulus because of repeated presentations leads to
increased preference for this stimulus. At least in case of simple stimuli and subliminal
exposures, the mere exposure effect has ample empirical support (Bornstein 1989). If we
translate this into the terms of the predictive coding framework, an increase in processing
ﬂuency amounts to an increase in predictability (reduced prediction error), but the ﬂuency
account has largely disregarded the dynamics of ﬂuency. Recently, however, some processing
ﬂuency theorists acknowledged the importance of this in the context of the research on the
insight experience (the Aha-Erlebnis). Topolinski and Reber (2010) report that a surprising
gain in ﬂuency increases positive affect and the judged truth of the solution found. Since
this positive affect sets in before any (conscious) assessment of the “insightful” solution has
taken place, they argue this positive effect cannot be solely due to the positive feeling of
pride.
Interestingly, discovering the solution of a neutral two-tone image (cf Gregory’s cam-
ouﬂaged dalmatian) is accompanied by amygdala activity, and the strength of this activity
predicts long-term memory for the organized stimulus (Ludmer et al 2011). Although the
study referred to did not directly probe possible associated (positive) affect, it is well estab-
lished that the amygdala intervenes in reward processing just as well as in fear processing
(Baxter and Murray 2002; Sander et al 2003). Here, the amygdala might signal the goodness of
the solution found in terms of representational efﬁciency, and phenomenologically this may
be experienced as positive. A reduction of uncertainty, or equivalently, a gain in predictability,
might account for the positive experience of the Aha-Erlebnis. That perceptual insight,
irrespective of the emotionality of stimuli involved as such, is processed by the same neural
structures as those responding to the beneﬁcial biological value of stimuli (Baxter and
Murray 2002) is intriguing. It points to the importance of this kind of perceptual and neural
(re)organization in economizing representations.
So far, we infer that a (temporary) state of unpredictability (prediction error) can be
as important for the emergence of perceptual pleasure as is the predictability. This might
particularly be the case for artworks, in which the presence of discrepancies would otherwise
be difﬁcult to explain. Earlier (Van de Cruys and Wagemans in press) we used the example
of earworms: the melodies that keep haunting us. They may be great Gestalts (extreme
predictability), but they are rarely described as beautiful. We will delve deeper into the role
of (un)predictability later on, using artworks as examples.
More neural evidence that (un)predictability is an important factor in emotion has been
accumulating. For example, a recent study found sustained amygdala activity for temporally
unpredictable tones in humans and mice in comparison with rhythmic (predictable)
tones (Herry et al 2007). Moreover, both humans and mice show increased anxiety-related
responses in a standard anxiety test when these unpredictable (versus predictable) tones
were played in the background. Other subcortical areas also seem to be involved in the
processing of prediction errors. Research on reward processing has found that dopamine
neurons in the ventral tegmental area encode the deviations between actual received rewards

1040
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
and the expected reward. The reward prediction errors may be crucial signals for learning
about rewards (Schultz et al 1997). Another region implicated in reward processing, the
putamen, was reported to be more active whenever a tone was not followed by the stimulus
type it predicted in an experiment only using entirely neutral, unrewarded stimuli (den
Ouden et al 2010). Similarly, plasticity in the amygdala in the context of fear learning seems
to be driven by prediction errors originating in the peri-aquaductal gray (McNally et al 2011).
Kapp et al (1992) show that amygdala responses wane once contingencies have been fully
learned—in other words once stimuli are perfectly predicted—and are reinstated only when
external associations change (when predictions fail).
The studies reviewed so far point to an interesting stance, namely that predictions and
prediction errors are omnipresent in the brain as has been suggested by several scholars (Bar
2007; Friston 2010a). We have come across predictions in perception—in reward and fear
processing and in cognitive schemata. In social and developmental psychology we encounter
a long tradition of theorizing about cognitive schemata giving rise to expectations and about
the general tendency to reduce dissonance (see, for example, Kagan 2002; Proulx et al 2010),
which can also be reconceptualized in terms of predictions and errors. Although a rigorous
comparison of these concepts still awaits to be done, we can discern a common theme in all
of these studies. The brain's main trade is to predict impending circumstances based on prior,
similar experiences. Cases in which this goes awry are signiﬁcant and therefore emphasized
by emotion. The organism has to deal with these mismatches by action (assimilation) or
by updating its mental model (accommodation through learning). To show that predictive
coding is a pervasive mechanism of mental function might seem of lesser importance for
the current purposes. Yet, as an explanation for emotion in art, which evidently works on
different perceptual and non-perceptual levels, a theory that encompasses more than purely
perceptual principles has substantial appeal.
Finally, this line of reasoning provides a way for visual processing to inﬂuence (and be
inﬂuenced by) emotion. Duncan and Barrett (2007) already remarked that in brain anatomy
the boundaries between emotion and cognition seem to dissolve. Conceiving perception in
terms of predictions and mismatches opens up a path for perceptual conﬁgurations to induce
different sequences of affect, partly independent of the particular contents of perception. It is
this link we want to explore with aesthetic appreciation of visual art as a concrete application.
Note that in what follows we do not aim to explain all possible emotions in art (if indeed
such a thing would ever be possible). We focus on perceptual features of art and only brieﬂy
touch upon content, which can, of course, induce a whole range of emotions, from very
straightforward ones (as, for example, in paintings of nudes) to very complex ones (as in
paintings portraying social settings). Here, we are not interested in intrinsic or associative
affective value of the content as such, although we agree that real impressive and expressive
art embodies an important interaction between stylistic aspects (perceptual) and thematic
ones (see below). Some other affects that we will not talk about but that can show up when
contemplating works of art have been listed by Jackendoff and Lerdahl (2006)—for example,
the admiration of craftsmanship, emotions linked to nostalgic memories associated with a
particular work, social emotions of belonging to (or differentiating oneself from) a group, etc.
These different affects probably interact when viewing art, and in the process the sources may
be lost, which means that affect caused by one factor can enhance or diminish affect caused
by another. Granted that these different emotions are difﬁcult to disentangle in our actual
experiences with art, here we are concerned only with the ways in which the perceptual or
cognitive organization can provoke emotions.

Prediction error in art
1041
4 An application to visual art
Visual art is in many ways different from the visual input we ordinarily receive from our natu-
ral environment. We want to focus on the prediction errors, more often called incongruities,
ubiquitous in art. When we talk of incongruities in the context of art, surrealistic paintings
spring to mind. Or perhaps Duchamps’ La Fontaine, a porcelain urinal, an object one would
never have expected to belong in an art exhibition, let alone to be called “beautiful”. However,
much more subtle kinds of incongruities play in many other styles as well. As a ﬁrst example,
take the painting below by Morandi (Figure 1). In his still lifes he often used subtle differences
in hues or texture for ﬁgure and background, which makes the perception very unstable. The
prediction error resides in those dissolving boundaries and more generally in the fact that
Morandi twists expectations of how still-life paintings are deﬁned traditionally.
Figure 1. Natura morta (1960), Giorgio Morandi.
Why do painters repeatedly and deliberately create such obstacles for us? As we saw,
current theories of predictive coding in visual perception assume that our brain aims at
reducing prediction errors. In art, however, even though we (or rather, the artists) fully
control the stimuli, we intentionally create prediction errors that may not even be possible
in the natural visual environment. So in art we do not always manipulate stimuli in ways that
reduce prediction errors. Why so? And why does this not imply that we experience most art
as unpleasant, as would be the case if all prediction error was negative? The common answer
is that in going to a museum, we expect the unexpected. In this limited domain and time
span, we can tolerate and even enjoy unpredictability because we expect to be surprised in
every new exhibition hall. Furthermore, in these settings there is no need for urgent actions.
Prediction errors in art do not need to be acted upon as in real life. This playful and safe
as-if context of art, where our guards can be lowered and our actions suspended, allows
for the usually negative prediction errors to be enjoyed. Hence, a positive reappraisal can
immediately follow the negative gut reaction. But why take this detour? The frequent use
of prediction errors in art and their relation to appreciation deserve to be explicated more
thoroughly.
4.1 From auditory to visual pleasures
We propose that while prediction error is always annoying or unpleasant initially and
conﬁrmed predictions are pleasurable as such (mostly independent of their content),
prediction errors or delayed prediction conﬁrmation can be an important tool for artists to
amplify the subsequent positive affect of prediction conﬁrmation, in a sort of contrast effect

1042
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
(Huron 2006). For developing the current view, we are much indebted to Leonard Meyer and
his treatment of emotion in music (Meyer 1961). He already invoked expectancy violations
to explain emotion expressed in music. Tensions are created in music by ﬁrst establishing a
strong pattern in rhythm and melody (a scale based on the tonic) and subsequently deviating
from it. The role of expectancy violations might have been realized in music ﬁrst because
musical patterns are spread out in time, so the dynamics of predictions and deviations thereof
are easier to notice. However, they also play in visual perception, albeit on a millisecond time
scale. For example in Day and Night by Escher (Figure 2), every new bird-like form the visual
system encounters conﬁrms and strengthens the (later destroyed) parsimonious prediction.
Figure 2. Day and Night (1938), M C Escher.
An experience of deep aesthetic appreciation is not so easily reproduced in the lab.
One more reason music might be more tractable in the lab than visual art is that music
happens to be the art form in which an aesthetic experience can be best elicited in an
intense, more or less controlled and reliable (repeatable) fashion. These experiences known
as music “chills” or “shivers-down-the-spine” have been successfully used to explore the
neural and cognitive underpinnings of music appreciation (Blood and Zatorre 2001; Huron
2006). Cognitively, Sloboda (1991) found that these chills are strongly correlated with marked
violations of expectation. Neurally, Blood and Zatorre (2001) reported that they are associated
with increases in cerebral blood ﬂow in regions involved in reward processing (ventral
striatum) and decreases in amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Similar to the study
by Ludmer et al (2011) discussed earlier, changes in predictability of stimuli elicit a pattern of
activity characteristic of processing biologically relevant, survival-related stimuli.
While musicians use uncertainty on the when (rhythm) and the what (melody, volume)
to evoke emotions in their listeners (Huron 2006), visual artists utilize uncertainty on the
where (spatial) and the what (object indeterminacy, see below) with the same intent. Below
we will discuss a series of examples, elucidating the workings of this artistic “tool”.
In Separation by Munch (Figure 3) there is a (mild) violation of grouping by similarity of
color and form; however, we have no problems ﬁnding out what the objects are. Artists seem
to like using strong predictions, either by building them themselves through repetition,
as in the Escher painting above, or by using a well-known conceptual domain in their
painting and thereby relying on existing strong predictions. In Munch’s Separation we ﬁnd

Prediction error in art
1043
this combination of a familiar pattern (strong predictions) together with a minimal deviation
of default expectations, which makes the painting attention-grabbing and memorable.(1)
Figure 3. Separation (1896), Edvard Munch.
In his Weeping Woman (Figure 4) Picasso arguably counts on our specialized face-
processing systems (fusiform face area) to project its guesses on what belongs where in a face
based only on some fragmentary cues. The viewer quickly runs into incongruencies, which
presumably generate arousal aimed at reducing the prediction errors. This style-induced
arousal could add up the emotionality of the contents, because despite the “errors,” we can
still recognize the emotional expression portrayed. We can contrast this with Ramachandran
and Hirstein's (1999) explanation invoking the peak shift phenomenon. In this account,
Picasso's face derives its emotionality from being a superstimulus, activating visual face
processing systems very strongly because input from multiple viewpoints is merged in
one image. This explanation for art is refuted by Hyman (2010), who observes that artistic
depictions often deviate too far from the norm to be examples of peak shift (which is, as
Hyman reviews, a very speciﬁc phenomenon in animal behavior). In our view it is precisely
the incompatibility (prediction error) that causes part of the emotionality in this (and other)
paintings.
Predictive coding is an intrinsically hierarchical, multi-level model (Lee and Mumford
2003) in the sense that implicit predictions are generated and checked on every level in the
visual system, from low-level feature-related to mid-level conﬁgurational predictions, up
to high-level concrete and abstract semantic predictions. Importantly, predictions on every
level are partly encapsulated (Jackendoff and Lerdahl 2006), such that even when we are very
familiar with a painting (eg, Blanc Seing by Magritte [Figure 5]), and the visual input is in
fact not unexpected any more, we are subject to these dynamics. That is, our visual system
unconsciously computes its moment-to-moment predictions and errors regardless of the
viewer's conscious memory.
(1)Of course, there is more to the paintings we discuss than the aspects we zoom in on. We just want
to draw attention to a possible commonality in these pieces, which can appeal to both laymen and
experts.

1044
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
Figure 4. Weeping Woman (1937), Pablo Picasso.
Figure 5. Blanc Seing (1965), René Magritte.
4.2 Art movements
Vincent van Gogh in The Olive Trees (Figure 6) plays with perceptual grouping by similarity
(parallel waves) breaching the borders of the objects as deﬁned by color and by our top-down
knowledge of what the objects are in the scene (trees, ﬁelds, sky). In this light, differences
between art movements and artists might also be interpreted in terms of differences in
the amount and kind of prediction errors primarily used. The evolution of movements
can be understood within our framework, recalling that predictions are dependent on the

Prediction error in art
1045
speciﬁc history of stimulation, and therefore on cultural and personal experience. Recall
that van Gogh (and numerous other great artists) did not enjoy any recognition from his
contemporaries. He was mocked and died in obscurity. Predictions evolve, and what was a
prediction error once can now be the canonical form of expression and thus fully predictable.
These shifts partly explain why artistic taste varies widely in different eras and within the
same era, between experts and laymen. In the predictive coding approach all perception
is a form of expert perception (Clark 2011), in the sense that it is always determined by an
individual’s expectations built up through a lifetime of implicit statistical learning.
Figure 6. The Olive Trees (1889), Vincent van Gogh.
A certain kind or amount of prediction error can be upgraded intentionally or uninten-
tionally to being the norm, the predictable standard, only for those who have developed the
allegedly exquisite sensitivities and expertise needed to appreciate or grasp these artworks
(ie, seeing the underlying predictable structure). This role of aesthetic taste in creating
social distinction and status is defended by the sociologist Bourdieu (1984), who argues
that by openly declaring oneself an aﬁcionado of difﬁcult and inaccessible artworks people
reassert their membership in society's upper classes. It also ﬁgures in current theories on the
evolutionary role of art as an expensive and time-consuming status symbol, not unlike the
peacock's tail (Pinker 2003).
4.3 Inter-individual differences and the optimum of (un)predictability
We can derive two important hypotheses from the previous. First, it follows that individuals
are likely to have an optimal amount of unpredictability that they most appreciate. Too
much prediction error is unpleasant or even disturbing; none or too little is boring (neither
positive nor negative). This relates to psychological or subjective complexity, an important
determinant of people's aesthetic evaluations (Gaver and Mandler 1987). The psychological
complexity is a function of both actual stimulus complexity and personal experience with the
class of stimuli involved. The predictability of the work of art increases with the observer's
knowledge of the correlational structure built up through exposure. An optimum of mild
violation of predictions will be experienced as most pleasant, because the experiencer
manages to return to a familiar mental schema. Therefore, for a given piece of art, we will also
see an evolution of liking through repeated exposure, with initially an increase of preference

1046
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
and motivation to enjoy the piece time and again, but as predictability further increases
appreciation will diminish again. A similar evolution of preference has been reported by
Berlyne (1970) relating complexity and novelty to arousal. He hypothesized that stimuli of
moderate complexity engender a moderate amount of arousal, which is optimally pleasing.
Berlyne does not further address the question of whether this mild arousal can be pleasant
in itself or, alternatively, whether the moderate complexity still allows a resolution to a
predictable, recognized conﬁguration, which only then is experienced as positive. We will
return to this issue later on.
Reliable inter-individual differences in appreciation should thus be present, which will be
dependent on personal experience, which is especially obvious when comparing aesthetic
evaluations by experts with those of laymen (Lindell and Mueller 2011). Additionally, we
speculate that these inter-individual differences in preference also depend on the strength
of the top-down predictions the viewer generates (irrespective of the particular perceptual
predictions). This factor may determine how much prediction error a particular person can
“tolerate” and appreciate, but whether this is the case is still an open, empirical question.
Related to that, one may wonder whether personality factors such as personal need for
structure (Thompson et al 2001), ﬁeld dependency (Witkin and Goodenough 1981), or the
systemizing quotient from autism research (Baron-Cohen et al 2003) relate to this strength of
top-down predictions. At least for personal need for structure a correlation has already been
found with art appreciation (Landau et al 2006).
The second hypothesis derived from our theorizing is that artists attempt to strike this
optimal balance between predictability and surprise in their works. This way their viewers
have to make an effort and initially experience minor negative affect, only to experience
a much intenser positive affect by contrast, once they actually mentally “resolved” the
prediction error. The effort or mental work one has to do to cope with the prediction error is
a conditio sine qua non for receiving perceptual pleasure of a Gestalt formation (prediction
error reduction). Before arriving at a clear, coherent interpretation of the jumble of lines in
Klimt’s Reclining Woman (Figure 7), our visual system is embroiled in a small struggle. Only
with some mental work is the familiar silhouette discovered. But the aesthetic pleasure is
larger as a result. Sometimes this Aha-Erlebnis emerges only after a glance at the title for
some contextual information, as for Picasso's Guernica.
Figure 7. Reclining Woman (1914/17), Gustav Klimt.
The hypothesis that aesthetic pleasure lies in forcing the brain to do some work has
also been put forward by Dodgson (2009). His research starts from the computer-generated
geometric patterns inspired by the early work of the English Op artist Bridget Riley. With

Prediction error in art
1047
a psychophysical test using different degrees of distortion, he shows that there is a range
in which a pattern is not immediately recognized but can be recognized given some extra
effort. Since Riley's works precisely lie in this region where a pattern is hinted at but not
made obvious, Dodgson suggests that this might be a common mechanism in all art. In
line with our account above, he argues that ﬁnding an aesthetic optimum is not a matter of
depicting the best Gestalt but rather of providing just enough information that the viewer
can reconstruct the pattern but not so much information that the pattern is plainly obvious.
Hence, Dodgson’s research is a nice illustration of the idea that artworks embody a right
balance of the expected and the surprising. It also helps to clarify discussions on the relative
importance of familiarity and novelty in art appreciation where it is often concluded that: “It
is not extreme novelty but ‘optimal’ innovation—novelty that allows for the recoverability of
the familiar—that is most pleasurable” (Giora [2003, p 176] quoted in Lindell and Mueller
2011, p 465).
Figure 8. Computer rendition of Fragment 6/9, Riley (from Dodgson [2009] with permission from the
author).
4.4 The valence of prediction error
A central assumption of our theory is that prediction errors are always to some extent
emotional, more speciﬁcally negative in valence. We are currently setting up experiments to
test this, but so far we have only indirect evidence to support it. For example, we note that
the expression of surprise, the emotional reaction to violation of predictions, is very close to
(and often indistinguishable from) a fearful expression. Neuroimaging studies lend support
for this similarity since the amygdala responds equally strongly to surprised as to fearful
faces and much less to angry or happy emotions (Whalen 1998). Moreover, a very recent
meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on aesthetic appreciation (across modalities) found
a consistent activation of the anterior insula (Brown et al 2011). This structure is known to
be involved in the conscious, bodily emotional experience (Craig 2009), in particular for
unpleasant emotions such as disgust and pain. The authors were puzzled that this region

1048
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
systematically pops up in studies on aesthetics and assumed it attests to the visceral impact
of artworks. In light of our theory, the insula activity might point to the unpleasantness of
prediction errors, which are an important stage in the aesthetic experience. The limited
temporal resolution of fMRI might not make the distinction between stages that quickly
follow each other. However, we should tread carefully in interpreting the anterior insula
activity because, as Yarkoni et al (2011) report in their large-scale meta-analysis, the insula
is one of the regions found to be active in a large percentage of neuroimaging studies, a lot
of which do not even study emotion. Still, it is interesting to see that the anterior insula is
not only involved in negative emotions but that more speciﬁcally (spatially and temporally)
separable signals can be found reﬂecting risk prediction and risk prediction errors in the
insula (Preuschoff et al 2008). This role of the insula in uncertainty and anticipation, which
has been noted before (Elliot et al 2000), is in line with our reasoning that prediction errors
in art cause uncertainty (risk of not being rewarded in the end), the computations of which
will determine whether to look away or to go on exploring the piece. Moreover, the anterior
cingulate cortex, a region often jointly active with the insula (Craig 2009), has been found
to be involved in signaling visual prediction errors (Noyce and Sekuler 2011) analogous to
its role in signaling motor mistakes (which we can reasonably assume are experienced as
negative). All this being said, whether our hypothesis of the negatively valenced prediction
errors stands the empirical test remains to be seen.
While traditionally the aesthetic experience is equated with attaining harmony and
successful insights, we are not the ﬁrst to emphasize negative affect, discrepancy, and
disruption as important components in aesthetic appreciation. Vygotsky (1971) used
Aristoteles' concept of catharsis to describe that in aesthetic experiences we go through a
transformation from a negatively valenced obstruction to a positively experienced resolution,
in full awareness that the positive catharsis would not be possible without ﬁrst having
experienced its contrast. More recently the artist Pepperell (2011) characterized his aesthetic
experience as a moment in which his “usual conceptual grip on the world failed”. This was
accompanied by mild anxiety and “active struggle to make sense of what [he] was seeing”.
Artists use the compulsive interpretative (predictive) mode of the visual system to leave out
parts of, or blatantly contradict, the suggested content of their works.
Pelowski and Akiba (2011) similarly highlight disruptions and breaches as vehicles for
the kinds of self-transformation described in accounts of rich aesthetic experiences. When
artworks forcefully challenge the conceptual classiﬁcations and personal self-understandings
of the viewer, they can lead him or her to question, change, or expand these, with possible
existential ramiﬁcations. This is a precarious balance to strike because the viewer might
prematurely break off perception. Overcoming initial negative experiences requires courage
and inventiveness to modify the existing (self-)schema (Vygotsky 1971; Pelowski and Akiba
2011) but is constitutive for the full aesthetic experience. It is encouraging to see that, starting
from different inspiration, namely the full, rich aesthetic experience and several social-
psychological ﬁndings, the authors arrive at an understanding of the aesthetic experience
that is consistent with ours. While their view explores the existential and meta-cognitive
implications of the conﬂicts present in art, ours starts from a substantiated theory of visual
perception, in a rather “bottom-up” way.
4.5 No pain, no gain?
What evidence do we have to argue that a reduction in unpredictability (prediction error)
is experienced as positive? Put differently, do we have reason to assume that the degree of
our mental efforts to compensate for this unpredictability (to resolve the picture) is directly
related to the reward we experience? A common ﬁnding in animal learning tasks is that
random intermittent rewards (there is a pattern but it is disrupted) or non-reward (during

Prediction error in art
1049
initial extinction trials: there was a clear pattern, but now it is interrupted) provoke most
vigorous responding. In those cases motivation is highest. For example, a variable interval
reinforcement schedule, in which the animal is rewarded on average every nth amount of
time, provokes the highest response rates, presumably because from the point of view of the
animal there remains something to be learnt. Neurally, unexpected rewards, compared with
expected rewards, are associated with increased dopamine peaks. Johnson and Gallagher
(2010) speciﬁcally asked whether it might be the effort required for getting a reward that is
the determining factor for the reward value. They reported that the positive affective quality
of taste can be boosted by increasing the amount of effort required to obtain it. In their study
mice learned to press a lever A for a reward and lever B for another, different tasting, reward.
Next, they gradually increased the number of operant lever presses needed to obtain one
of the two rewards. When tested afterwards outside of the training environment, the mice
showed a clear preference for the reinforcer for which they had to work the hardest in the
learning phase. In accordance with our speculations on art, they concluded that pleasure
(hedonic value) is increased by effort. In humans something similar has very recently been
reported as the IKEA effect: participants value the products of their own labour similar to
creations of experts, but only when they successfully completed them (Norton et al in press).
The view outlined here is bound to learn a lot more from advances in (animal) learning
studies on the link between uncertainty versus predictability and reward value. They might
help to explain why we can derive pleasures from mildly deviant stimuli, as in an addict
who experiences pleasure from almost winning (near-misses). In a set-up mimicking a
gambling machine, almost winning is shown to induce heightened reward expectancies in
rats, mediated by dopamine and analogous to the near-miss effect in addiction (Winstanley
et al 2011). It seems that part of the reward lies in the anticipation instead of the consumption
(Lauwereyns 2010), with a little unpredictability adding to the reward. One must note that this
is in agreement with the idea that biological organisms are characterized by striving: It would
have made little sense for evolution to reward static states of stimulation. Prediction errors
introduce uncertainty that will stimulate further processing (mental effort), the outcome
of which is also uncertain, thus unexpected when successful. Phenomenally, this kind of
perceptual problem solving is not only rewarding but also gives the viewer a sense of mastery
(Leder et al 2004).
In the context of art perception, Ishai et al (2007) ﬁnd a positive correlation between
the time needed to comprehend a picture and its aesthetic value (measured as the judged
degree of “powerfulness” of a presented painting), leading Pepperell (2011) to suggest that the
effort people have to invest to recognize the contents has a positive inﬂuence on aesthetic
value. Reports that the better the viewer's understanding of an artwork, the more he or
she experiences pleasure, should thus at least be re-examined (Leder et al 2004). No doubt
individual differences determine a large part of the variability here (as described earlier),
but in addition to that, experiment designs may not always allow the tracking of these
dynamics and the presence of moments of misconception. It may be true that understanding
facilitates liking, but this pleasure may be potentiated by preceding mismatches. Likewise,
when going to a scary ﬁlm, we endure cruel tensions because their resolution is so good.
Note, however, that when we say we like a painting, there is a kind of misattribution taking
place: the pleasurable experience associated with a processing characteristic, namely the
reduction of prediction error in the stimulus, is ascribed to the stimulus itself (Huron 2006).
Our fundamental thesis is that the progression from a state of more unpredictability to
a state of less uncertainty is pleasurable. Again, animal studies support this hypothesis. In
an elegant experiment Bromberg-Martin and Hikosaka (2011) showed that monkeys have a
preference for cues that indicate that advance information on the presence or absence of

1050
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
a forthcoming reward will be available over cues that signal such information will not be
available, even if their choice has no inﬂuence whatsoever on the actual appearance of the
reward. Moreover, the monkeys more consistently chose this advance information over the
no information cue than they choose a more probable reward over a less probable reward
(Niv and Chan 2011). In other words, information or reduction of uncertainty is rewarding
as such, consistent with our account. In fact, when Bromberg-Martin and Hikosaka (2011)
examined the neural underpinnings of the value of information, they concluded that it is
encoded by the same habenula and dopaminergic neurons that also encode primary rewards.
To be clear, these dopamine and habenula neurons are known to signal a change in reward
contingencies (reward prediction errors), and this is also what they found with regard to
information: these neurons do not encode the value of predicted information per se but only
the changes in predicted information (Niv and Chan 2011). The signals related to information
change were simply added up to signals related to reward changes, indicating that the value
of reward and that of information use a interchangeable neural currency (Niv and Chan
2011). In keeping with this, we contend that decreases of (information) prediction error
are pleasurable and constitute part of the aesthetic pleasure. Cues that signify a reduction
of uncertainty also seem to have greater value for humans. Ogawa and Watanabe (2011)
asked people to perform a contextual cuing task in which targets are surrounded either by a
repeated (and thus predictive) conﬁguration of distractors or, in the other half of the trials,
by a novel display of distractors. When subjects had to evaluate the goodness of the displays
afterward, predictive displays were judged more positively than non-predictive or novel
conﬁgurations. Since people did not see predictive displays more frequently (nor did they
recognize them signiﬁcantly more in a ﬁnal phase of the experiment), this increased liking
could not be caused by mere exposure. The authors conclude that predictability promotes
preference (Ogawa and Watanabe 2011). In the context of an effortful search task, with a large
degree of uncertainty on the position of the target, predictable conﬁgurations will become
associated with a higher value than conﬁgurations that do not reduce uncertainty.
To sum up, dealing with unpredictability requires effort from the viewer. But when
successful, it leads to positive appreciation. The idea that the viewer's personal efforts and
"accomplishments" matter in art appreciation is also recognized by Mamassian (2008, p
2152): “not all ambiguities in paintings are re-solved, and artists probably strive to leave the
right amount of ambiguities to let the observer contribute to his experience in a personal
way.” However, only by using minimal prediction errors painters can ensure that viewers
will obtain their reward(s) and not give up prematurely. Final gratiﬁcation may be further
postponed as long as the artist has hidden in the painting enough “micro-rewards” the viewer
can discover along the way.
4.6 Dynamics in art
Our view emphasizes the role of the dynamics of perceptual processing in art appreciation.
This emphasis is not particularly new, but has been foreshadowed by Arnheim, although
arguably in a less articulate way. In his seminal work, Arnheim (1974) asserts that visual
experience is dynamically governed by “attractions” and “forces” or “tensions”. Even though
these terms are kept rather vague in his writings, our prediction error account could be seen
as an effort to give his concept of tension new substance. Arnheim realized that these tensions
are inherent in any percept, as with our concept of prediction (error), even acknowledging
the active role of the observer and his past experience in (automatically) generating these
tensions. Analogously to our view, Arnheim contends that psychological, like physical,
systems “exhibit a very general tendency to change in the direction of the lowest attainable
tension level” (Arnheim 1974, p 14). A crucial difference between Arnheim’s view and ours
is that the ultimate goal for Arnheim is balance or stability, while for us it is the reduction

Prediction error in art
1051
of prediction error (or maximization of predictability). In general, once he acknowledged
the dynamic nature of perception, he remains overly focused on balance and stability as the
static pinnacle of beauty, largely ignoring the emotional dynamics of the transitions going
from “tensed” to “relaxed” interpretations of visual input that, according to our view, may
cause positive appreciations.
Because it is inspired by predictive coding, our view also shares with Arnheim’s the
concern for parsimony (efﬁciency of representation, cf supra), which he in turn inherits from
the Gestalt tradition, with its emphasis on simplicity and Prägnanz. Predictability implies
more efﬁcient, higher level representations, freeing up expensive processing resources. That
there is positive affect (appreciation) associated with this progression has been anticipated
by Eysenck (1942) in his law of aesthetic appreciation: “The pleasure derived from a percept
as such is directly proportional to the decrease of energy capable of doing work in the total
nervous system, as compared with the original state of the whole system” (Eysenck 1942,
p 358). Thus, a change towards a more efﬁcient state of the dynamic perceptual networks
given the current constraints of stimulation, tantamount to a decrease in prediction error
(surprise), is pleasurable as such, as we described for the Klimt sketch above (Figure 7).
4.7 From traditional to modern art
Melcher and Bacci (2008) noted that artists often use very familiar perceptual domains, like
faces or animals, but apply their “artistry” on them. Since prehistoric times, artists exploit very
familiar patterns, for which we developed exquisite, specialized systems through evolution
and experience. Melcher and Bacci (2008, p 352) observe that “the ability to recognize certain
stimuli quickly and easily makes it easier, then, for artists to add decorative elements, accurate
details and artistic style.” For example in prehistoric cave art, the patterns portrayed are
not “just” depictions of animals or humans; they incorporate counter-intuitive or unusual
deformations (see Figure 9).
Figure 9. Examples of prehistoric cave art (elongated human ﬁgures in aboriginal art in Kukadu
National Park, Australia).
The cultural anthropologist Dissanayake (2009) calls this special treatment “artiﬁcation”
or “making special,” which, according to her, encompasses formalization, exaggeration,
elaboration, repetition, and manipulation of expectation. Note that most (if not all) of
these terms relate to either conﬁrmation and strengthening of predictions or violation and
disruption of predictions (prediction errors). Dissanayake agrees that this process is most
obvious in the temporal, performing and traditional arts, but claims that these are universal
characteristics common to all art forms. This particular shaping of stimuli is meant to set

1052
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
these objects or practices apart from, and make them more than, the ordinary (traditionally
in the context of religious rituals).
In the context of their discussion of surprise in art, Melcher and Bacci (2008) provide
some other ﬁne examples of prediction error in art. About the Sleeping Hermaphrodite they
write:
Displayed with the back to the viewer, it offers a sensual pose that ﬂatters the femininity of the
ﬁgure, in accordance with the tradition of the reclining Hellenistic nude. Enticed by the sensual
nature of this work, the viewer who will then walk around the sculpture to see it from the front
will encounter the surprise of the ﬁgure’s androgynous nature, which provides a moment of
astonishment in which sensory information does not coincide with expectation (Melcher and
Bacci 2008, p 354).
On the powerful, realistic evocation of biological motion in Caravaggio's The Death of
the Virgin they hypothesize: “Thus, perception of motion in static art involves a form of
perceptual ambiguity, in which complex motion areas such as MT/MST are activated but
‘early’ vision detectors in V1 are silent” (Melcher and Bacci 2008, p 357).
Several theorists and art critics have argued that (post)modern artists, with their explicit
abandonment of any representational aspirations and their blunt refusal to provide any
familiar reference point whatsoever to their spectators, have taken things too far (Landau et
al 2006; Pinker 2003). They are said to leave the viewers of their works completely in chaos,
bombarding them with colors and fragmented shapes with no structure or meaning. In our
terms: an overload of prediction errors that despite our best efforts, cannot be reduced to a
more predictable, sparser explanation. As a consequence, modern abstract art, as compared
with other styles, is least preferred by the general public (Landau et al 2006; Lindell and
Mueller 2011). We suggested earlier that artists will attempt to ﬁnd an optimum, but their
success in doing so depends on their intended audience and its broader cultural context.
Works of art will survive through time if they manage to be at such an optimum (and thereby
appeal) across cultures and periods (Melcher and Bacci 2008). Of all abstract art our theory
predicts that we will be most impressed by paintings in which we can, with some labor,
distinguish recognizable, predictable forms. Excavation by de Koonig (Figure 10) can serve
as a good example, as can the paintings of Pepperell that also show this kind of object
indeterminacy, investigated by Fairhall and Ishai (2008).
Figure 10. Excavation (1950), Willem de Koonig.

Prediction error in art
1053
Clearly our approach can be applied to art belonging to a broad range of styles and eras.
In fact, it has most difﬁculties in explaining the attraction of hyper-realistic art. In this case
we can speculate that it has more to do with the admiration of craftsmanship, the emotional
content of the painting, or possibly an ultimate prediction error in all visual artworks: this
work provokes strong feelings in me, as if the particular object depicted is really in front
of me, while in fact it isn't. What we could call the “ceci n'est pas une pipe” experience.
Alternatively, we might be bemused by the fact that we see a nearly photo-realistic image
while we expected a painting. But evidently these are just ad hoc explanations.
4.8 The fate of prediction errors
The examples so far might have made it clear that often we do not end up with a coherent,
predictable Gestalt. Still, we want to draw attention to the fact that prediction errors at the
level of style (perceptual ones) sometimes can be resolved on the level of meaning (see, also,
Pinna 2010). The deserting lady in Munch's Separation dissolves in the road and the air,
and Picasso's Weeping Woman can be “broken” because she is sad. A clear congruency in
meaning unexpectedly “saves” the coherence of the paintings, and so the prediction error is
reinterpreted. With these symbolic explanations, we enter a more speculative realm, but it
would be foolish to expect that something as complex as art appreciation can be understood
by looking only at the low-level, perceptual features. Art is about the interaction of style and
content, not a simple addition of these components. As we reviewed in the introduction, a
predictive coding view can, similar to schema theory (Proulx et al 2010), provide a way for
high-level expectations to be involved in our experience with art.
What about those paintings in which we can not even remotely and mentally come to a
form of closure? Paintings are static art forms, so prediction errors often cannot be resolved,
except in our minds. In their artistic endeavors people seem to deliberately seek prediction
errors. Prediction errors intrigue us, especially when they violate strong default expectations.
Even if we are not sure there is an actual clue to them, we cannot remain indifferent to them
(they cause arousal), and we keep coming back to examine them (attentional resources are
recruited). We might still experience positive emotions from these “unsolvable” paintings,
though. By reappraisal of the negative prediction error in a safe context, the resulting emotion
is still very positive because of the contrast effect (cf supra). A related, but more implicit
mechanism, namely misattribution, could turn a negative arousal into something of positive
affective valence. This mechanism shows people often have very little insight into the sources
of their experienced emotions or arousal, as exempliﬁed by the classic Capilano suspension
bridge experiment (Dutton and Aron 1974). In this experiment passers-by on a scary rope
bridge or a solid wood bridge are asked some sham questions by an attractive female
researcher and told that they can always call for more information on the research afterward.
The authors found that if participants were questioned on the foot-bridge, they were much
more likely to call the researcher afterward to ask her out. The authors assumed that those
participants misinterpreted their arousal from the fright of walking on a high, shaky bridge
as feelings of attraction. The speciﬁc experiment has been criticized, but the phenomenon of
misattribution has been replicated since and is well-established. It might thus partly explain
why we misinterpret, for example, the mildly negative color mismatch in a Matisse painting
as affectively positive (Figure 11).
The question of whether prediction errors can be experienced as positive also relates
to the conceptual confusion on what exactly an aesthetic experience entails. We can safely
assume that art has to be rewarding in one way or another; otherwise, we would not be
motivated to engage with it. But people might label some artworks as "fascinating" or
"special", rather than "beautiful" (Augustin et al in press). Finally, a particular painting

1054
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
Figure 11. Blue Nude (1952), Henri Matisse.
might also be differently appreciated depending on the context of stimulation, as we will
brieﬂy discuss in the next section.
4.9 Inferentially rich, attention-grabbing meaning threats
Because of the prediction errors, we feel impelled to question our perception and to linger
on its contents. These visual or cognitive challenges urge us to, implicitly or explicitly, go
through multiple cycles, exploring different predictions and the corresponding errors (Leder
et al 2004). They grant access to different layers of meaning, which we so much like to
discover. They create the multi-interpretability and ambiguity that has been invoked by
others to explain our enjoyment of art (Biederman and Vessel 2006; Mamassian 2008; Zeki
2004; van Leeuwen 2007). In the context of creative discovery, Verstijnen et al (1998) have
coined the term surplus structure to denote that through externalizing their ideas in sketches,
artists themselves discover new, unanticipated features and interpretations of the raw ideas.
Might this be true? Not so much because in sketches they can more lucidly represent their
ideas but rather because sketches allow them to depart more easily from ordinary ideas and
exaggerate, restructure, and deform more freely, in other words amplify what would normally
be prediction errors?
Biederman and Vessel's (2006) idea is basically that inferentially rich stimuli will be
preferred because they are accompanied by more activity in regions higher up in the ventral
visual stream, which possess higher amounts of mu-opioid receptors. This hypothesis is not
at all incompatible with our account. Our optimally deviant expected patterns with a limited
violation of intuitions, combine the rich inferences (of a predictable pattern) with the high
saliency (of the discrepancies) which conspire to make a very emotional and memorable
stimulus (Sperber and Hirschfeld 2004). Discrepancies are attention grabbing and stimulate

Prediction error in art
1055
further processing, but only when strong predictions are ﬁrst built up (clear organization).
This optimum makes for a highly relevant stimulus according to Sperber's (2005) theory
because it guarantees the richest cognitive inferences for the least cognitive effort.
Our account also bears a clear resemblance to the Freudian notion of the uncanny (das
Unheimliche). Freud observed that we are disturbed and aroused by unfamiliar experiences
in an otherwise completely familiar setting (Proulx et al 2010). For example, in absurdist
or surrealist art we often ﬁnd an unfamiliar juxtaposition of very familiar objects. Thus,
strong expectations have to be present before such an experience can ensue. In a completely
unfamiliar situation no strong predictions are formed, so no violations will be encountered.
Incongruency or expectancy violation will result in negatively valenced arousal aimed at
reducing the inconsistency if at all possible, as in our account. Some authors have even
reported that this arousal can lead to an afﬁrmation of any other meaning framework to
which one is committed. For example, after exposure to an absurd Kafka parable, subjects
more strongly afﬁrmed their cultural identity than after reading one of Aesop’s meaningful
parables (Proulx et al 2010). The meaning maintenance model, as this theory is called,
has been developed to counter the terror management theory, which assumes that only
mortality threat (salience) will cause people to defend their cultural world-view. In a study
by Landau et al (2006) terror management theory has also been applied to art appreciation.
Apparently, mortality salience (having people to imagine what will physically happen when
they die and which emotions they have with that) decreases their liking for "meaningless,"
abstract art, while leaving their appreciation of representational paintings untouched. In
further studies the authors ﬁnd that this effect is limited to individuals with a high personal
need for structure, and diminished when the abstract artworks were given meaning (eg,
by giving a title). This research goes to show that next to stable traits of the viewer and
stable characteristics of the piece of art, aesthetic appreciation can also be inﬂuenced by the
context-dependent cognitive and emotional mindset the viewer is in. We could speculate
that any contextual uncertainty (prediction error or, in terms of the theories discussed,
threat of meaninglessness) could add up to the uncertainty in a painting and thus inﬂuence
its appreciation. For instance, against a background of unpredictable (versus rhythmic, cf
supra) tones a representational painting may be liked more, while an abstract painting might
be liked less. Related to this, Mueller et al (in press) recently probed implicit and explicit
attitudes towards creativity after inducing a sense of uncertainty in half of their volunteers.
These people were told they might receive additional payment based on a random lottery
or, in a second experiment, they were primed to be intolerant of ambiguity. While explicit
attitudes towards creativity were similar in the experimental and the controls, people in the
high uncertainty condition had an unconscious bias against creativity and judged a highly
creative idea less favorably.
Ultimately, maintaining (or returning to) predictability is about survival and maintaining
the body through homeostasis (Cerra and Bingham 1998; Van de Cruys and Wagemans
in press; Friston 2010a). Predictive coding is about reinstating predictability and therefore
about afﬁrming one's own existence. So within a predictive coding framework, we do not
need to assign a special status to the existential threat of mortality. We further assumed that
making progress in this prediction project of life genuinely feels good or, in the case of art,
is beautiful. In his Ethics, Spinoza (2001, p 40) writes, “[I]f the motion by which the nerves
are affected by means of objects represented to the eye conduces to well-being, the objects
by which it is caused are called beautiful; while those exciting a contrary motion are called
deformed.” When a successful, sublime aesthetic experience is described as a selﬂess state of
harmony between the viewer and the world (Pelowski and Akiba 2011), we might take this
quite literally: the beholder has advanced in tuning the self to the world.

1056
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
5 Remaining questions and concluding remarks
We hope to have shown that the predictive coding approach can summarize and throw a new
light on existing concepts in the ﬂourishing ﬁeld of aesthetic appreciation, such as familiarity,
complexity, novelty, prototypicality, interpretability, ﬂuency, incongruency, ambiguity, and
so. Further research will have to make clear what the added value is of thinking in terms of
predictions and prediction errors in comparison with these concepts. We want to end our
overview by discussing some of the limitations and advantages of our approach.
First of all, we do not want to reduce aesthetic experience to the formal mechanisms
discussed. For instance, we are not saying we experience a full-blown aesthetic reaction
when discovering the actual content or organization of 2-tone images, but our hypothesis is
that a signiﬁcant part of the aesthetic appreciation comes from discovering the organization
after struggle.
Second, we are being too vague when we claim that art is about optimally or minimally
unpredictable stimuli. The amount but also the kind of prediction errors seems important.
Some prediction errors are more potent than others. For example, we saw that artists either
induce strong predictions themselves in their viewer or rely on strong existing predictions of
the domain used in the painting, to subsequently violate them. Also, different artists may
have different preferences for the kind of prediction errors they use, as reﬂected in their style.
For instance, some artists play with classical grouping principles and their competition.
Third, one might object that our focus on prediction errors is born out of cultural myopia.
In Western art there is a strong impetus to be original and novel, and even to defy established
traditions. In traditional, non-Western cultures, however, originality is often discouraged,
and artists are expected to closely follow and endlessly repeat the same set of patterns
passed on for centuries (Dissanayake 2008). As we mentioned earlier, this repetitive art
also involves a modulation of predictability but it seems to lack any prediction errors.
However, Dissanayake also notes that these forms of art originally take place in the context
of ritual ceremonies in times of transition or uncertainty. These rituals nearly always concern
biologically important things, such as “assuring or restoring subsistence, safety, fecundity,
health, prosperity, and victory or successfully dealing with the bodily changes and emotional
and social concomitants of sexual maturity, pregnancy, birth, and death” (Dissanayake 2008,
p 19). Hence, she sees stress reduction or coping with uncertainty as an important adaptive
function of art. If we assume that, at least in these particular ceremonial situations, people
in traditional societies experienced more life-threatening uncertainties than we do in our
modern Western society, our hypothesis of a general preferred optimum of unpredictability
could still hold. In traditional communities, art could primarily function as a vehicle for
re-establishing predictability. In Western culture, on the other hand, we artiﬁcially create
obstacles for predictability (in art, disaster movies, etc) to be able to experience the joys
of their resolution (while we often still use predictable patterns for our wallpapers and
decorations). The proximate cause for making and consuming art would then be emotion
regulation, not "just" uncertainty reduction. Also, according to Dissanayake, art can be
traced back to the simpliﬁed, repeated and stereotyped interactions between adults and
children, which assist the development of emotional self-regulation, attention and learning.
Indeed, the dynamics of prediction and emotion seem to be protracted in children, where,
for instance, in the in the peek-a-boo game the contrast effect (positive emotion following a
negative one is more intense) is easily observed.
While art may therefore be a form of training of our exploratory learning capacities
in a safe, playful context—information foraging is after all a vital human capacity (Vessel
2004)—it didn't necessarily evolve for that reason. Rather our approach connects to the
neural recycling hypothesis (Dehaene and Cohen 2007), which assumes that art (similar

Prediction error in art
1057
to, for example, writing) didn't evolve for any particular adaptive function but is the result
of cultural inventions exploiting evolutionarily older brain circuits and inheriting many of
their structural constraints. Indeed, there is no art module in the brain that needed to evolve.
Artistic abilities are piggy-backing on our perceptual and emotional information processing
capacities. Once in place, art may or may not have become a criterion by itself for selective
forces to work on (co-optation), for example, in mate selection (Pinker 2003) or as a way to
promote belonging to a social group.
Fourth, unpredictability and its resolution are important in other human activities. For
instance, games are most rewarding when they have just the right amount of difﬁculty,
of unpredictability. Similarly in humor we build up expectations and create discrepancies
(Hurley et al 2011). Even in science we are most astonished when a scholar discovers (and
manages to explain or make predictable) a counter-intuitive discrepancy in a very familiar
domain. One might wonder what, if anything, is special about art. But does art need such an
essence? Could we not sufﬁce by stating that it is a human activity involving the full emotional
and cognitive abilities of human beings but with no immediate biological purpose? A quasi-
necessary result of a greatly expanded predictive capacity and an extended ability to delay
gratiﬁcation?
Finally, how do we explain within the predictive coding framework that humans—while
ultimately aimed at maximizing predictability, or equivalently, minimizing prediction errors—
still explore unpredictable stimuli, and even intentionally create them, as in the case of art.
This is a matter of current debate (Fiorillo 2010; Friston 2010a, 2010b). The immediate
motivation of seeking prediction errors may, in our view, be obtaining a larger reward (by
contrast) later. Friston explains that this complicated exploratory (itinerant) behavior does
not violate the general tenet of minimization of surprise, provided that the agent “revisits a
small set of states, called a global random attractor that are compatible with survival” (Friston
2010a, p 2). His generalization of predictive coding in the free energy principle optimizes this
motion through sensory state-space.
Turning to the advantages of our approach, artists and art critics will approve of the
importance of the active, albeit largely implicit, role of the subject (the viewer) in the
predictive coding approach. Even a static painting becomes a dynamic experience, as Dewey
(2005, p 222) writes: “The product of art—temple, painting, statue, poem—is not the work
of art. The work takes place when a human being cooperates with the product so that the
outcome is an experience that is enjoyed because of its liberating and ordered properties.”
Our proposal also repeats another adage of artists: learn the rules well, so you can break
them effectively.
Thus, predictive coding seems to agree with how artists themselves think about what they
do. The painter Henri Matisse famously said when interviewed: "C'est une création par les
rapports: Je ne peins pas les choses, je ne peins que des différences entre les choses" (Aragon
1971, p 140).(2) We may not read too much into it if we say that he intuitively appreciated
that our brain works contextually, by ﬁguring out the differences (prediction errors), not the
absolute values (Nikoli´c 2010; Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1999). Any outline sketch is a
sketch of the differences that the visual system would pick up when viewing the real scene.
In fact, scene category can be decoded from fMRI activity in the visual system during the
viewing of line drawings of scenes, just as well as from brain activity while viewing colour
photographs of the scenes (Walther et al 2011).
In addition, honoring Occam's razor, we may not need a special, separate psychological
theory for aesthetics by using predictive coding. This is consistent with the idea that
(2)"It’s a creation by relation: I do not paint things, I only paint the differences between things" (Author’s
translation).

1058
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
general-purpose motivations and capacities are involved in art, even though their particular
combination might be special to art. In this case, we can rely on the cognitive and neural
evidence for predictive coding, which is broader than visual perception (Friston 2010a;
Winkler et al 2009). The latter is particularly appealing because art obviously consists of more
than visual perception alone. Predicting is the default mode of the brain, encompassing
perceptual and semantic levels. And even though the emotional implications of the predictive
coding approach have not been thoroughly explored, its potential to connect perception,
learning, and emotion may be clear from this proposal.
Lastly, our view may open new avenues for the empirical study of aesthetic appreciation.
Prediction error and conﬁrmation may be tractable in the lab, and thus may allow us to
isolate one mechanism involved in aesthetic appreciation. For instance, we can induce strong
short-term predictions in subjects and subsequently violate or conﬁrm them. Also, it may
help to have physiological markers of prediction violation, for example, in the event-related
brain potential visual mismatch negativity (Kimura et al 2011). Here we can expect that
temporal aspects and expertise will critically inﬂuence the outcomes in perception and
emotion.
In this paper we have outlined a theory of art starting from the hierarchical, bidirectional
dynamics of vision. We concluded that it is not the most predictable stimulus that is most
pleasurable (the easiest Gestalt formation, cf perceptual ﬂuency) but the Gestalt that appears
unexpectedly after a fair amount of "obstinate obstruction". The positive affective evaluations
result from a transition rather than a certain state of stimulation. A stimulus has to play hard
to get before it can be pleasing (Lehrer 2008). But because our cognitive system ultimately
aims to return to predictability, an optimal amount of prediction error exists. Eventually
understanding art implies fully understanding our brain (not just the visual system) and its
embodied embeddedness in the natural, social, and cultural environment. We are far from
such an understanding, so any theorizing on art is necessarily preliminary and speculative.
Our theory on art is really a theory about perception and emotion and their interplay because
we believe that only by understanding this interaction we will come to comprehend human
artistic behavior.
Acknowledgements. Supported by the Methusalem program by the Flemish Government
(METH/08/02). We would like to thank Neil Dodgson, Cees van Leeuwen, and Michael Kubovy
for constructive comments on an earlier draft of this paper.
References
Alink A, Schwiedrzik C M, Kohler A, Singer W, Muckli L, 2010 “Stimulus Predictability Reduces
Responses in Primary Visual Cortex” The Journal of Neuroscience 30 2960–2966 ◀
Aragon L, 1971 Henri Matisse: Roman (Paris: Gallimard) ◀
Arnheim R, 1974 Art and Visual Perception (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press) ◀
Augustin M D, Wagemans J, Carbon C C, in press "All is beautiful? Generality vs. speciﬁcity of word
usage in visual aesthetics" Acta Psychologica
◀
Bar M, 2007 "The proactive brain: Using analogies and associations to generate predictions” Trends
in Cognitive Sciences 11 280–289 doi:10.1016/j.tics.2007.05.005 ◀
Baron-Cohen S, Richler J, Bisaraya D, Gurunathan N, Wheelwright S, 2003 "The systemizing quo-
tient: An investigation of adults with Asperger syndrome or high-functioning autism, and normal
sex differences” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 358 361–374
doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1206 ◀
Barrett L F, Bar M, 2009 ‘"See it with feeling: affective predictions during object percep-
tion” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364 1325–1334
doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0312 ◀
Baxter M G, Murray E A, 2002 "The amygdala and reward” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3 563–573
doi:10.1038/nrn875 ◀

Prediction error in art
1059
Berlyne D E, 1970 "Novelty, complexity, and hedonic value” Perception & Psychophysics 8 279–286
doi:10.3758/BF03212593 ◀
Biederman I, Vessel E, 2006 "Perceptual Pleasure and the Brain” American Scientist 94 247–247 ◀
Blood A J, Zatorre R J, 2001 "Intensely pleasurable responses to music correlate with activity in brain
regions implicated in reward and emotion” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98
11818–11823 doi:10.1073/pnas.191355898 ◀
Bornstein R F, 1989 "Exposure and affect: Overview and meta-analysis of research, 1968–1987”
Psychological Bulletin 106 265–265 doi:10.1037/0033-2909.106.2.265 ◀
Bourdieu P, 1984 Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press) ◀
Bromberg-Martin E S, Hikosaka O, 2011 "Lateral habenula neurons signal errors in the prediction of
reward information” Nature Neuroscience 14 1209–1216 doi:10.1038/nn.2902 ◀
Brown S, Gao X, Tisdelle L, Eickhoff S B, Liotti M, 2011 "Naturalizing aesthetics: Brain areas for aes-
thetic appraisal across sensory modalities” NeuroImage 58 250–258 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2-
011.06.012 ◀
Cerra P L, Bingham R, 1998 "The adaptive nature of the human neurocognitive architecture:
An alternative model” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 95 11290–11294
doi:10.1073/pnas.95.19.11290 ◀
Clark A, 2011 "Predictive Coding" Edge World Question Center 2011, http://edge.org/q2011/q11_6.h-
tml#clark
◀
Craig A D, 2009 "How do you feel—now? The anterior insula and human awareness” Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 10 59–70 doi:10.1038/nrn2555 ◀
Dehaene S, Cohen L, 2007 "Cultural Recycling of Cortical Maps” Neuron 56 384–398 doi:10.1016/j.n-
euron.2007.10.004 ◀
Dewey J, 2005 Art as Experience (New York: Penguin) ◀
de-Wit L, Machilsen B, Putzeys T, 2010 "Predictive Coding and the Neural Response to Predictable
Stimuli” Journal of Neuroscience 30 8702–8703 doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2248-10.2010 ◀
Dissanayake E, 2008 "The arts after Darwin: Does art have an origin and adaptive function" World
art studies: Exploring concepts and approaches (Amsterdam: Valiz) ◀
Dissanayake E, 2009 ‘"The Artiﬁcation Hypothesis and Its Relevance to Cognitive Science, Evolu-
tionary Aesthetics, and Neuroaesthetics” Cognitive Semiotics 9 136–158 doi:10.3726/81609136 ◀
Dodgson N A, 2009 "Balancing the expected and the surprising in geometric patterns” Computers &
Graphics 33 475–483 doi:10.1016/j.cag.2009.04.001 ◀
Duncan S, Barrett L F, 2007 "Affect is a form of cognition: A neurobiological analysis” Cognition &
Emotion 21 1184–1211 doi:10.1080/02699930701437931 ◀
Dutton D G, Aron A P, 1974 "Some evidence for heightened sexual attraction under conditions of
high anxiety” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 30 510–517 doi:10.1037/h0037031 ◀
Egner T, Monti J M, Summerﬁeld C, 2010 "Expectation and Surprise Determine Neural Pop-
ulation Responses in the Ventral Visual Stream” Journal of Neuroscience 30 16601–16608
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2770-10.2010 ◀
Elliott R, Friston K, Dolan R J, 2000 "Dissociable Neural Responses in Human Reward Systems”
Journal of Neuroscience 20 6159–6165 ◀
Eysenck H J, 1942 "The experimental study of the ’good Gestalt’—a new approach” Psychological
Review 49 344–364 doi:10.1037/h0057013 ◀
Fairhall S L, Ishai A, 2008 "Neural correlates of object indeterminacy in art compositions” Conscious-
ness and Cognition 17 923–932 doi:10.1016/j.concog.2007.07.005 ◀
Fiorillo C D, 2010 "A neurocentric approach to Bayesian inference” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology 11 605–605 doi:10.1038/nrm2963 ◀
Friston K, 2010a "The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory?” Nature Reviews Neuroscience
11 127–138 doi:10.1038/nrn2787 ◀
Friston K, 2010b "Is the free-energy principle neurocentric?” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11
605–605 doi:10.1038/nrn2787 ◀
Gaver W, Mandler G, 1987 "Play it again, Sam: On Liking Music” Cognition & Emotion 1 259–282
doi:10.1080/02699938708408051 ◀
Hebb D O, 1949 The Organization of Behavior (New York: John Wiley) ◀
Herry C, Bach D R, Esposito F, Di Salle F, Perrig W J, Schefﬂer K, Luthi A, Seifritz E, 2007 "Process-
ing of Temporal Unpredictability in Human and Animal Amygdala” Journal of Neuroscience 27
5958–5966 doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5218-06.2007 ◀

1060
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
Hurley M M, Dennett D C, Adams R B Jr, 2011 Inside Jokes: Using Humor to Reverse-Engineer the
Mind (USA: MIT Press) ◀
Huron D, 2006 Sweet Anticipation: Music and the Psychology of Expectation (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press) ◀
Hyman J, 2010 "Art and Neuroscience" Beyond Mimesis and Convention R Frigg, M Hunter (Eds)
(Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands) ◀
Ishai A, Fairhall S L, Pepperell R, 2007 “Perception, memory and aesthetics of indeterminate art”
Brain Research Bulletin 73 319–324 doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.04.009 ◀
Jackendoff R, Lerdahl F, 2006 “The capacity for music: What is it, and what’s special about it?”
Cognition 100 33–72 doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2005.11.005 ◀
Johnson A W, Gallagher M, 2010 "Greater effort boosts the affective taste properties of food" Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.1581
◀
Kagan J, 2002 Surprise, Uncertainty, and Mental Structures (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press) ◀
Kapp B, Whalen P, Supple W, le , le , 1992 "Amygdaloid contributions to conditioned arousal and
sensory information processing" The Amygdala: Neurobiological Aspects of Emotion, Memory and
Mental Dysfunction, J Aggleton (Ed) (New York: Wiley-Liss) ◀
Kimura M, Schröger E, Czigler I, 2011 “Visual mismatch negativity and its importance in visual
cognitive sciences” NeuroReport 22 669–673 doi:10.1097/WNR.0b013e32834973ba ◀
Koffka K, 1935 "Principles of Gestalt psychology" (New York: Harcourt-Brace) ◀
Kubovy M, 1999 "On the Pleasures of the Mind" Well-being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology,
D Kahneman, E Diener, N Schwarz (Eds) (New York: Russell Sage Foundation) ◀
Kumar S, Sedley W, Nourski K V, Kawasaki H, Oya H, Patterson R D, Howard M A, Friston K J, Grifﬁths
T D, 2011 “Predictive Coding and Pitch Processing in the Auditory Cortex” Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 23 3084–3094 doi:10.1162/jocna00021 ◀
Landau M J, Greenberg J, Solomon S, Pyszczynski T, Martens A, 2006 “Windows Into Nothingness:
Terror Management, Meaninglessness, and Negative Reactions to Modern Art” Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology 90 879–892 doi:10.1037/0022-3514.90.6.879 ◀
Lauwereyns J, 2010 The Anatomy of Bias: How Neural Circuits Weigh the Options (Cambridge MA:
MIT Press) ◀
Leder H, Belke B, Oeberst A, Augustin D, 2004 “A model of aesthetic appreciation and aesthetic
judgments” British Journal of Psychology 95 489–508 doi:10.1348/0007126042369811 ◀
Lee T S, Mumford D, 2003 “Hierarchical Bayesian inference in the visual cortex” Journal of the
Optical Society of America A 20 1434–1448 doi:10.1364/JOSAA.20.001434 ◀
Lehrer J, 2008 Proust Was a Neuroscientist (New York: Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt) ◀
Lindell A, Mueller J, 2011 “Can science account for taste? Psychological insights into art apprecia-
tion” Journal of Cognitive Psychology 23 453–475 doi:10.1080/20445911.2011.539556 ◀
Ludmer R, Dudai Y, Rubin N, 2011 "Uncovering Camouﬂage: Amygdala Activation Predicts Long-
Term Memory of Induced Perceptual Insight” Neuron 69 1002–1014 doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2011.0-
2.013 ◀
Mamassian P, 2008 “Ambiguities and conventions in the perception of visual art” Vision Research 48
2143–2153 doi:10.1016/j.visres.2008.06.010 ◀
Mandler G, 2003 "Emotion" History of Psychology Handbook of psychology, D K Freedheim (Ed) (New
York: John Wiley and Sons) ◀
McNally G P, Johansen J P, Blair H T, 2011 "Placing prediction into the fear circuit” Trends in
Neurosciences 34 283–292 doi:10.1016/j.tins.2011.03.005 ◀
Melcher D, Bacci F, 2008 "The visual system as a constraint on the survival and success of speciﬁc
artworks” Spatial Vision 21 347–362 doi:10.1163/156856808784532626 ◀
Meyer L B, 1961 Emotion and Meaning in Music (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press) ◀
Murray S O, Schrater P, Kersten D, 2004 "Perceptual grouping and the interactions between visual
cortical areas” Neural Networks: The Ofﬁcial Journal of the International Neural Network Society
17 695–705 ◀
Mueller J, Melwani S, Goncalo J A, in press "The Bias Against Creativity: Why People Desire But Reject
Creative Ideas" Psychological Science
◀
Nikoli´c D, 2010 "The brain is a context machine” Review of Psychology 17 33–38 ◀
Niv Y, Chan S, 2011 "On the value of information and other rewards” Nature Neuroscience 14
1095–1097 doi:10.1038/nn.2918 ◀
Norton M I, Mochon D, Ariely D, in press "The IKEA effect: When labor leads to love" Journal of
Consumer Psychology doi:10.1016/j.jcps.2011.08.002
◀

Prediction error in art
1061
Noyce A, Sekuler R, 2011 "Surprises are mistakes: An EEG source localization study of prediction
errors” Journal of Vision 11 182–182 doi:10.1167/11.11.182 ◀
Ogawa H, Watanabe K, 2011 "Implicit learning increases preference for predictive visual display"
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 73 1815–1822 doi:10.3758/s13414-010-0041-2
den Ouden H E M, Daunizeau J, Roiser J, Friston K J, Stephan K E, 2010 “Striatal Prediction Error
Modulates Cortical Coupling” Journal of Neuroscience 30 3210–3219 doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.44-
58-09.2010 ◀
Pelowski M, Akiba F, 2011 "A model of art perception, evaluation and emotion in transformative aes-
thetic experience” New Ideas in Psychology 29 80–97 doi:10.1016/j.newideapsych.2010.04.001 ◀
Pepperell R, 2011 "Connecting art and the brain: An artist’s perspective on visual indeterminacy”
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 5 84–84 doi:10.3389/fnhum.2011.00084 ◀
Pinker S, 2003 The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature (New York: Penguin) ◀
Pinna B, 2010 "New Gestalt principles of perceptual organization: an extension from grouping to
shape and meaning” Gestalt Theory 32 1–67 ◀
Preuschoff K, Quartz S R, Bossaerts P, 2008 "Human Insula Activation Reﬂects Risk Prediction Errors
As Well As Risk” Journal of Neuroscience 28 2745–2745 doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4286-07.2008 ◀
Proulx T, Heine S J, Vohs K D, 2010 "When Is the Unfamiliar the Uncanny? Meaning Afﬁrmation After
Exposure to Absurdist Literature, Humor, and Art” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 36
817–829 doi:10.1177/0146167210369896 ◀
Ramachandran V S, Blakeslee S, 1999 Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human
Mind (New York: Harper Perennial) ◀
Ramachandran V S, Hirstein W, 1999 “The science of art: a neurological theory of aesthetic experi-
ence” Journal of Consciousness Studies 37 6–6 ◀
Rao R P N, Ballard D H, 1999 “Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of
some extra-classical receptive-ﬁeld effects” Nature Neuroscience 2 79–87 doi:10.1038/4580 ◀
Reber R, Schwarz N, Winkielman P, 2004 “Processing ﬂuency and aesthetic pleasure: is beauty
in the perceiver’s processing experience?” Personality and Social Psychology Review 8 364–382
doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr08043
◀
Redies C, 2007 “A universal model of esthetic perception based on the sensory coding of natural
stimuli” Spatial Vision 21 97–117 doi:10.1163/156856807782753886 ◀
Sander D, Grafman J, Zalla T, 2003 “The human amygdala: an evolved system for relevance detec-
tion” Reviews in the Neurosciences 14 303–316 doi:10.1515/REVNEURO.2003.14.4.303 ◀
Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague P R, 1997 “A Neural Substrate of Prediction and Reward” Science 275
1593–1599 doi:10.1126/science.275.5306.1593 ◀
Sloboda J A, 1991 “Music Structure and Emotional Response: Some Empirical Findings” Psychology
of Music 19 110–110 doi:10.1177/0305735691192002 ◀
Sperber D, 2005 "Modularity and relevance: How can a massively modular mind be ﬂexible and
context-sensitive?" The Innate Mind: Structure and Content (New York: Oxford University Press) ◀
Sperber D, Hirschfeld L A, 2004 “The cognitive foundations of cultural stability and diversity” Trends
in Cognitive Sciences 8 40–46 doi:10.1016/j.tics.2003.11.002 ◀
Spinoza B de, 2001 Ethics (London: Wordsworth Editions) ◀
Summerﬁeld C, Monti J M P, Trittschuh E H, Mesulam M-M, Egner T, 2008 “Neural repetition
suppression reﬂects fulﬁlled perceptual expectations” Nature Neuroscience 11 1004–1006
doi:10.1038/nn.2163 ◀
Thompson M M, Naccarato M E, Parker K C H, Moskowitz G B, 2001 "The personal need for structure
and personal fear of invalidity measures: Historical perspectives, current applications, and future
directions" Cognitive social psychology: The Princeton symposium on the legacy and future of
social cognition
◀
Topolinski S, Reber R, 2010 “Gaining Insight Into the "Aha" Experience” Current Directions in
Psychological Science 19 402–402 doi:10.1177/0963721410388803 ◀
Van de Cruys S, Wagemans J, in press "Gestalts as predictions" Gestalt Theory
◀
van Leeuwen C, 2007 “What needs to emerge to make you conscious?” Journal of Consciousness
Studies 14 115–136 ◀
Verstijnen I M, van Leeuwen C, Goldschmidt G, Hamel R, Hennessey J M, 1998 “Sketching and
Creative Discovery” Design Studies 19 519–546 doi:10.1016/S0142-694X(98)00017-9 ◀
Vessel E A, 2004 "Behavioral and Neural Investigation of Perceptual Affect" Unpublished PhD thesis
University of Southern California
◀
Vygotsky L S, 1971 Psychology of Art (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press) ◀

1062
S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
Walther D B, Chai B, Caddigan E, Beck D M, Fei-Fei L, 2011 “Simple line drawings sufﬁce for
functional MRI decoding of natural scene categories” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108 9661–9666 doi:10.1073/pnas.1015666108 ◀
Whalen P J, 1998 “Fear, vigilance, and ambiguity: Initial neuroimaging studies of the hu-
man amygdala” Current Directions in Psychological Science 7 177–188 doi:10.1111/1467-
8721.ep10836912 ◀
Winkler I, Denham S L, Nelken I, 2009 “Modeling the auditory scene: predictive regularity represen-
tations and perceptual objects” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13 532–540 doi:10.1016/j.tics.2009.0-
9.003 ◀
Winstanley C A, Cocker P J, Rogers R D, 2011 “Dopamine Modulates Reward Expectancy During
Performance of a Slot Machine Task in Rats: Evidence for a 'Near-miss' Effect” Neuropsychophar-
macology 36 913–925 doi:10.1038/npp.2010.230 ◀
Witkin H A, Goodenough D R, 1981 “Cognitive styles: essence and origins. Field dependence and
ﬁeld independence” Psychological Issues 51 1–141 ◀
Yarkoni T, Poldrack R A, Nichols T E, Van Essen D C, Wager T D, 2011 “Large-scale au-
tomated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data” Nature Methods 8 665–670
doi:10.1038/nmeth.1635 ◀
Zajonc R B, 1968 “Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
9 1–27 doi:10.1037/h0025848 ◀
Zeki S, 2004 “The neurology of ambiguity” Consciousness and Cognition 13 173–196 doi:10.1016/j.co-
ncog.2003.10.003 ◀
Sander Van de Cruys (1982) has a MA in social and cultural anthropology and in psychol-
ogy from the University of Leuven, where he is currently pursuing a PhD in experimental
psychology. In his research he focuses on top- down inﬂuences in visual perception and
on the interplay between perception and emotion (see www.gestaltrevision.be).
Johan Wagemans (1963) has a BA in psychology and philosophy, an MSc and a PhD in
experimental psychology, all from the University of Leuven, where he is currently a full
professor. Current research interests are mainly in so-called mid-level vision (perceptual
grouping, ﬁgure-ground organization, depth and shape perception) but stretching out
to low-level vision (contrast detection and discrimination) and high-level vision (object
recognition and categorization), including applications in autism, arts, and sports (see
http://www.gestaltrevision.be).
.
Copyright © 2011 S Van de Cruys, J Wagemans
Published under a Creative Commons Licence
a Pion publication

