 
	 
LEARNING	  EXCHANGE	  PROTOCOL	  
World	  Café	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Note:	  	  	  All	  protocols	  have	  multiple	  origins.	  	  	  The	  strength	  of	  a	  protocol	  is	  in	  the	  ability	  of	  facilitators	  or	  planners	  to	  adjust/revise	  
for	  use	  in	  your	  context.	  http://www.nsrfharmony.org/free-­‐resources/protocols/a-­‐z	  is	  a	  good	  source	  of	  multiple	  protocols	  for	  
school,	  district,	  community	  and	  organizational	  use.	  
	  
Outcome:	  	  Design	  and	  implement	  an	  interactive	  world	  café	  process	  in	  which	  the	  
participants	  co-­‐construct	  understandings	  and	  knowledge	  through	  iterative	  experiences	  
with	  diverse	  participants	  and	  perspectives.	  
Description:	  	  	  As	  the	  graphic	  suggests,	  there	  are	  multiple	  purposes	  of	  the	  World	  Café.	  	  	  The	  
process	  fosters	  gracious	  space	  (“create	  hospitable	  space”);	  it	  draws	  on	  diverse	  perspectives	  and	  
sets	  up	  a	  space	  for	  equitable	  access/participation	  and	  diverse	  perspectives	  in	  the	  conversation.	  	  	  	  
The	  salon	  atmosphere	  of	  the	  world	  café	  presumes	  that	  the	  participants	  will	  not	  remain	  at	  one	  
table,	  but	  circulate	  (often	  more	  planned	  than	  might	  happen	  in	  a	  typical	  café	  situation)	  to	  other	  
tables	  and	  ideas.	  
	  
Theoretical	  Underpinnings	  
The	  World	  Café	  offers	  a	  tangible	  process	  for	  enacting	  opportunity	  to	  learn	  principles	  to	  
promote	  equity	  and	  excellence.	  	  It	  promotes	  constructivist	  learning	  principles	  because	  it	  is	  
interactive	  and	  relies	  on	  inter-­‐subjectivity	  and	  scaffolding	  (Vygotsky,	  1978)	  from	  diverse	  people	  
and	  multiple	  settings,	  the	  necessary	  components	  for	  complex	  authentic	  and	  experiential	  
learning.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

Resources	  
• Ùhttp://www.kbs-­‐frb.be/uploadedFiles/KBS-­‐
FRB/Files/EN/PUB_1540_Toolkit_13_WorldCafe.pdf	  
• http://www.theworldcafe.com/method.html	  
• http://www.therightquestions.org/the-­‐world-­‐cafe-­‐workshop-­‐facilitation-­‐method-­‐
principles-­‐and-­‐etiquette/#.VEAZWUtRFEo	  
	  
Process	  
As	  with	  all	  processes,	  the	  specific	  implementation	  should	  be	  based	  on	  the	  principles	  and	  
general	  design,	  but	  be	  customized	  for	  use	  by	  facilitators	  to	  achieve	  outcomes.	  
	  
From	  http://www.kbs-­‐frb.be/uploadedFiles/KBS-­‐
FRB/Files/EN/PUB_1540_Toolkit_13_WorldCafe.pdf	  (p.	  187)	  
The	  job	  of	  the	  Café	  facilitator(s)	  is	  to	  see	  that	  the	  guidelines	  for	  dialogue	  and	  engagement	  are	  
put	  into	  action.	  It	  is	  not	  the	  specific	  form,	  but	  living	  the	  spirit	  of	  the	  guidelines	  that	  counts.	  
Hosting	  a	  Café	  requires	  thoughtfulness,	  artistry	  and	  care.	  The	  Café	  facilitator(s)	  can	  make	  the	  
difference	  between	  an	  interesting	  conversation	  and	  breakthrough	  thinking.	  The	  responsibilities	  
of	  the	  Café	  facilitator(s)	  include	  the	  following:	  	  
• work	  with	  the	  planning	  team	  to	  determine	  the	  purpose	  of	  the	  Café	  and	  decide	  who	  
should	  be	  invited	  to	  the	  gathering	  
• name	  your	  Café	  in	  a	  way	  appropriate	  to	  its	  purposehelp	  frame	  the	  invitation	  	  
• work	  with	  others	  to	  create	  a	  comfortable	  café	  environment	  
• work	  with	  café	  hosts	  to	  design	  an	  appropriate	  question	  	  	  A	  Powerful	  Question	  
o is	  simple	  and	  clear	  
o is	  thought	  provoking	  
o generates	  energy	  
o focuses	  collective	  inquiry	  
o surfaces	  unconscious	  assumptions	  opens	  new	  possibilities	  
o seeks	  what	  is	  useful	  
• welcome	  the	  participants	  as	  they	  enter	  
• explain	  the	  purpose	  of	  the	  gatherin	  
• pose	  the	  question	  or	  themes	  for	  rounds	  of	  conversation	  and	  make	  sure	  that	  the	  question	  
is	  visible	  to	  everyone	  	  
• on	  an	  overhead,	  flipchart	  or	  on	  cards	  at	  each	  table,	  explain	  the	  Café	  guidelines	  and	  Café	  
etiquette,	  and	  post	  them	  on	  an	  overhead,	  an	  easel	  sheet	  or	  on	  cards	  at	  each	  table	  
• explain	  how	  the	  logistics	  of	  the	  Café	  will	  work,	  including	  the	  role	  of	  the	  ‘table	  host’	  
(the	  person	  who	  will	  volunteer	  to	  remain	  at	  the	  end	  of	  the	  first	  round	  and	  welcome	  
newcomers	  to	  their	  table)	  move	  among	  the	  tables	  during	  the	  conversations	  
encourage	  everyone	  to	  participate	  
• remind	  people	  to	  note	  key	  ideas,	  doodle	  and	  draw	  
• let	  people	  know	  in	  a	  gentle	  way	  when	  it	  is	  time	  to	  move	  and	  begin	  a	  new	  round	  of	  
conversation	  
• make	  sure	  key	  insights	  are	  recorded	  visually	  or	  are	  gathered	  and	  posted	  if	  possible	  
be	  creative	  in	  adapting	  the	  Café	  guidelines	  to	  meet	  the	  unique	  needs	  of	  your	  situation.	  	  
	  

Implementation	  
Preparation:	  	  Each	  table	  has	  a	  large	  sheet	  of	  poster	  paper	  for	  participants	  to	  write	  on.	  	  	  If	  you	  
want	  to	  go	  “all	  out”,	  you	  can	  set	  up	  a	  café	  environment	  with	  tablecloth,	  flowers,	  and/or	  
refreshments.	  There	  is	  typically	  a	  facilitator/host	  at	  each	  table.	  	  However,	  you	  can	  decide	  if	  the	  
table	  host	  remains	  for	  all	  conversation	  rounds.	  	  	  As	  with	  all	  movement	  protocols,	  it	  is	  important	  
to	  make	  accommodations	  for	  persons	  with	  disabilities	  so	  they	  have	  access	  to	  full	  participation.	  
	  
Groups	  of	  4-­‐6	  join	  the	  conversation	  clusters.	  	  	  
	  	  
• There	  will	  be	  progressive	  (three)	  rounds	  of	  conversation	  of	  approximately	  8-­‐12	  minutes	  
each	  the	  questions/topics	  co-­‐designed	  with	  hosts	  of	  each	  table.	  
• Questions	  or	  issues	  or	  thoughts	  that	  pertain	  to	  the	  designated	  topic	  are	  explored.	  
• At	  each	  conversation	  cluster	  table,	  both	  hosts	  and	  members	  WRITE,	  DOODLE	  AND	  DRAW	  
KEY	  IDEAS	  on	  the	  paper	  in	  the	  center	  of	  the	  group.	  	  Group	  members	  may	  take	  notes	  to	  
“travel	  with”.	  
• Upon	  completing	  the	  initial	  round	  of	  conversation,	  one	  person	  remains	  at	  the	  table	  as	  the	  
“host”	  while	  the	  others	  become	  travelers	  or	  “ambassadors	  of	  meaning.”	  The	  TRAVELERS	  
CARRY	  (CROSS-­‐POLLINATE)	  KEY	  IDEAS,	  THEMES	  AND	  QUESTIONS	  INTO	  THEIR	  NEW	  
CONVERSATIONS	  that	  may	  inform	  meaning	  of	  the	  remaining	  chapters.	  	  
• Table	  hosts	  should	  welcome	  the	  new	  guests	  and	  briefly	  share	  the	  main	  ideas,	  themes	  and	  
questions	  of	  the	  initial	  conversation.	  Guests	  should	  LINK	  AND	  CONNECT	  IDEAS	  coming	  
from	  their	  previous	  table	  conversations—listening	  carefully	  and	  building	  on	  each	  other's	  
contributions.	  
• By	  providing	  opportunities	  for	  cohort	  members	  to	  move	  in	  several	  rounds	  of	  conversation,	  
ideas,	  questions,	  and	  themes	  begin	  to	  link	  and	  connect.	  	  
	  
After	  the	  three	  rounds	  of	  conversation,	  share	  discoveries	  and	  insights	  in	  a	  whole	  group	  
conversation.	  This	  is	  a	  town	  meeting-­‐style	  conversation	  in	  which	  patterns	  can	  be	  identified,	  
collective	  knowledge	  is	  ‘harvested”,	  and	  possibilities	  for	  new	  and	  applied	  meanings	  emerge.	  
	  
	  
Café	  Etiquette	  
	  
Focus	  on	  what	  matters	  
Contribute	  your	  thinking	  
Speak	  your	  mind	  	  
Listen	  to	  understand	  
Link	  and	  connect	  ideas	  
Listen	  together	  for	  insights	  and	  deeper	  questions	  
Play,	  Doodle,	  Draw	  –	  writing	  on	  the	  paper	  is	  important!	  
	  

