International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 12, Number 12 (2017) pp. 3553-3556 
© Research India Publications.  http://www.ripublication.com 
3553 
Analysis and Comparison of Compression Algorithm for Light Field Mask  
 
Hyunji Cho1 and Hoon Yoo2* 
1Department of Computer Science, SangMyung University, Korea.  
2Associate Professor, Department of Media Software SangMyung University, Korea.  
                 *Corresponding author
 
 
Abstract  
This paper describes comparison and analysis of state-of-the-
art lossless image compression algorithms for light field mask 
data that are very useful in transmitting and refocusing the 
light field images. Recently, light field cameras have received 
wide attention in that they provide 3D information. Also, there 
has been a wide interest in studying the light field data 
compression due to a huge light field data. However, most of 
existing light field compression methods ignore the mask 
information which is one of important features of light field 
images. In this paper, we reports compression algorithms and 
further use this to achieve binary image compression by 
realizing analysis and comparison of the standard compression 
methods such as JBIG, JBIG 2 and PNG algorithm. The 
results seem to confirm that the PNG method for text data 
compression provides better results than the state-of-the-art 
methods of JBIG and JBIG2 for binary image compression. 
Keywords: Lossless compression, Image compression, Light 
filed compression, Plenoptic coding 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Light field (LF) cameras, also referred to as plenoptic cameras, 
differ from regular cameras by providing 3D information of 
images. The light field camera has a structure in which an 
array of microlens interpose in between the main lens and the 
image sensor as shown in Fig. 1. The 3D information is 
acquired by using angular information from the array of 
microlens. Hence, a light field camera is a next generation 
camera that can be utilized in various fields such as 3D optical 
microscopy, 3D computer vision application, 3D underwater 
imaging, medical imaging, and so on [1-4]. 
 
Figure. 1. Optical structure of a light field camera 
 
Figure. 2. Basic architecture from raw images to RGB and 
mask images 
 
The LF camera provides a raw image captured from 
photosensor with microlens, as depicted in Fig. 1. The raw 
data consists of 10 bits per pixel precision in little-endian 
format. The raw data is then processed by a series of methods 
consisting 
of 
demosaicing, 
devignetting, 
and 
view 
interpolation. Here, the view interpolation is a process of 
rearranging images having a honey-comb pattern, which is 
obtained from a honey-comb lenslet array, into a rectangular 
pattern. Now, let us define a light field function Lf, where an 
element Lf(r, c, i, j) has the following indices: 𝑟, 𝑐∈{1, … , 𝑁} 
are indices for a certain pixel under a microlens (hence 
addressing a particular view image) and 𝑖, 𝑗 correspond to the 
spatial pixel location in the view image of size of 𝑊× 𝐻. For 
example, we utilizes a light field image of 𝑁= 15, W= 434, 
and 𝐻= 625. Since the light field camera employs circular 
lenses, an empty space should be generated among the lenses. 
This empty space is represented as the mask data. Thus this 
mask data are very important in transmitting and refocusing 
LF images. 
Normally, very high storage capacity is required to store the 
raw LF data. A compression algorithm is required for 

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 12, Number 12 (2017) pp. 3553-3556 
© Research India Publications.  http://www.ripublication.com 
3554 
improving data compression performances. Thus, many 
studies related to the compression of the LF image have been 
discussed in different ways [5-14]. Some light field 
compression techniques use the statistical characteristics of 
the image. Another techniques are to model the light field 
function by taking advantage of geometrical information of 
the scene and the position information of the camera. 
However, these methods overlook the mask data compression. 
The pixels in the empty space between the lenses are 
unnecessary information, thus it need not be compressed or 
used in refocusing. Therefore, the mask data, which have been 
taken a much less attention, should be compressed before 
compressing other pixels.  In this paper, we compare and 
evaluate the performance of standard compression methods 
that can be employed in lossless compression for mask 
information. The state-of-the-art compression methods for 
binary compression, such as JBIG and JBIG2, are included in 
our evaluation. Interestingly, experiments indicate that the 
PNG method outperforms JBIG and JBIG2.  
 
RELATED WORK 
1. JBIG1/JBIG2 
JBIG is a standard for lossless image compression from the 
joint bi-level image experts group (JBIG) [15]. The core 
coding part of JBIG is a context-based binary arithmetic 
coding by defining a context using previous pixels. Normally 
an arithmetic coding is very efficient method to compress an 
information source of having small symbol set size [16]. Thus, 
the coding method is the theoretically optimal technique for a 
binary source.  
JBIG2 is a standard for lossy and lossless binary image 
compression from the same group [17]. Basically this method 
is based on the previous standard, JBIG. Also, the method is 
extended 
in 
order 
to 
improve 
lossless 
compression 
performance for a binary image, to provide a functionality of 
lossy compression for a binary image, and to efficiently 
compress halftone images. Thus, JBIG2 supports three coding 
methods for compressing a region segment: generic, halftone, 
and text. Generic regions are encoded as a template based 
arithmetic coding used in the JBIG. Halftone regions are 
encoded as a halftone coding using a grayscale image and a 
halftone pattern dictionary. Text regions are encoded as a 
pattern matching. For high efficiency of JBIG2, it segments 
the image and then use the best coding method for each region. 
 
2. PNG (portable network graphics) 
PNG is a raster graphics file format that employs lossless data 
compression [18]. It was created as an improved and non-
patented replacement for GIF (graphics interchange format). 
PNG is based on filtering and entropy coding as a W3C 
recommendation for still image coding. The encoding method 
of PNG is as shown in Fig.3. PNG uses a 2-stage compression 
process: filtering and the deflate method. 
 
Figure. 3. PNG encoding 
 
Before the deflate method is applied, the input image data is 
transformed via filtering or prediction. Predefined filters are 
used to predict the value of each pixel based on a predictor 
from previous adjacent pixels. There are five filter types: none, 
sub, up, average, paeth. A filter type with the best 
performance is applied to each line. 
The deflate compression algorithm uses a combination of 
the LZ77, that is the well-known technique to compress text 
data, and Huffman coding. LZ77 is the lossless data 
compression algorithm using the past of the sequence as the 
dictionary. The Huffman code is a prefix code that is 
commonly used for lossless data compression. Huffman 
coding is the process of finding and using such a code. PNG 
has high compression ratio of images with repetitive patterns 
by using filtering and the deflate algorithm. 
 
ANALYSIS OF COMPRESSION FOR LIGHT FIELD 
MASK  
The most important feature in the light field image is that the 
pattern is generated in the image by the lens arrangement as 
shown in fig. 4 (a). Thus, this paper focuses mask data to 
compress them efficiently.  
The mask data provide the information on the empty space 
between the lenses. Thus, mask data should be taken into 
account for compressing or imaging. In order to make the 
compression and imaging process of light field data more 
accurate and faster, mask data as well as light field raw data 
must be utilized.  
The mask data are extracted from light field raw data. 
Actually those data are a binary source. Also, the basic mask 
shape is a circular form and each mask is very similar. Thus, 
we consider some standard compression methods such as 
JBIG, JBIG2, and PNG as a candidate to compress the binary 
mask data of light field imaging. 
 

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 12, Number 12 (2017) pp. 3553-3556 
© Research India Publications.  http://www.ripublication.com 
3555 
The state-of-the-art methods among standard lossless 
compression for bi-level images are JBIG and JBIG2 of the 
joint bi-level images experts group in 1993 and 2000, 
respectively. The JBIG2 algorithm was announced which had 
better compression performance than the previous one by 
using more computing power.  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure. 4. Mask Data 
Thus, it is known as that JBIG2 is the best bi-level 
compression method in current. However, we expect that the 
compression performance of PNG is the best because mask 
data is composed of repeated patterns. Although the 
theoretically optimal performance is expected with respect to 
JBIG2, only pixel correlation is utilized in the JBIG binary 
image compression. Therefore, dictionary-based methods such 
as LZ77, LZ78, and so on can be more efficient than the 
JBIG2 method due to periodical patterns in the mask data.  
 
SIMULATION 
Experiments are conducted to compare and evaluate the mask 
data compression with JBIG, JBIG2, and PNG. Fig. 5 shows 
the light field raw dataset. A dataset consisting of eight light 
field images was selected for the experimental analysis. Each 
LF image has a resolution of 5368x7728 pixels. First, we 
extract the mask information for each LF image and thus we 
prepare a binary image as mask data. Then those mask data 
are compressed by JBIG, JBIG2, and PNG. Here, the options 
for PNG are manually selected in terms of the best 
compression performance. And the lossless coding options for 
JBIG and JBIG2 are selected.  
 
 
 
 
 
(a) bikes 
(b) buildings 
 
 
(c) cars 
(d) flowers 
 
 
(e) fruits 
(f) general 
 
 
(g) occlusions 
(h) people 
Figure. 5.  Light Field Raw Dataset1 
 
Table. 1. Compression ratio 
 
pbm 
PNG 
JIBG 
JBIG2 
bikes 
1 
10.45 
7.64 
8.19 
buildings 
1 
13.86 
10.26 
10.77 
cars 
1 
8.92 
6.96 
7.35 
flowers 
1 
8.36 
6.79 
6.80 
fruits 
1 
13.75 
10.20 
10.15 
general 
1 
9.89 
7.95 
8.93 
occlusions 
1 
9.28 
7.65 
8.58 
people 
1 
10.81 
8.60 
9.05 
AVERAGE 
1 
10.66 
8.26 
8.73 
 
                                                           
1 http://lightfields.stanford.edu/ 

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 12, Number 12 (2017) pp. 3553-3556 
© Research India Publications.  http://www.ripublication.com 
3556 
The experimental results were organized at the compression 
rate as shown in Table 1. The compression ratio is defined as 
follows 
Compression Ratio =
Unompressed file size
Compressed file size .             (1) 
 
It can be seen that the higher compression ratio the lower the 
compressed file size. 
In particular, the best compression ratio was achieved by the 
PNG encoder. In general, JBIG2 is expected for the best 
compression method of binary images. However, the 
periodical property of the LF mask data enables the PNG 
method to show the best performance in terms of compression 
ratio. 
 
CONCLUSION 
The main objective of this paper was to examine what is the 
best standard method to compress the light field mask data. 
The analysis on LF mask data and experimental results 
indicated the PNG method outperforms the state-of-the-art 
compression methods for binary images such as JBIG and 
JBIG2. Therefore, the deflate method used in the PNG 
technique can be a reference algorithm to develop a new 
coding method for LF mask data compression in the future.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was supported by a 2017 Research Grant from 
Sangmyung University, Seoul, Korea. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
X. Xiao, B. Javidi, M. Martinez-Corral, and A. Stern, 
“Advances in three-dimensional integral imaging: 
sensing, display, and applications [invited],” Appl. 
Opt., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 546–560, Feb 2013. 
[2] 
H. Yoo, "Depth extraction for 3D objects via 
windowing 
technique 
in 
computational 
integral 
imaging with a lenslet array," Elsevier Optics and 
Lasers in Engineering, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 912-915, Jul. 
2013. 
[3] 
H. Yoo, D-K Shin, and M. Cho, "Improved depth 
extraction method of 3D objects using computational 
integral imaging reconstruction based on multiple 
windowing techniques," Elsevier Optics and Lasers in 
Engineering, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 105-111, Mar. 2015. 
[4] 
Y. Lee and H. Yoo, "Three-dimensional visualization 
of objects in scattering medium using integral imaging 
and spectral analysis," Elsevier Optics and Lasers in 
Engineering, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 31-38, Feb. 2016. 
[5] 
C. Perra, “On the coding of plenoptic raw images,” in 
IEEE 22nd Telecommunications forum, Belgrade, 
Serbia, Nov. 2014. 
[6] 
C. Perra, F. Murgia, and D. Giusto, “An analysis of 3D 
point cloud reconstruction from light field images,” in 
International Conference on Image Processing Theory, 
Tools and Applications, Oulu, Finland, Dec. 2016. 
[7] 
F. Murgia and M. Giusto, “A comparison of raw light 
field lossless data compression algorithms,” in IEEE 
24nd Telecommunications forum, Belgrade, Serbia, 
Nov. 2016. 
[8] 
C. Perra, “Lossless plenoptic image compression using 
adaptive block differential prediction,” in IEEE 40th 
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and 
Signal Processing, Brisbane, Australia, April 2015. 
[9] 
J. Schwiegerling, G. C. Birch, and J. S. Tyo, “Analysis 
and compression of plenoptic camera images with 
zernike 
polynomials,” 
in 
SPIE 
Optical 
Engineering+Applications, 2012. 
[10] D. G. Dansereau, O. Pizarro, and S. B. Williams, 
“Decoding, calibration and rectification for lenselet-
based plenoptic cameras,” Australian Centre for Field 
Robotics; School of Aerospace, Mechanical and 
Mechatronic Engineering University of Sydney, NSW, 
Australia, Tech. Rep., 2013. 
[11] R. S. Higa, R. F. L. Chavez, R. B. Leite, R. Arthur, and 
Y. Iano, “Plenoptic image compression comparison 
between JPEG, JPEG2000 and SPITH,” Cyber 
Journals: JSAT, vol. 3, no. 6, 2013. 
[12] C. Perra and D. Giusto, “JPEG2000 compression of 
unfocused light field images based on lenslet array 
slicing,” 
in 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Consumer Electronics, Las Vegas, USA, Jan. 2017. 
[13] N. Gehrig and P. L. Dragotti, “Geometry-driven 
distributed compression of the plenoptic function: 
Performance bounds and constructive algorithms,” 
Image Processing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 18, no. 3, 
2009. 
[14] C.-L. Chang, X. Zhu, P. Ramanathan, and B. Girod, 
“Light field compression using disparity-compensated 
lifting and shape adaptation,” Image Processing, IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 15, no. 4, 2006. 
[15] Progressive bi-level image compression. CCITT 
Recommend. T.82 (JBIG), 1993 
[16]  I. H. Witten, R. Neal, and J. G. Cleary, "Arithmetic 
coding for data compression," Comm. ACM, vol. 30, 
pp. 520-540, June 1987 
[17] JBIG2 final draft international standard, ISO/IEC 
JTC1/SC29/WG1N1545, Dec. 1999. 
[18] Portable network graphics (PNG) specification (second 
edition), ISO/IEC 15948:2003 W3C Recommendation 
10 Nov. 2003 

