
visit Obama-OMama.blogspot.com 
for more eBooks and materials

EVERYDAY LIFE
ENGLISH
in
Improve
your
ENGLISH
Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas
New York   Chicago   San Francisco   Lisbon   London   Madrid   Mexico City
Milan   New Delhi   San Juan   Seoul   Singapore   Sydney   Toronto

Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States
of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may
be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the
prior written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-164236-6
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-149717-X.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occur-
rence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark
owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they
have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for
use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at
george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE 
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all
rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act
of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse
engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish
or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own
noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may
be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR
WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE
OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED
THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WAR-
RANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not
warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation
will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else
for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom.
McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no 
circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, 
consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has
been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause
whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise. 
DOI: 10.1036/007149717X

We hope you enjoy this
McGraw-Hill eBook! If
you’d like more information about this book,
its author, or related books and websites,
please click here.
Professional
Want to learn more?

iii
CONTENTS
 
 Introduction 
vii
 CHAPTER 1 LIFE IN AMERICA 
1
 
1. Driving Across America     1
 
2. What Do You Like 
About America?     2
 
3. An Island in Maine     4
 
4. West vs. East     5
 
5. Canada vs. the U.S.     6
 
6. Living in Washington     8
 
7. Coming from Spain     9
 
8. Time in Egypt and America     10
 
9. American Memories     11
 
10. Coming from India     12
 
11. Changing Times     14
 
12. Small-Town Life     14
 CHAPTER 2 THE FAMILY 
19
 
1. A Family in Maryland     19
 
2. Italian Roots     21
 
3. A Family Sabbatical     22
 
4. Changing Families     23
For more information about this title, click here

iv
Contents
Contents
 
5. Siblings     23
 
6. Family in New Zealand     24
 
7. Mothers and Daughters     27
 
8. Fathers and Daughters     28
 CHAPTER 3 THE HOME 
33
 
1. Row Houses     33
 
2. A Log House     34
 
3. Walking Th rough the House     36
 
4. A Favorite Room     37
 
5. Lincoln Logs     38
 
6. Living at the Drop Zone     41
 CHAPTER 4 THE ROLE OF WOMEN 
47
 
1. A Good Wife     47
 
2. Options     48
 
3. Working Moms     50
 
4. Changing Perspectives     51
 
5. Balancing Work and Family     52
 
6. Cultural Diﬀ erences     53
 CHAPTER 5 EDUCATION 
57
 
1. School in Philadelphia     57
 
2. Getting Recruited     59
 
3. A Liberal Arts Education     60
 
4. Th e School Newspaper     61
 
5. An Indian Perspective     62
 CHAPTER 6 RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT 
67
 
1. RVs and Horses     67
 
2. Computer Games     69

v
Contents
 
3. Stopper and Sweeper     70
 
4. Running     71
 
5. Climbing Mountains     72
 
6. Th e Soccer League     73
 
7. Flying     74
 
8. Outdoors in New Zealand     76
 
9. Wallyball     76
 
10. Making Movies     77
 
11. Life-Work Balance     78
 
12. Playing the Piano     79
 
13. Th e Performing Arts     80
 
14. Books on Tape     81
 
15. Reading     82
 
16. Opera     82
 
17. Playing Pool     83
 
18. Hobbies     85
 CHAPTER 7 THE USE OF LANGUAGE: PART I 
93
 
1. Sounding American     93
 
2. Linguistic Chameleon     95
 
3. Speaking Spanish     96
 
4. Listening     97
 
5. Color Commentary     98
 
6. Growing Up Bilingually     99
 
7. Getting Comfortable     100
 CHAPTER 8 THE USE OF LANGUAGE: PART II 
105
 
1. American English/
British English     105
 
2. Baltimore     108

vi
Contents
Contents
 
3. A French-Canadian Perspective    110
 
4. Where Are You From?     112
 
5. Change over Time     113
 
6. A Caribbean Perspective     113
 
7. A Southern Accent     115
 
8. Language and Culture     116
 CHAPTER 9 FOOD 
121
 
1. Cooking Vacations     121
 
2. A Wide Range     124
 
3. Midwestern Cooking     125
 
4. Noodles and Sausages     126
 
5. Cameroonian Cuisine     127
 
6. Cooking in Guyana     128
 
7. Food Phases     129
 CHAPTER 10 SPORTS 
133
 
1. Minor League Baseball     133
 
2. Second Baseman     134
 
3. Football Tryouts     136
 
4. Watching Sports     137
 
5. Hockey     138
 
6. A Common Ground     139
 
7. Baseball Strategy     141

vii
INTRODUCTION
English in Everyday Life consists of eighty-four interview 
segments with everyday people, not actors, speaking Eng-
lish in the United States. Th e interviews are organized 
into ten chapters. Each chapter focuses on a diﬀ erent 
aspect of everyday life, from the family and the home to 
free time, sports, food, and the use of language. Th e goal 
in using an interview format was to elicit natural speech 
and to allow the speakers to express themselves as freely 
and naturally as possible. In these interviews, you will 
hear the vocabulary and sentence structures that real 
speakers use to talk about their everyday lives. 
Because we wanted to provide learners of English with 
natural models of spoken English in the United States, 
those being interviewed did not memorize or rehearse their 
remarks. You will meet people of all ages and nationalities, 
from all walks of life: a policeman, a nurse, accountants, 
a paramedic, students, teachers, a librarian, a mechanic, 
a government worker, an IT professional, a travel agent, a 
sign language interpreter, musicians, and others.
Each chapter includes the complete transcript of 
each interview segment as well as deﬁ nitions of vocabu-
lary words, idioms, and constructions whose meanings 
or cultural references may not be immediately obvious 
to a nonnative English speaker. You will ﬁ nd questions 
and exercises at the end of each chapter that are relevant 
to both the text of the interview and your own personal 
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

viii
Introduction
Introduction
experiences. We recommend that you consult a com-
prehensive American English dictionary in conjunction 
with the use of the DVD and workbook. 
About the Transcripts
What you will hear on the DVD and see in the transcripts 
are examples of actual speech. Our goal is to provide 
examples of English as it is spoken by a wide range of 
people in the United States today. You will hear speakers 
from many states—Maryland, New Jersey, Massachusetts, 
Arkansas, Illinois, Maine, Minnesota, and Michigan—as 
well as speakers from Canada, India, Guyana, England, 
New Zealand, Cameroon, Egypt, and Spain. Also, you 
will hear one speaker whose speech has many features of 
what is known as African-American Vernacular English 
(AAVE). So you will hear English spoken with many dif-
ferent accents. You will also see a deaf user of American 
Sign Language (ASL) with her interpreter.
You will notice that while all of the speakers are ﬂ u-
ent, they sometimes use what some consider nonstan-
dard or even ungrammatical forms of English. And you 
will see that not only do the nonnative speakers use these 
forms but native speakers of American English frequently 
use them as well. Some of these speakers are very ﬂ uent 
users of varieties of English used in other countries, such 
as India, varieties that have been referred to as “World 
Englishes” and that diﬀ er from American or British Eng-
lish in very systematic and nonrandom ways. 
You will notice that when people speak, it is not at 
all like a newscast being read by an anchorperson on the 
evening news or like the written language that you might 
see in textbooks. You will see that people don’t always 
speak in complete sentences—they hesitate; they inter-
rupt themselves; they correct themselves; they start one 
sentence, give it up, and go on with another one. While 

ix
Introduction
the speakers clearly knew that they were being ﬁ lmed, 
what you see and hear is, for the most part, very natural 
speech. Our goal was to reﬂ ect this naturalness in the 
transcripts. Interjections and discourse markers such as 
um, uh, or er appear throughout the interviews and are 
transcribed exactly as they are spoken. Sometimes peo-
ple talk at the same time, which is indicated in the tran-
scripts by brackets around the simultaneous speech.
Th e transcripts also reﬂ ect the use of many custom-
ary and idiomatic constructions found in American Eng-
lish: take it up a notch, so-and-so, such and such, like, 
y’know, c’mon, gonna, wanna, and many others. Notes 
explaining such constructions appear at the end of each 
chapter. 
It is our hope that you will ﬁ nd these materials inno-
vative and useful for learning English as it is used in 
America today. 
How to Use These Materials in 
the Classroom
Th e DVD and workbook of English in Everyday Life have 
been designed for use in any classroom, laboratory, or 
home setting. Th ese materials, which are suitable for 
high school classes, university courses, and adult educa-
tion programs, can be used as the second semester of an 
elementary course.
Th e way that language is used by speakers in these 
materials can serve as the basis both for in-class discus-
sions and for homework assignments. 
Th e DVD and the workbook provide eighty-four seg-
ments, which should be used as follows: 
 1. Select the segment to be used and simply listen to 
it, before reading the transcript of the segment. Th e 
student can do this on his or her own or as part of a 
class activity. 

x
Introduction
Introduction
 2. After listening to the segment, read and discuss 
the transcript carefully, making sure that all of the 
vocabulary words and structures are understood. 
 3. Th en, listen to the segment again, this time using 
the transcript. Students may want to listen to the 
segment several times at this point. 
 4. In the classroom, answer and discuss the questions 
about both the segment and the students’ experi-
ences. And, of course, these questions and exercises 
can be assigned for homework.
Outlining a Course by DVD Segment
Th e instructor can decide how many segments to cover 
per week. Eighty-four DVD segments allow you to use 
the DVD and the workbook for an entire academic year. 
And the ﬂ exibility of the materials allows you to pick and 
choose the order in which to present the material. Each 
segment on the DVD is numbered on the menu and in 
the text so that you can pick exactly which one you want 
to focus on.
Sample Lesson Plan: One Week
First Day: Listen to the selected segments perhaps 
two or three times in class (do not read the tran-
script at this point). 
Second Day: Read the transcripts out loud, making 
sure that the students understand all of the gram-
matical constructions, vocabulary words, and 
cultural references. 
Th ird Day: Listen to the segments again, ﬁ rst with-
out the transcript and then with the transcript. 
Fourth Day: Discuss the transcript and the DVD 
segment and answer the questions pertaining to 
the segment. Assign as homework the questions 
and exercises that pertain to the students.

xi
Introduction
Fifth Day: Go over the questions and exercises 
pertaining to the students. Ask them to read their 
answers aloud, and have the class ask additional 
questions. 
Th e DVD segments and their transcripts can very 
easily be supplemented with materials that relate to 
the topic of the segment. For example, the segments on 
Food can be supplemented with menus or recipes. Th e 
important thing is to be creative and to get the students 
involved.
Additional Activities 
 1. Ask the students to summarize in writing and also 
aloud what is said in a given segment. 
 2. Ask the students to write the question that leads to 
the speaker’s response. Also, ask them to write addi-
tional questions to be asked. 
 3. Have the students interview one another on the 
topic of the segment in front of the class: 
• Help the students write their interview 
questions.
• If possible, record these interviews on audiotape 
or miniDV. Listen to or view the interviews and 
discuss them as a group. 
• Have the students transcribe these interviews, 
complete with hesitations, self-corrections, and 
so forth. Make copies of the transcript for the 
other students. Th e teacher may review the tran-
script but should make corrections only to errors 
in transcription—in other words, if the speaker 
uses a nonstandard form and the student tran-
scribes it accurately, you should not note it as an 
error. Th is is a good opportunity to point out the 
diﬀ erences between spoken language and written 
language. 

xii
Introduction
Introduction
• Have the students write questions about their 
transcripts, similar to the ones in the text. 
• Have the students record an interview with a 
native or ﬂ uent speaker, based on one of the 
DVD topics, and follow the same procedures just 
listed. Help the students prepare their questions, 
review the transcripts, and share them with the 
class. Also, ask the students to write questions to 
accompany their transcripts.
Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to Patrick Harris for his excellent 
work ﬁ lming and editing the DVDs. We thank all of the 
people who were willing to be interviewed and Holly 
McGuire, Christopher Brown, and Julia Anderson Bauer 
of McGraw-Hill Professional; Jim Dellon, Ivey Wallace, 
and Jayne McKenzie of Gallaudet University; Kevin 
Keegan of Hubert Blake High School in Silver Spring, 
Maryland; Mike Solano and Merchant’s Tire in Laurel, 
Maryland; and Jim Smith, Kim MacKenzie Smith, and 
Th e Skydivin’ Place in Kingsdale, Pennsylvania. 

1
LIFE IN AMERICA
In this chapter, interviewees talk about various 
aspects of life in the United States and how life 
in the United States may differ from life in their 
countries of origin.
1. DRIVING ACROSS AMERICA
MAN: I have driven throughout most of the country. Um, 
so, there’s, you know, the speed limits, well, it’s ﬁ fty-ﬁ ve, 
uh, there’re . . . Do you know how the ro—, the roads—by 
the way, this is fascinating—do you know how the road 
C H A P T E R  1
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
2
systems are laid out in the, in the U.S.? Do you know that? 
Th ey’re laid out, uh, if you, if you know locally where we 
are here, um, 95 is the main route. Ninety-ﬁ ve goes from 
the northern tip of Maine down to the southern tip of 
Florida, which is the entire Eastern Seaboard. If-if the, 
if the country were a rectangle, which it pretty much is, 
the, all interstates ending in odd numbers—95, 85, 75, 
65, 55, going all the way up to I-5—I-5 runs the northern 
tip of Washington to the southern tip of 
[ 
California
]
.
WOMAN:  
San Diego.
MAN: All-all the way down the West Coast, so you have 
the, you know, 95 ’n 5 to 95 and going West Coast, you 
have, uh, 10, which runs through Texas and all the way 
across there to the northern tip, which is 100, I think, 
and that runs through North Dakota, so, uh, a college 
friend of mine, on our ﬁ rst venture out, decided we were, 
we live on, sorta in the middle, which happens to be 70, 
it’s not quite 50 but a little bit farther north and 70 runs 
all the way across from, you know, Maryland all the way 
to California, um, and, uh, we decided we were going to 
do 70 on 70—miles per hour, that is—80 on 80, 90 on 90, 
and 100 on 100! And we did it. So we-we were cruisin’ 
across country in that manner and I’ve been th—, I c—, 
I would say I’ve been through at least half of the states. 
And if you drive through Kansas, the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve miles is 
pretty much exactly the same as the next ﬁ ve hundred-
plus miles that you have got to travel to get across it. It’s 
a very long state.
2. WHAT DO YOU LIKE ABOUT AMERICA?
WOMAN: It was the most interesting thing to me, the 
change of the seasons. I think that is just absolutely . . .  

Life in America
3
’cause I guess as I grew up with just one season. In fact, I 
shouldn’t say one—two seasons: we have the wet season 
and the rainy season. But it’s summer all year-round. And 
I just love especially fall. I’m a fall person. I just love, I 
love to see the colors, the trees when they, oh, turn those 
beautiful colors—that’s really, that’s what I like about . . . 
And what I like, too, television, ooh, I’m a television nut. 
I look at television all the time. And in Guyana, we don’t 
see the kind of programs that you have here, so . . .
INTERVIEWER: So what do you watch?
WOMAN: I like crime stories and, like “Law and Order” 
and, in fact, I watch all “Criminal Intent,” all of those 
“Law and Orders.”
INTERVIEWER: And what else?
WOMAN: I like game shows, too. I love “Jeopardy”; I love 
“Jeopardy.” Uh, yeah, game shows and “Law and Order,” 
those are my, crime stories, I like things like that.
Well, as I mentioned, the seasons. We don’t have 
spring, summer, autumn, winter. We have summer all 
year-round.
INTERVIEWER: Right.
WOMAN: Um, another thing, the traﬃ  c here. You just have 
to contend here with cars and maybe couple bicycles. But 
in Guyana, you’ve got to contend with not only the cars, 
pedestrians, bicyclists, we—most people ride a bicycle 
in Guyana, they-they don’t drive, they ride a bicycle. 
And there’s also something we call a donkey cart, which 
is something like a ﬂ at-bed truck, but instead of bein’ 
pulled by a-a car like in front, it’s pulled by a donkey. And 
they’re also, they also have the right of way, too, on the 
streets, too. So that’s-that’s something; every time I go 
home, I keep wondering, “How did I ever drive in Guyana 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
4
before?” because I know for sure I can’t drive there now, 
so . . .
3. AN ISLAND IN MAINE
WOMAN: Taiwanese, both parents are from Taiwan, came 
to the States for graduate school, uh, and then decided 
to stay both for political reasons and for career reasons. 
Um, uh, my parents came through, their Ellis Island was 
Kansas, uh, Univer
[
sity of Kansas
]
 at Lawrence.
INTERVIEWER:  
 
Kansas. 
WOMAN: Middle of, middle of the country, that was, I 
guess they were pulling a lot of Taiwanese students at 
that time so they came through there for their graduate 
school and then a job opportunity opened in Maine so 
that’s-that’s how the family ended up being the only Tai-
wanese family within a hundred-mile radius in Maine. 
INTERVIEWER: When did your parents come to the U.S.? 
WOMAN: Um, in the ’60s, the early ’60s. 
INTERVIEWER: So how was life—have they talked about 
how life was diﬀ erent there versus life here in the U.S.—
have they told you much about that or commented on 
that or . . . ? 
WOMAN: I think it wasn’t so much how life, there-there 
were some aspects of life that were diﬀ erent in the U.S. 
versus in Taiwan, but I think a lot of the quality of life 
that we had or a lot of the speciﬁ cs of, uh, our lifestyle 
had to do with living on an island in Maine as opposed 
to so much being in the U.S. I don’t, I wouldn’t, I’m old 
enough now that I think I didn’t have a typical upbring-
ing, I didn’t live in a typical American town. It was just 

Life in America
5
so much smaller but at the same time it was inundated 
every summer by millions of tourists from all over the 
world, so we-we lived in a sort of interesting balance 
between being a super-super isolated small town, middle 
of nowhere, no traﬃ  c lights on the entire island exis-
tence, and then having this center of, uh, the spotlight 
world destination for vacationers, um, which is an inter-
esting mix. It was, the island is sort of split into two. I 
lived on what they called the quiet side of the island, the 
western side, so that wasn’t developed as a tourist desti-
nation until the last decade. Um, the eastern side is where 
Bar Harbor is, all these sort of big tourist areas so that 
was, that’s always been a big tourist destination since, 
you know, from the last century in the 1800s. Um, so we 
could always in some sense retreat back to our quiet side 
of the island, and it-it wasn’t crazy the whole summer, 
thanks to that. But y-you could still feel a palpable dif-
ference between the way that life was in the summer and 
the way that it was in the rest of the year.
INTERVIEWER: Did you enjoy living on the quieter side?
WOMAN: I did. I’m glad I lived on the quiet side. It’s a little 
bit crazy with all the tourists.
4. WEST VS. EAST 
[Note: in this segment, you hear the voice of the inter-
viewer asking a question and then the voice of the sign 
language interpreter, seated on the right, who is inter-
preting for the deaf woman, on the left, who is using 
American Sign Language (ASL).]
INTERVIEWER: So, you’ve lived—I mean, you’ve really lived 
in the West—in California and in Oregon. So how is liv-
ing in the East diﬀ erent from living in the West?

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
6
WOMAN: Right, yes, that’s a good question. Th e West—one 
thing about the West that’s-that’s really nice is the-the 
outdoors. It’s, uh, it’s nice to be with people who enjoy 
going out and doing things in nature like I do. But in the 
East, uh, there’s so much cultural diversity, I’m able to 
meet so many diﬀ erent kinds of people. Th ere’s a lot of 
history here, museums, things of that nature that are 
really nice. And if I miss the West, I can always just ﬂ y 
over there and spend some time there again.
5. CANADA VS. THE U.S.
WOMAN: Well, there’s work. You know, to be totally hon-
est, that’s one of the reason I stayed here. . . .
INTERVIEWER: Oh really?
WOMAN: Is, uh, the market—especially like in the 
Baltimore-Washington, and the entire like Northeast 
corridor—there’s just so much work for musicians, for 
artists, and especially this area here because there are 
so many like big or middle-sized cities that all want an 
orchestra, and that they all want arts happening in their 
town, so, I mean, it’s, basically, one of the-the running 
gag we have among musician is like, you really have 
to suck on your instrument to not ﬁ nd work in the 
Washington-Baltimore area. Really, it’s like, you know. 
And so basically, that’s, uh, the main diﬀ erence for me—
it’s that I can, like, thrive here and make a living playing 
the violin, which is something I would have had a very, 
very, very diﬃ  cult time doing in Montreal, especially 
since I left when I was so young and never built up . . .
INTERVIEWER: Uh-hmm.
WOMAN: . . . contacts and relationships up there.

Life in America
7
MAN: Yeah, it-it makes me think of a funny story. Um, just 
the American perception of artists and musicians, um. If 
you go to Europe or even Canada, uh, you know, and-and 
you tell somebody—random person that you meet on the 
street—“Oh, I’m a musician,” they say, “Oh, that’s great!” 
And in-in the United States oftentimes, you meet some-
body on the street and you tell them that you’re a musi-
cian and they say, “Oh, well, what’s your day job?”
A funny story: I was playing a quintet—a brass quin-
tet job, uh, this is back when I lived in Oregon—we were 
playing at a fund-raiser for the, uh, the Oregon Repub-
lican Party and we were playing, you know, patriotic 
songs and stuﬀ  like that, and we had a short break, um, 
in between our-our performance, and a woman who was 
sitting near the front, uh, took me aside and said, “Oh, 
that-that man over there playing the tuba, what-what’s 
his name?” I said, “Well, his name’s Richard Frazier.” 
And she says, “Well, what-what does he do?” I said, “Uh, 
he plays the tuba.” And she said, “Oh, well, can-can you 
make a living playing the tuba?” And I said, “No, ma’am. 
I can only make a living playing the French horn.” But 
that’s-that’s the perception.
WOMAN: Yeah, I had a similar story happening to me actu-
ally not far from here, in Hagerstown. We were playing, 
I was playing Maryland Symphony one week and there 
was a donor reception after the concert and, you know, 
I’m chatting there with patrons and like, I guess, guild 
members and, you know, other people that were attend-
ing the reception and one lady comes up to me and she’s 
like, “You know, you look so good on stage and, like, you 
look like you’re very, very good violinist and wh-where 
did you go to school, how did you get so good?” And, you 
know, I tell her, well, you know, my entire, like, musi-
cal education: went to Peabody, took, you know, private 
instruction, did bachelor, master’s degree with a great 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
8
violin teacher, practiced ten hours a day for ten years, 
and-and, you know, got a bachelor’s and a master’s in 
music, and she’s like, “Wow, that’s great. So what do you 
do?” I’m like, “Well, that’s what I do. I got my education 
in music and I play the violin.” She’s like, “You don’t do 
maths, you didn’t do science?” Like, “No.” It’s like, “But 
you can’t do that! What-what-what do you mean, you-
you don’t do maths? You have to take maths. What’s your 
job?” And she just would not understand that my educa-
tion, my job was music and that, you know, I didn’t do 
maths and I could still earn a living without having done 
maths and science, which was, at the time, very fascinat-
ing that somebody would not accept the answer that, “I’m 
a musician.” Which is something that would never have 
happened to me in Montreal.
6. LIVING IN WASHINGTON
MAN: Uh, well, this is a, is a very urban environment. Um, 
I’m ﬁ nding things from my own perspective because the 
United States is not urban—it’s actually rural, most of 
it—but my, from my own perspective, this is a very much 
more built-up area and, um, and in that regard it’s-it’s 
diﬀ erent to what my-my childhood was.
INTERVIEWER: What other places have you visited in the 
United States or lived in the United States?
MAN: Uh, very little. It’s all, it’s all been here, really, in 
Washington.
INTERVIEWER: Oh yeah?
MAN: Yeah, it’s all, it’s all been, uh, my interest is-is pol-
itics and what shapes the course of countries and why 
people do what they do and why civilizations behave 

Life in America
9
the way that they do. So this is, if you were interested in 
looking at that, this has got to be an interesting place in 
that, in that way.
7. COMING FROM SPAIN
WOMAN: Well, I think that, uh, at that time—and this was 
twenty years ago—um, I think that I, uh, at ﬁ rst I thought 
that, like, the family structure was very diﬀ erent ’cause, 
of course, uh, I grew up in a country where family struc-
tures are very tight and every-everything centers around 
the family and that has changed, too, in Spain—but you 
know, at my time, eh, divorce wasn’t even allowed, so 
when I came here, that’s one of the things that struck 
me as diﬀ erent from-from Spain, that the family struc-
ture was very diﬀ erent, was more, uh, um, well, most 
people I-I met had parents who-who were divorced or, 
and then remarried and had stepbrothers and -sisters or 
half-brothers and half-sisters and that was—I mean, in 
Spain, you never. I mean, that was such an abstract con-
cept, something that you heard about in movies, right? 
Of course, now that’s normal in Spain, too. So I think 
that’s one of the things that struck me.
INTERVIEWER: What do you like about life in America?
WOMAN: Uh, well, I-I like the academic atmosphere here. 
Um, uh, since I teach at a university, I think I-I beneﬁ t a 
lot from the academic atmosphere. Th ere’s a lot, there’s 
a lot of resources, uh, easy access to grants, money, even 
though, of course, we complain all the time, you know, 
that there’s not enough money, not enough support, but, 
of course, if you compare, uh, the situation here to the 
situation in other countries in-in Europe, there’s a lot 
more resources here for-for research, and, um, also I like 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
10
the ﬂ exibility, the fact that, uh, people are just so free 
to move around. Th ey get tired of their job, whatever, 
no problem—they just move to another place, uh, start 
another job, and I like that kind of ﬂ exibility, whereas I 
think in Europe in general people are more, uh, the men-
tality is, “OK, once you buy your house, that’s where you 
die.” You don’t really move around that much.
8. TIME IN EGYPT AND AMERICA
I usually, I go in the morning. Uh, I get a lot of phone 
calls from the student. Uh, if somebody has a prob-
lem with, in any class or has a problem with a profes-
sor or has a problem in his own life, he can talk to me 
about it and I can explain to him what he has to do and 
I always let him know about the time between here and 
over there. Over here, the time is very, very valuable. You 
have to make sure, if you have a class at two o’clock, you 
have to be there at two o’clock exactly. If you make it ﬁ ve 
minutes before, it’s OK, but do not late one more minute 
than the time. And back home, timing is not, no value 
for the times. If you have a class at two, you show up two-
ﬁ fteen, at two-thirty, it’s OK. But over here, when you do 
that, meaning you underestimate the professor and he 
will get really upset with you. So I always focus about the 
time because the value here, timing here is money and 
back home, time is, you know, we have a lot free times.
Well, the life in America is the best. America, I con-
sider it, uh, one of the best places in the earth. I’ve been 
traveling a lot before I came to the States. I’ve been in 
England, I’ve been in France, I’ve been in Switzerland, 
I’ve been in Greece, I’ve been in Turkey, Czechoslovakia, 
Yugo-Yugoslavia—I’ve been traveling a lot before I come 
to the States. And United States one of the best because 
the economy is very strong and you have a lot of jobs 

Life in America
11
everywhere so that is very, very important in America. 
Back home, unemployment is almost 25 to 50 percent. 
It’s very hard to get a nice decent job, and if you get a nice 
decent job, doesn’t pay you enough money to make you 
live really well, so, but always go back. Home is home. 
Always, whatever home it is, it’s the best place for myself 
and for anybody else, but America is the best.
9. AMERICAN MEMORIES
MAN: Well, I-I grew up in England. Uh, I was born down 
on the south sea coast, so if you know England, right 
down here, maybe a hundred miles from London, uh, 
in a little town called Poole, P-o-o-l-e. Uh, and I lived 
in southern England until I was about twelve years old. 
My, uh, my father was a-a war hero in World War II in-in 
India, so my memories are more related to-to that. And, 
uh, when I was about twelve years old, my father decided 
that he wanted to experience the American dream, 
which I called the make a buck myth, because the myth 
was that we never had much money. So we arrived in 
New York City, came on a boat, uh, about as old as the 
Titanic, but more successful, and, uh, lived in the Bronx. 
So some of my earliest American memories, uh, were hot 
dogs, uh, the Statue of Liberty, and American kids say-
ing, “Hey, Slimy Limey, when are you going to learn to 
speak English?” So English—and timing is everything 
because this was few years before the Beatles—and if I 
had only come to America after the Beatles, I would have 
been cool. Instead, I was the geek who couldn’t speak 
English. Uh, well, at that age, you know, you do what your 
parents want you to do, so we moved to Florida, and I 
went to high school in Florida.
INTERVIEWER: Where in Florida?

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
12
MAN: Uh, Pompano Beach. Home of the Bean Pickers. 
Th is is a time when Florida had little tourists—uh, you 
could literally go right to the beach. Now it’s all condos 
for miles behind the beaches, uh. So I grew up, kind of 
grew up there. Kind of important to me is, when I arrived 
in New York, I was an English kid who had never seen 
a person of color in his life—1950s England was not a 
segregated society; there were not people of color living 
in England. Today it’s very diﬀ erent. So I arrive in New 
York City and I lived in a boys’ orphanage for a year, and 
all of the kids in the orphanage were black and Hispanic, 
Puerto Rican, African-Americans, and—very powerful 
experience—I mean, coming from England, living in the 
Bronx. When I went to Florida—racially segregated. 
Th e railroad tracks literally divided the town. S-so those, 
the juxtaposition of those three experiences probably are 
the most important experiences in my life in terms of 
what I believe in.
10. COMING FROM INDIA
MAN: Uh, now when I go back for vacation to India, I see 
what’s-what’s the diﬀ erence-diﬀ erent. I-I ﬁ nd everybody 
working in a slow motion. You know, you see the slow-
motion movie, the hand goes slowly, but, uh, and I-I see 
my brothers, uh, they take life little easy. Th ey wake up in 
the morning and, uh, there’s a lot of help around. Some-
body comes to do the dishes, somebody comes to do the 
laundry, and somebody else is doing the ironing, and 
they don’t have to do anything. My, but, my brother says 
he’s very busy—I see him doing nothing. He just-just-just 
goes; he doesn’t even drive his own car, and, uh, his, I 
mean, his wife doesn’t even iron the clothes. It’s just wait-
ing. He just goes for the shower; somebody comes, takes 

Life in America
13
out his clothes; he changes, of course; and, uh, he goes to 
job. Th ere are people who take care of the job. He’s, just 
says, “Yes” and “No.” People come to him, “Uh, this is 
OK?” “Yeah, OK.” “Is this ﬁ ne?” “OK.” Accountant come 
and says that. He’s not a big businessman—he’s probably 
does half of the turnover that I do here—but he-he’s like 
a king. And, uh, when I come back here, from the time 
I land U.S. airport, I have to pull my own bag, I have to 
drive my own car, I have to come home, pull my bags, 
take it myself in, and empty them myself. I have to do my 
own laundry, I have to wash, I have to clean the house 
myself. My, when my father came, he saw me cleaning 
the house, with the bathrooms. He said, “You, I thought 
this was America.” I said, “Yeah, this is America. Th at’s 
why I do it. You don’t do it in India.” He has never cleaned 
the bathroom. Somebody else does it for him. So life in 
India, now when I see, is like a luxury life. Th ey think 
that I’m-I, since I have a little more money than them, so 
I’m-I have more luxury life, but unless you come and live 
here, uh, you realize it’s-it’s like super speed versus slow 
motion.
Doesn’t give you time to think—that’s good thing 
about, uh, life in America. When you-you grow old, you 
don’t start, you never think you’re old because you don’t 
have time to think. And, uh, whatever you have, you have, 
what you don’t have, you have no time to think, so time, 
lack of time is a blessing, in a sense. And, uh, of course 
I like, uh, if you, if you are enthusiastic and if your body 
allows you to work hard, you can open any kind of busi-
ness; you don’t have too much of bureaucracy, not too 
much of red tape, you can start business pretty quick, 
and, uh, of course, uh, you have liabilities, you have to 
work hard to do that but, uh. Yeah, you don’t have to run 
over a period of one year, uh, like, uh, many other coun-
tries, like in India. America is very, very easy. I mean, I 
can just simply walk into a bank and show my good credit 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
14
and take a loan for anything. I mean, I can buy a house, 
virtually nothing in my pocket. I can say I’m a home-
owner and back home in India, I need to have at least 80 
percent, so, uh, I mean, there are a lot of good things. I 
mean, I like, uh, I like to drive, I like to go for, uh, vaca-
tion on-on, the driving. Good roads, I don’t have to worry 
too much about it, cars are pretty good. Even if I have the 
best car in India, I can’t drive at the speed I drive here. So 
there are a lot, a lot of good things. I mean, I, once I get 
used to, now I think now I am used to here, I cannot go 
back and, uh, have the slow-motion life anymore.
INTERVIEWER: Interesting.
11. CHANGING TIMES
Oh, oh, that’s-that’s a loaded question, you know that—
seriously loaded. Th ere was a time when-when I was 
growing up that, uh—and I sound like a geezer here—but 
there was a time where, you know, you didn’t lock your 
door, um, I never had a key to my house. Th ose times, 
those-those-those ways still are out in the West. Uh, it-
it’s less gentle than it used to be and let’s say, I’m not, don’t 
even get me into why this-this could have happened.
12. SMALL-TOWN LIFE
Th at’s an interesting subject there. I-I remember a time, 
we never locked our doors, uh, and I lived in a town, little 
town of Laurel for a while, and I think even back then, we 
never locked our doors ’cause nobody, you didn’t have to 
worry about anybody breaking into your house or doing 
anything. And on the farm we never, we’d go away for a 
weekend and never lock a door. And you didn’t worry. As 

Life in America
15
a kid, I remember at age six or seven, hitchhiking down 
the road during World War II. We’d go to Fort Meade to 
use the swimming pool. And we didn’t think anything 
about hitchhiking, and you didn’t worry about some 
dude picking you up and molesting you or anything like 
that, just, you just didn’t hear about it back then. And 
then over the years, you just see where they, pretty soon 
everybody locks their doors, they got three or four locks 
on their doors, they, their kids can’t go out and play in 
the yard, uh, like they could back in my day, and, uh, the 
parents just have to watch them every minute.
DEFINITIONS
academic atmosphere: Th e setting or state that contrib-
utes to and fosters academia—education, study, teach-
ing, learning, research, and the exchange of ideas and 
information.
American Sign Language (ASL): A form of manual com-
munication used by deaf and hard of hearing people in 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
16
the United States. ASL is an autonomous linguistic sys-
tem structurally independent from English. It is diﬀ erent 
from sign languages used in other countries, such as Ital-
ian Sign Language or Japanese Sign Language.
Bean Pickers: Manual laborers who harvested beans by 
hand; in this case, the name of the sports team at the 
school the speaker attended.
breaking into (break in): To enter illegally, usually by 
force.
’cause: Short for because.
change of the seasons: Th e transition of the year from 
spring to summer to fall (autumn) to winter.
cool: A slang expression that means to be desired or desir-
able, to be with it, to be in vogue, or to be happening.
day job: Th e primary job by which a person supports 
himself or herself while attempting to start, pursue, or 
establish another career. Th is term is used frequently 
with reference to musicians, artists, actors, and enter-
tainers, who often work at night.
dude: A slang term for a man or a boy.
Eastern Seaboard: Th e eastern portion of the United 
States along the Atlantic Ocean. 
ﬂ at-bed truck: A truck that has a ﬂ at and open back area 
for carrying cargo.
geek: An awkward person who doesn’t ﬁ t in. It can also 
mean a person who possesses a lot of specialized knowl-
edge in a particular ﬁ eld, such as a “computer geek.”
geezer: A slang term for an old person.
hitchhiking: Standing or walking along a roadside ask-
ing for a ride from people driving by.

Life in America
17
interstates: Refers to the major highway system of the 
United States.
make a buck: To earn money or make a proﬁ t.
maths (math): Th e ﬁ eld of study of numbers and 
calculation.
musician: Usually musicians.
Northeast corridor: Th e states in the northeastern por-
tion of the United States.
one of the reason: Usually “one of the reasons.”
person of color: A person not of the Caucasian race; a 
nonwhite person.
racially segregated: Separated on the basis of race.
running gag: A joke, funny story, or tale that is told 
frequently.
segregated society: A society in which the races live 
largely separated from one another.
slow motion: Moving at less than normal speed.
spotlight: In this context, the center of the focus of 
attention.
the student: Th e speaker probably means students.
suck on your instrument (usually, to suck at some-
thing): To not be very good or skilled at playing one’s 
instrument.
underestimate: Th e speaker probably means disrespect.
upbringing: Th e guided or directed growth of a child by 
his or her parents or guardian into adulthood.
the West: Th e western United States.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
18
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. List what these speakers like about life in the 
United States.
 2. Which speakers have had experiences in the 
United States similar to yours and why?
 3. Which speakers have had experiences most dif-
ferent from yours and why?
 4. Describe where you have lived in the United 
States.
 5. What do you like about life in the United States?
 6. What is the most diﬃ  cult thing about living in 
the United States?
 7. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

19
THE FAMILY
In this chapter, interviewees talk about life in their 
families.
1. A FAMILY IN MARYLAND
MAN: Family. I’ve been married to my wife for about sev-
enteen, eighteen years. We married young, at the age of 
twenty-one and twenty-two. And we initially, for years, 
did not want children. We did a lot of traveling to a num-
ber of diﬀ erent countries, and ﬁ nally, uh, somewhere 
around thirty-two, thirty-three, I looked at my wife 
C H A P T E R  2
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
20
and said, “Well, you’re not getting any younger, so if we 
wanna do this, we better go ahead and start working on 
this.” And so we made a decision to have children, and I 
have a daughter, Caitlin Cherie, who is four and a half 
years old, going on ﬁ fty. She’s also ﬂ uent in American 
Sign Language. In fact, from day one in the delivery 
room, I remember signing to her because I wanted to 
make this imprint on her brain, this language imprint for 
visual language, and so, uh, we have a special bond not 
just because she was my ﬁ rst daughter but also through 
American Sign Language. Um, it’s amazing to me, not 
coming from a deaf family, to see how language develops 
in a child who does not use, does not have deafness in the 
family. But she, uh, uses American Sign Language very, 
pretty ﬂ uently, and we have deaf people in our lives all the 
time, and so that’s been a big help for her. She came, uh, 
to a program after moving to this area at Gallaudet Uni-
versity called the, um, Child Development Center, and in 
that program—it’s a day care center where they have, uh, 
parents with deaf children attending the day care cen-
ter, the teachers are occasionally deaf and it’s just a really 
nice environment. And so she was in that program for 
about a year and a half. And so that’s my daughter Cait-
lin. I-I love my daughter; I’m so in love with her. Uh, I 
also have a son who’s nine months old; his name is Levi 
Joseph. And, we are bonding and having fun, and he is 
at nine months, he’s speaking several words, and he has 
about four-four or ﬁ ve signs. So at this point, living in the 
area, it’s, uh, my wife and two children, a girl and a boy.
INTERVIEWER: Do you have siblings?
MAN: I have, uh, four siblings. I have, uh, an older sister, 
two younger sisters, and a younger brother. And, uh, 
they’re all in New Jersey, uh, right now. We’ve recently 
convinced my mom to move to this area, to the Balti-
more, Maryland–D.C. area, so she should be moving 

The Family
21
down shortly, uh, once her house is sold. But my sib-
lings, uh, remain in New Jersey with the exception of 
my brother, who I’ve convinced to go to the University 
of Maryland, and so he’s, uh, just started there in grad 
school at the University of Maryland.
2. ITALIAN ROOTS
Well, the Sardegna side, my m—, I should say, my moth-
er’s side and my father’s side. Let me start with my father’s 
side, which is also from Sardegna, but my grandfather 
was a merchant marine traveling the world and had a 
friend in Detroit and ended his merchant marine tour 
and stayed in Detroit. So, uh, and, uh, but went back to 
Italy, married someone, brought her back, and then had 
three boys. My dad’s the youngest, and they were born, 
uh, in the States, and my, one of my uncles fought in 
World War II, my oldest uncle, you know, uh, he actually 
fought, I think, partially in Italy, which is kind of inter-
esting, um, and, and then, you know, they mixed in, one 
of my aunts is Polish and, you know, kind of indicative of 
the Detroit area, the sort of mix that’s there.
My mom’s side is a much more complicated side, and 
my mom is also from Sardegna, but part of her family is 
from Padova and, uh, Vicenza, the Veneto area, and then 
one of my great-grandfathers was from Rome, and, uh, 
was a judge who was sent to Sardegna. So, um, which is 
kind of interesting, given that there’s not a lot of move-
ment, um, in or out of, um, Sardegna. So I have second 
cousins in Padova, I have, uh, great-uncles in Padova, I 
have family in Sardegna, family in Vicenza, so it’s-it’s in 
that, it’s, that’s kind of split. And I must have family in 
Rome, but I don’t know, it’s just, uh, my mother’s never 
told me, you know, about that.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
22
I have two sisters and one brother. I’m the oldest. Um, 
and they’re all in Michigan. Um, they’re also very techni-
cal, um. My brother is, has a master’s in ﬂ uid dynam-
ics—he’s an engineer. And, um, one of my sisters was a 
math major, and, computer science, did artiﬁ cial intel-
ligence. Uh, another sister was, or is, uh, an engineer. 
I mean she’s not—she’s at home with the kids now. So, 
very, um, technical. Although most of us like to read a 
lot, which, um, is not always—you don’t always see a very 
technical—and like-liking to read a little bit. So . . .
3. A FAMILY SABBATICAL
I had a great experience when I was a kid. Um, my par-
ents were university professors as well, and when I was a 
young boy, my father got a sabbatical leave and so took 
the whole family to Europe for a year, uh, during his sab-
batical leave, and we traveled all around Western Europe, 
North Africa, the Middle East, and in the process, we 
visited, uh, not only the great cities of Europe but lots 
of the, uh, ancient sites, and so I was, I was exposed to 
archaeological sites from ancient Rome, Greece, Egypt, 
uh, throughout the Mediterranean area. And as a little 
kid, I was just fascinated by all of this and, uh, just, uh, 
drew up as much ancient history and-and culture as 
I possibly could at the time and came back fascinated 
with the study of antiquities. And so when I was a kid, 
I started reading, uh, ancient history and the ancient 
authors in translation and then later on, took up ancient 
languages.

The Family
23
4. CHANGING FAMILIES
Gosh, when I ﬁ rst came to the United States: one black-
and-white TV about this big, uh. Both my parents 
worked, so in that sense, I didn’t go through a period 
where my mother didn’t work and that kind of 1950s, 
1960s sort of thing. I’d have to say that parents are a 
whole lot busier today than my parents. I mean, when 
work ended, work ended. And today, with e-mail and, uh, 
electronic communication, work doesn’t really have the 
kind of boundaries.
5. SIBLINGS
So, I’m one of six. Um, in my family, it-it’s three girls and 
then three boys. And I’m the middle girl. So I have an 
older sister, and she is a mother of four girls herself, uh, 
in Minnesota, um, and then I’m here in D.C. And then 
my younger sister is, uh, back in Minnesota. She is an 
attorney-editor at West Th ompson Publishing, and she 
has a daughter who will be a year in April. Um, so it’s very, 
it’s interesting because my older sister is more a stay-at-
home mom. She-she does, like, work in a preschool or 
whatever, but she doesn’t have like a full profession, um, 
and, but she’s like an experienced mom because she’s 
the mother of four daughters, but I actually ﬁ nd myself 
have more in common with my younger sister, who’s just 
this new mom because she has this other component of 
working full-time, and so we have a lot more in common 
in the mothering aspect because of that, I think. Which 
is, that’s interesting to me. Th en, um, so Kathy, myself, 
Lisa, then Tom is the oldest son and he is, he lives in, uh, 
Minnesota as well. He works for an, he-he’s a ﬁ nancial 
accountant in an agricultural company. Um, sort of the 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
24
funny fact about him is he’s on a curling team, which 
many people don’t know about, but he actually plays it 
and it’s very fun to watch, but not a lot of people know 
about it. Uh, then, my, the middle boy Jim is, he lives in 
Arlington, Virginia, actually, and he works for, uh, Wells 
Fargo and he does, sort of, he has this hybrid position 
where he does banking stuﬀ , but he watches the legisla-
tive agenda on the Hill, and he sort of does the liaison 
between the banking aspect of that and the legislation. 
Um, and then the youngest, Patrick, is in Florida, and he 
is a wine consultant, um, at a Total Wine—it’s a com-
pany—and he, so people come to him and say, “I’m mak-
ing whatever for dinner, what kind of wine would you 
recommend?” And so he does that kind of education, so. 
He’s in Florida now. I forgot ’cause he moved recently. I 
had him back in Minnesota still ’cause he just graduated 
from college. I gotta remember that he’s a full-ﬂ edged 
adult now.
6. FAMILY IN NEW ZEALAND
MAN: He was, he was a photographer and had to, uh, 
travel a lot in his work. And, uh, and, my, I have a sister, 
and she has a-a large family of-of four children now and, 
uh, as a matter of fact, every year, I would travel, um, or 
my family would travel—I have a little family: I-I have a 
wife and son—we would travel to, uh, to New Zealand 
just about every year to see them, and, uh, usually it was 
in the wintertime because summer holidays here is the 
winter there, you see, it’s the opposite way ’round so we 
would end up in the kind of bleak season. Um, but, uh, 
but my sister and I, uh, y-you know, swap each other’s, 
uh, children’s interests and, um, my fam—, my mother 
and father now are very elderly, and they’re, my mother is 

The Family
25
now in her mid-eight—, late-late eighties now so, um, it 
was very quick, but they are. 
INTERVIEWER: Since your-your sister lives, still lives in New 
Zealand and you live here, what’s it like when the two 
families get together, living in vastly, somewhat vastly 
diﬀ erent cultures?
MAN: Yes, although it’s not vastly diﬀ erent. It’s not vastly. 
Th ere are, um, the interesting thing is that when we 
come here, the Kiwis come here, they expect the Ameri-
cans to be the same. Th ey expect them to have the same 
ideas and the same goals and the same attitudes to life, 
and it’s misleadingly not true. So it appears to be more 
similar than it is. So, somebody coming here would think 
it was the same, but it isn’t. When we get together, um, 
and we’ve, I’ve been fortunate enough, every one of her 
children has visited here and stayed with me, so I’ve been 
able to introduce to them what it’s like to live and visit, 
uh, well, at least in Washington, D.C.
Yes, well, um, the interesting thing about Gallipoli 
in the First World War was that most people’s grandfa-
ther fought it, you know what I mean. On my mother’s 
side, all of my-my grandfather’s brothers fought at Gal-
lipoli, you know. It was a, it was something that, um, that 
captured the whole generation that were sent oﬀ —and 
mostly volunteered, by the way—sent oﬀ  to ﬁ ght, um, a 
disastrous invasion, disastrous invasion of Turkey. Win-
ston Churchill’s idea, by the way, uh, to do that. And 
um, the casualties, so—and I recently gave the lecture 
about Iwo Jima because they’re very similar in terms of 
campaigns—but, um, to give you an example of things 
that don’t usually happen in wars or in battles, for the 
New Zealanders, for example, the-the casualties nearly 
equaled the numbers deployed, so that is nearly 100 per-
cent casualty rate, that, which is almost unheard of in 
battles but, uh, and my grandfather was-was wounded 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
26
there and he had a lot to say about it. Not to me because 
the war estranged a lot of families and, uh, and, uh, I 
didn’t really know I had a grandfather until I was twenty. 
And-and so I was about his age when he went. And then 
I met him and then  
[
 
we talked about it, so 
]
.
INTERVIEWER: 
Why did it estrange families?
MAN: Because people were changed by it, as they are today 
in-in wars, all over the world. War changes you. War, uh, 
alters your understanding, um, with the suﬀ ering, the 
loss, the, uh, the stress. Human relationships alter, people 
are changed by it, and I’m only speaking in-in a general 
way. I don’t really know—I mean, relationships break up, 
OK, as well, but there was such a lot of-of people having 
diﬃ  culties, a lot of young people. And there is a picture I 
have of my grandfather and he’s there, a very young man 
from a young country, and he’s dressed in his new uni-
form and it’s 1915 and he’s just about to be thrown into 
the most dreadful, uh, of all experiences and have his 
friends die and have his, in-in-in terrible circumstances, 
 
[
 
so 
]
.
INTERVIEWER: Was it the trauma  of that that took a long 
time for him to discuss it with you?
MAN: Uh, no, no, I don’t think so. Um, some people talk 
about their war experiences and some do not. Um, I 
think, I think most do not. But that wasn’t the reason. 
It was because, it was a small family reason that he had 
forged another life and he had another family. And so it 
wasn’t, uh, anyway, he had another life. And so I-I really 
didn’t know much about him until later. I knew my-my 
relatives on-on my other side, on my mother’s side of the 
family, who-who’d fought at Gallipoli, too, but as I said, 
it was such a common thing, there were so many, uh, so 
many sent oﬀ  to ﬁ ght in that.

The Family
27
7. MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS
My mother was one of ten children, so already that 
meant that she just had a lot more, a lot less attention 
from her parents and a lot more, um, a lot more people 
that she had to answer to. Uh, she also came from a very 
traditional Taiwanese household that all the children did 
what the father told them to do, and they were very, very 
well versed in what their duties were, what their respon-
sibilities were, and they-they did those things, they-they 
did those duties as they were expected. Um, I grew up in 
this country. I’d say that I’m American before anything, 
and I-I think that with that comes a certain attitude 
about how you deﬁ ne your own destiny—you make your 
own decisions—and this was always a source of friction 
growing up, on top of the normal friction that you have 
between say, adolescents and-and parents. I think we had 
some extra ones that came along, um, from the cultural 
aspects of it. But I’ve, the older I get, the more I’m struck 
by the similarities that we also had. She just had a lot 
of the same kind of reactions to the world that I’ve had, 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
28
and, uh, I didn’t recognize them when I was younger. But 
I think that her, the way that she approaches life—that 
“Well, you know, whatever happens, happens, and you 
sort of just roll with it and try to make the best of it”—
that’s sort of how I’ve approached life, too, and that’s-
that’s colored the way that I’ve lived my life, and so when 
I look at some of the, um, stories that she tells of when she 
was growing up, I think, “Huh, that’s the same reaction 
that I would have had,” or, “Th at’s the same thing that I 
would have done.” Um, so, despite the big cultural dif-
ferences that we had and the-the time diﬀ erences—you 
know, she had, she lived ﬁ fty years earlier than me—um, 
there’s actually a surprising amount of parallels between 
us, probably just because I’m her daughter and she’s my 
mother.
8. FATHERS AND DAUGHTERS 
WOMAN: Uh, I was born in Evanston, Illinois, which is a 
suburb of Chicago, and I grew up in the Chicago area, 
um, all the way through high school. Um, my mother was 
from the Chicago area, my father was from the South, 
but when he married my mother, they moved to Chicago 
and that’s where my roots are.
INTERVIEWER: Where in the South was your 
[
father from
]
?
WOMAN:  
 My father  
was born in Arkansas, um, in a little town in the north-
eastern corner of Arkansas called Rector. It’s hardly a dot 
on the map but sort of across the river from Memphis, 
Tennessee.
INTERVIEWER: You ever been there or . . . ?

The Family
29
WOMAN: I have been there, yes. Um, when I was little . . . 
my father was from a very large family; he was the oldest 
of nine children, and they all married and had children 
of their own and on and on and on. And when I was little, 
um, I think the ﬁ rst time was when I was about six, we 
went to Arkansas several summers when there was a very 
large family reunion. Um, my mother had been an only 
child, and, uh, her mother was an only child, too, so there 
were very few relatives on my mother’s side, and the ﬁ rst 
time I went to one of these family reunions in Arkansas 
with all of these people who were related to me, I was 
astonished. I had no idea that-that I had these many, that 
many people that were actually related to me. So it was, it 
was quite an eye-opening experience.
But I must say that, uh, having an actor as a father 
is a very diﬀ erent sort of family setting from what most 
children have. I didn’t have a father who went to work 
ﬁ ve days a week, nine-to-ﬁ ve, was home all the time on 
the weekends. Um, when you’re an actor, you’re a little 
bit itinerant, and sometimes you may be working a lot, 
sometimes you may not be working very much. Uh, of 
course, these actors frequently are working at night, so 
my father would be home during the day and rather, and 
working in the evenings. It makes for a very diﬀ erent sort 
of life experience and growing up experience. But it was 
also because of that, uh, unpredictability, I guess, um, 
for me and also for my brother and sister—there were 
three of us—um, acting was not the sort of lifestyle or 
career that any of us wanted to pursue. I think all of us 
 
[
 
grew up 
]
 . . . 
INTERVIEWER: It kind of turned  you oﬀ  from . . .
WOMAN: Yeah, kind of had the-the idea that it would be 
much better to have something that had more security 
attached to it, compared with the glamour, if you will, of 
being an actor. But it was a wonderful—as a kid growing 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
30
up—it was a wonderful thing because, um, we met lots 
of interesting people, acting friends of my father and my 
mother, um, who were also very down-to-earth people as 
well but, you know, celebrities and the like, that was kind 
of fun. But . . . 
INTERVIEWER: Did you get to see him perform?
WOMAN: Yes, I did, and that was the most fun thing of all. 
Um, it’s-it’s a real unusual experience when one, you have 
a certain image of your parents, you see them around 
the house all the time, and then suddenly to see one’s 
father or mother appearing on the Broadway stage or in 
a theater, uh, in costume and saying very diﬀ erent sorts 
of lines and speeches, uh, is-is really an amazing experi-
ence. And I was very, very proud of him for everything 
that he did.
DEFINITIONS
American Sign Language (ASL): A form of manual com-
munication used by deaf and hard of hearing people in 
the United States. ASL is an autonomous linguistic sys-
tem structurally independent from English. It is diﬀ erent 
from sign languages used in other countries, such as Ital-
ian Sign Language or Japanese Sign Language.
antiquities: Ancient civilizations and their remnants, 
ruins, and history.
Broadway: A major street in New York City, New York, 
that is synonymous with live theater and is the major 
theater district of the city.
’cause: Short for because.
curling: A team sport similar to bocce and shuﬄ  eboard 
that is played on ice with large granite stones and brooms 

The Family
31
in which the object is to get your team’s “stone” as close 
as possible to the target while preventing your opponent 
from doing the same.
day one: Th e very ﬁ rst day or beginning of an event or 
period of time.
a dot on the map: A very small town or location.
four and a half years old, going on ﬁ fty: An expression 
that means the speaker’s daughter is four and half years 
old chronologically but exhibits the maturity or mental-
ity of a much older person.
full-ﬂ edged: Complete, total, entitled to all the beneﬁ ts 
and responsibilities. 
gotta: Common verbal utterance of got to, which means 
the same as have to.
grad school (graduate school): Th e collegiate educa-
tional level after the ﬁ rst four years of college (baccalau-
reate) during which a person usually pursues an advanced 
degree.
the Hill: An expression that refers to the area around the 
U.S. Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., where the 
members of Congress (Senate and House of Representa-
tives) and their staﬀ s work. It is the center of the legisla-
tive branch of the U.S. federal government.
hybrid: An object or entity that has a mixture or combi-
nation of characteristics taken from other things.
just roll with it: An expression that means “to accept a 
situation or circumstance as it arises and deal with it or 
adjust to it.”
Kiwis: A slang term referring to people from New Zea-
land, derived from the kiwi bird, which is native to New 
Zealand.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
32
merchant marine: A nation’s publicly or privately owned 
commercial sailing ﬂ eet.
nine-to-ﬁ ve: Th is term refers to the typical hours that 
most people work during a ﬁ ve-day workweek, 9:00 a.m. 
to 5:00 p.m. It is often used to refer to a typical, ﬁ ve-day 
workweek job.
’round: Short for around.
sabbatical leave: At academic institutions, a leave 
of absence granted to faculty members every seven 
years, during which they can pursue other interests or 
activities.
wanna: Want to. 
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. Describe your family. How are the families of 
these speakers like your family?
 2. What kind of work do/did your parents do?
 3. How has your family life changed since coming 
to America?
 4. For which speaker do children play a large role? 
How does that compare to your family or to 
when you were growing up?
 5. What memories do these speakers have of their 
families?
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

33
THE HOME
In this chapter, interviewees talk about their 
homes.
1. ROW HOUSES
WOMAN: OK, I live in a little Victorian house, and, uh, as 
you walk in, there’s a little entrance, and then there’s a-a 
living room and a kitchen—there’s an arc and the kitchen 
is right there, so the kitchen and the living room are 
together. And then there’s a stairway, and upstairs there 
C H A P T E R  3
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
34
are two bedrooms and one full bathroom, and it also 
has a little patio.
INTERVIEWER: And what’s-what’s your favorite room in the 
house and why?
WOMAN: Um, I think my favori-favorite room is the living 
room because it’s one of these little Victorian houses so 
it has a-a—one of those windows, um, I don’t remember 
the name of it . . . um, a-a bay window—it has a bay win-
dow, and, uh, and it’s, uh, in, but you can, the stairway, it’s 
very, it’s one of those old stairways, so and it’s-it’s beauti-
ful, and it’s right there in the middle of the living room 
and so you can see the-the stairway and the, it’s very light 
and it’s also, we painted the walls yellow, which is a color 
I like, so and it’s comfortable, it’s got a nice comfortable 
couch, and I have my music, uh, stereo there so I can sit 
and listen to my music.
2. A LOG HOUSE
MAN: It’s a log house that my late wife and I built our-
selves, and I also have a three-car log garage that I, that 
my present wife and I built ourselves. And, uh . . .
INTERVIEWER: How did you decide on that type of house?
MAN: Always wanted a log house. So, bought a kit and 
built it.
INTERVIEWER: How long did it take you to build it?
MAN: Started in April, uh, and had it under roof by 
August of that year, and then it took from August of that 
year till the following June to get it ﬁ nished out on the 
inside, enough to move into it. It was actually, took lon-

The Home
35
ger to do the inside than it did to put the logs up. Logs 
were the easiest part of it. And I had never built anything 
of that magnitude. I mean, I was a carpenter’s helper and, 
uh, a bricklayer’s apprentice and all that business, but I’d 
never done anything like that. But, uh, the book they give 
you with the kit pretty much lays it right out, and if you 
had any problems, you called the company and they had 
an engineer pull out a set of your drawings and you had 
a set, and you’d tell him what page to go to and he would 
look at it and say, “What’s your problem?” And you’d 
say, “Well, here’s where I’m having a problem.” And they 
would tell you what to do.
Well, when you walk through the front door, the ﬁ rst 
thing you’re going to see is a staircase right in front of 
you that goes up to the loft, and it’s, uh, a cathedral ceil-
ing. And oﬀ  to the right is the living room, which is a 
sunken living room, it goes down into the, by the ﬁ re-
place with, um—I want to call it ﬂ agstone, like western 
Maryland stone—big ﬁ replace. And then the kitchen’s oﬀ  
from that. And then, the rest of it—you know, bathrooms 
and bedrooms and that kind of thing. Upstairs is the, in 
the loft, is where we watch TV and that kind of stuﬀ . And 
then my radio room is in the back . . . corner. 
INTERVIEWER: So what’s your favorite room in the house?
MAN: My radio room. Th at’s where I have all my stuﬀ ! 
INTERVIEWER: Yeah?
MAN: Yeah.
INTERVIEWER: Tell us about why that’s your favorite room.
MAN: Well, I can sit in there and work radio—talk to 
people all over the world on the radio and do diﬀ erent 
things.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
36
3. WALKING THROUGH THE HOUSE
MAN: OK, now that the renovation is done, it’s easier to 
visualize, but if you walk in my-my front door—we live 
in a-a town, and the reason I chose the town is because 
it has a lot, it has lots of trees and it probably reminded 
me of New Jersey. It’s an older town, not too old but, um. 
Trees. So, there, I have about, a lot of trees on my prop-
erty. Once you come inside the house, um, into the foyer 
area, to the left is a living room. Um, beyond the living 
room is a dining room area. Um, through the dining 
room, we have a kitchen area that we just ﬁ nished reno-
vating. We spent about a year and a half without cabinets 
because we had our cabinets, uh, custom-made and the 
cabinetmaker assured me that it would only take a few 
months, so I was zealous and took them oﬀ  the wall, and 
it took a lot longer to get them done, and so the kitchen 
is just, uh, to the right of the dining room. Beyond that, 
we have a-a back porch with, uh, looking out into a yard 
area.
Th e c—, the porch is enclosed, which is nice espe-
cially in the spring, uh, summer, and fall. Just oﬀ  the 
kitchen, uh, to the left—to the right, rather—we have 
a family room that has a ﬁ replace. Um, as well, oﬀ  the 
kitchen, there’s a mudroom, where we have a washer 
and dryer, uh, and a pantry, and we have a basement 
that also, uh, you can enter, uh, from the, or through the 
kitchen that’s, um, recently been reﬁ nished and has a new 
bathroom put down in the basement and a pretty big rec 
room, recreation room and family area in the basement. 
Upstairs we have four bedrooms. If you come in the front 
door just to the right before you go into, uh, the family 
room, there’re stairs that lead to the second ﬂ oor, and on 
the second ﬂ oor, to our right, I guess to the right, is the 

The Home
37
master bedroom—it’s just a bedroom with a-a private 
bathroom, master bath—and to the left, we have three 
bedrooms: my daughter’s room, uh, bathroom that used 
to be my daughter’s bathroom, and she’s still saying, “It’s 
my bathroom!” but now it’s their bathroom, it’s the kids’ 
bathroom, uh, and also, we have, uh, my son’s bedroom, 
as well as an oﬃ  ce, a pretty large oﬃ  ce that my wife and 
I share.
INTERVIEWER: What’s your favorite room in the house and 
why?
MAN: I would say my favorite room in the house is the liv-
ing room, and it’s probably the, my favorite room because 
of the co—, the color, for one—it’s a very warm color, it’s, 
uh, almost a watermelon-peach type of color, and so it’s 
just very calming when you’re in the living room—uh, 
doesn’t receive a lot of traﬃ  c, so it’s always pristinely 
organized and-and kept, uh, nice and the piano is also 
in the living room, and so I have tons of music that, uh, 
that’s hidden in the, not hidden but it’s hidden in a cube, 
an oversize cube, and so all music is inside there, catego-
rized, and I just enjoy, I enjoy the living room, it’s-it’s an 
open space, um, very calming and great music comes out 
of the room.
4. A FAVORITE ROOM
Um, well, as I-I said earlier, I read a lot and I have a very 
comfortable reading place in my living room, very comfy 
chair right by the window, has good light, and I can play 
some music if I want to. Um, it’s-it’s a very comforting 
place to come home to and enjoy just the-the solitude of 
a good book or two or three good books.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
38
5. LINCOLN LOGS
WOMAN: But it’s gonna be a log home, um . . .
MAN: Cedar log home.
WOMAN: Cedar.
MAN: Which I apparently have realized in our relation-
ship that I’m the picky one.
WOMAN: Imagine that.
MAN: It’s a, it’s-it’s awesome, it’s diﬀ erent from a conven-
tionally stick-built home, which is what they call, you 
know, what we’re in, which is generally 
[ 
a 
]
 . . .
WOMAN:  
Framed  . . .
MAN: Framed house, with two-by-fours, uh, batting, 
insulat—, type of insulation, and a kind of dry wall that is 
either painted or texture coated or something like that.
WOMAN: We are not building it ourselves.
MAN: We are not building it ourselves, which many log 
homes are built by . . .
WOMAN: Th e homeowner.
MAN: Th e homeowner and . . .
WOMAN: Like Bob Simpson.
MAN: Like Bob Simpson. And, um, they’re, it’s a full, 
y’know, log, which is shaped as sort of like a D, and so 
you have one round edge on the outside and ﬂ at edge, 
and the inside is the ﬂ at edge, and that log is your insula-
tion. Um, they put a very narrow strip on top of the log, 
and then they stack the logs on top very much like what, 
the traditional Lincoln log.

The Home
39
Drive up the driveway. We’re using the back of our 
home as the front entrance. Uh, where it is in the woods, 
we wanted it pictured so that when we’re in the house 
and looking out, we wanted to see the woods and not the 
driveway. If we had turned it around we’d be seeing the 
driveway. So we would go in our-our, quote-unquote, 
front door, which is, uh, adjoining our dining room. Uh, 
we would walk around the dining room; to the right of 
that would be the kitchen, uh, and the kitchen and din-
ing room both open up into a great room. On both sides 
of the house we have a bedroom on each side and a bath-
room on each side—a master bathroom. Um . . .
WOMAN: With a wood-burning stove in the great room.
MAN: Wood-burning stove in the center of the great room, 
pretty much. And, um, uh . . .
WOMAN: A stairway to go to the loft.
MAN: Uh, a stairway to go to the loft, and, uh, step down 
to go into a theater room.
INTERVIEWER: Now, so, what-what’s your favorite room in 
the house?
MAN: My favorite room would be, of course, the theater 
room. It will probably be the most expensive room in the 
house, as well. 
WOMAN: It may be his bedroom . . .
MAN: It may be my bedroom—and it may be my only room. 
But . . . it’s, uh, it’s a, that’s, that will be my favorite room. 
You know, I feel like I’m sort of taking an ownership to 
it and getting the, uh, everything laid out in it the way I 
want to. I want to make it more like a movie theater that’s 
in the house—not, like, a theater room that’s in, with sur-
round sound in—that’s in everyone’s house. I-I’ve typi-
cally like to, I don’t know, maybe, go a little bit too far 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
40
into the, uh, design phase of that. So, I’m contracting 
out a separate person to do the design, uh, of that room. 
And he’ll also be doing some of the building in there. 
Th e walls will have wall treatments in there, there should 
be maybe either soundboard or some sort of a, um, uh, 
sound dampener on the walls. Uh, there will be curtains. 
Most, uh, family rooms that have theater, theater room 
atmosphere don’t have curtains. Th is should have that. 
Um, just to give the idea.
WOMAN: Th ere’s no windows in that part of the house.
MAN: Th ere’ll be no windows in that part of the house. 
Th ere’s only one door, uh . . .
WOMAN: Th ey got to pay admission to get in. 
MAN: Right!
WOMAN: I think that’s what he . . .
INTERVIEWER: So that, what’s it for?
MAN: It-it’s to view movies. I-I will also use it—it will have 
the capability to probably have television, ah, pictured 
on an over hundred-inch screen. Uh, but, primarily for 
movies. It will be used as a theater the way a theater is 
conventionally used. So when you come in, there’ll be a 
quiet swinging door that will open, close behind you. If 
you come in the middle of a picture, you don’t want to 
talk, you want to be quiet and courteous to other people 
watching the ﬁ lm. Um, that’s sort of . . .
WOMAN: Th ere may be a trapdoor to let them out, down 
the bottom.
MAN: Th ere will not be any of that.
WOMAN: If they’re too loud.
INTERVIEWER: What’s your favorite room?

The Home
41
WOMAN: It’s probably going to be the kitchen, because I do 
like to cook. Um, so, I think it’s going to be the kitchen.
MAN: Ah, it’s deﬁ nitely the kitchen.
WOMAN: It-it’ll have to be the kitchen. I like to eat, 
too, so.
MAN: I’m going to like the kitchen, too.
WOMAN: Oh, no, you’re not.
6. LIVING AT THE DROP ZONE
WOMAN: Our house is a little unusual because we live at 
an airport, so, uh, you know, we have a, sort of like an 
apartment attached to the hangar, um. So actually if you 
came in the front, you would be in, uh, what would be the 
 
[
restroom for the-the hangar
]
.
MAN:  Well, this is actually the 
 front door here.
WOMAN: Yeah, OK, well, go ahead.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
42
MAN: It’s a sliding glass door—you come in that door and 
you’re in our living room. Th at restroom is actually for 
the people that use the skydiving school in the airport, 
and we normally keep that door closed and don’t come 
through there except in the wintertime when people’s not 
here and the snow’s piled up too deep out there to get in 
that door. Th en to the right of this thousand-square-foot 
room, there’s a small oﬃ  ce where I’m trying to start to do 
most of my work from—I’m trying to get out of my oﬃ  ce 
in town. I wanna sell that building and disclose of that. 
And then, uh, we have a huge bedroom to my left and a 
nice bathroom back there for ourselves, so it’s-it’s only 
about thirteen hundred square feet. It’s very small—it’s 
very modest in American standards—but if you go to any 
European nation and you have a twelve-hundred-square-
foot house, you’re doing pretty good.
WOMAN: On thirty-three acres.
MAN: Yeah, on thirty-three acres of land with your own 
runway and your four-thousand-square-foot garage 
with your airplane, your motor home, your two motor-
cycles, your Corvette, your pickup truck, et cetera, et 
cetera. Which is very unusual. Most people have a four-
thousand-square-foot house and a twelve-hundred-
square-foot garage. We have it the other way around 
’cause we’re never inside living. We’re always outside 
living.

The Home
43
DEFINITIONS
bay window: A kind of window that, instead of being 
ﬂ ush with the exterior wall of the house, extends out-
ward, usually with a windowsill large enough to hold 
objects such as potted plants or for a person to sit.
cathedral ceiling: A high vaulted ceiling similar to that 
found in a church or cathedral.
comfy: Slang for or shortening of the word comfortable.
contracting out: Hiring a contractor to do work.
disclose of: Th e speaker probably intends to say “dispose 
of,” which means “to sell [in this case], get rid of, throw 
away, or relinquish ownership of.”
drop zone: An area or business devoted to skydiving.
ﬁ nished out: Completed construction.
full bathroom: In American houses, a bathroom that has 
a sink, toilet, and shower or tub.
gonna: Going to.
great room: A large living room.
late: Deceased, dead.
lays it right out: To explain something or give a clear 
illustration or presentation of it.
Lincoln logs: A children’s toy consisting of a set of 
wooden or plastic logs of varying sizes, from which a 
child could construct various kinds of houses or other 
structures by interlocking the logs together. Th e toy is 
named after Abraham Lincoln, a former President of the 
United States, who lived in a log home as a child.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
44
log house: A house made of logs. Th is kind of house 
had its origin in the time of the original settlement of 
the United States. Th e logs were trees that had been cut 
down, shaped, and ﬁ xed together.
master bedroom, master bath: Th e largest, or main, 
bedroom or bathroom in a house.
mudroom: A small room where people can remove their 
dirty or muddy footwear before entering the rest of the 
house.
pantry: A relatively small closet-type storage room.
pretty good: Very good.
quote-unquote: A phrase that is used to indicate the 
statement following it is a direct quotation.
row houses: Houses built side by side and attached to 
the ones next to them.
surround sound: A feature of a stereo or sound system 
that makes the sound appear to be coming from all direc-
tions around the listener.
two-by-fours: Pieces of wood used in construction that 
are roughly two inches thick and four inches wide of 
varying lengths.
under roof: Completed to the point that the roof has 
been put in place.
Victorian house: A style of house similar to those popu-
lar during the Victorian era of England.

The Home
45
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. Which of these speakers has the most unusual 
home and why?
 2. Whose home is most similar to yours and why?
 3. Describe the house that you grew up in.
 4. Which is your favorite room in the house where 
you live now and why?
 5. How do homes in the United States diﬀ er from 
homes where you grew up and why?
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

This page intentionally left blank 

47
THE ROLE OF WOMEN
In this chapter, interviewees talk about the 
sometimes-changing role of women in the 
United States and in their countries of origin.
1. A GOOD WIFE
My mother, my mother wanted me to be a doctor. I don’t 
have the temp—, really, the temperament for it. She 
wanted me to be a doctor, but at the same time, a really 
good wife. And I think my-my mom was kind of just torn 
in those, you know, in the two ways, and it was this idea 
that you had—mother, wife—that was, you know, num-
C H A P T E R  4
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
48
ber one. And she just says, y’know, she wishes things 
were diﬀ erent when she were, when she was younger 
’cause it was a bit harder. My nieces, um, I think my sister 
didn’t have to worry ’cause I think my, the one niece has a 
pretty good head-head on her shoulders and thought it, 
you know, was an easy class, something that was kind of 
interesting, you know, like that, but she’s pretty focused, 
and I think-think she won’t have that guilt that, you know, 
my mom certainly had and, you know, I had a little bit of 
that, you know, being Catholic. Th at’s something you deal 
with, I think, and also with women, I think there’s this, 
um, so, but I think it’s good because there were contem-
poraries of mine whose, like, their parents didn’t want 
them to be doctors, they wanted them to be nurses, you 
know. My mom, at least, my par—, and my dad, too, you 
know, “Well, be a doctor—just be a good wife,” so.
2. OPTIONS 
I think that I’m a more, um, I’m more cognizant of my 
role as a mother. So I-I purposely think about that role 
and-and our relationship where I think my mom, because 
of circumstances, it, she was a mother and she was just 
doing mothering things. I don’t think she thought of it 
more as something that you could, I don’t know, plan for 
or-or perfect in any way. I’m not saying I’m good at it, 
but I just have thought about it so I did research about 
thi—, certain things ahead of time, to sort of anticipate 
things, um, and because of that, I-I don’t think I felt as 
overwhelmed by the, by that role, so I’ve enjoyed it more, 
and I think that our relationship has—you know, in the 
twenty-three months that it’s been around—has, i-it’s-it’s 
more, it’s not as stressed, I don’t feel like, I don’t feel like, 
I mean, at twenty-three months, I can’t remember what 
my relationship was like with my mother, but, um, I do 

The Role of Women
49
remember as I was older that, you know, it was some-
thing that she had to do and, she had, you know, she had 
to clean the house and we had to get things done and 
let’s move, and there was less, “OK, so what’s going on? 
Tell me what’s, what are you, what did you do today?” or 
whatever, um, where I thi—, I-I have that more with Aida. 
Um, also my mother had six children, so that reduces the 
time you can sp—, allocate to one individual, where I 
don’t have that re—, constraint.
I remember, um, my mom went to college, and I 
remember her telling me that she had the option of either 
becoming a nurse or becoming a teacher. Um, I never felt 
that I had those two options. Um, so I think choice is one 
big diﬀ erence, um. I-I-I guess there were three roles. I 
guess you could become a nurse, become a teacher until 
you became a mother. I think that’s sort of how she had 
it all laid out, um, where I never, I never felt that there 
was just those three options—I think that-that’s a big 
diﬀ erence.
So I think that’s one-one big one is just what are your 
options for the future, what-what do you want to be. Um, 
I f—, I feel like that sort of trickles down into all areas of 
your life. I think if you-you have, if it’s very clear you have 
these three options, then everything gets narrowed down 
and so you exclude other things because, I mean, what 
would be the point of pursuing anything else if tho—, if 
that’s where you’re headed? Um, I think one signiﬁ cant 
diﬀ erence is my access to sports. Um, that is a-a deﬁ n-
ing, like, characteristic of my background, growing up, 
and I was always involved in sports, and it really opened 
doors, like it brought me to a college I never would have 
dreamed of going to because I didn’t even know about 
it, but they recruited me, so then I went and I was like, 
“Oh, love this place. Let’s go here.” Uh, where my mom, 
although I know she’s a tremendously athletic woman, 
she, they didn’t have sports teams when she was in school, 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
50
um. And, so I think that is a huge-huge diﬀ erence, the 
impact of having that opportunity was just tremendous. 
Um, and I was, I think I’m a product of that sort of ﬁ rst 
generation that had, like, access to sports teams from 
the very beginning. So when I started, like, when I was 
really young—in kindergarten—it was gymnastics, and 
that was still the most common sports outlet for young 
girls. But quickly, the soccer sort of—you know, basket-
ball, volleyball—that started to sort of trickle down and 
they started introducing it like in fourth and ﬁ fth grade, 
that happened right as I was getting to fourth and ﬁ fth 
grade, and so I got, “Oh, well, I like gymnastics a lot, but 
I like volleyball a lot more,” you know, so, I-I mean, that’s, 
I think has made one of the biggest impacts on my life, in 
the course of my life.
3. WORKING MOMS
WOMAN: We could actually compare his mother to my 
mother.
MAN: Right, that’s better.
WOMAN: Which is a really good comparison . . .
INTERVIEWER: OK, OK.
WOMAN: Because my mom was a single mom and had to 
raise three of us on her own limited income, um, and his 
mom was not, so your mom, 
[
 so your mom 
]
 . . . 
MAN:  
My mom, my- my mom 
was fortunate enough that she could take time oﬀ  of 
work when she had our, us—me and my brother—and 
raised us primarily while my-my father had started his 
own business and kept that going to help support the 

The Role of Women
51
family. Th at was the way I think most families did it in 
that, in that time period. We, um . . .
WOMAN: And then when your mom went back to work, 
 
[
 she only 
]
 worked part-time.
MAN: She only,  she only went back part-time, and she did 
that to just have the extra spending money and, uh . . .
WOMAN: And to feel like she had her own life and 
independence.
MAN: Right, right, but she didn’t feel comfortable manag-
ing that full-time. Um, nowadays, I really feel like there’s 
a two-income house. You need two incomes to support 
any household with children. Th at’s sort of the way I feel 
it is. Uh, I’ve often said that if I were ever to have chil-
dren, that I would, uh, I would, at the very, very basic end 
of it, would not do anything less than provide them what 
my parents provided me.
4. CHANGING PERSPECTIVES
Boy, that’s an interesting subject. Um, well, I think there 
was a point in time where somebody said that staying 
home and taking care of your kids was demeaning to a 
woman, and a lot of them bought into that, and now I 
think it’s sort of going the other way. Some women are 
saying, “Well, I’ve been the-the route of, you know, being 
a corporate lawyer,” or whatever, and now they say more 
women are having ailments that were attributed to men 
more because they were out in the workforce and they 
were the high-powered executives. Now the women are, 
and they’re-they’re having to put up with these stresses 
that the men were putting up with. So now they say, 
“Well, you know, maybe staying home and taking care 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
52
of the kids wasn’t so bad.” So they’re, you know, some of 
’em are changing, some of ’em aren’t. But, uh, who knows 
who’s gonna sort that out?
5. BALANCING WORK AND FAMILY
I-I don’t know that I balance it that well. I think I kind 
of swing back and forth, um, pouring too much of my 
energy maybe i-in, more of my energy than is reason-
able into my job for a period of time, and then swinging 
back and being very, very, uh, insistent on spending extra 
time with my family. So maybe in, I like to think that 
in the long run, it balances out, but it’s true that there 
are moments when you realize that you’ve spent all your 
time on work things and you have hardly seen your fam-
ily. Um, I-I think that’s probably symptomatic of the way 
that it is for working mothers in the country in general. 
I-I’ve-I’ve, you know, everyone’s heard the stories of how 
it’s so much better in more progressive countries, the 
countries that have more progressive laws for working 
mothers. It’s just, um, it-it’s-it’s challenging here. I-I think 
that everyone tries to do their best at it, and my way isn’t 

The Role of Women
53
the same way as everybody’s else’s but, um, there’s always 
room for improvement, so it’s one of the areas that I’m-
I’m still working on, balancing a little bit more equitably.
6. CULTURAL DIFFERENCES 
MAN: As I said, I think women work much harder here, 
and, of course, they have, uh, more rights here. Th ey have 
freedom of speech. I mean, they-they have more inde-
pendence here, they have more money here, uh, but, uh, 
they work too-too much here. I mean, uh, as I said, doing 
from laundry, housework, house chores, I mean, they are 
too much. I mean, by the t—, I-I have seen my wife virtu-
ally doing nothing in India to doing everything here, so. 
Women, I mean, of course, she is much more indepen-
dent, she doesn’t have to ask me ever because she does 
her own job, she has her own money. She can just walk in 
and buy anything and trash it next day. I mean, nobody 
is going to ask a question why she did that. Lot of inde-
pendence, I mean, uh, and they see, the women around 
here have lot of, uh, independence themselves, there’s no 
cultural ba—, uh, barriers, there’s no, I mean, the best 
thing about America is that you’ve all kind of people 
from all over the world, they live here together, harmoni-
ously. And, uh, the women back home in India, they are 
like, uh, men are the head of the family, so if-if my child 
is born, the certiﬁ cate will carry my-my name—my son’s 
name—so birth certiﬁ cate will have my name. But same 
thing, if it is here, the mother’s name will be there, so 
it’s-it’s a two diﬀ erent worlds altogether. Women, I think, 
uh, they work much harder, but I think Indian women 
here, they’re happier because they get something they 
can never think of in India—independence, yeah.
My mother could never say, uh, anything to my father. 
Uh, my mother had to pray to God that he says, “Let’s go 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
54
for a movie.” And, uh, she could not say that, “Oh, we 
want to go for a movie.” He has to—she had to suggest in 
a diﬀ erent way, “Oh,” that, “I was talking to that neighbor 
and, uh, she went for a movie,” so the father has to catch, 
and if he’s not in a good mood, he will say, “OK, OK, 
that’s ﬁ ne.” So she had to pray for him to suggest some-
thing so we can, we can get it because he’s the man who 
decides because he has money. But my wife, I mean, she’s 
much independent here, and if I say I’m tired, she picks 
her own car and go. So it’s-it’s like two extremes. But, uh, 
I think—by and large I-I-I feel—there-there is a genera-
tion gap, too, of course, and, uh, my wife would not have 
been like my mother back home if we were in India. She 
would have been little more independent, but, of course, 
she is much more independent here because she drives 
herself, she has her own money, she has, uh, I mean, uh, 
she has a good job, so there’s a lot of diﬀ erences.
INTERVIEWER: A lot of diﬀ erences.
DEFINITIONS
by and large: An expression that means “generally speak-
ing,” “for the most part,” or “ in most cases.”
’em: Common shortened pronunciation of them.
full-time: Working at a job or a task for all of the time 
speciﬁ ed or needed to accomplish it. When used in refer-
ence to work, it usually means working at a job for forty 
hours per week.
gonna: Going to.
laid out: Predetermined.

The Role of Women
55
pretty good head on her shoulders: An expression that 
means “to have good judgment or be a sound or circum-
spect thinker.”
spending money: Money that can be used for any desired 
purpose, usually for pleasure, in contrast to money that 
has to be used for a speciﬁ c purpose.
swing back and forth: To move or alternate between two 
diﬀ erent positions or points of view.
trash it: To discard, throw away, or vandalize something.
trickle down: Th e ﬂ ow of something from one level or 
area to another.
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. What kinds of changes in women’s roles do these 
speakers describe?
 2. How is the role of women in the United States 
diﬀ erent from the role of women in other 
countries?
 3. How is the life of your sister or wife diﬀ erent 
from that of your mother?
 4. What do you think explains the changing role of 
women?
 5. How do you expect women’s roles to change in 
the future?
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

This page intentionally left blank 

57
EDUCATION
In this chapter, interviewees describe their educa-
tional experiences.
1. SCHOOL IN PHILADELPHIA
I had a, I grew up in Philadelphia, uh. So, in Philly, I 
started in local schools, um, I guess nursing school they 
started with, Pre-K, and, uh—not sure how detailed you 
want, but if it’s a year-by-year thing—uh, my, the thing 
in-in Philly, the, in a, in grade school, the, in Philadelphia 
in particular—and I don’t know if other cities do it—but 
it had a fabulous system where it was, there’s kind of two 
C H A P T E R  5
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
58
systems on top of each other where there’s a local school, 
uh, and then there’s also what they in Philly called mag-
net schools that pulled kids, uh, from all around to a 
diﬀ erent program, uh. So in, up until like fourth grade 
or something, I had a school where I went to four days 
a week, and then there was a diﬀ erent one that I went 
to that, I think that kept changing the name—it was 
ac—, you know, academically talented or gifted—they 
changed the name a number of times, but there was a 
diﬀ erent building, a diﬀ erent school you would go to 
the ﬁ fth day a week, um. And it was, as a kid, one of the 
big things is that you don’t, you know, I took—well, they 
didn’t have school buses—so you took, I took city buses 
to school starting in probably third grade, uh, and, I 
guess I had an older brother who would go with me, but, 
uh, somewhere in there he went oﬀ  to a diﬀ erent school, 
and I’m taking the bus to school at, you know, age, you 
know, nine or eight or something, which I don’t think 
they let kids do anymore. Uh, but you would, uh, that 
school—I always left each school one year before it was 
capped out. My elementary school went to ﬁ fth. I left 
after fourth grade and went to a diﬀ erent school that 
did ﬁ fth through eighth, uh, and then that school went 
actually through twelfth, but I left after eighth grade, 
after, uh, junior high, and that was a, uh, that school 
was called, uh, Masterman—it was somebody’s name: 
Julia Masterman, uh, Middle School. And that school 
was, that was a magnet school, so from my elementary 
school, I had to apply to get into that school, uh, and you 
had to have certain grades to get in, I mean, as a ﬁ fth 
grader, um, and that—I think, I’m not sure, but I think 
my dad had to go into the oﬃ  ce and-and push a little bit 
to get me in, uh, but he did—and that school was down-
town, uh, so again I’m taking the bus and the subway to 
school every day, uh, from age ten, um. And I went there 

Education
59
through junior high and then went to, uh, again a mag-
net school, so it wasn’t my local high school, um, uh, 
High School of Engineering and Science, um, which was 
a couple blocks, about three or four blocks oﬀ  campus 
from Temple University. And there they had a program 
where you did, uh, tenth, you did, uh, two years of Eng-
lish in eleventh grade, and English was the only class 
you needed four years of, which is why you did both 
years of it in the one year, and then, uh, and this was 
for the top sixty-some kids out of maybe a hundred and 
ﬁ fty, uh, they took those kids, gave them two years of 
English, and then you were done your high school ed—, 
you know, requirements, uh, and they waived a year of 
gym, I think, of phys ed and sent you to Temple Uni-
versity for a year instead of twelfth grade. Uh, so that’s 
what I did.
2. GETTING RECRUITED
WOMAN: Um, I ran track—well, I-I played volleyball, bas-
ketball, and track in high school, but, um, I was recruited 
to run track for the Brown University track team. And 
um, like I said, I didn’t, I was, little hick town, you know, 
farm girl. Ivy League, East Coast, what is all that? I 
didn’t know. And I had gotten this information from this 
university, and I was reading it, and reading about the 
university in general, not only the track team but the uni-
versity in general, and I said, “Gosh, this has, like, all the 
characteristics that I would dream up in an ideal school.” 
And they have a track team and, that seems somewhat 
interested, and so I said, “Well, I’ll check it out.” And so 
they ﬂ ew me out there and Providence, Rhode Island, 
you know, it was beautiful, loved the campus, loved the 
team. So, it, if it hadn’t, I just, if it hadn’t been for track 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
60
and doing well in track, I, why would they care, you know, 
about this little girl in Middle of Nowhere, Minnesota?
INTERVIEWER: But it opened a lot of doors and gave you 
opportunities?
WOMAN: Exactly, because then it, there I was at this, you 
know, Ivy League school, and, you know, just trem—, I 
was a history major and focused on American history, 
and, you know, I have as my advisor, Gordon Wood, the 
authority on the American Revolutionary War, you know. 
It was amazing. It was like, you don’t get that. I couldn’t 
have dreamt that. And then you’re around these brilliant 
people—I don’t know who I fooled to get in there—but, 
you know, your friends are just amazing and everyone 
has, comes from these just fascinating backgrounds . . . 
3. A LIBERAL ARTS EDUCATION
Well, at the-the, at the university level, one diﬀ erence is 
that, um, in Spain, we don’t have the concept of a lib-
eral arts education. So, uh, when you, by the time you’re 
eighteen and you decide to go to college, you have to 
know what you wanna do, so you want to be a doctor or a 
lawyer, whatever, you have to know. And you go straight 
into that ﬁ eld. And it’s actually, for some ﬁ elds, it’s actu-
ally quite competitive, so, uh, for example, if you want to 
go into med school, you better have like a Plan B and a 
Plan C, so you say, “OK, med school is my ﬁ rst choice, 
but then, uh, biology is my second choice, and pharmacy 
is my third choice,” for example. And then depending on 
what grade you get on your access exam, then-then you 
can get into one ﬁ eld or another, and then there are other 
ﬁ elds that are not so competitive. Um, but-but yeah, but 
the diﬀ erence is that you have to know what you want to 
do by the time you go to college, whereas here, you know, 

Education
61
the concept of a liberal arts education is completely dif-
ferent. Basically, you go to college to learn about, uh, a 
lot of things, to get a general education about a bunch of 
ﬁ elds, and then, uh, after that you decide what you want 
to major in.
4. THE SCHOOL NEWSPAPER
STUDENT: I’m-I’m on the newspaper, and, uh, I just recently 
got on—and pretty early for a sophomore, so. We’ll see 
how it pans out. If I like it a lot then that might be some-
thing I’m interested in pursuing.
INTERVIEWER: How often does the newspaper come out?
STUDENT: Uh, I believe the newspaper comes out once a 
month, which is not that often, but for a school paper, it’s 
better than most, and it’s-it’s a really big paper so there’s 
a lot going into it.
INTERVIEWER: Describe the process of getting it ready 
every month. What has to happen?

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
62
STUDENT: Well, ﬁ rst, um, we have a meeting, uh, trying 
to ﬁ nd article ideas, and basically everyone who knows 
someone interesting or something newsworthy, we just 
write it on the board, and then our sponsor, Mr. Keegan, 
he hands out the, uh, the articles. So we then have to go 
interview people, and, um, you have to have a recorder 
and have your questions all ready and then we write it, 
using a quote, I mean a lot of quotes. And then, um, then 
we submit it, um, to the, to the drive on the computers, 
and then the editors look over it. And then they paste it 
up on boards, on how the comp—, the, uh, newspaper 
layout would be and—it’s called pasteup—and, uh, then 
everyone edits your articles so you can’t be very touchy 
about that kind of thing, um. And you edit other people’s 
articles, and then, um, the pasteups, uh, get ﬁ xed, and so 
we put on new ones and then they’re sent to the printers. 
And we print in color, so it’s kind of costly.
5. AN INDIAN PERSPECTIVE
MAN: I’m trying to cope with American, uh, education 
system because my son goes to school, and I’m-I’m very 
interested to see what kind of education is he getting 
because I want him—naturally, as I said, I want him to 
go to Harvard University eventually, to the best college 
in-in the country. So I want him to be, so I-I look at his 
homework, I see the kind of, uh, I ask him, “What kind of 
interaction, uh, you have?” And, uh, also, so I see, uh, in, 
he’s in grade three and he has to do lot of book reports. 
He has to do science projects, grade three. Of course, it’s 
Howard County, so the educational level is a little high, 
but I have, I have to work hard, I have to take out at least 
an hour or two a day to understand the kind of project he 
has. My wife does all the book reports with him because 

Education
63
it’s English—her English is better than mine, and, uh, so. 
And I do all the science projects, all-all-all that projects 
so I have study myself and understand and then make 
him understand. I-I don’t think that I ever did so, but I 
called my brother whose son is also in the, daughter is in 
the same age and, uh, he tells me that they don’t have all 
that. Either he’s not paying attention, or, uh, they don’t 
have that, so I think American, uh, education system 
emph—, there’s a lot of emphasis on if they try to make 
you a good salesperson. I think it’s all about marketing, 
about sales so they, whatever they-they, I mean, he has to 
do lot of presentations in school, so all that public speak-
ing, uh, it’s easy for him. And, uh, of course, yeah, there’s 
lot of emphasis on the vocabulary, there’s a lot of empha-
sis on the spellings, which we never had. I still have bad 
spellings, so.
But, I’m very happy with America’s education system, 
but what I hear from my sister-in-law is, when they go 
into the high school, then I have to be little more vigi-
lant. You can’t say anything, but you just have to lead him 
by the example. So far, touch with my son is pretty good. 
He’s a very good human being, I mean, uh, he really is—
there’s a lot of respect for-for people, I hope he continues 
to be with the same American education system.
INTERVIEWER: Did you, was your system basically a British 
system, with forms and . . . ?
MAN: Yes, a lot of, we are basically, all-all Indian systems 
are British systems. We never had any system unless they 
came and made some, so, uh. Most, it’s like there’re a lot 
of forms, as you said. Th ere’re a lot, ev—, for everything, 
you have to get permission, uh, so, it’s-it’s pretty good. 
Th ere’s a lot of, emphasis in India is on memory, that you 
have to memorize a lot of stuﬀ  so, which is good. I mean, 
in my time, I never had to use calculator. I started using 
calculator when I went into job and I never had to use 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
64
calculator. I always did calculation with my hand and 
break it down and make it easy. But, uh, my son was ask-
ing me how he needs a calculator, so I just said, “No,” 
even though the teacher said it’s OK. So I-I-I, there some 
good things in India, but I think mostly the overall edu-
cation system here is good. I hope it continues to be like 
that when he goes to middle school or high school.
DEFINITIONS
access exam: An entrance exam that is required for 
entry into a particular school or ﬁ eld of study.
bad spellings (usually bad spelling or poor spelling): 
Th e inability to spell words correctly.
book reports: Reviews of books that a student has been 
required to read.
come out: In this context, published.
ﬁ fth: Fifth grade in an elementary education.
ﬁ fth grader: A child in the ﬁ fth grade.
ﬂ ew me out there: A phrase that means “to arrange for 
one’s transportation by plane.”
gosh: An exclamation. 
gym: Short for gymnasium; also used to refer to physical 
education class in schools. 
hick town: A rural, unsophisticated, or backward town.
Ivy League: An athletic conference in the northeast-
ern United States comprising eight universities: Brown, 
Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Harvard, Penn, Princ-
eton, and Yale. Th e term is also synonymous with aca-
demic excellence and prestige.

Education
65
liberal arts education: A college education oﬀ ered by 
some institutions in the United States, in which under-
graduates are required to take a wide range of courses 
in addition to specializing in one speciﬁ c area of study, 
before they are awarded a degree.
magnet schools: A kind of secondary school that oﬀ ers 
a specialized curriculum or courses.
major: Th e ﬁ eld or subject that a student has chosen as 
his or her primary area of study.
major in: To pursue a speciﬁ c ﬁ eld of study.
med school: Short for medical school. An educational 
institution where students study medicine in order to 
become doctors.
nursing school: Th e speaker probably means “nursery 
school,” a school for children under ﬁ ve years of age.
opened 
a 
lot 
of 
doors: Provided or created 
opportunities.
pasteup: In printing or journalism, the process of prepar-
ing a sample of how the ﬁ nished printed page will look. 
Th is was originally done by actually pasting samples of 
articles or pictures onto a sheet of paper or cardboard. 
Th is process has largely been superseded by computer-
ized page design.
Philly: Common nickname for the city of Philadelphia.
phys ed: Short for physical education. A class in school 
devoted to physical activity such as sports and physical 
ﬁ tness.
Plan B, Plan C: Expressions that mean “a backup plan 
(B for secondary; C for tertiary) or method for doing 
something.”

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
66
Pre-K: School for children before kindergarten.
ran track: To have participated in running events of track 
and ﬁ eld.
sophomore: In American secondary education, the 
tenth grade. At the college or university level, it indicates 
the second year.
third grade: Th e third of twelve levels in standard Amer-
ican primary education. 
touchy: Being sensitive to something.
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. What are the similarities and diﬀ erences 
between your educational experience and that of 
these speakers?
 2. What diﬀ erences do these speakers see between 
education in the United States and education in 
other countries?
 3. Describe your own educational experience in 
detail.
 4. Describe the educational experience of a friend 
or classmate and explain how it is diﬀ erent from 
your own.
 5. Pick one of these speakers and summarize what 
he or she says was the most challenging part of 
his or her educational experience.
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

67
RECREATION AND 
ENTERTAINMENT
In this chapter, interviewees talk about what they 
do in their free time.
1. RVS AND HORSES
MAN: Skydive, scuba dive, hang glide, BASE jump, ﬂ y, 
hang out with friends, drink beer, go out to see bands—
the list goes on. Always looking for something new and 
adventurous to do. Some new place to explore. Love to 
travel the world, see diﬀ erent cultures, interact with 
people. Stay away from the touristy places and go to the 
C H A P T E R  6
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
68
things oﬀ  the beaten path to see how people in other areas 
of the world really live and interact with each other and 
experience, uh, places as a local instead of as a tourist.
WOMAN: We have an RV. We like to travel around in that, 
and we avoid the cities, usually. We stick to the country 
and like he said, the oﬀ  the beaten path places.
INTERVIEWER: Uh-hmm. So what’s the last trip you took—I 
mean, and what was that? Where’d you go?
WOMAN: We went, uh, down through Virginia. We went 
to Mount Vernon, uh, George Washington’s home and 
um, and then down through . . .
MAN: Jamestown, Yorktown, the beginning of this 
nation—well, so they say, but really the Spaniards were in 
St. Augustine before the English were in Jamestown—but 
it was very interesting to learn all about that stuﬀ .
WOMAN: Uh, I’ve been riding since I was about seven 
or eight years old, and, uh, I enjoy it as a sport. I com-
pete, but I think I also just like the relationship with the 
animal.
MAN: We joke that it’s her second boyfriend.
WOMAN: Yeah, we call him my second boyfriend. But uh, 
yeah, I like to train for stuﬀ , uh, you know, and try and 
get better at it, and, uh, it’s a fun sport because it’s always 
changing, you know, and he’s really like a partner and 
you-you can’t tell what he’s gonna do next, so it-it keeps 
it interesting. Every day is diﬀ erent when I go out there, 
but I just like to be around him. It’s . . .
INTERVIEWER: In what events do you compete?
WOMAN: I do eventing, uh, which has, uh, three phases to 
it: there’s dressage, which is ﬂ at work—it’s kind of like 
ballet on horseback. And, uh, then there’s cross-country 

Recreation and Entertainment
69
jumping, where you jump natural obstacles over about 
a mile-long course and, uh, it’s timed for speed and, uh. 
And then stadium jumping, which is jumping inside a 
ring, and then you’re-you’re graded on all three of those, 
and then there’s one grand winner out of all of that, so 
 
[
 it’s fun 
]
.
INTERVIEWER: What was  the last competition like?
WOMAN: Uh, actually, I got eliminated. My horse is still 
young, and, uh, there was a jump that had one big white 
mum underneath it and, you know. Th ey-they’re animals 
that are trying to survive, you know, they still have, uh, 
instincts to survive, and I guess he thought that mum 
was gonna eat him. So he, uh, stopped three times, which 
wipes you out of the competition when you have refusals, 
so, yeah. But we’ll keep trying.
INTERVIEWER: So tell me about the horse.
WOMAN: Th e horse is, uh, I’ve had him for three years. 
He’s a Connemara Th oroughbred. Connemaras are from 
Ireland and, um, you know, Th oroughbred. And, uh, he’s 
just spooky and full of himself and likes to make life 
more interesting than what it is, so . . .
2. COMPUTER GAMES 
STUDENT: Um, not so much computer games as mostly 
video games. Um, but on the computer I’ll just go to a 
game website, and usually they have new games which I 
can play on there.
INTERVIEWER: What kind of video games do you play?
STUDENT: Um, mostly ﬁ ghting games where you just beat 
up a lot of people, but sometimes I’ll play a game that 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
70
actually has a plot. Um, when they have a plot, I like it to 
be a long game instead of just a mediocre or short plot 
that doesn’t take that long to ﬁ nish.
INTERVIEWER: For, like what, for example? Tell me about 
one in particular.
STUDENT: Well, this one game I like, Paper Mario, some-
how this guy ﬁ nds enchanted crystals, and he has to use 
their power to destroy an evil that took over the world 
a thousand years ago, got locked by these special crys-
tals, but it’s coming back because the crystals have been 
found by someone evil. And I’ve gotten to the ﬁ nal boss 
of the game and I still can’t beat it. I, so, I go and I train 
and train and I come back and I still lose. I need to work 
on that.
3. STOPPER AND SWEEPER 
STUDENT: I play soccer. I’m, um, a defense player. Uh, I 
play stopper and sweeper.
INTERVIEWER: Stopper and sweeper?
STUDENT: Yeah, in the lineup. It’s like, uh, stopper is in 
front of the person in front of the goalie and sweeper is 
in front of the goalie.
INTERVIEWER: OK. Are you good?
STUDENT: Uh, I’ve been playing since fourth grade, so I 
would hope so. Um, I used to play for my middle school 
for two years but, um, it was, it consumed a lot of my 
time, so when I got to high school, I didn’t want to do 
that, and then all I found out that all the soccer players 
at high school were kind of like slaves to the coaches and 
they didn’t have a lot of free time.

Recreation and Entertainment
71
INTERVIEWER: So do you play as part of a school activity or 
as part of a league outside of school?
STUDENT: I play for, uh, MSI, which is a league outside of 
the school. I still play, yeah.
4. RUNNING
INTERVIEWER: What do you do in your free time? 
 
[
 If you have free time . . . 
]
MAN: Free time, well, uh, yeah—  I love to travel. I go, uh, 
go back to Europe not just for research and excavation 
at, uh, at Pompeii, but I love travel and so, uh, get around 
Italy as much as possible and other places in Western 
Europe. But I’m also an outdoorsman. I enjoy athletic 
activity. I run a lot, uh, I bicycle quite a bit, um, I swim 
when I can, uh, I used to be a skydiver, which was, uh, a 
lot of fun. I don’t that much anymore but, uh, but I enjoy 
being out of doors.
Um, I’ve always enjoyed running since I was a kid, uh, 
especially long distances. It’s, uh, it’s a challenge but it’s 
also a kind of physical activity I just, I very much enjoy. I 
love being able to run for an hour or two, uh, or three or 
four at a time. It’s, uh, it’s something that, uh, that I enjoy. 
Just the feeling of being in good condition, of course, and 
having a strong body is-is satisfactory. But more than 
that, uh, being able to run for extended periods of time, 
uh, gives me time to think—it, uh, it’s a relaxing kind of 
time for me, gives me plenty of time to reﬂ ect or think 
about, uh, work or, uh, outside creative projects that I 
have under way, gives plenty of time for ideas to-to fer-
ment. But also, too, uh, frequently I run with an iPod 
and I have digital books, uh, digital recordings of books 
on my iPod and so I’m able to listen to books as I run, 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
72
and so, if you’re running for a couple of hours at a time, 
you can get through a fair amount of a book that way. 
And-and this way, I-I’m able to listen to books that, uh, I 
might not ordinarily have time to read outside of work.
Consistent running on a regular basis, uh, for a long 
period of time is the best-best training for a marathon. 
Um, it’s, running twenty-six miles and doing so with-
out dying is not something you can, you can just do on 
a whim, especially at my age. And so, um, good prepa-
ration for a marathon is running, uh, at least thirty-ﬁ ve 
miles a week for at least ten or twelve weeks, uh, prior 
to the marathon. So I usually, uh, I usually have train-
ing runs, uh, do two or three training runs of somewhere 
between, uh, seven and ten miles a week, and then on 
the weekend, I do a long run of at least ﬁ fteen. And, uh, 
so, if I am interested, if I have a target time and I wish to 
improve my time in a marathon, I will increase my train-
ing runs from, uh, from maybe to-to eight to twelve miles 
each and from three on average a week, to four, say, and 
then increase the length of my long runs on the weekend 
as well. But, uh, now that I’m, I’ve become a certain age, I 
also beneﬁ t from cross-training: riding a stationary bike, 
uh, swimming a lot, uh, doing, undertaking other, uh, 
exercises, um, that, um, keep the rest of my body vigor-
ous, not just my legs but are also, uh, less of an impact on 
my body or less stressful for an-an aging body.
5. CLIMBING MOUNTAINS
INTERVIEWER: So I know that you have a lot of outdoor 
activities. So talk about that.
WOMAN: Well, about ﬁ ve or six years ago, uh, I had a 
job where I had money so I could actually aﬀ ord to buy 
camping equipment, and I became a member of REI, 

Recreation and Entertainment
73
the outdoor cloth—, the outdoor store. It’s Recreational 
Equipment Incorporated, REI. So I started buying equip-
ment from there and in my home in Oregon—I lived 
there for the past eleven years—and we have a famous 
mountain there called Mount Hood. And so my friends 
and I—hearing friends who can sign—I joined them and 
we went, uh, climbing. We would start at midnight and 
climb up the mountain in the snow overnight, and then 
the snow would freeze and so you can use your clamps on 
the backs, bottom of your shoes, and hike up the moun-
tain, and you’d think it’s not that bad—it’s only a mile or 
so—but it took me eight hours to get all the way to the 
top because it was so hard to breathe. But it was a great 
experience, and once we got to the top, I can’t explain the 
feeling. It was just a wonderful experience, a great feel-
ing and, just to stand at the top of the mountain and-and 
look out down below. But the wind was-was terrible up 
there. And then, after I looked around for a while, I had 
to get back down the mountain, and to get back down 
the mountain, I used an ice axe, a pick axe, and had to 
push, put that into the side of the mountain to be able to 
slide down and . . . Th e next day, I had bruises all over me 
from sliding down the mountain, but it was a really great 
experience.
6. THE SOCCER LEAGUE
MAN: If I can come across some free time, which, uh, I, uh, 
well, I-I like making time for myself and my family. Um, 
I like spending time with my kids, uh, and my wife, uh, 
but also, if I’m not doing that, I try to, I play a lot of soccer 
during the weekends and tennis during the weekdays.
INTERVIEWER: Do you play in a-a soccer league?

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
74
MAN: Yes, um, I, um, I used to play, uh, when I was back 
home, at a very high level, um, so when I came here, I 
came on a soccer scholarship so I was, uh, All-American 
for four years, playing soccer in Oklahoma. And, uh, 
when I graduated, the intention was to play in the profes-
sional league, the MLS, uh, but the way the story goes, 
usually if you do not have your green card at the time 
when you’re supposed to play, uh, you’re considered not 
eligible to work, and as such, you cannot play on the team 
unless you adjust your status. So while that is waiting, 
you get married, you have kids, and that dream goes out 
the window, so. But as much as that goes out the win-
dow, your skill remains with you. So right now, I play at 
a league in Germantown, uh, it’s called, uh, the, uh—I 
forgot it again—it’s a semiprofessional league, there’s 
a soccerplex in Germantown, uh, WISL, Washington 
International Soccer League, so we play Sunday games 
and then Saturday we practice.
7. FLYING
MAN: Entertainment. I’m not a big television person. I-I, 
TV has its place but . . . movies. I-I love music, I’d have 
to say, and I-I play piano. My wife is a pianist as well. I 
also play the ﬂ ute. Um, years ago, as a kid, I played the 
violin, viola, and trumpet, and so music is very impor-
tant to me. Uh, we, I don’t get out to concerts much but 
mostly I’m at home just either listening to music, play-
ing music, uh, not so much watching movies but just 
enjoying, enjoying life. Uh, I also am a federal, I guess a 
licensed pilot. I’ve been ﬂ ying for about, since 1998, so 
about nine years, instrument-rated pilot, and now that 
I’ve recently returned to freelancing, uh, in my private 

Recreation and Entertainment
75
practice as an interpreter, I should have more time to ﬂ y, 
so it’s one of things I’m looking forward to, is spending 
more time back in the air. Since I’ve moved to the area 
for the past year and a half, I’ve been going back to New 
Jersey and ﬂ ying with the same, uh, ﬁ xed-based opera-
tor, FBO, that I was ﬂ ying with out of New Jersey, and so 
now I hope to return to the skies a little bit more in this 
area.
INTERVIEWER: Where did you learn to ﬂ y?
MAN: At Teterboro, uh, Airport in New Jersey at a school 
called Airﬂ eet Training Systems. And, uh, it was just a 
dream I always had and working for myself at the time, 
I had the time. I also started learning with a friend from 
kindergarten who always wanted to ﬂ y. I just think 
through our twenties, we didn’t have the funds to learn 
how to ﬂ y, so ﬁ nally at thirty, we both decided, “We’d 
better get started now before we get too old.” And so we 
both started learning together at the same time, which 
is good, because once you’re in the air, it’s kinda lonely, 
if you’re just going around with, you know, to diﬀ erent 
locations, it’s exciting. But having a friend, someone there 
that you can ﬂ y with and split the cost with as well, has 
been exciting, so we kinda learned at the same time.
INTERVIEWER: Have you ﬂ own just in New Jersey or what’s 
the farthest that you’ve ﬂ own?
MAN: Th e farthest I’ve ﬂ own would probably be from New 
Jersey to Maine. It’s not terribly far. But I’ve-I’ve ﬂ own 
from New Jersey to the Maryland area, uh, to Virginia, 
but I think the farthest would be to Maine, so just a cou-
ple of hours, two to three hours.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
76
8. OUTDOORS IN NEW ZEALAND
Well, um, compared to here, you see, I have a little boy 
myself now and he’s eight years old, so I remember my 
own childhood at the age of eight very often because 
you relive it. You know, if you’ve never had a child before 
and you get to reexperience everything of your own. 
Th e diﬀ erence was, I think, in New Zealand, you can’t 
understate how much the outdoors plays a role in life. 
Uh, as, and-and the United States is an outdoors country, 
too, but New Zealand is ﬁ lled with, um, with beautiful 
things and a temperate climate, and New Zealanders by 
culture love sport, obsessively, uh, I would say. Y’know, 
you think it’s-it’s obsessive here; i-it’s not, comparatively. 
And so, people, and that’s why you get some of these 
very unusual sports being developed there, like people 
jumping oﬀ  bridges and, uh, and bouncing and bungee 
jumping and throwing themselves against things, you 
know, all that. It comes from a love of doing things like 
that. And so, uh, childhood there, um, memories of-of-
of being involved in the outdoors and-and, uh, and play-
ing, but mostly making your own entertainment. Um, it’s 
not a structured environment. People forge their own, 
uh, their own games, their own ideas. When you go for 
the summer holidays, you’re usually oﬀ  on an adventure 
somewhere, you know. It’s, uh, yeah, that, so those-those 
spring to mind.
9. WALLYBALL
MAN: Uh, I like to play sports. I like to drive my Jeep, um, 
go four-wheeling. Um, I guess mess around with the 
computer, a few things.
INTERVIEWER: What kind of sports do you like to play?

Recreation and Entertainment
77
MAN: Uh, I played soccer for about four years. I was a 
goalie. I played lacrosse for two years—I was still goalie. 
I’m very, I have that catlike reﬂ ex even though it doesn’t 
look like it ’cause of my size. Uh, I play a sport called 
wallyball. It’s volleyball and handball mixed in together, 
but instead of playing volleyball outside, it’s indoors in a 
small court, and you can use the wall to bounce the ball 
oﬀ  of. You just can’t touch the ceiling or you can’t touch 
two walls at the same time and you still use the ground 
to score on. Like, I play with kids my age on one team 
and ﬁ fty-year-old guys on the other team. So far, that, we 
barely ever beat ’em, so far, the old guys. 
INTERVIEWER: So how many people are on a team?
MAN: Um, it depends on how many people show up that 
night. I mean, it could be three, three on three, it could 
be two on two, it could be, uh, up to three teams of four.
INTERVIEWER: Do you have, do you play in a league or just 
pickup games?
MAN: It’s more of like, I play with my girlfriend’s dad and 
just—it’s more of like people we know throughout, uh, 
businesses and stuﬀ , and friends.
10. MAKING MOVIES
MAN: Um, when I can manage some time, uh, I always 
have believed in-in, uh, being industrious. I try not to 
limit myself to just nursing or business. I ﬁ nd time to, 
uh, to showcase or act in some movies, if that’s possi-
ble. I also did modeling, uh, in my day, and, uh, and it 
is my aspiration to end up on the big screen one day in 
Hollywood. So this is just a movie that actually, uh, was 
released today. Uh, it’s called Th rough the Fire. It’s, uh, a 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
78
Nigerian-based movie, uh, and then, uh, it just tells the 
story of how people leave Africa and come here and go 
through what they go through to get, uh, status adjusted 
or to get health care if they’re out of status and stuﬀ  like 
that. Just the struggles that Africans go through when 
they come to America.
INTERVIEWER: How many movies have you made or how 
much acting have you done since you’ve been here?
MAN: Acting—actually, since I came to this country, this 
is the second movie, uh, that I’m in. Uh, when I used to 
be back home, uh, we did a lot more stage drama at the 
university. I was actually the theatrical director for one 
of the groups at the university, so I was exposed in that 
way, so when I came, I did not want to let, uh, my acting, 
uh, ambition and aspirations, uh, go to waste.
11. LIFE-WORK BALANCE
Uh, I keep pretty busy, I guess, um. I don’t, uh, I’m 
not one of these people that have a billion hobbies, uh, 
I mean, I know, there’s people like my dad who always 
has, you know, spelunking and, you know, whatever else 
that he’s learning—sailing—and doing. He always has a-
a thousand things to do with, uh, all of this, um. But I-
I keep pretty busy. I’m-I’m somebody that likes to keep 
a very good life-work balance so I-I’m not sitting in the 
oﬃ  ce for eighty hours a week, uh, but I’m married and I 
spend, we spend a lot of time together, uh. We do diﬀ er-
ent things. Th is is—well, this is baseball season, although 
it’s too cold. But, uh, so this time of year, there’s, baseball 
just started, which gets us all excited. Um, what else do 
we do? We love to travel, uh, and that’s, uh, that’s, we’re 
getting ready for a trip right now.

Recreation and Entertainment
79
12. PLAYING THE PIANO
MAN: Depends on the mood. I would say, uh. I-I play some 
religious music, some spiritual music. A lot of, some, I-I 
guess my wife would call them show tunes, and it’s prob-
ably with the inﬂ uence from theater, but just a lot of, uh, 
anything that I interpret, I have to get the music because 
it’s a work expense, and I need to be familiar with how to 
interpret the music, and so I have lots of music, uh, in my 
library. And so there-there, lots of show tunes, lots of, uh, 
spiritual music, some jazz, some classical music—that’s 
pretty much it.
INTERVIEWER: When do you play?
MAN: Pretty much every Sunday. It’s, there’s, there’re two 
things that I do on Sunday and it’s, this is just what’s 
happened over the years. I typically play at least a song 
or two towards the evening, and I also watch “Animal 
Planet.” And so it’s just, uh, a habit that my wife has got-
ten, she and I have gotten into before we had kids. It’s just 
a calming thing, it’s a Sunday evening, it’s relaxing, “Let’s 
look at the animals,” and it’s just become a tradition in 
that my daughter and I have now started Sunday eve-
ning, “It’s time to watch ‘Animal Planet,’” and we . . . Th e-
the question was, “When do . . . ?” When do I play—so 
Sunday evening, I’d say, uh, pretty much. And any other 
time that I have a free moment. Th e other time I play is 
when I’m waiting for my wife, uh, when we’re about to go 
out. She’s, I’m always ready ﬁ rst and the kids are ready 
and we’re always waiting, and so in that-that little span 
of time where we’re waiting for my wife to ﬁ nish getting 
ready before we depart to go out, I usually play a song or 
two just to pass the time.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
80
13. THE PERFORMING ARTS
WOMAN: I go to a lot of plays, um, at both the Studio Th e-
atre—season tickets there—and the Shakespeare Th e-
atre. And I, um, went there after I saw Th e Trojan Women. 
I’m like so-so on Shakespeare—I like Shakespeare, I like 
Greek tragedy a lot, um, and it’s, so, the combination is 
interesting. Uh, Studio Th eatre has interesting, you know, 
sort of newer things to see; occasionally the Arena Stage, 
um, I’ll go to. Movies I like. Um, some dance things, you 
know, I like, and concerts, um . . . 
INTERVIEWER: What was the last concert you saw?
WOMAN: Last concert I saw was Yo-Yo Ma and the Silk 
Road, which I thought was really, uh, interesting, 
yeah, so.
INTERVIEWER: So classical music?
WOMAN: Yeah, I like classical, I like modern sort of, um, 
something called Trip-Hop, which is kind of jazzy, it’s 
English. I don’t know, it’s not really rock but electron-
ica—kind of that, um, so I do that. I’m not much of a tele-
vision watcher. Occasionally, and I’ve taken up knitting. 
I’m learning how to knit. And so, it’s too boring to do it 
by itself, so, like, Jon Stewart, I can watch Jon Stewart, I-I 
watch Jon—I like him a lot. He’s funny, so a little bit of 
that and I’ll knit and . . .
INTERVIEWER: What inspired the learning how to knit?
WOMAN: Um, there’s a woman in my oﬃ  ce who’s an expert 
knitter and she oﬀ ered to teach people how to knit, and 
I said, “Oh, what the heck?” you know. And um, Th urs-
day at lunch, you can go in and knit and, um, talk with 
people, learn how to do new things, so. My mother is still 
shocked, shocked. She-she can’t believe it, so.

Recreation and Entertainment
81
14. BOOKS ON TAPE 
I do, um, I do read. Uh, I-I don’t read nearly as much as 
other people. I know my wife devours b—, you know, 
paperbacks like there’s no tomorrow. Uh, but I always 
have a book on tape that I listen to, which I consider 
reading, uh, but I always, I always have a book on tape 
that I’m listening to, to and from work. Uh, my commute 
to work is about, uh, thirty-ﬁ ve to forty minutes, um, and 
I, and then I also always have a book that I’m actually 
reading, which is mostly for the days I’m on public tran-
sit. And, uh, right now I’m reading—what am I reading? 
It’s a book about Venice, of course, because I’m getting 
ready for my trip. Uh, I forget what it’s called—City of 
Fallen Angels? Uh, so it’s a little bit disorienting because 
I always have two—one in my car and one that I’m read-
ing—and then there’s also the fact that my, we have two 
cars and a driveway that, you know, whoever comes in 
last is the car that’s available. One car has a CD player 
and the other car has a tape player, so I always have one 
that I’m reading, one that I’m listening to on cassette, 
and one that I’m listening to on CD. Um, but, and then 
in, what I listen to usually rotates between a ﬁ ction and 
a history. Uh, the public library has a fabulous collection 
of books and CDs of college courses and history, and it’s 
a lot of stuﬀ  that, you wouldn’t necessarily pick up and 
read a biography of Julius Caesar but, you know, listening 
to and from work, it’s fabulous—or the travels of Marco 
Polo, to and from work. It’s not necessarily something I’m 
gonna pick up and read on a Saturday afternoon, but—so 
I do a lot of that.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
82
15. READING
MAN: Reading. I do a lot of reading. I have three book-
cases in the house full of books.
INTERVIEWER: What sorts of things do you read?
MAN: Everything. You name it. I probably have a book on 
everything, how to do everything. And I’m particularly 
interested in World War II, and especially the airborne 
units of World War II, and what they did and that type 
of thing. But military history in general, like Civil War, 
First World War, World War II—all the way up.
16. OPERA 
You know that, you know, you often ask yourself the-the 
moon question: what beer do you bring to the moon? Or-
or what, or-or-or what, uh, or-or, who, what music do 
you bring to the moon? You know, uh, the beer would 
have to be Guinness because it’s good for every occasion, 
although I love Natty Boh, uh, because it’s a hot-weather 

Recreation and Entertainment
83
beer—we live in hot weather, uh, but, um, what? I’ve often 
asked myself that question and-and-and, um. Well, a cou-
ple years ago—it changes day to day—right now, you’re 
asking me, uh, there’s on—, there’s three. I mean, there’s 
Mozart, but Mozart, you have to be absolutely—Mozart 
is frenetic, he can be frenetic, he-he-he demands a lot of 
you. Uh, Verdi, he’ll just sweep you, he’ll just sweep you 
away but sometimes it, um, sometimes you don’t want 
to be swept away, sometimes it’s too many choruses, too 
much orchestra. Puccini, Puccini if you, if you, if you 
wanna cry, Puccini, or-or, in-in-in Verdi, especially in, 
uh, Il Trovatore, you know, the-the, uh, “è pieno, è pieno, 
è pieno il mio cuor,” you know, I-I-I . . . Or, uh, and then 
sometimes, on a, today was a French day because it’s-it’s-
it’s a C major day and sometimes, if-if the moon were, 
uh, in-in November or something. Dark. November day. 
Wind out there, some rain like yesterday—it has to be 
Wagner. It has to be Wagner. It has to be. It has to be 
the Götterdämmerung. It has to be, it has to be Brun-
hilde gettin’ on Grane and going into the, into the ﬁ re. 
So-so-so actually, uh, if you ask me my moon, my moon, 
my moon opera, my moon composer . . . Who-who com-
bines all three of those if you, if you really need it. Uh, I 
think right now, God sends me to the moon right now, 
I’d have to do Guinness, ’cause it’s cold up there, and I’d 
have to do Verdi, because he’s so universal.
17. PLAYING POOL 
WOMAN: I go to the zoo.
MAN: She, weekends.
WOMAN: I go to the zoo, yeah.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
84
INTERVIEWER: 
[
OK, so we got that . . .
]
MAN:  
 Uh, skydive. Um, 
 in my free time.
WOMAN: Well, we like to travel, 
[
  we like to 
]
 go diﬀ erent 
places.
MAN:  
 
We do. We  like to travel, 
we like to keep it going. I occasionally drink a beverage. 
Just sort of something to do. I play pool. I play pool quite 
a bit. Um, what else 
[
 
do we do 
]
?
WOMAN:  
Jigsaw puzzle.  We’re working on a 
jigsaw puzzle.
MAN: We’re homebodies, now that I think about it. We 
like to travel, but we’re really homebodies.
INTERVIEWER: When do you play pool?
MAN: Ah, I usually play pool on Th ursday nights in a APA 
league, American Pool Players Association, uh. It’s, um, 
they, it becomes on a natio—, it-it can get to a national 
level. It’s starts at a very local, your own—your home 
bar, you know, sort of thing. Uh, they have some really 
scrappy nasty tables and constantly smoke-ﬁ lled rooms 
and you play there. And you go t—, at the end of session 
you can go to, uh, um, a tournament, which is your little 
area, which might be ﬁ ve bars in the neighborhood, uh, 
and if you win that you go to, uh, uh, sort a local, uh, 
meeting for districts, and districts can be all over the 
state, uh, and that’s usually played, which was ﬁ ve min-
utes from her old house. Um, we, after that point, if you 
actually win that and you become champions in eight 
ball in that tier for the state, they, at that juncture, will 
pay for you and your eight team members’ plane tickets 
to Las Vegas, and, uh, they put you up in a hotel out there, 
and you go to a national tournament out there.
WOMAN: He’s never made it that far.

Recreation and Entertainment
85
MAN: We’ve never made it that far. I’ve known people 
who’ve gone to Vegas, that they’ve gotten ﬂ own to Vegas, 
but our, any team that I’ve ever been on has-has not gone 
that far. Even if you win a few rounds of the, uh, national 
things that are happening locally, ra—, actually, not 
national, at the state level, um, they will pay you. We-
we’ve gotten a payout of our team members, each one, 
somewhere in the neighborhood of forty or ﬁ fty dollars, 
which is actually very good. It’s, you’re at least winning 
something at that point.
18. HOBBIES
MAN: Hmm, I got all kinds of hobbies. Skydiving.
INTERVIEWER: OK.
MAN: Flying. Fishing. Hunting. Uh, competitive riﬂ e and 
pistol shooting. Uh, ham radio. Um, wood carving. Um, 
probably a bunch I can’t even think of right now.
INTERVIEWER: So with-with that many hobbies, how do 
you spend your time with them—do you participate in 
whichever one . . . ?
MAN: Well, the-the seasons have a lot to do with that. Like 
in summertime, I like to be ﬁ shing, uh, skydiving, and 
ﬂ ying and the weather’s good. Uh, shooting outdoors and 
all that business. Come wintertime, we’re not jumping 
so much, so I might do more ham radio, uh, hunting in 
the wintertime, um, woodworking, doing stuﬀ  in-in the 
house. But I like, I like being outdoors more than I like 
being indoors.
Well, I always wanted to jump. And when I left Med-
star—when I retired from there—I started teaching ﬂ ying 
up here at Hanover, and that’s how I met Jim and I started 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
86
ﬂ ying jumpers, and then I decided I was gonna do it, so 
my wife bought me one jump for a birthday present. She 
said, “You’re just gonna do this once.” I said, “Yeah, that’s 
it.” So here we are, several hundred jumps later, and I’m 
still at it. And since I started at age sixty, uh, you know, a 
lot of people wonder why I do that. Th ey-they doubt my 
psychological stability because I jump out of airplanes.
INTERVIEWER: But you obviously enjoy it?
MAN: Oh, yeah. And you, I’ve met more nice people sky-
diving, and, uh, I’ve, I mean, there was an esprit de corps 
with the state police because you’re involved in a situa-
tion where you have to depend on each other a lot but 
skydiving is-is a stronger esprit de corps, esprit de corps 
to me than with the state police, just because of the peo-
ple involved and you’re doing a sport that’s, you know, 
potentially dangerous, so everybody’s sort of lookin’ out 
for everybody, you know. It’s like when you jump, you, 
in the plane, you’re looking at another guy’s equipment 
to see if maybe everything’s hooked up alright, and the 
other guy’s lookin’ at your stuﬀ , too, so you-you know, 
you’re lookin’ out for each other. And it’s a sport that not 
too many people do—what, there’s thirty thousand of us 
in the United States?
DEFINITIONS
All-American: A designation given to collegiate athletes 
in the United States who are among the best in their par-
ticular sport.
BASE jump (BASE jumping–Building Antenna Span 
Earth): A kind of skydiving in which the participant 
jumps from a ﬁ xed object on the ground instead of from 
an aircraft. 

Recreation and Entertainment
87
bungee jumping: Jumping from a ﬁ xed object above the 
ground, such as a bridge or crane, with an elastic cord 
attached to one’s body that stops the person’s descent 
after falling for some distance but before reaching the 
ground or water below.
’cause: Short for because.
classical music: Typically, music from the late eighteenth 
and early nineteenth centuries by European composers 
such as Beethoven, Mozart, Brahms, Wagner, Bach, and 
the like. 
computer games: Interactive video games designed to 
be played on a computer.
dressage: An equestrian sport in which the rider guides 
the horse through a series of movements in a manner as 
relaxed and eﬀ ortless as possible. Th e rider is judged on 
how well he or she performs the movements with the 
horse.
eight ball: A game in pocket billiards in which the object 
is for a player to sink all of the balls he or she is shooting 
before sinking the eight ball.
’em: Short for them.
esprit de corps: A French phrase meaning “camarade-
rie” or “team spirit.”
ﬁ xed-based operator (FBO): A center at an airport that 
provides services such as parking, tie-down, fueling, and 
ﬂ ight training for pilots and aircraft owners.
ﬂ at work: Movements or maneuvers that a rider on 
horseback guides the horse to perform while on level 
ground—the basis of dressage.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
88
four-wheeling: A recreational activity that involves driv-
ing a motor vehicle specially designed for use in rugged 
oﬀ -road (not streets or highways) areas.
free moment: A brief period of time for which there is 
no obligation to do something.
full of himself: Egotistical, self-centered, stubborn, or 
arrogant.
goalie: Slang or short for goalkeeper. A defensive position 
in soccer (or hockey) whose sole purpose is to prevent 
the opposing team from scoring.
gonna: Going to.
ham radio: Amateur radio used as both a service and a 
hobby in which diﬀ erent kinds of radio equipment are 
used for communication to allow people at diﬀ erent 
locations in the world to communicate with each other. 
It is sometimes referred to as shortwave radio.
hang glide (hang gliding): An aerial sport in which 
the participant glides through the air while suspended 
beneath a wing-type glider made of fabric-type material 
covering a metal frame.
hang out: To spend time alone or with friends with no 
speciﬁ c agenda in mind.
homebodies: People who like to stay at home, or people 
whose life is centered around the home.
instrument-rated pilot: A pilot who has received addi-
tional training, education, and certiﬁ cation that allow 
him or her to ﬂ y in conditions or situations that require 
the use of more specialized ﬂ ight instrumentation for 
navigating and controlling an aircraft.

Recreation and Entertainment
89
iPod: A small, portable electronic device on which music 
or other kinds of recordings can be stored and played 
back.
jigsaw puzzle: Typically, a large ﬂ at puzzle with some 
kind of pattern, picture, or design on it that takes a sig-
niﬁ cant amount of time to assemble.
jump: A term often used synonymously with skydiving.
jumpers: Skydivers.
keep it going: To stay active or busy and participate in 
diﬀ erent activities.
kinda: Kind of. 
knitter: A person who knits.
knitting: To make something from yarn or thread by 
using needles to produce interconnecting loops of 
material.
licensed pilot: A person who has met all of the training 
and educational requirements established by the FAA 
(Federal Aviation Administration) and who has been 
issued a permit to ﬂ y an aircraft.
MLS (Major League Soccer): Th e professional soccer 
league of North America.
MSI (Montgomery Soccer Incorporated): A local youth 
soccer league.
Natty Boh: Nickname for the American beer National 
Bohemian.
not terribly far: A common expression that means “not 
very far.”
off the beaten path: Places to which people do not fre-
quently go or travel.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
90
outdoorsman: A person who enjoys outside sports or 
activities.
performing arts: Refers to live entertainment such as 
theater, ballet, and concerts.
pickup games: Informal games in which teams are 
formed in an impromptu fashion from the people that 
are available.
pool: A game or games similar to billiards but played 
on a table with pockets in which the object is to sink or 
pocket more balls, or certain balls, before your opponent 
does.
pretty busy: Very busy.
riding: Reference to horseback riding.
RV (recreational vehicle): A kind of motor vehicle in 
which people can live as they travel from place to place.
scrappy: Rough, ragged, or of poor quality.
scuba dive (SCUBA–Self-Contained Underwater Breath-
ing Apparatus): A kind of diving in which a person car-
ries his or her own air supply.
season tickets: Tickets that a person purchases for a 
speciﬁ c kind of event that allows him or her to attend 
every scheduled performance that takes place during a 
speciﬁ ed period of time.
sign: To use sign language.
soccerplex: An arena where soccer is played.
span of time: A period of time.
spelunking: Th e sport of exploring caves.
spiritual music: Music with a religious theme.

Recreation and Entertainment
91
status: Immigration status.
stopper: A defensive player in soccer who occupies a 
midﬁ eld position outside of the sweeper.
sweeper: A defensive player in soccer who occupies 
a position between the goalkeeper and the rest of the 
defensive line. 
touristy: Something that is designed for, caters to, or 
appeals primarily to tourists.
wanna: Want to.
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. List the three most interesting pastimes 
described by the speakers and explain why you 
think they are interesting.
 2. What role do pastimes play in the lives of these 
speakers?
 3. Which pastime would you like to try and why?
 4. Describe the pastimes of a friend, colleague, or 
classmate.
 5. How much free time do you have? Are you able 
to balance free time and work?
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

This page intentionally left blank 

93
THE USE OF LANGUAGE
PART I
In this chapter, interviewees talk about the role of 
language in their lives.
1. SOUNDING AMERICAN 
I think that the most diﬃ  cult thing for them to learn is 
actually, um—that’s a good question. Well, if I were to 
get technical about it, I would say that pronunciation is 
the hardest thing to learn. I-I see people—I have a lot of 
contact with internationals just because my husband is 
a, is an international, my parents were, um. Th ey have a 
tremendous facility with English in general, they can use 
C H A P T E R  7
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
94
English in everyday communication, they use English in 
sort of very specialized areas, science or linguistics, and 
they’re comfortable with that and they’re very proﬁ cient, 
but they still maintain this accent, so I would say that 
sounding like an American on a phonological point, uh, 
level, of having the American accent, I think that’s a lot 
harder than, um, mastering the grammar or even mas-
tering some of the idiomatic phrases that sort of make 
you stand out as a, would normally make you sound like 
a native speaker but, um, the-the accent is sort of, is very 
tenacious.
I think I pay more attention to them, and I think 
it’s because growing up I was very aware of, I wanted 
to sound like an American when I spoke English, but I 
wanted to sound like a Taiwanese when I spoke Taiwan-
ese. And I had a Taiwanese accent speaking English in 
the beginning, and I was very, very, very determined to 
standardize that accent and make it sound like Middle 
America. So I-I-I do remember watching the news with 
my father and foll-following along underneath my voice, 
and on a soft voice, what the news anchor was saying, 
to try to mold my accent closer to his. And that was at a 
very young age, I was doing that, so that by the time I was 
twelve or thirteen, I had pretty much wiped out whatever 
Taiwanese accent I had. And by the time I was ﬁ fteen, I 
no longer had a Maine accent, so I was as standard as I 
could make my accent. On the Taiwanese side, I was, um, 
always upset when we would go to Taiwan and people 
would look at me and after three minutes of talking to 
me, say, “Oh, you must be an American, you-you came 
here from America.” And that really, that really upset 
me, since Taiwanese was my native language, my ﬁ rst 
language—I didn’t speak English until I was old enough 
to play with other children, um—but living in this coun-
try, with the exposure that I had, I-I had some vestigial 
American accent that people could always identify me. 

The Use of Language: Part I
95
I’ve worked on that, too, and really listened to understand 
why my pronunciation is diﬀ erent from my mother’s or 
diﬀ erent from my aunt’s, and as a result, I think actually 
my-my accent has improved as I’ve gotten older, but now 
they identify me with a much older cohort, I sound like 
I’m about ﬁ fty or sixty ’cause those are my models that 
I’ve, I-I speak like, um, but, yeah, all my life I’ve really 
tried to, I’ve been very aware of my accent and tried to 
modify it, um, not always successfully, with-with vary-
ing success depending on which language we’re talking 
about, but that is always been something that’s been very 
much at the front of my mind, so I’m very aware of that.
2. LINGUISTIC CHAMELEON 
Considering that, as a, I grew up as a, as I said, as Navy 
brat and I lived in many diﬀ erent regions of the country 
growing up. Uh, sure, there’re-there’re deﬁ nitely diﬀ erent 
accents. And a funny thing that I’ve noticed about myself, 
and I’m—somebody else observed it in me, I wasn’t 
even consciously aware of it until somebody pointed it 
out—but I’m somewhat of a linguistic chameleon in that 
whatever accent I’m speaking with is usually, I-I’ll gravi-
tate towards the person that I’m speaking with, because 
I lived in so many diﬀ erent places and have adopted so 
many diﬀ erent accents, you know. If-if I’m speaking to 
somebody from the South, I’ll—without even being con-
sciously aware of it—I’ll slide into a little bit of a drawl 
and-and-and it-it just is-is a very natural thing for me, 
whereas if I’m speaking to somebody from a more urban 
area, uh, or-or the West Coast, there’s a li-little bit of an 
Oregon accent. It’s hard for me to put my ﬁ nger on but, 
uh, there’re deﬁ nitely regional diﬀ erences, and because 
I’ve lived in so many diﬀ erent regions, I-I’ll just kind of 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
96
slide into that accent without even being conscious of it, 
when I’m speaking to somebody from those areas.
3. SPEAKING SPANISH 
STUDENT: Um, I’m ﬂ uent in Spanish ’cause I was in the 
dual-language program when I was really little, like 
around six, so I remember in ﬁ rst grade, uh, my school 
taught me Spanish. And, um, I’m still in it now. I’m in 
a lot of AP classes, which are college courses in high 
school. And then, um, I kind of grew up at Gallaudet and, 
um, I know some sign language. I’d really, really like to 
learn more though, but I-I have an OK vocabulary.
INTERVIEWER: Do you have much occasion to use your 
Spanish?
STUDENT: Um, I have more than I would like to, um. My 
parents, every time we go to a restaurant or we just see 
anyone who’s Hispanic, they make me talk to them and 
sometimes, I don’t know, if I were in a foreign country, 
I don’t think I would like someone going, “Oh, I speak 
English, talk to me!” You know? So, I feel like it’s kind 
of mean. But they make me talk to people in Spanish all 
the time. Sometimes they like it, though, sometimes they 
like it because they can relate and it’s nice to hear your 
own language. Sometimes maybe they’re annoyed by it. 
I would be.
INTERVIEWER: Have you had a chance to go to Spanish-
speaking countries and use it?
STUDENT: Yeah, in sixth grade I went to Spain for two 
weeks with my mom and my grandma and, uh, we trav-
eled all around from Madrid to Barcelona to Sevilla and, 

The Use of Language: Part I
97
um, it was, it was fun, although now that I look back, I 
was just kind of too young to go, but that actually helped 
me a lot—just two weeks made me so much more ﬂ uent 
than I already was.
4. LISTENING
MAN: It was hard, is not easy because you have to make 
your living while as you go to school at the same times. 
And back home, most, uh, students just go to school. 
Th ey don’t have to work to make the living. So it’s little bit 
here, it’s little bit stressful and hard to learn at the same 
time you have to make your living at the same times.
INTERVIEWER: So what would you say was the hardest thing 
 
[
about learning English
]
?
MAN:  It’s still, sometimes 
 I have little bit heavy 
accent, uh, in my language, so I took some classes to 
imp—, to prove my accent so people can understand me 
a lot more better. But, uh, I learned, when you talk to the 
client, just slow down a little bit because when you speak 
fast like American people sometimes you don’t get the 
point, so I slow down and try to explain it carefully so 
they, I make sure they got the point of what I’m trying to 
explain to-to him or to them.
INTERVIEWER: Do you have trouble understanding diﬀ er-
ent accents in America?
MAN: Sometimes. From the South, sometimes, but I 
always listen, and if I don’t understand, I ask again, they 
repeat what you said.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
98
5. COLOR COMMENTARY
I know from what my mother has told me that I was a 
very late talker. Like not, she thought something was 
wrong. I wasn’t saying anything, um, until one day I 
busted out with a whole sentence. Um, so she’s like, “Oh, 
thank goodness, nothing’s wrong.” So I think that my 
daughter, Aida, is speaking much earlier than I ever did, 
and I think part of the reason is—well, part of the reason 
is she’s the only child we have and I was number two, so 
that might have contributed—but in the, bigger compo-
nent is the fact that she has all this sort of language stim-
ulation all of the time, and she’s constantly going back 
and forth, and she really gets it. Maybe she was just also 
genetically predisposed to being verbal, I don’t know, but 
I think that sort of compilation of characteristics has 
made this chatterbox, which is what she is. I’ve, I-I think 
that she may become, um, a play-by-play, do color com-
mentary, because that’s what she does all day long: “OK, 
I’m sitting now, OK, let’s go,” and everything is, she does 
little commentary of everything that we’re doing: “OK, 
we’re sitting now. Now where are we going? We are going 
to the store.” Everything . . .

The Use of Language: Part I
99
6. GROWING UP BILINGUALLY
MAN: English—actually I grew up, uh, with English lan-
guage. Uh, we were colonized by, uh, after the Second 
World War, at the end of the Second World War. Uh, 
Cameroon was one of the countries that was parti-
tioned between Britain and France, and so it made us a 
de facto, uh, bilingual country. So, I grew in the English 
section, studied entirely in English. And, of course, we 
spoke the dialect at home, but when we went to school, 
we, uh, studied in English. But going to the university, to 
the university, we had to go to the French section. Uh, 
there’s ten provinces in Cameroon. Eight of them are, uh, 
French speaking and two of them are English speaking, 
so you have to go to the French side to go to university, so 
then you’re supposed to be bilingual, so we started study-
ing French while going to primary school in the English 
section to prepare for university in the French section, 
so. Uh, English, I grew up learning English, but French I 
had to study as a second language.
INTERVIEWER: So, d’y—, do people comment on your 
accent?
MAN: At times, at times. Uh, when I came initially in ’94, I 
might have had a little bit of a heavier accent. Uh, I don’t 
know that it will ever change that much, but, uh, some-
times some people do not understand when I express 
myself, sometimes, but most often than not, uh, I articu-
late, I believe I articulate well because I studied linguis-
tics also at the university. Not that that should matter, 
but somehow I put a lot of emphasis on my phonetics 
and pronunciation so a lot of people can get along with 
understanding me, but you run into occasions where, 
uh, people just cannot get what you say, and I would say 
something about two or three times, and they would be 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
100
like, “What are you saying?” Th en eventually when they 
get it, they really do not say it far from what I said, you 
know, so I said, “Maybe it’s the accent,” you know.
INTERVIEWER: Now do you have trouble understanding 
people in the United States who have diﬀ erent accents?
MAN: Not really. Um, I-I’m at a point now where I can 
actually tell sometimes if you’re from the South or from 
California or from Vegas, you know, so I not only under-
stand what they say but I can decipher, uh, which sec-
tion they-they coming from, but every now and then, 
you run into somebody that have a very fast speech, you 
know, very rapid speech, and it’s hard to pick up every-
thing they say. And, uh, it’s not too diﬃ  cult understand-
ing people in the United States because also the choice 
of words. Th ey use high-frequency words, uh. By high-
frequency words, words you hear every day, you know, 
it’s, uh, when you start reading a book, uh, like Agatha 
Christie or something, then you see words which could 
be challenging or require you to go into the dictionary to 
see what they mean. But in everyday language, uh, a lot of 
Americans—and this is probably a plus—use, uh, high-
frequency words, so there is no mystery in the language, 
so to speak. 
7. GETTING COMFORTABLE
WOMAN: Um, well, I think that, um, one of the hardest 
things, um, for learning any foreign language is, uh, just 
becoming comfortable with yourself in that language. 
Um, and, uh, so, for example, pronunciation for me, uh, 
one of the, I think I’ll always have an ac—, a foreign accent 
in English, no matter how many years I live here, and you 

The Use of Language: Part I
101
have to feel comfortable with that, OK? I have a foreign 
accent and that’s just me, that’s just part of me, part of 
who I am, and you have to reach a point at which you 
feel comfortable, comfortable with that and not, uh, self-
conscious about it. So that’s one of the hardest things.
Now, if we go to the speciﬁ cs, uh, I think that one of 
the things that everybody complains about when they’re 
learning English is all these preposition—I think they 
call them particle verbs—these prepositional verbs like, 
uh, turn up, turn out, turn in. Everybody gets confused 
about those, uh, and if you get the wrong preposition, of 
course, you’re saying the wrong thing. So I think that’s a 
hard thing because it’s very idiomatic, and, of course, the 
most idiomatic aspects of the language are the ones that 
are harder to learn. You just have to get immersed in the 
culture and just pick them up.
I have trouble with, uh, the accents-accents from, uh, 
the South of the United States, uh, ’cause, I mean, if, I 
think I can travel anywhere in the Northeast and even 
though there are diﬀ erent accents, I don’t think I have 
problems understanding people in general. Um, I’ve lived 
in the Northwest and in the Southwest, and I never had 
any trouble, but when I lived in North Carolina, when I 
ﬁ rst moved to North Carolina, I could not understand 
my own students. I mean, I had trouble with the south-
ern accent and then, of course, I got used to it. But, uh, 
yeah, in terms of geographical accents, I would say the 
southern accent.
INTERVIEWER: So what did you do when you couldn’t 
understand somebody?
WOMAN: I asked them to repeat or I, or I just guessed.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
102
DEFINITIONS
AP: Advanced placement classes, oﬀ ered in high school.
busted out: In this context, to have suddenly exclaimed 
or to have said something unexpectedly.
’cause: Short for because.
chatterbox: Slang for a talkative person.
color commentary: Information provided by one of the 
members of a broadcast team at a sporting event that 
is designed to ﬁ ll time when action is not taking place 
in the competition. Th at information includes things 
such as personal interest stories, statistics, and points of 
strategy.
drawl: A colloquial word used to describe the lengthen-
ing of vowels in a person’s speech. It is frequently found 
in speech patterns in the southern United States.
linguistic chameleon: A person who adapts or adjusts 
his or her speech and language usage to match the envi-
ronment in which he or she is at any given time.
Navy brat: A child who grew up with one or both parents 
in the U.S. Navy and typically lived in many places.
play-by-play: A detailed moment-to-moment descrip-
tion of the action in a sporting event.
so to speak: A phrase used to mean “as an example” or 
“in that way.”
turn in: Often used to mean “go to bed.”
turn out: Th e end or resolution of a situation—for exam-
ple, “How did everything turn out?” It can also mean the 
attendance of people at an event.
turn up: To appear or become available.

The Use of Language: Part I
103
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. What do these speakers think about accents?
 2. What do you notice about accents?
 3. In your experience, what is the hardest thing 
about learning English?
 4. Do you speak diﬀ erently, depending on whom 
you are talking to?
 5. How many languages do you speak? When and 
how did you learn them?
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

This page intentionally left blank 

105
THE USE OF LANGUAGE
PART II
In this chapter, interviewees continue to share 
their perspectives on the role of language in their 
lives.
1. AMERICAN ENGLISH/BRITISH ENGLISH
MAN: I, of course, since, India is, we have been ruled by 
Britishers, so I know English pretty well. And, uh, I know 
In—, few Indian languages. I mean, like one of them is, 
uh, Hindi, and I also know, uh, Punjabi—that’s-that’s 
where, uh, my family belongs to, Punjab, the north part 
of India—and a little bit of Urdu.
C H A P T E R  8
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
106
INTERVIEWER: Uh-hmm. So in which situations do you use 
your, 
[
 
your languages 
]
?
MAN: If-if I have an Indian  client and I know that he 
speaks Hindi, to make that person comfortable, I speak 
Hindi. It’s all what kind of client I have. I mean, there’s 
some clients who may be from India, origin from India, 
but they hesitate speaking an Indian language, so I-I 
don’t mind. It’s all customer service, so. Whosoever 
feels comfortable, whatever.
INTERVIEWER: So even with Indian clients, you may speak 
English?
MAN: Yes, yes. I mean, like the, some of the Indian, regions 
in India, they do not speak Hindi. If you go to south, they 
speak southern language and English. So by and large, 
English is kind of language that is easily understood by 
most of the people, like, unless you go into the suburban 
areas of India, so, you know, you’ll have a problem with 
English, but otherwise, most people speak English. So 
it’s either Hindi or English, but when I have people from, 
uh, northern part of India, which is called Punjab, so I-
I speak in Punjabi, and they-they are thrilled about it. I 
mean, they feel pretty much at home.
Oh, you mean in America, yes. Uh, I mean, I ﬁ nd it, 
uh, I have to struggle to make people understand what 
I’m saying because I-I speak mostly British English and 
it’s not exactly British accent, it’s British English. Uh, 
but in America also I ﬁ nd that I-I went to Florida with 
my son for vacation, so it’s like you could see that, they 
speak diﬀ erently. And the, some of the words they don’t 
use and some of the words they use, we never use it here, 
so. I mean, they-they could tell that, “Oh, we-we, you’re 
not from Florida, right?” So I-I know that they can make 
out that I am, deﬁ nitely I am not from America, so they 
can make out. But when they even speak to my son, who 

The Use of Language: Part II
107
speaks very good American English, as for the standard 
of Maryland, even he could be distinguished that he’s not 
from Florida, so I-I deﬁ nitely notice this. But, of course, 
I’ve not traveled so much so I can’t say for sure.
INTERVIEWER: What about, I mean, when you lived in New 
York or in other places—do you, do you have a hard time 
understanding accents or . . . ?
MAN: Uh, no. I never had a problem to understand what 
they’re saying, but by and large, there’s some kind of 
people, when they speak, they neither speak English nor 
they speak, I mean, I don’t know if it’s a diﬀ erent kind 
of language altogether. Th ey are not pronouncing the 
words should be pronounced, so half of the time, it’s like 
a rap, you have to try to understand the song, so when I 
was in-in-in, uh, in America, uh, in New York, I-I ha—, I 
had a hard time trying to follow. I mean, it’s like, uh, you 
heard something, you have a pic—, like you have a picture 
memory, and then you try to ﬁ gure out, “Oh, he meant, 
oh yeah, he said that.” So, you can’t, I’m, I was not very 
responsive, saying, “Oh, you’re saying this” or “I’m saying 
this.” So it’s like, uh, “OK, he said that, yeah,” eventually. 
You know, like when my boss, who was an American, 
he asked me, I said, “Uh, about that travel agent”—uh, 
because you’re a wholesaler, about that travel agent—he 
said, “What about it?” “What about it?” is a very rude 
word in India. I mean, if I say “What about it?” that 
means I am saying, “What the hell you talking about?” 
You know, but what he meant was, “Tell me quickly what 
happened,” OK, so that he can give a decision, so he was 
pretty normal. But I thought, “Why did he say that? I was 
only thinking about him.” Th en over a period of time, I 
realized he always says that, “What about it?” So, yeah, 
New York is too fast.
Uh, when they are learning English, I think the hard-
est part is, uh, I think everybody is confused whether 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
108
they should learn the language English or they should 
understand the cul—, English culture here, because, um, 
anybody who migrates from their own country to here, 
there is lot of adjustments that you—the food adjust-
ments, food habits, the way you work, the time you oﬀ er, 
dedication—you-you have to forget about basically. You 
have to wipe the slate oﬀ  completely. So on top of it, if 
you have to learn English, then you’re trying to under-
stand the culture and the language. And, of course, Eng-
lish language by itself is very confused sometimes. When 
you put English English and American English, so there 
are some words like in India we say, “Uh, I need a, uh, I 
need a torch.” So the torch in India is battery here, so, 
uh, if I tell somebody, “I need a torch,” they say, “Why, 
do you want to bring my building down? You burn it 
down. Do you need a torch, ﬁ re?” So-so, they, so, it’s like, 
uh, I mean, I had to learn, relearn English in American 
culture, so it’s a culture and English both put together, 
sometimes can be pretty intimidating, yeah.
2. BALTIMORE
WOMAN: Some people say I sound like I’m from Boston, 
uh, which I’ve only visited, on-on occasion.
MAN: Did we go?
WOMAN: We drove through it.
MAN: We drove through it, right.
WOMAN: Um, we, some people say—let me see, there was 
another one. Recently someone asked me if I was, if I 
was—I-I don’t want to say Amish, but it was something 
like that, and I can’t think of what it was, but, um, maybe 
it was Mennonite or something. . . .

The Use of Language: Part II
109
MAN: Oh, yeah.
WOMAN: Someone said I had a Mennonite accent, and, of 
course, I don’t—I don’t hear an accent at all. So, I’m like, 
“Nope.” But I guess my accent would be from—it’s more 
a dialect—but it would be from Highlandtown ’cause I 
grew up in the, in the city, in east Baltimore.
MAN: And just-just the way she says that, I say it diﬀ er-
ently. I say Highlandtown and, which you can tell that 
there’s, but everybody has an accent.
WOMAN: Yeah, like-like 
[
 
water-water 
]
.
MAN:  
So the question is, “Do  you have 
an accent?” “Yeahbsolutely!”
WOMAN: So, I think it’s a, more a dialect.
MAN: Right, it’s . . .
INTERVIEWER: What about you? Do people tell you . . . ?
MAN: Um.
INTERVIEWER: Or how would you describe your accent?
MAN: Yes. And I, people have said something to me and, 
um, you’ll obviously notice that if you, all you need to do 
is live somewhere else for any extended period of time 
and even where we’re going, we’ll probably get that. But, 
um, the, earlier, when I was very young and one of the 
ﬁ rst trips I took out west was to Denver, and I was ski-
ing with a friend, and they asked me where I was from. I 
said, “Baltimore.” And he said, “Balmore? Balmore? Bald-
win? Bal? Balmore?” Th ey didn’t know what I was say-
ing. I said, “I’m from Baltimore.” He said, “What-what’s 
Baltimore?” I s—, I said, “Uh, the Orioles play there.” And 
they go, “Oh, you mean Bal-ti-more.” “Yeah.” “Oh, yeah, 
Balmore, Baltimore, yes.” Th at’s what they . . . So, yeah, of 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
110
course, we have accents. I-I call that an accent. Probably 
is a dialect. Is that the right word, I think?
INTERVIEWER: Do you, do you notice accents in the other, 
in other parts of the country?
WOMAN: Yeah, that’s the, that’s the joy of the United 
States, is that, you know, people don’t talk the same. Uh, 
you know, it all, it’s all diﬀ erent. I mean, we have the 
mountains and the water and the valleys in between. I 
mean, it’s like we have everything—like many diﬀ erent 
countries all in, all in one, 
[
 and I do 
]
 . . . 
MAN:  
What is?
WOMAN: Th e United States. I do en—, so I do enjoy listen-
ing to other people talk, like, I mean, if you talk to any-
body from the Bronx, you deﬁ nitely know they’re from 
the Bronx, uh . . .
MAN: Boston.
WOMAN: Boston—you deﬁ nitely know they’re from . . .
MAN: Boston.
WOMAN: Boston. So that’s the joy of being in the United 
States and traveling in the United States. You get many 
more cultures in a much more contained free area where 
you can just go to easily. You don’t even need a passport.
MAN: And some people look at you funny.
WOMAN: Yeah.
3. A FRENCH-CANADIAN PERSPECTIVE
WOMAN: Well, I haven’t been exposed much to Texas and 
Deep South accents, but the few times that I have heard 

The Use of Language: Part II
111
those accents, I did struggle a bit, yes. Um, Quebec has 
diﬀ erent accents, even just in the French that is being 
spoken up there, and that-that’s very interesting ’cause I 
have met lots of people down here that come from Que-
bec, and we can tell which area we’re from just from the 
way we speak our French and I-I had learned English in 
school in Montreal, but I could barely speak a full sen-
tence when I got here in Baltimore for school, so basi-
cally I learned to speak English here, and I can recognize 
all the diﬀ erent accents—English accents that are like 
being, you know, that I hear around me—but I guess my 
ears are better than, you know, my mouth, like, me, as far 
as like perfecting the way I speak English is a lot harder 
than me, like, recognizing all the other accents going on 
around me.
What was the hardest for me was to be in a very big 
group of people speaking very fast. Um, the hardest thing 
. . . I guess, I-I don’t know . . . the hardest thing. I guess 
it would be to just get used to the vocabulary, because 
the verbs in English, you know, no matter how they are 
used, whether it’s, like, future, past, or present tense, they 
always look or sound about the same. But the vocabulary 
is just so vast and luckily, going from French to English, 
lots of the words are similar, just pronounce them diﬀ er-
ently, but I guess personally, I had, my-my biggest strug-
gle was the spoken part. I could read ﬁ ne, I could write 
paper—it would take me a long time, but I could write 
my papers—but the dialogue part . . .
MAN: I don’t doubt that part of that was complicated by 
the fact that nobody in America actually speaks proper 
English.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
112
4. WHERE ARE YOU FROM?
Um, well, my accent has picked up little things from dif-
ferent places that I’ve been. I would describe it as, it’s very 
hard when you’re, uh, going to a new place, and as I said, 
you know, I traveled all to those diﬀ erent countries try-
ing to sell my TV show, and it was a real challenge. Th is 
was probably the easiest place in terms of the-the people 
in business are welcoming here. Um, whereas Europe 
is, from my perspective—from my experience—doesn’t 
like to experiment too much with new things. Um, in, 
uh, in the U.S., they love it, that is what they-they want 
and their motivation. So I would be faced with having 
to talk to people most of the time who didn’t want to 
talk to me. So having an accent that was slightly diﬀ er-
ent meant I got another minute or two that they listened 
to me, before they got rid of me. So in that way, in that 
way, my accent, um, helped. Where they, most people, 
it depends where you are, where they think you’re from. 
Um, if you’re, if I was in England, they would, they’d be 
sure I was a colonial and they would say so. If I was here, 
uh, if I were in the U.S., they would probably think I was 
Australian or South African or-or English. Um, when I’m 

The Use of Language: Part II
113
in New Zealand, now they’re not sure where I am from. 
Th ey, you know, but, “I’m from right here.” Uh, when I’m 
there, I say that. So-so it depends where you are.
5. CHANGE OVER TIME
Yes, most people will ask me where I’m from, in the United 
States. Uh, I think it’s funny, though, when I go back to 
England and if I used a British passport or they looked 
carefully at my American passport, they’d say, “Welcome 
home.” But everybody would call me a Yank. Uh, so to 
a Brit, no, they don’t think I have an accent other than 
maybe an American accent. In the United States, most 
people think I have an accent. Uh, probably less and less 
people think it’s British, just because of time.
6. A CARIBBEAN PERSPECTIVE
WOMAN: Yes, and they keep wondering, “After forty-
something years, you still have your accent?” I said, “Yes, 
I guess it’s a part of me, so . . .”
INTERVIEWER: And what-what, how do you describe it to 
them? Your accent, I mean, when they say, “What-what 
kind of accent do you have?” What do you tell them?
WOMAN: A West Indian accent, it’s a West Indian accent. 
Mm-hmm.
INTERVIEWER: Do you have trouble understanding accents 
in the United States, other accents?
WOMAN: Funny enough, not really, no, no. I always liked 
languages so, you know, and with, especially with Span-
ish, you had to learn the diﬀ erent accents or dialects, you 
know. So, no, I don’t have any trouble with that, no.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
114
INTERVIEWER: Do you al—, do you speak, uh, Guyanese 
Creole also?
WOMAN:  
[
No, no, mm-mm.
]
INTERVIEWER:  No, you don’t.  You speak . . .
WOMAN: I just speak 
[ 
English 
]
.
INTERVIEWER:  
English.
WOMAN: English, mm-hmm.
INTERVIEWER: Do you understand it?
WOMAN: I understand Pidgin Creole.
INTERVIEWER: Right.
WOMAN: Yes, yes.
INTERVIEWER: Yes, so you do.
WOMAN: A little bit, yeah, mm-hmm.
INTERVIEWER: And did your family speak that when you 
were . . . ?
WOMAN: No, no. Strictly . . .
INTERVIEWER: No. Just strictly English.
WOMAN: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Yeah, you would, you 
would ﬁ nd people really in the country, those are the 
ones that would speak that, and the Amerindians, those 
are the ones that would speak that-that Creole language, 
but no.
INTERVIEWER: Do you hear diﬀ erences between your accent 
and other accents in the Caribbean?
WOMAN: Yes, oh yes.
INTERVIEWER: For example . . .

The Use of Language: Part II
115
WOMAN: Uh, Barbadians. Oh, you could tell the Barbadian 
accent, it’s, uh, I don’t know how to describe it, but you 
could tell that Barbadian accent. Th e Jamaican accent 
is also diﬀ erent. But the Guyanese, we roll our rs when 
you’re speakin’ so people say that they could always tell a 
Guyanese by the way the rs come out. Um, the Trinidadi-
ans, they have a singsong kind of way that they speak, so, 
yeah, you could tell the diﬀ erence.
7. A SOUTHERN ACCENT
MAN: Yes, very.
INTERVIEWER: What kind of accent?
MAN: Well, I grew up in Arkansas, and so I do have, uh, 
inﬂ uence of the South in-in my, in my speech. I left 
Arkansas after high school, however, and so for, since 
high school, I’ve lived on the eastern seaboard, and so the 
strength of the southern accent in my voice has dimin-
ished considerably. Uh, I ﬁ nd myself sort of in a, in an 
intermediate position now with recognition of my accent 
because when I live here on the East Coast, uh, people’ll 
say things like, “You’re not from around here, are you?” 
because they detect that trace of southern accent still in 
my, in my diction. But when I go back to visit friends in 
Arkansas, I’ve lived on the eastern seaboard long enough 
so that they tell me that I sound like I’m a damn Yankee.
INTERVIEWER: No kidding!
MAN: Oh yeah, yeah. Th ey say . . .
INTERVIEWER: But you went to graduate school in North 
Carolina?

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
116
MAN: North Carolina—still the South, true, uh, still, 
certainly North Carolina has very strong southern, uh, 
dialect—but I’ve lived in D.C. now for almost thirteen 
years. . . .
INTERVIEWER: Right.
MAN: Um, and also I’ll admit I have, I have intentionally 
tried to lose some of the, uh, stronger elements of my 
southern accent.
INTERVIEWER: 
[
 
Like? 
]
MAN:  
Intentionally tried to.  Um, well, I, uh, I 
prefer not to pronounce words the way they tend to be 
pronounced in Arkansas sometimes. For, an example is, 
uh, is the verb going, g-o-i-n-g. In Arkansas, it’s slurred 
into a long diphthong frequently, and many people pro-
nounce it “goeeng” as if it were the s—, you know, uh, 
yeah, pronounce it “goeeng.” And I prefer to pronounce it 
“going,” and so I’ve made an intentional eﬀ ort now to say 
“going” rather than “goeeng.”
INTERVIEWER: Right.
8. LANGUAGE AND CULTURE
Th e hardest thing? Um, the hardest thing, I would say, 
the hardest thing in-in-in America, to learn English—
American English—would be to, uh, um, assume a love 
for the culture. Now, that may be diﬃ  cult coming from, 
say, Italy-Ita, it-it-it may be diﬃ  cult, and it’s been diﬃ  cult 
for every immigrant over here to assume a love for the 
culture that you have all of a sudden moved into and-and-
and must-must-must assume the culture, but you have to 
have that, you have to have a love for it. If you don’t have 
a love for it—I mean, you can have a practical reason for 

The Use of Language: Part II
117
coming over. My-my-my-my grandparents did from Ire-
land, which, another language I’ve-I’ve studied, um, or-or 
my great-grandparents from Poland, uh, maybe-maybe 
have a reason for coming over here ’cause it-it wasn’t cool 
over in Poland and it certainly wasn’t cool over in Ire-
land—um, but, even-even about ten years ago, I-I could 
speak to my great-uncles that Lidia found through gea—, 
uh, uh, uh, genealogy, and, uh, they still spoke with-with-
with an accent. Th ey still spoke, uh, polova populsku, half 
Polish and-and it’s in Chicago and-and-and, I-I-I, they, 
I-I don’t assume that they-they-they, acquired a love for 
this culture and that may be diﬃ  cult, coming from-from 
an-another—I’m not gonna say—we don’t have a hell of 
a lot of culture, but it-it may be even a little more diﬃ  cult 
for them to pick up coming over here than for us to pick 
up going over-over there.
DEFINITIONS
Amerindians: Indian people indigenous to the Americas 
and the Caribbean region.
Amish: A Christian religious sect of Swiss origin often 
found in eastern Pennsylvania and known for their 
choice not to use modern conveniences and modes of 
transportation.
Brit: Short for British.
Bronx: One of the ﬁ ve boroughs of New York City.
by and large: An expression that means “generally speak-
ing,” “for the most part,” or “in most cases.”
’cause: Short for because.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
118
cool: A slang expression that means “to be desired 
or desirable,” “to be with it,” “to be in vogue,” or “to be 
happening.”
customer service: In business, addressing and meeting 
the needs of the customers or clients.
eastern seaboard: Th e eastern portion of the United 
States along the Atlantic Ocean.
for sure: With certainty.
gonna: Going to.
Guyanese Creole: A Creole language spoken by the peo-
ple of Guyana.
hell of a lot: A slang expression that means “a large 
quantity.”
Mennonite: A Christian religious sect devoted to peace 
from which the Amish are derived.
no kidding: An expression that means “Really? Is that 
true?”
Pidgin Creole: A layperson’s term for a dialect spoken in 
Guyana. Pidgins are deﬁ ned as languages that arise out 
of contact and that are no one’s native language; creoles 
typically refer to pidgins that have native speakers—that 
is, the children of the speakers who originated the pid-
gin. Pidgins and creoles diﬀ er in linguistic structure.
pretty intimidating: Very intimidating.
rap: A kind of music in which the lyrics are spoken in a 
rhythmic fashion.
torch: In British English, a ﬂ ashlight or some other kind 
of handheld light.

The Use of Language: Part II
119
wipe the slate off completely (usually wipe the slate 
clean): To dismiss or disregard previous results or 
actions.
Yank, Yankee: A term often used by foreigners, usually 
Europeans, to refer to Americans.
yeahbsolutely: Th is speaker’s combination of the words 
yeah and absolutely. An emphatic “yes.”
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. Summarize what these speakers say about 
accents in the United States.
 2. Do you have trouble understanding accents? If 
so, which ones and why?
 3. Do people say that you have an accent? If so, how 
would you describe it?
 4. Of the speakers in Chapter 7 and this chapter, 
which one has the accent that is the hardest to 
understand?
 5. In your daily life, which accent is the most dif-
ﬁ cult to understand?
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

This page intentionally left blank 

121
FOOD
In this chapter, interviewees talk about their favor-
ite foods and about cooking.
1. COOKING VACATIONS
WOMAN: Well, I have found that-that a very interesting 
way to learn about the culture of a country is to go to that 
country and spend time with-with the people who-who 
create the food that people eat in those places. And, um, 
there’s, there’re a lot of opportunities in all kinds of, all 
parts of the world these days to travel, to go to areas that 
C H A P T E R  9
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
122
are sort out of the normal places that people, tourists go, 
um, but, uh, to go with small groups of people and meet 
chefs, meet home cooks, learn from them the things that 
are important to them in terms of how they cook, the 
traditions that they have, the kinds of ingredients that 
they use, and it really, really gives you, um, a real eye-
opening lesson in what a real culture is like—very dif-
ferent from reading about it in a book or a magazine. (I) 
mean, the best thing would be to go and live in a place for 
a long time, but some of these sorts of experiences, you 
really get to meet people who are very passionate about 
the things that they do in their everyday life. And food is 
something that, I think, is worth having a great passion 
about.
INTERVIEWER: Where have you been on some of these 
cooking vacations?
WOMAN: Well, I’ve been a number of diﬀ erent places here 
in the United States. Um, (I’ve) been to New Mexico, for 
example, uh, California, uh, but I really have enjoyed 
traveling in Europe in a number of places where cook-
ing and-and travel come together. I’ve been to Spain, 
I’ve been a couple of times to diﬀ erent places in France. 
Mostly I’ve been to diﬀ erent places in Italy, uh, and from 
the-the north to the south: Sicily, Puglia, Rome, Venice—
various places like that, and each experience is really very 
diﬀ erent, and that’s been something that-that I’ve, the 
education of learning about a country through its food 
is something I’ve found really fascinating. As Americans, 
I think we often have this impression that the food of a 
country is a single thing, deﬁ ned by two or three sort of 
ingredients. We-we may think of Italian food, for exam-
ple, as just spaghetti and meatballs, um, because that’s 
kind of the way we were raised to think it’s just one single 
thing. Well, it’s not. It’s the-the food of even of a country, 
which, Italy is not a very large country geographically, 

Food
123
but the diversity of its food and the-the-the ingredients 
that diﬀ erent parts of, cooks in diﬀ erent parts of the 
country rely on, is-is vastly diﬀ erent, and learning about 
those diﬀ erences—whether it’s part of the country uses 
one kind of cheese, part of the country uses another kind 
of cheese, some parts of the country which are very rich 
in terms of having animals that they can use will have 
a lot of meat in the diet, other parts of the country that 
are, that are more impoverished don’t have so much meat 
in the diet, some parts of the country use tomatoes in 
almost everything that they cook, um, versus another 
region of the country that doesn’t—and just learning why 
the people in diﬀ erent parts of the country, um, use cer-
tain ingredients, don’t use other ingredients and-and the 
wonderful things that they can make out of the simplest 
combination of ingredients is-is what I’ve really enjoyed 
learning about.
Well, as an example of sort of the simplicity of cook-
ing, um, when I was in Rome once and-and on one of 
these cooking tours, um, I learned about a very simple 
pasta dish, which has nothing more in it than, um, a can 
of tuna and a little bit of oil, garlic. Garlic is an impor-
tant ingredient in Italian food, um, which adds spice 
and complexity. Um, all of these ing—, simple ingredi-
ents—the-the tuna, some chili, red chili ﬂ akes, um, and 
the garlic—are cooked very brieﬂ y just to warm them up. 
Th en you cook pasta, um, a, something like a spaghetti or 
a linguini kind of pasta, and while the pasta is still warm, 
right out of the water, you add it to this warm mixture 
of tuna and oil and garlic and chili ﬂ akes, and then you 
add to that some, a-a fresh green, um, something sort of 
spicy or bitter like arugula, or what, uh, what the British 
call rocket—I never quite understood why they use that 
diﬀ erent term, but they do—and the heat of-of the sauce 
and the heat of the, of the hot, fresh cooked pasta sort 
of wilts the green vegetable and it all comes together in 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
124
just the simplest way. You add a little fresh lemon juice 
and that’s it. It’s just simplicity, but it’s so simple that 
each of those ingredients in the dish contributes a spe-
cial elegance and a special ﬂ avor to it, just all in itself. 
It’s just wonderful—and quick and easy. But it-it reﬂ ects 
the, this desire that certainly the Italians have of using 
what’s available to them, um, and emphasizing the indi-
vidual ingredients, not clouding them with heavy sauces 
or things of that sort.
2. A WIDE RANGE
MAN: Good question. Uh, I like a wide range of foods from 
American to Pakistinian, Greek. Uh, I have a broad-
broad taste when it comes to food. I don’t do much, uh, 
unhealthy foods, though. I-I’m pretty serious about 
health, so I don’t do too much fried foods and, um, I like 
to cook, so . . .
INTERVIEWER: So what-what’s your favorite thing to cook? 
Can you, tell me about one of your favorite dishes?
MAN: Chicken.
INTERVIEWER: Chicken?
MAN: Yeah—there’s no wrong way to cook it. Th ere’s so 
many things that you can do with it. But, um, I actu-
ally, uh, I like stewed chicken, you know, cut up onions, 
maybe some peas, carrots in the chicken. I like jasmine 
rice or yellow rice, chickpeas—oh, man—your-your broc-
coli, cheese sauce, things of that nature. Simple but, you 
know, real nice, healthy for you.
INTERVIEWER: What’s your favorite ethnic food, other-
other than food, uh, that’s not an American dish?

Food
125
MAN: My favorite. Th at’s an interesting question, ’cause 
it’s like comparing apples to oranges. I have several favor-
ites, so it’s kinda hard to pick.
INTERVIEWER: Pick one, any one.
MAN: One particular favorite. Ah. Tandoori chicken 
is one of my favorites, um, which is, uh, Pakistinian, 
Indian-style, and I like what they call samosas, uh. I 
have—oh my gosh, it’s so much—I like curried okra. 
It’s-it’s so many diﬀ erent dishes, but I would say Indian 
dishes would be my favorite. Indian dishes. I would say 
the Tandoori chicken is probably one of my favorites or 
chicken masala.
INTERVIEWER: Are there any particular regional American 
foods that you like?
MAN: C’mon, hamburger and fries. You know, I do occa-
sionally, you know, have my taste for junk food, so a 
Fuddrucker burger is not the worst thing to have. So 
occasionally I will stop in, I’ll-I’ll have a burger and-and 
some fries. Th at’s-that’s pretty much about it. I don’t do 
too much other like junk kind of food, but that’s-that’s I 
guess about my-my favorite American dish.
3. MIDWESTERN COOKING 
WOMAN: I love cooking, I’m a big cook.
INTERVIEWER: What kind, any type of food in particular?
WOMAN: No. I will, I like, whatever it is I like the taste of, 
then I want to learn how to do it. Um, I think, uh, it’s a 
factor of growing up in the Midwest where in an, you 
know, Irish family where dinner consists of meat and 
potato. And seasoning is what, maybe salt and possibly 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
126
ketchup? Um, and I remember when I went to college 
and, uh, started tasting all these other foods, I was like, 
“Oh my gosh, I’ve been missing out all this time! Th is 
is terriﬁ c!” Um, so yeah, anything that isn’t bland, I’m a 
fan of.
4. NOODLES AND SAUSAGES
WOMAN: I-I like to eat a lot, so I-I have a broad range of 
what I like to eat. I, uh, I’m-I’m very fond of Taiwanese 
food, the food that I grew up with. I like, um, dumplings, 
I like spring rolls—the Taiwanese kind, not the fried 
American kind. I like lots of noodles, any noodle dishes 
that we have. Um, but ever since I was sixteen and went 
to France for the ﬁ rst time and stayed with a host family 
there, I’m a big fan of French food and Alsatian food in 
particular, so the Germanic heavy potatoes and sausage 
thing—I love sausages and potatoes, sauerkraut. I could 
eat that all day. Um, but pretty much I’ll eat anything you 
throw at me. I-I-I really enjoy eating. It’s one of the things 
that I, um, I love to do.

Food
127
INTERVIEWER: Do you cook those things as well?
WOMAN: With limited success. It’s always better if some-
body else cooks it.
5. CAMEROONIAN CUISINE
MAN: I actually have a very simple, uh, approach to food. 
I know what I like and I don’t try to deviate a lot from it. 
I like, once it has rice in it, I’m happy, you know, so, I love 
rice so you’ll see me eating Chinese or rice cooked from 
the house or if I have to eat fast food, I eat McDonald’s, 
you know. A lot people consider it fast food and so that’s 
good, but I-I like McDonald’s so I eat McDonald’s and, 
uh, I know I have a high metabolic rate so I’m not too 
worried about, uh, eating from McDonald’s.
INTERVIEWER: Do you cook for yourself a lot or . . . ?
MAN: My wife cooks a lot. Uh, I cook on intervals, uh . . . 
When I cook, it’s an entire ceremony because I like to 
wear my hat, like a chef, have an apron and then cook 
about three dishes and so it’s, uh. She always loves it 
when I cook that—it’s always usually a surprise, by the 
time she returns from work and the chef has done his 
thing, you know. But she cooks on a daily basis.
INTERVIEWER: What’s your best or favorite dish you cook?
MAN: Rice and stew.
INTERVIEWER: Really?
MAN: Yes. And stew is like a tomato base with, uh, like 
add a chicken or beef or gizzard or . . . So that’s what we 
call stew but you have to have tomatoes, uh. Th at’s what I 
have in common with the Italians, is the tomato, yes, and, 
of course, rice. And then we have fufu and eru, which is 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
128
my traditional dish. Uh, a lot people in Cameroon, uh, 
love eating fufu and eru. It’s very, very delicious. I just 
don’t eat it on a regular basis as, uh, other people rather 
me do, you know. But, uh, I love fufu and eru, rice . . .
INTERVIEWER: What are in, what are in those dishes?
MAN: In fufu and eru? It’s, um, it’s a cassava-based, uh, 
substance. It’s like, uh, I would compare the texture to 
mashed potato only a little denser, that’s what a fufu is, 
so you usually eat it with your hands. And then the eru 
is a vegetable, um, they have to slice it in very thin, uh, 
layers and then cook it with spinach or water leaf, as we 
call it, and they use, uh, red oil. It’s palm oil, not the-the 
vegetable oil. And this oil you can get from international 
stores, uh, and then cook it with whatever else—snails 
or beef or chicken or anything. But with snails, it’s even 
more delicious.
6. COOKING IN GUYANA
INTERVIEWER: Do you cook Guyanese?
WOMAN: Yeah, mostly, yeah. . . . We are, we are, uh, in fact, 
sometimes we even call Guyana West Indian, I guess 
because of the British, um, inﬂ uence. We speak English; 
we consider ourselves part of the West Indian culture, 
and that’s what I cook mostly. In fact, that’s what I, that’s 
what we cook, West Indian food, mostly.
INTERVIEWER: So what-what are the main dishes that you 
cook?
WOMAN: Well, we have a thing called pelau, which is rice 
and chicken and pigeon peas. Uh, you-you cook that all 
up together and-and that’s a main meal—you just have 
that with a salad.

Food
129
INTERVIEWER: Uh-huh.
WOMAN: Th en we have a Guyanese meal that you call pep-
per pot, which is all diﬀ erent kinds of meat together and 
you put in it something that we call cassareep, which is, 
um, the, you-you put the cassava out to dry and then you 
squeeze it.
INTERVIEWER: Uh-hmm.
WOMAN: Uh, and they make, the juice of that is called cas-
sareep, if you leave it to ferment for a—I’m not sure how 
long but for a while—and that’s what you use, and you 
put that in it and it, and it turns brown so it’s a very, very 
brown meat, and you eat that with white rice or what-
ever. And, of course, you must have your fried plantains, 
ripe plantains, you must have fried ripe plantains. And 
curry is another one of our-our, um, our-our dishes, um, 
and you eat that with either rice or with, uh, something 
that we call roti, which looks like a, something like a pita 
bread, but just-just a little diﬀ erent but just like a pita 
bread.
7. FOOD PHASES
WOMAN: In general? Um, I’m not very picky with food. I 
basically like everything. Um, I’m not a big meat eater 
but, uh, other than that, I eat pretty much everything. 
I, uh, I go through phases. Sometimes I-I’m into Italian 
food, and then I go through a phase when I’m really like 
into Th ai food or—I like Asian cuisine a lot. And I also 
like, like the Southwest food, like, um, Austin is a great 
place for food, um, because they have that Tex-Mex food, 
but it’s very good. Th ey have just wonderful, wonderful 
Mexican restaurants in Austin. And I also like, like, uh, 
I lived in Arizona for a few years when I went in gra—, 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
130
when-when I was in grad school, and they have this, 
they call it this Southwest fusion cu-cuisine and it’s just 
very, very sophisticated. It has aspects of just traditional 
Southwest food but kind of very innovative and very 
sophisticated and beautifully presented and I like that, 
too.
INTERVIEWER: How is food in-in general in America diﬀ er-
ent from what you grew up with?
WOMAN: Well, um, I think that one of the things that I 
like about food in Spain is that it, uh, it incorporates a 
lot of fresh elements, so, you know, you have some dishes 
in Spain that are very elaborate, but like everyday food is 
actually very simple but, uh, people eat a lot of fresh ﬁ sh, 
uh, you know, fresh vegetables, fresh fruits, and that’s, 
eh, I think that’s a nice thing about Spanish food. Like 
every day, what people eat at their houses, not necessarily 
what you eat when you go to a restaurant.
DEFINITIONS
’cause: Short for because.
c’mon: Common pronunciation of come on.
done his thing: To complete a job or task.
eye-opening: Suddenly enlightening or educational, or 
enlightening or educational in a way that signiﬁ cantly adds 
to or contradicts previously held concepts of knowledge.
Fuddrucker: An American fast-food chain.
I’m a big cook: Big in this sense means “enthusiastic.”
kinda: Kind of. 

Food
131
McDonald’s: An American fast-food chain.
Midwestern: Refers to the central portion of the United 
States.
oh my gosh: Common exclamation.
Pakistinian: Usually Pakistani; of or pertaining to 
Pakistan.
Southwest: Refers to the southwestern portion of the 
United States—often Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas.
Southwest fusion: Combination of the foods typically 
found in the southwestern portion of the United States.
stop in: To go to or patronize a business.
Tex-Mex: A combination of Texan and Mexican used in 
reference to a type of cuisine.
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. What kind of foods do these speakers like?
 2. Which of these foods have you tried?
 3. What’s your favorite kind of food and why? What 
kind of food do you not like and why?
 4. What role does food play in your life? Is it 
important?
 5. Write the recipe for a dish that you cook.
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

This page intentionally left blank 

133
SPORTS
In this chapter, interviewees talk about the role of 
sports in their lives.
1. MINOR LEAGUE BASEBALL
MAN: Um, I don’t follow professional sports very much. I 
would much rather do just about any sport than watch 
just about any sport. Although last year I started going 
to, uh, minor league baseball games here in Frederick, 
the Frederick Keys. Th ey’re a, they’re a farm team for 
the Baltimore Orioles and the stadium is-is very close 
C H A P T E R  1 0
Copyright © 2009 by Stephen E. Brown and Ceil Lucas. Click here for terms of use. 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
134
by here, it’s very inexpensive and you can sit right-right 
up close next to the action. It’s-it’s a very, very relaxed 
atmosphere.
WOMAN: It’s great.
MAN: Yeah, it’s a lot of fun—lot of fun.
WOMAN: He got me addicted enough that I actually now 
go see the Iowa Cubs when I’m in Iowa in the summer, 
and I call him at night and I, we talk about minor league 
baseball. It’s great.
MAN: Yeah. I have a-a friend who’s a hard-core sports 
fan—just about any kind of sport but especially base-
ball—and he’s gotten me into doing the box scores, you 
know, and keeping track of the whole thing, and I’ve-I’ve 
sent him copies so that he can critique them and tell me 
how to do better next season.
2. SECOND BASEMAN 
MAN: When I was a kid, I, uh, I, uh, um, I was essentially 
asthmatic, um, very asthmatic. I-I met a guy named Steve 
Wheaton—I think he was two-two years older when-
when, me, than when I, when I was eight, he was ten—and 
he, we played baseball and, um, baseball became my life. 
Baseball still is ex—, uh, I, um, it, I was extremely good 
at baseball, uh, I still, uh, I shouldn’t say I-I am, uh, now, 
of course, but I-I-I was even, uh, some Detroit Tiger, uh, 
scout was scouting a guy that, you know, poetically, uh, 
was on the same team I was at Providence College in, uh, 
um. I only found out through my brother—I was playing 
against this guy and-and, uh, I only found out from my 
brother, from the-the-the coach that-that Detroit Tiger 
fan, uh, scout, said, “Th at guy out there can do every-

Sports
135
thing, but that guy is much too small.” But that was all, I-I 
but-but that’s how, I-I-I-I was good. And I loved it. I loved 
it, I loved it. I dropped it in college while ba-basically, um, 
I would say I was, I had a-a scholarship I had to keep. You 
lose, uh, sports is something that, um, sports, it can be 
all, it has to be all consuming. If you want to be a pro at 
baseball, if you want to be a pro at anything, and you guys 
may know this, if you want, you have to totally devote 
yourself. It’s, a-a-a-a major league baseball player, they-
they say athletes are dumb. Th ey-they may not necessar-
ily be dumb, but a lot, almost everything they have, if you 
want to make it to the pros, you’ve got to be 110 percent 
devoted. If you’re not, you’re not gonna make it.
INTERVIEWER: What position did you play?
MAN: Second base.
INTERVIEWER: Why?
MAN: Second, um, second base because, uh, um, I didn’t 
have the arm. Later w-went to shortstop—certainly 
didn’t have the arm for the outﬁ eld. I was quick. I-I did 
have the arm from second base to-to ﬁ rst base in double 
play, and-and I could cover the ground there, and-and 
usually, uh, the second baseman hits, traditionally, the, 
one of the-the-the shorter guys and-and usually a hot-
head. And-and I was.
You know, you know, uh, it’s the old McLuhan thing. 
I-I-I almost do prefer the radio.
INTERVIEWER: Why?
MAN: Because-because you have to put more of yourself 
into it. You have to, you have to, uh, provide—you have to 
provide, you’ve been there, you have to provide the sur-
roundings, plus I-I believe the radio announcers are, well, 
television, they-they are, well, it’s a, it’s a, television, look, 
it’s a hot medium so, uh, they are more laid back about 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
136
it. I mean, uh, uh, so it winds up: “Th e pitch,” “Strike.” 
Well. But-but in the radio, you got, you know, this, this, 
this, and this ’cause they gotta keep—and they’re good—
they gotta keep it going. And, so I do f—, actually, a lot of 
times when the television is on, I will have the radio, um, 
with, uh, the-the-the sound oﬀ .
3. FOOTBALL TRYOUTS
MAN: I think it’s gonna be kind of intimidating, seeing 
that, um, there’s gonna be a lot of people there probably 
bigger than me, probably stronger than me, but I’m just 
gonna have to prove it, that I’m worth it for the team.
INTERVIEWER: Do you know what the routine is for open 
tryouts? Do they tell you what drills you’re gonna have 
to do—what exercises—what you’re gonna have to 
demonstrate?
MAN: Uh, I don’t know at this point. I’m just hoping to 
go on luck right now. Um, hoping that they just give me 
some drills that I can actually just pass and hopefully 
make the ﬁ rst cut. And from there, we’ll, I’ll ﬁ gure out 
where to go.
INTERVIEWER: Are you doing your own conditioning and 
training program to prepare for that?
MAN: Um, I’m using the tire shop mostly, as my condi-
tioning. I lift the tires, try to build up my arms. Um, I’m 
constantly walking around fast, to keep my cardio up. 
Um, I ch—, I try to eat a lot of protein so I can keep my 
muscles strong—stuﬀ  like that.
INTERVIEWER: And, uh, and the wallyball?
MAN: Wallyball, yeah. It’s mostly cardio and more physical, 
I guess you can say. And I do that every Th ursday night.

Sports
137
4. WATCHING SPORTS
STUDENT: Yeah, I really like watching sports, uh, with my 
dad especially ’cause he’s kind of a character and, um, it’s 
kind of weird ’cause I-I probably watch more sports with 
my dad than my brother does, which isn’t very normal. 
But, uh, we like to watch basketball. Right now, March 
Madness. Kind of excited ’cause I had Georgetown going 
pretty far, and, um, we-we shout and, uh, we get excited, 
and it’s-it’s really fun. We also watch football, always root 
for Penn State ’cause that’s where my dad went, and last 
year they had a really good year, so that was fun. Um, 
sometimes we watch some crazy things, like, we watched 
rugby, we watch golf, which is actually more interest-
ing than I would imagine but not interesting enough to 
watch the whole thing.
INTERVIEWER: Why do you say it’s more interesting than 
one would imagine?
STUDENT: Well, golf is typically assumed to be a boring 
sport, just someone hitting the ball and it goes into the 
hole somewhere, hopefully, if they’re any good. But it’s 
more interesting now ’cause of Tiger Woods, and he’s 

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
138
kind of a big deal, and we like to see him win just ’cause 
it’s more interesting when he does. Um, yeah, usually we 
watch the eighteenth hole.
INTERVIEWER: Th e eighteenth hole?
STUDENT: Yeah, that’s pretty much it. My dad, we’ll, we, uh, 
my dad has that complex where you have to switch around 
the channels all the time so, uh, we’ll-we’ll go back and 
forth but we’ll-we’ll really watch the eighteenth hole.
INTERVIEWER: Are there any non-American sports that 
you like?
STUDENT: Uh, soccer. Uh, World Cup, that was really fun. 
Um, that’s really international. And then the Olympics—
actually, I don’t know, I really like other things more than 
the Olympics, but everyone plays there. Uh, rugby is 
international.
5. HOCKEY
WOMAN: Uh, I used to, I used to have season tickets with 
my dad, and I used to go to minor league hockey also with 
my dad when I was in Montreal. It’s a lot harder to follow 
here, and since we work mostly nights, then never, can 
never watch the games so it’s—I do, I do miss hockey.
INTERVIEWER: Did you play as you were coming up?
WOMAN: Yes. Yes. Oh, that was fun. Th at’s actually a 
good story. Uh, I’ve always loved, you know, ice-skating. 
From the minute I could stand up, my dad bought me ice 
skates, of course, you know. And by the age of, like, four, 
uh, ﬁ ve or six, you know, I don’t know if they have, like, 
girl hockey in the United States, but in Canada, you have, 
like, girl teams and guy teams, but the girl teams, the, it’s-
it’s not a real hockey stick, it’s just a stick with a ring, and 

Sports
139
basically you just, like, put the stick, you know, inside the 
ring and that’s how you drag it on the ice, so it’s not real 
hockey. It’s weird. And basically, that’s girl hockey, and I 
did not like that so after a couple of weeks of, like, play-
ing that when I was ﬁ ve, I got really upset and I was, like, 
“Dad, I want to play with the guys. Th is is not hockey!” 
So my dad actually was able to, like, you know, put me 
in the, in the real hockey team with all the boys, and, 
you know, when you’re ﬁ ve, it’s OK, but by the time I was 
eight, some of the coaches and other boys and parents 
had issues about having, like, a girl in the locker room, so 
that’s when I stopped playing hockey. But I did play real 
hockey for a couple of years as a kid. It was great.
6. A COMMON GROUND
MAN: I like to play ’em. I don’t like to watch ’em too much, 
except for the playoﬀ  times but actually, I’m pretty ath-
letic, uh.
INTERVIEWER: So what sports do you play?
MAN: Basketball, football, soccer, baseball—several of 
’em, quite a few, quite a few sports.
INTERVIEWER: Are you in leagues or 
[
 do you just 
]
 pick up
games or . . . ?
MAN:  
I used to be,  I used 
to be, I used to play, um, high school ball, uh, played 
league balls around the community, um, street teams, uh, 
quite a bit of, a lot of trophies, medals through my youth, 
real athletic. I was a PAL boxing team. Uh, we train the 
children in self-defense also, which is, um, an important 
thing, try to teach them mental and physical discipline, 
so, yeah, I’m into sports. I-I like sports, yeah.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
140
INTERVIEWER: What was your favorite sport?
MAN: Handball.
INTERVIEWER: Oh yeah?
MAN: Yeah.
INTERVIEWER: Why?
MAN: Oh man, what can’t I say about handball? It’s just 
a beautiful sport. It’s hand-and-eye coordination, you, it 
builds and develops reﬂ ex, strength. It’s-it’s as good as 
swimming as far as, uh, muscle workout, you work out 
every muscle in the body. It’s just, it’s just an overall great 
sport.
INTERVIEWER: Uh, so you say you participate more than, 
you like to participate more than you like to watch. When 
you do watch, what sports do you like to watch?
MAN: I like to watch Ultimate Fighting Championships. 
I like basketball and-and football, and I tend to, I tend 
to watch those during playoﬀ s and, but I will watch soc-
cer. Soccer is something that, if I’m passing it, I-I kind of 
stop ’cause you have to admire the shape that these guys 
are in. We’re talking about a ﬁ eld that’s greater than the 
length of a football ﬁ eld. Th ey’re running forty-ﬁ ve min-
utes at a time, long periods before a break—the endur-
ance involved in it is just incredible—so I like a good 
soccer game, and the fact that it’s worldwide, it’s not 
limited to any one particular region, so it crosses a lot of 
boundaries and-and it takes away, uh, a lot of the walls 
that are between people, you know, and-and it gives peo-
ple a common ground. And that’s one of the beauties of, 
beautiful things about sports, um, that it takes away the 
race barriers, it takes away a lot of the language barriers. 
It’s just down to fundamental teamwork. You know the 
language of the game, you get there, and you do it. Every-

Sports
141
body does their part, everybody doesn’t have to score, 
everybody doesn’t have to be the guy who runs the whole 
length of the game. You know, you just do your part. You 
might be the guy that just picks up for that superstar who 
gets tired. You give him a break so he can continue to be 
a superstar, the support team.
7. BASEBALL STRATEGY 
MAN: To the casual observer, it takes forever and noth-
ing really happens and it’s not very interesting. Uh, but if 
you follow it and you kind of pay attention to the strategy 
that’s going on, then it’s an interesting mix of, uh, ath-
leticism and that ability, but also, this mind game. And 
at its peak, you can sit there either watching the TV or 
watching a, at the game, and you can watch the mind 
game between the pitcher and the batter. Uh, we used to 
watch, and this is when—I laugh because this is when I 
knew my wife really had been totally hooked—when, uh, 
last year when Daryle Ward was, uh, playing ﬁ rst base a 
little bit with the Nationals and he was a, he was a bat-
ter that fouled oﬀ  a lot of ba—, a lot of pitches, and you 
would just, you could, it was like watching a soap opera 
just for that at bat. You know, where the, what the pitch 
was gonna be, and he would ﬁ ght it oﬀ  and he’d kind of 
stare down the pitcher a little bit, and the pitcher would 
stare him down a little bit. It was just this great mind 
game that plays out in turns rather than all at once, so 
it kind of gives you that chance to sit back and watch it 
all unfold, um, rather than other sports like football or 
basketball that it’s all kind of a rush and it happens right 
there. Uh, maybe I’d understand the strategy more if I 
knew more about those sports, but, uh, but that’s what I 
love about baseball.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
142
Uh, there’s also this whole world of baseball, of the 
statistics, and people track this stuﬀ  and baseball is really 
known for, uh, for people being crazy with tracking all 
these stats. Uh, and, which actually, I, in a, in a kind of 
dumb way, and I can’t believe I’m telling you this, but ties 
in a little with the Grateful Dead thing because people, 
you know, a lot of Deadheads will keep stats, you know, 
how many times you saw what song or what concert at, 
where, you know, what venue, and things like that, uh, 
and I remember meeting a guy at a show at Shoreline 
Amphitheatre in, uh, California, and he was, after the 
concert, and he was—we were sharing a hotel room and 
after the concert—he was noting down his little stats and 
I-I thought it was the funniest thing, because I did the 
same thing, but I had never realized other people did that. 
And I realized from talking, and from talking to him, we 
realized that we both also had this love of baseball and 
the statistics, uh, and he was a business statistics major, 
and we got into this whole conversation. And it was right 
at the time where I was switching from history to, uh, 
or from geoscience to history, and it kind of planted the 
seed of, uh, of-of using some of these same interests in a 
diﬀ erent setting.
Th e end, the end of the game, which is why I never 
understood people that leave in the seventh inning, 
’cause that’s, you know, it all builds up to, you know, 
unless they, unless it’s twelve to one in the ﬁ fth inning 
and then it’s kinda done but, uh, it-it all builds up to the 
strategy at the end, you know, towards the end, uh, and 
it-it, that-that’s the best part. And I like sitting where 
you can see—I like now sitting behind home plate. My 
tickets are behind home plate but up. Uh, I like sitting 
behind so you can really see where the pitch is, um, and 
that’s important. If you’re sitting like out in the outﬁ eld, I 
think that’s one reason why, you know, if you’re kind of a 
casual fan and you get sort of the not, you know, the-the 

Sports
143
cheaper seats, uh, you can’t really see so much of the stuﬀ  
that colors the game, which is why I think sitting, you 
know, dead center at RFK is less exciting.
INTERVIEWER: Uh, if you could play, what position would 
you play and why?
MAN: If I could play. Uh, we used to play a game, one 
of, friend at work had a thing where if you could, dur-
ing the Olympics, they would ask that, like, you know, if 
you could do any one sport in this, in the Olympics, you 
know, which would it be? Um, and I think I decided on, I 
think he had decided on moguls. I had decided on some-
thing else, I forget what. It was a skiing event, though. 
Uh, in baseball, if I could do one thing and why, uh, as a 
kid, I wanted to be a pitcher. And why, I don’t know but 
it-it’s just such a crazy, ridiculous thing to do or be good 
at, to take this little thing and make it move in unpre-
dictable ways to try to get it past some other guy. Uh, 
it-it’s, that’s a, that’s another aspect of baseball that I just 
think is-is so bizarre. Um, you know, the ball is so small 
and it just, you know, to throw it ninety feet and have 
it do these crazy things and have some guy with a bat 
trying to hit it is just such a bizarre thing, uh, and then 
something that, uh, some, you know, in a sport where, 
if you succeed slightly more than a quarter of the time, 
you’re really good, is just, uh, I love that.
DEFINITIONS
asthmatic: Suﬀ ering from asthma, a respiratory ailment 
characterized by wheezing and diﬃ  culty breathing due 
to inﬂ ammation and constriction of air passages in the 
lungs.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
144
at bat: When a baseball player stands ready to receive a 
pitch from the opposing pitcher.
big deal: A special or noteworthy event or occurrence.
box scores: In baseball, a play-by-play record of the prog-
ress of the game from inning to inning.
’cause: Short for because.
colors the game: To have an eﬀ ect on the progress or 
various aspects of the game.
dead center: Th e exact middle of something.
Deadheads: Nickname for the fans of the band the Grate-
ful Dead.
Detroit Tiger: A member of the professional baseball 
team the Detroit Tigers.
eighteenth hole: Th e last hole of a standard round of 
golf. 
’em: Short for them.
farm team: In sports, a minor league or semiprofessional 
team that is used by a major league or professional team 
to develop its future players.
ﬁ ght it off: In baseball, refers to the batter’s eﬀ ort to pre-
vent being struck out or making an out in his confronta-
tion with the pitcher.
ﬁ rst cut: A term commonly used in sports in the process 
of selecting team members that refers to the ﬁ rst round 
of eliminating those players who are not good enough, 
who are undesirable, or who do not meet the criteria to 
become a member of a team.
fouled off: A phrase used in baseball when the batter 
hits a pitch but the ball does not land in the “fair” part of 
the playing ﬁ eld.

Sports
145
gonna: Going to.
gotta: Common verbal utterance of got to, which means 
the same as have to.
inning: An interval of play in the game of baseball. A 
regulation game consists of nine innings.
kinda: Kind of.
laid back: An informal expression that means “relaxed 
or casual.”
March Madness: In American collegiate basketball, a 
term that refers to the postseason NCAA tournament 
process that involves sixty-four teams. It usually takes 
place at the end of March or in early April.
McLuhan thing: A reference to Marshall McLuhan, a 
Canadian educator, philosopher, scholar, and communi-
cations theorist probably most well-known for his state-
ment “Th e medium is the message.”
mind game: Slang for the psychological competition that 
takes place between competitors.
minor league: In American sports, the level of teams 
below the major professional leagues. Th ese minor leagues 
often serve as training and development venues for future 
major league players.
Nationals: Professional baseball club in the Washington, 
D.C., area.
open tryouts: Athletic auditions or a recruitment process 
in which prospective players are tested and display their 
skills in hopes of being selected to become members of 
a team. In open tryouts anyone can try out for the team 
in question, not just players who have been recruited by 
the team.
PAL: Police Athletic League.

Improve Your English: English in Everyday Life
146
pitcher: A position in baseball; the player who throws 
the ball to the batter.
RFK (Robert Fitzgerald Kennedy Memorial Stadium): A 
sports stadium in Washington, D.C., named for the for-
mer attorney general of the United States.
rush: A sense or feeling of excitement.
scout: In this context, an employee for a professional 
sports team whose job is to observe and assess the talent 
of players who might be recruited to play for the team.
stare down: To look at someone very intently for the 
purpose of trying to intimidate him or her.
stats: Short for statistics. Used in sports to refer to 
numerical data collected about players, teams, games, 
and things related to a particular sport.
tryouts: Athletic auditions or recruitment process in 
which prospective players are tested and display their 
skills in hopes of being selected to become members of 
a team.
winds up (wind up): In baseball, the motion that a pitcher 
goes through in preparation to make a pitch to a batter.

Sports
147
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
 1. List the sports that these speakers watch and 
play and explain why they like them.
 2. Compare the role of sports in the United States 
with their role in other countries.
 3. Which sports do you like to play or watch and 
why?
 4. Explain the rules of a sport that you play or 
watch.
 5. Which sport would you like to try and why?
 6. Identify three words or phrases in this chapter 
that are new to you, and write a sentence with 
each one.

