51
Chapter 2
Individuals: An Essay in 
 Descriptive Metaphysics:
Towards a basic ontology
The central question raised by Strawson in Part I of Individuals con-
cerns the ways in which reference to individuals and particulars is 
obtained in the practices of ordinary language. Anything whatsoever 
can be identifyingly referred to, can appear as a logical subject, can 
appear as an individual. Thus particulars such as historical events, 
material objects and persons are individuals, but so too are such non-
particular individuals as qualities, properties, numbers and species. 
There is the further question of whether our reference to a particular 
can be secured through the exclusive use of purely universal or gen-
eral terms, or whether in every case the identiﬁ cation of a particular 
by a speaker making references rests ultimately on his own environ-
ment, and thus on the use of expressions of a demonstrative, or ego-
centric, or token-reﬂ exive sort. Part II is concerned with the linguistic 
complements to those metaphysical or ontological questions, and at 
the end with the perennial question of what things may properly be 
said to exist. 
The distinction between singular reference and predication has also 
been central to Strawson’s entire work. We have already seen how that 
distinction led him to mark out three parallel distinctions: the formal 
one between individual and predicative variables, the functional one 
between referring and describing, and the grammatical one between 
subject and predicate. To ignore those distinctions and parallels would 
be to ignore Strawson’s root distinction in “On Referring” between 
sentence and statement. To maintain those distinctions and their par-
allels, on the other hand, leads directly and necessarily to the further 
question of just how that reference to these individuals or particulars 
is obtained in the practices of ordinary language. The referring terms 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

52
Peter Strawson
and rules of ordinary language do indeed have an unavoidable note of 
approximation and a sometimes useful ambiguity, and that might seem 
to preclude the establishment of ﬁ rm guidelines, but we have already 
seen that Strawson thinks that a loosening of the strict regularity that 
some formalists would require is simply the condition that must be met 
if we are to seek realistically an engagement between formal logic and 
the workings and the logic of ordinary language. 
 In pursuit of these issues in Individuals, a work that Strawson sub-
titles An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics, he maintains a distinction 
between a descriptive metaphysics, which is content to give an account 
of the actual structure of the world of our experience, and a revision-
ary metaphysics, which attempts vainly to provide a better structure. 
Aristotle and Kant he ﬁ nds descriptive, while Descartes, Leibniz and 
Berkeley are seen as revisionary. Revisionists are laudable for their 
partial visions, but Strawson will ﬁ nd his own home in an attempt to 
rethink the thoughts of Aristotle in contemporary terms.
We recall from “On Referring” that the singular terms of sentences 
do not in themselves refer; they are instead used by persons to make 
statements that do refer to objective particulars. Quine notwithstand-
ing, those singular terms are not eliminable extrusions. We cannot 
simply say that to be is to be the value of a variable of quantiﬁ ca-
tion, since, as we shall see at length, the identiﬁ cation of a particular 
lies beyond that formalist reach. For Strawson, our ontology must 
include objective particulars or individuals as well as what it is that 
makes it possible for us to identify and reidentify them. Our ontology 
will doubtless include much besides those particulars, but they will 
always be present as basic to the entire structure. We are thus led to 
the broader ontological questions of the most general features of our 
thought about the world of our experience, and to those presupposi-
tions that make the identiﬁ cation of particulars possible.
Individuals is divided into two parts. Part I, “Particulars”, is con-
cerned with the central and fundamental place of material bodies and 
persons among particulars in general. That is presupposed in Part 
II, “Logical Subjects”, which then proceeds to consider the connection 
between the idea of a particular and the idea of an object of reference 
or logical subject. That link is found in the crucial idea of complete-
ness. We may see Part I as metaphysical and Part II as grammatical 
or linguistic, but the practices of ordinary language are continuously 
present in both parts, and Strawson himself doubts whether either 
part can be completely understood without the other. We do well to 
follow the order that Strawson provides.
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

53
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
Part I: Particulars
Chapter 1: Bodies
The Identiﬁ cation of Particulars
Our account of things that exist comprises objective particulars as 
foundational. The general theoretical problem addressed in Individu-
als is how the identiﬁ cation of those particulars is secured. Strawson 
thinks that his own use of “particulars” is an ordinary one: “Historical 
occurrences, material objects, people and their shadows are all partic-
ulars; whereas qualities and properties, numbers and species are not” 
(IE: 15). A speaker making a statement may refer to some particular, 
and a hearer may or may not be able to identify the particular referred 
to. And, since we can think about a particular in an identifying way 
without speaking about it, the question of identiﬁ cation will not be 
directly dependent on the speaker–hearer relationship. Thus we come 
at the outset of our investigation to the general question of the condi-
tions that make such identiﬁ cations and reidentiﬁ cations possible. 
Certainly a sufﬁ cient although not a necessary condition for the 
successful identiﬁ cation of a particular is that the speaker be able to 
discriminate that particular from all others. Prime instances of such 
discriminations occur when the particular is sensibly present to the 
speaker and reference is made through the use of demonstratives. 
When the particular is not sensibly present, however, a speaker must 
ultimately depend on the use of descriptions. That would seem to raise 
the fundamental difﬁ culty that a single description might equally 
well apply to different particulars located in different sectors of the 
universe. That for Strawson is a needless worry, since our knowledge 
of particulars takes place in a uniﬁ ed structure of a spatiotemporal 
character, and our use of this system turns fundamentally on our 
knowing our own place in it (IE: 23).1 We accord this pre-eminence to 
spatiotemporal relations as a common point of reference because this 
system is peculiarly comprehensive and pervasive. We need not worry 
about there being two or more exactly similar networks that would 
make individuating descriptions impossible; the worry is groundless 
since we the speakers have each of us a unique time and place that 
provide points of reference within the network. A similarly groundless 
worry supposes that each “here” and “now” is altogether private and 
personal, with the result that there are as many networks as there are 
persons; this worry is also groundless because we are in the system, 
rather than having the system within us. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

54
Peter Strawson
Strawson’s claim that the identiﬁ cation of particulars necessar-
ily rests on demonstratives will deny the possibility of “pure indi-
viduating descriptions”, for example, “the ﬁ rst dog to be born at sea”, 
or “quasi-pure individuating expressions”, for example, “the tallest 
man who ever lived”. There are indeed descriptions that begin with 
phrases such as “the ﬁ rst” or “the only” and thereby apparently pro-
claim the uniqueness of their application, and so it would seem that 
our individuating thoughts do not always need demonstratives and 
a single uniﬁ ed spatiotemporal framework of particulars. Strawson’s 
rejoinder is that such expressions are not applicable when (a) there 
are no candidates for the title, or (b) when there are two equally good 
candidates for the title. Apparent remedies for such failures them-
selves fail: “We may indeed increase the improbability of the second 
kind of application-failure by adding to the detail of the description; 
but we thereby increase … the probability of the ﬁ rst kind of appli-
cation-failure” (IE: 28). Our only way out of this bind is to draw on 
the way we do indeed have an actual knowledge of particulars in our 
common spatiotemporal framework, that is, through the foundational 
use of demonstrative terms. For Strawson, any particular identiﬁ ed 
in purely descriptive terms would effectively be cut off from playing 
any effective role in our general scheme of knowledge. 
In all of this the reader may properly be reminded of Strawson’s 
root distinction between sentence and statement that lies at the heart 
of “On Referring”.
Reidentiﬁ cation
One of the conditions of our use of this system of spatiotemporal 
identiﬁ cation is that we are able not only to identify but also to rei-
dentify particulars. Both identiﬁ cation and reidentiﬁ cation involve 
thinking that some thing is the same one. Our criteria of reidentiﬁ ca-
tion must allow for discontinuities and for limits of observation. Our 
account leans heavily on “qualitative recurrences”, that is, on the 
fact of repeated observational encounters with “the same pattern of 
objects”. This latter phrase allows a confusing but helpful ambigu-
ity between qualitative and numerical identity. Where we say “the 
same” of what is not continuously observed, we think we can make 
that qualitative–numerical distinction. 
The sceptic will deny this and will say that in cases of non- continuous 
observation all we really have are different kinds of qualitative iden-
tity, that we have no warrant for saying that this particular is numeri-
cally the same as one previously encountered. For Strawson, the best 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

55
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
reply is that our conceptual scheme simply is that of a single spatio-
temporal system of material things, and a condition of that scheme is 
precisely the acceptance of particular-identity in at least some cases of 
non-continuous observation. Thus what the sceptic rejects, the sceptic 
tacitly accepts:
[W]e should … have the idea of a new, a different, spatial system 
for each new continuous stretch of observation …. Each new sys-
tem would be wholly independent of every other. There would be 
no question of doubt about the identity of an item in one system 
with an item in another. For such a doubt makes sense only if 
the two systems are not independent, if they are parts, in some 
way related, of a single system which includes them both. But the 
condition of having such a system is precisely the condition that 
there should be satisﬁ able and commonly satisﬁ ed criteria for 
the identity of at least some items in one sub-system with some 
items in the other. [The sceptic] pretends to accept a conceptual 
scheme, but at the same time quietly rejects one of the conditions 
of its employment. Thus his doubts are unreal … 
(IE: 35)
There is a complex interplay between the reidentiﬁ cation of things 
and the reidentiﬁ cation of places. For Strawson, there is no mystery 
about their mutual dependence:
[T]he reidentiﬁ cation of places is not something quite different 
from, and independent of, the reidentiﬁ cation of things. There is, 
rather, a complex and intricate interplay between the two. For on 
the one hand places are deﬁ ned only by the relations of things; 
and, on the other, one of the requirements for the identity of a 
material thing is that its existence, as well as being continuous 
in time, should be continuous in space. 
(IE: 36–7)
With this reference to this interplay of things and places, Strawson is 
revisiting familiar ground. John Locke held that it was not possible 
for two things of the same kind to exist in the same place at the same 
time, and that it is under this condition that we ﬁ nd the principle of 
individuation. Leibniz in reply thought that some further distinctions 
are required:
In addition to the difference of time or of place there must always 
be an internal principle of distinction; although there may be 
many things of the same kind, it is still the case that none of them 
are ever exactly alike. Thus, although time and place (i.e., the 
relations to what lies outside) do distinguish for us things which 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

56
Peter Strawson
we could not easily tell apart by reference to themselves alone, 
things are nevertheless distinguishable in themselves. Thus, 
although diversity in things is accompanied by diversity of time 
or place, time and place do not constitute the core of identity and 
difference …. It is by means of things that we must distinguish 
one time or place from another, rather than vice versa; for times 
and places are in themselves perfectly alike … 
 
 
 
(Leibniz 1981: 230)
Further questions on the relationship between the spatiotemporal 
framework and the contents of that framework are precisely those 
ontological and epistemological issues that Strawson will later exam-
ine much more fully in its Kantian context in The Bounds of Sense.
Basic Particulars
We have at this point Strawson’s account of how it is possible for us 
to identify and reidentify the particulars to which we refer in the 
statements we make. That account naturally allows us to raise the 
question of whether among the various kinds of particulars there 
is one class or category of particular that we necessarily regard as 
basic, that is, a class of particulars to which we make those identify-
ing references without which references to other sorts of particulars 
would be impossible. 
From the premise that identiﬁ cation and reidentiﬁ cation rest on 
location in a unitary spatiotemporal framework, we might conclude 
that the particular objects that constitute the content of that frame-
work must be three-dimensional objects with some endurance through 
time. From this we could in turn conclude that material bodies must 
count as basic particulars.2 Strawson is quick to agree that such an 
argument so simply put is at the same time so general and so vague 
that it is inadequate as a viable support for a general philosophical 
position. Consequently he sets out to develop a line of investigation 
that will be both more direct and more detailed, and which will thus 
provide a more adequate backing for according material bodies a pri-
macy among particulars.
There are “private particulars” such as mental events and sense 
data which cannot count as basic particulars since they are clearly 
dependent on another more basic class of particulars, namely, per-
sons. We may also ﬁ nd another class of “identiﬁ cation dependence” 
in the cases of theoretical constructs such as the particles of physics, 
which while not private are nonetheless also both unobservable and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

57
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
dependent for their identiﬁ cation on grosser larger bodies. Here we 
ﬁ nd a dependence of things that are unobservable on things that are 
not only observable but that are also objects of public perception, 
objects such that different people have sense experiences of them, ones 
that speaker and hearer alike can identify on a particular occasion of 
discourse. It is, of course, true that the publicly observable particulars 
available on any particular occasion do make up a severely limited 
ﬁ eld, and that successful identifying reference to items lying outside 
our immediate perception may be made only through the use of some 
category of particulars that is itself in turn identiﬁ cation-dependent, 
but that does not invalidate the claim of an ultimate primacy for 
material bodies. 
What makes identiﬁ cation and reidentiﬁ cation possible is the basic 
particular that is publicly observable. Strawson’s initial claim is that 
material bodies meet that requirement. But there might seem to be 
another class of particulars that would equally well meet the need, 
namely, particular events, processes, states or conditions. A particular 
ﬂ ash or band of light might be identiﬁ ed as the ﬁ rst or the nth in a 
series of such things directly located by a speaker and a hearer but, 
of course, our reference to it is made by way of a reference to a par-
ticular of a different sort, for example, to a place or a material body. 
We may also think of a series no member of which can be solitary, 
for example, day and night, or the succession of years, but even in 
such cases reference is made by situating it in relation to the present 
spatiotemporal moment. 
Thus far it seems that material bodies and their spatiotemporal 
locations remain basic. Against this we might object that such a cri-
terion is inadequate in the face of simultaneous events, but Strawson 
can easily respond that simultaneity does not preclude spatial dif-
ference. A further objection has ties to longstanding metaphysical 
contentions. Every birth event is indeed the birth of some particular 
creature. But we could then argue that every creature is tied to a 
particular birth, and so there might seem to be a mutual identiﬁ ca-
tion dependence between the event and the material body, and in 
that case the material body no longer has an exclusive claim to be the 
basic particular. That is an argument Strawson rejects. A large class 
of events or processes such as being born is necessarily conceived of 
as predicated of particulars of another type, namely, material bodies. 
There is a general and one-way relation between the material bodies, 
persons and places on the one hand, and events on the other. We can 
refer to Socrates without referring to a particular event in his life, but 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

58
Peter Strawson
we cannot refer to the particular event without referring to Socrates 
and thus there is a real asymmetry. Material bodies, persons and 
places may be referred to without reference to particulars of types 
other than their own. They uniquely provide one single common and 
extendable framework. They alone are basic to particular identiﬁ ca-
tion of whatever sort.
This unique role of material bodies is further conﬁ rmed when we 
consider the question of reidentiﬁ cation, that is, our ability to identify 
either bodies or events as the same as ones previously identiﬁ ed. If 
bodies are basic to identiﬁ cation, they must also be basic to reidenti-
ﬁ cation. In the cases of a break in the continuity of observation, that 
reidentiﬁ cation is dependent on a continuity of existence in space, 
that is, a common spatiotemporal framework. Again, we can see that 
bodies alone are competent to provide that framework, since they 
alone are relatively enduring occupiers of space. 
It has been objected that this conclusion rests on an untenable 
distinction between material bodies or persons and processes. It may 
be argued that “Caesar” is simply the name of a series of events, 
that crossing into Britain and crossing the Rubicon are members of 
a series of events, effectively and in sum a biography, and that the 
basic reference is to “process-things”. The conclusion is that there 
is no justiﬁ cation for a fundamental distinction of category between 
things and processes. Strawson’s reply is that such “process-things” 
are a category of four-dimensional things for which we have neither 
an accepted use nor a systematic need. In practice, we do in fact dis-
tinguish between an object and its history, a person and his biography, 
and the terms we use to talk about persons and things are simply 
fundamentally different from the terms we use when talking about 
processes and events. We do not use the category of “process-things” 
when talking about either. It might be objected to this rejoinder that 
there are neither bodies nor persons who have no histories or biogra-
phies, that none of Strawson’s particulars are “bare particulars”, that 
bodies and persons in fact are unavoidably tied to processes. But it 
would be open to Strawson to accept this and nonetheless to maintain 
that there is an identiﬁ cation dependence of events and processes on 
bodies and persons, but not vice versa. Bodies and persons are the 
basic particulars.
Strawson considers a ﬁ nal objection. How do all of these theoretical 
arguments for the primacy of material bodies bear on and relate to the 
ways in which in our actual speaking we commonly go about the busi-
ness of identiﬁ cation and reidentiﬁ cation? And if a ﬁ rm tie between 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

59
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
practice and theory cannot be secured, then what is the use or the 
justiﬁ cation for the theory? Strawson grants the force of this objection. 
It is closely parallel to an objection he himself has made against the 
claims of the modern formalist logician whose concern with systematic 
completeness and consistency has made him impervious to the prac-
tices of ordinary language. For Strawson, it would indeed be possible 
to attempt to spell out in great detail all the complex ways in which 
his general theory ﬁ ts with our actual practice, but to do so would 
be to erode progressively the possibility of any general theory at all, 
and, in any event, Strawson ﬁ nds that his efforts are not completely 
in vain. We do not in our ordinary conversation make explicit use of 
the referential framework that bodies alone can provide, but we do in 
practice use a device that is close kin to that framework:
The place of the explicit relational framework is taken in part by 
that linguistic device which has so often and so justly absorbed 
the attention of logicians – the proper name. Demonstratives or 
quasi-demonstratives apart, it is proper names which tend to be 
the resting-places of reference to particulars …. Now, among par-
ticulars, the bearers par excellence of proper names are persons 
and places. It is a conceptual truth … that places are deﬁ ned by 
the relation of material bodies; and it is also a conceptual truth, 
of which we shall see the signiﬁ cance more fully hereafter, that 
persons have material bodies. 
(IE: 58)
For Strawson, the primacy of material bodies in that identiﬁ cation 
and reidentiﬁ cation of particulars, which is foundational to ordinary 
language, is secure.
Chapter 2: Sounds
Material bodies are then basic and prior in the identiﬁ cation of other 
kinds of particulars. Strawson does not make the claim that this onto-
logical priority of bodies justiﬁ es more ambitious claims such that 
only bodies are real, or that all particulars are reducible to bodies. 
Such claims may be understandable in the light of the priority that 
material bodies do have, but they are claims that Strawson carefully 
and emphatically rejects.
A question and a challenge remain. While we may carefully restrict 
the priority claims for body to particular identiﬁ cation, it might seem 
that this apparently modest claim might still be challenged, since 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

60
Peter Strawson
even if we grant the primacy of bodies in a spatiotemporal framework 
in our ordinary identiﬁ cation of particulars, it might seem that there 
could be other kinds of frameworks that could equally well claim that 
power. The question thus arises of whether we can make intelligi-
ble to ourselves some other conceptual scheme, that is, one in which 
material bodies in a spatiotemporal framework are not the sole basic 
particulars. 
Strawson begins his examination of this question by noting two dis-
tinctions that have been central up to this point, namely, the distinc-
tion between identiﬁ cation and reidentiﬁ cation, and the distinction 
between speaker and hearer. The two distinctions have so far been 
closely tied. This is a tie that Strawson now wishes to loosen. This is 
apparently plausible, since thinking is not essentially different when 
we intend to communicate to another than when we do not. Plainly 
we can think in an identifying way about particulars without talking 
about them.
Consider then simply within the contents of consciousness those 
particulars that are only states of consciousness of one’s own, and 
those particulars regarded as having actual or possible objects of those 
experiences. Refer to the latter as “objective particulars”. In the con-
text of this terminology we may now ask whether bodies as basic par-
ticulars are a necessary condition of the knowledge of objective par-
ticulars. The claim thus far that bodies are basic is deduced from the 
fact that our schema for the reidentiﬁ cation of objective particulars is 
a uniﬁ ed system of both space and time. One way to look for a schema 
in which bodies are not the basic particulars would be to entertain 
the notion of a non-spatial conceptual scheme that would nonetheless 
provide for the reidentiﬁ cation of objective particulars. 
For that purpose, Strawson suggests that we explore this notion 
of a no-space world, one that by deﬁ nition would be a world with-
out bodies. Which of our ﬁ ve senses would we have to eliminate to 
arrive at a bodiless no-space world? Eliminate the “trivial senses” of 
taste and smell. Touch and sight must also be eliminated since their 
ﬁ elds are necessarily extended and hence spatial. A purely auditory 
world, a world in which sounds are the only sensory input, would on 
the other hand not allow for any spatial dimension. Thus we arrive 
at the fruitful question of whether a person whose sensory experi-
ences are sounds and sounds alone could have a conceptual scheme 
that would provide for objective particulars. If sounds are thus to be 
public objective particulars, we need the notion of other people, other 
observers. Thus the issue comes to these two closely allied questions: 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

61
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
“Can the conditions of a non-solipsistic consciousness be fulﬁ lled for 
a purely auditory experience? … Can we, in purely auditory terms, 
ﬁ nd room for the concept of identiﬁ able and re-identiﬁ able particu-
lars at all?” (IE: 69). A positive answer to the second question is a 
necessary  condition for a positive answer to the ﬁ rst, since the very 
notion of  reidentiﬁ cation requires the continuous existence of an 
unobserved particular, a requirement unavailable for a solipsistic con-
sciousness.
What sense could we give in a purely auditory world to the ques-
tion whether this particular sound can be identiﬁ ed as the same 
sound heard at another time? We can certainly say that the G major 
chord heard in this performance of Bach’s Mass in B Minor is the 
same chord that we heard in a previous performance, but in this 
case we can say that it is the same chord only as a universal or type, 
and not as the same particular chord. Strawson concludes that our 
familiar notion of an unobserved particular reidentiﬁ ed across time 
requires the idea of such particulars also having a particular place 
in a spatial system whose entirety is not revealed at any particular 
moment, and that this spatial system provides differentiating loca-
tions, places that house not only spatialized objects but also such 
particulars as sounds that are not essentially spatial. This enabling 
notion of place is one that is not available in the no-space world of 
the purely audible.
Gareth Evans’s article “Things Without the Mind – A Commen-
tary upon Chapter Two of Strawson’s Individuals” (1980) provides 
a detailed and probing account of some of Strawson’s assumptions 
and conclusions in Individuals. While Evans is frequently critical 
of Strawson, he nonetheless praises and joins him in their common 
effort to consider imaginatively alternative and possible accounts of 
the concepts that are commonly accepted as part of the human con-
ceptual scheme. We have seen a primary example of that enterprise in 
Strawson’s attempt in Individuals to ﬁ ll in the details of the world of a 
subject having only the auditory sense, a subject in a no-space world. 
For Evans, one way of considering such possibilities is to compare 
the worlds of a subject having hearing only, henceforth Hero, and 
a subject having seeing only, henceforth Seer. At the beginning of 
Individuals, Strawson proposes that spatiotemporal material bodies 
are the basic particulars in our conceptual scheme, but he is then 
prepared to ask whether such particulars are a necessary condition 
of any scheme at all that provides for the knowledge of objective 
 particulars. It is this that leads to the question of the possibilities 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

62
Peter Strawson
that may be inherent in Hero’s no-space world. That leads Strawson 
to consider the question of whether it is so much as possible that 
Hero could have a conceptual scheme that would “in purely auditory 
terms, ﬁ nd room for the concept of identiﬁ able and re-identiﬁ able 
particulars at all”. There is the further question of whether the condi-
tions of a non-solipsistic consciousness could be met by Hero. Despite 
a valiant effort, Strawson inconclusively concludes that continuing to 
explore the fantasy world of Hero is both tedious and unpromising. 
His modest purpose throughout has simply been to explore the issue 
of the very intelligibility of a conceptual scheme that, while devoid of 
material bodies, would nonetheless provide for the identiﬁ cation and 
reidentiﬁ cation of objective particulars.
While Evans is broadly critical of the main line of approach that 
Strawson has taken in exploring the possible viability of Hero’s world, 
a criticism that, with minor exceptions, Strawson accepts, Evans 
nonetheless ﬁ nds it promising to consider another and more promis-
ing line of approach that is at least implicit in Individuals. Evans 
approaches the questions of whether Hero’s conceptual scheme allows 
for the identiﬁ cation and reidentiﬁ cation of objective particulars and 
whether it allows for a non-solipsistic consciousness by testing the 
very provisional hypothesis that Hero would at least understand two 
mutually dependent conditions: (a) that the phenomena he perceives 
may occur unperceived, with the change or maintenance of their rela-
tive “positions” in some quasi-spatial dimension; and (b) that a change 
or maintenance of his own position may occur. For Evans, that under-
standing is more than can be provided for by a purely auditory experi-
ence, and he concludes that in the absence of some further support, it 
is virtually impossible for Hero to have the conception of an objective 
world existing independently of his experience.
For Strawson, Evans’s hypothesis has two mutually dependent 
but distinguishable aspects: (i) objectivity, the thesis that there are 
processes independent of Hero’s experience of them, and (ii) spatial-
ity, the thesis that Hero’s perceptible objects are ordered in a spatial 
manner allowing for the simultaneous existence of distinct processes 
(objects) of that kind. Strawson thinks that if Evans’s argument is 
sound, this would strengthen what is, after all, the major point of 
Individuals, namely, the primacy of spatiality in our identiﬁ cation 
and reidentiﬁ cation of material bodies.
Evans’s argument has two major lines, the causal ground argu-
ment and the simultaneity argument. The causal ground argument 
holds that if there is to be an objective world existing independent of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

63
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
a subject’s experience, then the perceiver’s perceptible objects must 
have sensible properties that themselves require a persisting causal 
ground distinct from themselves. Our human experience does have 
such a ground in our concept of space-occupying material bodies. No 
set of properties constructed from sense experience alone could pro-
vide the concept of such a ground. Hero has only sense qualities and 
relations, and thus lacks the resource needed for the concept of an 
objective world existing independent of his experience.
That argument is supplemented by the simultaneity argument. 
What is needed for an objective world is the idea of distinct although 
possibly qualitatively identical things existing simultaneously in spa-
tial relationships. Blind persons do have that concept despite their lack 
of sight, but their situation is not that of Hero, who lacks any opportu-
nity for the direct application of simultaneous spatial concepts. 
Strawson thinks that Evans is right in holding that “simultaneous 
spatial concepts” are a necessary condition for the idea of an objective 
world. It is not quite clear to Strawson whether Evans also thinks 
that it is a sufﬁ cient condition. Consider the case of Seer, a subject 
who has only visual experience. Seer does indeed have the requisite 
simultaneous spatial concepts and, if having such concepts are suf-
ﬁ cient to provide objectivity, he lacks nothing. It seems to Strawson 
that Evans would be no more willing to grant the concept of objectivity 
to Seer than to Hero, but for the reason why this is so, it is necessary 
to return to the major causal ground argument.
Strawson assumes that, for Evans, while such properties as col-
ours and visual shapes are commonly considered objective properties, 
they are dispositional properties of objects, having other non-sensory 
properties that make them space-occupiers, thus providing the causal 
ground of the sensory properties themselves. Strawson agrees that 
no objective world can be constructed out of those sense experiences 
alone. We ordinarily take the experience of visual properties such as 
shape and colour to be things in an objective spatial world. We cannot 
take such properties to be merely dispositional; they need some per-
sisting categorical base of a character different from themselves. We 
apparently need some non-sensory theoretical properties such as force, 
mass and charge. The difﬁ culty is that these properties are themselves 
dispositional, and thus that the categorical base for objectivity is yet 
to be found.
The resolution of this difﬁ culty is complex. Strawson has addressed 
it in “Perception and its Objects” (1979). In this reply to Evans, he 
gives at least a hint:
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

64
Peter Strawson
Fundamentally, the question is whether we are to retain our hold 
on a direct realist view of perception, such as can plausibly be 
ascribed to unreﬂ ective common sense, or to embrace an exclu-
sively representative theory. If we do retain our hold on the former, 
then we are released from the grip of the belief that sensory prop-
erties, conceived of as objective, must therefore be conceived of as 
merely dispositional, as requiring a categorical base of a different 
character from themselves. It may be asked how if we do retain 
our hold on the uncritical realism of common sense, we can simul-
taneously entertain, without contradiction, the scientiﬁ c world-
view – a view which, taken alone, is necessarily associated with 
a representative view of perception and, if held with a consistent 
exclusiveness, inevitably runs into the difﬁ culty just described. 
The answer lies in recognizing a certain irreducible relativity in 
our view of the world and in acknowledging our capacity to shift 
our standpoint from one standpoint to another, while retaining our 
grasp of the identity of what we thus variously view from differ-
ent standpoints. Self-consciousness on this point is what saves us 
from self-contradiction; though not, necessarily, from intellectual 
discomfort. 
(Strawson 1979: 280–81)
Strawson never assumes the real possibility of either a purely audi-
tory experience or a solipsistic consciousness. Any further pursuit of 
the no-space fantasy he ﬁ nds both difﬁ cult and tedious, but its investi-
gation does serve to conﬁ rm the thesis that in a descriptive metaphys-
ics, material bodies in a common spatiotemporal network are the basic 
particulars. He now abandons his investigation of the purely auditory 
world and turns his attention to the issues raised by an apparent possi-
bility of a solipsistic consciousness in the world of our ordinary human 
experience. Our concern in that world is with the identiﬁ cation and 
reidentiﬁ cation of three sorts of particulars: material bodies, places 
and persons. Material bodies are indeed the basic particulars, but in 
fact they and places are said to have a mutual dependence, and the 
very notion of persons is said to entail embodiment. A fuller explication 
of the notion of persons in its relation to material bodies and to the very 
possibility of solipsism is therefore in order.
Chapter 3: Persons
Among particulars, material bodies are for Strawson uniquely basic 
in the sense that they alone can be identiﬁ ed and reidentiﬁ ed  without 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

65
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
reference to any other sort of particular. He ﬁ nds this conﬁ rmed by the 
apparent impossibility of ﬁ nding a place for a reidentiﬁ able particular 
in the fantasy no-space world of a purely auditory experience, since in a 
sounds-only world there is no readily apparent way in which a distinc-
tion can be made between oneself and what is not oneself. The condi-
tions of a non-solipsistic consciousness would thus be unavailable.
But how then are the conditions of a non-solipsistic consciousness 
produced in our ordinary human experience? It is here that keeping 
in mind the purely auditory experience will help us to see the strange-
ness of what we as a matter of fact do. In the world in which sounds 
alone exist, what possible place could there be for the distinction 
between the hearer and the heard? It would seem utterly strange for 
the hearer to think of himself as a sound among sounds, the notion 
of a sound having the experience of other sounds.
This brings into sharper focus the question of what makes pos-
sible in the ﬁ rst place the distinction between the hearer and the 
heard, between the perceiver and his perceptions, a distinction we 
commonly make in our experience of the world. Strawson begins his 
investigation by thinking of some of the ways in which we commonly 
talk about ourselves. We ascribe to ourselves characteristics that 
we ascribe to material bodies such as height, colouring, shape and 
weight. But we also ascribe to ourselves other characteristics that we 
would not ascribe to material bodies, characteristics such as actions 
and intentions, sensations, thoughts and feelings, perceptions and 
memories. That distinction suggests at least two related questions: 
why are one’s states of consciousness ascribed to anything at all and 
why are they ascribed to the same thing to which we also ascribe 
physical characteristics?
The answers to those questions may appear to be satisﬁ ed by the 
fact that in our actual human condition a person’s body plays a unique 
role in his perceptual experience. Take visual experience. Consider 
(a) eyelids and all that is known by ophthalmic surgeons, (b) the 
orientations of the person’s eyes and (c) the location of the person’s 
body. For each person there is just one body that occupies uniquely a 
particular causal position with regard to his perceptual experience of 
both other things and himself. That fact does account for the particu-
lar attachment I feel for my own body, but it does not explain why I 
should ascribe my thoughts and my feelings to anything at all: why 
there should be a concept of myself at all. And even if those thoughts 
and feelings are ascribed to a something, the fact of the unique role 
of body in perceptual experience still does not in itself account for our 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

66
Peter Strawson
attributing events in consciousness to the very same thing to which we 
attribute the corporeal characteristics of the favoured body. In sum, 
we have yet to account for the use we make of “I”: for the notion we 
have of a person. Historically, one response to these apparent puzzles 
has been the claim that they rest on linguistic confusion. That claim 
has been shared by the Cartesians and by the no-ownership view held 
at a certain time by Wittgenstein and perhaps by Schlick. 
 For the Cartesian, the essence of mind is to think and the essence of 
body is to be extended, and the two are radically both distinguishable 
and separable substances. When we refer to a person, we are referring 
to that person’s mind or to his body or to both, but we never attribute 
consciousness to the very same thing to which we attribute corporeal 
characteristics. That dualism seems to avoid at least for the moment 
the question of why we ascribe consciousness to the same thing to 
which we ascribe physical characteristics, but it does not escape the 
question of why we ascribe conscious events to anything at all.
For Strawson, the no-ownership view does indeed address that 
latter question. Both Wittgenstein and Schlick found support for this 
view in Lichtenberg’s dictum that instead of saying “I think” I ought 
simply to say “There is a thought”. The statement “It is raining now” 
does not require the existence of an “It” presently engaged in the 
process of raining. The no-ownership theory presumably begins with 
a consideration of the unique causal position of a particular material 
body in a person’s experience. It is the uniqueness of this body that 
gives rise to the linguistic confusion of supposing that one’s experi-
ences are owned by that particular body. That would make some kind 
of sense if we continued to think of the body itself as the owner, but 
we slide from that acceptable sense to the view that the ownership 
belongs to something else called an ego whose sole function is to pro-
vide that ownership. But the very notion of ownership supposes that 
what is owned may be transferred, and since this is clearly not true in 
the case of mental events, the whole notion of an Ego to which states 
of consciousness may be ascribed is an illusion. 
For Strawson, that view of things is incoherent, since the no-
 ownership theorist is using the very sense of ownership that his theory 
denies. He begins his account with some such contingent statement as 
“All my experiences are uniquely dependent on the state of body B”. Any 
effort on his part to be rid of the troublesome “my” would inevitably lead 
to saying something like “All experiences are causally dependent on 
body B”, and that statement is clearly contingently false. Experiences 
owe their identity as particulars to the fact that they are experiences of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

67
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
a particular person. If experiences are to be the identiﬁ able particulars 
that they are, then it must be logically impossible for an experience 
ascribed to one person to be alternatively assigned to another. What 
the no-ownership theorist would deny, he must admit.
Both the no-ownership theory and Strawson’s rejection of that 
theory have a history that has been usefully articulated by Roderick 
Chisholm (1969). He reminds us that the theory in one form was 
defended by Hume: “As our idea of any body, a peach, for instance, 
is only that of a particular taste, color, ﬁ gure, size. consistency, etc., 
so our idea of any mind is only that of particular perceptions with-
out the notion of anything we call substance, either simple or com-
pound” (Hume 1955a: 194).3 Locke had already described the notion 
of substance as that of an unknown and unknowable substratum and, 
granted Ockham’s razor, Hume’s conclusion was bound to come. The 
no-ownership theory continues to have its supporters in the present 
age, and Chisholm cites instances in which this is evident on both 
sides of the great divide between continental and Anglophone philoso-
phers. Thus Sartre makes a basic distinction between being-in-itself 
(en-soi), things presented to the consciousness, and being-for-itself 
(pour-soi), the conscious self to which those things are manifest, and 
it is impossible for us to make of the self an en-soi, something known 
as it is in itself.4 Russell said that the self is not “empirically discover-
able” (1956: 305), and Carnap said that the given is subjectless (2003 
[1928]: 103–6).
Support for the no-ownership theory thus occurs across time, but 
so does opposition. Chisholm (1969) cites Brentano’s remark about the 
concept of substance: “Those who say that this concept is not included 
in any perception are very much mistaken. Rather it is given in every 
perception, as Aristotle had said …” (Brentano 1925: 30). And to the 
extent that Hume’s position is anticipated in Locke, then Leibniz had 
already provided a counter:
[F]rom the beginning we conceive several predicates in a single 
subject, and that is all there is to these metaphorical words “sup-
port” and “substratum”. So I do not see why it is made out to be a 
problem. On the contrary, what comes into our mind is the con-
cretum conceived as wise, warm, shining, rather than … abstrac-
tions or qualities such as wisdom, warmth, light, etc., which are 
much harder to grasp …. So to treat qualities or other abstract 
terms as though they were the least problematic, and concrete 
ones as very troublesome is … to put things back to front. 
 
 
 
(Leibniz 1981: 217)
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

68
Peter Strawson
To free ourselves from the problems inherent in a no-ownership 
view, Strawson ﬁ nds a need to recognize the primitiveness of the 
concept of a person, that is, “a type of entity such that both predicates 
ascribing states of consciousness and predicates ascribing corporeal 
characteristics, a physical situation etc. are equally applicable to a 
single individual of that single type” (IE: 101–2). Descartes made a 
radical distinction and separation between mind and body, between 
thought and extension, and thus bequeathed to modern philosophy 
the task of showing how those two primitive notions could be related. 
The difﬁ culty is that we cannot come to the concept of individual 
different consciousnesses, other minds, if we attempt to make that 
concept primitive. Strawson’s counter is to make the concept of person 
primitive, and to make ego a secondary concept to be analysed only 
in the comprising concept of person. I can distinguish between the 
contents of a person’s consciousness and his corporeal characteristics, 
but at base they cannot be separated and made primitive.
For Strawson, making the concept of person primitive is also an 
effective reply to the no-ownership theorist. It was inevitable that 
from his starting-point, Hume would come to a no-ownership view:
For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, 
I always stumble on some particular perception or other, of heat 
or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never 
can catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can 
observe any thing but the perception. (Hume 1955b: I IV vi, 84)
For Chisholm, what Hume denies, Hume presupposes. Chisholm won-
ders how Hume can say he does not ﬁ nd himself if he ﬁ nds himself 
to be stumbling, and if he ﬁ nds himself to have certain perceptions 
and to lack others. For Strawson, Hume sought, or pretended to seek, 
the illusory primary concept of the unity of a pure consciousness, the 
ego-substance. His search was in vain because that unity can only be 
found if there is simultaneously a way to differentiate among indi-
vidual consciousnesses, but apart from the corporeal characteristics 
of a person, no such way exists. Where there is no principle of dif-
ferentiation there can be no principle of unity.
The concept of a person is logically prior to that of the individual 
consciousness. The concept of a person is not to be analyzed as 
that of an animated body or of an embodied anima …. A person is 
not an embodied ego, but an ego might be a disembodied person, 
retaining the logical beneﬁ t of individuality from having been a 
person. 
(IE: 103)
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

69
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
For Strawson, we cannot argue, in the manner of Hume, “from my own 
case”, because I can have no idea of “my own self” without already hav-
ing the idea of “other self”. To have this idea of “other self” requires that 
I be able to identify individuals of that type, and that identiﬁ cation in 
turn requires that those other selves have both states of consciousness 
and corporeal characteristics, that is, that they be persons.
From a linguistic point of view, Strawson thus makes a rough dis-
tinction between the M-predicates and the P-predicates of a person. 
The M-predicates of a person are those that are also applied to those 
material bodies to which we would never ascribe predicates ascribing 
states of consciousness. M-predicates would thus include having a 
certain weight, or being in a certain location. P-predicates are all the 
other predicates we apply to persons. Learning to apply P-predicates 
is simultaneously learning how to apply them to others and how to 
apply them to oneself. 
It might seem that ascribing P-predicates to another is necessarily 
rooted in observation, while ascribing them to oneself is not. This is 
the source of the idea that the only things we know apart from obser-
vation or inference are purely private experiences, and this would 
seem to drive a wedge between the concept I have of myself and the 
concept I have of another. In reply, Strawson asks us to consider those 
actions such as playing a ball game or going for a walk that involve 
bodily movement but that also clearly imply intention or at least some 
general state of consciousness. In such cases I do not hesitate to con-
cede that the actions of myself and those of another are of the same 
sort, and I understand them both in terms of a common intention. 
Self and others as persons are thus inextricably joined in a common 
human nature.
While there is a common human nature, one condition of our actual 
conceptual scheme is that this nature is not that of a community 
nature – of what has sometimes been referred to as a “group mind”. 
Those who have attempted to talk of such a mind have inevitably 
done so in analogy to our talk about individual persons. We do indeed 
sometimes talk of groups such as armies and teams having inten-
tions and goals, but we do this some of the time, not all of the time, 
and we do well to remember that this is an analogy with deﬁ nite 
limitations. If instead of talking in analogy of a group’s having such 
person-charactertistics as intentions some of the time, we were to say 
that they have them all of the time, we should no longer be speaking 
in terms of an analogy. In this manner of speaking, there would then 
remain no way of making an identifying reference to any individual 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

70
Peter Strawson
consciousness within the group, and we will thus have eliminated 
the very condition that seemed to make the hypothesis of a primary 
“group mind” possible. We are brought back to a description of our 
actual linguistic practice when we recall the “startling ambiguity” of 
the phrase “a body and its members”. 
To be a person is to have both M-predicates and P-predicates. This 
concept of person is primary, but it is possible to think of a separate 
pure individual consciousness in a secondary and derivative way. We 
could entertain the notion of a disembodied person, a former person, 
surviving bodily death. Strawson does not ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to conjure up 
such a possibility. He thinks that we have only to think of ourselves 
as having visual and auditory and perhaps some organic sensations, 
as we do at the present, while having no perception of our own bodies 
and having no power of initiating any changes in the physical world. 
But then two unappealing consequences follow:
The ﬁ rst is that the strictly disembodied individual is strictly soli-
tary …. The other … is that in order to retain his idea of himself as 
an individual, he must always think of himself as disembodied, as 
a former person …. In proportion as the memories fades, and this 
vicarious living palls, to that degree his concept of himself as an 
individual becomes attenuated. At the limit of attenuation there 
is, from the point of view of his survival as an individual, no dif-
ference between the continuation of experience and its cessation 
…. No doubt it is for this reason that the orthodox have wisely 
insisted on the resurrection of the body. 
(IE: 115–16)
Chapter 4: Monads
We can now see that a central issue for Strawson is the relationship 
between the problem of the individual consciousness with the general 
topic of identiﬁ cation. He turns now for comparative and clarifying 
purposes to a consideration of Leibniz’s system, a system he takes to be 
in marked contrast to his own point of view. He is not concerned with 
whether his account of Leibniz is in all detail historically accurate. 
Strawson’s purpose here is simply to use his description of Leibniz’s 
system as a way to make clear his own very different perspective.
There are two important ways in which Leibniz’s system appear to 
run counter to positions that are fundamental to Strawson’s approach. 
For Strawson, the identiﬁ cation of particulars rests ultimately for us 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

71
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
on the use of terms with some demonstrative force, on the use of a 
spatiotemporal system in which each of us has a particular location. 
Hence for Strawson it follows that a system that does not allow for 
temporal or spatiotemporal entities cannot be a system that allows 
for particulars at all. Kant is correct in saying that space and time 
are our only forms of intuition. 
In contrast, for Leibniz the basic individuals are monads. The 
nature of these monads comes under the principle of the identity of 
indiscernibles as a necessary truth, so that each monad has a unique 
complete individual concept: “some description in purely universal, or 
general, terms, such that only that individual answers to that descrip-
tion” (IE: 120). Leibniz evidently thought that he could specify that 
type of description, but that only an omniscient God could give the 
actual description for each particular individual, that is, a complete 
individual notion, a description of the entire universe from one certain 
“point of view”. The number of possible points of view is greater than 
any assignable number, each point of view is universally exhaustive, 
and, under the principle of the identity of indiscernibles, each must 
be unique. 
For Leibniz, the models for these basic individuals or monads are 
minds. Monads can therefore be individuated without reference to 
material bodies or persons, thus in terms of the states of consciousness 
alone. To take “point of view” literally would be to think of the monad 
as representing a common world of spatially extended objects. Even on 
that literal interpretation, the identiﬁ cation of a particular becomes 
impossible. Think of the squares of a chessboard. The “point of view” 
from c3 is qualitatively indistingishable from the view from f6. But 
for Strawson that literal interpretation is not faithful to Leibniz, since 
in his system all that is real are the monads, that is, mind-like con-
sciousnesses and their states. For Leibniz, there is no public space, 
only the private spaces of the individual monads, among which there 
are certain correspondences. But, in the absence of a public space, a 
plurality of monads with the same “point of view” is logically possible. 
Leibniz thus far fails to provide for the identiﬁ cation of individuals. 
For Strawson, Leibniz is now reduced to the following unappealing 
alternatives:
 (a) Reduce the identity of indiscernibles from a necessary truth for 
all possible worlds to a contingent truth for our actual world. But 
the system then becomes capriciously theological: the free choice 
of a God who apparently does not care for redundancy. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

72
Peter Strawson
 (b) Make “complete individual concepts” rather than minds the basic 
individuals of the system, and let the system be altogether con-
cerned with the relations of concepts and concept sets. Logical 
purity is then retained, and a number of principles that charac-
terize Leibniz’s system are guaranteed, namely: the identity of 
indiscernibles; the principle that monads are neither spatial nor 
temporal; the requirement that the predicate inheres in the sub-
ject of every singular proposition; pre-established harmony; and a 
maximum of diversity in phenomena combined with a maximum 
of simplicity in natural laws in the best of all possible worlds. As 
a logical construct this is all admirable; the difﬁ culty is that it 
tells us nothing about the empirical reality with which we are 
 familiar.
 (c) To remedy that difﬁ culty, we might continue to make “complete 
individual concepts” rather than minds the basic individuals 
of the system, but nonetheless allow each concept to have an 
instantiation “at least something like the creation of a unitary 
series of perceptual and other states of consciousness – a private 
view of a possible world” (IE: 130). For such an instantiation to 
yield results satisfactory to Leibniz, the identity of indiscerni-
bles and other key doctrines must be made contingent. Straw-
son ﬁ nds this mixed interpretation truest to the historical Leib-
niz. The basic individuals of the system are neither spatial nor 
temporal, but the system is not totally divorced from empirical 
reality. The logical impurities are thus admitted, although at 
one remove. 
Strawson thinks that if we start along with Leibniz with the notion 
of a consciousness and its states as the primary individuals, then we 
are going to be faced with the insoluble problem of the possibility of a 
number of individuals being indistinguishable from one another, and 
the identiﬁ cation of particular individuals impossible. For Strawson, 
the problem is not one to be solved; rather, it is to be dissolved by mak-
ing person rather than consciousness the basic particular. Person is 
primary, and the person’s M-predicates and P-predicates are secondary 
terms, distinguishable but inseparable. For each one of us in our actual 
use of language, there is just one person to whom ascribing conscious-
ness does not depend on observed behaviour. That person is oneself. 
Strawson’s account of Leibniz’s system does serve as a useful foil 
for his own account of the identiﬁ cation of particulars. The contrasts 
are indeed clarifying, and it is evident why Strawson classiﬁ es the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

73
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
 metaphysics of Leibniz as revisionary set over against his own descrip-
tive metaphysics. For Strawson, it matters little whether his account 
is historically accurate. Strawson is certainly entitled to his foil, and 
the use of Leibniz as a foil has a long history going back to Voltaire 
and continuing unabated down through our own time. A scholarly con-
cern about actual detail in texts may in this context seem beside the 
point, yet a consideration of possible differences between Strawson’s 
account of Leibniz and the texts themselves may be in some measure 
enlightening. Indeed, it can be argued that a closer consideration 
of Leibniz’s own texts shows him in many ways to be supportive of 
Strawson’s own position.5 Here are some particular instances.
 For Strawson, all that is real in Leibniz’s system are conscious-
nesses and their states. The monad is neither temporal nor spatial 
in any public sense. But for Leibniz, each ﬁ nite monad expresses its 
own body’s changes and viewpoint and thereby all other things, and 
there is thus a sense in which each ﬁ nite monad is both spatial and 
temporal. Every change has its place and time, and each ﬁ nite monad 
has a certain ordered relation of coexistence with all the others. Leib-
niz does not think “that any ﬁ nite substances exist apart from a body 
and that they therefore lack a position or an order in relation to the 
other things coexisting in the universe” (Leibniz 1970: 531).6 In the 
world that Leibniz himself thinks actual, there would be no sensation 
without body; indeed, there would be no thought of any kind, since 
ultimately self-consciousness itself is dependent on the experiencing 
of sense particulars (1981: 212).
Strawson also claims that for Leibniz there are inﬁ nitely many 
possible worlds, each separately capable of being described in univer-
sal terms without contradiction, and that for Leibniz the instantiation 
of one possible world does not logically entail either the creation or the 
non-creation of other possible worlds (IE: 130). That effectively voids a 
distinction between possibility and compossibility. But there are texts 
in which Leibniz clearly maintains that distinction. The universe is 
not a collection of all possibles, since not all possibles are compos-
sible (Leibniz 1970: 662).7 For Leibniz, there are many possible uni-
verses, each being a collection of compossibles, and he forcibly rejects 
as the “ﬁ rst falsehood” the claims of Descartes, Spinoza and Hobbes 
that everything that is possible is either past or present or future 
(ibid.: 273).8 Jaakko Hintikka (1972) has argued that if Leibniz’s logi-
cally based distinction between possibility and compossibility is to 
hold, then irreducible relations must necessarily obtain among the 
 individual substances constituting an actual world.
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

74
Peter Strawson
Strawson explicitly denies his Leibniz the irreducible relations 
that characterize a single common world: there are private spaces, 
but no public space. But in a text that is not isolated, Leibniz himself 
maintains the reality of a single actual world:
The mutual connection … of all created things to each other … 
causes each simple substance to have relations which express all 
the others and consequently to be a perpetual living mirror of the 
universe …. The inﬁ nite multitude of simple substances, which 
seem to be so many different universes, are nevertheless only the 
perspectives of a single universe according to the different points 
of view of each monad. 
(1970: 648)9
Like Strawson, Leibniz acknowledges the possibility of disembodied 
consciousness, but also in accord with Strawson he does not recognize 
separated consciousness entirely detached from any body. The ﬁ nite 
monad is indeed the primary individual, and the further distinctions 
between mind and body are secondary. 
In Individuals, Strawson is not primarily concerned with whether 
his Leibniz corresponds in all detail to the texts. His Leibniz is intended 
only to serve as a clarifying foil. It is true that from the voluminous 
body of Leibniz’s writings it is possible to make more than one selec-
tion of texts and claim that this selection represents Leibniz’s actual 
system, and Strawson is fully entitled to his own interpretation. It 
also seems true that there is another Leibniz, whose stance on the 
identity of individuals is in some ways not completely dissimilar to 
Strawson’s own.
Part II: Logical Subjects
Chapter 5: Subject and Predicate (I): Two Criteria
To this point, Strawson has argued for the primary place of material 
bodies and persons among the particulars to which we make an iden-
tifying reference, with other kinds of particulars seen as secondary. 
He now sets out on a further investigation of the apparent connection 
between the idea of particulars in general and the idea of an object of 
reference or a logical subject. The initiating difﬁ culty is that anything 
at all can be identifyingly referred to, can appear as a logical subject, 
can appear as an individual. It is necessary at the outset to keep in mind 
Strawson’s distinct uses for “individual” and “particular”.  Particulars 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

75
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
are individuals, but so are a vast variety of individuals other than 
particulars; for example, categories such as “quality”, “characteristic”, 
“relation”, “sort”, “species”, “number” and so on are also individuals 
(IE: 227). We thus make identifying references to both particulars 
and categories as individuals. We may accept the uniqueness and the 
primacy of material bodies and persons among particulars, but there 
is the further question of whether particulars in general hold some 
special position among objects of reference or logical subjects. 
The traditional doctrine that Strawson wishes to investigate holds 
that particulars such as “John”, and universals such as “being mar-
ried”, and universals-with-particulars such as “being married to John”, 
can all be identiﬁ ed through the use of referring expressions, and 
can all be logical subjects, while only universals and universals-with-
 particulars, and never particulars alone, can be predicated through the 
use of predicative expressions. If so, then there is thus an asymmetry 
of use between particulars and universals, and a functional antithesis 
between subject and predicate in propositions with two terms copu-
lated. That antithesis has been forcibly denied, notably by Ramsey, for 
whom there is no essential distinction between the subject of a proposi-
tion and its predicate.10 Strawson articulates Ramsey’s objection, and 
then attempts to sort out the differences between that objection and 
the traditional doctrine. 
 That task requires a preliminary consideration of the subject–
predicate distinction itself. Strawson will ﬁ nd two different criteria 
for making that distinction, the grammatical and the category, and 
between those two criteria he will ﬁ nd both tensions and afﬁ nities. 
If we can both ﬁ nd and explain a correspondence between the two, 
then we will have found the rationale for the traditional doctrine that 
Ramsey rejects. 
The “Grammatical” Criterion
The traditional doctrine is that some terms can appear only as sub-
jects while others can appear either as subjects or as predicates, and 
that in no proposition can the act of referring to something be an act of 
predicating that thing. Strawson’s investigation of the merits of that 
thesis begins by listing certain distinctions between the two kinds of 
elements that combine to form a singular proposition of a fundamental 
sort. Those distinctions may be made in more than one way:
 I. The functional distinction between (A) indicating something and 
(B) ascribing something to that something.
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

76
Peter Strawson
These two functions can be assigned to the linguistic parts of a state-
ment, and that in turn yields:
 II. The distinction of linguistic parts between (A) subject expressions 
and (B) ascriptive-expressions.
Distinctions I and II taken together suggest a further and non-
 linguistic distinction:
 III. The distinction of propositional constituents between (A) subjects 
and (B) predicates.
The elements or roles in Lists I and II are exclusive, that is, the act of 
referring to something cannot be the act of describing it. In contrast, 
some of the elements of III can appear in either role in Lists I and II.
 Strawson considers next the possibility of a List IV, in which 
the division exclusions of Lists I and II are preserved, while at the 
same time the elements on this new list are non-linguistic and in 
that sense correspond to the elements of List III. The distinction in 
List IV is thus a non-linguistic counterpart of the distinctions in List 
II. Borrowing Frege’s terminology, the parallel distinction on List IV 
is between (A) object and (B) concept; a proper name can never be a 
predicative expression, although it may be part of one, for example, 
“is married to John”. 
Thus armed, Strawson begins the task of drawing an overtly gram-
matical distinction between A-expressions and B-expressions. Both 
kinds of expressions introduce terms, but they do so in distinctive 
ways. B-expressions introduce their terms in a propositional or asser-
tive way. What such terms are introduced into is a proposition. In 
contrast, the terms introduced by A-expressions have no such impli-
cation; they are, for example, the forms we use if we simply want to 
make a list of terms, with no assertive aspect. Frege characterized 
the distinction between A-expressions and B-espressions on List IV 
by means of a metaphor. Objects are complete or “saturated”, concepts 
are incomplete or “unsaturated”, and at least one part of a thought 
must be incomplete or predicative if the parts are to hold together 
(IE: 152–3).11
It is only because the sense of “B-expressions” is incomplete that 
they are capable of serving as a link in a proposition. “B-expressions” 
appear fragmentary because they suggest a particular kind of comple-
tion, while “As” look non-fragmentary because they carry no such sug-
gestion. It is essential in all of this to recall that the distinction made 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

77
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
is between the styles of the introduction of terms, between assertion 
and non-assertion, and that nothing has been said up to this point 
about the distinction between particulars and universals. 
A further qualiﬁ cation is necessary. A-expressions and B- expressions 
alike must introduce a term, that is, an A-expression or a B-expression 
must have the intention of distinguishing that term from all others, 
of identifying it. Compare “Peter struck a philosopher” to “Peter 
struck the philosopher”. The expression “the philosopher” does dis-
tinguish and therefore counts as a singular term, but not so for “a 
philosopher”. Thus indeﬁ nite descriptions such as “a philosopher” are 
excluded, as are the substantives of quantiﬁ cation, “everything” and 
“something”.
The distinction thus made is between B-expressions, which are 
assertive and incomplete and that serve therefore as a link in a propo-
sition, and A-expressions, which have none of those characteristics. 
But the distinction thus made seems to encourage precisely the scepti-
cism of someone like Ramsey. It seems that we might undermine the 
whole distinction between A-expressions and B-expressions by simply 
assigning the linking function to something both conventional and 
separate from those terms, for example, by simply enclosing the sub-
ject and predicate terms within parentheses, that is “(Socrates Wis-
dom)”. With that move, the essential difference between A- expressions 
and B-expressions is removed, and with Ramsey we might move to 
the conclusion that no fundamental distinction between universals 
and particulars can be made on the basis of an essential difference 
between subject and predicate. While Ramsey’s scepticism may rest 
on simple instances of the subject–predicate distinction that do not 
adequately address the full complexities of our ordinary language, 
that scepticism does serve the function of requiring us to look beyond 
the grammatical distinction if we are to ﬁ nd a proper basis for the 
traditional doctrine, namely, that a particular can never serve as 
a predicate. That further search leads us to an investigation of the 
category criterion.
The Category Criterion
The grammatical version of the subject–predicate distinction holds 
that what is predicated is introduced by a part of the sentence that 
has a unique assertive role. It takes no direct account of a difference 
of type or category of terms. The category version is in contrast based 
on a difference of category or type of terms, notably the differences 
between universals and particulars.
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

78
Peter Strawson
Any term, universal or particular, can be assertively tied to another 
term to form a proposition. Any term can thus be thought of as a 
 principle of collection for other terms, and it collects just those terms 
that, when it is assertively tied to any one of them, results in a true 
proposition. Strawson carefully distinguishes three types of assertive 
tying, ones in which the speaker:
 (a) instances something as such and such, for example, “Fido is a 
dog”.
 (b) characterizes a subject as such-and-such, for example, “Socrates 
is wise”.
 (c) attributes something to something else, for example, “Plato is 
the teacher of Socrates”.
Assertive ties may bind particulars to universals, universals to univer-
sals, and particulars to particulars. For the binding of particulars to 
universals, there is a distinction between instantial and characterizing 
universals, and hence between instantial and characterizing ties.
Instantial universals distinguish and count the individual par-
ticulars they collect, and do not provide any method for individuating 
those particulars. “Dogs” and “vertebrates” are universals for distinct 
sorts, but those terms do not themselves individuate the particulars 
they collect. This kind of universal is generally introduced by cer-
tain common nouns. Characterizing universals group and count only 
those individual particulars that are already distinguishable by some 
antecedent method. This kind of universal applicable to particulars is 
introduced by verbs or adjectives, for example, “smiles” or “angry”. The 
power of characterizing universals to supply principles of grouping 
for particulars already distinguishable by some antecedent method 
is, however, a power they share with particulars themselves. Thus 
“utterances” can be further characterized or grouped by a universal, 
for example, “wise utterances”, but they may also be characterized or 
grouped by a particular, for example, “Socrates’ utterances”. Socrates, 
like wisdom, can serve as a principle for grouping particulars. Straw-
son now assigns the name “the attributive tie” to those assertive ties 
that bind particulars to particulars.
With these distinctions in hand, Strawson is prepared to compare 
some of the ways in which terms collect each other. We ﬁ nd that one 
particular may be instantially tied to different sortal universals, for 
example, Fido is a dog, an animal, a terrier; and, in turn, the sortal 
universal dog collects Coco and Rover as well as Fido. One particular 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

79
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
may also be characteristically tied to different characterizing univer-
sals, for example, Socrates is wise, warm, ﬁ ghts and talks, and, in 
turn, the characterizing universal “warm” collects particulars other 
than Socrates. 
The attributive tie is different. Thus “Socrates” collects by charac-
terizing ties a great number of universals: he is smiling, he is orating. 
By the attributive ties he also collects a great number of particulars: a 
particular smile, a particular oration. But while the universals “smil-
ing” and “orating” can in turn collect, by the characterizing tie, many 
particulars of the same kind as Socrates, the particulars “Socrates’ 
smiling” and “Socrates’ orating” cannot collect, by the attributive tie, 
any other particulars of the same kind as Socrates:
Let us express this feature of attributive ties by speaking of the 
dependent member and the independent member of any such tie; 
the independent member may in general collect many particulars 
similar to the dependent member, but the dependent member 
cannot collect any other particulars similar to the independent 
member. 
(IE: 170) 
Strawson concludes that we may rule that universals can be predi-
cated of particulars, but particulars cannot be predicated of univer-
sals. Universals can be either subjects or predicates, while particulars 
can be subjects but never predicates, although they can be parts of 
what is predicated, for example, “married to John”. 
Strawson’s investigation of the distinction between subjects and 
predicates began with a consideration of the threefold grammatical 
criterion for that distinction: the predicate is introduced by an asser-
tive symbolism, there is no assertive symbolism for the subject, and no 
category distinction is made between universal and particular terms. 
The investigation has now proceeded through the category criterion 
for which the distinction between universal and particular is central, 
no particular can appear as a predicate, and in which there is no refer-
ence to the location of the assertive symbolism. The grammatical and 
category criteria therefore appear independent, but there are afﬁ ni-
ties, since they seem to yield similar conclusions. If we can both ﬁ nd 
and explain a correspondence between these criteria, we will have a 
rationale for the traditional doctrine that particulars can appear in 
discourse as subjects only, and never as predicates, while universals 
can appear as either subjects or as predicates.
 Strawson thinks that he can ﬁ nd and explain that correspondence, 
and that the general lines of his argument are clear and indisput-
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

80
Peter Strawson
able. He also warns us that its detailed explication is a subtle mat-
ter of great difﬁ culty. The key to the correspondence between the 
 grammatical and category criteria is found in the ways in which terms 
are introduced into propositions. Strawson begins by considering 
ﬁ rst the introduction of individual particulars into propositions and 
then the introduction of kinds of particulars into discourse.
The introduction of terms into propositions involves the idea 
of identiﬁ cation, that is, the question of which particular term or 
which universal term it is that is being introduced. For speaker and 
hearer alike, for an identifying reference to a particular to be made, 
there must be some true empirical proposition such that there is 
but one particular that answers to that description. Thus John may 
be identifyingly referred to by name and, if need be, both speaker 
and hearer must be prepared to substitute some true empirical 
proposition, which will be a description of John as a unique particu-
lar. That description may include demonstrative terms and, indeed, 
ultimately it must do so, since Strawson has argued that in the end 
a description made in purely universal terms cannot satisfy the 
condition that a successfully identifying reference must refer to just 
one particular.
There is no such demonstrative requirement for the introduction of 
a universal term. Knowing which universal is being referred to does 
not require knowledge of an empirical fact; it requires only know-
ing the language. And now we have a new criterion for the subject–
 predicate distinction, one that harmonizes with both the grammatical 
and the category criteria:
We … propose … a new, or mediating, criterion for the subject–
predicate distinction. A subject-expression … presents a fact in its 
own right and is to that extent complete. A predicate- expression 
is one which in no sense presents a fact in its own right and is 
to that extent incomplete …. This new criterion harmonizes … 
with the grammatical criterion …. We ﬁ nd an additional depth in 
Frege’s metaphor of the saturated and unsaturated constituents 
…. The new criterion … also harmonizes … with the category 
criterion …. These considerations … explain the traditional, per-
sistent link in our philosophy between the particular–universal 
distinction and the subject–predicate (reference–predication) dis-
tinction. 
(IE: 187–8)
The crucial point for the whole of Part II of Individuals, and thus 
for a real understanding of the entire work, is thus found in the notion 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

81
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
of completeness. It is here that we ﬁ nd the link between the idea of a 
particular and the idea of an object of reference or logical subject (IE: 
12). Strawson concedes that the crucial idea of completeness remains 
vague, but he argues that expressions that introduce particulars must 
always carry with them some presupposition of empirical fact. Quine 
has argued in opposition that all “subject expressions” are superﬂ u-
ous because they can always be replaced by quantiﬁ cational variables 
and predicative expressions, with the consequent elimination of all 
singular terms. Strawson ﬁ nds Quine’s argument circular in that it 
effectively presupposes precisely what it is intended to deny. Quine 
would eliminate all singular terms for particulars and have “their 
place” taken by the bound variables of existential quantiﬁ cation, but 
it makes no sense to say that those variables have the place they have 
if there is in fact no such place.
Chapter 6: Subject and Predicate (II): Logical Subjects 
and Particular Objects
The Introduction of Particulars into Discourse
For Strawson, the introduction of an individual particular into a prop-
osition presupposes an empirical fact that itself involves the introduc-
tion or identifying reference to some particular. This introduction of 
particulars into a proposition is clearly set off against the introduction 
of universals into a proposition, where there is no presupposition of an 
empirical fact. We may now also attempt to think of a general theory 
for the introduction of kinds of particulars, or particulars in general, 
into our customary discourse. 
Just as the introduction of a particular has a presupposition, so too 
does the introduction of a kind of particular. Every introduction of a 
particular carries a presupposition of empirical fact. The introduction 
of certain kinds of particulars has as its parallel condition the exist-
ence of facts of a presupposed kind, but the statement of those facts 
cannot in the end introduce any sortal or characterizing universals at 
all. At this point, the asymmetry between particulars and universals 
that was an essential characteristic of the presuppositions of indi-
vidual particulars may appear to have been lost. 
This confronts us with the question of how the theory that gov-
erns the introduction of particulars can complement the theory that 
governs the introduction of kinds of particulars while at the same 
time preserving the asymmetry between particulars and universals. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

82
Peter Strawson
For the introduction of kinds of particulars, we shall have to ﬁ nd 
 universals that are neither sortal nor characterizing. Strawson thinks 
there are such universals, termed “feature-universals”, for example, 
terms such as snow, coal, gold and water:
Snow, water, coal and gold … do not function as characterizing 
universals …. [They] are general kinds of stuff, not properties 
or characteristics of particulars; though being made of snow or 
being made of gold are characteristics of particulars. Nor are 
[these] universal terms sortal universals. No one of them of itself 
provides a principle for distinguishing, enumerating and reiden-
tifying particulars of a sort. 
(IE: 202)
Such a phrase as “lump of coal” does introduce a sortal universal, but 
“coal” taken by itself does not. Thus while “coal” does not introduce a 
particular, it does provide the basis for such an introduction. 
Strawson thinks that his argument about the introduction of 
kinds of particulars or particulars in general into discourse has a 
“speculative and uncertain character”, from which his earlier argu-
ment about the introduction of particulars into propositions is hap-
pily both independent and free. But if we are prepared to accept both 
arguments, then they can be brought together to give us a certain 
logico- metaphysical picture. Here once again Strawson’s basic view 
will be that particulars are complete in a way in which universals are 
not. There are both right and wrong ways of showing this.
 A wrong way is to attempt to separate the unitary thought of 
a particular into the idea of the particular itself and the idea of a 
universal that it instantiates. In this way, “Socrates” is separated 
off as a “bare particular” for which there are innumerably many 
descriptions in universal terms. This way of the bare particular is 
the way of Locke, the path that leads to the notion of the particular 
subject as an unknown and unknowable substratum. This leads in 
turn to Hume’s vain search for himself. For Strawson, the contrast-
ing right way is to see once again that the introduction of particu-
lars into propositions and into discourse depends on some empirical 
fact, while the introduction of a universal does not. The proposition 
taken as a whole individuates the particular, but does not introduce 
it. This individuation of the introduced particular is obtained by 
describing it as either (a) uniquely related to some other identiﬁ ed 
particular, or (b) uniquely exemplifying some combination of uni-
versal and demonstrative terms. We still need a theory to account 
for the introduction of kinds of particulars. We need a resolution 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

83
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
that will exclude sortal and characterizing universals. Strawson 
ﬁ nds this in the facts of a feature-placing kind that underlie our 
talk about the basic particulars, namely, about material bodies and 
persons.
Strawson’s aim throughout Part II has been to ﬁ nd some basis for 
the subject–predicate distinction in the antithesis between “complete-
ness” and “incompleteness”, an antithesis that would serve to show 
the basis for the traditional association of the subject–predicate dis-
tinction with the particular–universal distinction. He is now prepared 
to sum up:
We set up, as a paradigm for reference, as a paradigm for the 
introduction of a subject, the use of an expression to introduce 
a particular … [namely] something which is both complete for 
thought in that it unfolds into a fact, and incomplete in that, so 
introduced, it is thought of as a constituent of a further fact …. 
We set up as a paradigm of description, of the introduction of a 
predicate, the use of an expression to introduce a universal … 
[namely] something which has the same kind of incompleteness 
as the particular but lacks its completeness. 
(IE: 212)
It is evident that in our ordinary language about the world of 
our experience, the introduction of the ordinary concrete particular 
has a primary importance. Strawson has argued above that there 
are occasions in our ordinary discourse when we do dispense with 
particulars and their predicates and all sortal and characterizing 
universals in favour of corresponding feature concepts. Since we do 
this some of the time, we may well ask whether it would be possi-
ble to do it all of the time. That is to ask whether, consistent with 
our continuing to be able to converse about the world as we com-
monly experience it, a language without particulars is possible. It is 
evident to Strawson that this would require an enormous inﬂ ation 
of needed expressions and tortuous constructions. One particularly 
acute problem that would arise early in our search would be ﬁ nding 
a way to provide these features with a particular location in space 
and in time. There may be such a way, but Strawson is content to 
leave the task to someone whose taste for ingenuity for its own sake 
exceeds his own. We come in the end to the not surprising conclu-
sion that if we wish to say the things that we do say, then the intro-
duction of ordinary concrete particulars into our language has huge 
advantages.
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

84
Peter Strawson
Chapter 8: Logical Subjects and Existence
Anything whatever can be identifyingly referred to; anything can 
appear as an individual. Particulars are individuals, but so are all 
manner of categories: qualities, properties, classes, kinds, numbers, 
propositions and so on. The variety is endless. Anything can be a logi-
cal subject.
A grammatical index of the appearance of an individual or subject 
in a proposition is the presence of some singular deﬁ nite substantial 
expression, for example, a proper name, the name of a universal or a 
deﬁ nite description. That raises immediately the question of the man-
ner in which such expressions may also be said to exist, a question 
that reﬂ ects the ancient but evergreen debate between nominalists 
and realists.12
Consider “the man in the moon”. We may say “The man in the 
moon does not exist”, or “The man in the moon does exist”. By the 
grammatical index, there appears to be a reference to an individual, 
along with an explicit afﬁ rmation or denial of that individual’s exist-
ence. But the grammatical index is not infallible, since we cannot 
take “the man in the moon” as truly a referring expression, since 
that would presuppose precisely what the content of the proposi-
tion afﬁ rms or denies. Consider instead “The man in the moon lives 
on cheese”. In this case, the grammatical index is not misleading. 
Here the reference is to an individual for whom there is no explicit 
denial or afﬁ rmation of existence, it is instead simply a fact that no 
such particular exists. So the ﬁ rst case, in which the existence of the 
man in the moon is explicitly afﬁ rmed or denied, is the interesting 
exception to the use of the grammatical index for the appearance of 
a singular deﬁ nite substantial expression as an individual. There 
is no problem from a logical perspective in glossing that exception 
by construing the proposition as referring to nothing, and as saying 
merely that there is, or is not, just one man in the moon. We may 
conclude that while the grammatical index is not quite infallible, it 
is nonetheless generally a good guide. We need only use caution in 
exceptional cases. 
Strawson agrees, however, that such an approach is likely to meet 
resistance from empirically or nominalistically inclined philosophers. 
The nominalist is opposed to allowing non-particulars to be individu-
als, to be logical subjects. He seeks to have his way by a reduction-
ist programme in which we replace reference to non-particulars by 
quantiﬁ cation over particulars. In this programme, (a) “Anger impairs 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

85
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
judgement” is replaced by (b) “People are generally less capable of 
arriving at sound judgements when they are angry than when they 
are not”. In this case, the replacement seems natural enough. Thus 
states such as “anger” are poorly entrenched against the nominal-
ist programme. So too are qualities (bravery), relations (fatherhood), 
activities (swimming) and even species (man). There are, however, 
other kinds of non-particular individuals that seem well-entrenched 
that are resistant to reduction. Strawson instances types:
I have in mind, for example: works of art, such as musical and 
literary compositions …, makes of thing, e.g. makes of motor-car, 
such as the 1957 Cadillac, of which there are many particular 
instances but which is itself a non-particular; and more gener-
ally other things of which the instances are made or produced 
to a certain design, and which, or some of which, bear what one 
is strongly inclined to call a proper name, e.g. ﬂ ags such as the 
Union Jack. 
(IE: 231)
Those non-particulars that are types support a remarkable analogy 
to particulars themselves. Consider the instance of the Union Jack, 
which we may see as a model particular, a prototype serving as a 
standard for the production of other particulars. This way of seeing 
things tends quickly enough in the direction of a Platonic realism, in 
which the Idea is the model particular for all of the particular imita-
tions in the sensible order. It is a direction that for Strawson has con-
straining limits, since if it is generalized to cover all non-particulars, 
it becomes “absurdly inappropriate”. 
While Strawson is no advocate of a Platonic realism, nor is he an 
advocate of an opposing nominalism. He has argued throughout for 
particulars to be taken as paradigm logical subjects, and that may 
seem to lean him in a nominalist direction, but once again there are 
constraining limits. There is a Platonist zeal, and there is a nominalist 
zeal, and Strawson rejects them both. He is thus brought in the end 
to questions that have been with philosophy since its earliest days: 
should non-particulars have the status of logical subjects? Do such 
entities exist? Here the apparatus of contemporary logic may seem to 
provide some immediate help. That logic reconstructs the question of 
existence and its association with logical subjects through the means of 
quantiﬁ cation. Thus, from “Socrates is wise” the explicitly existential 
statement “There exists something that is wise” can be inferred; “Fx”, 
hence “(∃x)Fx”. The conclusion follows that whatever can be referred 
to by a subject expression may be said to exist, and conversely.
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

86
Peter Strawson
Reﬂ ection may enable us to see that this approach is too simple. It 
initially invites the question of why the apparatus of quantiﬁ cation 
should always be applied to subject expressions and never to predicate 
expressions. The logician would have it that a number of subjects 
are said to have a single constant predicate. What keeps us from an 
alternative structure in which a number of predicates are said to 
have a constant subject? What possible justiﬁ cation is there for the 
logician’s preference? Following Russell, we can see an answer to this 
question by considering the ways in which the subject and predicate 
terms of a proposition are introduced. Consider a statement: “Socrates 
is wise”. Why do we have
 (1) “(… is wise) is sometimes true”
but not
 (2) “(Socrates …) is sometimes true” ?
Recall now the different ways in which subject and predicate terms 
are introduced into a proposition. The predicate term “is wise” does 
not have an empirical presupposition. We understand the term quite 
aside from whether we think anyone is wise or not. It follows that 
(1) is a functioning part of a proposition, which as a whole does con-
vey empirical information. But that in turn requires that the term 
“Socrates”, performing its role as subject, presupposes an empirical 
fact known by both speaker and hearer. But in (2), there is no way in 
which “Socrates” can be a referring expression:
To put the point crudely. That an already identiﬁ ed item, of what 
ever type, has some (unspeciﬁ ed) property or other, i.e., falls under 
some (unspeciﬁ ed) principle or other of collection of like things, is 
never news; that something or other unspeciﬁ ed has an already 
identiﬁ ed property, i.e., falls under an already identiﬁ ed principle 
of collection of things, is always news. 
(IE: 237)
 Acceptance of this conclusion gives rise directly to another funda-
mental question. When I say that Socrates is wise, why am I committed 
to the view that there exists such a thing as a wise man, rather than 
to the view that wisdom exists? The way to an unrestrained Platon-
ism seems to lie open. The proper approach to that possibility is once 
again the comparison of the contrasting ways in which subject and 
predicate terms are introduced into propositions. If we simply concen-
trate on what follows from subject–predicate propositions in the way of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

87
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
 existence claims, we get no reason for preference. But if we concentrate 
on what is presupposed by the use of these term- introducing parts of 
a proposition, the situation changes. A subject expression introducing 
a particular presupposes some empirical fact; a predicate expression 
introducing a universal does not. 
A difﬁ culty still remains. Particulars are indeed the paradigm for 
logical subjects, and now with Locke we may be tempted to adopt the 
view that the only things that exist are particulars. A resolutely reduc-
tionist programme would eliminate the presence of any non-particular 
individuals. If we take this path, however, an unrestrained Platonism 
is escaped only by the adoption of a similarly unrestrained nominal-
ism. That is a path Strawson is unwilling to take, since he thinks 
that no programme to eliminate all non-particulars as subjects can be 
successful. He ﬁ nds an alternative way, one that for him escapes the 
dilemma between Platonism and nominalism. Recall the statements 
that the man in the moon exists or that he does not exist. We have 
seen that the attempt to take “the man in the moon” as an identifying 
reference to a particular necessarily fails. By use of the idioms of exis-
tential quantiﬁ cation, we can avoid the snares that follow from such 
misleading attempts. The beneﬁ t of this approach is that it gives us 
an effective means to say that particulars exist without having to say 
that existence is a predicate of particulars. Every subject–predicate 
proposition entails one in which the subject expression is replaced by 
the existential claim “There exists something which …” – “∃x …”. The 
converse is also true, that is, in every case of a true statement made 
through the apparatus of an existential claim, a true statement could 
be framed in which a term-identifying subject expression replaces the 
existential quantiﬁ er. To take this approach is to allow for the intro-
duction of non-particular individuals into our discourse. Every existen-
tially quantiﬁ ed statement can be reconstructed as a subject–predicate 
proposition in which the subject is a property or a concept, and the 
predicate term either afﬁ rms or denies its instantiation. 
Summary
The central questions addressed in Part I of Individuals concern the 
ways in which reference to individuals and particulars is obtained in 
the practices of ordinary language. Anything whatsoever can be iden-
tifyingly referred to, can appear as a logical subject, as an  individual. 
Thus particulars such as historical events, material objects and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

88
Peter Strawson
 persons are individuals, but so too are such non-particulars as quali-
ties, properties, numbers and species. Among particulars, material 
bodies and persons hold a central position, since they are basic from 
the standpoint of identiﬁ cation and reidentiﬁ cation. The notion of 
persons as primitive and underived is a necessary condition for the 
maintenance of our common membership in a non-solipsistic, spatio-
temporal world of particulars.
Part II of Individuals is concerned with the linguistic complements 
to those metaphysical or ontological theses. Particulars are found to 
hold a primary place among individuals because they are paradigms 
for logical subjects. A joint consideration of the grammatical and cat-
egory criteria for the introduction of subject and predicate terms into 
a proposition provides support for according a central place among 
individuals to material bodies and persons, and to saying that they 
are what primarily exist. That belief is one that is widely held among 
persons who are not deeply reﬂ ective: by the common man in the street. 
Strawson concludes that if metaphysics is the ﬁ nding of reasons for 
what we instinctively believe, then what he has done is metaphysics.
Some critiques of Strawson’s positions
One of the best early notices of Individuals is that by J. O. Urmson 
(1961). The issues he raises have remained central in the evaluation 
of Strawson’s work, and time has justiﬁ ed Urmson’s claim that Indi-
viduals was a book that would continue to inﬂ uence philosophical 
discussion for some time to come. I also think that Urmson is correct 
in saying both that Individuals is a difﬁ cult book, and that it is made 
more so “by many sentences which, while logically and grammatically 
impeccable, are unnecessarily complicated in structure”. At the same 
time, I also think that Strawson’s prose is not always turgid, and 
indeed that at critical junctures there is a pithy directness, a helpful 
metaphor, and not infrequently a certain elegance of style. 
Urmson ﬁ nds Chapter 3, “Persons”, both rewarding and inconclu-
sive. He ﬁ nds that, for Strawson, the notion of person is primitive, that 
is, there is a logically irreducible category of things to which certain 
predicates (thought, pain, perception) can be applied by the criterion 
of either the observation of others or one’s own experience. But, for 
Urmson, there cannot be predicates “P” such that each of these two 
criteria can be a sufﬁ cient condition for applying “P ” while at the 
same time holding that the two criteria are not equivalent. Strawson 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

89
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
has rejected both Cartesian dualism and the no-ownership theory as 
accounts of mind and other mind, but Urmson ﬁ nds Strawson’s argu-
ments in this regard unpersuasive, since there are many concepts for 
the application of which we have, illogically, two independent sets of 
criteria or sufﬁ cient conditions. Urmson instances personal identity, 
for which we sometimes use memory, and sometimes body-continuity. 
Normally, both conditions are satisﬁ ed, but conﬂ ict may arise, and 
we may well be puzzled. We shall presently see Strawson himself 
in Freedom and Responsibility reﬂ ecting on the ways in which we 
attempt to bring together ostensibly conﬂ icting criteria.
In “The Primitiveness of the Concept of a Person” (1980), Hidé 
Ishiguro further investigates the two concepts of “person” and “primi-
tive” as they are employed in Individuals.13 On her interpretations, to 
say that “person” is a primitive concept is not to say that it is simple; 
it is rather to say that it is indispensable. To say that a concept is 
primitive is, moreover, not to say that it is absolute; its use is, instead, 
relative to some other concept, for example, the concept of a person is 
relative to the concepts of a mind and a body. 
In considering this concept of person, Ishiguro ﬁ nds helpful Leibniz’s 
earlier distinctions among clear, confused and distinct ideas (Leibniz 
1970: 91–4).14 For Leibniz, an idea is clear if it sufﬁ ces to allow us to 
recognize the thing represented. Clear knowledge is either confused or 
distinct. It is confused if we are unable to enumerate the various marks 
that distinguish the thing from other things, even though it may have 
such marks. This is the way we know colours and odours and all of the 
other objects of the senses. We cannot explain red to a blind person, 
nor may an artist be able to explain why this particular note or ending 
is the “right one”. Distinct knowledge, in contrast, does enable us to 
enumerate the distinguishing marks; compare the contrasting ways 
in which a miner and a chemist identify the metal gold. For Ishiguro, 
our knowledge of persons may be similarly clear but confused in that 
sense. We are thus obliged to consider a person a person whether we 
like it or not; nor does this have to wait for the time when we recognize 
them as material bodies having certain M-predicates.
The fact that some people think they can talk with plants, ﬁ sh 
or dogs does not for Ishiguro establish those things as persons. She 
thinks that a minimum condition of personhood involves the possibil-
ity of entering into a mutual relationship of that kind. She ﬁ nds that 
in Freedom and Resentment Strawson calls such features of human 
life “shared reactive attitudes”. Ishiguro would link such “shared reac-
tive attitudes” with her idea that the concept of person is primitive in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

90
Peter Strawson
relation to the concept of a material body. She proposes to accomplish 
this in three steps:
 1. We get the very concept of person by considering ourselves and 
other beings of the same sort as persons.
 2. Thus we distinguish persons from other things without having 
to bother with saying what kind of material objects they are by 
means of some neutral physical features.
 3. And it is in this indispensable way that we have the sortal concept 
of a person. 
In reply, Strawson ﬁ nds Ishiguro’s most interesting point on the con-
cept of person is her observation that in order to be a person, one must 
see oneself and others as persons, a point that he did not have in mind 
in Individuals, but one on which he thinks she is right.
 Ishiguro makes one other point that Strawson also ﬁ nds impor-
tant. One of Strawson’s purposes in Individuals had been to oppose 
the reductionism of the Cartesian dualist. Strawson thinks that while 
that reductionism is not in vogue at the present, there is another one 
that is both more popular and more plausible, namely, the view that 
we may reduce the notion of “person” to that of “living human body”. 
But Ishiguro plainly holds that while the only persons we human 
beings have personal relations with are other human beings, the 
concept “person” does not in itself commit us to saying what kind of 
material object a person is by means of some neutral physical features. 
If we accept that, Strawson observes, then of course instead of identi-
fying “person” with “living human body” we ought at least to have it 
identifying with “living personal body”. In that event, “personal body” 
is plainly itself derivative from the primary concept “person”. That 
would lend additional support to Strawson’s campaign against the 
more popular and more plausible reductionism of the present. 
Individuals was ﬁ rst published in 1959, and it was based on lec-
tures given at Duke University, North Carolina, in the academic year 
1954–55. The work has indeed stood the test of time in the sense 
that towards the end of his career, Strawson continued to support 
its major lines of argument and to see them as fundamental for his 
entire work. That is evident from his response to Chung M. Tse’s 
article “Strawson’s Theory of Subject and Predicate” (1998), written 
in November 1997.
Professor Chung M. Tse shows great discernment in identifying 
what he calls “the soul” of my philosophy. Certainly, if any single 
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

91
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics
issue, or cluster of issues, can be said to be central to my thought, 
it is precisely that of the metaphysical and epistemological foun-
dations of the familiar logico-grammatical distinction between 
reference and predication or subject and predicate. 
 
 
 
(Hahn 1998: 383)
Chung’s summary repeatedly cites Individuals, where Strawson has 
argued both that the ontological distinction between particular and 
universal provides the foundation of the logical distinction between 
subject and predicate, and that among spacetime particulars, it is 
enduring space-occupants that are primary. Universals taken as indi-
viduals may be identifyingly referred to, and if we take reference to be 
the mark of existence, then on Chung’s reading, Strawson’s position 
is that universals as well as particulars may be said to exist, “though 
not in the same sense of existence” (ibid.: 384). Strawson’s response 
is to disclaim the reservation, since for him there is but one sense 
of existence, although the vast differences between particulars and 
universals may reﬂ ect a correspondingly great difference between the 
implications of the two categories. In the end, Strawson himself recog-
nizes the actual existence of two categories of entity: particulars and 
universals. The existence of a particular requires having a particular 
spacetime location; the existence of a universal requires no more than 
the possibility of its instantiation.
The link to Kant
In Individuals, we see that, in the pursuit of an adequately descrip-
tive general ontology, questions of formal logic, epistemology and the 
practices of ordinary language are all inextricably tied together. The 
whole work is a sustained effort on Strawson’s part to search out the 
presuppositions of the knowledge and experience that we undoubtedly 
do have. That same touchstone of presuppositions is one that under-
lies all three of Kant’s critiques, and so it was altogether natural that 
in the years following the publication of Individuals, Strawson began 
to lecture regularly on the Critique of Pure Reason. A consequence 
of those lectures was his publication in 1961 of The Bounds of Sense. 
This is a work in which the major themes of Individuals remain in 
place, while Strawson continues to search for yet deeper insights into 
the limits of what we can conceive of as a possible general structure 
of our human experience.
https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/UPO9781844653171.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

