 

 
 
 
Inertial Propulsion Based Upon the Ether 
 
ABSTRACT 
The intention of this publication is to propose a hypothetical reactionless drive spacecraft (devoid of a propellant) employing 
differential centrifugal forces as well as counteracting three-dimensional mirror-image symmetry. Nevertheless, bearing in mind the modern-
day laws of physics (Newton and Einstein), it is assumed by most experts that this is not possible, for it is posited that a closed system 
cannot exert a net force upon itself. 
Contrarily, there are many experiments/inventors who have already proven, moreover, demonstrated inertial propulsion (e.g., Dean 
Drive/Thornson Inertial Propulsion Drive). Furthermore, given the circumstance that there is no underlying scientific supportive 
theory, those results, generally but not exclusively, have been ignored or debunked by the general scientific establishment. 
However, by employing the existence of the ether, the author posits an alternative theory that gives explanation to 
those experiments/demonstrations. With hope and assuming this new premise (the ether) is eventually validated, the outcome will lead 
to the general acceptance by the physics community—that one can utilize reactionless propulsion to build a functioning spacecraft. 
Therefore, at that time, there will be a strong impetus to build such devices (e.g., NASA/Elon Musk). 
 
 
 
PROLOGUE 
 
Most physicists/scientists presuppose that there is no ether (SRT/GRT). It is my intent to show that 
there is indeed an ether explicated by the following discussion/videos relevant to the idea/notion of 
inertial/reactionless propulsion. 
 
Inertial propulsion without a propellant has been claimed by many inventers. Nevertheless, since this 
concept violates the irrefutable laws of physics, it is assumed by most present-day scientists that this is not 
even possible. The reasoning is as follows: Modern-day physics hypothecates there is no true centrifugal 
force. It is only a fictitious force. Because of this assumption, inertial propulsion cannot exist. In essence, 
a closed system cannot exert a net force upon itself. On the other hand, if you view the videos at the 
following websites, you will note it is obviously not a fictitious force, but rather a real force. 
https://bit.ly/3iXZBg7 
https://bit.ly/3v2ojRX 
https://bit.ly/3oMADVx 
 
Now, regarding this article, the author intends to show in the latter half how one can utilize that just 
observed in the videos to then construct a reactionless drive spacecraft. If so, then the classic laws of 
physics regarding the fictitious centrifugal forces are in erratum 
 
For further clarification and illumination, visualize the translational motion of the devices you have 
just witnessed in the videos as just presented, moreover, specifically in only one axis. Notice, the devices 
cannot move in the other two axes, due to the wheels-blocking effect, and the Earth’s surface/gravity, 
again a blocking effect—therefore, leaving the original one-axis motion on the Earth’s surface intact. 

Now instead, envision being positioned in outer space, whereby with the use of multiple similar 
devices there is then employed counteracting three-dimensional mirror image anti-symmetry (two separate 
platforms with counteracting symmetry in three dimensions). As a result, this function leaves the original 
one axis translational motion intact but negates all motion in the other two axes somewhat analogous to 
the above website videos. This is essentially inertial propulsion without a propellant. If so, then the classic 
laws of physics regarding the fictitious centrifugal force is in erratum—it is a real force. Again, this article 
with additional detailed explanations, as well as three-dimensional illustrations /projections, can be found 
at the website inertialpropulsionbyramsey.com. 
 
See Division B of this book starting on page 16. 
 
In addition, and more significantly, the author will hypothesize, by using the concept of the ether, 
exactly how one can give explanation to a true centrifugal force. See Division A of this book starting at 
page 4. Hopefully, the reader will then have the impetus to read, moreover, evaluate the paper titled The 
Ether, which can be found at the website theetherbyramsey.com. This site explains relativity as a function 
of the ether, an alternative to Einstein’s relativity assumptions (no ether). 
 
Introduction 
 
Einstein’s Special Relativity Theory (SRT) assumes the absence of the ether. So, by inference then, 
inertial mass is the intrinsic property of the object, as a response to its acceleration by force (F=ma). 
In contrast, as posited by the book titled The Ether by Ramsey, if it exists (ether), it is the object’s 
acceleration/deceleration by force (F=ma) →relative to the ether itself← which then produces inertia as 
well as momentum. They are essentially two inverse aspects of the same function. 
 
The primary reason the author believes in the ether is this: Recently physicists have established 
and confirmed, the reality of the God particle, another name for the Higgs boson which is a quantum 
(part of) of the Higgs field. Fundamentally, the Higgs field permeates all the space of the universe; this 
includes the interspace of all of matter. Fundamentally it is what gives rise to inertial mass. Therefore, 
the presumed empty space of the universe is in fact something →rather than nothing←. In the author's 
opinion, the Higgs field is just another name for the ether. 
 
Chapter 1 of The Ether by Ramsey explains in detail, how the Higgs field (that which causes inertial 
mass/rate of time) is synonymous with the traditional meaning and definition of the word ether, the 
preferred frame for the velocity of light. Nonetheless, for the benefit of the average reader, moreover, 
to simplify this article and for future reference, the word ether will generally be used, rather than the 
term Higgs field. 
Given below is the author's definition of inertia and momentum as an effect of the ether. 
• Inertia = force (F=ma) accelerating matter, relative to the ether (at rest), therefore generating 
an →external resistance force of inertia← (from that ether) as a response to that acceleration = 
compaction of that structure. 
• Momentum = force (F=ma) exerted on matter, already in inertial motion, however, in this 
case producing deceleration of that object relative to the ether (at rest) and therefore, 
generating an →external resistance force of momentum← (from the ether) as a response to that 

deceleration = compaction of that structure. 
• Physical matter at constant translational velocity, vis-á-vis the ether, does not interact with 
the ether (at rest), so there is no change in its velocity. 
 
Contents 
Here is the outline of the contents to be presented in this publication. It is divided into two major 
divisions: A and B as well as numerous subsections. 
Division A compares the classic concepts of inertia and momentum from the frame of Newton 
and Einstein (no ether) versus a reference frame presuming the reality of the ether. Division A is 
separated into six subsections. 
1. The classic theory (Newton) of both translational inertia (acceleration) and momentum 
(deceleration) are illustrated and defined from the frame of an object’s own intrinsic physical 
properties (no ether). This classically is referred to as the “property of the object." 
2. Both translational inertia (acceleration) and momentum (deceleration) of an object are 
illustrated and defined, from the frame of the ether. 
3. The classic theory of rotation inertia and rotational momentum are presented (Newton = no 
ether). 
4. Both rotational inertia and momentum as an effect of the ether are presented. 
5. The law of the conservation of angular momentum of a rotating wheel is illustrated from two 
different reference frames (the classic theory versus the ether theory). 
6. The strength of a true (not fictitious) centrifugal force (a product of the ether) is explained 
partly based upon the length of the radius of a rotating wheel. 
 
 
Division B uses the concepts provided in Division A to explain how it is possible to design and 
construct a reactionless drive spacecraft. Division B is separated into two subsections. 
1. Six YouTube sites are referenced which, to some extent, demonstrate inertial propulsion. 
2. The author hypothecates two ideas for the design and construction of spacecraft, both of 
which exploit differential centrifugal forces along with counteracting three-dimensional 
mirror-image symmetry to then explain how one can propel those devices by employing, (as a 
function of the ether) a reactionless drive propulsion system (Centrifugal Inertial Drive = 
C.I.D). 
 
DIVISION A 
 
1. Translational inertia (acceleration) and translational momentum (deceleration) are 
illustrated and defined from the frame of an object’s own intrinsic physical properties 
(Newton) 
 
The three laws of Newton: 
https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~jos/pasp/Newton_s_Three_Laws_Motion.htm 
 
A. For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. 

B. Every object in a state of uniform motion will remain in that state of motion unless an 
external force acts on it. 
C. Force equals mass times acceleration. 
Einstein believed that there was no ether. If this is so, then the inertial mass of an object (inertia 
and momentum) must by exclusion be a function of its own intrinsic physical properties (its atoms). 
What other options are there? To be more specific, according to the laws of modern physics, there is 
no →external opposite force← as a response to an object’s acceleration/deceleration by F=ma. 
Rather, there is only →intrinsic atom resistance within that object (property of the object)← as a reaction to that 
acceleration/deceleration. 
 
For that classic definition of →inertia← see Figure 1 and the following diagram. 
 
 
Left 
Right 
 
 
 
Figure 1 
 
 
A is translational inertia without an ether. 
• (Figure 1, A-1 left) There is a force (F=ma) which accelerates the solid rectangle/object: See 
horizontal →solid← arrow pointing to the right. 
• (Figure 1, A-2 right) The rectangle as a function of its own intrinsic physical properties (its 
atoms) then resists that acceleration. See horizontal →white← arrow located within the object 
pointing to the left. This is defined as inertia. Be aware, internal object resistance is not an 
opposite external force; rather it is only an effect of the → property of the object←. 
• (Figure 1, A-1 and A-2) The structure is then compacted as a function of both horizontal 
arrows oriented in opposite directions. 
• The resistance, as a function of the property of the object, does not prevent its 
acceleration/movement from the direction of F=ma. Nevertheless, there is still a resistance to 
that motion. 

For the classic definition of →momentum← see Figure 2 and the following discussions. 
 
 
 
Left 
Right 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 
 
 
B is translational momentum without an ether. 
• (Figure 2, B-3 right) There is a force (F=ma) which decelerates the object/rectangle already in 
inertial motion. See →solid← horizontal arrow pointing to the left. 
• (Figure 2, B-4 left) The rectangle as a function of its own intrinsic physical properties (its 
atoms) then resists that deceleration in the same direction as the motion of the object. See the 
horizontal →white← arrow located within the object pointing to the right. This is defined as 
momentum. Observe again, there is internal object resistance as a property of the object but 
not an external force. 
• The resistance as a property of the object does not prevent the deceleration as an effect of 
F=ma. There is still deceleration, nonetheless a resistance to that deceleration. 
• (Figure 2, B-3 and B-4) The structure is then compacted as a function of both horizontal 
arrows oriented in opposing directions. 
 
In summary, regarding the modern interpretation of Newton’s three laws, there is no 
→external← resistance force from the ether; rather, there is only →internal atom← resistance derived 
from the “property of the object.” 
 
2. Translational inertia (acceleration) and translational momentum (deceleration) of 
an object are illustrated and defined from the frame of the ether 
The following account is not the classical theory of translational inertia and momentum as 
commonly taught by modern-day physicists/scientists. The ensuing descriptions comprise an 
alternative explanation proposed by the author but now as a function of the ether. 
• Matter at a constant velocity relative to the ether (at rest) does not interact with that ether, 
accordingly there is no change in its velocity. 
• Matter accelerated by force (F =ma) relative to the ether (at rest) →produces an external resistance 
force of inertia← (derived from that ether/Higgs field) as a response to that acceleration, 
furthermore, oriented in the opposite direction of the object’s motion/acceleration. 

 
From another perspective, the ether of the universe is all-pervasive; this includes the inner space 
of matter, nevertheless, still located external to its atoms. This external ethereal resistance force of 
→inertia← is then applied individually to all the atoms that make up that object. 
 
The ether resists the acceleration, but it does not prevent the acceleration. This is somewhat, and 
the author emphasizes somewhat, analogous to a boat being propelled by force in water. Water resists 
the boat’s motion (F=ma); however, it does not prevent that motion. Yet, there is a difference: Water 
resists both the velocity and acceleration of the boat, whereas the ether only resists the acceleration 
of the object but not its velocity. 
• Matter already in inertial motion, decelerated by force (F=ma) relative to the ether (at rest) 
then generates an →external resistance force of momentum← (derived from that ether) as a response 
to that deceleration but now in the same direction as the object’s motion. Refer to Figure 2 
for further clarification. 
 
Again, alternatively stated, the ether of the universe is all-pervasive; this includes the inner space 
of matter, nonetheless, still located externally to its atoms. This external ethereal resistance force of 
→momentum← is then applied individually to all the atoms that make up that structure. 
 
For a definition of →inertia← as an effect of the ether, refer to Figure 3 and the following 
discussion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Left 
Right 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 
 
C is translational inertia with an ether. 
• (Figure 3, C-5 left) There is a force (F=ma) that accelerates the solid object/rectangle. Refer 
to →horizontal solid← arrow pointing to the right. 
• (Figure 3, C-6 right) The ether (Higgs field) located within the inner space of the rectangle 
resists that acceleration →by an external resistance force of inertia from the ether, within the object, then 
applied to all of its atoms). Refer to →horizontal dotted← arrow pointing to the left. 
• The ether does not prevent/stop the acceleration in the direction of F=ma, but it does resist 
that motion. 
• Again, this is somewhat, and the author emphasizes somewhat, analogous to a boat being 
propelled by force in water. Water resists the boat’s motion (F = ma); however, it does not 
prevent that motion. Yet, there is a difference: Water resists both the velocity and acceleration 

 
 
of the boat, whereas the ether only resists the acceleration of the object but not its velocity. 
• (Figure 3, C-5 and C-6) The structure is then compacted as a function of both horizontal 
arrows oriented in opposing directions. 
 
For a definition of →momentum← as an effect of the ether, refer to Figure 4 and the 
following dialogues. 
 
 
 
 
 
Left 
Right 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
 
 
 
D is translational momentum with an ether. 
• (Figure 4, D-7 right) There is a force (F=ma) that decelerates the solid object/rectangle already 
in inertial motion. Refer to →horizontal solid← arrow pointing to the left. 
• (Figure 4, D-8 left) The ether (Higgs field) located within the inner space of the rectangle 
resists that deceleration by an →external resistance force of momentum from the ether, within the object, 
then applied to all of its atoms←. Refer to →horizontal dotted← arrow pointing to the right. 
• The ether does not stop or prevent the rectangle’s deceleration in the direction of F=ma, but 
it does resist that motion. 
• (Figure 4, D-7 and D-8) The structure is then compacted as a function of both horizontal 
arrows oriented in opposing directions. 
 
If the acceleration and deceleration are the same, then the external resistance forces from the ether 
are identical (the compaction is the same). Refer to the horizontal arrows in figures 3 and 4. Observe: 
They are pointing in opposite directions. And so, inertia and momentum are inverse functions of the 
same thing: a relative change in velocity (whether increasing or decreasing) with respect to the ether 
at rest. 
 
In summary, presuming the ether exists, it is not the →property of the object← that produces inertia 
and momentum. Rather both are a function of →external ethereal resistant forces←, as a response to the 
object’s acceleration/deceleration by force (F=ma). Compare figures 1 and 2 (intrinsic object (atom) 
resistance) with figures 2 and 3 (external resistance force derived from the ether). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Third: Rotational inertia and rotational momentum the classical theory (no ether) 
The modern laws of physics presuppose no ether. Therefore, by logic, inertia and momentum 
cannot be a function of what does not exist—rather, both are related to the intrinsic physical “property 
of the object.” Now refer to Figure 5 as illustrated below. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 
 
 
Fictitious centrifugal force without an ether. 
• (Figure 5, #9) The solid black and dotted circles represent the attached peripheral rotating 
masses. 
• (Figure 5, #10 and #11) The centripetal force (F=ma) accelerates the attached peripheral mass 
towards the pivot. 
• (Figure 5, #12) The rotating masses as a function of their own intrinsic physical properties 
(atoms) resist that centripetal acceleration (property of the object). There is no external 
opposite force; there is only internal object resistance to the centripetal force. 
• (Figure 5, #13) The centripetal force is only an apparent force and not real. See below. 
▪ 
Centrifugal force, a fictitious force, peculiar to a particle moving on a circular path, that 
has the same magnitude and dimensions as the force that keeps the particle on its circular 
path (the centripetal force) but points in the opposite direction. (Encyclopedia Britannica) 
▪ 
In the case of a rotating system, the centripetal force pulls the mass inward to follow a 
curved path, while the mass appears to push outward due to its inertia. In each of these 
cases, though, there is only one real force being applied, while the other (centrifugal) is 
only an apparent force. What Are Centrifugal & Centripetal Forces? | Live Science 
• Presuming no friction, the wheel will rotate in infinitum. 
In summary, according to classic laws of physics, there is no centrifugal force, only an apparent 
force not a genuine force. 
Fourth: Rotational inertia and rotational momentum as a function of the ether are 
illustrated and defined 

The following account is not the classical concept of rotational physics as commonly taught by 
modern-day physicists/scientists. The ensuing description is an alternate explanation, hypothecated 
by the author, regarding rotational physics →as a function of the ether/Higgs field←. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 
 
 
 
True centrifugal force as a function an ether. 
• (Figure 6, #14) The solid black and dotted circles depict the attached peripheral rotating 
masses. 
• (Figure 6, #15) The centripetal force (F =ma) accelerates the rotating mass directly towards 
the pivot. 
• (Figure 6, #16) This centripetal force produces →deceleration← of the rotating mass, relative 
to the ether, in the +y direction, therefore creating an external force of →momentum← in the 
+y direction (derived from the ether/Higgs field). For the latter, see the solid vertical arrow 
(16) pointing towards +y. 
• (Figure 6, #17) At the exact same time, the centripetal force produces →acceleration←, of the 
rotating mass, relative to the ether, in the +x direction, therefore, creating an external force of 
→inertia← in the –x direction (derived from the ether/Higgs field). For the latter, see the solid 
horizontal arrow (17) pointing towards –x. 
• (Figure 6, #18) Be cognizant that the vector sum of the two external ethereal forces is the 
centrifugal force which is oriented in the opposite direction compared to the centripetal force. 
Note, arrow #18 and its direction which is opposite that of the centrifugal force. 
• (Figure 6, #19) What all this means is that the centrifugal force is, in fact, real; not fictitious 
or only apparent as postulated by Newtonian mechanics 
Observe in the illustration, the continuous →loss← of angular velocity in the +y direction is equal 
to the continuous →gain← in velocity in the +y direction, so there is no change in the overall angular 
velocity (assume no friction). Accordingly, absent an outside torque or friction, the wheel will 
continually rotate ad infinitum. 
To summarize, according to modern-day classic physics, there is no centrifugal force only an 
apparent—not a genuine—force. Then again, presuming the ether’s existence, there is, in fact, a true 
physical centrifugal force. 

 
Fifth: The conservation of angular momentum of a rotating wheel vis-à-vis different 
reference frames: the classic theory versus the ether theory 
A spinning ice skater is a common example of conservation of angular momentum. When the 
skater starts spinning with hands outstretched, the angular velocity is low, but the spinning becomes 
very fast as the hands are pulled in. What happens is that as the moment of inertia decreases, the 
angular velocity increases, so that the angular momentum is conserved. 
 
 
 
 
(OpenStax College - Angular Momentum and Its Conservation (Fair Use) 
http://cnx.org/content/m42182/1.5/) 
Figure 7 
 
 
The purpose of the following dialogue is to explain this phenomenon, first from the frame of 
classic physics and, subsequently, to explicate the same phenomenon from the frame of the ether. 
However, instead of a twirling ice skater, imagine a rotating wheel associated with numerous attached 
peripheral masses, two of which can symmetrically move centrally towards the pivot and vice versa, 
to some extent analogous to the ice skater example just illustrated. 
First, as illustrated below, is the classic theory of the conservation of momentum vis-à-vis a 
rotating wheel (no ether). 

The Classic Theory 
 
Figure 8 
 
 
 
Conservation of angular momentum without an ether. 
• The hollow dotted circles and the solid black circles characterize the attached peripheral 
masses. 
• The larger gray circles depict the wheel with the attached peripheral masses. 
• The solid straight arrows located at the periphery of the wheels portray the rotational 
direction of the wheels clockwise. 
• The dotted arrows located outside the wheel indicate the direction of motion of the attached 
peripheral masses rotating in synchrony clockwise along with the wheels. 
• The single straight solid arrow pointing to the pivot represents the centripetal force. 
• The small hollow-tipped white arrows pointing away from or toward the pivot portray the 
symmetrical movement of two of the peripheral masses, ether towards the pivot or away from 
the pivot. 
 
The following description is from the frame of only the rotating wheel, and generally, but not 
exclusively, not from the frame of the rotating masses. 
 
The left images (A and B) illustrate what occurs when two of the peripheral masses are 
symmetrically transferred →by force← centrally towards the pivot—the wheel’s rotational rate then 
increases. The reasoning is as follows. 

Angular momentum without an ether. 
• The angular velocity of the peripheral masses (A), when located at the circle’s circumference, 
is greater compared to when positioned centrally towards the pivot (B). 
• Therefore, when the two peripheral masses are symmetrically transferred →by force← towards 
the pivot (B) a →torque of momentum (from the masses)← is then exerted on the wheel, (because 
their angular velocity is greater compared to the wheel’ s angular velocity), thus producing an 
increased rotational rate. 
 
→Observe, at the exact same time, there is a reciprocal force (F=ma) derived from the rotating wheel exerted on 
two masses causing their deceleration. For simplicity of illustration, this function is not shown in the above figure←. 
 
The two images to the right (C and D) depict what happens when the two central masses are 
→ allowed ← to symmetrically move towards the wheel’s circumference; the wheel’s rotational rate 
then decreases. The reasoning is as follows. 
Angular inertia without an ether. 
• The angular velocity of the central masses (C) when located towards the pivot is less compared 
to when they are positioned at the circle’s circumference (D). 
• Therefore, when the two central masses are symmetrically →allowed← to move towards the 
wheel’s circumference (D) a →torque of inertia (from the masses)← is then exerted on the wheel, 
(because their angular velocity is less compared to the wheel’s angular velocity) thus producing 
a decreased rotational rate. 
 
→Observe, at the exact same time, there is a reciprocal force (F=ma) derived from the rotating wheel exerted on 
two masses causing their acceleration. For simplicity of illustration, this function is not shown in the above figure←. 
 
The Ether Theory 
At this time, the same law of the conservation of momentum of a rotating wheel is explained but 
now from the frame of the ether. Again, bear in mind, all that deliberated below is from the reference 
frame of only the rotating wheel, and generally but not exclusively, not from the frame of the attached 
rotating masses. 

 
Figure 9 
 
 
Conservation of angular momentum with an ether. 
• The hollow dotted circles and the solid black circles characterize the attached peripheral 
masses. 
• The larger gray circles depict the wheels and their attached peripheral masses. 
• The solid straight arrows located at the periphery of the wheels portray the direction of the 
wheels rotating clockwise. 
• The dotted arrows located outside the wheels indicate the motion of the attached peripheral 
masses rotating clockwise in synchrony along with the rotating wheels. 
• The single solid arrow pointing to the pivot represents the centripetal force. 
• The small hollow-tipped white arrows pointing away from or toward the circumference of the 
wheels represent the symmetrical movement of two of the peripheral masses’ ether inwards 
towards the pivot or outwards away from the pivot. 
 
The left images (E and F) illustrate what occurs when two of the peripheral masses are 
symmetrically transferred →by force← towards the pivot—the wheel’s rotational rate then increases. 
The reasoning is as follows. 
Angular momentum with an ether. 
• The angular velocity of the peripheral masses (E) when located at the wheel’s circumference 
is greater compared to when they are positioned centrally towards the pivot (F). 
• Therefore, when the peripheral masses are symmetrically transferred →by force← towards the 

pivot (F), then a torque (from the masses) is exerted upon the wheel (because their angular 
velocity is greater compared to the wheel’s angular velocity) thus producing an increased 
rotational rate (acceleration). See solid arrows. 
• At the same time, the ether (Higgs Field) then resists the wheel’s acceleration by an external 
resistance force of inertia (derived from the ether). The ether does not prevent that 
acceleration, but it does resist it by an external force. See dotted arrows. 
• →Take note, again simultaneously, there is a reciprocal force (F=ma) derived from the rotating wheel, exerted 
on two masses causing their deceleration. In turn, as a response to that deceleration, this effect produces an 
external resistance force of momentum (from the ether) in opposition to the decelerations. For simplicity of 
illustration, this function is not shown in the above figure. 
 
The two images to the right (G and H) depict what happens when the two central masses are 
→allowed← to symmetrically move directly towards the wheel’s circumference—the wheel’s rota- 
tional rate then decreases. The reasoning is as follows. 
Angular inertia with an ether. 
• The angular velocity of the two central masses (G) when located centrally is less compared to 
when they are positioned at the wheel’s circumference (H). 
• Therefore, when the two central masses are symmetrically →allowed← to move directly 
towards the wheel’s circumference (H) then a torque (from the masses) is exerted on the wheel 
(because their angular velocity is less compared to the wheel’s angular velocity), generating a 
decreased rotational rate. See solid arrow. 
• At the same time, the ether (Higgs Field) then resists the wheel’s deceleration by an external 
resistance force of momentum. The ether does not prevent that deceleration, but it does resist 
it by an external force. See dotted arrows. 
• →Take note, also simultaneously, there is a reciprocal force (F=ma) derived from the rotating wheel exerted 
on two masses causing their acceleration. In turn, as a response to that acceleration, this effect produces an 
external resistance force of inertia (from the ether) in opposition to the accelerations. For simplicity of illustration, 
this function is not shown in the above figure←. 
 
In summary, this subsection is intended to be a mental exercise to help the reader 
perceive/visualize the concepts or rotational inertia and rotational momentum from two different 
perspectives—the classical theory vs. the ether theory. 
Sixth: The strength of a true (not fictitious) centrifugal force (a product of the ether) is 
explained partly based upon the length of the radius of a rotating wheel. 
 
Now, please see Figure 10 as illustrated below. 

 
 
Figure 10 
 
 
 
Centrifugal force 
• Presume the presence of the ether, therefore, a real centrifugal force. 
• Assume wheel A and wheel B both possess the same rotational rate. 
• The black circular masses of wheel A are located at the circumference whereas with B more 
towards the pivot as shown. 
• Therefore, the moment of inertia of the black masses is greater for A compared to B. 
• A1 and B1 represent the centrifugal forces of their respective wheels A and B. 
• The arrow pointed at the pivot of A and B is the centripetal force. 
• Given the assumptions just presented, then both the real centripetal force and the real 
centrifugal force →exerted on the black masses← are greater for A1 compared to B1. 
• This last assumption is obvious to the average individual, for without a background in physics 
most individuals intuitively presume there is a real centrifugal force 
• Then again, classic modern theory posits there is only a centripetal force, moreover, the 
centrifugal force is fictitious and not real. However, as shown in this article, if there is indeed 
the ether, there is also undeniably a centrifugal force. It is not fictitious; it is real. 
 
Succinctly, all of that which is illustrated and deliberated above presumes the ether exists, as 
hypothecated by the book titled The Ether by Ramsey. Consequently, there also is a real centrifugal force, 
not an apparent or fictitious force. For that reason, the real centrifugal force exerted on a mass (object) 
is greater when it is located at the periphery of a rotating wheel compared to when positioned towards 
its center, assuming equal rotational rates for both scenarios. 
 

DIVISION B 
As noted in the abstract, at the beginning of this publication, the purpose of this article, assuming 
the existence of the ether, therefore, a real centrifugal force, is to use that real force, along with 
counteracting three-dimensional mirror-image symmetry to design and eventually construct a 
reactionless propulsion spacecraft (Centrifugal Inertial Drive = C. I. D). 
 
First: This subsection references websites showing inventors/experiments that have 
already demonstrated and proven inertial propulsion. 
 
It is far easier to understand all the above if one can observe relevant experiments, performed by 
others, moreover, comprehend their function, based upon the ideas just presented, especially that of 
subsection six of Division A. Therefore, the author references six websites, which in one form or 
another, display inertial propulsion and some of which are followed by a brief discussion and 
evaluation. 
 
To comprehend this hypothetical invention, one must be able to mentally visualize in three- 
dimensions. So, to begin with, let us define the coordinate system. Assume the plane of the Earth’s 
surface is represented by the x and y axes. Presume the z axis is oriented perpendicular to this plane 
with one side oriented away from Earth (+z) and on the other side towards its center (- z). 
→Furthermore, for purposes of orientation, hypothecate that the direction of motion of all the experimental devices as 
shown in the YouTube videos is defined as the +y direction←. The author references the following three 
YouTube video sites since it is much easier to understand what occurs by watching a video rather than 
evaluating a written dissertation. 
 
https://bit.ly/3ByYHPg 
https://bit.ly/3v2ojRX 
https://bit.ly/3av3u8y 
 
After reviewing these three sites, take note, these inventions possess only one axis of freedom of 
motion, the y axis →defined as the direction of their motion←. Be cognizant of the fact that these 
experiments cannot move in the z axis due to gravity and the blocking effect of the Earth’s surface. 
And they cannot move about in the x-axis due to fixed orientation of the wheels. The only direction 
of freedom of motion is in the y axis. Bear in mind, this is crucial; relative to the y axis the centrifugal 
force is greater in the +y direction compared to the –y. So, the devices then →propel← in the +y 
direction (→defined by the author as the direction of motion←). After comprehending all the above, again 
review the above websites and apply the principles as just explained. 
 
The author now references this second set of videos. 
https://bit.ly/3oMADVx 
https://bit.ly/3oLGxpX 
https://bit.ly/3iXZBg7 
 
After viewing all six videos, it should be obvious to all that there is in indeed a true centrifugal 
force; otherwise, the inventions would not function as observed. True or false? 
Second: The author hypothecates two forms of spacecraft using a C.I.D. along with 
counteracting three-dimensional mirror-image symmetry to then propel those devices devoid 
of a propellant. 
 
It is far easier to comprehend the following set of illustrations if one first understands what is 

occurring in the YouTube videos as just referenced. The ensuing illustrations are a modification of 
what occurs in those videos. Fundamentally, the author uses three-dimensional mirror-image 
symmetry to counteract all forces except those asymmetrical forces oriented in the y-axis. And since 
the centrifugal force in the +y direction is greater than -y, the inertial propulsion force without a 
propellant overall is then in the +y direction. Voilà! There you have it in a nutshell. 
 
A hypothetical inertial propulsion spacecraft system is now presented using differential rotational 
rates/centrifugal forces as well as counteracting three-dimensional mirror-image symmetry. 
 
To begin, imagine a rotating wheel with an attached solitary mass positioned at its inner periphery. 
Now, the faster the rotational rate, the greater the centrifugal force exerted on that object. This basic 
idea is used to explain how a reactionless inertial propulsion engine can be designed and created. 
However, before proceeding, please re-review the YouTube video as shown below. 
 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=53rURZsFlZI 
This is only a partial explanation of what occurs in that video. 
 
If you watch this video very carefully, you will note that the rotational rates of both symmetrical 
peripheral masses are greater in the +y direction (defined as the direction of motion) compared to – 
y; so then too are the centrifugal forces also greater in the +y direction versus –y. Counteracting 
mirror-image symmetry and the fixed position of wheels prevents any motion in the x axis and gravity 
and the earth’s surface blocks movement in the z axis. All that is left is a →net← inertial/centrifugal 
propulsion force oriented in the +y direction (again defined by the author as the direction of motion). 
This concept will now be expanded to include counteracting three-dimensional symmetry as 
demonstrated in the following set of illustrations. 
 
To start, see Figure 11 below which illustrates the physical structure of the device. 
 
Figure 11 
• Time 1 = the platform (rectangle) encompassing two counteracting identical and symmetrical 
rapidly rotating wheels, each of which is associated with an attached peripheral mass as shown 
(+y direction). See length of curvilinear arrow within wheels = rapid rate. 
• Time 3 = the platform at later time 3, encompassing two counteracting identical and symmetrical 
slower rotating wheels, each of which is associated with an attached peripheral mass as shown (- y 
direction). See shorter length of curvilinear arrow within wheels = slower rate. 
• (A) = Time 1: the counteracting symmetrical wheels are rotating →rapidly← clockwise with 
respect to the left wheel and correspondingly counterclockwise relative to the right wheel. 
• (B) = Time 3: the counteracting symmetrical wheels are rotating →slowly← clockwise with 

respect to left wheel and similarly counterclockwise relative the right wheel. At Time 3, their 
rotational rates are still identical but now slower compared to Time 1. 
• (C) = Symmetrical/identical rotating peripheral masses. 
• (D) = Time 1: the strength of centrifugal force exerted on the two masses with the same rapid 
rate of rotation specifically oriented in the +y direction; the more the force the longer arrow. 
• (E) = Time 3: the strength of centrifugal force exerted on the two masses with the same, but 
now slower, rate of rotation oriented specifically in the -y direction; the shorter arrow. 
• The dotted semicircular arrows located peripherally within the wheels symbolize the direction 
as well as the rotational rate—the longer the arrow, the faster the wheel’s rotational rate. 
• The centripetal forces are not displayed in Figure 11. 
 
Please see the Figure 12 below which illustrates the function of the apparatus but only with 
respect to the y axis (–y and + y directions). 
 
 
 
Figure 12 
 
• At Time 1, the counteracting symmetrical wheels and attached masses are rotating rapidly (on 
the platform = rectangle). The left wheel is rotating clockwise, whereas the right wheel is 
rotating counterclockwise at an equally rapid rate. The straight dotted solid- tipped arrows 
associated with the peripheral masses denote the centrifugal forces oriented specifically in the 
+y direction. The length of the arrows symbolizes the strength of that force. The greater the 
rotational rate, the more the centrifugal force and the longer the arrow. The single solid 
straight arrow located at the center of the platform, in the +y direction, represents the sum 
vector force of the two centrifugal forces from the wheels and attached masses. The centripetal 
forces are not displayed in Figure 12. 
• Later, at Time 3, the counteracting symmetrical wheels are now rotating slowly (on the 
platform = rectangle). The left wheel is rotating clockwise whereas the right wheel is rotating 
counterclockwise, at an equally slow rotational rate. The straight dotted solid- tipped arrows, 
associated with the peripheral masses, denote the centrifugal forces but this time specifically 
in the -y direction. The length of this arrow represents the magnitude of that force. Observe 
that the length of this arrow is shorter compared to Time 1; since the rotational rate is slower, 
so the centrifugal force is less. To be specific, the slower the rotational rate, the less the 
centrifugal force—the shorter the arrow. The single thick solid straight arrow located at the 
center of the platform in the -y direction, represents the sum vector force of the centrifugal 
forces from the two wheels. The centripetal forces are not displayed in Figure 12. 
• Be cognizant of the fact that, and this is crucial, the sum vector centrifugal force in the +y 

direction is greater than –y based upon the different rotational rates (+y > –y). 
 
Please see the following sets of figures, which utilize this basic concept but now include 
counteracting three-dimensional mirror symmetry to describe how to propel a spacecraft with 
reactionless propulsion. 
 
To explain counteracting three-dimensional mirror-image symmetry, the author will use this 
approach. 
• First, there is a written description. 
• Second, four illustrations depicting the written explanation are presented. 
• And finally, a further clarification of the illustration is discussed. 
 
The written description. (See figure 13.) 
 
Instead of one, there are now two platforms oriented in the z axis, one above the other with mirror 
image symmetry. 
 
With respect to each platform, there are two counteracting symmetrical (functional and structural) 
rotating wheels with attached peripheral masses as shown in Figure 13. 
 
With respect to each platform, the counteracting wheels with their masses rotate faster in the +y 
direction (Time 1 in the illustrations) when compared to the –y direction (Time 3 in the illustrations). 
Therefore, because the rotational rates are greater in direction + y versus –y, the centrifugal forces 
exerted on the masses are also greater in the +y direction compared to –y. 
 
With respect to each platform, this also means that when oriented in the x axis (+x and – x) (Time 
2), the rotational rates of both counteracting wheels with their masses are decreasing as they transverse 
from direction +y to –y. 
 
And conversely, with respect to each platform, the rotational rates of the wheels and masses are 
increasing in the x axis (+x and –x) (Time 4) when traversing from direction – y to +y. 
 
Counteracting mirror-image symmetry prevents any →net← centrifugal force in the x axis. In 
addition, again the overall structure consists of an upper and a lower platform with mirror-image 
symmetry but now in the z axis. 
 
 
Figure 13 - A 
 
Therefore, in summary, not only is there counteracting mirror-image symmetry in the x axis but 
also in the z axis. 
1. Be aware and this is crucial: All centrifugal forces are counteracted except those forces in the 

y axis being greater in the +y direction compared to the –y direction. 
2. Accordingly, there is then a net inertial propulsion force without a propellant in the +y 
direction. 
 
For a better perspective, the following two images are nonfunctional mockups of the first 
proposed device so one can picture its physical structure in three dimensions then followed by time- 
interval illustrations.      
 
 
 
Figure 13 – B 
 
 

 
Figure 13 - C 
Further clarifications of the illustrations. 
 
As illustrated in Figure 13 above, the following dialogue explains the function of this hypothetical 
invention from different rotating time frames. All four wheels on both platforms with their attached 
masses possess a maximum rotational velocity in the +y direction and a minimum rotational velocity 
in the –y direction. Counteracting mirror-image symmetry negates all centrifugal forces except those 
forces in the y axis (the x and z axes are negated). And the forces in the y axis are asymmetric being 
greater in the +y direction compared to the –y, thus inertial propulsion without a propellant. The 
following narratives clarify each separate time frame of Figure 13. 
• Time 1 is when the counteracting wheels with their attached peripheral masses of both the 
upper and the lower platforms are all oriented specifically in the +y direction, moreover, at 
a rapid rotational rate. The centrifugal forces are at a maximum in this position, because 
the rotational rates are also at a maximum. 
• Time 2 is when the counteracting wheels with their attached masses of both the upper and the 
lower platforms are oriented specifically in the x axis. The rotational rates of the wheels and 
attached masses are now decreasing as they traverse from the +y direction to –y. Observe in 
the illustration that there is mirror-image symmetry of the upper and the lower platforms. 
Additionally, with respect to both platforms, the centrifugal forces counteract one another in 
the x axis (right = –x, left = +x). So overall with respect to the x axis, there is then no →net← 
centrifugal force. 
• Time 3 is when the counteracting wheels with their attached peripheral masses of both the 
upper and lower platforms are all oriented specifically in the –y direction but now at a slower 
rotational rate. The centrifugal forces are at a minimum in this position, because the rotational 
rates are also at a minimum. 
• Time 4 is when the counteracting wheels and their attached masses of both the upper and 
lower platforms are again oriented specifically in the x axis. The rotational rates of the wheels 
and attached masses are now increasing as they traverse from the -y direction to +y. Observe 
in the illustration that there is symmetry of the upper and lower platforms. Additionally, with 
respect to both platforms, the centrifugal forces counteract one another in the x axis (right + 

x, left -x) So overall, with respect to x axis, there is once again no →net← centrifugal force. 
 
In summation, combining all four time frames into one overall imaginary pictorial image, 
there is mirror symmetry of the upper and lower platforms in the z axis, and there is also counteracting 
mirror-image symmetry of the right and left sides of both platforms in the x axis. Therefore, the only 
remaining asymmetry is in the y axis with the centrifugal force being greater in the +y direction 
compared to the -y direction = C. I. D = reactionless propulsion. 
A second hypothetical inertial propulsion invention is now provided, this time using 
differential/true centrifugal forces based upon the length of the radius of a rotating wheel, as 
well as counteracting three-dimensional mirror-image symmetry. 
To start, please see Illustration 14 below. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14 
The image on the right is a summation of the four different rotational time frames as presented on the left. 
As in Figure 14, envision a rotating wheel with a mass (object) initially positioned adjacent to its 
circumference, specifically oriented in the +y direction as shown above (1). Presume as the wheel 
rotates clockwise, through the x axis (2), the mass gradually moves by force inwards towards the center. 
So eventually, when finally, it reaches the –y direction, it is then located directly adjacent to the pivot 
(3). Subsequently, presuppose as the now more-central mass continues to rotate clockwise, again 
through the x axis (4), it gradually begins to move outwards towards the wheel’s circumference. Finally, 
visualize when it is again located at the wheel’s periphery, the mass is once more oriented specifically 
towards +y. (1) 
So, let’s expand this concept by using the same principle but now also along with the use of 
counteracting mirror-image symmetry. 

 
Refer to Figure 15 above which illustrates the basic physical structure of this hypothetical 
invention. 
• The overall rectangle represents the platform encompassing two counteracting symmetrical 
rotating wheels (shaded) each of which contains four inner smaller white wheels (with an 
attached peripheral black mass) all of which are counter rotating in the opposite direction 
relative to its own larger shaded wheel. 
• With respect to the left versus right sides, there is overall structural, as well as functional, 
mirror-image symmetry (x and y axes). 
• The large left shaded wheel is rotating clockwise defined as the large left wheel. 
• The large right shaded wheel is rotating counter-clockwise—defined as the large right wheel. 
• Referring specifically to the left side, all four of the inner smaller white wheels including their 
peripheral masses are rotating counterclockwise, while at the same time the large left wheel is 
rotating clockwise. 
• Referring specifically to the right side, all four of the inner smaller white wheels including their 
peripheral masses are rotating clockwise, while at the same time the large right wheel is rotating 
counterclockwise. 
• In addition, the left and right sides have counteracting mirror-image synchrony. 
The synchronization function is pictured in Figure 15. The following pertains to the left and right 
sides →individually and separately←. 
• Relative to the large, shaded wheel during its rotation in one direction, as each of its four 
counter-rotating inner smaller white wheels reaches the +y direction, its peripheral mass is 
located at the periphery of its own shaded wheel, specifically oriented towards +y. 
• Relative to the large, shaded wheel during its rotation in one direction, as each of its four 
counter-rotating inner smaller white wheels reaches the -y direction, its peripheral mass is now 
located towards the pivot of its own shaded wheel, specifically oriented towards –y. 
• Furthermore, when each of the four smaller white wheels reaches x axis, the position of its 
peripheral mass at that time is then located approximately halfway between the center and the 
circumference of its own large rotating wheel. But observe carefully in the above illustration: 
In this case, relative to the large (shaded) wheel, their position is located more towards 
direction +y compared to -y. 
 
 
Left 
Right 
Figure 15 

Be cognizant that the overall function of each of these separate counteracting wheels, as pictured 
above, is →somewhat analogous← to the basic principle, as presented in Figure 14, now illustrated again 
in Figure 16 below. See the comparison. 
 
Figure 16 
 
Notice the similarity of function between the upper images compared to the lower images. 
 
Now recollect, the centrifugal forces exerted on equal masses positioned at the periphery of a 
rotating wheel are greater than if the masses were located towards the pivot, assuming identical 
rotational rates. See Figure 17 below, a repeat of Figure 10. Take note, A1 is greater than B1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Figure 17 (repeat of Figure 10) 
 
• A1 represents the centrifugal force exerted on the outer black masses of rotating wheel A. 
• B1 represents the centrifugal force exerted on the inner black masses of rotating wheel B. 
• Observe that A1 is greater than B1. 
• This is assuming the rotational rates of both wheels are identical. 
See the websites referenced below for examples of differential centrifugal forces based upon the 
length of radius of a rotating wheel. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cszpwt0udr8 
Inertial Thruster Moving - YouTube 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ifwJ5q26CvY 
This is only a partial explanation of the websites. 
If you watch these three videos carefully, you will observe that the radius of the rotating 
mass/masses is/are greater in the +y (defined as the direction of motion) compared to the –y 
direction, so then the centrifugal force/forces is/are also greater in the +y direction compared to –y. 
 
These inventions possess only one axis of freedom of motion—the y axis. Furthermore, these 
apparatuses cannot move in the z-axis due to gravity and the blocking effect of the earth’s surface. 
And they cannot move about in the x-axis due to fixed orientation of the wheels. The only direction 
of freedom of motion is in the y-axis. Notice, this is crucial; relative to the y- axis, the centrifugal force 
is greater in the +y direction compared to the –y. So, the devices then →propel← in the 
+y direction. Most importantly these videos demonstrate that there is in fact a true net centrifugal 

force in the +y direction (defined by the author as the direction of motion). See Figure 18 and the 
following dialog for a summation. 
 
 
Figure 18 
• The straight single dotted arrow on the platform directed specifically towards +y represents 
the sun vector force of all the centrifugal forces from all the masses (black circles) oriented in 
the + y direction. 
• The straight single dotted arrow on the platform specifically directed towards -y represents the 
sum vector force of all the centrifugal forces from all the masses (black circles) oriented in the 
-y direction. 
• The sum of the vector forces is greater towards +y compared to –y. 
• Counteracting mirror-image symmetry in the x-y plane negates all other centrifugal forces. 
• Therefore, there is a C.I.D. in the +y direction. 
 
So, let us assemble these concepts into one overall picture. If one carefully examines the Figure 
18 above, you will notice, due to counteracting mirror-image symmetry between the left and right sides 
(x axis,) all centrifugal forces are annulled except those forces in the y-axis. And those forces are greater 
in the +y direction compared to the -y direction. Thus, there then exists inertial propulsion devoid of 
a propellant in direction + y. 
And as for the conservation of angular momentum, if you again observe Figure 18 very carefully 
you will note that with respect to both the left and right sides that any motion of the four black 
peripheral masses (of the inner white counter-rotating wheels) to and from the pivot relative to its 
own larger shaded wheel, when summed together over 360 degrees, offset one another. As a result, 
due to this counteracting anti-symmetry, moreover, as a function of the law conservation of angular 
momentum, there is no change in the angular velocity of either large, shaded wheel. 
The descriptions given above encompass only two-dimensions. This will now be expanded to 
three-dimensions. So now see Figure 19 below. 
Again, for a better perception, the following two images are non-functional mockups of the second 
proposed device, so one can picture its physical structure in three dimensions then follow illustrations 
and descriptions. 

 
 
 
 
Figure 19 
 
• The entire apparatus consists of two planes, an upper platform and a lower platform, 
therefore, relative to each other oriented in the z-axis. 
• There is mirror-image symmetry of the upper platform versus the lower platform in the z- 
axis. 
• There is also counteracting mirror-image symmetry of both sides of each platform in the x 
axis. 
• Thus, all centrifugal forces annul one another except those unbalanced forces oriented in the 
y axis. 
• The centrifugal forces in the y-axis are greater in direction +y compared to –y. 
• Consequently, overall, there is net centrifugal force oriented in the +y direction = 
propulsion without a propellant. 

In Conclusion 
 
As posited by this entire article, these two different hypothetical inventions, employing the ether 
as an external force, demonstrate that it is possible to build reactionless drive spacecraft (devoid of a 
propellant) by using a Centrifugal Inertial Drive System along with counteracting three-dimensional 
mirror-image symmetry. The idea that a closed system cannot exert a net force upon itself (classic 
physics) is false. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDENDA 
 

 
 
 
 
The More Certain About What You Know, 
The Less You Can Discover 
 
More on Inertial Propulsion 
 
 
There are many assumed irrefutable laws of physics. One of these is the law of conservation of momentum. 
So, given this assumption, inertial propulsion without a propellant is not possible. In essence, a closed system 
cannot exert a net force upon itself. 
 
Set 1 
It is posited by mainstream physics that the centrifugal force is not a real force but rather a fictitious force. 
For a complete explanation, please review the videos as presented below. 
• 
https://bit.ly/3jcnoZA  
• 
https://bit.ly/3ierzVC  
 
Set 2 
Now, please refer to this second set of videos.  
• 
4 wheel Mov 1 - YouTube 
• 
New Space Engine: Dean Spacecraft Propulsion - YouTube 
• 
Dean Space Drive - YouTube 
These two sets of videos seem to contradict one another. If you believe that the law of conservation of 
momentum is irrefutable, then read this following explanation.  
 
 
Oscillation Thrusters 
The oscillation thruster, also describable as a sticktion drive, internal drive, or slip-stick drive, is a commonly 
suggested device that uses the motion of internal masses to create net thrust. One of the most famous oscillation 
thrusters is the 1959 “Dean Drive” described in Patent 2,886,976 (ref. 10). A more recent and simple example is 
shown in figure 1 (ref. 11). Further still, figure 2 displays an example that uses rotating masses (ref. 12). Although 
there are many versions, all oscillation thrusters have the following common components: 
 Chassis to support a system of masses  
 Conveyor that moves the masses through an asymmetric cycle  
 Power source for the conveyor 
A crucial feature is that the internal masses go through a cyclic motion where the motion in one direction is 
quicker than in the other. The result is that the whole device moves in surges across the ground, giving the 
appearance that a net thrust is being produced without expelling a reaction mass or having a direct driving 
connection to the ground.  
Because it would constitute a breakthrough to be able to move a vehicle without using a reaction mass (ref. 
2), these devices appear to be breakthroughs. Regrettably, such devices are not breakthroughs, since they still 
require a connection to the ground to create net motion. The ground is the reaction mass and the frictional 
connection to the ground is a necessary component to its operation.  

More specifically, it is the difference between the static fiction (sometimes called sticktion) and the dynamic 
friction between the device and the ground that is required for their operation. Static friction, the amount of 
friction encountered when contacting surfaces are not moving relative to one another, is typically greater than 
the dynamic friction between the same materials. Dynamic friction is the amount of friction when the contacting 
surfaces are moving relative to one another.  
Recall that the device’s internal masses move fast in one direction and slow in the other. When the masses 
move quickly, the device has enough reaction force to overcome the static friction between itself and the ground, 
and the device slides. When the internal masses return slowly in the other direction, the reaction forces are not 
enough to overcome the static friction and the device stays in its place. The net effect is that such slip-stick 
motion causes the device to scoot across the floor. 
 
 
Linear Oscillation Thruster 
This is a typical example of an oscillation througter, specifally from Patent 5,685,196 from Richard Foster (ref. 11). As the 
cam (60) rotates, a mass (50) moves slowly in one direction and is allowed to return quickly in the other. The reaction force 
from one one part of this cycle is sufficient to overcome static friction, while the reation force is insufficient in the other 
part of the cyle. This leads to one-directional motion, giving the illusion of net thrust. 
NASA- https://quantumdynamicsinc.com/scientific-papers 
 
On the other hand, if you still don’t believe that inertial propulsion is real? How do you explain the boat 
example in the websites below, based upon friction and gravity? 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nIt661hfr9c and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-uhOtDlXkcU 
After viewing the boat example in the first link, consider this. There is no friction or stiction between the 
boat and the Thornson inertial drive device (located within the boat) given the fact that there is no relative 
movement between the two, because the device is physically attached to the boat. Yet there is more momentum 
in the direction of motion; hence the boat moves in only one direction. Most importantly, the resistance from 
the water is greater in the direction of motion. Take note, this overall function violates the law of conservation 
of momentum.  
In addition, using the concept of sticktion and friction, how does one explain the following YouTube video 
starting at 1 minute 27 seconds (Dean Space Drive - YouTube) whereby there is a loss of weight. If you cannot, 
then here is another theory: there is a true centrifugal force = a true ether as posited by the book The Ether by 
Ramsey (see theetherbyramsey.com).  
 
The More Certain About What You Know the Less You Can Discover. 
 
 
 
 
 

Is It Time to Change the Laws of  Physics? 
 
 
The original classic interpretation of the MMX performed by Michaelson and Morley, assumed incorrectly 
that the interference pattern occurred at the telescope/observer with respect to two parallel waves that shift 
back and forth every 90 degrees thorough 360 degrees of rotation. (However, parallel-only with respect to 
time in the equations of the MMX—not in reality only mathematically.)  
But this author believes the interference pattern initially occurs at the half-silvered mirror from two waves 
traveling in actual physical opposition to one another, after their refection from the peripheral mirrors.  
The mathematical outcome of the classical Michaelson-Morley interpretation versus this alternative 
assumption by the author are different. They are not the same, so the consequence is different. Thus, the null 
result regarding the classical interpretation presumed by Michaelson and Morley is then in erratum = there is a 
true ether. Read more about this topic at https://bit.ly/3Au59HC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

True Centrifugal Force vs  
Pseudo-Centrifugal Force 
 
Can we assume there is a true centrifugal force? 
 
Please view this video which demonstrates the 4 Wheel Slow Speed Thornson Drive 
https://bit.ly/3iXZBg7 
 
Now, assuming there is a true centrifugal force, the device depicted in the above video will function on the 
surface of the earth, as well as in outer space, since there is more momentum in one direction compared to the 
opposite direction— most importantly, as a function of a true centrifugal force. 
However, in contrast, presuming only a pseudo-centrifugal force, not a real force as classically hypothesized 
by mainstream physicists, the apparatus shown in the video will only function on the surface of the earth and 
not in outer space. It will oscillate in outer space but not propel linearly in one direction = no net motion 
over time. The reasoning is as follows. Presupposing no real force, it is the difference between sticktion in one 
direction and friction in the other direction that causes the device on the table to move in one direction. A more 
thorough explanation is given below.  
A crucial feature is that the internal masses go through a cyclic motion where the motion in one direction is quicker than in the 
other. The result is that the whole device moves in surges across the ground, giving the appearance that a net thrust is being produced 
without expelling a reaction mass or having a direct driving connection to the ground.  
Regrettably, such devices are not breakthroughs since they still require a connection to the ground to create net motion. The 
ground is the reaction mass and the frictional connection to the ground is a necessary component to its 
operation. More specifically, it is the difference between the static fiction (sometimes called sticktion) and the 
dynamic friction between the device and the ground that is required for their operation. Static friction, the 
amount of friction encountered when contacting surfaces are not moving relative to one another, is typically greater than the dynamic 
friction between the same materials. Dynamic friction is the amount of friction when the contacting surfaces are moving relative to one 
another. (NASA) 
Recall that the device’s internal masses move fast in one direction and slow in the other. When the masses 
move quickly, the device has enough reaction force to overcome the static friction between itself and the ground, 
and the device slides. When the internal masses return slowly in the other direction, the reaction forces are not 
enough to overcome the static friction and the device stays in its place.  
On the other hand, it is my hypothesis that there is a true centrifugal force based upon a true ether, 
therefore, inertial propulsion is real and practical. 
Also see the website The Ether by Ramsey (theetherbyramsey.com). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

