Journal of Conscious Evolution
Volume 1
Issue 1 Issue 01/2005
Article 12
May 2018
Inner and Outer Realities: Jean Gebser in a
Cultural/Historical Perspective
Combs, Allan
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal
Part of the Anthropology Commons, Cognition and Perception Commons, Cognitive
Psychology Commons, Developmental Psychology Commons, and the Philosophy of Mind
Commons
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journals and Newsletters at Digital Commons @ CIIS. It has been accepted for inclusion
in Journal of Conscious Evolution by an authorized editor of Digital Commons @ CIIS. For more information, please contact
digitalcommons@ciis.edu.
Recommended Citation
Combs, Allan (2018) "Inner and Outer Realities: Jean Gebser in a Cultural/Historical Perspective," Journal of Conscious Evolution: Vol.
1 : Iss. 1 , Article 12.
Available at: https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/12

Inner and
Outer
Realities:
Jean Gebser in a
Cultural/Historical
Perspective1
Allan Combs
University of North
Carolina-Asheville
Saybrook Graduate
School-SF
Copyright authors and
Journal of Integral Studies.
1Originally a Plenary talk
given at the Jean Gebser
Symposium 2000 , Dresden,
Germany 
 
Through the long course of history the Western mind seems to have pursued
two recognizably different paths in the pursuit of knowledge about world and
about human nature itself. One emphasized the outward appearance of
things, while the other searched for hidden organizing principles within. The
ﬁrst has tended toward materialism as its preferred worldview, while the
second toward idealism. By this I mean followers of the ﬁrst path have
tended to seek truth in the realities of the visible material world, while those
who have pursued the second have stressed the importance relationships and
abstractions?aspects of the world that cannot be observed directly. The ﬁrst
group has relied on immediate experience, while the second has rested is
case on logic, mathematics, and intuition. The former are known as
empiricists and the latter as rationalists. Such a picture, of course, is an
oversimpliﬁcation of the history of Western thought, but gives us a working
context in which to discuss Jean Gebser?s contribution to modern thought,
and the reconciliation that integral consciousness brings as a gift to the
today?s world.
Before turning to Gebser, however, it will be useful to review some of the
highpoints of the two major themes mentioned above. Among the earliest
and most thoroughgoing of the materialists we ﬁnd the Greek philosophers
Leucippus (c. 460-? BC) and Democritus (c. 460-370 BC). Both argued that
everything in existence is composed of atoms. In Greek, the word atom is an
adjective for the word indivisible, so in a literal sense what we see when we
look around is the complete story; there are no inner hidden parts to reality,
and there are not hidden causes either. Not surprisingly, these two
philosophers believed in an absolute material causality as well. A more
liberal approach to understanding the physical world was promoted by
Aristotle (384-322 BC), who was arguably the ﬁrst scientist in history.
Though his work on logic places him in the tradition of rationalism as well,
he also was an empiricist, for instance observing and categorizing plants by
their appearance. He valued the physicality of the world we live in, and did
not withdraw from it into realms of pure speculation. He believed, for
example, that the rational soul, which he thought unique to human beings, is
so completely fused with the physical body that we see the uniqueness of
each individual in the way they walk, talk, and generally comport
themselves. He did not subscribe to the notion, espoused by his teacher
Plato, that the material world is a mere reﬂection of a more essential realm of
pure forms.
Near the beginning of the modern era the British philosopher John Locke
(1632-1704) promoted a thoroughgoing empiricism, with the notion that
infants are born with no innate knowledge or understanding whatsoever, but
learn everything from sensory experience. 
Let us suppose the mind to be, as we say, a blank slate (tabula rasa)
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
1 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
1
: Inner and Outer Realities
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

of white paper, void of all characteristics, without any ideas; how
comes it to be furnished? To this I answer on one word, from
experience: in that all our knowledge is founded and from what it
ultimately derives itself. [1]
This extreme form of empiricism set the pattern for the development of
modern science right through the 19th century, and has played a major role in
20th century science as well. Though science has made good use of
mathematics and logic, both tools of rationalism, over and above everything
else it has tended to stress the observable material world?though it has done
so in terms of measurement and quantiﬁcation rather than in terms of
descriptive qualities. Indeed, perhaps the most important of inﬂuence of
Copernicus and Galileo was their reduction of the notion of observation to
numbers alone.
Interestingly, though some of these architects of modern science were deeply
religious individuals, the t endency to attend to the surface qualities of
phenomena could not but in time lead to the dismissal of the whole notion of
God and invisible causes in general. So it was that in the early 19th century,
when the great French mathematician Pierre Simon Laplace was asked by
Napoleon why he had not dedicated his most recent treatise to God, as was
the usual practice, the latter replied, ?I have no need of that hypothesis.? By
the time we arrive in the 20th century, with the Vienna Circle and the Logical
Positivists, headed by Professor Moritz Schlick, philosophy was dealing
mainly with language and common sense, which for all practical purposes
amounted to a reduction of scientiﬁc discourse to what can be immediately
observed. These inﬂuences led to a capping-off of discussion about many of
the most fascinating aspects of modern physics, for instance, until well into
the second half of the 20th century, all because such discussion would have
dealt with invisible aspects of reality.
The other path to knowledge, the one that seeks hidden organizing
principles, can be traced back at least to Pythagoras of Samos (c. 569-475
BC), who explored music and harmony as represented in mathematics?for
example in the relationship of the length of a vibrating string to the pitch of
the tone it produces when plucked or struck. His choice of mathematics,
which in his time meant geometry and ratios, placed him at the beginning of
the Western scientiﬁc tradition, where formal relationships represented in
numbers are a fundamental organizing feature of reality. Plato (c. 428-347
BC) similarly believed in the preeminence of abstract relationships, posing
the existence of a perfect realm of ideals, or archetypes, more real that the
material world, and lending shape to it. In his writings we discover a fully
conceived realm beyond the visible world that inﬂuences and lends shape to
day-to-day reality. There were two aspects to this non-material reality that
bear on our discussion of Jean Gebser. Each has its own history, but both
seem to be struggling toward a mutual reconciliation in the modern world.
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
2 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
2
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 12
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/12

One aspect of Plato?s thought emphasized the Pythagorian notion that the
foundational aspects of the cosmos are best understood in terms of
mathematics, i.e., geometry. This idea later caught ﬁre in the work of
Copernicus, Galileo, and Newton, setting the stage for an entire worldview
based on the notion that mathematics?which thanks to Rene Descartes?
invention of ?analytic geometry? now combined both geometry and
numerical manipulations?was the very language of the creation itself, and
surely the means by which God had put it all together. Mathematics has not
only continued to deﬁne virtually all legitimate endeavors in astronomy, but
has become the core method of physics as well, with advanced university
mathematics courses cross-listed in departments of physics and astronomy as
well. In the second half of the 20th century this trend has gone much further.
For instance, mathematically based hybrid sciences involving physics,
chemistry, and biology have led to the mapping of the human genetic code at
the molecular level, and are presently poised to transform the very biology of
humans and other organisms. Debates over the ethics and practicalities of
such changes will occupy the opening decades of the 21st century and
perhaps many more decades to come.
Some of the most intriguing scientiﬁc advances of the 20th century were
made in the realms of quantum mechanics and chaos theory, both of which
rely heavily on sophisticated mathematics. The former opened up an expanse
of microworld complexity lying just behind the macroworld of ordinary
experience. Cutting below the atoms of Leucippus and Democritus, quantum
mechanics points to a ﬂuid unity at the deepest levels of reality, levels
entirely invisible to the common sense of Logical Positivism. Chaos theory,
at the same time, has shown that many types of complex real world events,
ones that emerge through the interaction of multiple underlying causes,
cannot be predicted with precision, though, ironically, mathematics can be
used to obtain qualitative descriptions of them. The latter is in part due to the
emergence of new properties of whole systems that simply do not exist at
lower scales of complexity. A common example is the weather, which is an
emergent product of a large number of constantly changing geothermal and
atmospheric factors. Human moods, and perhaps other aspects of human
experience, are also the emergent outcomes of myriad undergirding
conditions. Thus, while complex emergent phenomena do not arise out of an
invisible realm, they do emerge, as it were, out of nowhere.
Invisible Realities.
Let us now return to a less often discussed aspect of Plato?s thought, having
to do with the idea of an invisible reality that lies behind the world of
appearances. The famous allegory of the cave, found in the book VII of the
Republic, [2] remains even today one of the most intellectually compelling
parables of the notion that the world of appearances is an illusion that hides a
truer and more perfect reality behind it. In this story, human beings are
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
3 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
3
: Inner and Outer Realities
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

pictured as chained to each other in a cave, where they can see only the
shadows of real objects on the cave walls. Far away, outside of the cave, is
the true reality, where the sun is so bright that if one of these unfortunate
individuals were dragged directly into its brilliance, he would instantly be
blinded by the light, and only in time adjust to its intensity. And, if he were
allowed to return to his previous companions, we are told, they would not
believe the story he would tell them about his experience.
This wonderfully rich metaphor appears in the midst of an otherwise rational
discourse on politics. Here, it would seem, it is used by Plato to allow the
mental structure of consciousness to sense a reality best represented by
mythic consciousness. But before pursuing this line of thought further, let me
ﬁrst speak to the rational aspect of this allegory, the idea there the world of
appearance is not the true world, and that a more fundamental reality is to be
found elsewhere, a reality that undergirds the everyday world of
appearances. For the rational consciousness this idea is expressed through
metaphysics, and appears again and again in the history of Western thought.
Perhaps the greatest example is found in Immanuel Kant?s (1724-1804)
division of the cosmos into a phenomenal world of appearances and a more
essential world underlying it, to which we do not have direct access. We
must approach it through a perceptual coordinate system of space and time,
which gives rise to the particular categories of experience that characterize
human knowledge. In this, Kant was attempting to answer Hume?s
arguments in favor of an empiricism that denied just about any kind of
(rational) knowledge that did not come through the senses. Kant's arguments
were, however, so convincing that most thoughtful readers were convinced,
as had Plato been many centuries before, that reality is not what we see when
we casually look out at the world.
Nineteenth and twentieth century science has validated this view in many
ways. In the study of the senses it is obvious, for example, that the world
comes to human experience transmitted into the brain in a vast ﬂow of neural
impulses from the eye, the ear, the tongue, skin, and so on. Thus, in some
very real sense we must construct our worlds of experience from information
provided by the senses. When these malfunction our experience of reality
can be profoundly altered. Physics, especially quantum physics, in its own
way has shown us exactly what Kant intended, namely that the world as we
know it, the world that presents itself to us in colors, forms, and textures, and
more fundamentally in terms of space and time?in other words in a world of
appearances?is not as basic as the quantum world where even space and time
do not hold absolute sway. Once we get comfortable with the notion that
space and time, to say nothing of color, form, and texture, are aspects of
appearance and not fundamental of reality, we begin to reconsider many
aspects of the physical, organic, and psychological worlds in which we live
as well. For instance, biological molecules are subject to quantum level
effects, so it becomes possible, even necessary, to reconsider the nature our
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
4 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
4
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 12
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/12

own bodies in light of the new possibilities of quantum physics. Is it
probable, for instance, that quantum level phenomena such as non-locality
(action at a distance), or the ?entanglement? of events separated by time,
might play a role in the quantum neurodynamics of the brain, and thus in the
human mind and consciousness itself? Such ideas are important in
considering Gebser?s own thinking, since he was very much aware of recent
developments in physics, and considered them directly relevant to
discussions of an invisible reality. It is in such ideas that aspects of the
magic, mythic, and mental structures of consciousness seem to approach
each other and contribute to a larger integral vision.
Now let us return one more time to Plato and note that he was, in fact, no
stranger to the mythic and perhaps even magical consciousness. Like
virtually all Greeks of his time, he was aware of the mystery schools
common in those days, and which in one form or another continued through
most of antiquity until they were ﬁnally all but eradicated by the early
Christian church. In Greek culture these schools dated back at least to the
time of Parmenides (c. 515 BC), and even earlier in the Middle East, as
suggested by certain fragments of the story of Gilgamesh which indicate that
he and Inkidu traveled into the underworld guided by esoteric knowledge.[3]
Virtually all mystery schools spoke in one form or another of a reality behind
or below the ordinary world of appearances, a reality from which important
truths about life in this material world of could be sought and sometimes
found. Parmeaides seems to have traveled in sleep into the underworld, past
?the gates of the pathways of Night and Day,? in search of wisdom. 
The mares that carry me as far as longing can reach
Rode on, once they had come and fetched me onto the legendary
Road of the divinity that carries the man who knows
Through the vast and dark unknown. And on I was carried
As the mares, aware just where to go, kept carrying me
Straining at the chariot; and young women led the way? [4]
The mythic Orpheus is said to have traveled into the underworld as well, in
hopes of retrieving his beloved Eurydice, and became the central ﬁgure of
the Orphic Mysteries in which Socrates himself may have participated.
These mystery schools appear to owe a great deal to the even older tradition
of shamanism, in which the shaman, in an altered state of consciousness that
is essentially magical, actively moves into the world below or world above,
there going about his healing, or leading a soul into the afterlife, or whatever
his business is. In such traditions it is not so much that these alternative
realms of reality are more real than the world of appearances, as is the case
in Plato?s allegory of the cave, but that they are of at least equal importance,
and often are the location where mythical or magical realities reside which
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
5 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
5
: Inner and Outer Realities
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

directly inﬂuence the world of day to day life.
Plato was well aware of these, and similar ideas about different realities.
Sometimes he embedded these ideas in mythical texts. Near the end of the
Republic, for instance, is found the myth of Er, in which we are told that
prior to birth each soul receives its fate (Moira), and is given a daimon, or
soul-companion, to guide it through life. When the soul enters the material
world at birth it passes through a realm of forgetfulness, however, and arrives
without memory, so that it is the job of the daimon to guide it in its assigned
fate. The Romans had a similar idea in the notion of a personal genius that
?knew everything about a person?s future and controlled his fate.? This
genius was ?an agent of personal luck and fortune?. [5] In both instances we
have the idea that there is a pre-destined pattern assigned to each
individual?s life that constitutes their fate. And even though the individual
may initially, or even permanently, be ignorant of this fate, it sets the proper
pattern for his life.
An important variation on this theme was found in Neoplatonism, where it
was said that the individual chooses his own life situation prior to birth, but
that his subsequent life then ﬁts into a larger pattern. Plotinus, the foremost
spokesman for this philosophy wrote, 
Coming into this particular body, and being born of these particular
parents, and in such a place, and in general what we call external
circumstances. That all happenings form a unity and are spun
together is signiﬁed by the Fates [Moirai].
?Plotinus,
II.3.15
[6]
Now, Neoplatonism was one of the great underground inﬂuences in the
development of Western civilization. Though it is not commonly discussed,
and has not generally been in the best favor of the Church Fathers (to put it
mildly) Neoplatonism has nevertheless moved like an underground stream,
surfacing at key moments throughout history to inﬂuence thinkers and artists.
It was, for instance, inﬂuential in the work of many painters of the
Renaissance and afterward. It was also inﬂuential in the thinking and writing
of the remarkable 15th century theologian, Nicholas of Cusa (1404-1464),
who is of special interest to us here because he appears to have been an
important inﬂuence on Gebser himself. Nicholas of Cusa was inspired by
Plotinus? concepts of nous, the higher realm of archetypes and true
knowledge, comparable to Plato?s realm of ideals, and of the One, the deep
well of Being from which, in its abundance, all existence ﬂows. Nicholas
believed in a higher source of wisdom than the rational intellect, stressing the
importance of knowing the limits of the ordinary mind. He referred to
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
6 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
6
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 12
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/12

conventional knowledge as learned ignorance (docta ignorantia). Also in
line with Neoplatonism, he proposed the doctrine that all potential exists
within God, who alone is inﬁnite. Because God is the absolute maximum, he
contains all things "enfolded" ( complicatio), and is also their source or
"unfolding" (explicatio).
The latter notions anticipate the ideas of quantum physicist David Bohm,
who argues that the material world is supported by a vastly deeper and larger
process which he terms the implicate order. [7] This hidden order can be
thought of as a holographic process of cosmic dimensions, similar to a deep
ocean on which the universe, the explicate order, rides like waves. Strictly
speaking, little that is truly new or creative comes from the explicat e order
itself, as it is only a surface phenomenon. The implicate order is the
well-spring of creativity, expressing itself not only in the physical world, but
through human intelligence and even life itself. These are precisely the
processes that Nicholas of Cusa, using different language, attributed to God;
namely that novel aspects of reality come into existence by unfolding
outward from their divine source. Let that divine source be Gebser's origin,
and let projection be the mechanism for the unfolding, and we have Gebser's
concept precisely.
We may note that with Jean Gebser we have come full circle in terms of
Western concepts of the nature of consciousness. The ﬁrst profound Western
system concerned with consciousness was that of Plotinus, and in Gebser we
return again to Neoplatonic ideas, now transformed into modern concepts.
The Inner and the Outer
Bringing all the above discussion together, we now see that Jean Gebser was
a true Neoplatonist in the tradition of Nicholas of Cusa. Expressing the
latter?s ideas in modern terms we obtain the vision of a universe with a deep
structure that, in Kantian fashion, is ordinarily known to us only as it unfolds
into our day to day experience. This deep structure is not formless, however,
but is the very embodiment of universal forms, or truths, as expressed in the
Neoplatonic idea of the nous. As we have seen, however, according to the
older traditions this deep invisible reality contains more than the abstract
geometry of stars, ﬂowers, and crystals, but also the very patterns of our own
lives?our destinies that we must ﬁnd live out if we are to ﬁnd the central
meaning of our own individual existence. This notion is also seen in the
psychology of Carl Jung, with whom Gebser was personally very familiar. 
In the ﬁnal analysis, we count for something only because of the
essential we embody, and if we do not embody that, life is wasted. [8]
Jung, who considered himself to be a modern representative of the ancient
Gnostic tradition, was not have been ignorant of these Neoplatonic ideas.
More than any other modern thinker he made extensive use of the notion of
archetypes, which for him were of a more psychological nature, and reside
behind visible reality in the collective unconscious. The latter exists between
the outer world of appearances and the deep unus mundus, or ?one world? in
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
7 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
7
: Inner and Outer Realities
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

which all reality, both physical and psychological, is rooted. So it is that both
Jung and Gebser emphasized the importance of ﬁnding and fulﬁlling life?s
purpose, a purpose already written, as it were, in the book of destiny, behind
the space-time world of appearances. In this they placed themselves in the
tradition of seeking the form and meaning of a thing in the deep pattern that
marks its individuality, rather than in its surface traits. It is interesting that
this approach marks a distinct and separate approach to even the scientiﬁc
method, one that was favored by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832),
who found Newton?s experimental methods distasteful, and who proposed a
more contemplative approach to understanding nature and the objects in it.
This tradition continued through the writings of Schiller, Schelling, Hegel,
Coleridge, and Emerson, and continuing in Rudolf Steiner and Carl Jung,
and continued right down to Brian Goodwin, [9] one of today?s foremost
biologists and systems theorists. For these thinkers the human mind was not
separate from the natural world, as it was for Descartes, but a participating
part of it. In the words of cultural historian Richard Tarnas, 
It is only when the human mind actively brings forth from within itself the
full powers of a disciplined imagination and saturates its empirical
observation with archetypal insight that the deeper reality of the
world emerges. [10]
This certainly was Gebser?s approach as well.
In such matters Gebser was also clearly inﬂuenced by the great Indian yogi
and philosopher Sri Aurobindo, for whom ?the divine? seeks to express itself
in the world of human experience, even to the point of transforming the
human body into a divine vehicle. Sri Aurobindo saw this as an evolutionary
process, though certainly not of the Darwinian variety. The basic idea, which
is completely compatible with Plotinus, Nicholas of Cusa, and perhaps even
David Bohm's quantum physics, is that the form already exists in the divine,
struggling, or perhaps I should say waiting for the appropriate vehicle to
move into physical expressing. Sri Aurobindo and his partner, The Mother,
hoped to make themselves such a vehicle. However, in time they both died,
passing from physical existence, and so presumably they did not complete
this great effort. They did, however, consider themselves to be pioneers,
laying a course for others to follow in the future. In Sri Aurobindo's own
words, 
Seeking to embrace all life in itself [puts one] in the position not
of a pilgrim following the highroad to the destination, but, ?of a
pathﬁnder hewing a way through a virgin forest.
TheEssential Aurobindo
[11]
And so in their own view Sri Aurobindo and The Mother were evolutionary
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
8 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
8
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 12
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/12

pathﬁnders, making way for a divine process already complete in the
timeless and spaceless invisible, and struggling to emerge into the visible
world of appearances.
Sri Aurobindo also shared another most important vision with Gebser, that of
an integral consciousness. Though Sri Aurobindo did not actually speak of
?integral consciousness? as such, he came very close to it: 
To be wholly and integrally conscious of oneself and of one's being is
what is implied by the perfect emergence of the individual
consciousness, and it is that towards which evolution tends. All b
eing is one, and t o be fully conscious means to be integrated with the
consciousness of all, with the universal self and force and action.
?The Future Evolution of the Divine Life on Earth;
Pondicherry, 1963[12]
Indeed, what Sri Aurobindo called the Supermental is clearly very much like
the idea of integral consciousness.
To what extent did Sri Aurobindo inﬂuence Gebser?s thinking on the nature
of integral consciousness? This is a difﬁcult question to answer. Both men
were writing at roughly the same time. And we know that Gebser took a
keen interest in Indian spirituality, includi ng the teachings of Sri Ramana
Maharshi and the writings of Sri Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. Of the latter he
commented, ?Like Sri Aurobindo, he is the living proof of that new
(integral) consciousness in the dawn of which mankind is now living?. [13]
Gebser also corresponded with the prominent Buddhist scholar D.T. Suzuki.
It was the latter who veriﬁed Gebser?s report of a powerful episode of
integral consciousness as an authentic experience of nirvana. Indeed, the
whole affaire of Eastern inﬂuences in Gebser?s thought would be an
excellent topic for an investigation.
Gebser and Modern Science
Having pursued these oriental and historical themes in Gebser?s thought, let
us now turn our attention to the modern scientiﬁc world, asking what
relationship the latter might have on his ideas. In doing so let us seek an
integral perspective, emphasizing how Gebser brought together traditional
Eastern and contemporary Western thought.
To begin with, let us note the obvious fact that Gebser was very well
informed about the facts of modern technology as of as late as the early
1970s. In fact, most major paradigm-changing developme nts had occurred
much earlier in the century, and by the early 70s their implications in terms
of consciousness and reality were being widely discussed. It was already
apparent that quantum physics had undermined the clockwork worldview of
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
9 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
9
: Inner and Outer Realities
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

materialism that supported the Age of Enlightenment from the time of
Descartes and Newton, and in more subtle ways had made possible barren
modern philosophies such as Logical Positivism, which attended only to the
most literal surface aspects of phenomena. In fact, the deep implications of
quantum physics were well known to Gebser. For example, that space and
time are not absolute features of the cosmos, but rather simply the way we
experience it in the day-to-day reality of the marketplace (to use Hume?s
well-worn reference). Also he know that events can be connected outside of
the traditional space-time fabric, so that the magical notion of synchronicity,
which refers to non-causal (or acausal) but nevertheless meaningful
coincidences, becomes part of the new physics, though it was prohibited in
Newton?s universe. To be more explicit, subatomic particles that were once
bound together like Siamese Twins, in what is termed the singlet state,
continue to share their destinies afterwards, though they appear to the
observer to be separate and independent particles. Observations made on
either one of them simultaneously effects the possibilities that can be
displayed by the other, despite the fact that they may be vastly distant from
each other and have no possible means of communication according to
ordinary classical physics. Modern physicists have pointed out that since all
particles were once bound together in a grand singlet state at the moment of
the big bang, all matter in the universe is connected in this way. Thus, in
some ultimate but real sense we are all part of a vast single event unfolding
at a deeper level than the space-time display that our senses display to us as
reality!
One version of this idea, which Gebser was either aware of or anticipated,
was Bohm?s previously mentioned concept of the implicate order, according
to which the entire cosmos as we experience it ?unfolds? out of a deeper sea
of reality that exists beyond space and time. The latter are the means of its
exfoliation into the world of human experience. This deeper reality, which
Bohm represented in the mathematics of holography, must be thought of as
pure process. The explicate order, or reality as we ordinarily experience it
from day to day, on the other hand, is the simply the surface of the implicate
order, like the surface of the sea, which appears real but is only a reﬂection
of the deeper event that is not constrained or deﬁned by space and time.
Now, Bohm?s theory of the implicate order is just one theory by just one
physicist, and at that a theory which is not widely accepted by all or even
most physicists. Nevertheless, the basic notion that the world we experience
is undergirded by a much different order of reality, one where space and time
do not have their ordinary meanings, and where distance and causality are
not what they appear to ordinary experience, is just about universal in
today?s physics of the microworld. Notions of super-strings and quantum
foam are conceptually closer to traditional Buddhist ideas of the Creative
Void than to the empty vacuum that ﬁlled Newton and Descartes? spaces
between atoms. Out of these fundamental levels of reality arise everything
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
10 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
10
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 12
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/12

we experience, and even the ways in which we experience it. In Bohm?s
implicate order, but also in many other of today?s representations of the most
fundamental levels of reality we ﬁnd echoes not only of Kant?s metaphysics,
but also of Plato?s realm of ideals, Plotinus? nous, and Nicholas of Cusa?s
God beyond rational knowing from which all of creation unfolds into the
world we experience from day to day. Here we might notice that Plato and
the whole Neoplatonic tradition emphasize the idea the hidden orders of
reality are a source of patterns, or archetypes, which lend form to objects and
events in the world of objective experience. Similar ideas are being discussed
today by theorists such as Rupert Sheldrake and especially Ervin Laszlo,
who has written several books which develop the idea that quantum vacuum
ﬁelds may represent a kind of cosmic memory in which not only physical
patterns, such as the spiral form of galaxies and sunﬂower seeds, but patterns
of human thought and behavior, can be stored for later expressed. [14]
Nearly all of these ideas were anticipated in one form or another in Gebser?s
integrative mind. He was one of the ﬁrst to recognize the basic similarity
between the Creative Void of Buddhism and the seething caldron of creation
found at the most fundamental levels of the reality of quantum physics.
Perhaps even more important, he recognized and repeated again and again in
his writings the fact that the reality reported to us by modern physics is an
integral reality, comprised of magic events such as synchronicity, as well as
mythic concepts such as David Bohm's holographic metaphor for reality, and
the fusion of these with the mathematics of the mental structure of
consciousness, all together giving birth to an integral understanding of the
cosmos that unite all structures of consciousness in a single integral vision.
Beyond even this, Gebser had the remarkable foresight to anticipate the basic
insight of the modern sciences of complexity, namely that most real world
events, especially those involving human behavior, constantly derive from a
rich and extremely intricate network of interactions, which cannot be
simpliﬁed and reduced to the linear causal sequences that characterized the
Newtonian cosmos. In the Foreword to P.J. Saher?s Eastern Wisdom and
Western Thought, published in 1969, he not only anticipated the view of the
modern sciences of complexity, which today include chaos theory, but
suggested the inﬂuence of the invisible as well. 
What does this network-image mean? It is an acknowledgement that
so-called reality is not a mere space-time sequence but a complex
process. A network is no system (which as such always ﬁxes limits)
but an expression of a texture of relations (and of the abundant
possibilities suited to the network). In other words, historical realities
are not, as thought hitherto, events succeeding each other
consequently but are constellated by the interplay of many factors,
the invisible among them. [15]
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
11 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
11
: Inner and Outer Realities
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

Today, complexity theorists study the networks of interactions that inﬂuence
just about all real world events, and also speak of the web and even ﬁne mesh
of interacting inﬂuences that characterize the activity of all such complex
organizations, including biological systems from the level of single celled
organisms up to the behavior of human beings, societies, economies, and
governments.
All of this anticipates an idea which I feel is very important to understanding
today?s world. This is the notion of complex wholeness, [16] or in other
words the understanding that real world events participate in enormous
complexity, but are not lost into it. Rather, complex structures such as cells,
ecologies, brains, and societies, exhibit an emergent property of wholeness,
which gives them an identity and style that we can recognize. Individuals,
for example, have unique personalities, nations have national styles, and so
on. These complex emergent properties must be understood in terms of the
dynamics of complexity, but reﬂect underlying unities in the dynamics that
create and support them.
Evolution is one such emergent property of complex dynamics?the evolution
of the individual and the evolution of a species. Science today is not yet
ready to deal with the inﬂuence of the invisible behind such evolution, but
Gebser felt strongly that it plays a signiﬁcant role; a role that goes beyond
ordinary determinism, and points in the direction of a governing fate, or
daimon, to return all the way to Plato. If Jean Gebser and Sri Aurobindo
were alive today we might guess that they would see in the wondrous
emergent properties of complex adaptive systems, systems with properties
that can be inﬂuenced by the smallest possible of forces, an opening for the
invisible. And perhaps the science of the future will validate such thinking,
ﬁnding in the inﬂuences enfolded in the implicate order or the quantum
vacuum ﬁeld the inﬁnitesimally tiny whispers that pivot us toward our
personal and collective fates.
General references include:
Gebser, J. The Ever-Present Origin. (N. Barstad and A. Mickunas, Trans.).
Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1949/1986.
Smith, W. The Quantum Enigma: Finding the Hidden Way. Peru, ILL:
Sherwood Sugden & Co., 1995.
And thanks to Theo Röttgers' recent translation of Gebser?s The Invisible
Origin: Evolution as a Supplementary Execution.
< http://www.ctl.unca.edu/combs/IntegralAge/InvisibleOrigin.htm >
[1] Lock, J., An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. A.C. Fraser, ed.
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
12 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
12
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 12
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/12

(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1894). Bk. II, Chap. 1, Sec.2.
[2] Plato. The Republic. B. Jowett, trans.; NY: Modern Library, 1982.
[3] Thompson, W. I., The time falling bodies take to light: Mythology,
sexuality, and the origins of culture. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1981.
[4] Kingsley, P., In the Dark Places of Wisdom. Inverness, CA: Golden Suﬁ
Center, 1999; p.53.
[5] Hillman, J., The Soul's Code : In Search of Character and Calling.
Warner Books, 1997.
[6] Plotinus, The Enneads. Stephen MacKenna, trans.; Burdett, NY: Larson
Publications, 1992.
[7] . Bohm, D., Wholeness and the implicate order. Boston: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1980.
[8] Quoted in Hillman.
[9] Goodwin, B. How the leopard got its spots: The evolution of complexity.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1994.
[10] Tarnas, R. The passion of the Western mind. New York: Harmony
Books, 1991; p. 434.
[11] McDermott, R. The Essential Aurobindo. NY: Schoken Books, 1973;
P.144-145.
[12] Sri Aurobindo. The life divine. Pondicherry, India: Sri Aurobindo
Ashram Press, 1970.
[13] Saher, P.J. Eastern Wisdom and Western Science: The Psycho-
Cybernetics of Contemplative Ideas in Religion and Philosophy. London:
Allen and Unwin, 1969, p.11.
[14] Laszlo, E. The Whispering Pond. Rockport, MA: Element, 1997.
[15] p.14
[16] Morin, E. Homeland Earth: A Manifesto for the New Millennium
(Advances in Systems Theory, Complexity and the Human Sciences). S. Kelly
and A.B. Kern, trans.; Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 1998.
 
Realities
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Realities.htm
13 of 13
5/30/18, 12:58 AM
13
: Inner and Outer Realities
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

