
Intelligence and
Intelligence Testing
Have you ever wondered what IQ is and how it is measured? Why is there 
such a premium placed on high IQ? What do we mean by intelligence? What 
does your IQ score mean?
There can be no denying the enduring appeal of IQ over the last century. It 
is probably one of the most misunderstood yet highly researched psychologi-
cal constructs. Such has been the controversy surrounding this topic that it is 
difficult to distinguish fact from fiction. Intelligence and Intelligence Testing is a 
text that aims to address that.
This book examines the controversial psychological construct that is IQ, 
discussing and reviewing the history and current status of the research on intel-
ligence and providing an overview of its development, measurement and use. 
From Galton, Spearman and Binet to the relatively recent controversy caused 
by the research of Herrnstein and Murray, this important book makes a major 
claim about the importance of ‘problem-solving on demand’ as one of the key 
components of today’s notions of intelligence.
Chapters include coverage of:
intelligence and schooling
 
■
cultural differences in views of intelligence
 
■
the history of IQ testing and its emergence into public consciousness
 
■
IQ as a predictor of educational and occupational outcomes
 
■
psychometrics and measurement of intelligence
 
■
the future of intelligence research.
 
■
Written by Richard B. Fletcher and John Hattie, the author of the highly 
regarded Visible Learning, this textbook will be invaluable for all undergraduate 
and Master’s level students studying the theory of intelligence and the impact 

of testing on education. Detailed and annotated further reading lists and a 
glossary are also included.
Richard B. Fletcher is Senior Lecturer in the School of Psychology at Massey 
University, New Zealand.
John Hattie is Professor of Education at the University of Melbourne, 
Australia, and Director of the Visible Learning Research Lab.

Intelligence 
and Intelligence 
Testing
Richard B. Fletcher 
and John Hattie

This first edition published 2011
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2011 Richard B. Fletcher and John Hattie
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted 
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from 
the publishers.
The right of Richard B. Fletcher and John Hattie to be identified 
as authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance 
with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents 
Act 1988.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hattie, John.
Intelligence and intelligence testing / by John Hattie and 
Richard Fletcher. — 1st ed.
Provided by publisher.
 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1. Intelligence levels. 2. Intelligence tests—History. 
  I. Fletcher, Richard (Richard B.) II. Title.
 BF431.H3487 2011
 153.9–dc22 
2010035443
ISBN13: 978-0-415-60091-0 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978-0-415-60092-7 (pbk)
ISBN13: 978-0-203-83056-7 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2011.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
ISBN 0-203-83056-3 Master e-book ISBN

v
Contents
List of illustrations 
vii
Preface 
ix
Chapter 1 
What is intelligence? 
1
Chapter 2 
The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence 
and IQ tests 
13
Chapter 3 
Why do we care about intelligence? 
31
Chapter 4 
The measurement of intelligence 
39
Chapter 5 
The development of an IQ test 
51
Chapter 6 
Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test television programme 
63
Chapter 7 
Profile of a nation 
69
Chapter 8 
The future of intelligence 
79
Appendix 
87
Glossary 
99
References 
103
Index 
107


vii
Illustrations
Figures
3.1 Relationship between years of job experience and 
performance ratings 
33
4.1  The normal distribution curve 
45
4.2  An example of a Raven-type item 
49
5.1  Item characteristic curves 
59
5.2  The test information function for the total IQ score 
59
6.1  Studio group results, 2003 
65
6.2  Groups’ total scores on four dimensions where there are 
differences 
66
7.1  IQ distribution of New Zealanders 
70
7.2  IQ score and male height 
71
7.3  IQ score by hair colour 
72
7.4  IQ score by eye colour 
73
7.5  IQ score and dexterity 
73
7.6  IQ score by number of books in the home 
75
7.7  IQ score and alcohol 
76
7.8  IQ score and dimensions of IQ by smoking 
77
7.9  IQ score and sport 
77
Tables
5.1  IQ test format, 2003 
52
5.2  Population distribution in the trials 
58
5.3   Factors and their factor loadings for the Test the Nation: The New 
Zealand IQ Test 
60


ix
Preface
In 2003 and 2004, we were asked to be part of the two New Zealand versions 
of Test the Nation – a television programme that has been broadcast in many 
countries, it allows viewers to test their intelligence while watching a studio 
audience doing the same. Our involvement with these New Zealand versions 
involved us writing and reviewing many questions and tests to measure intel-
ligence. One of the agreements we had with the television studio was that we 
could use our involvement to promote our discipline of educational psychol-
ogy, and share in the use of the data generated in the programmes – the result 
of which is this book. Using a programme such as Test the Nation to unravel 
the mystique of IQ has been a fun and enlightening experience, and we hope 
our book will provide readers with a greater understanding of this complex 
concept. As well as describing how we approached the task of devising credible 
tests for a television programme that had to fulfill the dual criteria of education 
and entertainment, we also introduce the debates about what intelligence is; 
how, when and whether we should measure it; the controversies surrounding 
intelligence and many other interesting snippets about intelligence. We hope 
you enjoy this book.


1
1
What is intelligence?
If we said that we wanted to measure whether you can reason, think logi-
cally, solve problems and use your memory successfully to accomplish these 
tasks, most people would agree that this is a worthwhile activity. Yet, if we said 
we wanted to measure ‘intelligence’, and particularly if we used the phrase 
‘IQ’, it would be likely to provoke outcries such as ‘You cannot measure IQ’, 
‘You’re a racist’, ‘IQ is a dirty word’, ‘There is not an agreed definition of what 
intelligence means’, ‘Intelligence is different across cultures’ and other cries of 
woe. As a lecturer in psychology I (Richard) often say to students that there 
are three typical reactions people give when asked about IQ: those who like it 
(usually because they have scored or believe they will score highly on an IQ 
test), those who could not care less about it (they scored around the average 
score on an IQ test) and those who think they are a waste of time (yes, you 
guessed it – they scored low on the IQ test). What intrigues us as professional 
educators is the range of opinions that people proffer about intelligence and 
IQ and just how little of these are based on a solid understanding of these 
topics. It should be no surprise that the term ‘intelligence’ provokes such 
 reactions, given the complexity of the concept and the many contrasting and 
often conflicting views people have expressed in regard to this psycho logical 
concept. This should be of no surprise given its often chequered history (more 
on this in Chapter 2). Indeed, its history has made some people wary of it and 
in particular the  manner in which it has been used – sometimes with good 
cause.
The term IQ is often tossed about in casual conversation with little under-
standing as to its meaning, its component or how it is measured – if asked, 
most people could hazard a guess as to what IQ stands for, but they would 
probably find it difficult to elaborate much more about IQ. It is the case that 
the psychological and statistical terminology used by the ‘experts’ often builds 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
2
smokescreens that can make research on the topic inaccessible and somewhat 
dry to the layperson. It is worth mentioning at this point that intelligence and 
IQ are subtly different, in that intelligence in its broadest sense is more related 
to the ability to acquire and apply knowledge, whereas IQ places this defini-
tion into a metric with the ‘Q’ denoting a quotient (something divided by 
something, i.e. IQ = 100 × (Mental Age/Chronological Age)). It is, perhaps, 
terms like ‘mental age’ that can be off-putting to the layperson as it is difficult 
to convey its meaning (even professional psychologists have difficulty with 
it). In many ways, the overuse of jargon and the smokescreens have been to 
the detriment of our profession; for our part we want to break open this very 
interesting but often abused concept so that you, the reader, can become more 
informed about the issues and current debates.
We have aimed to write the book in a style more accessible than the typical 
education or psychology book. We have provided references for more reading 
on the topics covered in this book in the Appendix, and those wishing to see 
defence for the claims we make in the chapters should seek out some of these 
references.
This book is essentially about intelligence and IQ. The ‘I’ relates to defin-
itions and the ‘Q’ addresses issues of metrics, which implies the processes and 
issues surrounding its measurement. We do not forget the most critical aspects 
of IQ – that is, how we interpret the results as well as the conclusions we 
make about IQ. It is hoped that having read this book you will have a better 
understanding of what IQ is, how it is measured and what use it has or can 
have in today’s highly technological and competitive society.
To set the context for more detailed discussion on the concept of intelli-
gence and IQ, we begin by looking at everyday views held about intelligence. 
We then discuss differences in cultural views of intelligence, consider briefly 
the views expounded by the ‘experts’ and conclude with a summary of the 
major dimensions of ‘intelligence’ as perceived by 52 eminent researchers of 
intelligence.
The Ministry of Magic has always considered the education of young witches and wizards to be 
of vital importance. The rare gifts with which you were born may come to nothing if not nurtured 
and honed by careful instruction. The ancient skills unique to the wizarding community must be 
passed down the generations lest we lose them for ever. The treasure trove of magical knowledge 
amassed by our ancestors must be guarded, replenished and polished by those who have been 
called to the noble profession of teaching.
J. K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix

What is intelligence?
3
Everyday views on intelligence
In a series of studies, American psychologist Robert Sternberg (1985a), then 
professor at Yale University, asked laypeople what intelligence meant to them. 
He found that people  perceived intelligence as being related to reasoning 
logically, making connections between ideas and seeing all aspects of a prob-
lem. From this series of studies, Sternberg concluded that laypeople held one 
of three primary views of intelligence: problem-solving intelligence, verbal 
intelligence and social intelligence – all views that fit well with the attributes 
most ‘experts’ ascribe to the concept of intelligence, as discussed later in this 
chapter.
We also vary our beliefs about intelligence depending on the age of the 
 person whose intelligence is being considered. For example, children are 
 considered intelligent if they are good at problem-solving and reasoning; young 
adults, if they have high verbal and learning ability; and older people, if they 
have skill at social adaptation, usually about the more everyday problems in the 
world around them. Thus, we value problem-solving intelligence in children, 
verbal intelligence in young adults and social intelligence in adults.
The beliefs we hold about intelligence can make a big difference to our 
 effectiveness. For example, Carol Dweck (1999) has shown many times that 
teachers who believe intelligence is something that is changeable and can be 
improved are far more successful at teaching than those who believe intelli-
gence is something that is fixed and something you cannot change – regardless 
of the truth about whether intelligence is or is not changeable. In sum, the 
 confidence that teachers have about their ability to change students’ intelligence 
is a  powerful tool for actually making a difference!
Intelligence and schooling
From a developmental perspective, primary/elementary school teachers 
 consider intelligence to be more related to social attributes such as popularity, 
friendliness, respect for law and order and interest in the environment. High 
school teachers favour more verbal skills and energy, and university teachers 
see intelligence as related to reasoning, broad knowledge and the ability to deal 
maturely with problems. Thus, elementary teachers favour social intelligence; 
high school teachers favour verbal intelligence and university teachers favour 
 problem-solving intelligence.
Having the positive attitude that we can change our level of performance 
can certainly make a difference. While some see such attitudes as related to 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
4
intelligence (highly intelligent people are more confident of their success), 
there is much evidence that confidence of success occurs at all levels of intel-
ligence – if you are confident you can improve then you are more likely to 
improve. Perhaps Norman Vincent Peale was right – we can build confidence 
to win and influence not only people but also our abilities. This is important, 
because intelligence, while valued as an asset, is not something that can be easily 
‘learned’ via a training programme. It may be that a more important area for 
people to invest in is personal confidence. In other words, the question is not 
whether a person can attain a certain standing on a test or task but whether he 
or she has the confidence to tackle such tasks. As parents we would do better 
to believe that increasing our children’s confidence to try certain tasks is more 
potent for enhancing qualities such as self-esteem and motivation than relying 
solely on outcomes such as IQ or achievement scores. The message is clear: We 
should seek to combine personal efficacy/confidence with the motivation to 
learn, which may relegate intelligence to a lower priority, and which should 
then promote learning for the sake of learning. By promoting intrinsic motiva-
tion and confidence to try new tasks rather than focus on intelligence scores 
per se, there may be more successful outcomes. It is most important that we 
teach children, particularly elementary school–aged children, that effort and 
intelligence are separate abilities as this will more likely result in ‘effortful and 
confident learning’, which in turn makes a major difference to their achieve-
ment. We will note below that many Asian parents emphasise ‘effort’ whereas 
Western parents attribute success in school and other tasks to natural ability, 
luck and good fortune!
It is likely that because intelligence involves reasoning and problem-solving 
there is also a skill in knowing when to use these various intelligence  strategies. 
Certainly, if you do not have a high ability in these strategies then you are 
unlikely to use them, to know when to use them or to realise how critical it is 
to acquire them. There is a double whammy here: a person with lower intel-
ligence may not have sufficient knowledge about how they solve problems 
(the jargon word is metacognition or self-regulation) or how to choose among 
various intellectual strategies and, most importantly, they may not comprehend 
the importance of effort and attention to the task – particularly when they 
encounter obstacles to learning. Fortunately, however, it is possible to teach 
The test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to hold two opposed ideas in mind at the same 
time and still retain the ability to function.
F. Scott Fitzgerald, first published in Esquire

What is intelligence?
5
people some of these strategies, and in particular to appreciate that effort, 
motivation and attention are important.
Cultural differences in views about intelligence
Just as laypeople in the Western world have different views of what intelligence is, 
so there are diverse perspectives of intelligence as we move across different cul-
tures. The major difference across cultures relates to the importance of what we 
reason and problem-solve about. Some societies care more about  problem-solving 
that leads to greater personal development (individualism), while others care 
more about problem-solving that leads to greater social harmony  (collectivism) 
– and there are many variations in the balance of these factors.
Collectivism refers to societies (or people) that favour harmony, a sense of 
closeness and duty to family and others, seeking others’ advice and a respon-
sibility to the group. Individualism refers to societies that value uniqueness, 
personal independence, achievement, self-knowledge, clear communication 
and competition. You can imagine that what is seen as intelligence is likely to 
differ in these two types of societies.
Collectivists are more likely to see social intelligence, working with others, 
contemplative thinking, seeking the views of others, humility and an ability 
to know oneself and others as the hallmarks of intelligence.
Individualists are more likely to see verbal and knowledge-based notions 
of intelligence, speed of thinking, getting ahead and enjoying learning for 
 self-improvement as the hallmarks of intelligence.
Collectivists consider rote learning and good memory as powerful tools for 
acquiring a deeper understanding of various topics. They see memory of facts 
as important for deeper thinking and intelligence. Collectivists would claim 
that we need to understand the surface features of things before we delve 
deeper into the relations between these facts or ideas, and particularly before 
we  generalise or extend our thinking. In more individualistic societies, rote 
memory is something used often for quick success at passing exams or getting 
through difficult problem-solving exercises, but often this way of learning is 
not praised. Individualists largely view memory for facts as unimportant for 
intelligence. It is not surprising, then, that many Westerners condemn Eastern 
students as rote learners and fail to recognise that they are, indeed, using this 
technique to assist them in attaining a deeper level of understanding. This 
explanation of the different uses of memory in intelligence helps us unravel 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
6
what John Biggs (1996) has called the ‘apparent paradox of the Asian learner’ 
– they come out at the top in the comparison of education systems across the 
world but we seem to not like the way they come out on top.
Another example of differences across cultures is silence. In some societies 
silence is a hallmark of intelligence, but that certainly is not the case in most 
Western or individualistic societies, where silence is often interpreted as the 
absence of intelligence. Similarly, some collectivist societies do not value the 
speed of thinking that many Western cultures do. Slow, contemplative thought 
rather than quick thinking is seen as the hallmark of intelligence in many 
non-Western cultures.
Another major difference across cultures relates to the purpose of intel-
lectual thought. In many Western cultures, intelligence is considered a means 
for individuals to devise deeper understanding and to engage in meaningful 
debate. Many Eastern, particularly Confucian-based, countries see intelligence 
more as a way for members of that society to recognise contradictions and 
complexities, thus enabling them to more successfully play out their social roles 
and adapt to their environment.
Of course, statements about whole cultures need to take into account that 
there are many differences among individuals within those cultures. Certainly 
there are major differences within cultures about the role of social aspects of 
intelligence; an exciting concept that needs to be explored further. Within any 
culture, it should not be surprising that there are many different beliefs about 
what intelligence means. Some place higher value on social and practical notions 
of intelligence, some value verbal and nonverbal intelligences more highly and 
some place more value on cognitive and problem-solving notions. The com-
mon denominator is that intelligence requires thinking, problem-solving and 
successfully adapting to one’s environment.
Experts’ views of intelligence
The many ‘experts’ or academic researchers on the topic of intelligence come 
from diverse disciplines, ranging from education, psychology and sociology 
to medicine and politics. Not surprisingly, there are many contested views on 
what intelligence means. In 1921, E. L. Thorndike asked experts (mostly fellow 
academics) to define intelligence, and then again, in 1986, in another study by 
Robert Sternberg and Douglas Detterman, experts were asked how they defined 
There is nobody so irritating as somebody with less intelligence and more sense than we have.
Don Herold

What is intelligence?
7
intelligence. At both times, experts indicated that they regarded intelligence 
in terms of adapting to the environment, using mental processes and higher-
order thinking such as problem-solving and effective decision-making – quite 
similar to the lay views. Both groups argued about whether there were one or 
many notions of intelligence and about whether intelligence was narrow or 
broad in what it encompassed. The 1986 group included the ability to control 
or regulate knowledge, saw knowledge as more important and placed more 
emphasis than the 1921 definitions on the role of context, particularly the 
importance of culture in defining intelligence.
We discuss the history of views on intelligence and the development of IQ test-
ing more fully in Chapter 2. For now, it is worth noting that the person who 
primarily set the foundations for our current ‘expert’ views on intelligence was 
English psychologist Charles Spearman, who introduced the notion of ‘g’ or 
general intelligence to explain a common attribute that seemed to underlie the 
many achievement tasks (Spearman, 1904; Jensen, 1998). However, although the 
existence of ‘g’ is largely agreed upon, the nature of ‘g’ remains hotly disputed. 
Others have claimed that intelligence consists of a number of primary cognitive 
abilities, such as verbal relations, numerical facility, memory and perceptual abil-
ity (Thurstone, 1938). Others have argued that there are various hierarchies of 
intelligence, such as fluid intelligence (involving  reasoning, memory, inferences), 
crystallised intelligence (verbal, numerical abilities) and visual intelligence (pic-
turing, mental rotation) (Cattell, 1971; Horn and Cattell, 1966; Gustafsson, 1984). 
Robert Sternberg has  proposed three types of intelligence how people solve 
problems, how we adapt to our environments and how we use past experiences 
in solving problems and  adapting to our environment (Sternberg, 1985b).
The one major exception to the notion that there may be only one under-
lying dimension (‘g’) is the claim by American psychologist Howard Gardner 
that there are multiple intelligences based on what people actually do, and 
each should be considered independently (Gardner, 1999). He has defined 
eight intelligences:
Linguistic
 
■
 intelligence involves sensitivity to spoken and written language, 
the ability to learn languages and the capacity to use language to accomplish 
certain goals.
Logical-mathematical 
 
■
intelligence relates to the capacity to analyse problems 
logically, carry out mathematical operations and investigate issues 
scientifically.
Musical 
 
■
intelligence involves skill in the performance, composition and 
appreciation of musical patterns.
Bodily-kinesthetic 
 
■
intelligence relates to the potential of using one’s whole 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
8
body or parts of the body to solve problems.
Spatial 
 
■
intelligence involves the potential to recognise and use patterns, 
images and pictures.
Interpersonal 
 
■
intelligence is concerned with communicating and under-
standing others’ feelings and motives.
Intrapersonal 
 
■
intelligence entails the capacity to understand oneself, to 
appreciate one’s feelings, fears and motivations.
Naturalist 
 
■
intelligence involves recognising, categorising and drawing upon 
certain features of the environment, and an understanding of the role that 
culture has in our everyday living.
The claim about multiple intelligences, however, falters on a major issue: there 
is no evidence for the claim that differing intelligences are not correlated, and 
there may well be fewer underlying dimensions (e.g. working memory, verbal 
facility and even perhaps ‘g’; see Akbari and Hosseini, 2008).
In sum, the major dimensions of most ‘expert’ models of intelligence include 
proficiency in abstract thinking, capacity to learn from experience and an ability 
to learn from and to adapt to one’s environment, new situations and society. 
Perhaps the best explanation of intelligence is that in an editorial signed by 
52 of the most eminent researchers of intelligence. Linda Gottfredson (1997) 
coordinated this statement, and it concluded:
Intelligence is a very general mental capability that, among other things, 
involves the ability to reason, plan, solve problems, think abstractly, com-
prehend complex ideas, learn quickly, and learn from experience. It is not 
merely book learning, a narrow academic skill, or test-taking smarts. Rather, 
it reflects a broader and deeper capability for comprehending our surround-
ings – ‘Catching on,’ ‘making sense’ of things, or ‘figuring out’ what to do.
Intelligence, so defined, can be measured, and intelligence tests measure 
it well. They are among the most accurate (in technical terms, reliable and 
valid) of all psychological tests and assessments. They do not measure creativ-
ity, character, personality, or other important differences among individuals, 
nor are they intended to.
. . .
IQ is strongly related, probably more than any other single measurable 
human trait, to many important education, occupational, economic, and 
Intelligence is the wife, imagination is the mistress, memory is the servant.
Victor Hugo

What is intelligence?
9
social outcomes. Its relation to the welfare and performance of individuals 
is very strong in some arenas in life (education, military training),  moderate 
but robust in others (social competence), and modest but consistent in 
others (law-abidingness). Whatever IQ measures, it is of great practical and 
social importance.
A high IQ is an advantage in life because virtually all activities require 
some reasoning and decision-making. . . . Of course, a high IQ no more 
guarantees success than a low IQ guarantees failure in life.
. . .
The practical advantages of having a higher IQ increases as life settings 
become more complex (novel, ambiguous, changing, unpredictable, or multi-
faceted). For example, a high IQ is generally necessary to perform well in 
highly complex or fluid jobs (the professions, management), it is a consider-
able advantage in moderately complex jobs (crafts, clerical and police work); 
but it provides less advantage in settings that require only routine decision 
making or simple problem solving (unskilled work) (pp. 13–14).
Overview of intelligence
It does appear that there is some intellectual functioning that is general across 
many ways of thinking. This general intelligence (‘g’) involves processing 
 efficiency and capacity, it relates to the thinker’s ability to stay focused on 
goals, and it involves the ability to uncover and deal with relations at  different 
levels of complexity and abstraction. Such an understanding allows us to 
 readily  discriminate intelligence from creativity – as creativity involves creat-
ing  something new or different and the ability to bring together seemingly 
unrelated relationships between ideas or things. Intelligence is what we do 
when we do not know what to do.
There have been critics of this notion of ‘g’, who see our knowledge and 
reasoning processes as more modular or specific (e.g. having multiple intel-
ligences). While the evidence for this latter view is limited at best, nonetheless 
we all know people with very high intelligence who are useless at various 
tasks. It is certainly worth knowing the areas we are good at, the ones we can 
readily improve, the ones we simply must admit our inabilities in, and come 
to value our other attributes that make us worthwhile in our own eyes and 
in the quest for good living and working with others. To discover these areas 
is a major use of intelligence testing – as it is often claimed to evaluate our 
proficiency in thinking to then undertake various tasks.

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
10
There is no need to agree to one single definition of a term (even dic-
tionaries, the guardians of the history of words, include multiple meanings of 
most words). Any quest for a common and agreed definition is quite absurd. 
Having intelligence is not as important as knowing when to use it, just as having a hoe is not as 
important as knowing when to plant.
Chinese proverb
Plato
Plato’s (369 BC, Cornford, 1935: 99–100) notions of intelligence likened 
the mind to a block of wax, which could differ in hardness, moistness 
and purity. When the wax is pure and clear the mind will readily learn 
and retain information and not be confused. When the wax is muddy 
and impure then it will be hard for the mind to learn, locate and retain 
information. When the wax is hard the mind will be slow to learn and 
there will be no depth of thinking, and when it is soft it would be quick 
to learn but we can become confused as knowledge can be easily 
remoulded.
Einstein
In many ways IQ has become synonymous with people rather than 
with the actual concept itself. For example, mention the name Albert 
Einstein and the response will invariably include a reference to ‘high 
IQ’, ‘very intelligent’ or ‘brilliant’. Einstein’s immense contribution to 
understanding the physical laws of the universe is well known, even 
though he was not a university professor when he published his semi-
nal 1905 paper – he was working as a patent clerk in Switzerland. 
But it is instructive to note that Einstein was not always viewed as 
one who would make a significant contribution to the world. One of 
Einstein’s teachers admonished the future genius, saying ‘Nothing will 
become of you’ and ‘Your presence in the class destroys the respect 
of the students’. Further, Einstein failed to get promoted from  patent 
clerk third class to patent clerk second class in 1905 because he 
needed to wait ‘until he ha[d] become fully familiar with mechanical 
engineering’ (Bodanis, 2000: 5).

What is intelligence?
11
A physicist may struggle to define electricity or magnetism and would think 
it absurd and meaningless to try to do so. Rather, the physicist could tell you 
how electricity reacts with other attributes, how it can be used and the value 
of knowing some properties of electricity. By the end of this book you will 
have a better understanding of what we mean by intelligence and of some of 
the controversies surrounding the meaning, uses and misuses of this notion.


13
2
The brief and 
sometimes dirty history 
of intelligence and 
IQ tests
For many a scientific discipline it would be uncommon to claim that its  history 
has been plain sailing and that its evolution has been uncontroversial. It is 
because science advances in a cannibalistic manner, devouring old theories for 
new theories, that anything that challenges the status quo is often met with 
disdain or disbelief and then the debate becomes embroiled in controversy. 
A combination of time and evidence, however, often results in new theories 
taking hold and, like the old ways before them, they become the accepted 
doctrine – until, that is, another challenger arrives on the scene.
Intelligence testing and its history are no exception and, like most branches 
of science, it has been built on the strengths and weaknesses of previous theory 
and research. Thus, the present-day notions of intelligence and its measurement 
stand on diverse theoretical foundations. We should be pleased that there is a 
diversity in views, as this makes for spirited debate and serves to advance our 
understanding of this often-misunderstood and controversial concept. Indeed, 
if the history of IQ and its measurement were not without controversy, this 
would make for a boring chapter. For the most part, we say the debate is healthy, 
and long may it continue.
As with most historical events, the social norms and ideologies of the day 
played a significant role in the development of intelligence and IQ testing. 
These concepts did not develop in a social vacuum and the developers, as well 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
14
as their practices and outcomes, were very much bound up in the context of the 
times. We would be the first to admit that there is a tarnished history that sits 
behind IQ testing, but such a history is what it is – a history – and thus it should 
not be used to prejudge the current debates on definitions and measurement. 
Most people today operate in a world of political, social and cultural diversity, 
as well as equity, which was not the case in the not-too-distant history when 
IQ testing was emerging. Suffice to say times have changed, and we should be 
thankful for that; scientists today are more aware of the socio-political climate 
and are more constrained by the ethical, moral and consequential outcomes 
of their research. There certainly has been a tendency to ‘politicize the debate 
on intelligence, or even regard certain issues (pertaining to it) as taboo’ (Howe, 
1997: 13). We were also well aware of these reactions throughout the devel-
opment of the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test programmes, as were 
the Television New Zealand producers and staff. It is important not to be put 
off because IQ has been misused and abused in the past, but rather to look at 
where it is now and judge for oneself the merits or demerits of such a concept 
and also to take comfort in the fact that we have learned from the mistakes 
and successes of others.
At the centre of the historical debate on IQ and its testing are arguments 
such as intelligence is immutable and intelligence testing is merely a sorting 
device for placing people into neat, identifiable categories from which they 
cannot escape. Antagonists such as Stephen Jay Gould (1981) have argued 
that the perniciousness of the IQ testing process means that a single score 
does not take into account the complexity of the individual and context in 
which they exist. Above all, Gould argued that IQ tests are simply a tool to 
maintain the social order by confirming a person’s societal position. After all, 
there are divisions in society and what better way to highlight these by using 
a seemingly ‘objective’ measure of ability. In other words, he argued IQ tests 
are blunt instruments with which to maintain societal order while at the same 
time allowing one to passively ignore the complex issues and problems that 
underlie differential levels of ability.
If only the debate were so simple. Sure, it is easy to debunk the whole 
notion of intelligence and the associated methods of assessing it. It is easy to 
claim that ‘intelligence is what the intelligence test measures’ but that because 
There are three kinds of intelligence: one kind understands things for itself, the other appreciates 
what others can understand, the third understands neither for itself nor through others. This first 
kind is excellent, the second good, and the third kind useless.
Niccolò Machiavelli

The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence and IQ tests
15
measurement definitions are so narrow and culturally specific we should ban 
all intelligence testing. But such an argument is akin to throwing the baby out 
with the bath water. Most psychologists and psychometricians would agree that 
intelligence testing has its limitations, but most would also support the notion of 
intelligence as being a major dimension in an individual’s overall psychological 
make-up and, therefore, something that should not be ignored (as Wittgenstein 
commented, ‘The strength of the rope lies not in any one thread but in the 
overlapping of many fibres’ – intelligence is but one thread). Indeed, measures 
of intelligence can be important in many ways, as Chapter 4 details. Yes, IQ has 
had some bad press, and yes, it has not always been used in the most ethical or 
defensible ways, but the same could be said about personality and many other 
forms of testing. In today’s highly competitive workforce the preponderance of 
personality tests and their use when making important employment decisions 
about people is on the rise, yet there is too little criticism of these methods. This 
lack of critique could be because there have been fewer ‘dirty’ stories about the 
misuse of these methods, less connection in the past between personality and 
race issues and because the scientific community has been less rigorous in its 
attention to the measurement and use of these methods. So let us take a look 
at the history of this controversial concept of intelligence and its measurement 
– but please keep in mind our earlier comment that the history of IQ, like so 
many other controversial topics, is located within a much larger social debate 
that reflects the beliefs, biases and prejudices of the prevailing views of the 
time. While it is easy to ridicule IQ based on its history, it is harder to refute 
the notion of individual differences in ability, be they intellectual or physical, 
especially when one can see such variation in everyday things.
The earliest ability testing
From a historical perspective, ability testing can be traced back to ancient 
China in 2200 BC. For anyone wanting to work in the public office, the 
Chinese Emperor initiated a series of tests designed to find the most proficient 
 candidates in areas such as law, agriculture, military affairs, finance and geogra-
phy. The testing process was gruelling and often took many days to complete. 
The selection process began with preliminary examinations to identify the top 
7 per cent, who then progressed to the district assessment. From here, between 
1 per cent and 10 per cent moved to Peking for the final examinations, of which 
about 3 per cent would pass and become members of the Mandarin class of 
bureaucrats. The process was very much in the spirit of ranking  individuals by 
merit and one can well imagine the stress and competitiveness of the  candidates 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
16
throughout the process. It was only as recently as 1906 that the exam was 
abolished. Such was the influence of the Chinese examination system that 
some European countries fashioned their civil service examinations in a similar 
manner and many continue it to this day.
Francis Galton
It was not until the nineteenth century, when the Industrial Revolution took 
hold and capitalism swung into full gear, that people began to show an interest 
in human capacity. Chiefly, it was the scientist Francis Galton (half-cousin of 
Charles Darwin) who began to develop methods for measuring many people’s 
skills, and thus set his legacy as the doyen of measurement of individual differ-
ences. His incursions into the field of experimental psychology, as well as his 
immense contribution to statistics, marked Galton as a significant pioneer of 
the then developing area of psychological measurement.
Central to Galton’s views on psychology was the influence of evolutionary 
theory. What intrigued him most was the notion of heredity – in particular, 
mental inheritance. In essence, he believed that reputation was a good measure 
of a person’s mental ability and that genius was something passed on to the next 
generation. That is, prominent people tended to produce prominent children. 
The problem with his line of thinking was that it did not include the vitally 
important social factors affecting different groups. The son or daughter of a 
king and queen will one day be a king or queen, but to say this has anything 
to do with intelligence is hard to defend. While Galton’s theory might sug-
gest sons become as prominent as their fathers, this was, and perhaps still is (as 
in the case of George W. Bush), very much a function of social standing and 
privilege and not intelligence. Indeed, for many years (until the 1960s) some of 
the finest universities in the United States favoured admitting sons of alumni 
and aimed for graduates who would have the most influence on leadership 
in government and business – and thus had very small quotas on those who 
could enter on ability (Karabel, 2005).
There is no doubting Galton’s influence on psychology and particularly his 
work on measuring individual differences. His main books, Hereditary Genius 
(1869), and Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development (1907) were serious 
Undernourished, intelligence becomes like the bloated belly of a starving child: swollen, filled with 
nothing the body can use.
Andrea Dworkin

The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence and IQ tests
17
academic works that aimed at shedding light on the mental inheritance and 
the improvement of races. These books laid the foundation of the eugenics 
movement, which was later taken up with great zeal by the intelligence test-
ers in the United States at the beginning of the twentieth century. What the 
eugenics movement sought was to regulate marriage and family size according 
to hereditary parental capacity and (in Galton’s case) this was defined as mental 
capacity. The argument was that if your parents were bright then you should be 
allowed to marry and produce offspring. The opposite was also the case and was, 
by and large, the controversial dimension – dull people should not be allowed 
to procreate and produce more dull kids. In developing a method for measuring 
mental ability, Galton mainly used sensory motor tasks such as reaction times. 
Hence, those with faster reaction times were by Galton’s calculations the most 
intellectually adept. Galton’s use of sensory motor tasks, along with the tests 
of the American James McKeen Cattell (who coined the term ‘mental test’ 
and whose work paralleled Galton’s), was discredited as being too simplistic to 
capture the complexity of intellectual functioning and was, not surprisingly, 
abandoned, but their logic, as we will see, remained chillingly intact.
Charles Spearman
As noted in Chapter 1, Spearman was the person who was the most responsible 
for setting the foundations for our current views on intelligence. He noticed 
that when a series of ability tests were administered there was much overlap 
in the skills required to perform these tests. He introduced the notion of ‘g’ or 
general intelligence to explain the common attribute that seemed to underlie 
the many achievement tasks (Spearman, 1904; Jensen, 1998); ‘g’ has become a 
major, albeit controversial, psychological construct in the history of education 
and psychology. This has become one of the most replicated findings in psy-
chology; while some may not wish to explain the overlap as ‘g’ or intelligence, 
some explanation for the commonality is needed. Regardless of whether one 
agrees or disagrees with his notions, it is extremely difficult to ignore Spearman’s 
contributions to the field of intelligence and its measurement.
Alfred Binet
At the same time as Spearman was driving the theoretical debate, the French 
psychologist Alfred Binet, along with Théodore Simon, picked up the measure-
ment baton where Galtonian science left off. Binet’s approach to understanding 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
18
intelligence, however, was radically different from that of Galton and Cattell, in 
that he believed individual differences in intelligence were much more com-
plex than just assessing sensory acuity and response times. Binet argued that 
 higher-order thinking processes, such as memory, attention and imagination, 
were most critical and that these were the key dimensions to measure.
The original motive for the intelligence scale that Binet and Simon devel-
oped in 1905 was to identify children within the Parisian school system who 
were not benefiting from regular forms of instruction. The implication was 
that intelligence was not fixed or necessarily due to any single cause, but that 
appropriate schooling could modify intelligence – this was in stark contrast to 
his predecessors. Binet’s work, in effect, signalled the beginning of the special 
education programmes and the assessment of students most likely to benefit 
from these programmes (and those likely to receive benefit in the ‘regular’ or 
sometimes ‘gifted’ classrooms), which still exists in some form in modern-day 
schools. Binet and Simon’s measure was aimed at assessing a child’s general 
intellectual development and was composed of 30 tests, arranged in ascending 
order of difficulty. The tests ranged from vocabulary to physical performance 
tasks. It is important to understand that the motive for Binet and Simon in 
their testing of intelligence was not for comparative purposes but rather for 
identifying or classifying which children would be better educated in special 
classrooms.
The Binet–Simon scale was revised in 1908 to include the concept of  mental 
level, which was simply the ordering of the test by the age level at which 
 typically they were passed. So if 80 to 90 per cent of children aged five, say, 
passed certain questions then these were classified at the five-year-old level. So, 
for example, a nine-year-old child operating at a five-year-old mental age would 
be classified as being ‘retarded’ by four years and therefore a likely candidate 
for special education. The subsequent 1911 revision resulted in each age level 
having five tests as well as the age range being extended to adulthood.
The American adoption of IQ
It was, in many ways, the introduction of the concept ‘mental age’ that influ-
enced much of the subsequent practices of the intelligence testing movement 
in the United States. Indeed, in 1912 the German psychologist William Stern, 
It has yet to be proven that intelligence has any survival value.
Arthur C. Clarke

The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence and IQ tests
19
unhappy with the notion of mental age, suggested dividing the mental age 
by the actual age to get the ‘mental quotient’, which American psychologist 
Lewis Terman later multiplied by 100 to make it more understandable and thus 
called it the ‘intelligence quotient’ or ‘IQ’ (Terman’s contribution is discussed 
in more detail later in the chapter).
The birth of this concept of IQ (as the psychometric measurement of 
 ‘intelligence’) is a critical historical development that has shaped the debate 
regarding intellectual functioning and its associated uses. Once IQ had been 
defined and methods for measurement were established, it was then put to 
work in many different contexts. In general the argument ran along the lines 
of ‘If you can measure IQ then you can rank people and if you can rank people 
then there is great utility in testing IQ’. Thus, as Stephen Jay Gould (1981) 
and others have suggested, began the mass-marketing of IQ, especially in the 
United States.
Henry Herbert Goddard
One of the first people to see the potential use of IQ testing was Henry Herbert 
Goddard, who translated the Binet–Simon scale for use in the United States. 
Goddard was hired by the Vineland Training School for Feeble-Minded Boys 
and Girls in New Jersey to understand more about the education and identifica-
tion of categories of ‘feeble-minded’ students (today we call ‘feeble-mindedness’ 
developmental disability). Using his translated Binet–Simon scale, Goddard 
classified students using diagnostic criteria and mental age into categories he 
called idiots, imbeciles or feeble-minded persons.
Goddard’s work soon found him sitting comfortably in the hereditarian 
camp, as his work reflected the same logic and sentiment as Galton’s earlier 
work. What underpinned his work was the belief that intelligence was genet-
ically derived and that ‘feeble-mindedness’ was the result of a single recessive 
gene. Later studies by Goddard provided data indicating that about 3 per cent 
of children could be classified as ‘feeble-minded’. Goddard became concerned 
about the effects the ‘feeble-minded’ might have on society, and espoused 
views that children with such classifications should be segregated from society 
and even sterilised to prevent them from breeding. Such was the concern that 
33 states in the United States of America passed laws permitting the sterilisa-
tion of ‘feeble-minded’ individuals, and more than 60,000 men and women 
housed in mental institutions were sterilised, with many not knowing what 
was  happening to them.

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
20
Armed with his new hammer (mental testing), Goddard set out on a  crusade 
to try to fix what he saw as a serious adjunct to ‘feeble-mindedness’ –  notably,  
the influx of poorer southern and eastern European immigrants to the United 
States. What concerned Goddard most was their potential to compound the 
‘menace of feeble-mindedness’ even more by their breeding with other ‘feeble
-minded’ mates. Thus, the answer to this problem was simple: test all new 
immigrants arriving at Ellis Island and determine their ‘mental’ level and send 
back those with low scores. As we noted earlier, science often walks hand in 
hand with the dominant social ideology of the day; thus, Goddard’s work at 
Ellis Island was, at that time, complementary to a view that immigration needed 
to be more tightly restricted and those with low scores on his test should be 
deported to their country of origin. What better way to justify such actions 
than by using the latest scientific tool!
The backbone of Goddard’s operation at Ellis Island was a two-stage approach. 
First, an assistant would wander through the halls and visually identify people 
thought to be mentally defective (subjective bias as well as informed consent 
was yet to emerge as a debate in psychological enquiry). Once identified, the 
potential candidate, often confused and frightened, was taken to another loca-
tion where the revised Binet–Simon scale, along with some other performance 
measures, was administered. If the person was found to be mentally defective 
they were often deported. How awful it must have been for those people denied 
entry to the ‘land of opportunity’ because they had the unfortunate opportunity 
to meet Henry H. Goddard and his troupe of testers.
Ethical issues aside, it is worth dwelling on the notion that Goddard translated 
the scale from French to English and then retranslated it into various other 
 languages; therefore, the accuracy of these tests was likely compromised, given 
that French norms were used in the classification. Even today, translating a test 
into another language is a controversial and difficult process. This combined 
with the poor reliability and validity of the translated measures, as well as the 
huge cultural issues involved in testing people from such varied backgrounds 
and especially in these tense situations of border and customs checks, creates a 
grossly unfair testing process. The widespread use of Goddard’s procedures at 
Ellis Island saw the numbers of immigrants deported grow exponentially.
Although Goddard initially held staunch hereditarian views, he later recanted 
his opinion in favour of the nurture over nature argument. In essence, he 
acknowledged that ‘feeble-mindedness’ was something that could be treated, 
Love is the triumph of imagination over intelligence.
Henry Louis Mencken

The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence and IQ tests
21
and that institutionalising people on the basis of IQ scores was not necessary. 
One positive thing in Goddard’s favour was that he helped draft one of the 
first state laws mandating that special provisions be made for special education 
classes. Obviously Goddard was a complex and contradictory man of his day 
(see Zenderland, 1998).
Lewis Terman
The next major event in the IQ testing movement came in 1916 when Lewis 
Terman revised the Binet–Simon scale and renamed it the Stanford–Binet 
scale (Terman was a professor at Stanford University and named his test after 
the university and in honour of Binet). Terman’s contribution to IQ testing 
was enormous and the new Stanford–Binet scale set a benchmark by which all 
other tests came to be evaluated. Not only was the new scale increased in length 
but also it could be used with ‘retarded’ and normal children as well as normal 
and superior adults. One of the most radical aspects of the overhaul was setting 
the average IQ to 100 and the average variability around that score to 15 (see 
the normal distribution curve diagram, Figure 4.1, p. 45). The Stanford–Binet 
scale is in its fifth revision; its scaled scoring system has been adopted by many 
other IQ measures and it remains one of the more widely used.
One of Terman’s lasting legacies was his use of the Stanford–Binet scale 
in his study of gifted children and their life trajectories. Originally started in 
1922 and designed to run for 10 years, the study aimed to shed light on how 
‘intellectually gifted’ children, if selected early enough and cultivated in the 
right manner, would eventually take their rightful place at the top of society. 
Such was Terman’s interest in the intellectual development of these children 
that this continues to the present day. Of the 1,528 original recruits – 856 
males and 672 females, nearly all white and living in California – some 200 
(as of July 2000) ‘Termites’, as they are called, were still alive, some of them 
quite famous; for example, the famous educationalist Lee Cronbach and the 
physiologist Ancel Keys (he discovered the link between chol esterol and heart 
disease). Although the sampling of subjects was haphazard and subjective, some 
interesting facts have emerged. For example, more than two-thirds went on 
to higher education, 97 gained doctorates, 57 became medical doctors and 83 
became lawyers.

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
22
The role of the United States Army
The First World War provided the catalyst for the development and mass use of 
IQ tests. Both Goddard’s and Terman’s influence on IQ testing meant that they 
were often invited to work with some of the most prominent psychologists of 
the day. As a member of Robert Yerkes’ testing team at Yale University, Goddard 
was involved in the development and administration of the United States Army 
Alpha and Beta tests, which differed markedly from earlier IQ tests. Whereas 
the Binet–Simon scale, and its translated versions, was individually administered, 
the army Alpha and Beta tests were developed for group  testing. The advantage 
of this approach was that recruits could be tested and scored quicker. Thus, IQ 
testing developed into an efficient, scientifically-based industry, which over the 
years has grown in importance (examples include the Educational Testing Service 
and the Law School Admission Test). IQ testing had truly come of age.
The Alpha and Beta tests were administered to identify those recruits with 
low intelligence as well as those suited to certain jobs or officer training. The 
Alpha test was used with recruits who could read and write, whereas the Beta test 
was used for illiterate recruits or those who could not speak English. Like most 
of the early IQ tests, little was known about their psychometric properties. For 
example, the Beta test was usually administered to large groups by the examiner, 
who used pictorial cues as well as hand signals and facial expressions when read-
ing each question aloud. One of the main criticisms of the Army Alpha and Beta 
tests was the lack of uniformity of the conditions for giving the test, as well as the 
variability of the examiners, both of which can dramatically affect the validity 
of the scores. Although the tests were given to more than 1.75 million soldiers, 
it is unclear whether the testing programme made any difference to military 
functioning or efficiency. Indeed, many higher-ranking military officers were 
sceptical about the uses of psychological testing and, thus, much of the data went 
unused. After the war, it was found that while the Alpha test had high reliability, it 
had lower validity for predicting ‘officer material’ – indeed, the Alpha tests were 
better predictors of truck driving, which would surprise few who have watched 
movie footage of the US troops in battle. (Reliability and validity are important 
attributes of measurement and are discussed more fully in Chapter 4.)
One person who did use the army Alpha tests was Carl Brigham, who in 
1923 analysed the racial differences between recruits. He concluded that African 
Americans and Mediterranean and Alpine recruits were ‘intellectually inferior’, 
Anyone who conducts an argument by appealing to authority is not using his intelligence; he is 
just using his memory.
Leonardo da Vinci

The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence and IQ tests
23
and so continued the many debates on IQ and ethnicity. Like his colleague 
Goddard, Brigham later recanted and attributed these differences to language 
and cultural differences.
Sir Cyril Burt
With the rise of Nazism and its beliefs about racial superiority, it is not  surprising 
that the eugenics movement lost favour and momentum in the West. That is 
not to say that IQ disappeared from view; it merely meant that other means 
of showing the link between IQ and hereditary needed to be found, and thus 
entered the first knight of psychology: Sir Cyril Burt. There is no denying Cyril 
Burt’s influence on psychology, especially his development of educational psy-
chology. He was also instrumental in refining the statistical technique of factor 
analysis, which is still at the forefront of most psychological research today. Factor 
analysis is a complex correlational technique that is used to detect if groups of 
questions or tests share a common underlying theme. It is the critical method 
used in determining if measures can be compartmentalised into smaller units. 
Thus, it can test if overall IQ has subdimensions, such as numerical reasoning, 
verbal analogy and so on, and whether these subdimensions can be meaning-
fully weighted to form a single (unidimensional) score.
Cyril Burt was a staunch hereditarian who undertook his pioneering work 
on special education in Britain throughout the twentieth century, and has 
been (falsely) attributed as the father of the eleven-plus examination, whereby 
children sit tests at age 11 to decide on the nature of the high school they 
attend (academic, vocational and so on). Indeed, Burt argued that IQ tests, like 
the 11-plus examination, could be used to identify children from the lower 
classes who could profit from a more academic schooling (he was certain that 
intelligence genes were not confined to the British upper class). He also started 
the largest study of identical twins who had been separated at birth and reared 
in different families.
Burt, like many researchers in the area of intelligence, was subjected to many 
personal barbs and the greatest was the accusation of fraud, published after 
he died in 1976. A front-page news item in a British newspaper claimed that 
Burt was a fraud because he invented crucial data. His biographer, Hearnshaw 
(1979), also made various claims against Burt: he could not have possibly 
collected some of his post-war data and thus he fabricated them by invent-
ing data to fit his theories; his work was an ‘elaborately constructed piece of 
work’ based on invented data; some of his co-workers were fictitious; he used 
his position to change other researchers’ papers to reflect better his views and 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
24
contributions; and he altered the history of his area to claim priority over 
some contributors. 
He falsified history in the interest of self-aggrandizement. That he was guilty 
of malfeasance there can be no reasonable doubt. The only question at issue 
can be, was he guilty simpliciter or guilty with diminished responsibility as 
a result of pathological influences?
(p. 180)
Hearnshaw answered the question by supporting the latter argument.
The reason why Burt undertook these actions was, claimed his biographer, 
because he had Ménière’s disease, which is typical of obsessive–compulsive 
types – the connection is abject nonsense. During his childhood, claimed 
Hearnshaw, he was forced to survive by observing his peers and enemies closely, 
‘to keep his feelings to himself, to bluff it out, and to outmanoeuvre those who 
tried to molest him’ (Hearnshaw, 1979: 273). Hearnshaw’s claim is that Burt 
learned his deviousness because he studied Greek and Latin for ten years as a 
student – as, in preparation of producing pieces of Greek and Latin prose, the 
perfect copy or fake achieves the highest mark – hence he was trained in copy-
ing and faking! ‘In the lost boyhood of Cyril Burt psychology was betrayed’. 
Worse, in his adulthood he was not a ‘sociable or clubbable man’ (p. 291).
None of these accusations have withstood critique – although Burt may 
have been careless and not always clear in his methods – but his reputation 
has been  sullied. His work, however, has been replicated so many times that it 
almost does not matter whether he was a fraud or not (Joynson, 1989; Hattie, 
1991). But the claims are not uncommon for researchers studying this topic; 
there are many critics. Recently, as another example, a noted American scholar, 
Linda Gottfredson, has spoken about the accusations, deceit and harassment she 
has experienced because of her work on intelligence (Wainer and Robinson, 
2009). The most famous case of death threats, rioting and ugly critique relates 
to Arthur Jensen (see next section). Since the 1970s, intelligence and IQ testing 
has lost its aura of mainstream respectability: in many places IQ tests have been 
banned, research on the topic has diminished, new names are being invented 
to test developers and users do not have to use ‘IQ’ for things such as problem-
Great spirits have always found violent opposition from mediocrities. The latter cannot 
understand it when a man does not thoughtlessly submit to hereditary prejudices but honestly 
and courageously uses his intelligence.
Albert Einstein

The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence and IQ tests
25
solving and differential abilities. One of the now more popular IQ measures 
is called the ‘assessment battery for children.’
Arthur R. Jensen
In 1969, Arthur R. Jensen, a Berkeley psychologist, published a controversial 
paper in the Harvard Educational Review. In his paper, Jensen approached the 
now taboo subject of race and IQ by highlighting the interplay between 
nature (genetics) and nurture (environment) in explaining differences between 
African Americans and Caucasians. Jensen’s paper was primarily an attack 
on the utility of compensatory education – that is, education designed to lessen 
the gap in achievement between those from minority backgrounds compared 
with those from the majority. In particular, Jensen argued that environment 
alone was not the sole cause for any disparity between certain groups, and fac-
tors such as genetics may explain some of the achievement score differences, 
thus compensatory education was not the means to close the gap. But it was 
one sentence that caused an uproar: ‘The preponderance of the evidence is, 
in my opinion, less consistent with a strictly environmental hypothesis than 
with a genetic hypothesis, which, of course, does not exclude the influence 
of environment or its interaction with genetic factors’ (p. 82). This claim that 
there may be innate differences between blacks and whites on IQ prompted 
a torrent of abuse, and Jensen was heckled, threatened, abused and generally 
vilified. Jensen went on to become one of the most eminent scholars in the 
field of intelligence and continued his research on the differences between the 
IQ of various groups, although this is not as well known. It is not the fact that 
there are differences in IQ scores across groups that is contentious; it is the 
claimed reasons for this difference.
The Flynn effect
We also know, thanks to New Zealand scholar James Flynn, that there has been 
an increase in the average IQ over the generations. For example, it is now well 
documented that both African–American and Caucasians gained 15 IQ points 
during the past 30 years. So in one sense, the African–American community 
has closed the entire ‘gap’, which certainly demonstrates the power of envi-
ronment (the problem is that the Caucasian IQ has also increased 12 to 15 IQ 
points during this same period).

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
26
Indeed, this effect, now called the ‘Flynn effect’, is well established. Nations, 
almost without exception, have shown gains of about 20 IQ points per gen-
eration (30 years). These gains are highest for IQ tests that are most related to 
reasoning and the capacity to figure out novel problems (this is often called ‘fluid 
intelligence’, see Chapter 5); and least related to knowledge, which arises from 
better educational opportunity, a history of persistence and good  motivation 
for learning (this is often called ‘crystallised intelligence’, see Chapter 5). It is, 
therefore, important to note that these gains in IQ across decades and genera-
tions is not related to the type of knowledge gained from increased schooling, 
increased test-taking sophistication, increased nutrition, greater urbanisation, 
eradication of childhood diseases, upgrading of early childhood or preschool 
programmes or education in general.
Herrnstein and Murray
Perhaps the best instance of extreme argument about IQ and race differences 
is Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray’s now-infamous 1994 book The 
Bell Curve. The book includes reports of many research studies, but it was the 
authors’ interpretations of the research that caused an outcry. For example, when 
citing research on the relation between IQ and illegitimacy, they noted that 
the smarter a woman is, the more likely that she deliberately decides to have 
a child and calculates the best time to do it. The less intelligent the woman 
is, the more likely that she does not think ahead from sex to procreation, 
does not remember to use birth control, does not carefully consider when 
and under what circumstances she should have a child. How intelligent a 
woman is may interact with her impulsiveness, and hence her ability to exert 
self-discipline and restraint on her partner in order to avoid pregnancy.
(p. 179)
They go on to conclude that ‘low intelligence is an important independent 
cause of illegitimacy’ (p. 189). Such (il)logic and the assumption that having 
a baby is entirely up to one sex, the omission of mentioning the father, and 
the conclusion of ‘welfare being the prime suspect’ is more rhetoric than 
research.
Military intelligence is a contradiction in terms.
Groucho Marx

The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence and IQ tests
27
They also used other studies on intelligence to stretch claims so that they 
could make particular public policy statements. For example, Herrnstein and 
Murray argued that the United States is run by rules congenial to people with 
high IQs and that makes life more difficult for everyone else. Herrnstein and 
Murray argue that this has led to the creation of complicated, sophisticated 
systems of fairness, justice and right and wrong that those creating such sys-
tems claim are ethically superior to simple, black-and-white versions. Hence 
the recommendation from Herrnstein and Murray to have less government, 
let business be business – unhampered by complicated rules – let communi-
ties make their own decisions, have less welfare and centralised handouts, and 
so forth.
The Bell Curve was a reawakening of the Jensen debates, although it did 
not last as long as or have the same depth of scholarly analysis associated with 
Jensen’s works. There were reactions in newspapers and popular journals, books 
attacking the claims and spurious logic, but the overwhelming reaction was 
‘Sigh, here we go again’. Both the more outlandish claims and scholarly debate 
is likely to continue on the topic of IQ differences between race and cultural 
groups, and we could be optimistic if we could discover ways to reduce these 
gaps.
IQ research today
The debates about IQ today are rarely mainstream for psychologists. Instead, 
research is more related to the notions of ‘cognitive functioning’, developed 
during the 1970s and 1980s, whereby there is a search for the various strategies 
and manners in which we process information. This has led to the identifica-
tion of many strategies, and some researchers seem to be concerned that some 
of us have more versatility and expertise in the use of these strategies and that 
this seems to relate to the notion of general intelligence, or ‘g’. In many ways, 
researchers of today rarely refer to the notion of ‘g’. This makes life easier as 
it avoids the debates about race, heredity and ‘designer genes’; but one does 
not need to scratch too far beyond the surface to note that the issues of IQ 
are still present.
Neither a lofty degree of intelligence nor imagination nor both together go to the making of 
genius. Love, love, love, that is the soul of genius.
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
28
The small number of researchers who are still publishing on intelligence 
today are more focused on the nature of ‘g’ and the many dimensions of intel-
ligence. It seems that older rejected theories (such as faculty psychology, which 
assumed that there were various bumps on the head that could be traced to 
different thinking patterns) have been reinvented in the name of multiple 
 intelligences and dimension theories of intelligence – that is, there is a denial 
of the notion of ‘g’ and a denial that whenever tests of cognitive abilities are 
related to each other there is a source of commonality that can explain these 
relations. These newer ‘g’-denial theories have not influenced the work of 
psychologists very much (as these theories have limited support for them), 
but they are sufficiently seductive to be very evident and are present in some 
educational claims.
There is a large amount of research seeking alternative measures of ‘g’ using 
brain functioning, blood flow and other physiological cues. This may be fascinat-
ing but is unlikely to lead to much change in the debate if the major impact is 
to replace IQ tests with neurological-based measures. We may have a semblance 
of more pure, or cultural-free, measures, but any new physiologically based 
test will still only be as important as its capacity to predict and explain our 
 thinking – and we have already rehearsed these debates over the past century 
with psychologically based tests.
The concept of IQ has an enduring appeal, although for the past 40 years its 
popularity has been waning. Despite this waxing and waning, IQ has emerged in 
many different forms and has found its rank among the plethora of theoretically  
and empirically based psychological constructs. Indeed, it stands out as being one 
of the most well-supported notions in educational and mainstream psychology, 
with many uses in education, industry and health, to name but a few.
Researchers and practitioners most certainly have learned from the mistakes 
and abuses of the past, and contemporary IQ tests reflect the advances made in 
test construction, scoring and analysis (more on this in Chapter 5). Although the 
criticisms of IQ from people such as Stephen Jay Gould (1981), the accusations 
of fraud about Burt and the tensions raised concerning Jensen’s research have 
not benefited the reputation of IQ, there is much that is good in the modern 
research literature; for example, the use of IQ tests in identifying patients with 
Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s disease, identification of children who have not had 
opportunities to learn but have remarkable cognitive thinking skills, and ensur-
ing that students with some physical disadvantages are not then considered to 
Truly great madness cannot be achieved without significant intelligence.
Henrik Tikkanen

The brief and sometimes dirty history of intelligence and IQ tests
29
be unable to think and not derive benefit from schooling – to name a few. The 
next chapter looks more closely at some of the benefits of research relating to 
intelligence and IQ measures.
As with many research areas where controversy abounds, this provides a 
healthy forum to check the positives and negatives of each argument. This, 
indeed, is the manner in which science advances. The net result is that the 
theory with the most evidence will likely gain the foreground (or the one 
without damning evidence against it) and must then be prepared to take on 
new challengers. IQ and intelligence have done this in the form of ‘g’ and, 
whether you agree or disagree with it, its ability to withstand the many attacks 
says much about its staying power. Ignoring it ignores scientific evidence and 
we do this for many cultural and social reasons, but it rarely leads to advances 
in our understanding.
Where to from here?
For more than a century scientists have had an enduring fascination with IQ 
and its correlates. Stating that there are differences between groups has proven 
a highly controversial topic. It is worth remembering that IQ, as envisaged by 
Binet and many since, was about individual differences and not group differ-
ences. This is where the research baton needs to be redirected. It is important 
to recognise and understand why such differences exist. Any psychological 
construct is only as important as its value, consequences and predictive powers. 
So how useful is intelligence?


31
3
Why do we care about 
intelligence?
Most of us had our first ‘intelligence’ test, of sorts, when we were born. Within 
minutes, midwives and doctors administer the Apgar test. This test, devised by 
Virginia Apgar in 1952, does not require pushing, prodding, needles or any kind 
of intrusive measures. It involves rating the baby’s appearance (blue to pink), 
pulse or heart rate (<100 bpm to >100 bpm), grimace (no response to sneezing 
or coughing), activity (in arms and legs to all-over movement) and respiration 
(slow and irregular to good and crying). If the baby’s Apgar score is less than 7 
much more attention is given to the development and activities of the baby over 
the next hours and days. The claim is that the Apgar score predicts subsequent 
survival and development. In this sense, the Apgar score is valuable – it is not 
directly a measure of health, but a surrogate or approximation that is easier to 
obtain than plugging in heart monitors, using injections to draw blood and so 
on. The power of the Apgar score is that it unobtrusively measures and that it 
predicts. In the same way we need to ask in what ways a measure of intelligence 
(the IQ test) is valuable – what does it predict or explain? Is what it predicts 
useful? Do the positive consequences exceed the negative?
As we noted in Chapter 2, many psychologists and others began question-
ing the value of IQ tests in the 1960s and 1970s, particularly when differences 
in white and African–American students’ IQ averages were used to justify race 
claims. Such disputes and discord led to a decreased use of IQ and intelligence 
tests, and alternative tests to identify differences in performance emerged. Many 
of these new tests were not successful, so the solution became obvious – devise 
a test that looks like an IQ test, smells like an IQ test and walks like an IQ 
test, and never mention the word IQ or intelligence. Examples include the 
Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children, and the latest revision of the Raven’s 
Matrices – neither mentions IQ or uses the IQ scale. We continue to want 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
32
to use notions of ‘intelligence’ but there seems to be a penchant to disguise 
this use.
It is certainly the case that in the United States, the country where outcry 
against the misuse of IQ tests was the greatest, there are a number of power-
ful tests being used to assess IQ but without a hint that it is IQ that they are 
measuring. For example, students who wish to enter a university in the United 
States must sit the Scholastic Achievement Test (SAT) or Graduate Records 
Examination (GRE) – both of which are standardised tests that measure, among 
other things, verbal and mathematical ability, the two abilities that are the major 
dimensions of many IQ tests. The use of intelligence tests makes much sense 
when it is noted that in the United States there is no common curricula across 
school districts or states. Any achievement tests used across state borders would 
then advantage one state over another (as must be related to one or the other 
achievement curricula), and thus is inherently unfair. Hence, more general 
reasoning, problem-solving and logic problems are included to neutralise the 
differences in what is taught in schools. It seems ironic that the country that 
most derided IQ tests, with many states banning their use, has one of the largest 
education systems built on the administration of IQ-based tests.
There are many claims for the explanatory and predictive validity of IQ 
tests. The value of intelligence is that it can be powerful in the understanding 
of real-life behaviour, and is among the most powerful predictors of many 
job-related performances. There are many other predictors of success, but few 
receive the same attention or have been as successful as IQ. A critical aspect to 
consider is that some dimensions of intelligence are more powerful in some 
situations, cultures, instances and on some occasions than others. Let us look 
at some of the ways intelligence and IQ tests can be valuable.
IQ predicts performance in jobs
The general argument often heard in workplaces is that different jobs require 
different skills and aptitudes and, therefore, that measures of specific job-related 
skills would be the best predictors of performance on the job. This is, however, 
not the case. As Frank Schmidt and John Hunter (2004) have repeatedly shown, 
this myth is not based on evidence but on wishful thinking. Rather, general 
intelligence is the best predictor of job performance, whereas tests specific to the 
aptitude required for the job appear to contribute little or nothing to prediction. 
A great deal of intelligence can be invested in ignorance when the need for illusion is deep.
Saul Bellow

Why do we care about intelligence?
33
Having summarised the findings from more than 400 research studies, Schmidt 
and Hunter found that general ability was correlated highest for high complex 
jobs (17% of all jobs, r = .57) and medium complex jobs (63% of all jobs, 
r = .51), and not as high but still among the highest of all predictors for low 
complex jobs (about 20% of all jobs, r = .38). The best predictor of job per-
formance is ‘g’, or whatever is measured by IQ tests. The more complex the job, 
the better IQ is as a predictor of that job! Schmidt and Hunter concluded that 
among the variables that can be used for hiring, none are close to general mental 
ability in validity (the next most valid predictor was conscientiousness).
IQ predicts performance in job training
Some have claimed that greater experience truly makes the difference to 
 performance. Again, Schmidt and Hunter have shown that this claim is wrong. 
The relationship between experience and performance ratings is .49 for those 
who had been on the job for 0–3 years. This relationship drops rapidly to a low .15 
for those who had been on the job 12 years and up, as Figure 3.1 shows.
There is a lot of evidence that a strong relationship between general intel-
ligence and success at school exists. Brighter children learn faster, seek out 
more opportunities for learning and are quicker at choosing among a greater 
Correlation
Years of Experience
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0–3
3–6
6–9
9–12
12+
Figure 3.1 Relationship between years of job experience and performance ratings: IQ predicts and explains 
performance at tasks that require problem-solving

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
34
range of mental strategies to solve problems. Ignoring the substantial effect that 
general intelligence has on children’s educational success can lead to major 
gaps in schooling. James Flynn (2008) has argued that the greatest shift in the 
past 100 years has been from schools teaching ‘lots’ of information (kings and 
queens, grammar, times tables) to problem-solving on the spot. Today’s stu-
dents need skills to think faster, think differently and think smarter, and such 
problem-solving needs to be applied more creatively to many new and often 
unstructured problems. These are the major dimensions as to what intelligence 
means today, and many schools are moving to developing these problem-solving 
abilities.
IQ can be used to diagnose problems
A common and valuable use of IQ scores is when a child is having problems 
with school work. Often these problems are manifested as the child being 
bored, acting out or not engaged. When such a child is referred to a counsellor, 
guidance expert or educational psychologist, one of the more valuable assess-
ments to be used is a measure of the child’s intelligence. A comparison between 
the child’s actual achievement and progress when examined alongside his or 
her IQ can lead to specific treatments to correct the behavioural or academic 
problems. If, for example, the child is performing far below his or her level of 
intelligence, this could lead to a recommendation for more challenging and 
engaging work! If the opposite is the case, it may be that the work needs to 
be tailored to provide more appropriate challenges.
It is critical to note that it is rare for a psychologist to only use an IQ test – it 
is most often implemented as part of a battery of assessments. A study by one 
of the authors (Hattie, 1987), in the heyday of IQ tests, reviewed the files of 
more than 1,000 children from a large school district. There was not one case 
where an IQ test only was administered – it was always administered alongside 
other measures. Hence, the value of IQ tests is as much related to how it is 
interpreted in conjunction with other methods of assessment as it is to the 
score attained in the IQ test alone.
A great many people think that polysyllables are a sign of intelligence.
Barbara Walters

Why do we care about intelligence?
35
Intelligence is among the best predictors of earnings
It has long been noted that there is a relationship between IQ scores and later 
earnings. For example, Jencks (1972) found that men inducted into the Korean 
War who had high IQs (110+) had personal incomes 34 per cent above the 
national average after they returned to civilian life. In contrast, those whose 
IQ scores were below 90 had personal incomes about 34 per cent below the 
national average. However, it is not the case that IQ alone is the determinant 
of earnings, as commitment, motivation and opportunity are also involved. As 
we often note, when attending school reunions, it is often the students from 
the third- or fourth-stream classes who become millionaires and entrepreneurs, 
and those from the top two streamed classes who become the servants of these 
entrepreneurs (their lawyers, accountants and doctors). More than IQ is involved 
in earnings, although it is an important dimension.
IQ is related to the wealth of nations
In a fascinating book produced in 2002, Richard Lynn and Tatu Vanhanen 
outlined their theory that the intelligence of a country’s population is a major 
factor responsible for national differences in economic growth and for the gap 
in per capita income between rich and poor nations. They used extensive data 
from various norming and IQ tests, as well as data from more recent inter-
national studies of educational achievement to estimate the mental abilities of 
185 countries. Lynn and Vanhanen’s work shows that differences in national 
intelligence have been an important factor contributing to differences in the 
wealth and poverty of nations from 1820 onwards. From their analysis, Lynn 
and Vanhanen concluded ‘differences in national intelligence provide the most 
powerful and fundamental explanation for the gap between rich and poor 
countries’ (p. 107). They then added two more variables into their equation, the 
extent of economic freedom and the extent of democratic systems, and these 
along with IQ served to explain 52 to 65 per cent of the relationship between 
IQ and wealth of nations – an almost unheard-of predictive explanation of the 
differential wealth of countries.
They provided two reasons for this high relationship between IQ and wealth. 
First, there is a positive relationship between IQ and earnings among individuals 
A large section of the intelligentsia seems wholly devoid of intelligence.
G. K. Chesterton

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
36
within countries; second, there is a tendency for countries with a higher average 
IQ to have leaders (at least at certain times, such as Bill Clinton versus George 
W. Bush in the United States) who are also more intelligent than  average; such 
leaders are more likely to provide an economic environment that is favorable 
for economic growth and avoid making mistakes in economic policy that retard 
economic development.
These results need to be treated with some caution because some of the data 
sources are questionable. To derive the IQ of a nation on, at times, very small 
sample sizes is suspect at best. For example, they used 80 students for Tonga 
and 80 for Western Samoa and both samples were children living in Auckland, 
New Zealand. It is also very difficult to believe a country’s average IQ is 59, as 
was the case for Equatorial Guinea (with a sample size of 48 adolescents). This 
would mean that less than 5 per cent of the nation had an IQ above 100, and 
that if all the people of Equatorial Guinea were living in New Zealand they 
would all be in special classes. It is absurd to claim a country has an average 
IQ so low, based on so few, leading to such a ridiculous average. Something is 
wrong, for example, when it is noted that the overall average IQ score from 
the 81 countries listed is 88, well below the expected average of 100.
IQ and schooling
A long-standing debate has been whether schooling can enhance a student’s IQ 
score. Many have claimed it is very difficult to make any changes, but others 
have disputed this. One claim is that schools can assist students to reach their 
potential (within the limits of their IQ) and others have claimed that there is no 
such notion as ‘within the limits of their IQ’. Research by Cornell University 
developmental psychologist Stephen Ceci has exciting implications for schools. 
Ceci (1991) has demonstrated that schooling increases IQ scores. Teachers who 
‘believe’ that achievement is more a function of effort and teaching rather than 
of intelligence are more likely to enhance their students’ achievement (regard-
less of the correctness of this belief). However, it is likely that, while schooling 
may influence IQ, people with higher IQs may also seek more education and 
derive greater benefits from schooling. There is also a detrimental effect on IQ 
from dropping out of school early. Ceci (2003) described a study that showed 
Advertising may be described as the science of arresting the human intelligence long enough to get 
money from it.
Stephen Leacock

Why do we care about intelligence?
37
a drop of 2 IQ points for each year of high school not completed beyond 
compulsory school age. Similarly, missing school (truancy, sickness) can lead 
to drops in IQ. This suggests that without the opportunity for mental activity 
provided by schools, intelligence can be significantly limited.
Concluding comments
While important, general intelligence (or ‘g’), as measured by IQ tests, is only 
one of the attributes we value in our society. Arthur Jensen (1998: 356), for 
example, has underlined that the expression of intelligence in any person’s life 
and in the character of a society depends on other factors, equally important, 
that are independent of ‘g’. He goes on to say that it is the interaction between 
general intelligence and these other factors that accounts for much, probably 
most, of the enormous variance in the visible aspects of what most people 
regard as worldly success. Success in life is not at all related to a single factor; 
success has many dimensions and IQ plays an important part in only some 
of them. There are many other factors that can sit along with, and at times 
surpass, IQ and these certainly are valued just as much as IQ. These include 
conscientiousness, integrity, sustainability, effort, commitment and seeking to 
be self-learners, among other attributes.
Perhaps if we didn’t use the terms IQ, ‘g’ or general intelligence we would 
be no worse off. Indeed, that is what psychology appears to have done since 
the radical days of discontentment about IQ in the 1960s and later. But this 
would be a false illusion, as we have reinvented IQ in so many new forms and 
words. Moreover, we still use tests (such as the Kaufman Assessment Battery 
for Children, the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale and the Raven’s Matrices) 
even though they have a reduced emphasis on the notion of IQ or do not used 
the term at all; we still assess children’s generalised skills (under many names) 
before recommending various treatments and programmes; and we still find 
that general intelligence is the best predictor of job performance and success 
in many aspects of our society.
All men see the same objects, but do not equally understand them. Intelligence is the tongue that 
discerns and tastes them.
Thomas Traherne


39
39
4
The measurement of 
intelligence
We doubt that any expert in psychological measurement would state that the 
measures they develop or use capture every aspect of the psychological concepts 
they are investigating. Human behaviour is extremely complex to understand 
and to measure. One of the main problems that psychologists continually face 
is that the things they wish to understand are not always directly observable 
and therefore measuring them becomes problematic. This is in contrast to 
disciplines such as biology, where the biologist can name, measure and count 
different cells or organisms. Thus, the perennial problems of  psychology can be 
stated as (a) defining unobservable concepts and (b) measuring unobservable 
concepts. Take, for example, the concept of jealousy. How would you define 
it? What is jealousy composed of, and how would you measure it? Sure, we all 
think we know what jealousy is, and perhaps have had a personal experience 
of it, but when it comes to defining what it is, then it becomes a much more 
difficult task. For the psychologist then, the problem is to ascertain a set of 
meanings as to what jealousy is, and to then devise ways of measuring these 
meanings. Again, this is no simple task. Straight away you can see that there are 
many things that the psychologist needs to consider before any measure can 
be built. As human behaviours, interactions and attitudes are complex things, 
any decisions as to how best to represent these are fraught with difficulty and 
controversy. Decisions as to what the set of meanings for intelligence will 
include need to be justified, tested and defended. This involves the processes 
of research.
Another issue to consider is that in choosing what to include in a measure 
other things need to be left out. From a technical viewpoint this relates to what 
is called scientific parsimony and it allows researchers to gain a basic understand-
ing of the psychological concept being investigated. The issue here in relation 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
40
to intelligence is that the set of understandings as to what  intelligence refers 
to needs to cover the broader dimensions, which in turn capture as many of 
the smaller parts as possible. Thus, Goethe’s claim about science leaving out 
 important aspects of the phenomena when seeking to understand more about it 
has some legitimacy, especially in psychology, as we need to be as  parsimonious 
as possible given the complexity of the subject.
In the early part of the twentieth century, the Harvard psychologist Edward 
Boring claimed that intelligence is what the intelligence test measures. In other 
words, intelligence tests only measure the skills required to correctly answer the 
questions on a particular test. It is not uncommon to find that IQ tests differ 
in terms of the types of questions they ask. It follows, then, that the types of 
questions asked are directly related to the test developer’s definition of intel-
ligence. Thus, a common critique of IQ tests is that they are too narrow in 
their focus and are therefore not a true reflection of a person’s intelligence, but 
rather the test developer’s view of what intelligence is. Boring’s claim, then, 
is not without foundation as most, if not all, intelligence tests differ from one 
another in terms of the theoretical definitions and the questions they ask. So 
which of the many IQ tests available are the best? To answer that requires an 
understanding of the characteristics that a test needs in order for it to be ‘the 
best’. It’s time to introduce some technical terms to help you figure out what 
a ‘good’ intelligence test is.
What is psychometrics and why is it important?
There are two fundamental aspects to the measurement of any psychological 
concept: validity and reliability. Both validity and reliability are the psychometric 
terms that define the evidence required for a psychological test score to be of 
any use, from both a theoretical and a practical point of view. Psycho = mind, and 
metric = measurement, therefore psychometrics is simply mind measurement. Without 
the two essential building blocks of reliability and validity, a test and the scores 
it produces, regardless of its subject matter, can have no meaning or utility, 
because we would simply be guessing. If, on the other hand, a test has high 
validity and reliability then the scores obtained on it will have some meaning 
and can be used with confidence to make decisions about the test-taker. And 
Many highly intelligent people are poor thinkers. Many people of average intelligence are skilled 
thinkers. The power of a car is separate from the way the car is driven.
Edward de Bono

The measurement of intelligence
41
let’s be clear here, test scores are often used to make decisions about people, be 
they personnel recruitment, job reassignment and so on. Because they can and 
have been used to make very important decisions about people, the dependable 
use of test scores can have dramatic implications for individuals.
In many ways, establishing the psychometric qualities of an intelligence test, 
or any test for that matter, is like building a legal case in a court of law. One 
starts from the premise that the test is not guilty (has no validity or reliability) 
and then a case is built to show that it is ‘guilty’ of having these properties. Like 
any astute lawyer, a good psychometrician will painstakingly piece together 
a robust case to demonstrate that the test is worthy for its intended uses, and 
constantly be on the alert for competing claims that might undermine this 
case.
So, if a person gets a high score on an intelligence test, does this mean that 
he or she has high intelligence? It depends. The answer would be yes, if the test 
is valid and reliable, and if it has the support of good psychometric evidence. 
But many of the tests of intelligence in popular magazines, for example, have 
no evidence of reliability or validity, and therefore no weight should be placed 
on the interpretations from such tests. Such tests may look acceptable, but it 
would not be defensible to make any decisions based on tests such as these that 
lack evidence of validity and reliability.
Validity
In simple terms, validity asks the question, ‘Can you provide evidence that the 
interpretation that you wish to make from a test is defensible?’ A key source of 
evidence for claiming validity is that the total score from any test should relate to 
a single attribute. Consider that we have devised a test consisting of ten spelling 
and ten mathematics questions. If two people both get ten of these 20 ques-
tions correct, it is not clear what this score of ten represents. One person may 
have got the ten spelling questions correct and the other the ten mathematics 
questions correct. There is no way to compare the two scores as they derive 
from different attributes inherent in this test. So, an important consideration 
is that the questions in a test should all relate to the one single dimension. 
Psychologists call this unidimensionality (uni = one, dimension = quantity). 
So anyone writing questions to assess numerical word problems would want 
to make sure that numerical reasoning is the only ability being tested. A 
question worded ‘Bob scored four tries and kicked four conversions; how 
many points did he score in the rugby game?’ clearly has two dimensions: 
(a) numerical reasoning and (b) knowledge of the code of rugby and its scoring 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
42
system. This particular question would, therefore, have a bias towards those 
who know how much a try and a conversion are worth. These people are 
using their additional knowledge of rugby to answer the question correctly. 
This sort of question is not fair and should never be allowed in a test because, 
as in this instance, not everyone is familiar with the scoring system in rugby. 
Therefore, one of the things a psychometrician does when developing tests 
is to check that each question assesses the construct (in our case, intelligence) 
of interest, and does not include questions that people answer correctly using 
skills other than intelligence (such as specialised knowledge). This is what we 
did in developing the IQ test for the television programme Test the Nation: The 
New Zealand IQ Test (which we discuss in Chapter 5).
Thus far we have claimed that a ‘valid’ test should be based on a clear set of 
understandings of what is being measured and that each question in the test 
should assess only one dimension – of course, we want this to be the dimension 
we are claiming to measure. Another essential component in the psychometric 
process is to provide some evidence that the test does measure what it says it 
measures. One way to provide evidence for this claim (and we used this method 
in Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test) is to find an existing measure (gold 
standard) of intelligence and then correlate the scores from the new test with 
the scores on this gold standard. What you would hope to see is that people 
who score highly on the new test also score highly on the gold standard; simi-
larly, those with a low score on one test also get a low score on the other. Any 
other permutation is not acceptable and would lead to evidence that does not 
support the validity of the test.
Reliability
Reliability, on the other hand, is about the consistency of getting the same 
score on the same test on different occasions. In other words, if some-
one were to take the test again would they get a similar score? The issue 
here is repeatability. For example, if you took the test the first day and 
scored 120, the next day and scored 85 and the third day and scored 105, 
the consistency of your scores is highly variable, and there would be obvi-
ous concern about which score, if any, to believe. In such a circumstance, 
we could say that the test scores lack reliability. The scores are so different 
No one ever went broke underestimating the intelligence of the American people.
H. L. Mencken

The measurement of intelligence
43
it is difficult to capture your ‘true’ score. Which score would you think was your 
true score? Many of us would want to keep the test where you scored 120, of 
course! But, not so fast. We have to consider why the scores varied so much. 
After all, it is not expected that one’s intelligence would change that dramatically 
over a three-day period, so what is leading to the scores being so variable? There 
can be many things that affect performance on a test; for example, you may be ill 
on one of the days, you may not have had your favourite breakfast cereal or you 
may have been nervous, and so on. The point is that scores on tests can change 
from one day to the next, and one of the key considerations in developing a 
test is to minimise these daily fluctuations – so regardless of where, when or 
how the questions are administered, the score that you receive from a test will 
be consistent, repeatable or similar over numerous administrations. Another 
way of saying this, but in language more often used by psychometricians, is 
that we want to reduce the unwanted sources of error. The aim is to minimise 
errors of measurement, or, in other words, maximise the reliability of the test.
IQ norms
Let us presume we have developed the test for Test the Nation: The New Zealand 
IQ Test and can provide evidence that the scores from this test can be interpreted 
reliably and validly. But we also need some further understanding of how we 
can compare our scores with other people’s scores – how do the scores on our 
test compare with what would be ‘normal’ for the New Zealand population 
and how do we know what is ‘normal’? This question refers to the notion of 
norms, which refers to the typical performance of a population of people. For 
our IQ test, we wanted to evaluate the typical scores (identify the norms) for 
blondes, left-handers and for all New Zealanders. There are some guidelines 
that can help us establish these norms.
One of these guidelines is that if we take a large enough sample of New 
Zealanders we can estimate the mean, and we can see how spread-out the 
scores are around this mean. We can also then estimate the average IQ for 
 certain groups or categories; for example, by age, gender and occupation. One 
of the amazing features of most achievement attributes such as IQ is that if we 
obtained a large enough sample of people, then graphed the scores, we would 
find that there were as many people above the mean as below it, and that 
the shape of the distribution would be very symmetric. Please note that this 
normal distribution curve (as it is called) is not a stipulation of achievement or 
intelligence scores; it is a fundamental observation that psychometricians have 
found on numerous occasions. Let us look at this curve.

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
44
The normal distribution curve, or the bell curve as it is also known, does 
not have to occur, but with achievement scores it nearly always does. There will 
be a small percentage of people who score highly and a small percentage who 
have low scores, but the majority of people will be based around the average 
score. It has been traditional when developing IQ tests to arbitrarily set the 
mean for the population of interest (in this case, New Zealanders) at 100 and 
to create scores that then represent the various increments around this mean 
of 100. Similarly, we could arbitrarily decide on a scale for the IQ test (as was 
done when IQ tests were first developed in the 1910s). We could create scores 
along the IQ scale such that 50 per cent of the population is expected to score 
between 90 and 110; about 16 per cent would score above 115 and 16 per cent 
below 85; and about 2 to 3 per cent would score above 130 and 2 to 3 per cent 
would score below 70. Thus:
An IQ of 80 would be higher than 10 per cent of all persons taking 
 
■
this test.
An IQ of 90 would be higher than 25 per cent of all persons taking 
 
■
this test.
An IQ of 100 would be higher than 50 per cent of all persons taking 
 
■
this test.
An IQ of 110 would be higher than 75 per cent of all persons taking 
 
■
this test.
An IQ of 120 would be higher than 90 per cent of all persons taking 
 
■
this test.
An IQ of 130 would be higher than 98 per cent of all persons taking 
 
■
this test.
Figure 4.1 shows how this distribution works, based on a well-known adult 
measure – the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale. It shows that about 2 per cent 
of any population would have an IQ between 55 and 77, 14 per cent between 
70 and 85, 34 per cent between 85 and 100 and so on. There would be 68 per 
cent who would have an IQ between 85 and 115, and nearly all of us have 
an IQ score between 70 and 130. When we add the percentages from left to 
right, then 50 per cent have an IQ of 100 or lower, 84 per cent an IQ of 115 
or lower and 98 per cent an IQ of 130 or lower.
Success in almost any field depends more on energy and drive than it does on intelligence. This 
explains why we have so many stupid leaders.
Sloan Wilson

The measurement of intelligence
45
As we found on the day after the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test 
went to air, many New Zealanders were surprised (indeed, shocked) that they 
had an ‘average IQ’. Indeed, 50 per cent found they had average intelligence – 
which is exactly what was expected!
We have now discussed the main concepts that we would need not only 
to create the tests for the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test television 
programmes but also to evaluate the tests. Any scores from the New Zealand IQ 
tests would need to be reliable, valid, relate to one underlying dimension and 
have normative information in order for meaningful interpretations to be made.
Measures of adult intelligence
There are many current IQ tests for adults and for children, and it is impossible 
to provide the details of each, given the scope of this book. Any reader inter-
ested in locating a particular test should read the Mental Measurements Yearbook 
(http://www.unl.edu/buros), a compilation of reviews of all the published tests 
that are used throughout psychology, including many intelligence tests. What 
we will cover in the next section of this chapter are two tests that are often 
considered the gold standard for assessing adult intelligence – and which we 
subsequently used in developing the 72-question test for the second year of 
the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test television programme.
Number of scores
68%
95%
55
70
85
100
115
130
145
0.1%
0.1%
2%
2%
14%
14%
34%
34%
Score on Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
Figure 4.1 The normal distribution curve

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
46
The WAIS (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale)
Arguably, one of the most well-known and widely used IQ tests is the Wechsler 
Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), which was developed by the psychologist David 
Wechsler (1896–1981) in 1955, and was based on his 1949 WISC (Wechsler 
Intelligence Scale for Children). Indeed, the impetus for the WAIS was the lack at 
that time of an adult version of an IQ test. Subsequent revisions of the original 1955 
version of the test are to be found in the WAIS-III (1997) and WAIS-IV (2008).
Wechsler’s notion of IQ stems from his early career working with the psy-
chologist Charles Spearman and the mathematician Karl Pearson, as well as 
his experiences testing army recruits for job assignments. It was while testing 
army recruits that Wechsler became concerned with the  apparent  discrepancy 
between the intellectual abilities needed in civilian life and those that he was 
testing in the military. Such was his disenchantment that it led him to reassess 
his views on intelligence and its measurement. Wechsler believed that intel-
ligence was not a single capacity but the sum of many  different abilities. Thus, 
he set about developing a measure that provided some unique approaches to 
understanding and quantifying intelligence. Wechsler defined intelligence as the 
‘capacity of an individual to understand the world about him and his resource-
fulness to cope with its challenges’ (1975: 139). That is, intelligence is what we 
do in the real world and ways in which we adapt to meet the challenges of new 
situations. This approach was a radical departure from the staunch hereditarian 
views of intelligence as immutable, because it implied that intelligence was 
adaptive and could be changed.
In developing his scale, Wechsler provided not only a much more detailed 
and comprehensive measure of intelligence but also a more useful scoring 
system, as well as the notion of a performance scale. Unlike the other popular 
IQ test, the Stanford–Binet test (for children and adolescents), which required 
the test-taker to pass two out of three tasks in order to get credit for a par-
ticular test, the WAIS simply added up the number of correct responses to 
get an intelligence scale score and an overall IQ score. The advantage of this 
method is that groups of questions can be aggregated by content area, so that 
test-takers can gauge where their strengths and weaknesses are in the different 
subject areas (vocabulary, general knowledge and so on) as well as their overall 
IQ. Another advance of the WAIS was the use of a performance scale, which 
requires test-takers to do something other than simply respond to questions. 
Talent wins games, but teamwork and intelligence win championships.
Michael Jordan

The measurement of intelligence
47
For example, they may be asked to point to a missing detail, or assemble a 
series of blocks. The rationale for the performance scale was that it overcame 
problems of test-taker disadvantage because of language, education and other 
barriers to performance.
Remember we said earlier that typically the psychologist will define a broader 
concept of what he or she is trying to measure and then find some smaller aspects 
to measure so as to provide evidence of it? This is exactly what Wechsler did. 
The WAIS is organised around four broader dimensions –  verbal comprehen-
sion, working memory, perceptual organisation and processing speed – each of 
which has various smaller subtests, as explained below.
Verbal comprehension. The verbal comprehension dimension of the WAIS 
test has questions on vocabulary, on identifying similarities and asking for 
information. The vocabulary questions aim to test vocabulary level by asking 
the test-taker to define words. The similarities questions ask the test-taker to 
identify the relationship between pairs of words; for example, ‘How are a shoe 
and a sock alike?’ This section is aimed at measuring logical and abstract think-
ing. The information questions are typically general knowledge questions. The 
questions become progressively more difficult and are a measure of learning 
and memory. It is noted that such questions can be affected by cultural and 
educational experiences.
Working memory. The working memory dimension of the WAIS test includes 
tests on arithmetic, digit (or number) spans and putting numbers and letters into 
sequences. In the arithmetic subtest, all problems are worked out in the head 
and then verbally given. The arithmetic questions aim to measure knowledge of 
arithmetic procedures, concentration and short-term memory. In the digit span 
subtest, a series of numbers are verbally presented to the test-taker who is then 
asked to repeat the sequence either forwards or backwards. As the test progresses 
the sequences become longer. The aim of this section is to assess concentration 
and short-term auditory memory. For the letter–number sequencing subtest, 
both letters and numbers are randomly ordered and orally presented. The task 
is to repeat the numbers in ascending order and the letters in alphabetical order. 
Again, this section measures short-term memory and attention.
Perceptual organisation. The perceptual organisation dimension of the WAIS 
test includes subtests on picture completion, block design and matrix reasoning. 
In the picture completion subtest, a picture is shown to the test-taker, who in 
turn must identify what important detail is missing. This subtest measures per-
ception, concentration, alertness and attention to detail. It is generally regarded 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
48
as a good indicator of nonverbal intelligence. In the subtest on block design, 
the blocks are patterned in various designs using only two colours, and are 
placed before the  examiner. A picture of a series of blocks in a certain pattern 
is shown to the  test-taker who is then asked to reproduce the pattern. This 
subtest measures perceptual motor skill and psychomotor speed. It is also a 
very good measure of nonverbal concept formation. The subtest on matrix 
reasoning measures nonverbal analogy as well as reasoning and information 
processing. The task involves identifying patterns among a series of shapes. As 
the subtest progresses, it becomes more difficult to identify what the relation-
ship is among the shapes.
Processing speed. The processing speed dimension of the WAIS includes sub-
tests using symbols. In the subtest on digit symbol copy, the test-taker is shown 
a series of symbols that are associated with a number. The task is then to match 
as many  symbols to the numbers as fast as possible under timed conditions. 
This subtest measures factors such as learning ability, visual motor dexterity, 
speed and persistence. In the subtest on symbol search, two geometric shapes 
are shown to the test-taker, who then has to find one of the two shapes in 
an adjacent search group of geometric shapes. This section is timed and is a 
measure of cognitive processing speed.
Scoring WAIS. A unique feature of the WAIS is the manner in which the 
test can be scored. Apart from a total IQ score, and the subtest scores (for ver-
bal comprehension, working memory, perceptual organisation and processing 
speed), one can also compute a verbal score and a performance score. The 
verbal IQ score is computed using vocabulary, similarities, arithmetic, digit 
span, information and letter–number sequencing. The performance IQ score 
is computed using picture completion, block design, matrix reasoning, symbol 
search and digit symbol copy.
One of the reasons we chose the WAIS as a gold standard was that it has the 
most extensive psychometric evidence. The technical manual that accompanies 
the test is one of the most comprehensive that we have encountered over the 
years. Suffice to say, the psychometric qualities of the WAIS are well documented, 
suggesting that the test is valid and reliable and that the scores obtained from it 
are a strong indicator of the facets of IQ that it purports to measure.
To make a book is as much a trade as to make a clock; something more than intelligence is 
required to become an author.
Jean de La Bruyère

The measurement of intelligence
49
The Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices
The Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices (Raven’s Matrices or Raven’s test) 
were originally developed in England in 1936, by L. Penrose and J. C. Raven, 
as a measure of a person’s ability to form perceptual relations and to reason 
by analogy. In other words, the Raven’s test is independent of language and 
 formal schooling and is a test of nonverbal IQ. It is based on Spearman’s general 
intelligence, or ‘g’, and was used during the Second World War for military 
classification, proving to be most successful in predicting the performance of 
signalling and radar operators. Spearman’s definition of ‘g’ was the process of 
extracting relationships among stimuli (question and answer). Thus, the fun-
damental aim of the Raven’s Matrices is to assess test-takers’ abilities to work 
out patterns, similarities or relationships.
The Raven’s Matrices consists of 60 questions arranged in five sets of 
12 questions each. Each question contains a figure of five to seven patterns 
with a missing piece. Each set involves a different principle or theme for 
obtaining the missing piece, and within a set the questions are arranged in 
Figure 4.2 An example of a Raven-type item
You can’t legislate intelligence and common sense into people.
Will Rogers

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
50
increasing order of difficulty, hence the notion of ‘progressive’. The manual 
provides  conversion from the raw scales to IQ percentiles, which can then be 
converted to IQ scores. (A percentile is the value of a variable below which a 
certain percentage of observations fall. So the twentieth percentile is the value 
(or score) below which 20 per cent of the observations may be found.) The 
norms are available for more than 15 countries but there are none for New 
Zealand adults. We used the US, UK and Australian norms and noted that there 
were only trivial differences between the IQ conversions from each.
Consider this example item (from http://wapedia.mobi/en/Raven%27s_
Progressive_Matrices). You are asked to decide on the pattern to go into the 
lower-right-hand box. Typically four options are provided to choose from, 
but it is worth trying this version – note how you go about thinking of the 
right answer, how you have to see relations, consider options and invest some 
effort into these thinking processes.
Like the WAIS, the Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices have been 
 thoroughly researched and have an abundance of psychometric data to support 
both their validity and reliability. Thus, it was a natural choice for us to use them 
in the validation of the tests for Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test.
Concluding comments
To be able to claim a test has validity and reliability requires detailed evidence to 
suggest that the interpretations that we wish to make from the test has defensible 
evidence to support it, and that the results from the test can be reproduced 
on different occasions. If these things can be demonstrated through detailed 
analysis then test administrators and those being tested can have confidence in 
the results obtained and any subsequent decisions that are made.
With regard to developing the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test 
not only did we rigorously search for the best tests with which to correlate 
our test but also we employed some of the most sophisticated data analysis 
methods available to ensure that the test met the high standards required for 
validity and reliability. A detailed description of how we developed the test is 
given in Chapter 5.
I wish there was a knob on the TV to turn up the intelligence. There’s a knob called brightness, 
but it doesn’t seem to work.
Will Gallagher

51
51
5
The development of an 
IQ test
Both of us are busy teachers and researchers with lots of students, many research 
projects and a mutual passion for promoting our discipline of psychology and 
psychometrics. So when, in 2003, Television New Zealand called and asked 
us to meet to discuss the development of a New Zealand IQ test for a New 
Zealand version of the Test the Nation programme,* we were naturally curious 
and excited. The concept also involved having a studio audience made up of 
various groups who would compete in a live programme on a series of ques-
tions leading to an IQ score. At the same time, viewers could complete the 
test at home using pen and paper and an answer sheet available from various 
magazines, by answering on the web or by texting their answers in, and they 
then could compare their scores with the average scores of the various studio 
groups. We worked on two programmes with Television New Zealand, the first 
in 2003 and the second in 2004. The programme is termed ‘credible entertain-
ment’ or ‘edutainment’ and we were employed to be part of the ‘credible’ or 
‘edu’ part!
The pressure on us was live television, 72 perfect questions, no New Zealand 
standardised adult IQ to relate to, no notion of the sample on the night and 
the average had to be a perfect 100 (which is the average IQ score)! The 
excitement was this challenge (and the opportunity to obtain and  analyse 
the data).
* The Test the Nation concept is owned by Netherlands-based Eyeworks Holding and is licensed 
for distribution to many other countries, including the United Kingdom, Australia, Germany, 
Belgium, Canada, the United States, Indonesia, Denmark, Japan, Ireland and the Middle East.

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
52
The model for the New Zealand Test the Nation IQ Test
The format for the first year was based on testing six major abilities:  language, 
number, knowledge, spatial awareness, reasoning and memory. Each of these com-
ponents consisted of two subcomponents, giving 12 subtests (see Table 5.1).
The first dimension, language, was included because it is an important 
(although not the only) part of reasoning, solving problems and adapting to 
our current environment.
Arithmetic relates to how we handle concepts of quantity and numbers. 
Being able to add, subtract, multiply and divide numbers, as well as solve numer-
ical word problems, are useful skills for everyday situations. For example, giving 
and receiving the correct change to/from the bus driver and being able to work 
out the time the journey takes is an important life skill.
Knowledge relates to the knowledge we need of how our world works, and 
includes both general knowledge and social knowledge (or social intelligence, 
as it is also known). Social knowledge (intelligence) can include the ability to 
understand people’s thoughts, feelings and intentions; the ability to interpret 
meaningful connections among various acts of oneself and others; an ability to 
deal with people, to interpret sequences of social behaviour, to interpret changes 
in social behaviour and to be good at taking the perspectives of other people; 
and an ability to adapt well in social situations and to understand the common 
socially acceptable norms and rules in human relations in one’s own society or 
culture (even if one does not follow these). Although social knowledge is one 
Table 5.1 IQ test format, 2003
Dimensions
 Subtest dimensions
Subtest 1
Subtest 2
Language
Vocabulary
Meanings
Number
Number problems
Word problems
Knowledge
General knowledge
Social knowledge
Spatial awareness
Spatial reasoning and object 
awareness
Mental rotation
Reasoning
Number series
Series completion
Memory
Word memory
Picture memory
I’m not offended by all the dumb blonde jokes because I know I’m not dumb . . . and I also 
know that I’m not blonde.
Dolly Parton

The development of an IQ test
53
of the oldest notions in the history of intelligence (it was first well developed 
by Hunt in 1928 in the George Washington Social Intelligence Test, and was 
a key part of Joy Guilford’s 1967 search for the 120-plus separate intellectual 
abilities), it is not usually included in the assessment of intelligence. The social 
knowledge questions in our test assessed knowledge of social norms in New 
Zealand society by asking, ‘What is considered socially appropriate?’ in various 
circumstances.
Spatial awareness relates to the proficiency to think in abstract ways. It 
often involves us reasoning in our minds about complex problems. Sometimes 
words help, sometimes they do not; spatial awareness is more related to solving 
problems while considering many parts of the problem at the same time. For 
example, furniture removal people often are faced with the problem of having 
to move awkward-shaped objects into confined spaces and, therefore, require 
spatial reasoning proficiency in order to meet the demands of such a task.
Reasoning relates to our understanding relationships and making  connections 
that are not immediately obvious. The ability to reason through problems is 
particularly important when facing problems we have not seen before. The ways 
we think of possible answers, consider various options and reach reasonable 
conclusions are all part of what we call reasoning.
For our IQ testing, we divided memory into memory for words and memory 
for pictures. Memory is an important aspect for living and operating in our 
world. For this aspect of IQ we were more interested in the short-term memory. 
For example, it is very useful to remember where the car keys were last seen, or 
where children are to be picked up from, as there are important implications 
for not remembering such day-to-day things.
The questions
In the first year of the New Zealand television programme (2003), Professor 
Con Stough and his team of test developers (Karen Hansen, Gilles Gignac and 
Jenny Lloyd) at Swinburne University of Technology in Australia developed 
an initial 150 questions across six dimensions. Our role was to choose the final 
72  questions, making sure they had psychometric credibility (high reliability), 
that there were high correlations between the questions and there was a standard 
IQ distribution of scores (validity), that collectively they cohered into a single 
total IQ score (unidimensionality) and that no question or answer would be 
challenged  (credibility). We reviewed each question, modified many in detail, 
added some more New Zealand–based questions to the ‘knowledge’ dimension 
and  pretested the questions. We then performed an extensive psychometric 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
54
analysis of the questions to choose six questions for each of the 12 subtests 
within the six major dimensions of the IQ test format. In the second year 
(2004) we developed our own questions.
If you were to ask any test developer what the most difficult aspect of 
putting a psychological test together is, then more often than not it would 
be writing the questions. The difficulty is not only to write good-quality 
questions but also to write good distracter answers. Consider that each 
question has a stem (the problem) and four response options (only one 
can be correct, with the others being not correct but plausibly correct to 
attract those who do not know the answer to be tempted to choose them). 
The main issue here is that if you have four response options then there is 
a 25 per cent chance of getting it correct. If the distracter options are not 
too convincing then this probability starts to increase, but if they are well 
written then the probability of ‘guessing’ the correct answer starts to decrease 
from 25 per cent. The long and the short of all this is that it is the writing 
of distracter response options that takes the time and the skill to write. The 
last thing we wanted was for people to be able to guess the answer, as this 
would then have led to IQ scores being overestimated and misleading. For 
the 2004 programme it took us three weeks to write over 100 questions 
from which the final selection was made.
Criteria for choosing the questions
We used four criteria for choosing the best questions to assess intelligence in 
New Zealand: 1) item difficulty, 2) item discrimination, 3) item and test infor-
mation and 4) identification of a common factor across the six dimensions.
Difﬁ culty
We aimed to select questions across the difficulty range – we wanted some 
easy, some mid-range and some hard questions. But what does ‘easy’ and ‘hard’ 
mean? We know from the use of IQ tests over the past 100 years that, if they 
are administered to large enough samples, the distribution of intelligence looks 
very similar every time. Most people score near the middle, and of the rest, 
We should take care not to make the intellect our god; it has, of course, powerful muscles, but no 
personality.
Albert Einstein

The development of an IQ test
55
about the same number score at the top as score at the bottom. There is a sense 
of wonder every time a test of intelligence is administered – if the sample is 
large enough you get a normal bell-shaped distribution (known as the normal 
distribution curve) (see Figure 4.1).
Therefore, we knew we needed some questions that were of a difficulty 
level that best assessed people with an IQ of 85; more questions in the middle, 
to assess people with an IQ between 90 and 110; and some questions at the 
high end, to assess those with an IQ above 125. That is, we needed questions 
that about half of those scoring about 85 would answer correctly, so as to dis-
criminate between those above and below 85; questions that about half of those 
scoring around 90 would get correct; and so on for every part of the IQ scale 
(from 85 to 130). You do not need too many questions at each IQ point (this 
would lead to redundant information), as the aim is to cover as many points as 
 possible, and a long test may lead to fatigue during completion.
But this was a television programme, and one aim was to hold the viewers’ 
attention to the end of the programme; therefore, we decided to have more 
easy than hard questions, while still ensuring that the final scores could be 
defensible when converted to the correct IQ scale (more on this later). So 
we aimed for questions such that the average score on the 72 questions was 
about 50. This meant that there would be fewer questions aiming at discrimi-
nating at the higher end of the IQ distribution, and thus we had to choose 
superb questions to discriminate those in this top half of the IQ distribution 
(>125 IQ).
Discrimination
The questions also had to differentiate between people with either a high or 
a low overall IQ – this is what is meant by discrimination. Difficulty relates to 
how easy or difficult the question is, and discrimination refers to whether a 
question can get maximum discrimination between high and low performers 
overall on the total set of questions – the greater the discrimination, the more 
power the question has to provide information about intelligence.
Information
The best way to choose questions is to consider the information (see Glossary 
for item information) from each question. The more information that can be 
gained the better the question will be able to provide details about its difficulty 
and discrimination. Another way of saying this is that the aim is to choose a set 
of questions that gives us the least amount of error in estimating a person’s score 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
56
(from easy to hard questions, from lower to higher intelligence). High informa-
tion means low error, and low error means a large amount of information.
A common factor (‘g’) across dimensions
Across the various questions, and particularly across the six major dimensions 
of the IQ test, it is expected that there would be evidence of a ‘factor’ (derived 
from factor analysis; see Glossary) which explains peoples’ performances on all 
the questions (whether they get questions correct or not). This is because we 
are saying that the 12 subtests are not independent measures of problem-solving 
intelligence but different measures of problem-solving intelligence and that 
together, each contribute to measuring what we are calling intelligence: the 
ability to problem-solve using language, numbers, knowledge, spatial awareness, 
reasoning and memory.
Choosing the ﬁ nal set of questions
Finally, there needed to be six questions measuring each subtest attribute. In 
some ways this should have been the easiest criteria to meet, but in reality it 
was not easy. We were essentially trying to do many things at once: choose 
questions for difficulty and discrimination along the curve that related to the 
overall score and that covered different components and contexts. We used a 
mathematic modelling process called linear programming to choose the ques-
tions to ensure that we met these conditions.
Collecting data for the New Zealand Test the Nation 
IQ Test
As noted above, we began the process of collecting data for the IQ test by 
reviewing the questions for appropriateness, accuracy and completeness. As 
a consequence, we made a number of changes to the questions. We then 
advertised on television and made contact with various factories, worksites 
and offices for volunteers – the aim was to get a group of people with a 
range of ages, occupations and abilities. The trial took place on a Sunday. 
The participants were administered the 150 questions, the Raven’s Standard 
The fool doth think himself wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.
William Shakespeare

The development of an IQ test
57
Progressive Matrices, and four subtests from the Weschler Adult Intelligence 
Scale (WAIS).
It was a fun day. Between subtests, the groups were informed about the 
purpose of each section, there were prize draws, a nice lunch and a gift bag 
at the end. It was fascinating for us to have a group of people so interested in 
the notion of IQ, and they certainly expressed disappointment when the day 
finished! The atmosphere during the actual testing was subdued and quiet, 
reflecting the attention being paid to the problem-solving, but the many breaks 
helped to reduce fatigue.
Altogether 274 people attended the Sunday trial of the questions. There 
was a greater percentage of females (62%) than in the population, but a good 
spread of ages (28% between ages 18 and 25, 38% between ages 26 and 40, 
26% between ages 41 and 59, and 7% older than 60). The participants were 
asked to write down their ethnicity: 5 per cent were Asian, 7 per cent Mäori, 
3 per cent Pacific Islanders, 58 per cent Päkehä (New Zealand European) and 
27 per cent categorised themselves as New Zealanders. It is thus difficult to 
compare with ethnicity from the census figures (because New Zealander is 
not an official census category).
Occupations were spread over a wide range. The most common were student 
(33), manager (18), retired (16), sales (14), mother/caregiver (14), accountancy/
finance (10), information technology business (9), teacher (8), medical (8), 
unemployed (6), consultant (5), storeperson (4), receptionist (4), engineer (4), 
retail (3), restaurant (3) and legal/law (3). Other occupations included artist, 
volunteer, table game dealer, solicitor, seamstress, psychic, proofreader, plasterer, 
naval rating, meteorologist, ice cream truck driver, footwear buyer, dog groomer, 
celebrant, beneficiary and auctioneer.
We compared this spread of occupations with the New Zealand census 
 figures. The sample included more service and sales, technicians and associate 
 professionals than in the New Zealand population. There were fewer plant 
and machine operators as well as agriculture and fishery workers in the sample 
than in the New Zealand population. Table 5.2 gives an indication of how the 
New Zealand census divides up our workforce, and also a comparison with 
the Sunday trial audience.
Occupations were converted to a 10-point (low) or 90-point (high) 
scale to measure the ‘status’ of each occupation. Status is defined in terms 
of ‘buying power’ and is also known as socio-economic status. There were 
fewer higher (12% vs. 28%) and more middle (67% vs. 43%) socio-economic 
respondents, but similar percentages of lower socio-economic respondents 
(22% vs. 28%).

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
58
The properties of the questions
We looked first at the attributes of an excellent question using graphical  methods. 
What these graphs present is the relationship between a persons’ ability and their 
probability of getting the item correct. Thus, people with more  ability have a 
higher probability of getting the item right compared with those with lower 
ability. The graph of the performance of question 29 (from the original 150 
questions) is presented to the left in Figure 5.1. It indicates that there is much 
discrimination between 85 and 115 IQ (–1 to +1 sd) (sd ≠ standard deviation; 
see Glossary for explanation), and the difficulty of the question is such that 
answering it correctly would indicate an IQ score of about 105. The steeper 
the line of the curve the more successful the question is at discriminating at the 
Table 5.2 Population distribution in the trials
Occupation group
Sunday 
sample
New Zealand 
population
Sunday 
sample (%)
New Zealand 
population (%)
Armed forces
2
5,892
.72%
.57%
Elementary occupations
7
61,926
2.52%
5.97%
Service and sales 
workers
55
90,729
19.78%
8.75%
Agriculture and fishery 
workers
0
104,061
.00%
10.03%
Plant and machine 
operators and 
assemblers
13
110,598
4.68%
10.66%
Trades workers
20
123,690
7.19%
11.92%
Technicians and 
associate professionals
66
123,885
23.74%
11.94%
Clerks
23
130,167
8.27%
12.55%
Professionals
42
137,517
15.11%
13.26%
Legislators, 
administrators and 
managers
47
148,989
16.91%
14.36%
Intellectual growth should commence at birth and cease only at death.
Albert Einstein

The development of an IQ test
59
item difficulty (see Glossary) of the question. Contrast this with question 16 (to 
the right in Figure 5.1) where there is less discrimination (the curve is flatter) 
although the difficulty is about the same. Question 29 provides more informa-
tion about IQ than question 16. It is optimal to choose a series of questions 
with steeper discrimination curves across the range of difficulty desired (80 to 
125), and this is primarily how we chose the final set.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
Ability
b
Item Characteristic Curve: ITEM0029
a = 0.983
b = 0.336
Probability
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
3
Ability
b
Item Characteristic Curve: ITEM0016
a = 0.439
b = 0.145
Probability
Figure 5.1 Item characteristic curves
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
0.81
0.65
0.48
0.32
0.16
0
Subtest: TEST0001
Scale Score
Information
Standard Error
Figure 5.2 The test information function for the total IQ score (—— = information, —•— = the standard error)

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
60
Using the four criteria outlined above, we chose the final test consisting of 72 
questions. Figure 5.2 presents the test information function (our third criterion: see 
Glossary) for the total score (this is the  accumulation of the information curves 
across all 72 questions). The least amount of error (i.e. the most information) 
can be found between 80 to 120 (this corresponds to –3 and –1 on the graph), 
and the least information above 120, although there is sufficient information 
to have confidence in the IQ scores across the range 85 to 135. The standard 
error increases for IQs above 125, hence there may be more variability in the 
IQ scores above this level.
We also wanted to evaluate whether there was a factor common to all 
12  subtests. A method called factor analysis (see Glossary) allowed us to check 
this. We found that there is about 30 per cent in common variance across the 
12 subtests. We found two clear factors (see Table 5.3) that were also very 
much related to each other. In keeping with the tradition of the history of 
Table 5.3  Factors and their factor loadings for the Test the Nation: 
The New Zealand IQ Test
Subcomponent
Fluid intelligence
Crystallised intelligence
Mental rotation
0.78
–0.11
Understanding word meanings 
0.69
0.03
Spatial reasoning and object 
awareness
0.50
0.01
Memory for words
0.38
0.20
Series completion
0.34
–0.02
Memory for pictures
0.22
0.20
Social knowledge
0.18
0.02
Arithmetic in words
–0.03
0.70
Number series
–0.07
0.68
Meaning for words
0.02
0.48
Arithmetic in numbers
0.33
0.42
Knowledge
0.26
0.41
The right half of the brain controls the left half of the body. This means that only left-handed 
people are in their right mind.
Anonymous

The development of an IQ test
61
IQ, we called the first factor ‘fluid intelligence’ (mental and spatial rotation, 
memory) and the second, ‘crystallised intelligence’ (arithmetic, knowledge, 
vocabulary).
The notion of fluid and crystallised intelligence has been popular for many 
years (since Ray Cattell introduced the concept in his doctoral thesis in 1929, 
which was supervised by Charles Spearman, the originator of the notion of 
‘g’). Fluid intelligence (GF) relates to the capacity to figure out novel problems, 
whereas crystallised intelligence (GC) relates to knowledge that arises not only 
from better educational opportunities but also from a history of persistence 
and motivation in applying fluid intelligence to areas of learning. GC therefore 
reflects more on scholastic and cultural knowledge acquisition. For example, it 
requires more GF to answer the question:
Temperature is to cold as height is to
(a) hot 
(b) inches 
(c) size 
(d) tall 
(e) weight
On the other hand, more GC is required to answer the question:
Bizet is to Carmen as Verdi is to
(a) Aida 
(b) Elektra 
(c) Lakme 
(d) Manon 
(e) Tosca
Persons with more GF tend to acquire more GC; that is, they reap greater 
returns on the initial investment of their fluid intelligence, and it is GC that 
differs most across cultures.
The Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test included both GF and GC. In 
Table 5.3, the numbers in each of the columns are what we call factor loadings 
and simply reflect the degree to which the subset of questions is related to the 
underlying factor: the higher the number the more the items in each factors 
are related to each other.
The tests with the greatest fluid intelligence loading included mental 
 rotation, understanding word meanings, spatial and object awareness and series 
 completion – all dimensions less likely to be affected by schooling or cultural 
influences (that is, whether the person is more collectivist or individualist). The 
tests with the greatest loading for crystallised intelligence included arithmetic, 
number series, vocabulary and general knowledge – all dimensions more likely 
to be affected by schooling.
Man has made use of his intelligence: he invented stupidity.
Remy de Gourmont

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
62
Relating to the gold standard
Recall that a major aim of the Sunday trial was to relate our final 72-question 
test to the ‘gold standard’ tests: we needed to do this for validity reasons. The 
Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices was administered to all 274 participants 
in the trial. The average IQ was 95 (sd = 10.84), and the questions were very 
reliable (α = .89).
As the Raven’s Matrices measure one aspect of IQ, we also administered 
some of the more verbal tests of the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) – 
the four subtests of arithmetic, information, similarities and picture completion. 
In the arithmetic subtest the respondent must mentally solve a series of arithmetic 
problems. In the information subtest the respondent must respond to a series of 
questions that tap into one’s knowledge about common events, objects, places 
and people. In the similarities subtest, the respondent is presented with pairs of 
words and asked to explain the similarity of the common objects or concepts 
they represent. For picture completion, the respondent must identify an important 
part that is missing from a set of pictures of common objects. We then scored 
these tests according to the strict guidelines in the manuals of each of the gold 
standard tests. All four subtests were very reliable (alpha >.73).
One way to tell whether the Raven’s Matrices and the WAIS were  measuring 
the same aspects of IQ or not was to correlate the scores. The correlation 
between them was high (.65), indicating that while the two tests share much 
in common, there is merit in combining the more nonverbal Raven’s Matrices 
and the verbal WAIS to form an overall gold standard IQ score. Therefore, we 
combined the two IQ scores and the average IQ was 102 (sd = 18). This is very 
close to perfect – the aim was to have an average of 100 and a spread of 15.
We then equated the mean of the final 72 Test the Nation: The New Zealand 
IQ Test questions to this combined gold standard IQ. The average for the Test the 
Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test was 98 (sd = 12). The correlation of the final 
72 questions with the Raven’s Matrices was .67, with the WAIS was .69, and 
with the full gold standard IQ was .75. This score provides much confidence 
in any equating of the 72 questions with the gold standard IQ score. Scores 
were then transformed into IQ scores taking into account age.
We were now ready to proceed to the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ 
Test television programme.
It is the mark of an educated mind to be able to entertain a thought without accepting it.
Aristotle

63
6
Test the Nation: The 
New Zealand IQ Test 
television programme
The questions for Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test had been tested and 
finalised – it was now ‘show time’.
There were two days of rehearsals, with a group of Wellington drama 
 students and their friends as stand-ins for the studio audience. There were many 
changes to the script, the autocue was constantly in a state of updating and there 
was lots of laughter as we worked our way through the programme format, 
inventing on the way, agreeing as to the comments and all the time trying not 
to use memory to rehearse lines as the aim of the game was spontaneity and 
 credibility in our interactions with each other.
A major part of the entertainment was for viewers to see how the seven 
groups, somewhat stereotyped, would perform during the evening. In the first 
year the groups were: builders, teachers, students, twins, sports stars, blondes 
and celebrities; in the second year they were: models, real estate agents, taxi 
drivers, cricket supporters, Tolkein fans, 60+ and celebrities.
On the night the various groups were introduced to the format, and to the 
keypad boxes with A, B, C and D for entering their responses. The countdown 
began, and away we went – live to air.
As the test developers, we were anxious that the questions in the test would 
not be too easy – after seeing the questions on so many occasions over the past 
month, they seemed so simple! The first subtest was introduced (language) and 
then the first question – and there was relief when we saw that the percentage 
of the studio audience passing was very close to that of the Sunday trial group. 

Intelligence and intelligence testing
64
From then on, we were confident that the overall mean would be close to 
100. Our concern instead turned to hoping that the studio audience did not 
detect any errors. If they did, it would be a sign that the folks at home would 
take umbrage at the questions and they could use any error to explain why 
their score was not an accurate reflection of their IQ.
As expected, the members of the studio audience felt very happy with their 
level of performance during the section administering the questions. This is not 
surprising, as when most of us choose an answer from four options we often 
think we have chosen correctly – there is no evidence to believe otherwise. 
So the mood was high.
Then came the answers. The mood changed; rather than the excitement 
and confidence that was evident when the studio audience was doing the 
questions, the air now was more subdued. We got through the night with no 
errors in the questions or answers, but there was some angst in the studio about 
a couple of questions. Many groups, except the teachers, forgot the basics of 
arithmetic. When asked a question like: 9 + 3 × 2 many put 24 whereas the 
correct answer would be 9 × 6 = 54. It seemed that many of the audience 
members had forgotten the age-old BEDMAS rule (brackets, exponentials, 
divide, multiply, add and then subtract)!
We know that telling others one’s IQ score is akin to telling one’s age, 
income and sexual peccadilloes. There was not much sharing of the IQ scores. 
A major reason for this relates to the major misconceptions about IQ. Too 
many people think that one needs a high IQ to be successful in today’s world 
and then become upset when their IQ is not ‘high’ – they forget that there are 
so many other attributes that can make a person successful (such as creativity, 
perseverance, humour, personality). There is also a general belief that one’s 
own IQ is somewhat high – certainly above average. We know from research 
 studies that about 80 per cent of people state their IQ is above average – which 
is just not possible given that the tests are created so that 50 per cent are 
above  average and 50 per cent are below average! This means that, by design, 
50 per cent of people will score between 90 and 110, which translates into 
2 million of the 4 million people in New Zealand classified as ‘average IQ’. 
One of the aims of the programme, therefore, was to educate people on how 
the IQ scale works, and hopefully bring some realism into the interpretation 
Sometimes I think the surest sign that intelligent life exists elsewhere in the universe is that none 
of it has tried to contact us.
Calvin from Calvin and Hobbes (Bill Watterson)

Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test television programme
65
of IQ, as well as appreciation that IQ is but a part of success in our lives and 
that most of us do not differ so much from the norm in intelligence.
The final section of the programme involved reporting back the results. 
While some results were hinted at during the programme, the high point for 
the studio was receiving their comparative results. And, boy, was there a roar 
of delight when each group was revealed!
Proﬁ le of the studio groups
The competition for best group was tight throughout the evening. Figure 6.1 
presents the IQ score for the seven studio groups. The celebrities were the 
highest-scoring group, followed by the teachers, who delighted in having beaten 
the students. The next groups were the sports stars, twins, blondes and then 
the builders.
The studio groups were not selected to be representative of all their popula-
tions (particularly given there were only 30 in each group) so these differences 
should be seen for the fun of the chase in the studio. Across most of the 
 dimensions there were few differences in the average percentage-correct scores 
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
Builders
Blondes
Twins
Sport
Stars
Students
Teachers
Celebrities
IQ
Figure 6.1 Studio group results, 2003
If anything, the essence of intelligence would seem to be in knowing when to think and act 
quickly, and knowing when to think and act slowly.
Robert J. Sternberg

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
66
for each subsection of the IQ test. There were only four dimensions where 
there was larger variability: The celebrities and teachers outperformed the 
blondes, twins and builders on vocabulary, meanings, number problems and 
knowledge  – perhaps not too surprisingly, given that the former use these 
attributes often in their everyday vocations (see Figure 6.2).
Response to the programme
As part of reporting, the results from the first set of internet and text results 
from around the nation were presented. These preliminary results were engaging 
and created much discussion in the following days. The reaction was imme-
diate, aplenty and interesting. Talkback radio was buzzing, mostly about the 
competition within families. When New Zealand is compared with many 
other international studies, it comes out on top in both competitiveness and 
 cooperation. We may love to cooperate, but we also love to compete – and there 
was plenty of the latter during Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test!
The reaction from colleagues was mixed. Many were pleased to see their 
profession represented on such a programme, some thought any promotion 
of the ‘evil/outdated concept of IQ’ was not appropriate and most thought it 
was fun. The hits on the Mensa website (http://www.mensa.org.nz) increased 
from ten a day to 9,611 the day after the programme, as did hits to a more 
95
75
55
35
Score Total
Blondes
Twins
Builders
Sports Stars
Students
Teachers
Celebrities
Meanings
Vocabulary
Knowledge
Number problems
Figure 6.2 Groups’ total scores on four dimensions where there are differences
Some ideas are so stupid that only intellectuals could believe them.
Michael Levine

Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test television programme
67
detailed paper on the development of the IQ test on the Test the Nation: The 
New Zealand IQ Test website. We have run special classes and adult education 
classes on our campuses detailing more about intelligence and IQ testing, and 
overall it has been a pleasant experience witnessing people’s increased interest 
in measurement.


69
7
Profile of a nation
On the night, 180 participants responded in the studio, and 7,551 sent results in 
via the internet or by phone text. Each participant also completed a background 
survey, and this was used on the night of the programme to make contrasts and 
inform the audience about differences in intelligence.
As is the case with all statistical analyses, it is important to not treat any 
differences in the average of many subgroups as necessarily meaningful. An 
important consideration is how many points difference there should be before 
it is reasonable to conclude that the groups are meaningfully different. The 
answer in the current case, given the scale (80 to 135+ IQ), the sample size and 
the estimate of reliability, is that any mean difference of two or more points is 
worth considering further as evidence of difference (this is calculated using a 
statistical process called standard error). So, if the males differ from the females 
by 2 or more IQ points then we can be confident in concluding there is really 
a difference. Any difference of less than two is merely a function of chance 
factors (usually because of the vagaries of accurately measuring IQ). A further 
way to evaluate the magnitude of the difference is to calculate ‘effect-sizes’ – 
which is measure of the size of the difference – and in this book we consider 
any effect-size greater than .6 as substantial, between .2 and .6 is considered 
medium, less than .2 is small (see Cohen, 1969; Hattie, 2009). The ‘why’ of any 
difference is always the more fascinating consideration.
For each of the sections in this chapter there is a corresponding set of refer-
ences for further information provided in the appendix.
The overall intelligence of New Zealanders
Figure 7.1 shows the distribution of IQ scores across all participants. It is clear 
that the IQ scores from this sample follow the typical normal distribution curve 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
70
of the distribution of intelligence – that is, there are just as many participants 
above as there are below the average. The blip at the lower end is probably caused 
by a number of people who were under 18 years, for which the norms did not 
appropriately account (who probably called themselves ‘18 to 25-year-olds’), 
and because some viewers could have ‘faded out’ during the 2 hours of the test, 
and started to guess more towards the end – although this is somewhat amel-
iorated as they needed to finish the test before they could submit their answers 
(and the ratings showed no drop-off in viewers in the last hour of the testing).
Attributes of New Zealanders
Age
There is evidence that shows that as we get older (>40), there is a decline in 
intelligence, mainly due to a reduction in our processing speed and working 
memory capacity (Fletcher and Hattie, 2004). However, as we get older we 
can also become more successful in adapting our changing abilities to our 
NZ IQ
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
70–74
75–79
80–84
85–89
90–94
95–99
100–104
105–109
110–114
115–119
120–124
125–129
130–134
135–139
140–144
145–149
150–
Frequencies
Figure 7.1 IQ distribution of New Zealanders
SCARECROW: I haven’t got a brain. Just straw.
DOROTHY: How can you talk if you haven’t got a brain?
SCARECROW:  I don’t know. But some people without brains do an awful lot of talking, 
don’t they?
The Wizard of Oz

Profile of a nation
71
environment, which takes some skill (a process often called selective optimisa-
tion: Ackerman, 1996; Baltes and Baltes, 1990). To allow for these age differences 
it is often recommended that the total score on the items is converted to IQ 
scores differently for the various age groups. There were differences in the 
total scores from the 72 questions by the four age groups. The mean for 18- to 
25-year-olds was 52, for 26- to 40-year-olds it was 50, for 41- to 59-year-olds 
it was 48 and for those aged 60 and over it was 42.
Gender
There were differences between males (105.4) and females (103.8) – but, 
although males outscored females, the effect-size (es) was small (es = .11). This 
difference does not satisfy our guideline that there needs to be at least 2 IQ 
points’ difference to begin to consider there is a difference worth interpreting. 
In the 2004 test, the difference was slightly greater (100.5 to 96.1). In both 
years, the subscales in which males outscored females the most were arithmetic 
and reasoning.
Height
There were differences relating to height, with taller New Zealanders the 
more intelligent.
102
100
98
96
104
94
<150cm
151–160cm 161–170cm 171–180cm
181–190cm
>191cm
92
90
88
86
84
IQ
Figure 7.2 IQ score and male height

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
72
Hair colour
When participants and viewers were asked to estimate the intelligence of females 
with different hair colours, blondes were rated lowest, followed by redheads, 
with brunettes rated the highest. But when the IQ scores were investigated, 
there was no difference in these averages of IQ for hair colour; the pattern 
was similar across the two years of testing (see Figure 7.3). (This pattern was 
similar to that in the UK Test the Nation IQ results.)
Eye colour
This was the variable that was most systematic across the two years of the test. 
Those with grey eyes outscored all other eye colours (see Figure 7.4).
Dexterity
There were no differences in intelligence between right- and left-handed 
people, but those who were ambidextrous had significantly lower IQ scores 
(see also Corballis, Hattie and Fletcher, 2008) (see Figure 7.5). This pattern was 
observed in both 2003 and 2004.
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
93
103
95
94
Grey
Bald
Red
Brunette
Blonde
Black
Figure 7.3 IQ score by hair colour
Only in Britain could it be thought a defect to be ‘too clever by half’. The probability is that too 
many people are too stupid by three-quarters.
John Major

Profile of a nation
73
Glasses
Those with glasses had higher intelligence scores than those who did not wear 
glasses (99 to 96 in 2003 and 100 to 97 in 2004). The dimensions with the 
greatest differences were learning and language, with those who wore glasses 
outscoring those without glasses.
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
94
95
Brown
Hazel
Blue
Green
Grey
Figure 7.4 IQ score by eye colour
98.5
98
99
99.5
97.5
97
96.5
Right
Left
Either
Figure 7.5 IQ score and dexterity

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
74
Birth order and family size
It has long been argued that being a firstborn and being part of a smaller  family 
are related to higher IQ. The typical claims as to why there are differences is 
that (a) firstborns have more family resources available to them than other 
siblings, who by definition are in a larger family group, (b) firstborns experi-
ence longer periods of rich parent–child relations and (c) lower-IQ parents 
are more likely to have larger families. Despite such arguments, we found no 
difference in birth order (in either 2003 or 2004).
Marital status
Prior research has shown there is a marked similarity between husbands and 
wives in IQ scores – we tend to be attracted to others with similar levels of 
intelligence. Further, where there is more discussion among adults, there is 
higher intellectual performance (and vice versa). There were no differences 
in either year of the programmes for married, single or de facto relationships.
Books in the home
The number of books in the home (presumably being read and not just sitting 
on the shelf) has been shown to be a great predictor of intelligence – and such 
a question has often been used as a proxy to indicate intelligence when more 
formal IQ tests are not available. The highest relationships between the number 
of books in the home and the dimensions tested were with the dimensions 
of language, arithmetic and learning, and the lowest (close to zero) were with 
memory and reasoning. Figure 7.6 shows the relationship between IQ scores 
and numbers of books in the home.
Star signs
We know of no research showing there is a relationship between IQ and star 
signs. Further, we considered star signs over the two years of the programme, 
and the correlation between star sign and IQ was close to zero – again, show-
ing that there is no useful information in knowing one’s star sign and relating 
it to one’s IQ. It is a non-informative comparison.
Intellectuals solve problems; geniuses prevent them.
Albert Einstein

Profile of a nation
75
Owls and larks
It is popularly thought that people who prefer to work and think in the morning  
(termed the larks) will perform better at that time, while those who prefer to 
work and think in the afternoon and evening similarly do better work at those 
times (termed the owls). However, so far the research has shown that, despite their 
preferences, larks actually perform better in the afternoon and owls perform bet-
ter in the morning. In terms of the results from both New Zealand Test the Nation 
programmes, there were no differences in IQ related to whether people called 
themselves larks or owls. There was, however, one major difference in larks and owls 
and it related to age. In both 2003 and 2004, younger people (18 to 25-year-olds) 
who considered themselves larks (‘morning’ people) had much lower IQs (92) 
compared with younger people who considered themselves owls (100).
Pet owners
The New Zealand Test the Nation data from both years indicate that those who 
had pets were no different in intelligence from those with no pets.
Food and alcohol
IQ scores were not affected by meat-eating or vegetarianism in either the 2003 
or 2004 test results. But those who chewed gum had lower IQ (95) than those 
who did not chew gum (98).
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
88
1–19
20–49
50–99
Books
100+
Figure 7.6 IQ score by number of books in the home

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
76
Those who drank wine (especially among males) had higher IQs, and those 
who preferred spirits had the lowest IQs. There were no differences between 
beer drinkers and non-drinkers (see Figure 7.7).
Those who drank spirits scored the lowest on the three dimensions that 
discriminated between drinking preferences. The wine drinkers were highest 
on learning and language, and beer drinkers highest on number.
Smoking
Those who did not smoke had higher IQs (100) than those who smoked (96). 
On every dimension of IQ, non-smokers outscored their puffing peers (see 
Figure 7.8). There also is much evidence that smoking in parents is associated 
with lower IQ in their children.
Sport
As Figure 7.9 shows, the most intelligent spectators were those who watched 
cricket and league, particularly when compared with those who watched 
motor sport and netball. There were some differences for males and females: 
Beer Drinkers
Non-Drinkers
Spirit Drinkers
Wine Drinkers
Female
Male
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
95
94
93
92
91
IQ
Figure 7.7 IQ score and alcohol
Intellectual brilliance is no guarantee against being dead wrong.
David Fasold

Profile of a nation
77
50
55
60
65
70
75
Language
Spatial
Arithmetic
Memory
Reasoning
Learning
Non-Smoker
Smoker
Figure 7.8 IQ score and dimensions of IQ by smoking
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
95
94
93
92
Netball
Other
Motor
Sport 
Soccer
Rugby
League
None
Yachting
Cricket
Figure 7.9 IQ score and sport
The difference between a smart man and a wise man is that a smart man knows what to say, a 
wise man knows whether or not to say it.
Frank M. Garafola

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
78
higher-IQ males tended to watch cricket, netball and soccer. This pattern was 
similar across the two years.
Exercise
There were no differences in IQ for those who did and did not exercise, across 
either year.
Summary: the state of the nation
As expected, the distribution of intelligence across New Zealand participants 
is normally distributed – there are just as many New Zealanders above as there 
are below the mean, and over half score between 90 and 110. The profile of 
the more-intelligent Kiwi was taller, grey-haired or grey-eyed, wears glasses, 
has more books in their home, drinks wine, doesn’t smoke and follows the 
cricket and league. The profile of the less-intelligent Kiwi included being 
shorter, black- or blonde-haired, brown or hazel eyes, ambidextrous, drinks 
spirits, smokes and follows motor sport and netball. There were no differences 
relating to left or right-handedness, birth order, marital status, star signs, pet 
ownership or not, or whether you exercise or not.
The best intelligence test is what we do with our leisure.
Laurence J. Peter

79
8
The future of 
intelligence
Since our involvement with the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test 
 television programmes in 2003 and 2004, we have had time to reflect on the 
programme’s meaning and effect on the broader community. We started out 
wanting to be a part of a credible form of entertainment that was underpinned 
by top-flight psychometrics and, above all, remaining true to our academic 
traditions. We feel we achieved these goals and more, as the debate on intelli-
gence IQ after both screenings of the programme was vigorous and challenging. 
We both feel that programmes such as Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ 
Test are a valid vehicle for presenting contentious issues in a way that is both 
fun and educational. Further, from an academic perspective, the psychometric 
qualities of the two tests we worked on are as good as, if not better than, some 
commercially available tests. The tests we evaluated and made were created for 
the purpose of ‘edutainment’, and they have also provided us with a snapshot 
of IQ within the New Zealand context. The entertainment aspect is reflected 
in the bias towards easier questions based on the 72 questions, but still ending 
up with a test that had the expected normal distribution curve with a mean 
of 100 and standard deviation of 15.
The distribution of IQ was normal for the IQ tests that were administered 
in both years – this is not only desirable, but also a fascinating fact of nature 
and not an imposed statistical artifact. That cognitive (or ‘thinking’) dimen-
sions are normally distributed is one of the most commonly found attributes 
of most human cognitive endeavours. There are just as many of us above as 
there are below the average in IQ when we consider achievement or cogni-
tive attributes; just as many super bright as there are those at the other end of 
the normal distribution curve. Most important of all, the average IQ is 100, 
and most of us score between 90 and 110. It was amazing how many people 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
80
taking part in the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test programmes thought 
that a score of 90–110 was somehow deficient – it is not: it is where most of 
us score on IQ, because this is how IQ tests are designed. It is as important to 
remember that there are so many other influences on our lives that are just 
as interesting, and that are predictive of behaviours and opportunities that we 
value (e.g. creativity, humility, openness).
Many of the attributes in Chapter 7 were chosen because of interest to a 
television audience and some could be considered of little scientific interest 
beyond a ‘gee-whiz’ reaction. Moreover, deeper analyses of reasons for dif-
ferences on some of these variables would likely show that there are many 
interactions among variables that can affect the result (for example, interac-
tions among variables may lead to different conclusions depending on age, sex, 
years of schooling and so on), or the variables may be correlates (for example, 
hair colour explained by age differences; grey-haired people are more likely to 
be older) that provide better explanations than if a variable (for example, hair 
colour) is considered by itself.
The variables that seemed to provide the most discrimination included age 
(younger participants had higher raw scores before conversion to take age into 
account) than older. There were also some social variables where there were 
differences in IQ scores, such as number of siblings, the number of books in 
the home and whether one was a smoker or non-smoker – such variables are 
often associated with more resources in the person’s environment. There were 
no differences between males and females; no differences for birth order, marital 
status, star signs or pet-owning; and no differences between vegetarians and 
meat-eaters, or between those who exercised and those who did not.
There were two fascinating findings that were similar across the two years: 
those relating to ‘larks’ and ‘owls’ and those relating to handedness. For the 
first, younger participants who considered themselves evening people (owls) 
outperformed their peers who considered themselves morning people (larks). 
It does appear that our daily life is organised around three potentially different 
clocks: a solar clock, which provides light and temperature; a social clock, which 
relates to our preferences for work and play; and a biological clock, which we 
certainly know about when jet-lagged or have had too much exercise or party-
ing. Generally these clocks are synchronised, but not for all of us. Adolescents 
and young adults seem to have the least-synchronised clocks and many make 
claims that they are better in the morning (larks) while other young people 
Half of being smart is knowing what you are dumb about.
Solomon Short

The future of intelligence
81
claim they are better in the evening (owls). There were many more owls than 
larks in this age group, but our work and school life is not best tailored for 
owls. The greatest difference between these two groups is the extent of sleep 
each group gets – owls get far less sleep (especially during the week) than 
larks! Research has shown that this leads to decreased vigilance and attention 
(Goldstein et al., 2007; Bonnet and Arand, 2001; Roenneberg, Wirz-Justice 
and Merrow, 2003). In the case of the Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test 
programmes, the tests were administered in the evening (7.30–10.30 p.m.) 
and thus should have favoured owls, who believe they have higher arousal, 
vigilance and interest in the evening compared with larks. Indeed, this was the 
pattern shown by the results – younger people (those aged 18–25 years) who 
considered themselves owls had much higher IQs (100) compared with those 
in the same age group who considered themselves larks (92)!
The second fascinating difference was handedness. Michael Corballis has 
written many books explaining the genetics, differences and importance of 
handedness. We described to him the major differences we found in each year 
between right-handed and left-handed people compared with ambidextrous 
individuals. This led to a joint publication on this issue (Corballis, Hattie and 
Fletcher, 2008). There have been claims that various difficulties (reading, speech 
and so on) are more prevalent in ambidextrous people compared with those 
with stronger and consistent cerebral symmetry. The suggestion, attributable 
to Orton (1937), is that ambidexterity reflects a lack of cerebral dominance, 
which in turn leads to confusion over left and right. This can then be seen as 
a difficulty in reading scripts that demand consistent left–right directionality 
(Corballis and Beale, 1993). Orton also proposed that lack of consistent cer-
ebral dominance could lead to conflict in the processing of language. Recent 
evidence confirms that atypical cerebral lateralisation can lead to such deficits 
as stuttering (e.g. Foundas et al., 2004) as well as other language disorders (Lane, 
Foundas and Leonard, 2001). On a positive note, being ambidextrous may be 
related to creativity: Albert Einstein, for example, was an early slow learner who 
exhibited ‘an unusual symmetry between the hemispheres’ (Witelson, Kigar 
and Harvey, 1999: 2151), and Leonardo da Vinci habitually wrote left-handed 
in mirror writing, although he may not have been exclusively left-handed. 
Our data, however, supports the claim that there may be a dip in performance 
when people are ambidextrous.
Throughout this book we have referred to ‘g’ and to intelligence, and also 
introduced the Flynn effect, which shows that there have been major gains in 
IQ during the past century. It is worth examining the claims Flynn makes 
in his recent book What is Intelligence? (2008) to bring a lot of the research on 
intelligence into perspective. A major factor in the gains in IQ over the last 

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
82
century, claims Flynn, relates to the increase in solving problems ‘on the spot’. 
Thus, the gains may be more related to how we know than to what we know; 
there has been little gain in school-related abilities (arithmetic, vocabulary, 
information): ‘Today’s youth are much better at on-the-spot problem solving 
without a previously learned method’ (p. 22). Moreover, we have moved, says 
Flynn, from seeing through concrete pre-scientific spectacles to more abstract 
post-scientific thinking. It is not that our ancestors were stupid or that we now 
are geniuses, but that we have changed how we think: we have less difficulty 
now in freeing logic from concrete references, and are now more able to reason 
purely about hypothetical situations – and these kinds of questions are common 
in the IQ tests. Maybe we need to consider the various relations, abstractions 
and critical processes that are needed for surviving in today’s world and using 
these as the criteria for building new forms of ‘intelligence’ tests. It is less ‘what 
you know’ or ‘how you know’ and more ‘How well do you solve problems?’, 
‘How sensitive are you to seeing patterns, abstractions and relationships?’
This suggests a future for intelligence and IQ tests – provided we are willing 
to acknowledge differences in what is being measured. We started the process of 
writing this book by suggesting that we wished to measure the cognitive and 
thinking methods that best allow us to cope with our environment. For many 
of the earlier  decades of last century this could be measured by how much we 
knew – as this often reflected access to education and schooling, was valued 
in many  professions (e.g. doctors, lawyers) and is what schools often valued 
(rehearsing and memorising information to pass end-of-year tests). I (John) 
recall, for example, my parents saying, ‘Uncle Roy was brainy as he knew the 
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World’. I looked these up and memorised them 
in the belief that I too could become brainy! The message is not my naiveté 
but the notion that knowing lots was an index of intelligence. As technology 
allowed easier access to knowledge, its value (knowing lots) decreased, and we 
came more to esteem knowing what to do with this information. We moved 
to valuing problem-solving, reasoning and thinking about – built on top of 
knowing lots. As we increase the tools available to make connections, we 
may come to value more the evaluation and decision-making skills. Hence, 
measures of intelligence may need to move away from measuring our ability 
to know, to store much in working memory and to reason, and move towards 
Man had always assumed that he was more intelligent than dolphins because he had achieved so 
much – the wheel, New York, wars, and so on, whilst all the dolphins had ever done was muck 
about in the water having a good time. But conversely, the dolphins believed themselves to be 
more intelligent than man for precisely the same reasons.
Douglas Adams

The future of intelligence
83
our proficiency to problem-solve, reason and, particularly, to do this quickly. In 
the near future, we may want to add measures of evaluative skill and optimal 
decision-making (often in the presence of many unknowns).
Indeed, this is how our measurement has changed. While there is still a 
case for using IQ tests of the past (WAIS, Stanford–Binet), there is a growing 
increase of new measures based on problem-solving and seeing patterns (and 
this latter is why the Raven’s test has remained an evergreen measure in the 
history of IQ testing). The at times dirty history of IQ testing has brought 
many of the tests and their use into disfavour, but there are still many current 
tests that look like IQ tests, feel like IQ tests and are interpreted like IQ tests, 
but are just not called IQ tests. Instead we have ‘assessment batteries’, and the 
new Raven’s is the same form of testing but now does not provide methods 
for calculating IQ scores. The claim of this book is that we need generalised 
measures of what we value in cognition and thinking. We need such measures 
that do not necessarily advantage those with lots of schooling or opportunity 
as there may be many without such schooling and opportunity who have 
the thinking skills but not the knowledge base. Why should only those who 
have been given resources and advantages in gaining knowledge be the ones 
to succeed (many of our current qualification and entry exams are still based 
on quantity of knowledge)? By using IQ or the more appropriately named 
problem-solving or optimal decision-making tests we can more readily identify 
those who could be taught to succeed.
Contrary to an often-cited and popular view, IQ is not immutable or ‘fixed’ 
by genetics. Again, James Flynn has noted:
Huge g [general intelligence] gains from one generation to another show 
that IQ is highly sensitive to environmental factors, and some of these may 
be cultural factors such as learned strategies or problem-solving picked up 
at school, or at home or elsewhere.
(1987: 33)
Similarly, Stephen Ceci (1991) has demonstrated that schooling increases IQ 
scores, although it is not easy to change them. Roberts et al. (2008) con-
cluded that educational interventions can increase IQ by about 8 points 
– which could make a major difference in how we then apply these enhanced 
cognitive-thinking attributes to learning, to being selected into more elite 
The essence of intelligence is skill in extracting meaning from everyday experience.
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Intelligence and Intelligence Testing
84
programmes and to gaining the other wealth, health and happiness dividends 
that come from increased intelligence. But this also requires an investment 
of effort, and herein may be the true benefit. This should give hope to all 
that IQ can be enhanced in each and all of its dimensions. But note what it 
means to enhance intelligence. It means, for example, devising programmes of 
study and employing effective teachers who can enhance many dimensions 
of thinking. In James Flynn’s terms, it means developing how we solve problems 
with cognitive content – that is, developing our mental acuity or the ability to 
provide on-the-spot solutions to problems we have never encountered before; 
developing our powers of reasoning to solve problems less in the concrete and 
more in the abstract; developing our attitudes to treat seriously the solving 
of problems, the acquisition of knowledge and information (the more you 
have, the more problems you can attack); enhancing our speed of information 
processing and developing our working memory. This can be accomplished 
but it should be clear that some content or context is needed to develop these 
thinking skills. These skills all assist in directing our investment of mental energy 
into solving cognitively demanding problems. The demands of ‘intelligence’ in 
today’s society requires more than ‘knowing much’; it involves having a sense 
of urgency in solving problems on the spot, and developing a persistence in 
seeking cognitive challenges.
What seems more important is to believe that we can make changes to intel-
ligence, even when the research shows that this is not easy. Such confidence that 
we can change is the hallmark of many successful teachers. This is aligned with 
one of the major purposes of using intelligence testing; that is, to find people 
with high levels of skill in problem-solving who may not have been provided 
with the resources and opportunities to learn how to study or how to pass 
examinations, or who may not necessarily have been born into families who 
have provided the resources we need to develop our problem-solving skills.
Those who prefer alternatives to IQ and intelligence need to consider one 
of the major discoveries that begs for an explanation – that there seems to be 
some common elements underlying our skills in completing most cognitive 
tasks. Some may call this underlying skill ‘g’; some, intelligence; some, work-
ing memory. However, denying it will not make this finding go away. There 
may, indeed, be multiple intelligences, but there are some well-established 
The invention of IQ did a great disservice to creativity in education. Individuality, personality, 
originality, are too precious to be meddled with by amateur psychiatrists whose patterns for a 
‘wholesome personality’ are inevitably their own.
Joel Hildebrand

The future of intelligence
85
commonalities across these many talents that beg for an answer – what is the 
nature of the core underlying skills that allow us to survive in our cognitive 
world? In this book, we are placing our bets on ‘problem-solving’, which can 
be taught, can be understood and is even more valuable when the problem-
solving is in an area of worthwhile activity. Some would consider solving 
crosswords worthwhile; some, weaving; some, astrophysics and some, politics. We 
are not deciding on the activity but we are talking about the problem-solving 
skills. These problem-solving skills relate to the ability to reason, plan, solve 
problems, think abstractly, comprehend complex ideas, learn quickly and learn 
from experience. When these are mixed with personality dispositions such as 
openness to experiences and a tendency to engage in cognitively demanding 
endeavours there is a powerful mix of success factors in our society.
Intelligence is still one of the best predictors of much that we value in our 
society – doing well in school, doing well in jobs, health, wealth and  happiness – 
but certainly we should not mistake one for these others, nor assume it is the 
only predictor. There are many other predictors of success, but few have received 
the same attention or have been as successful as measures of intelligence.
So where does the discussion on the development of the concept of IQ 
go from here? We would hazard a guess that the use of, and debate about, 
 intelligence and IQ testing will continue in much the same vein as it has over 
the past century (although the terms may change). Debates will be hot about 
group differences, and these will be so strong that the power of IQ tests to 
account for individual differences will continue to be diminished, to the cost 
of many individuals who may be misplaced in remediation and inappropriate 
programmes of study. New jargon (e.g. processing power, critical thinking, 
evaluation proficiencies) will continue to replace older notions of intelligence, 
and new methods of assessing these attributes will continue to be developed 
(primarily because the cognitive attributes that lead to success in understanding 
our environment will remain of major concern in modern societies) and will 
remain important for a long time to come.
My view is that intelligence is the ability to use optimally limited resources – including time – to 
achieve goals. . . . The products of intelligence may be clever, ingenious, insightful, or elegant.
Ray Kurzweil, The Age of Spiritual Machines


87
Appendix
Where to ﬁ nd out more about intelligence
Some web pages
A great site by Jonathan Plucker and his associates is full of historical  information 
and current hot topics, as well as resources for teachers. It can be found at: 
http://www.indiana.edu/%7Eintell/index.shtml
G. Scott Acton has a similar site that can be found at: http://www.personality
research.org/intelligence.html
You can also test your IQ at various sites, but the quality of online tests are 
variable and should be treated with much caution:
http://www.2h.com/iq-tests.html
http://www.iqtest.com/
http://www.eskimo.com/~miyaguch/hoeflin.html
http://www.bricks-game.de/
http://unl.edu/buros
http://wapedia.mobi/en/Raven%27s_Progressive_Matrices
http://www.mensa.org.nz
Important books
Bock, G. R., Goode, J. A. and Webb, K. (eds.) (2000). The Nature of Intelligence: 
Novartis Foundation Symposium 233 Chichester: Wiley. .
Ceci, S. J. (1996). On Intelligence: A Bioecological Treatise on Intellectual Development. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Appendix
88
Deary, I. J. (2000) Looking Down on Human Intelligence: From Psychometrics to the 
Brain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gottfried, A. W., Eskeles Gottfried, A., Bathurst, K. and Wright Guerin, D. 
(1994). Gifted IQ: Early Developmental Aspects –The Fullerton Longitudinal 
Study. New York: Plenum.
Jensen, A. R. (1998). The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability. Westport, CT: 
Praeger.
Khalfa, J. (ed.). (1994). What is Intelligence? Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1998). IQ and Human Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
McArdle, J. J. and Woodcock, R. W. (eds) (1998). Human Cognitive Abilities in 
Theory and Practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Neisser, U. (ed.) (1998). The Rising Curve: Long-Term Gains in IQ and Related 
Measures. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Perkins, D. N. (1995). Outsmarting IQ: The Emerging Science of Learnable Intelligence. 
New York: Free Press.
Richardson, K. (2000). The Making of Intelligence. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A Triarchic Theory of Intelligence. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (ed.) (2000). Handbook of Intelligence. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (ed.) (2002). Why Smart People Can Be So Stupid. New Haven: 
Yale University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. and Detterman, D. K. (eds) (1986). What is Intelligence? 
Contemporary Viewpoints on its Nature and Definition. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Sternberg, R. J. and Grigorenko, E. L. (2002). The General Factor of Intelligence: 
How General is It? Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sternberg, R. J. and Kaufman, J. C. (eds) (2001). The Evolution of Intelligence. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Valencia, R. R. and Suzuki, L. A. (2001). Intelligence Testing and Minority 
Students: Foundations, Performance Factors, and Assessment Issues. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
IQ tests and their use
Jencks, C. (1972). Inequality: A Reassessment of the Effect of Family and Schooling 
in America. New York: Harper & Row.

Appendix
89
Jensen, A. R. (1969). How much can we boost I.Q. and scholastic achievement? 
Harvard Educational Review, 33, 1–123.
Jensen, A. R. (1998). The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Kaufman, A. S. (1990) Assessing Adolescent and Adult Intelligence. Boston: Allyn 
and Bacon.
Kaufman, A. S. (1994) Intelligent Testing with the WISC-III. New York: John 
Wiley.
Linn, R. (ed.) (1989) Intelligence: Measurement, Theory, and Public Policy. Proceedings 
of a Symposium in Honor of Lloyd G. Humphries. Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press.
Love, H. D. (1990) Assessment of Intelligence and Development of Infants and Young 
Children with Specialized Measures. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Mensh, E. and Mensh, H. (1991) The IQ Mythology: Class, Race, Gender, and 
Inequality. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Sprandel, H. Z. (1995) The Psychoeducational Use and Interpretation of the Wechsler 
Adult Intelligence Scale (2nd edn). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Common beliefs about IQ
Derr, R. (1989). Insights on the nature of intelligence from ordinary discourse. 
Intelligence, 13, 113–18.
Gottfredson, L. S. (1997). Mainstream science on intelligence: An editorial with 
52 signatories, history, and bibliography. Intelligence, 24, 13–23.
Sternberg, R. J., Conway, B. E., Ketron, J. L. and Bernstein, M. (1981). People’s 
conceptions of intelligence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41, 
370–85.
Relationships to intelligence
Heredity
Although the largest contributor to intelligence may be heredity, the effects of 
environment have been greatly underestimated – particularly how environment 
leads to opportunities, encouragement and basic living quality. It is, however, 
the interaction of the effects of genetics and environment that is most power-
ful. It is likely that there are as many people genetically well endowed with 
IQ who live in poverty, have little access to schooling and have been given 
few opportunities to learn as there are people genetically less endowed with 
IQ-ruling nations and living in excess.
Dickens, W. T. and Flynn, J. R. (2001). Heritability estimates versus large 

Appendix
90
environmental effects: The IQ paradox resolved. Psychological Review, 108(2), 
346–69.
Grigorenko, E. I. (2000). Heritability and intelligence. In R. Sternberg (ed.), 
Handbook of Intelligence (pp. 53–87). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Herrnstein, R. and Murray, C. (1994) The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class 
Structure in American Life. New York: Free Press.
Studies of twins
Research on twins still dominates recent research on intelligence. There remains 
much controversy, but some findings seem well supported. Monozygotic twins 
(MZ twins from the same egg) reared together are much more similar in IQ 
(r = .86) than dizygotic twins (DZ twins from different eggs) reared together 
(.60). MZ twins reared apart (r =.75) are more similar in IQ than DZ twins 
reared together (r = .60). The relation between siblings is about .50. The IQ 
of adopted persons who have never known their biological parents is more 
highly related with the IQ of their biological parents than with the IQ of their 
adoptive parents. Unrelated persons reared together from infancy show a much 
lower IQ relationship with each other (r = .25 in childhood and r = –.01 in 
adulthood) than do biological siblings reared together (r = .49). So, IQs of 
twins are closer than between non-twins within a family – regardless of the 
family in which they are reared.
Detterman, D. K., Thompson, L. A. and Plomin, R. (1990). Genetics of 
specific cognitive abilities. Annual Review of Genetics, 20, 369–84.
Changing a person’s IQ
Stephen Ceci (1991) has demonstrated that schooling increases IQ scores, 
although it is difficult to find many specific or short-term programmes that 
make a difference to IQ scores. Teachers who believe that achievement is more 
a function of effort and teaching than of intelligence are more likely to enhance 
their student’s achievement (regardless of the correctness of this belief). It is 
likely that, while schooling may influence IQ, people with higher IQs may also 
seek more education and derive greater benefits from schooling.
There is a detrimental effect on IQ from dropping out of school early. Ceci 
(2003) described a study that showed a drop of 2 IQ points for each year of 
high school not completed beyond compulsory school age. Similarly, missing 
school (truancy, sickness) can lead to drops in IQ. This suggests that without 
the opportunity for mental activity provided by schools, intelligence can be 
significantly limited.

Appendix
91
Ceci, S. (1991). How much does schooling influence general intelligence and 
its cognitive components? A reassessment of the evidence. Developmental 
Psychology, 37, 703–22.
Dickens, W. T. and Flynn, J. R. (2001). Heritability estimates versus large envi-
ronmental effects: The IQ paradox resolved. Psychological Review, 108(2), 
346–69.
Grotzer, T. and Perkins, D. N. (2000). Teaching intelligence. In R. Sternberg 
(ed.), Handbook of Intelligence (pp. 492–515). New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Self-ratings of IQ scores
There is only a modest correlation between self-estimated IQ and actual 
IQ score. Nearly everyone estimates that their IQ is above 100 (the average 
IQ scores from reputable tests). Males give a higher mean self-estimate of IQs 
than do females (113 vs. 106), and male estimates are significantly higher than 
their actual IQ and female estimates are significantly lower than their actual IQ. 
Females attribute higher IQs to others than they claim for themselves, whereas 
males attribute lower IQs to others than for themselves. Females estimated 
higher IQs for their fathers than for their mothers (114 vs. 107).
Bennett, M. (1996). Men’s and women’s self-estimates of intelligence. Journal 
of Social Psychology, 136, 411–12.
Furnham, A. and Rawles, R. (1999). Correlations between self-estimated and 
psychometrically measured IQ. Journal of Social Psychology, 39(4), 405–10.
Furnham, A., Clark, K. and Bailey, K. (1999). Sex differences in estimates of 
multiple intelligences. European Journal of Personality, 13, 247–59.
Furnham, A., Dixon, D., Harrison, T., Rasmussen, S. and O’Connor, R. (2000.). 
Sex, social class, and estimating IQ: Middle-class male subjects rate themselves 
most intelligent. Psychological Reports, 87(3), 753–8.
Hogan, H. W. (1978). IQ self-estimates of males and females. Journal of Social 
Psychology, 106(1), 137–8.
Reilly, J. and Mulhern, G. (1993). Gender differences in self-estimated IQ: The 
need for care in interpreting group data. Personality and Individual Differences, 
18(2), 189–92.
Changes over generations
Deary (2000) reported a study where 101 children who were tested for 
intelligence in 1932 at age 11 were retested in 1998 at age 77. The correla-
tion between the two scores was a staggering .77 – that is, a person high in 

Appendix
92
 intelligence at age 11 is most likely to be high in intelligence at age 77, and 
similarly for those low in intelligence! James Flynn’s demonstration that there is 
an average increase of over three IQ points per decade was found for  virtually 
every type of intelligence test, delivered to nearly every type of group. For 
example, Flynn concluded that someone who scored among the strongest 
10 per cent in the Raven’s Matrices a hundred years ago would nowadays be 
categorised among the weakest 5 per cent. The Flynn effect can account for 
some of the reduction of IQ with age, as older people were raised in a period 
where the general level of intelligence was lower. Flynn argues that it is probably 
not intelligence itself that is increasing but some kind of abstract problem-
solving ability. It may, however, be that because people are more exposed to 
testing, and in particular IQ type tests, IQ scores are changing. Perhaps IQ 
scores may increase as a function of watching and taking part in television 
programmes such as Test the Nation: The New Zealand IQ Test. Who knows?
Flynn, J. R. (1984). The Mean IQ of Americans: Massive Gains. New York: Harper 
& Row.
Flynn, J. R. (1987). Massive IQ gains in 14 nations: What IQ tests really measure. 
Psychological Bulletin, 101, 171–91.
Flynn, J. R. (2007). What is Intelligence? Beyond the Flynn Effect. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Neisser, U. (1977). Rising scores on intelligence tests. American Scientist 
(September-October).
Context
Birth order and family size
Page, E. B. and Grandon, G. (1979). Family configuration and mental ability: 
Two theories contrasted with U.S. data. American Educational Research Journal, 
16, 257–72.
Rodgers, J. L., Harrington, G. H., van den Gord, E. and Ross, D. C. (2000). 
Resolving the debate over birth order, family size, and intelligence. American 
Psychology, 55(6), 599–612.
Zajonc, R. B. and Mullally, P. R. (1997). Birth order: Reconciling conflicting 
effects. American Psychology, 52, 683–99.
Married, de facto and single status
Dixon, R. A. and Gould, O. S. (1996). Adults telling and retelling stories col-
laboratively. In P. B. Baltes and U. M. Staudinger (eds), Interactive Minds: 

Appendix
93
Life-Span Perspective on the Social Foundation of Cognition (pp. 221–41). New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Mascie-Taylor, C. G. N., Harrison, G. A., Hiorns, R. W. and Gibson, J. B. (1987). 
Husband-wife similarities in different components of the WAIS IQ test. 
Journal of Biosocial Science, 19, 149–55.
Life expectancy
Those with higher IQs at age 11 are more likely to live longer than those with 
lower IQs at age 11.
Whatley, L. and Deary, I. (2001). Longitudinal cohort study of childhood IQ 
and survival up to age 76. British Medical Journal, 322(7290), 819–911.
Occupation
Success in occupations depends on many cognitive and learned skills, which 
may be influenced by IQ among other attributes. IQ is related to occupation 
to the degree that the occupation requires abstract reasoning and problem-
solving. Those occupations with lower mean IQ levels also have the largest 
variability. For example, farmers have an average IQ of 93 but the largest range 
of IQ (from < 50 up to 150).
Hunter, J. E. and Schmidt, F. L. (1996). Intelligence and job performance: 
Economic and social implications. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 2, 
447–72.
Hunter, J. E., Schmidt, F. L. and Judiesch, M. K. (1990). Individual differences in 
output variability as a function of job complexity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
75, 28–42.
Schmidt, F. L. (1988). The problem of group differences in ability scores in 
employment selection. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 33, 272–92.
Schmidt, F. L., Ones, D. S. and Hunter, J. E. (1992). Personnel selection. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 43, 627–70.
Attributes of individuals
Age
Ackerman, P. L. (1996). A theory of adult intellectual development, process, 
personality, interests and knowledge. Intelligence, 22, 227–57.
Baltes, P. B. and Baltes, M. M. (1990). Psychological perspectives on successful 
aging: The model of selective optimisation with compensation. In P. B. Baltes 

Appendix
94
and M. M. Baltes (eds), Successful Aging: Perspectives from the Behavioural Science 
(pp. 1–34). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Berg, C. A. (2000). Intellectual development in adulthood. In R. Sternberg 
(ed.), Handbook of Intelligence (pp. 117–37). New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Bigler, E., Johnson, S., Jackson, C. and Blatter, D. (1995). Aging, brain size, and 
IQ. Intelligence, 21, 109–19.
Sex differences
Colom, R., Juan-Espinosa, M., Abad, F. and Garcia, L.F. (2000). Negligible sex 
differences in general intelligence. Intelligence, 27, 57–68
Lynn, R. (1994). Sex differences in intelligence and brain size: A paradox 
resolved. Personality and Individual Differences, 17(2), 257–71.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1997). Sex differences and IQ. Journal of Biosocial Science, 
28(4), 559–71.
Nutrition (height and weight)
The best-established health correlates are stature (taller people are brighter), 
head size, brain size, frequency of brainwaves, speed of evoked brain potentials, 
rate of brain glucose metabolism and general health.
James, W. H. (1982). The IQ advantage of the heavier twin. British Journal of 
Psychology, 73(4), 513–17.
Lagerstroem, M., Bremme, K., Encroth, P. and Magnusson, D. (1991). School 
performance and IQ test scores at age 13 as related to birth weight and 
gestational age. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 32(4), 316–24.
Lynn, R. (1989). A nutrition theory of the secular increases in  intelligence: 
Positive correlations between height, head size and IQ. British Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 59(3), 372–7.
Matte, T. D., Bresnahan, M., Begg, M. D. and Susser, E. (2001). Influence of 
variation in birth weight within normal range and within siblings on IQ at 
age 7 years: Cohort study. British Medical Journal, 323(7308), 310–14.
Segal, N. I. (1989). Origins and implications of handedness and relative 
birth weight for IQ in monozygotic twin pairs. Neuropsychologia, 27(4), 
349–61.

Appendix
95
Head size
There is a slight positive correlation (r = .20) between head size and IQ scores. 
Head size is a proxy for brain size, and the correlation with brain size is in 
the .30 to .40 range. Phillippe Rushton (1995) found that African-descended 
peoples average cranial size was 1267 cm3, European-descended peoples was 
1347 cm3 and East Asian-descended peoples was 1364 cm3. He hypothesised 
that these differences, containing millions of brain cells and hundreds of  millions 
of synapses, underlie the race differences in IQ. This is a very contentious and 
much-argued claim.
Jensen, A. R. and Johnson, F. W. (1994). Race and sex differences in head size 
and IQ. Intelligence, 18, 309–33.
Lynn, R. (1989). A nutrition theory of the secular increases in  intelligence: 
Positive correlations between height, head size and IQ. British Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 59(3), 372–77.
Rushton, J. P. (1995). Race, evolution and behavior: A life history perspective. Port 
Huron, MI: Charles Darwin Research Institute.
Vernon, P.  A., Wickett, J. C., Bazana, G. and Stelmack, R. M. (2000). The neuro-
psychology and psychophysiology of human intelligence. In R. Sternberg 
(ed.), Handbook of Intelligence (pp. 241–64). New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Willerman, L., Schultz, R., Rutledge, H. N. and Bigler, E. (1991). In vivo brain 
size and intelligence. Intelligence, 15, 223–38.
Hair colour
Weir, W. and Pine-Davis, M. (1989). ‘Dumb blondes’ and ‘temperamental 
redheads’. The effects of hair colour on some attributed personality char-
acteristics of women. Irish Journal of Psychology, 10(1), 11–19.
Alcohol
Oscar-Berman, M., Clancy, J. P. and Weber, D. A. (1993). Discrepancies between 
IQ and memory scores in alcoholism and ageing. Clinical Neuropsychologist, 
7(3), 281–96.
Streissguth, A. P., Barr, H. M. and Sampson, P. D. (1990). Moderate prenatal 
alcohol exposure: Effects on child IQ and learning problems at age 712 years. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 14(5), 662–9.

Appendix
96
Larks or owls: preference for time of day for ‘thinking’
Bonnet, M. H. and Arand, D. L. (2001). Impact of activity and arousal upon 
spectral EEG parameters. Physiology & Behavior, 74, 291–8.
Goldstein, D., Hahn, C. S., Hasher, L., Wiprzycka, U. and Zelazo, P. D. (2007). 
Time of day, intellectual performance, and behavioral problems in morning 
versus evening type adolescents: Is there a synchrony effect? Personality and 
Individual Differences, 42(3), 431–40
Gupta, S. (1991). Effects of time of day and personality on intelligence test 
scores. Personality and Individual Differences, 12(11), 1227–31.
Leigh, C. and Reynolds, C. R. (1982). Morning versus afternoon testing and 
children’s intelligence test performance. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 55(1), 
93–4.
Roenneberg, T., Wirz-Justice, A. and Merrow, M. (2003). Life between the 
clocks: Daily temporal patterns of human chronotypes. Journal of Biological 
Rhythms, 18, 80–90.
Song, J. and Stough, C. (2000). The relationship between morningness-
 eveningness, time-of-day, speed of information processing, and intelligence. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 29(6), 1179–90.
Handedness
Corballis, M. C. (1997). The genetics and evolution of handedness. Psychological 
Review, 104, 714–27.
Corballis, M. C. and Beale, I. L. (1993). Orton revisited: Dyslexia, laterality, 
and left–right confusion. In D. M. Willows, R. S. Kruk and E. Corcos (eds), 
Visual Processes in Reading and Reading Disabilities (pp. 57–73). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Corballis, M. C., Hattie, J. and Fletcher, R. (2008). Handedness and intellectual 
achievement: An even-handed look. Neuropsychologia, 46, 374–8.
Foundas, A. L., Bollich, A. M., Feldman, J., Corey, D. M., Hurley, M., Lemen, 
L.C. and Heilman, K. M. (2004). Aberrant auditory processing and atypical 
planum  temporale in developmental stuttering. Neurology, 63, 1640–6.
Hernandez, M. D. (1999). Temperament at 4 years: The contributions of 
handedness, gender and IQ (lateralisation). Dissertation Abstracts International: 
Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 59(11-B), 6092. (Dissertation 
Abstract-1999–95010–036).
Lane, A. B., Foundas, A. L. and Leonard, C. M. (2001). The evolution of neuro-
imaging research and developmental language disorders. Topics in Language 
Disorders, 21, 20–41.

Appendix
97
Segal, N. I. (1989). Origins and implications of handedness and relative birth 
weights for IQ in monozygotic twin pairs. Neuropsychologia, 37(4), 349–61.
Star signs
Fuzeau-Braesch, S. (1998). Are personality differences between twins predicted 
by astrology? Comment. Personality and Individual Differences, 21(3), 455–7.
Television
From the available research, there is no evidence that the amount of television 
viewing affects IQ.
Gortmaker, S. L., Salter, C. A., Walker, D. K. (1990). The impact of television 
viewing on mental aptitude and achievement: A  longitudinal study. Public 
Opinion Quarterly, 54(4), 594–604.
Rural–urban differences
About 50 years ago, average rural–urban IQ differences were substantial, but 
they have now reduced to nothing. This is primarily due to the increasing 
similarity in experiences between rural and urban dwellers, the improvements 
in schooling capacity of both rural and urban schools and the increasing sophis-
tication of farming practices.


99
Glossary
Bias 
a term used to denote whether certain groups of people 
have an  advantage of getting an item correct compared 
with other groups of test-takers. Bias is typically related 
to an item having more than one underlying dimension, 
usually a secondary, unintended one such as a mathemati-
cal question (primary dimension) with a rugby context 
(secondary dimension). Mathematical ability alone should 
be the reason people get the question correct and not 
their knowledge of rugby. In this example it might be 
that males have an added advantage of getting the item 
correct as they may have more knowledge of rugby, thus 
the item is biased in favour of males.
Correlation 
a statistic for measuring the strength and direction of 
the relationship between two variables measured on the 
same person. For example, a correlation of .80 between 
achievement test scores and the amount of books in the 
home would suggest that people with high scores on 
achievement tests tend to have more books at home. 
Correlations range between –1.00 and 1.00, with 
0.00 indicating no relationship between scores on two 
variables.
Cronbach’s alpha 
a statistic to quantify the consistency among the items in 
measuring a person’s true score. It can be thought of as 
the average of the inter-item correlations. The higher the 
reliability (>.70) the more confident you can be that the 
items are consistently measuring a person’s true score.

Glossary
100
Effect-size 
a statistical value that summarises the relationship between 
two variables within a statistical population. An effect-
size can also be used to quantify differences between 
groups.
Factor analysis 
a statistical method used to reduce large amounts of data 
into meaningful clusters. For example, questions written 
to measure mathematical ability and questions measuring 
motivations should correlate more highly among each 
other. So, the mathematics questions should all be cor-
related more highly with each other but not with the 
motivation questions, and vice versa.
Factor loading 
the degree to which a question is related to the underlying 
 factor: the higher the number, the stronger the relation-
ship between the item and the factor.
Gold standard 
a criterion measure. Typically the test being developed 
is correlated to the criterion or ‘gold standard’ test.
Intelligence 
quotient 
a number that quantifies a person’s intelligence.
Item difficulty 
is related to the amount of people who get the item cor-
rect in relation to all those who take the item. Thus, if 
100 people attempt the item and 80 people get it correct 
then it is an easy item (80/100 = .80)
Item 
discrimination 
relates an individual’s performance on an item to their 
overall test score. People with a higher ability should get 
difficult items correct and do well on the overall test. 
People with a lower ability should get more difficult 
items wrong and do less well on the test.
Item distractors 
a four-choice item will have one correct answer (the 
keyed correct one) and three distractor answers. The idea 
of the distractors is that they should be equally plausible 
to those who are not at the ability level needed to attain 
the correct answer.
Item information 
is related to the error associated with each item. An item 
with low error has higher information that is analogous 
to how accurately the item measures that it is measuring 

Glossary
101
at a certain level of difficulty. In other words, items with 
high amounts of information have great precision in 
 estimating a person’s ability at a particular point of 
difficulty.
Item response 
theory 
a mathematical model that relates an individual’s ability 
to item responses.
Item stem 
the actual question statement.
Items 
the questions in a test.
Normal 
distribution 
a bell-shaped curve representing the distribution of a set 
of scores that are clustered around an average score.
Norms 
a comparison score in relation to other test-takers 
scores.
Percentile 
a value on a variable where a percentage of the scores 
fall. For example, if someone had a score at the seventy-
fifth percentile, then this is the point where 75 per cent 
test-takers score below.
Psychological 
constructs 
unobservable psychological entities such as confidence, 
self-esteem and motivation, etc.
Psychometrics 
a branch of applied statistics that studies the theory and 
measurement of psychological attributes such as confi-
dence, self-esteem and motivation, etc.
Reliability 
a theory relating to the consistent measurement of a 
person’s ‘true’ score.
Standard deviation is a measure of variability in a distribution of scores. The 
higher the standard deviation, the greater the spread of 
scores in the  distribution from the mean score.
Test information 
function 
the sum of the item information function curves. With 
large amounts of items, tests can be constructed to provide 
maximum precision (low error) of ability at any chosen 
degree of difficulty for a test. Simply select items that 
have high information around the point of difficulty.

Glossary
102
Unidimensionality an assumption that an item or a set of items measure only 
one psychological construct – for example, verbal ability 
or spatial reasoning.
Validity 
the appropriateness of evidence to defend the interpret-
ations and actions derived from tests.
Variable 
an entity that can take on different numerical values – for 
example, height, weight, IQ, etc.

103
References
Ackerman, P. L. (1996). A theory of adult intellectual development, process, 
personality, interests and knowledge. Intelligence, 22, 227–57.
Akbari, R. and Hosseini, K. (2008). Multiple intelligences and language learning 
strategies: Investigating possible relations. System, 36, 141–55.
Baltes, P. B. and Baltes, M. M. (1990). Psychological perspectives on successful 
aging: The model of selective optimisation with compensation. In P. B. Baltes 
and M. M. Baltes (eds), Successful Aging: Perspectives from the Behavioural Science 
(pp. 1–34). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Biggs J. B. (1996). Paradoxes of the Chinese learner. In D. Watkins and J. Biggs 
(eds), The Chinese Learner: Research and Practice. Hong Kong: Centre 
for Comparative Research in Education / Camberwell, Vic.: Australian 
Council for Educational Research.
Binet, S. (1916). The development of intelligence in children. Baltimore, MD: Williams 
& Wilkins.
Bodanis, D. (2000). E=MC2: A Biography of the World’s most Famous Equation. 
New York: Berkeley Books.
Bonnet, M. H. and Arand, D. L. (2001). Impact of activity and arousal upon 
spectral EEG parameters. Physiology & Behavior, 74, 291–8
Boring, E. G. (1923). Intelligence as the tests test it. New Republic (6 June), 
35–7.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytical Studies. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cattell, R. B. (1971). Abilities: Their Structure, Growth, and Action. New York: 
Houghton Mifflin.
Ceci, S. J. (1991). How much does schooling influence general intelligence and 
its cognitive components? A reassessment of the evidence. Developmental 
Psychology, 37, 703–22.

References
104
Ceci, S. J. (1996). On Intelligence: A Bioecological Treatise on Intellectual Development. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ceci, S. J. (2003). Cast in six ponds and you’ll reel in something: Looking back 
on 25 years of research. American Psychologist, (November) 855–64.
Cohen, J. (1969) Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. New York: 
Academic Press.
Corballis, M. C. and Beale, I. L. (1993). Orton revisited: Dyslexia,  laterality, 
and left–right confusion. In D. M. Willows, R. S. Kruk and E. Corcos (eds), 
Visual Processes in Reading and Reading Disabilities (pp. 57–73). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Corballis, M. C., Hattie, J. and Fletcher, R. (2008). Handedness and  intellectual 
achievement: An even-handed look. Neuropsychologia, 46, 374–8.
Cornford, F. M. (1935). Plato’s Theory of Knowledge: The Theaetetus and the Sophist 
of Plato. Trans. F. M. Cornford. London: Routledge.
Dweck, C. S. (1999) Self-theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality, and 
Development. Hove: Psychology Press, Taylor & Francis Group.
Fletcher, R. J. and Hattie, J. A. C. (2004). Test the Nation: The development 
of an IQ test for New Zealand adults – 2004. Psychological Reports, 102(2), 
389–97.
Flynn, J. R. (1987). Massive IQ gains in 14 nations: What IQ tests really measure. 
Psychological Bulletin, 101, 171–91.
Flynn, J. R. (2007). What is Intelligence? Beyond the Flynn Effect. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Foundas, A. L., Bollich, A. M., Feldman, J., Corey, D. M., Hurley, M., Lerman, 
L. C., Heilman, K. M. (2004). Aberrant auditory processing and atypical 
planum temporale in Developmental Stuttering. Neurology, 61, 1640–6.
Galton, F. (1869). Hereditary Genius. London: MacMillan.
Galton, F. (1907). Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development (2nd edn). 
London: J. M. Dent & Co.
Gardner, H. (1983) Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. New 
York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1999) Intelligence Reframed: Multiple Intelligences for the 21st Century. 
New York: Basic Books.
Goldstein, D., Hahn, C. S., Hasher, L., Wiprzycka, U. and Zelazo, P. D. (2007). 
Time of day, intellectual performance, and behavioral problems in morning 
versus evening type adolescents: Is there a synchrony effect? Personality and 
Individual Differences, 42(3), 431–40
Gottfredson, L. S. (1997). Mainstream science on intelligence: An editorial with 
52 signatories, history, and bibliography. Intelligence, 24, 13–23.
Gould, S. J. (1981). The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.

References
105
Guilford, J. P. (1967). The Nature of Intelligence. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gustafsson, J. (1984). A unifying model of the structure of intellectual  abilities. 
Intelligence, 8, 179–203.
Hattie, J. A. (1987). Patterns of usage and some psychometric properties of the 
Stanford–Binet Intelligence test. Australian Journal of Psychology, 23, 1–11.
Hattie, J. A. (1991). The Burt controversy: An essay review of Hearnshaw’s 
and Joynson’s biographies of Sir Cyril Burt. Alberta Journal of Educational 
Research, 37, 259–75.
Hattie, J. A. (2009). Visible Learning: A Synthesis of 800+ Meta-Analyses on 
Achievement. Oxford: Routledge.
Hearnshaw, L. (1979). Cyril Burt: Psychologist. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Herrnstein, R. and Murray, C. (1994) The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class 
Structure in American Life. New York: Free Press.
Horn, J. L. and Cattell, R. B. (1966). Refinement and test of the theory of 
fluid and crystallized intelligence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 57(5), 
253–70.
Howe, M. J. A. (1997). IQ in Question: The Truth About Intelligence. London: 
Sage.
Hunt, T. (1928). The measurement of social intelligence. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 12, 317–34.
Jencks, C. (1972). Inequality: A Reassessment of the Effect of Family and Schooling 
in America. New York: Harper & Row.
Jensen, A. R. (1969). How much can we boost I.Q. and scholastic achievement? 
Harvard Educational Review, 33, 1–123.
Jensen, A. R. (1998). The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability. Westport, CT: 
Praeger.
Joynson, R. B. (1989). The Burt Affair. New York: Routledge.
Karabel, J. (2005). The Chosen. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Lane, A. B., Foundas, A. L. and Leonard, C. M. (2001). The evolution of neuro-
imaging research and developmental language disorders. Topics in Language 
Disorders, 21, 20–41.
Lynn, R. and Vanhanen, T. (2002). IQ and the Wealth of Nations. Westport, CT: 
Praeger.
Neisser, U. (1977). Rising scores on intelligence tests. American Scientist 85: 
440–7 (September/October).
Orton, S. T. (1937). Reading, Writing, and Speech Problems in Children. New York: 
W. W. Norton & Co.
Penrose, L. S. and Raven, J. C. (1936). A new series of perceptual tests: 
A  preliminary communication. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 16, 
97–104.

References
106
Roberts, R. D., Stankov, L., Schulze, R. and Kyllonen, P. C. (2008). Extending 
intelligence: Conclusions and future directions. In P. C. Kyllonen, 
R. D. Roberts, L. Stankov (eds), Extending Intelligence (pp. 363–78). Malwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Roenneberg, T., Wirz-Justice, A. and Merrow, M. (2003). Life between clocks 
– daily temporal patterns of human chronotypes. Journal of Biological Rhythms, 
18, 80–90.
Schmidt, F. and Hunter, J. (2004). General mental ability in the world of work: 
Occupational attainment and job performance. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 86(1), 162–73.
Spearman, C. (1904). General intelligence objectively determined and measured. 
American Journal of Psychology, 15, 201–93.
Sternberg, R. J. (1985a). Implicit theories of intelligence, creativity, and wisdom. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 607–27.
Sternberg, R. J. (1985b). Beyond IQ: A Triarchic Theory of Intelligence. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. and Detterman, D. K. (eds) (1986). What is Intelligence? 
Contemporary Viewpoints on its Nature and Definition. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Thorndike, E. (1921). The Teacher’s Word Book. New York: Teachers College.
Thurstone, L. L. (1938). Primary Mental Abilities. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Wainer, H. and Robinson, D. H. (2009). Profiles in research: Linda S. Gottfredson. 
Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 34(3), 395–427.
Wechsler, D. (1939). The Measurement of Adult Intelligence. Baltimore: Williams 
& Wilkins.
Wechsler, D. (1975). Intelligence defined and undefined: A relativistic appraisal. 
American Psychologist, 30, 135–9.
Wechsler, D. (1997). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (3rd edn). San Antonio, TX: 
The Psychological Corporation.
Wechsler, D. (2008). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (4th edn). San Antonio, TX: 
The Psychological Corporation.
Witelson, S. F., Kigar, D. L. and Harvey, T. (1999). The exceptional brain of 
Albert Einstein. Lancet, 353, 2149–53.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations (2nd edn). Trans. G. E. M. 
Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell.
Zenderland, L. (1998). Measuring Minds: Henry Herbert Goddard and the Origins 
of American Intelligence Testing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

107
Index
African-American 22, 25, 31, 95
Apgar Test 31
bell curve 26, 27, 44
bias 15, 20, 42, 79, 99
Biggs 5–6
Binet 17–18, 19, 20, 21, 22
birth order 92
body-kinesthetic intelligence 8
Burt, Cyril 23–4, 28
collectivism 5–6, 61
correlation 23, 33, 53, 62, 74, 91, 99
crystallised intelligence 7, 26, 60–1
difficulty 18, 54–6, 59, 100
discrimination 54, 56, 58, 59, 80, 100
factor analysis 23, 37, 54, 56, 60–1, 
100
fluid intelligence 7, 25, 60–1
Flynn effect 25, 34, 81–4, 92, 104
general intelligence (‘g’) 7–9, 17, 27, 
37–8, 56
Galton i, 16–17, 18, 19, 104
Goddard 19–21, 22
Gould 14, 19, 28
Graduate Records Examination 32
handedness 72, 78, 80, 81, 96
heredity 17, 20, 23, 46, 89–90
Herrnstein and Murray i, 26–7, 106
individualism 5–6, 61
information in tests 54, 55–56, 59–60, 
101
interpersonal intelligence 8
intrapersonal intelligence 8
Jensen 7, 17, 24, 27, 28, 34, 88, 89, 96, 
106
Kaufman Assessment Battery for 
Children 31
language 7, 49, 52, 56, 73, 76, 81
linguistic intelligence 15
logical-mathematical intelligence 7
memory 1, 5, 7 18, 47, 48, 52, 53, 56, 
60, 61, 70 74, 83, 84

Index
108
mental age 2, 18, 19
Mental Measurements Yearbook 45
musical intelligence 7
naturalist intelligence 7
norms 13, 20, 43–5, 50, 52, 70, 101
number knowledge 47, 52, 56, 60, 66
perceptual organisation 7, 47, 48
problem-solving i, 34, 82
processing speed 5, 6, 47–8, 70, 84
psychometrics i, 15, 19, 22, 41–2, 48, 
51, 53, 79, 101
Raven’s Progressive Matrices 31, 37, 49, 
50, 57, 62, 83, 92
reasoning 3, 4, 7, 9, 23, 25, 32, 41, 47, 
48, 52, 53, 56, 60, 71, 74, 77, 82, 84, 
93
reliability 20, 22, 40–3, 50, 53, 69, 99
Scholastic Achievement Test 32
schooling i, 3–4, 23, 26, 28, 34
sex differences 71, 80, 94
social intelligence 3, 5, 52, 53
spatial intelligence 8, 52–3, 56, 60–1, 
77
Spearman i, 7, 17, 46, 39, 61, 106
standardised tests 32, 
Sternberg 3, 6–7, 88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 95, 
106
Terman 19, 21
Test the Nation vi, 14, 42, 50, 52–3, 56, 
60–2, 63–7, 72, 75, 79–82
Thorndike 6, 106
Thurstone 7, 106
twins 23, 63, 65–6, 90
unidimensional 23, 41, 53, 102
validity 20, 22, 32–33, 40–2, 50, 53, 63, 
102
verbal comprehension 47–8
verbal intelligence 3, 6, 47
visual intelligence 7
Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale 37, 
44, 57, 62
working memory 47–48, 84

