Journal of Conscious Evolution
Volume 1
Issue 1 Issue 01/2005
Article 1
May 2018
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and
Comprehensive Mapmaking
Saiter, Sean M.
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal
Part of the Anthropology Commons, Philosophy Commons, Psychology Commons, and the
Sociology Commons
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journals and Newsletters at Digital Commons @ CIIS. It has been accepted for inclusion
in Journal of Conscious Evolution by an authorized editor of Digital Commons @ CIIS. For more information, please contact
digitalcommons@ciis.edu.
Recommended Citation
Saiter, Sean M. (2018) "A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive Mapmaking," Journal of Conscious Evolution:
Vol. 1 : Iss. 1 , Article 1.
Available at: https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive Mapmaking
By Sean M. Saiter
( ©2005The Journal of Conscious Evolution)
I don't believe that any human mind is capable of 100 percent error. So instead of asking
which approach is right and which is wrong, we assume each approach is true but
partial, and then try to ﬁgure out how to ﬁt these partial truths together, how to integrate
them--not how to pick one and get rid of the others.
-Ken Wilber (from the foreword to The Eye of Spirit)
Introduction
While attempting to keep to the larger vision of integral studies as a whole I shall be proposing a
rudimentary outline of an underlying assertion primarily based upon the works of Ken Wilber, Jean
Gebser, Don Beck and Christopher Cowan (based on the work of Clare Graves), and Mark B.
Woodhouse. Robert Kegan, Howard Gardner, James Mark Baldwin, Susan Cook-Greuter, and Carol
Gilligan are inﬂuences working in the background.
Perhaps the most important thing to keep in mind when trying to understand integral studies as a ﬁeld
is that a fundamental, underlying message in Wilber's, Graves', Beck's, Gebser's, and Woodhouse's
work is that we are currently in a pivotal transition from one age to another.
The idea, and this is a rather popular idea, is that we are in the throes of a rather deep and penetrating
shift in collective consciousness complete with its own once-in-a-lifetime phenomena. In my humble
opinion, the works exempliﬁed in this essay are among the most sophisticated, timely, and
comprehensive manifestations of this general perception of global transformation.
The main function of this essay is to serve as a preliminary introduction to the new ﬁeld of integral
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
1 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
1
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

studies by looking into four particular theorists. Three of these, Wilber, Beck, and Gebser, are highly
inﬂuential and central to the ﬁeld. This has much to do with Wilber's highly inﬂuential work.
Woodhouse, on the other hand, exempliﬁes an "outsider" perspective yet remains, I believe just as
inclusive.
This is an argument for the validity of the integral approach and a call to awareness about the
transition that is represents. By proposing a context for the ﬁeld within the boundaries of the common
underlying message of a profound shift in human consciousness, we can come to a greater
comprehension of what can be considered to be among the most reﬁned manifestations of human
potential to date.
Constructs with greater explanatory power and practical application tend to prevail. (Spiral
Dynamics, 29)
In the following pages I have attempted to bring together a few of the more comprehensive maps
central to the endeavor of integral theory. There are powerful forces at work in the world that shape
and mould our experience as human beings. It has been postulated that ever since humankind started
to record this experience there have been attempts at grand, universal visions designed to explain and
to help in comprehending and dealing with the mysterious dilemma of existence.
To use Gebser's terminology, we are currently moving through a mutation (acausal leap) into the next
step in our collective development. Gebser and as we shall see, the other theorists presented here, are
not alone in this view. There exist plenty of theorists and outspoken individuals and groups who have
proposed very similar if not exact pictures. On that note, it should be kept in mind that the ideas
represented here are more than just concepts. They are more like invitations into a ﬂow of awareness
just beginning to emerge in the general population.
However, in order to gain a sufﬁcient understanding of the work, it might help to deﬁne the term
"integral" ﬁrst. Brieﬂy stated, integral means a bringing together and strategically linking of
apparently contradictory or seemingly divergent worldviews, concepts, and practices in the attempt to
create a realistic, workable, ﬂuid, and dynamic "meta-vision."[1] This is a "grand unifying theory" as
opposed to a "grand uniﬁed theory," the latter of which suggests a summation of all knowledge, an
absolute, an end, which is absurd and unrealistic.
Based upon this deﬁnition, integral studies is exemplary of a new level of development, an
aperspectival[2] way of being. It is extremely important to understand that these theorists (with the
exception of Woodhouse and to a certain degree, Beck) have attempted to write or propose their
vision from a point of view that essentially transcends yet includes the rational mind. That is, the
average mode of thinking is in a linear, causal manner where all phenomena have a cause and an
effect, a beginning and an end. This mode of thought is what we normally fall back on and cultivate
when in the process of reading or writing. For example, the traditional book format is a linear model
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
2 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
2
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

with a beginning and an end. The meaning behind the words on each page builds upon each
proceeding page until a whole context of understanding is (ideally), created. In Wilber's terms, the
book is a holon: wholes, within wholes, within wholes. Each context, or book, is different to some
extent in terms of the length, size, form, color, weight, language, style, meaning, etc., yet each book,
by the simple fact that it is a book, is to some extent, both a reﬂection of the dominant mode of
thought or way of being of the collective consciousness or an era and the consciousness an individual
author. In the era that we are currently moving out of, according to Gebser, the rational mind has been
dominant and all-pervasive. In the era that we are currently moving into, integral/aperspectival will
be the dominant mode.[3]It is from this mode of thinking that much of these ideas are founded upon.
The integral vision rides the crest of the leading developments in our postmodern world. Every era has
its most sophisticated, highly developed, and ultimately inﬂuential expressions. The European
Renaissance and the legacy of Ancient Greece are but two examples. However, unlike these, the
integral vision is difﬁcult to place within the context of history and time. The reason for this apparent
ambiguity is simple. It is merely a matter of perspective. In integral studies there are multiple
perspectives. Indeed, every perspective is attempted to be taken into account on some level, as being
if anything, a partial truth. This is part of the point.[4]In other words, one of the main reasons why
there is such a thing as Integral Studies, Integral Theory, Integral Psychology, Integral Business,
Integral Consciousness Studies, and Integral Art can be understood in terms of multidimensional,
multi-level thinking and, furthermore, being.As already mentioned, this is what Gebser calls integral-
aperspectival, what Wilber calls vision-logic and what Beck calls Second-Tier:
This multidimensional grid--not simply all-level, all quadrant--opens the study of human beings
in a profound fashion. That, of course, is part of integral studies . . . Thus, modern-day integral
studies can do something at which the great traditions failed: trace the spectrum of consciousness
not just in its intentional but also in its behavioral, social, and cultural manifestations, thus
highlighting the importance of a multidimensional approach for a truly comprehensive overview
of human consciousness and behavior. [5]
It can be said that the historical context of the integral vision is cradled within the perennial
philosophy in a general sense and the "Great Chain of Being" in a speciﬁc sense.[6]The idea behind
the perennial philosophy is that it is as old as recorded history (if not older) and runs through and
underneath every great spiritual or religious tradition in the world. It is "perennial" because it seems to
be ever-present, that is, undying. It manifests in nearly every culture and in every age. The perennial
philosophy is best exempliﬁed by the recognition of the unifying, timeless, spaceless, and formless
quality behind, above, within, below, and encompassing all of existence. "In other words, the
perennial philosophy is not, at its core, a set of doctrines, beliefs, teaching, or ideas, for all of those
are of the world of form, of space and time and ceaseless change, whereas very Truth is radically
formless, spaceless, and timeless, encompassing all space and time, and thus it could never be
enunciated in formal or doctrinal fashion."[7]
The integral vision, although ﬁrmly rooted in the philosophia perennis, recognizes that the world's
problems and that the average person's needs are not answered through the perennial philosophy
alone, that is, the perennial philosophy can only speak about one aspect of life. It cannot, for example,
give data about population percentages or help us understand certain physical phenomena such as the
wave function or magnetic ﬁelds. It cannot reveal to us the deep psychological issues predominantly
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
3 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
3
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

centered on the personal level of the individual. Wilber goes to great lengths in revealing the
limitations of the great mystical traditions despite their ability to point the way to transpersonal
awareness.[8]
If approached in the manner that will be employed here, it can be seen that existence, and more
speciﬁcally, human existence, follows a continuum of development, a spiral, if you will. The notion
of the spiral is an elegant model in the context of this comprehension. It can be seen as both linear and
as cyclical. Our representative of the spiral model of development in the following pages is Don Beck
and Chris Cowan in what they have dubbed Spiral Dynamics. By looking into the Spiral Dynamics
model we can begin to see just how such seemingly different phenomena such as the perennial
wisdom traditions and complex modern issues such as environmental degradation and the global
infrastructure relate to each other. We can begin to make important connections between all
expressions of human existence. By doing so we are creating a space for the further expansion of
consciousness both on the collective level and on the individual level. Spiral Dynamics has much to
contribute to integral studies, as we shall see.[9]
Integral studies is highly informed by theories of development: development of individuals,
development of cultures, development of nations, ecosystems, biospheres, noospheres, planets,
cosmos, and most importantly, consciousness. The desire to create a new model and approach to every
ﬁeld of human inquiry and action imaginable is also pivotal here. It is a reaction, but not reactionary,
to the pathologies of modernism and postmodernism. In it's highest ideals it is comprehensive, all-
level, atemporal,[10] ﬂuid, open-ended, and constantly shifting to accommodate the seemingly never-
ending transcending and including that is at the heart of all development, i.e., this movement is deeply
holonic. It makes connections but not at the cost of distinctions. It overlooks nothing while remaining
realistic and sensitive to time, place, state, and perspective. It is scientiﬁc yet spiritual, rational yet
intuitive, critical yet open. In fact, in my opinion, one of the more fascinating aspects of this approach
is the discussion of the need for the individual seeking verition in this realm to develop and call upon
a "higher" order of thinking (as in Wilber's vision-logic). As already mentioned, Jean Gebser uses the
term(s) "integral/aperspectival" to refer to a similar state of high comprehension. Don Beck follows
suit when he describes the manifestation of Second Tier thinking starting with the Yellow vMEME
and the Turquoise vMEME.[11]All of these examples I will cover in more detail later, evaluating and
summarizing each individuals' work in the context of the birthing of a new structure of consciousness.
This "higher order" is merely a step in a process that extends much further. For example, Wilber has
done much to describe levels of development that range beyond the rational and the vision-
logic/centauric level. These are the transrational, transmental, and transpersonal realms. In the latter
case, transpersonal psychologists are primarily concerned with exploring this fascinating realm. They
are interested in supramental phenomena of consciousness heretofore never adequately looked at or
revisited from a more veriﬁable, concrete perspective. Not until the twentieth century has there been
such a development or recognition of the need for more veriﬁably valid data. Indeed, this ability to
offer questions of veriﬁability, injunctions, and paradigms is one of the enduring gifts of both
modernism and postmodernism (a topic of great interest to all the theorists discussed here). In this
regard Wilber states that:
Since Kant, we have been forced to acknowledge, not that metaphysics is meaningless, but that
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
4 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
4
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

metaphysics without direct experience is meaningless.And direct transpersonal experience relies
on genuine transpersonal practices, paradigms, injunctions, and exemplars, which disclose the
domains of post-postconventional experience that alone can ground a veriﬁable spiritual
knowledge, thus fulﬁlling the Idealist promise precisely by transcending its limited agenda.[12]
Fundamental to the vision is the idea of integrating and balancing not only seemingly disparate
worldviews or paradigms, but integrating and balancing seemingly disparate spiritual practices,
psychological methodologies, medical practices, scientiﬁc methods, political agendas, art, business
practices, and other varied injunctions too numerous to mention. No less important is the need to
integrate and balance our individual understanding of such things from the different levels and states
of our being, to integrate our understanding from the level of whole groups of individuals to whole
cultures, and ultimately to the whole planet. Hopefully, as information and experience permits, this
integrating will move into the outer as well as the inner reaches of time and space, physical and non-
physical, into worlds as yet unseen by humankind. Indeed, nothing shall be overlooked. Not that all
shall be neatly compartmentalized, but rather that all shall be taken into account when trying to
construct dynamic and comprehensive maps of the Kosmos.[13]
Now, in the process of creating this more complete picture of the manifest and unmanifest realms
through the use of hierarchies (holarchies) it should be kept in mind that there is a sharp distinction
between pathological hierarchies and natural hierarchies:
Each is a whole/part, a holon, existing in a natural hierarchy, or an order of increasing wholeness
and holism . . . But that which transcends can repress.And thus normal and natural hierarchies can
degenerate into pathological hierarchies, into dominator hierarchies.In these cases, an arrogant
holon doesn't want to be both a whole and a part; it wants to be a whole, period . . . Power
replaces communion; domination replaces communication; oppression replaces reciprocity.[14]
It should also be mentioned that, by and large, the ability to construct an integral vision of the world
has never, in known history, been attainable to a large percentage of the world population. Never
before has information and the complete variety of spiritual practices been as accessible as it is today.
That is the upshot of postmodernism and the information age. Multimedia, the internet, books, and the
general availability of diver se ways of knowing, whether embraced or not, make it possible to
become acquainted with these dynamic systems and to be open to integration and synthesis on a
multitude of levels. It is my intention to make all of this more apparent in the following pages. In the
ﬁrst section I will introduce some of the more salient aspects of the four approaches represented here.
Ken Wilber with his Integral, AQAL approach, Jean Gebser and his ﬁve structures of consciousness,
Beck and Cowan with Spiral Dynamics, and Mark B. Woodhouse and his "new paradigms." In the
second section I will brieﬂy cover the theory, practice, and visions for the future of comprehensive
mapmaking. I believe that the ideas covered here will increasingly be of more signiﬁcance and
importance as current events continue their onward march.
I. The Theorists
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
5 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
5
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

Ken Wilber
In many important ways, Wilber has been the most pivotal writer to popularize the issues presented
here. He is credited with synthesizing unrelated and often contradictory disciplines. Whether you
agree with every single detail or not there is simply no way to discredit what he has done to introduce
the world to the endeavor of comprehensive mapmaking. If one is searching for an ever-increasingly
holistic picture of the phenomenon of consciousness in the grand universal context, he is without a
doubt, an excellent place to start. The simple fact that he draws from such diverse elements as
evolutionary theory, cultural studies, spirituality and systems theory among many other ﬁelds, helps to
support this statement. All of his books are excellent overviews of what a larger vision of the universe
can look like. Yet, only a few of these books cover his latest and most reﬁned work.[15]The Eye of
Spirit, Integral Psychology, and Sex, Ecology, Spirituality, seem to exemplify his most reﬁned
work.[16] Not only do these texts represent his latest model, they are also mature examples of the
latest in what can be rightly called a "world philosophy."[17]
Since the publication of his ﬁrst book The Spectrum of Consciousness[18] he has almost single-
handedly revived the popular and professional interest in areas such as Consciousness Studies,
Transpersonal Psychology, and Spirituality. According to his publisher, Shambhala Publications, he is
the most widely translated living academic writer in the world. No small feat for someone who lives
outside of the academic mainstream.
Wilber's work is directly inﬂuenced by Alfred North Whitehead, Emerson, Plotinus, Nagarjuna, and
Sri Aurobindo. Not to mention Jurgen Habermas, Hegel, Piaget, James Mark Baldwin, Jean Gebser,
Schelling, and several representative ﬁgures from the great nondual mystical traditions.[19]Of course,
this list is still incomplete, however, it gives a fair idea of where his center of gravity has been.
Wilber's methodology, to put it simply, is founded upon what he calls "orienting generalizations."
Here the general idea is to arrange as much information as possible from as many ﬁelds and traditions
as possible and for argument's sake assume that all the views proposed are true but partial. From here
it is then possible to try to devise a system of understanding whereby as many of these truths are
intentionally incorporated into this meta-system, this integral understanding:
He is not worried, nor should his reader be, about whether other ﬁelds would accept the
conclusion of any given ﬁeld; in short, don't worry, for example, if empiricist conclusions do not
match religious conclusions. Instead, simply assemble all the orienting conclusions as if each ﬁeld
had incredibly important truths to tell us. This is exactly Wilber's ﬁrst step in his integrative
method--a type of phenomenology of all human knowledge conducted at the level of orienting
generalizations. In other words, assemble all of the truths that each ﬁeld believes it has to offer
humanity. For the moment, simply assume they are indeed true . . . For the second step in Wilber's
method is to take all of the truths or orienting generalizations assembled in the ﬁrst step and then
pose this question: What coherent system would in fact incorporate the greatest number of these
truths?[20]
From this point it is possible to "connect-the-dots" and establish meaningful communication between
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
6 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
6
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

systems that would otherwise seem at odds with each other. To use his language this is called AQAL,
short for all quadrants, all levels, all lines, all states . . .
The next cornerstone backing up his whole theory is what he has termed the "four quadrants." Here
we have an elegant visual representation of the pathologies and the contributions of the premodern,
modern, and postmodern worldviews with the added feature of it being a post-postmodern vision
itself. In the upper left-hand (UL) quadrant we have the interior-individual. This quadrant represents
everything that is related to the individual and the interior aspects of the individual. Fields such as
psychology, psychiatry, individualized spirituality, mathematics, phenomenology, and anything
requiring interpretation on the level of single holons is what we are talking about here. This quadrant
also represents the "I" aspect of nature. Next we have the lower left (LL) where everything is still
interior except that now we are talking about collectiveinteriors. This is the cultural worldspace where
interpretation still reigns supreme but only on the level of multiple holons. Here we have shared,
cultural values and worldspaces. Pursuits and anything related to community and culture dominate
here. This is also known as the "We" aspect. Moving on, we come to the right-hand paths. The right-
hand paths are monological, empirical/positivistic, and oriented around material or physical sciences.
Here, in the upper-right (UR) is the individual-exterior.This represents all of the sciences dedicated to
the pursuit of quantiﬁable, individual holons. Physics, neurobiology, empiricism, behaviorism, etc. are
seen here. In the lower-right quadrant (LR) is the collective-exterior.Systems theory, Marxism, and
sociology are exempliﬁed here and instead of being it singular to denote an individual exterior
approach, the LR is comprised of its, plural. Both right-hand paths are also referred to as the "IT" of
nature. Wilber calls the I, the WE, and the IT the "Big Three."[21]
The four quadrants can be put in other ways as well. The examples given above show the four
quadrants applied to human pursuits and understandings. For now, a more detailed description of this
application can be skipped since that would mean more than just an introduction to integral theory. I
wish only to cover the basics. Other important concepts of his include the Pre/Trans fallacy, a
recognition that the difference between prerational and transrational states of awareness are often
confused with each other due to the fact that they are, by deﬁnition, nonrational.[22] Wilber has gone
to great lengths to point out how this occurs, who is, in his opinion, committing the fallacy, and how
to avoid it.
Perhaps most importantly, his theories are, in all actuality, a call to transformative practice.
Repeatedly, he reminds the reader that all true understanding is grounded in such practice and that the
intellect alone will not carry one to the higher realizations discussed in his work.
Ken Wilber is by no means the ﬁrst or the last word on proposals for new ways of comprehending our
times. There have been many before him and there will be many after. When it comes to predecessors
and an individual who Wilber credits much of his work to, Jean Gebser takes center stage.[23]
Jean Gebser: The Aperspectival World
This Swiss cultural philosopher and poet, however seemingly obscure, is certainly one of the greatest
minds of the twentieth century. I believe that anyone who has ever read The Ever-Present Origin[24]
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
7 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
7
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

would not deny this. What makes his work so impressive is the execution of his proposal and central
thesis that humankind undergoes radical shifts or mutations in consciousness and that we are currently
emerging into what he called the integral/aperspectival consciousness, an idea that remains quite
novel for its time and place.
Gebser was born in Posen,[25] Prussia (now Poland) on August 20, 1905, an auspicious time indeed:
In the same year, Albert Einstein formulated his special theory of relativity--a theory that, for
Gebser, came to epitomize the radical transformation of our Western civilization which it was his
life-task to understand, document, and communicate. For Gebser, the Einsteinian innovation in
thought was an important manifestation of a new consciousness of time, which he rightly
identiﬁed as the fundamental theme of our epoch.[26]
Aristocratic by birth, Gebser eventually relocated to Switzerland after spending several years in
Germany, Florence, and Spain[27] and Paris (where he unhappily lived despite his access to the circle
around Paul Eduard, Louis Aragon, Andre Malraux, and Pablo Picasso).[28]It was when he made his
ﬁnal move to Switzerland in 1939 that he was to ﬁnd the intellectual space to ﬁnally write his
magnum opus: The Ever-Present Origin (ﬁrst published in 1953[29] despite having been ﬁnancially
poor by this time).
In The Ever-Present Origin Gebser outlines ﬁve great stages or structures of collective human
consciousness. Although these structures have been applied to the individual level as well[30] Gebser
was predominantly only interested in the cultural level of development. In this regard it should also be
noted that he was acutely aware of his European background and was, therefore, not ignorant of the
fact that his was a uniquely European bias by default.[31] Thankfully, as his modern-day proponents
and popularizers have so assiduously tried to make clear, his ideas are by no means limited to Europe,
or more importantly, to the time in which he lived. Though one can deﬁnitely see the European in
Gebser, he is still considered to be ahead of his time.
Gebser's structures of consciousness include: 1) the archaic; 2) the magical; 3) the mythical; 4) the
mental/rational; and 5) the integral/aperspectival (the emergent consciousness).[32]The archaic
structure is characterized by a total absence of dimensionality likened to a state of deep, dreamless
sleep. The archaic is zero-dimensional, non-perspectival, and lacking any sense of separation from the
environment. It is "the source from which all springs, but it is that which springs forth itself. It is the
essence which is behind and which underlies consciousness" and "it is just there, and things just
happen."[33]This structure is the most difﬁcult to describe because it is the farthest from what we
know and where we are now.
The magical structure of consciousness is characterized by a "one-dimensional, pre-perspectival,
point-like existence that occurs in a dream-like state. Unlike the dreamlessness of the previous
structure, a recognition is developing in man that he is something different from that around him . . .
Feuerstein, one of Gebser's main biographers, feels that this structure persisted till around 40,000 BC
and the advent of the Cro-Magnons."[34] This structure is also referred to as being in attunement with
the natural rhythms of the environment and is very alive today in such phenomena as Voodoo and
Wicca[35] where a magical worldview dominates.
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
8 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
8
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

Historically, according to Gebser, the transition from magical to mythical marked the beginning of the
two-dimensional, symbolic consciousness. "Language is becoming ever more important"[36] as is the
ability to interpret life as a series of ever-complexifying myths. It can best be likened to a dream and
is alive today through inﬂuences such as Joseph Campbell and Robert Bly who have helped us to
understand this most crucial element of consciousness.[37]
By the time we reach the mental structure of consciousness we begin to see a radical shift from two-
dimensional (mythical) into three-dimensional space. Historically, in the Western tradition, the
example of this was classical Greece. According to this version of history, the early Greeks such as
Aristotle, Pythagoras, Plato, and of course, Socrates were among the ﬁrst to display this structure. As
would be guessed, much more is known about this structure than any of the others. It has been the
dominant mode since its emergence around 10,000 to 500 BC and has only begun to wane in our era.
There have been many stages to this structure but the basic characteristics of being perpsectivally and
analytically oriented have remained consistent. Time, space, and point of view are the hallmarks of
this structure. It is also likened to wakefulness (as opposed to the sleep speciﬁc magic and mythical
structures).[38] Finally, we reach the ﬁfth structure of consciousness, the integral/aperspectival world
on which much if not all of Gebser's efforts rest. It is called "integral" because of the unique ability to
add up all of the perspectives and transcend the limitations of three-dimensionality. It stresses the
importance of the relations between the perspectives themselves. As already stated, the aperspectival
mind is synonymous with Wilber's vision-logic and therefore has the same characteristic of adding up
"all the perspectives tout ensemble, and therefore privileges no perspective as ﬁnal: it is
aperspectival."[39]In Gebser's terms this primary characteristic is "transparency" or "diaphaneity"
which, along with the term "latency" are among the most important terms he uses.[40]
The integral/aperspectival is marked by being acausal, awaring, arational, aspacial, and atemporal.
Terms which imply not a negation but rather a "stepping out of" a dualistic relationship. In other
words, aperspectivism is not a contradiction in terms. It is a "perspective" that does not seek to come
from no perspective. It is, rather, a "perspective" that seeks to, as already stated, favor no one
perspective as being dominate over another. It is a ﬂuid understanding of the multiplicity of
perspectives available and seeking to honor each of them in the context of the whole. Thus, the
aperspectival, by not choosing favorites, seeks to to honor each of them in the context of the every-
increasing understanding of the whole. The aperspectival, by doing this, seeks to establish a new
holistic and more complete verstehen. It necessarily requires a leap into a mode of awareness
generally not employed by the world at large. The closest equivalent manifestation (that is only
among the very ﬁrst signs) of this structure so far has been the healthier aspects of postmodernism.[41]
However, according to Wilber, Feuerstein, Gebser, and Gebser's many proponents, the
integral/aperspectival structure has yet to fully develop.
To assist in the identiﬁcation of the themes inherent in the birthing of this new aperspectival world
Gebser gave a list of certain key terms crucial to this end:
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
9 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
9
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

the whole,
integrity,
transparency (diaphaneity),
the spiritual (the diaphainon),
the supercession of the ego,
the realization of timelessness,
the realization of termporicity,
the realization of the concept of time,
the realization of time-freedom (the achronon),
the disruption of the merely systematic,
the incursion of dynamics,
the recognition of energy,
the mastery of movement,
the fourth dimension,
the supercession of patriarchy,
the renunciation of dominance and power,
the acquisition of intensity,
clarity (instead of mere wakefulness),
and the transformation of the creative inceptual basis.[42]
Such often cryptic terms are only linguistic ﬂags to help recognize this emergent consciousness and
should not be taken as absolute signiﬁers. Gebser, like most pioneers, found the use of language
limiting in his attempt to share his crucial insights but nonetheless, used it with skill and creativity.
[43]As already mentioned, many of his ideas had no active terms for them during his day. As a result,
he took the liberty of creating his own. In the context of his overall theory, three terms stand out:
eteology, systasis, and synairesis.These are important terms because they adequately describe his
"methodology" even if they do not lend themselves well to average usage.
To Gebser, what he was proposing through The Ever-Present Origin was not another philosophy but,
rather, a new "eteology. In other words still: "The Greek word eteos means 'true, real'; as an adverb,
eteon means 'in accord with truth, truly, really' and comes from the root se:es, meaning 'to be'."[44]
The difference comes with the understanding that a philosophy is another three-dimensional, rational
system. An eteology, on the other hand:
(M)ust replace philosophy just as philosophy once replaced myths. In the eteologemes, the eteon
or being-in-truth comes to veracity or statement of truth, and the "wares" of guards or guards
verity and conveys the "verition" which arises from the a-waring and imparting of truth. Eteology,
then, is neither a mere ontology, that is, theory of being, nor is it a theory of existence. The
dualistic question of being versus non-being which is commensurate only with the mental
structure is superceded by eteology, together with the secularized question as to being, whose
content--or more exactly whose vacuity--is nothing more than existence. Every eteologeme is a
"verition," and as such is valid only when it allows origin to become transparent in the present. To
do this it must be formulated in such a way as to be free of ego, and this means not just free of
subject but also free of object; only then does it sustain the verity of the whole. This has nothing
to do with representation; only in philosophical thought can the world be represented; for the
integral perception of truth, the world is pure statement, and thus "verition."[45]
To put it bluntly, Gebser is proposing a whole new way of being and The Ever-Present Origin is
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
10 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
10
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

speciﬁcally written from the viewpoint of this "verition." It would seem that this is part of the reason
why his work seems so cryptic and esoteric. In a very real sense, it requires a level of understanding
yet to be experienced by the vast majority of people on the planet. From an outsider perspective, this
stance would seem to be impractical and even arrogant. Yet, perhaps it is meant to be seen as a
necessary variable in an attempt to push the evolutionary impulse that much further. Indeed, what if
people like Gebser, by creating a new "space" where such thought-forms didn't exist before, act as an
attractor or even create a ﬁeld that catalylizes or "pulls" the collective consciousness to emerge into
that new way of being in the world?
Systasis is "the conjoining or ﬁtting together of parts into integrality."[46]It is the actual process of
merging partials into a whole.[47]Synairesis, on the other hand, is "an integral understanding, or
perception, of reality."[48]Synairesis is the "verition" and systasis is the process. Interestingly enough,
Gebser's intention for using such terms was to transcend the limitations of three-dimensional thought
through the use of linguistic signiﬁers, like a Zen koan. It is a call to freedom from the bondage of
time and space. A call to a "liberating understanding of the whole."[49]A call to which we are just
beginning to heed.
Clare Graves & Don Beck:  The Second Tier: Spiral Dynamics
In the relentless attempt to construct a more efﬁcient, visionary, and complete model of consciousness
few such models have had as much practical impact as Spiral Dynamics (SD). In their book by the
same name, Don Beck and Christopher Cowan took the psychological principles as outlined and
proposed by Clare Graves[50] and expanded them to include the "ﬂedgling science of memetics"
[51]and (more recently) the sophisticated theories of Ken Wilber thus creating Spiral Dynamics
Integral (SDi)[52]: "Spiral Dynamics, (is) a bio-psycho-social-spiritual conceptual system that
describes how and when worldviews emerge, and how they form themselves naturally into spirals of
complexity. The Spiral is not a cookie-cutter; it is a process."[53]
Thus, Spiral Dynamics has become one of the only sophisticated applications of effective change with
a truly integral/holistic approach. Graves' model, unlike many theoreticians, was speciﬁcally designed
to be applicable in the real world. This characteristic is what immediately makes Spiral Dynamics
unique, especially in the context of integral theory.[54]
Like the other theorists presented here and like all of the great holistic thinkers, Graves was a
developmentalist. In his own words:
Brieﬂy, what I am proposing is that the psychology of the mature human being is an unfolding,
emergent, oscillating spiraling process marked by progressive subordination of older, lower-order
behavior systems to newer, higher-order systems as man's existential problems change. Each
successive stage, wave, or level of existence is a state through which people pass on their way to
other states of being. When the human is centralized in one state of existence he or she has a
psychology which is particular to that state. His or her feelings, motivations, ethics and values,
biochemistry, degree of neurological activation, learning system, belief systems, conception of
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
11 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
11
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

mental health, ideas as to what mental illness is and how it should be treated, conceptions of and
preferences for management, education, and political theory and practice are all appropriate to
that state.[55]
The most recent incarnation of Spiral Dynamics has been carried out by Don Beck in collaboration
with John Petersen of the Arlington Institute,[56] Dr. Ichak Adizes, Alan Tonkin, Evan Fowler, and
several others who have continued to reﬁne Spiral Dynamics into what it is today--SDi. SDi is the
name formally given to the addition of Ken Wilber's model (4Q/8L)[57] into the equation: "An
aggressive and comprehensive All Quadrants/All Levels strategy designed to address the
asymmetrics and gaps in human development by mobilizing and aligning our resources in a systemic
manner so none be left behind."[58]
Spiral Dynamics is organized around waves of human unfolding called vMEMEs. A vMEME is
shorthand for value meme. Brieﬂy, a meme has been called a "mind virus" because it behaves like a
virus though I ﬁnd calling it a virus is a bit too value laden.[59] It is an independent idea, value, set of
thoughts, beliefs, etc. that has the tendency to "infect" or be passed like a virus from person to person,
group to group, or culture to culture. Memes are also likened to genes yet they are not physical in any
way. In fact, strangely enough they would have no existence outside of human minds yet they exhibit
properties that seem to be self-creating (autopoiesis) even at the cost of human lives.[60]
A vMEME speciﬁcally refers to a type of meme that is at once "a psychological structure, value
system, and mode of adaptation, which can express itself in numerous different ways, from
worldviews to clothing styles to governmental forms."[61]Spiral Dynamics outlines eight distinct and
basic vMEMEs with the potential for more to be added as time and consciousness develop. These
levels have been assigned different colors to represent their respective characteristics and to serve as
convenient signiﬁers. Furthermore, they are divided into two "tiers." Again, I will use Wilber's
summary of the vMEMEs to describe the distinct characteristics of each stage:
First Tier:
1. Beige: Archaic-Instinctual. The level of basic survival; food, water, warmth, sex, and safety have
priority. Uses habits and instincts just to survive . . . 0.1 percent of the adult population, 0 percent power.
2. Purple: Magical-Animistic. Thinking is animistic; magical spirits, good and bad, swarm the earth
leaving blessings, curses, and spells that determine events. Forms into ethnic tribes. The spirits exist in
ancestors and bond the tribe . . . 10 percent of the population, 1 percent of the power.
3. Red: Power Gods. First emergence of a distinct self from the tribe; powerful, impulsive, egocentric,
heroic . . . The basis of feudal empires power and glory. The world is a jungle full of threats and
predators . . . 20 percent of the population, 5 percent of the power.
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
12 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
12
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

4. Blue: Conformist Rule. Life has meaning, direction, and purpose, with outcomes determined by an all-
powerful Other or Order. This righteous Order enforces a code of conduct based on absolutist and
unvarying principles of "right" and "wrong" . . . Rigid social hierarchies . . . Law and order; impulsivity
controlled through guilt; concrete-literal fundamentalist belief; obedience to the rule of the Order . . . 40
percent of the population, 30 percent of the power.
5. Orange: Scientiﬁc Achievement. At this wave, the self "escapes" from   the "herd mentality" of blue,
and seeks truth and meaning in individualistic terms--hypothetico-deductive, experimental, objective,
mechanistic, operational--"scientiﬁc" in the typical sense. The world is a rational and well-oiled machine
with natural laws that can be learned, mastered, and manipulated for one's own purposes. Highly
achievement oriented, especially (in America) toward materialistic gains . . . 30 percent of the population,
50 percent of the power.
6. Green: The Sensitive Self.[62]   Communitarian, human bonding, ecological sensitivity, networking.
The human spirit must be freed from greed, dogma, and divisiveness; feelings and caring supercede cold
rationality; cherishing of the earth, Gaia, life. Against hierarchy; establishes lateral bonding and linking . .
. Emphasis on dialogue, relationships . . . this worldview is often called pluralistic relativism . . . 10
percent of the population, 15 percent of the power.
Second Tier:
7. Yellow: Integrative. Life is a kaleidoscope of natural hierarchies [holarchies], systems, and forms.
Flexibility, spontaneity, and functionality have the highest priority. Differences and pluralities can be
integrated into interdependent, natural ﬂows . . . Knowledge and competency should supersede rank,
power, status, or group. The prevailing world order is theresult of the existence of different levels of
reality (memes) and the inevitable patterns of movement up and down the dynamic spiral. Good
governance facilitates the emergence of entities throughout the levels of increasing complexity (nested
hierarchy).
8. Turquoise: Holistic. Universal holistic system, holons/waves of integrative energies; unites feeling with
knowledge [centaur]; multiple levels interwoven into one conscious system. Universal order, but in a
living, conscious fashion, not based on external rules (blue) or group bonds (green). A "grand uniﬁcation"
is possible, in theory and in actuality. Sometimes involves the emergence of a new spirituality as a
meshwork of all existence. Turquoise thinking uses the entire spiral; sees multiple levels of interaction;
detects harmonics, the mystical forces, and the pervasive ﬂow-states that permeate any organization.
Second-tier thinking: 1 percent of the population, 5 percent of the power.[63]
The difference between the two tiers is crucial. The overriding characteristic of ﬁrst-tier thinking is
the inability to perceive the world from the perspective of the other vMEMEs. First-tier thinking
believes its worldview to be "better" than any of the other memes, including second-tier. People in the
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
13 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
13
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

ﬁrst tier have a chronic lack of ability to step out their values. It cannot grasp the entire spectrum of
interior and cultural development. Second-tier thinking, on the other hand, doesn't have this problem.
Second-tier thinking is characterized by the ability to consider the other vMEMEs in their own right
and is not afraid of dynamic hierarchical systems based upon this meta-perspective. It is in the
second-tier where all worldviews are beginning to be integrated and balanced into a "higher" way of
perceiving.[64]It is a multileveled, multidimensional, richly holarchical view.[65] Second-tier thinking
is rare. However, according to many, it is emerging on a greater scale now than it ever has especially
with many "green memers" moving up the spiral at the same time:
With only 1 percent of the population at second-tier thinking (and only 0.1 percent at turquoise),
second-tier consciousness is relatively rare because it is now the "leading edge" of collective
human evolution. As examples, Beck and Cowan mention items ranging from Teilhard de
Chardin's noosphere[66] to the growth of transpersonal psychology, with increases in
frequency deﬁnitely on the way--and even higher memes still in the ofﬁng . . . [67]
The vMEMEs can be open, arrested, or closed (OAC status) and understood in the context of phases:
alpha, beta, gamma, delta, new alpha; conditions: potential, solutions, dissonance, insight, barriers,
consolidation; variations: 7th quantum, 6th UP-Shift, 5th Break-OUT, 4th stretch-UP, 3rd Stretch-
DOWN, 2nd Expand-OUT, 1st Fine-TUNE; and what Beck and Cowan call the Universal "P-O-A"
(politeness, openness, and autocracy) which is necessary for healthy organizations. All of the states
and conditions are explained thoroughly in Spiral Dynamics and I only mention them here because I
want to show that this model is more than would be assumed by looking at the tiers just described.
[68]When SD (SDi) is integrated with other time-tested models such as the Enneagram, for example,
what we end up with is a seemingly complicated but more complete and holistic way of understanding
in this case, the individual. Wilber in particular is quite good at integrating such models.[69]Yet, of
course, he is not the only one. Some of the ﬁgures who have pioneered the creation and reﬁnement of
developmental models include the likes of Susan Cook-Greuter, Carol Gilligan, Robert Kegan,
Laurence Kohlberg, Jane Loevinger, Jean Piaget, Jenny Wade, Charles Alexander, Howard Gardner,
and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi.[70]
Spiral Dynamics stands as an extremely timely and updated model in the integral vision despite its
shortcomings concerning the coverage of transmental and transpersonal states as already mentioned.
Interestingly, Beck's model, like both Wilber's and Gebser's models, foresees a great transition on the
horizon. Spiral Dynamics' description of the second-tier and the potential for higher orders of being
past the turquoise vMEME infer the ever-reﬁning development of consciousness on this planet.
Mark B. Woodhouse: Accelerated Interdimensional Integration
A new worldview is emerging, and many are kneedeep in some very messy transition dynamics.[71]
Woodhouse is the wildcard in this theoretical equation. What I mean is that he is the one theorist
presented here who is, to my knowledge, not discussed nor mentioned by Wilber or any of the other
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
14 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
14
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

integral thinkers. If Woodhouse is acknowledged it is only in passing. Despite his acute, well
researched, and generally excellent writing, I feel that the reason for this is because he seriously
considers and is willing to discuss such fringe phenomena as UFOs, alien abduction experiences, and
channeled information claims without immediately dismissing or marginalizing them. Such
willingness, unfortunately, keeps him out-of-the-loop so to speak for without this quality it wouldn't
be hard to imaging his work being a bit more popular.[72] Woodhouse's excellent and fascinating book
Paradigm Wars: Worldviews for a New Age, is in my estimation, just as holistic and integral of an
approach as is the works of Beck, Wilber, and Gebser. Woodhouse represents a kind of litmus test for
how far integral studies is willing to go. I include his work here because he, like the above theorists,
proposes a major shift in consciousness on the horizon and also because he does so with just as much
of a critical eye and a penchant for comprehensive mapmaking despite his relatively unconventional
views.
Paradigm Wars is an example of how to critically evaluate trends, inﬂuences, ﬁelds of study, and
paradigms of the modern and the postmodern world without maligning or unnecessarily marginalizing
streams of inﬂuence considered "unveriﬁable" by traditional standards. When it comes to the nature
and style of Woodhouse's work he has this to say about it:
Paradigm Wars aims, accordingly, for what might be described as the less rigorous end of
academic scholarship and the more discerning New Age/New Paradigm readership of popular
culture. It can serve both as a textbook for college courses and as companion reading for personal
exploration. This middle ground represents a huge market that university presses and trade
publishers tend to overlook, because their sights usually are set respectively on the upper end of
intellectual respectability and the mid-to-lower end of popular culture.[73]
He keenly questions the assumptions and the challenges or our times. His core methodology is quite
similar to Wilber' s in that he seeks to take as broad of a sampling as possible and come to some basic,
root generalizations in an attempt to bridge gaps and integrate them as much as possible:
In fact, there doesn't have to be an all-purpose deﬁnition in the ﬁrst place. All we need are some
overlapping goals at a theoretical level and a sufﬁcient number of bridge movements at a social
level. The emergence of a new worldview is never a monolithic, prearranged affair in which we
all pledge mutual respect and agreement before we jump in, so to speak.[74]
The way in which Woodhouse approaches his subjects is less as someone who is trying to develop a
new system or "ism" and more as someone who seeks only to put all the cards on the table so to
speak. His is one of less organization and more revelation. Fewer answers and more questions. He
certainly has reached conclusions and has made strong proposals, but, in all, his work is more a call to
honesty and balance than it is to hard, unmovable injunctions. His discussion of the phenomena of the
New Age movement and what he calls the "New Paradigm" and the "Rising Culture," are worth their
weight because, unfortunately, few authors have yet to treat this topic with such fairness[75]:
In short, the (popular) New Age is both more restricted than the New Paradigm dialogue in the
breadth of its vision and less sophisticated in articulating that vision. But the two are sometimes
closely related under the umbrella of a Rising Culture . . . Be aware of the unique demands of
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
15 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
15
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

shifting contexts. The more one retains general labels, the more likely one is to introduce
confusion and controversy from other parts of the cultural map. It's impossible to know whether
one is for or against the New Age until one knows what the phrase means.[76]
Other topics explored by Woodhouse include the relation of systems holism with the perennial
philosophy, the mainstream establishment and alternative therapies, paranormal phenomena in
relation to veriﬁability, classical physics and the new physics, energy monism, consciousness as the
ground of reality, theories of time, traditional educational systems and new forms of education,
channeling, and claims concerning extra-terrestrial agendas and origins. In short, he is interested in a
fair discussion of fringe topics normally not given much rational consideration by other "holistic"
authors.[77]
To continue, Woodhouse's conception of holons enveloping holons is nearly identical to both Wilber
and Beck's models of development:
Each level in the Great Chain (with the exception of the lowest) contains the level below it and
(with the exception of the highest) is contained by the levels(s) above it. More structured than the
belief that everything contains everything else, interpretation is asymmetric. Higher contains
lower, suffuses and permeates lower, but not the reverse.[78]
The only difference between Woodhouse's model and Wilber's model of holonic enfoldment is that
Woodhouse believes there are ultimate ends ("with the exception of the lowest . . . with the exception
of the highest"[79]), and Wilber believes such enfoldment runs inﬁnitely into eternity: "And each of
the virtual particles in the cloud, of course, also drags along its own virtual cloud, bubbles within
bubbles [holons within holons], and so on ad inﬁnitum. . ."[80] This distinction is crucial when
discussing epistemologies and underlying assumptions. However, it is a distinction that is not crucial
to our discussion here. What is crucial is how Woodhouse's theories and ideas of the coming
transformational shift are similar and different to those of Wilber, Gebser, and Beck/Cowan/Graves.
Woodhouse sees that the pace of change in our cultural worldspace is quickening and seems to be
shifting in ever more complex and difﬁcult to adjust-to ways:
What is happening? There are plenty of sociological explanations. Here are some examples. For
one, our values may not be keeping up with the pace of technological change. Then again,
cultural relativism is rampant; any behavior is OK, so long as one claims the appropriate legal or
moral right. Or it may be observed that the media is simply giving us more information than we
can meaningfully assimilate. Then, too, people's very life-styles are being threatened by massive
trends seemingly beyond their control. Congress appears unable to come to grips with major
issues, especially those relating to the economy. We are being conditioned to blame others when
things don't go our way. Living without a sense of rootedness causes deep anxieties, thereby
causing us to invent cosmic meaning for our lives even if they have little basis in fact. And it's not
surprising that, faced with massive despair and little hope, people turn to drugs . . . However,
according to psychological and sociological perspectives, there is nothing metaphysically
signiﬁcant about this time of great change. Nothing is going on behind the scenes, so to speak . . .
There is some truth to virtually all of the above explanations. However, the question is whether
they go far enough, whether they really get to the heart of the matter. I don't think they do. I
believe that something quite metaphysically signiﬁcant is transpiring behind the scenes. Behind
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
16 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
16
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

what we can see, I think, are energetic shifts on a global scale that we cannot see. I call this
process "accelerated interdimensional integration." This is a speculative concept, but one which
provides a needed supplement to the literature of crises and change.[81]
Woodhouse goes on to outline certain key features of this accelerated process. These key attributes
reﬂect a proclivity towards an understanding of reality as energy and includes the idea that our
dimension is being infused with increasing amounts of higher and faster vibrations of energy thereby
pushing old paradigms and pathologies to the surface in an effort to "purge" whilst at the same time
making more room for a "fourth-dimensional awareness." Finally, Woodhouse believes that, within
the next ten or so years, society will increasingly split into two distinct sides represented by a bell
curve. On one side is the rising culture and the other is the dying culture. On this last idea Woodhouse
says:
This divergence of rising and decaying cultures is only a transitional picture. After a suitable
period of time, the Rising Culture will be represented by a single curve. The shift will be
relatively complete. And we shall see things and do things we never thought likely or possible,
especially in the areas of health, education, and relationships. Occupying a new perspective
within the Great Chain inevitably extends the limits of the possible.[82]
Woodhouse's ideas are unlike Wilber's, Gebser's and Beck's in that he is less concerned with problem
of proof and the rigid academic view it represents.[83]Although his conclusions are both highly
personalized and, to an extent, highly biased they are also highly objective.[84]They are based upon
careful consideration of the available alternatives and proclivities toward subjective interpretation
much in the same way that the other three are. Mark Woodhouse is as guilty as any other writer or
theorist in that he cannot escape his subjective truth. However, he, like Wilber, Gebser, and Beck,
proposes his ideas with wisdom, intelligence, meticulous research and an inspiring vision of what the
future, our future, holds.
II. Integral Studies
On the Nature of Theory and Practice
Theory is often seen dichotomously relative to practice or application. It is not past me to understand
the usefulness of this distinction, and if used with mindfulness, makes a great deal of sense. However,
I also get the impression that there is a general lack of understanding, especially in pragmatically
oriented, "back to basics" circles, about the importance and role of theory.
The pursuit to understand and develop fundamental ideas, concepts, and visions through the use of
verbal and written language is something that pervades and underlies our culture in very profound and
important ways. The theory that we know as the scientiﬁc method is a case in point. Before any
applications were made and before it was put into practice, this theory was incubated through years of
wonder, thought, careful observation, imagination, and intuition, all being the foundation of action.
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
17 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
17
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

Nothing exists in a vacuum, that is, nothing that we do or say happens out of extremely complex and
dynamical contexts that exist on multiple levels. The scientiﬁc method, although proved to work
within our experience of the world, was developed as a result of curiosity about our world and the
inherent need to make sense of it all. In Jean Gebser's terms this development is directly related to the
rational structure of consciousness. Nonetheless, another example is the theory of universal human
rights, an idea that is younger than most people living today are aware of and an idea that was born
out of decades if not centuries of conﬂict and human suffering. Today, as mostly postmodern
Westerners, we are likely to take such things for granted. Thus, through this, we can move into a
greater understanding of waves of development heretofore called holarchies.[85]Woodhouse describes
hierarchies in a similar way:
The concept of hierarchical interpenetration is foundational to the emergence of any paradigm
that claims adequacy. It represents a key philosophical and experiential insight that, when
properly interpreted, resolves a number of long-standing philosophical disputes.
Quite often, I believe, carefully constructed and stable theories are at the heart of nearly every single
major course of deliberate action that the modern and postmodern world has seen.[86]That is not to
say that these theories weren't themselves grounded or born out of pure inspiration or transpersonal
states of awareness, i.e., born out of non-rational, non-logical means. Many great insights have come
from realms beyond what we call the rational or the mental. Indeed, that is at the core of what the
term "insight" means.[87] However, in this world, such inspiration, in its raw form, is simply not
enough to change the world in increasingly effective ways (and it is changing the world, hopefully for
the better, that we are talking about when we wish to emphasize the importance of applications). In
terms of action in the world, just because an individual has a powerfully transpersonal experience of
oneness with the cosmos doesn't imply that they will know how to raise a child, balance their
checkbook, or carry on a decent conversation.
If we were to observe every act taken that has produced quantiﬁable results whether it be the
construction of modern cities, the development of the internet, or the construction of the light bulb in
your lamp we would see behind it a well-ﬂeshed, well-thought, and solid theory. This theory would in
turn have been seeded by inspiration.[88] Sometimes such theory is the result of an individual's efforts
and sometimes it is the result of a collective effort (keeping in mind that such boundaries are
extremely tenuous).
However, another possible way of looking at the issue is to say that theory is a form of action. If
looked at this way, we would inevitably by-pass the whole dualism of theory vs. practice and thus
move towards a more ﬂuid understanding, a holonic understanding. When I tell someone that I am
researching and writing theory they almost automatically think of the seemingly opposite, practice. As
I stated before, I agree that this is a useful distinction. However, I do not think that it is a necessary
one. In a sense, we are always "doing something" unless we are "doing nothing" in which case has
nothing to do with theory or practice in the ﬁrst place.[89]
If one downplays the importance of theory, then one downplays the whole history of conscious human
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
18 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
18
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

understanding (at least the history of the modern world). It is a practice that is integral to the ways in
which we know our world.[90] I do not wish to overemphasize its importance because it is only one
fraction of the whole story. Nonetheless, the endeavor of theory as a practice, as a discipline, as a
profession, is a fundamental and increasingly sophisticated practice of self-reﬂection in both the
individual and the collective sense.
In the context of integral studies, theory is only one aspect of the whole story. The intellectual
capacity is really, in important ways, a means to an end. The whole endeavor must be put into the
right context in order to be of any ultimate use to the ﬁeld. Here is where it is at odds with most other
disciplines. Not only does it seek to correct, integrate, and expand upon the existing understanding of
our world in an intellectual, vision-logic sense but it also seeks to put the needed emphasis upon direct
revelation of said truths, especially where it concerns transpersonal and transmental understanding.
According to the great wisdom traditions and to transpersonal theory there will always be a limit to
how far logic and reason alone will take an individual. Aside from correcting that type of
understanding through experiment, data accumulation, and consensual justiﬁcation, the individual
must be willing to take up what Michael Murphy and his colleagues call "integral transformative
practice."[91]Again, Wilber writes:
The fact that the physiological (or "material") and the cognitive (or "mental") are two of the most
fundamental lines in the human being ("matter" and "consciousness," Right and Left) means that
a truly integral spiritual practice would, at the very least, put an equal emphasis on both body and
mind at each and every stage of general evolution, gross bodymind to subtle bodymind to causal
bodymind.[92]
It is this transformative practice that grounds all of the theories and ideas. It not only builds upon the
theories but precedes the theories in many ways that cannot be understood intellectually. Theory can
point in the right direction and provides a structure by which to guide. Transformative practice such as
meditation, yoga, or even entheogens,[93] so the idea goes, are the substance of such theories,
especially theories such as those presented here. One begets the other in a cyclical process. There is an
inner science and there is an outer science. Ultimately they are one and the same.
The Validity of Integral Knowing and the Problem of Proof
The question of how we can know something and what it is that we can know is fundamental to any
valid quest for understanding. Questioning our underlying assumptions is difﬁcult for most people but
it is indispensable. That is, if we are to make the fundamental assertion that there is any understanding
to be had in the ﬁrst place.
In The Eye of Spirit Wilber discusses this thorny issue in great detail. He helps to reveal in what ways
integral studies is similar to and different from other disciplines dedicated to solid injunction and not
merely speculation. According to him there are three characteristics that all valid knowledge quests
must follow:
1. Instrumental injunction. This is generally of the form, "If you want to know this, do this."
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
19 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
19
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

2. Intuitive apprehension. This is an immediate experience of the domain disclosed by the
injunction; that is, a direct experience or data-apprehension. (Even if the data is mediated, at
the moment of experience it is immediately apprehended). In other words, this is the direct
apprehension of the data brought forth by the particular injunction, whether that data be
sensory experience, mental experience, or spiritual experience.
3. Communal conﬁrmation (or rejection). This is a checking of the results--the data, the
evidence--with others who have adequately completed the injunctive and apprehensive
strands.[94]
Starting from these three premises we can then move into a more accurate way of describing and
experiencing things. Wilber again: Thus, the epistemological claims of integral studies are, like any
other valid knowledge claims, thoroughly grounded in experiment, data accumulation, and consensual
justiﬁcation."[95]
For Woodhouse, all claims are only a matter of degree, there is no way to know a given claim
conclusively: "For virtually no claim ever gets conclusively proven. The evidence for our beliefs
simply ranges from very strong to very weak."[96]Similar to Wilber's three criteria Woodhouse also
has a list of performances to make except that he applies them speciﬁcally to claims of the paranormal
variety:
A recurring, identiﬁable phenomenon; overall reliability of reports; veridicality of relevant
experiences; conﬁrmability; coherence of phenomena within a larger paradigm; inability of
competing paradigms to reasonably explain the phenomena; applicability of the explanation to
other related phenomena; falsiﬁability; capacity to generate further test implications; capacity to
make a positive difference in promoting shared views and goals.
He goes on to qualify the criteria:
These are the main criteria by which we would attempt to answer the question "What is real?" in
normal science and, appropriately modiﬁed, the criteria by which we can approach the same
question in the parasciences. The difference between how they are used in mainstream science
and how they are used in parapsychology, transpersonal psychology, and spiritual practices
depends on how narrowly or broadly we interpret experience. I have adopted the broad
interpretation to show how the same criteria can be applied across domains.[97]
Integral Studies seeks to apply these premises and types of criteria across all domains and ﬁelds.
In Conclusion
The integral vision, in theory, draws upon such a vast ocean of knowledge and experience that any
attempt at covering all of its avenues is bound to be, in some area, parsimonious and incomplete. To
integrate and organize as much relevant information as possible is a feat that can be nothing more than
a perpetual work-in-progress. In reality, all human inquiry and understanding is a work in progress yet
much of our history is characterized by deﬁnitive proclamations that leave no or little room for
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
20 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
20
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

improvement. This is the story that underlies the search for a general theory of everything, not just the
physical world.
Nonetheless, as far as my purposes here are concerned, it is my opinion that methods and applications
based on the visionary theories proposed by the likes of Wilber, Gebser, and Graves/Beck/Cowan
have not been adequately formed and the ones that have been formed have yet to be sufﬁciently tested
empirically.
Again, where applications have been formed or proposed there is a general lack of reﬁnement that can
only come from further research and a greater pooling of individuals and organizations working in
this area. The impulse to create comprehensive maps of life, the universe, and everything from this
new way of being in the world is, essentially, what the ﬁeld is about.
At the time of this writing integral studies is still very much in a gestational phase. Only a relatively
small percentage of the world and more speciﬁcally the American population is involved in, interested
in, or actively living from this type of inquiry and awareness. There simply hasn't been enough time
for these ideas to be tested in the culture at large over the periods of time needed for much of the
empirical research that would help to solidify the ﬁeld. Of course, much of the ﬁeld is based upon
empirical research that has been done under different guises such as developmental theory,
evolutionary theory, systems theory, complexity science, and transpersonal studies. So, in this sense it
could be argued that any new ﬁeld, at least in the beginning, is a matter of linguistic relativity.
To be clear, I am stating that basic proposals have been made into the idea of what, for example, an
integral pedagogy would look like. Both Wilber and Beck have made a great deal of trailblazing in
this regard. However, there has not been much widespread action taken to test their methodologies
and hypotheses, that is, on a larger scale. The possible exception is the great deal of work that Beck
and Cowan have made into applying Spiral Dynamics, to a turbulent South Africa; a test that is well
documented in Beck's book The Crucible.[98]They have, in a number of important ways, arduously
tried to apply their ideas in the real world.
My point here is that such applicable efforts have not only been widely unknown to most people but
have also been carried out in limited or limiting contexts. Of course, in my opinion, this is more a
matter of getting enough people to do the basic research required to test the theories. Nonetheless,
what research has been done should not be overlooked. Arguably, a good place to see the beginning of
this application of theory and the ﬁrst strong steps toward a greater dissemination is the newly formed
Integral Institute[99], whose founding members include nearly every major professional who has been
instrumental with the establishment of the overall integral ambition.
No less important in the context provided here are questions concerning why applications must be
developed in the ﬁrst place, how the pedagogy would be different, and what is the ultimate goal or
purpose. This is a question of motive and must be included in the general impulse to create better
maps by which to live by. It should go without saying that the answers to these questions, however
relative, can either be simple summaries or complex explanations. Hopefully, both approaches can be
used without losing sight of the vision, the original creative impulse driving our desire to know.
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
21 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
21
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

The four models introduced here and brieﬂy outlined are among the ﬁrst wave of models based upon
this more organized vision. I t is certainly a matter of speculation when considering where these
models will be in the future since more reﬁned and sophisticated models are still in the making. One
thing is certain: the integral vision has not fallen on deaf ears. There are already a growing number of
individuals who are working hard to develop and expand the proposals and injunctions given here.
With such strong and inspiring minds as the likes of Ken Wilber, Jean Gebser, Don Beck, Mark
Woodhouse, and the whole array of individuals and organizations dedicated to this effort, the vision
stands as the vanguard of a truly new wave of human evolution.
References
Beck, D. and C. Cowan. 1996. Spiral Dynamics: Mastering Values, Leadership, and Change:
Exploring the New Science of Memetics.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
--2001. SDi: Spiral Dynamics in the Integral Age. http://members.ams.chello.nl/f.visser3/wilber
/sd-i.html (The World of Ken Wilber Website by Frank Visser). --1999. The Search for
Cohesion in the Age of Fragmentation: From the New World Order to the Next Global Mesh.
http://www.spiraldynamics.net/DrDonBeck/essays/search_for_cohesion.htm
Feuerstein, G. 1987. Structures of Consciousness: The Genius of Jean Gebser: An Introduction and
Critique.
Lower Lake, CA: Integral Publishing. --1998. Gebser's Archaic Consciousness and Wilber's
Critique. http://www.yrec.info/contentid-130.html
 
Gebser, J. 1989. The Ever-Present Origin. Athens,Ohio: Ohio University Press.
 
Laszlo, E. 1996. The Systems View of the World: A Holistic Vision for Our Time. Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton Press.
 
Luftmensch. 2002. The Integral and the Spiritual in Ken Wilber and Jean Gebser.
http://www.godconsciousness.com
Mahood, E., Jr. 1996. The Primordial Leap and the Present: The Ever-Present Origin--An Overview
of the Work of Jean Gebser. http://www.gaiamind.org/Gebser.html (Gaiamind).
Mickunas, A. 1997. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Jean Gebser.
Originally published in Integrative Investigations, January 1997, Volume 4, #1.
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
22 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
22
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

Neville, B. 2002. The Body of the Five-Minded Animal. A Chapter in S. Gunn & A. Begg. Mind, Body
and Society: Emerging Understandings in Knowing and Learning. Department of Mathematics &
Statistics, University of Melbourne. 2001
Wilber, K. 2001. The Eye of Spirit: An Integral Vision for a World Gone Slightly Mad
(Third Edition: Expanded). Shambhala.
-Sex, Ecology, Spirituality: The Spirit of Evolution (Second Edition: Revised). Boston:
Shambhala.
-Integral Psychology: Consciousness, Spirit, Psychology, Therapy. Boston: Shambhala.
 
Woodhouse, M. B. 1996. Paradigm Wars: Worldviews for a New Age. Berkeley, CA: Frog, Ltd.
[1] "I have chosen the word integral to represent this overall approach because integral means integrative,
inclusive, comprehensive, balanced." (Wilber, The Eye of Spirit, xx).
[2] "The mental-rational consciousness, which operates on the basis of a spatialization of reality, is intrinsically
perspectival. It has the ego as the point of origin of its conceptualization of the world. The arational-integral
consciousness, however, is ego-free (not merely egoless) and hence also aperspectival, that is to say, not
transfixed in partial viewpoints." (Structures of Consciousness, p. 212)
[3] Integral-aperspectival is similar to Wilber's vision-logic. It is a special way of seeing, a sort of cognition:
"As rationality continues its quest for a truly universal or global or planetary outlook, noncoercive in nature, it
eventually gives way to a type of cognition I call vision-logic or network-logic. Where rationality gives all
possible perspectives, vision-logic adds them up into a totality, which is simply the new and higher interior
holon. Aurobindo gave the classic description of vision-logic, which can freely express itself in single ideas,
but its most characteristic movement is a mass ideation, a system or totality of truth-seeing at a single view; the
r elations of idea with ideas, or truth with truth, self-seen in the integral whole." (Sex, Ecology, Spirituality, p.
190)
[4] "(C)lear cut boundaries are rare." (Woodhouse, Paradigm Wars, p. 8) and "There is no single correct
interpretation because no holon has only one context. There are as many legitimate meanings as there are
legitimate contexts, which does not lead to nihilism but cornucopia." (Wilber, The Eye of Spirit, p. 122)
[5] The Eye of Spirit, pp. 31-32.
[6] The Great Chain of Being is also called the "Great Nest of Being" and can be understood as the "view that
reality is composed of various levels of existence--levels of being and knowing--ranging from matter to
conception of wholes within wholes within wholes indefinitely, reaching from dirt to Divinity . . . The Great
Nest of Being is the backbone of the perennial philosophy, and it would therefore be a crucial ingredient of any
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
23 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
23
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

truly integral psychology." (Wilber, Integral Psychology, pp. 5-6) It might also be helpful to keep in mind that
the perennial philosophy is a reoccurring theme in the field and especially in its predecessor, Transpersonal
Psychology.
[7] EOS, p. 53.
[8] "(T)he great wisdom traditions even at their best still neglected several crucial items, items that the early
investigators of the spectrum of consciousness could not, or at any rate did not, know." (EOS, p. 30)
[9] In fact, Spiral Dynamics (now known as Spiral Dynamics Integral) has essentially become a core model of
the integral movement.
[10] "The origin and the arational-integral consciousness (which renders the origin transparent to the wakeful
consciousness) can be said to be atemporal, or achronic, because they are not defined by experience or
conceptualized time, just as they transcend experienced or conceptualized space." (Structures of Consciousness,
p. 213) In other words, "time transcending."
[11] See the description of the Beck's vMEMEs later in the paper.
[12] The Eye of Spirit, p. 243.
[13] That's Kosmos with a "K." This term is specific to Wilber and seems to be borrowed directly from Plato.
Wilber uses it to denote a more complete version of the universe: "The Kosmos contains the cosmos (or the
physiosphere), the bios (or biosphere), nous (the noosphere), and theos (the theosphere or divine domain)--
none of them being foundational (even spirit shades into Emptiness)." (Sex, Ecology, Spirituality, p. 45)
[14]EOS, p. 67.
[15] Wilber describes his work as having four phases. Phase 1 is the Romantic Wilber, II is the
Aurobindo/Wilber model, phase III is when he began a more fleshed-out account of the contributions of
Western culture, and IV is where he combines all these phases and adds a more mature context set firmly
within the four quadrants and their historical unfolding.  (The Eye of Spirit, p. 309) Phase four is what I am
referring to in this essay.
[16] I mention only the more technical books he has written. He is also popular for a handful of more reflective
and poetic writings.
[17] "Put differently, I sought a world philosophy. I sought an integral philosophy, one that would believably
weave together the many pluralistic contexts of science, morals, aesthetics, Eastern as well as Western
philosophy, and the world's great wisdom traditions. Not on the level of details--that is finitely impossible; but
on the level of orienting generalizations: a way to suggest that the world really is one, undivided, whole, and
related to itself in every way: a holistic philosophy for a holistic Kosmos: a world philosophy, an integral
philosophy." (SES, xii)
[18] He wrote this at the age of twenty-three after dropping out of graduate school studying for a degree in
molecular biology.
[19] Most notably Vedanta, Zen, and Tibetan Buddhism.
[20] The Eye of Spirit, p. xiii.
[21] "So we have four major perspectives (the inside and the outside of the singular and the plural): I, it, we,
its.
[22] Sex, Ecology, Spirituality, pp. 210-212.
[23] Gebser has been largely unheard of by the mainstream academic community until recently. According to
Georg Feuerstein in his introduction and critique of Gebser, Structures of Consciousness,the reason for this
apparent lack of recognition since his death (despite a fair degree of notoriety during his lifetime, especially
after the publication of The Ever-Present Origin) is due largely to the prevailing attitudes during and after the
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
24 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
24
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

war years: "While Europe was still caught in the melancholy mood of the war years, Gebser's constructive
challenge held no fascination. In the frivolous boom years of economic reconstruction after World War II, his
work seemed too 'perennial' to be attractive to the frenetic, progress-oriented mind. And Gebser steadfastly
refused to sensationalize, propagandize, or, as did Sartre, climb on the barricades to get a hearing. In the
feverish counter-culture of the 1060s and the 1970s, the sobering demand for personal initiative and integrity
implicit in his work could not possibly have had appeal. Now, as we inexorably move toward the close of this
millennium, we are once again getting in touch with our disillusionment, jadedness, and "sense of vacancy." (p.
32, originally taken from the foreword by Gordon Rattray Taylor in Rethink, 1949 and 1950)
[24] Here I am using the only English translation available thanks to Noel Barstad and Algis Mickunas of Ohio
University.
[25] Alternately called "Poznan."
[26] Structures of Consciousness, p. 21
[27] Originally motivated by the work of Rainer Maria Rilke, he moved here and worked with Federico Garcia
Lorca among other notable Spaniards (SOC, p. 25) Gebser was also a member of Carl Jung's institute for a
number of years. (SOC)
[28] Ibid, p. 26.
[29] Ibid, p. 29.
[30] Wilber takes this upon himself to do.
[31] That is, a person is limited by her or his cultural upbringing (it is relative).
[32] Wilber's correlative terms are sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete-operational (con-op), formal
operational, and vision-logic or the "centauric." (SES)
[33] The Primordial Leap and the Present: The Ever-Present Origin--An Overview of the Work of Jean Gebser
by Ed Mahood, Jr. (Downloaded from www.gaiamind.org/Gebser)
[34] Ibid.
[35] As it is practiced by people where it is considered indigenous, i.e., not necessarily from an revisionist
perspective or by someone in a modern country revivifying a certain school such as neo or techno shamanism.
[36] Ibid.
[37] Ibid.
[38] The Primordial Leap and the Present.
[39] Sex, Ecology, Spirituality, p. 193.
[40] Gebser's terms are coined by him. They are arguably esoteric to the average reader yet to him there simply
did not exist the words to adequately describe what he meant. "The former deals with what is concealed; as
Gebser describes it, latency is the demonstrable presence of the future. In this manner the seeds of all
subsequent phases of evolution are contained in the current one. It is on the basis of this aspect that integration
takes place. The second term, transparency, deals with what is revealed. According to Gebser, transparency
(diaphaneity) is the form of manifestation (epiphany) of the spiritual. This is perhaps the most important
statement he makes. The origin, the source from which all springs, is a spiritual one, and all phases of
consciousness evolution are a testimony to the ever less latent and ever more transparent spirituality that is
inherent in all that is. Without a recognition of this fundamental and pivotal idea, Gebser cannot be understood
and we will not be able to understand ourselves. It is not just an intellectual development that is being
described in his theory, rather it is the ever more apparent manifestation of the spiritual that underlies and
supports the concept of evolution itself." (The Primordial Leap and the Present: The Ever-Present Origin--An
Overview of the Work of Jean Gebser)
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
25 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
25
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

[41] See Wilber's books, predominantly Sex, Ecology, Spirituality for an exhaustively detailed discussion on
the nature of postmodernism in relation to the emergent consciousness.
[42] The Ever-Present Origin, pp. 361-362.
[43] The subject of the usefulness or necessity of using esoteric language is beyond the scope of the essay here.
It is my belief that Gebser, perhaps could have used more graspable language. Yet, I do also get the impression
that this was less important to him as it was to get the meaning just right. In a sense, he wasn't writing for the
public but to deepen and flesh-out his understanding. Of course, keeping firmly in mind the context in which he
lived.
[44] Ibid, p. 312, n. 4.
[45] The Ever-Present Origin, p. 309.
[46] Ibid., p. 310.
[47] Ibid., p. 292.
[48] Structures of Consciousness, pp. 194-195.
[49] The Primordial Leap and the Present.
[50] Clare Graves formerly taught psychology at the Union College in Schenectady, New York before his death
in 1986.
[51] The Search for Cohesion in the Age of Fragmentation: From the New World Order to the Next Global
Mesh by Don Beck, Ph.D. Taken from www.integralage.org/docs/DonBeck1. Note: integralage.org does not
exist anymore.
[52] One of the functions of adding Wilber's model is due to the fact that Spiral Dynamics did not include the
"higher" stages or levels of development such as the transpersonal and the transmental: "As is usually the case
with Western researchers, he recognized no higher (transpersonal) levels, but the contributions he (Graves)
made to the prepersonal and personal realms were profound." (Integral Psychology, p. 40) SDi still lacks a
complete account of transpersonal states of consciousness though this is being remedied.
[53] Ibid.
[54] "(T)o date, it has been tested in over fifty thousand people from around the world, and there have been no
major exceptions found to his scheme . . . Far from being armchair analysts, Beck and Cowan participated in
the discussions that led to the end of apartheid in South Africa . . . The principles of Spiral Dynamics have been
fruitfully used to reorganize businesses, revitalize townships, overhaul educational systems, and defuse inner-
city tensions. Beck and Cowan have had this extraordinary success because, in a world lost in pluralistic
relativism, they have brought the clarity--and the reality--of dynamic developmentalism." (Integral Psychology,
p. 41)
[55] Summary Statement: The Emergent, Cyclical, Double-Helix Model of the Adult Human Biopsychosocial
Systems, Clare Graves, Boston, May 20, 1981.
[56] The Arlington Institute in Arlington, Virginia, is where the Vital Sign's Monitor is currently being
developed: "The intent of the Vital Signs Monitor, displayed within the Institute's Fusion Center, is to track
vMEMETIC flows and Stages of Change within the American society . . . The Arlington Institute is currently
using national polling firms to detect our "EKG"-like social pulses" (Don Beck, The Search for Cohesion in the
Age of Fragmentation).
[57] Four quadrant/eight level. Synonymous with AQAL.
[58] The Search for Cohesion in the Age of Fragmentation.
[59] The term was first coined by the evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins with his publication of
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
26 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
26
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

The Selfish Gene in 1976.
[60] There are currently several excellent books covering the topic of memes. The ones I have found the most
useful are The Meme Machine by Susan Blackmore (1999); The Selfish Gene by Richard Dawkins (1976); The
Evolving Self: A Psychology for the Third Millennium by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi; and Global Brain: The
Evolution of Mass Mind from the Big Bang to the 21st Century by Howard Bloom (2000).
[61] Integral Psychology, p. 47.
[62] The Green meme, both healthy and pathological versions, have been given an exhaustive amount of
attention by Wilber. Since much of his work is written for academically minded people, and since most
academics express the green meme rather strongly, this makes a great deal of sense.
[63] Paraphrased from Integral Psychology, pp. 48-52.
[64] "The health of the entire spiral is the prime directive, not preferential treatment for any one level" (Ibid. p.
232, n. 22).
[65] Ibid. p. 52.
[66] The term "noosphere," or, the world of the mind, has its roots in ancient Greek philosophy but was given
new life by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin and Sir Karl Popper. Teilhard de Chardin understood the noosphere as
the third world, the first being the lithosphere (physiosphere), and the second being the biosphere.
[67] Ibid. p. 52.
[68] The prolific use of acronyms displayed here is generally considered to be confusing and unnecessarily
complicated which has much to do with why it is rarely mentioned in the Integral literature.
[69] Integral Psychology still remains one of the best places to see this ability in action.
[70] This is but a small sampling.
[71] Paradigm Wars, xiii.
[72] Relatively speaking, many of the integrally informed are still among the minority and in many ways trying
to establish credibility. It stands to reason that the lack of credibility leveled against metaphysics and New Age
literature by the mainstream has much to do with this.
[73] Paradigm Wars, xvi.
[74] Paradigm Wars, p. 53.
[75] And even fewer have attempted to see it in the context of integral or transpersonal study.
[76] Ibid. p. 53.
[77] Wilber discusses the New Age/New Paradigm but does not distinguish the two as does Woodhouse.
Furthermore, like Woodhouse, he criticizes the various New Age movements in much the same manner, i.e., as
being shallow, incomplete, retro-romantic, and magical narcissistic. However, Wilber goes no further than this
and fails to discuss other phenomena such as UFOs and channeling within a more discriminating light in the
way, I believe, Woodhouse does. Woodhouse's discussion is a continuation of where Wilber leaves off when it
comes to New Age faddism and its related phenomena. Conversely, Wilber would, conceivably, put
Woodhouse in the proverbial doghouse with the rest of the retro-romantics and New Age trippers.
[78] Paradigm Wars, p. 238.
[79] Ibid.
[80] Sex, Ecology, Spirituality, p. 43.
[81] Paradigm Wars, p. 278-279.
[82] Ibid. p. 281.
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
27 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
27
: Integral Theory and Mapmaking
Published by Digital Commons @ CIIS, 2018

[83] The literature of "crisis and change" can just as easily refer to the various books about pole shifts, earth
changes, 2012, and the photon belt as it can refer to more "respectable" works exemplified by Wilber, Stan
Grof, and others.
[84] At first sight this might seem to be a contradiction in terms yet I maintain that these qualities do co-exist.
Some would call this depth.
[85] "Thus holarchy, as I use the term, includes a balance of both hierarchy (qualitatively ranked levels) and
heterarchy (mutually linked dimensions). Theorists who attempt to use only one or the other of those types of
relations have consistently failed to explain development at all." (Integral Psychology, p. 32) The terms
"holarchy" and "holons" were originally taken from the influencial book The Ghost in the Machine by Arthur
Koestler.
[86] If they weren't necessarily premeditated then they most definitely were rationalized and even justified after
the fact.
[87] At this level, such distinctions become blurred to the point where the discussion could easily be propelled
into philosophical hermeneutics.
[88] The nature and origins of inspiration are, of course, arguable.
[89] Thus, we enter the realm of the semantic paradox.
[90] "Ours is a complex world.  But human knowledge is finite and circumscribed.  'Nature does not come as
clean as you can think it,' warned Alfred North Whitehead, and went on to propound an extremely clean and
elegant cosmology.  Since theories, like window panes, are clear only when they are clean, and the world does
not come as cleanly as all that, we must know where we perform a clean-up operation.  Scientific theories,
while simpler than reality, must nevertheless reflect its essential structure."  (Ervin Laszlo in The Systems View
of the World, p. 9)
[91] Michael Murphy is a pioneer in this area and an individual at the forefront of the Integral/transformative
movement.  See his book The Future of the Body for a more detailed understanding of ITP:  "And the overall
conclusion of the book is unmistakable:  integral practice is now the most viable mode of human
transformation." (The Eye of Spirit, p. 234).  In terms of an introduction to integral theory Michael Murphy
would be immediately included for his ITP alone but since this introduction is but a brief glimpse he has been
intentionally left out.
[92] The Eye of Spirit, p. 231.
[93] Entheogens are god-manifesting substances. The use of powerful psychoactives in a sacred manner.
[94] EOS, p. 77.
[95] Ibid. p. 17.
[96] Paradigm Wars, p. 106.
[97] Ibid. pp. 111-112.
[98] John Petersen at the Arlington Institute and a few other organizations are just beginning this daunting task.
[99] The Integral Institute was founded by Ken Wilber and is based out of Boulder, Colorado.
A General Introduction to Integral Theory and Comprehensive...
http://cejournal.org/GRD/Mapmaking.htm
28 of 28
5/29/18, 10:03 PM
28
Journal of Conscious Evolution, Vol. 1 [2018], Iss. 1, Art. 1
https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejournal/vol1/iss1/1

