
Into Modern Science: The Legacy
of Greek Mathematics
Plan of the Chapter
This chapter moves into a much faster clip. We still look at
individual authors, but we take each brieﬂy and consider the authors as
tokens for entire civilizations (I also reduce, even further, my use of
footnotes: other than direct quotations, I refer in general to the
Suggestions for Further Reading). More than this: the chapter is decid-
edly not “the history of mathematics after the Greeks.” Its subject matter
is much narrower: the way in which Mediterranean civilizations, from
the Middle Ages onward, responded to the legacy of ancient Greek
mathematics. Speciﬁcally, our subject matter is the reception of Greek
mathematics in three cultures, which we survey in sequence, one section
each. “Byzantium and the Making of ‘Greek Mathematics’” looks at the
Greek-language tradition of mathematics in the Middle Ages, mostly in
the city of Constantinople. Its main theme is manuscript transmission,
and so, ﬁnally, we get a closer look at some of the primary sources
informing the book so far. The following two sections engage with more
original developments. “The World Made from Baghdad” concerns the
Arab-language tradition of mathematics in the Middle Ages (and glances
at its satellites in other languages – which encompass medieval Latin).
We mention some essential new contributions – such as the rise of
algebra – as we note the continuity of Arab and Greek mathematics.
The same is true, to some extent, even of the last major episode – “The
Renaissance to End all Renaissances” – the ﬁnal section, dedicated to the
return of Greek mathematics in early modern Europe. The makers of
what is now known as the scientiﬁc revolution saw themselves not as
revolutionaries but as restorers, and it is impossible to understand their
project
apart
from
the
history,
surveyed
in
this
book,
of
Greek mathematics.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”
The plague was just the beginning. A century later, almost instantaneously,
Arab conquerors rolled over both big empires, Byzantium and Sassanid
Persia. Byzantium’s holdings in Africa and the Near East were now gone.
Constantinople always subsisted on the grain shipped from Egypt, and
without it, the empire no longer had the resources with which to support
much of a capital, let alone a centralized state. Authority was delegated to
small ﬁefdoms nearer the borders. Cities became smaller, almost rural –
even within the walls of Constantinople itself. (Its population shrank in
size, perhaps from hundreds of thousands to mere tens of thousands: a
postapocalyptic landscape.) Ancient states had a much weaker footprint
than their modern counterparts possess, and the historical maps – display-
ing contiguous landmasses as “the Roman Empire” – are misleading. It was
always more of a Swiss cheese: the state controlled, in a limited sense, only
parts of its land, the cities, the roads. But now it was more holes, less
cheese, and it did matter that the borders were so much nearer. From now
on, a major defeat on the battleﬁeld meant that the enemies could easily
reach the city walls – a terror that would revisit the city of Constantinople
every few decades. The state: under siege. Little wonder that ambitions,
cultural or otherwise, were diminished. The remarkable fact is the very
survival of a Byzantine state, in a large part subsisting on the inertia of the
past: the physical capital of the walls, the symbolic capital of the emperor
and the church.
These were not happy times, and the history of Byzantium’s early
centuries is of continuous conﬂict, made even more vicious – and ideo-
logical – in the eighth century. This spasm of internal conﬂict was marked
by iconoclasm, the prohibition of the veneration of religious images and
their active destruction. We have no direct record of the motivations of the
iconoclasts (history was written, ultimately, by their enemies), but it seems
likely that iconoclasm was an attack on the echoes of pagan culture, still
embedded within elite behavior. We have seen the pagans gradually giving
up their Neoplatonism, perhaps clinging – some of them – to mathemat-
ics, the last relic of a lost culture. Perhaps we should see iconoclasm as a
ﬁnal radical wave of de-paganization. At any rate, it was a kind of cultural
revolution, pitting the emperors – together with much of the populace –
against the cultured elite. In the end, by the early ninth century, the
cultural revolution passed, Byzantine Christianity was stabilized, and the
images were allowed again. Elites usually win. But the elite was chastened,
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and there is little wonder that not much culture was produced throughout
the seventh and especially the eighth centuries.
Who could produce it? The state, indeed, had long retreated from the
patronage of culture. The old traditions of learning – the mark of high
status – did not disappear, but their site was transformed. By the sixth
century, Christian education displaced the pagan one: the key was biblical
study. This education did produce an institutional setting: not just the
church but, speciﬁcally, a certain type of monasticism. Not all intellectuals,
of course, were monks, but monasteries were especially important for
keeping alive the practice of book-making. Books, now, required scriptoria
because the parchment codex calls for a considerable division of labor. The
parchment needs to be procured (often produced on location from slaugh-
tered animals). The leaves are arranged into gatherings and then, often,
divided between the scribes, each assigned diﬀerent portions of the text.
The leaves are also ruled in advance, in preparation for inserting the text.
Specialist scribes might work on the rubrics (titles and other marks added
in a contrasting color such as red); others still come in, on occasion, to
insert more lavish art; the production of covers is a separate skill yet. These
are often big books, folio-size, thick, with hundreds of leaves. Big and
elaborate, a codex is best conceived as a small library unto itself, often
containing multiple works as well as commentary: the attitude of book
learning, folded into a single artifact.
In the ninth century, things were on the up again: monks went back to
their scriptoria. As more books were made, new practices were introduced.
The monumentality of the book was further enhanced by a new kind of
script: minuscule. Up until then, Greek writing was usually produced in
“majuscule,” similar to our own “uppercase” Greek. In the ninth century,
Greeks started writing in “lowercase.” It now became possible to cram even
more works into the same size of codex. Soon enough – like the papyrus
roll preceding it – majuscule became obsolete. To survive, books had to be
in minuscule. Uppercase books are now extremely rare, not only because
they are so old but also because, even to their owners, they appeared
obsolete: one wanted to read in minuscule. But this would be the last
destructive disruption. Even the coming of paper into the Christian world,
from the thirteenth century onward, simply expanded the availability of
materials but did not make old parchment books obsolete; the coming of
print, in the ﬁfteenth century, made the old codices, if anything, more
valuable, glowing now with the aura of a unique artifact. After the hiatus of
the seventh and eighth centuries, books would be made again – and from
now on, they would be kept. A book made in Byzantium in the ninth

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

century certainly would not be guaranteed survival (in particular, it needed
to be lucky with worms and ﬁres – as testiﬁed by the browned edges and
tunneled interiors of many surviving old books). But it had a sporting
chance. Perhaps to percent of all the books made in Byzantium in the
ninth century can still be found and read in modern libraries. It is thanks
to the monks of Byzantium that we can access Greek antiquity, and now –
at long last – we can look at the thing itself, unmediated: here, in its
physical presence, is Greek mathematics.
And so, we may begin at Oxford, with Ms. D’Orville . Now
we can see what a minuscule codex can do: it assembles the entirety of
Euclid’s Elements in a single volume; tucked in for good measure are also
the so-called “Book ” (Hypsicles; see p. ) and the so-called “Book
” by someone in the milieu of Isidore of Miletus (p. ). The
manuscript is from , which we know because this is the ﬁrst artifact
in our entire journey to be dated by its scribe. The scribe should well have
inserted a colophon, identifying himself by name and date – he had reason
to be proud! This is probably the most beautiful specimen of
Euclid anywhere.
Although there is in this case only a single scribe – one “Stephen the
Cleric” – the manuscript remains composite, containing several layers of
scholia, many of which were introduced by the ﬁrst reader, the one who
commissioned the book. We can identify that reader, as well. This is
Arethas – later made bishop of Caesarea – the most learned Greek of
his generation.
Arethas studied with Photius, patriarch of Constantinople throughout
much of the second half of the ninth century. Photius himself is a striking
ﬁgure. He was a strong iconophile or “lover of images”; books, he loved
even more. He is now famous chieﬂy for his massive compilation the
Bibliotheke, consisting of surveys of books he had read and found
especially noteworthy. Some are with Christian contents; many others
represent the entire range of pagan literature (we notice: the Byzantine
elite would always go back to mark itself by its ability to read its pagan
past). Several dozens of those authors are now not even extant. (The
Bibliotheke, in such cases, is our best witness to an otherwise-lost book, a
true treasure trove.) Photius read all the classical Greek orators; he read
Greek novels; he read many histories. The goal of wide learning, for its
own sake, is evident. We witness an explicit project of renaissance.
With Arethas, we see this renaissance reaching even wider. Several
commissions are known besides the Euclid volume. We know about works
of grammar and of rhetoric. (Books from the entire Photius range, then: all
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

copied and preserved thanks to Arethas.) Crucially, he also commissioned
copies of Plato and Aristotle. He wrote his own commentary to Revelation,
so, a biblical scholar. But he also wrote commentaries to Aristotle’s
Categories and to Porphyry’s Isagoge. In the relay race of Greek commen-
tary culture, the baton was surely dropped to the ground sometime late in
the sixth century. But as we noted, ancient commentaries are, above all, a
literary representation of how idealized teaching should look. One can use
them not just to learn but also so as to learn how to learn – or more
precisely, to learn how to write new commentaries. The generation of
Arethas dusted oﬀthe old books, with their commentaries – lifted the
discarded baton from the ground – and started running again.
The scholia introduced by Arethas’s hand into his manuscript of Euclid
were certainly not his own original invention. We ﬁnd similar notes,
independently, in other manuscripts of Euclid, and the entire medley
must have been put together in a manuscript that Arethas consulted for
his own scholia. Many of these notes – but not all of them – derive from
Proclus’s commentary. Thus, both the source text (ﬁfteen books of the
Elements) and the commentary are compilations, probably of the sixth
century, now put together, in the ninth century, in a single synthesis.
The milieu in which those books were made was conscious of its
scholarly project. We may consider another manuscript, this time found
in the Vatican – codex Vat. Gr. . Unlike the one found in Oxford, this
manuscript does not carry a colophon with names or dates (although the
handwriting suggests, perhaps, the ﬁrst half of the ninth century: the kind
of manuscripts Photius would have studied). As a compilation, this is even
more ambitious than the one commissioned by Arethas: following the
thirteen books of Euclid’s Elements – with scholia – it has the Data (with
Marinus’s introduction); the so-called Books and ; and ﬁnally,
Theon’s great commentary to Handy Tables. The manuscript is so large
that it has broken, in modern times, in two. The scribes who made such
books, and their patrons, must have had access to ﬁne libraries, from which
such compositions could be compiled. For once, this is directly attested in
a small comment, at the bottom of page , just below what is now
transmitted as the sixth proposition of Book :
This theorem is not carried in most [books] of the new edition, but is found
in the old one.
The scribe must have been familiar with several manuscripts of Euclid,
some of which explicitly referred to themselves as a “new edition.” In fact,
it is easy to imagine how such a self-proclaimed “new edition” could have

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

looked because, in fact, most of the medieval copies we now have of Euclid
are exactly of this kind. Their title page usually carries some kind of
variation of the phrase “based on the edition by Theon.” This, in turn,
is signiﬁcant – and is in turn consistent with another, single passage in the
text now transmitted of Theon’s commentary to the Almagest. In Book of
this commentary, as Theon surveys basic tools required for the study of
chords, he cites (Rome .–.) the result that sectors of equal
circles are to each other as their angles, adding “as proved by us, in the
edition of the Elements, at the end of the sixth book.” It seems, then, that
the scribe of the Vat. Gr. knew several books with a title such as “of
the edition of Theon” and one without such a title. Vat. Gr. itself does
not carry such a title, and – unlike most other manuscripts – it did not
originally include the result concerning the sectors. (This result was,
however, inserted into its margins by a later Byzantine hand.)
I keep saying that it is thanks to the scholars of Late Antiquity and of
Byzantium that we even possess Greek mathematics. But this does not
mean that we simply go to the extant medieval books, read them, and say,
“Yes, this is what Euclid wrote.” We read, instead, modern editions, which
are not merely more practical (printed in a script we are familiar with) but
also aim to be more correct. Each manuscript, after all, contains its own
errors, makes its own additions and omissions, and modern editors try to
work out what was the original form, removing the interventions of past
scribes and editors. The ﬁrst hints of such a philological approach are
found already in authors such as Eutocius (who discovered and edited
Archimedes’s appendix to Sphere and Cylinder) and, indeed, in intermedi-
aries such as the scribe of Vat. Gr. . In the nineteenth century,
philology became a science. Francois Peyrard was the ﬁrst librarian of
the École Polytechnique, ﬁlled by the reforming zeal of the Napoleonic
era. Napoleon looted many of the greatest treasures of the Vatican and
brought them into Paris. Peyrard studied this Vatican manuscript of
Euclid during its Parisian stay (commendably, after the fall of Napoleon,
most of the treasures were returned). He noticed the marginal comment
next to ., the absence of the title “based on the edition of Theon,”
and concluded that this codex – alone of all extant copies – was based on
an old version of the Elements, preceding Theon’s edition.
In the course of the nineteenth century, philologers gradually produced
scientiﬁc editions of the great bulk of ancient literature – collecting all
manuscripts, transcribing them precisely, establishing whether or not some
of the extant manuscripts were copied from other extant ones, discovering
the aﬃnities between those that were independent of each other and thus
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

constructing a family tree, at the end of this process applying linguistic,
stylistic, and contextual reasoning to reconstruct lost archetypes. It took a
while before philologers turned to scientiﬁc Greek texts, and we are lucky
that one of the best philologers of the nineteenth century – the Danish
Johan Ludvig Heiberg – edited so many mathematical works. He pro-
duced his ﬁrst edition of Archimedes (we will soon get to see why a second,
and much better one, was deemed necessary) in , when he was merely
twenty-six years old. A year later, he started on his Euclid, and his principle
was clear: to rely on the Vat. Gr. (called by Heiberg – and ever since –
“Codex Peyrard”).
Heiberg’s edition was necessarily imperfect. Euclid was recopied more
than most other ancient authors (already from the ninth century, we note
two celebrated copies – but there are many more to come from later
centuries). There are dozens of Greek copies of Euclid’s Elements, which,
as you recall, is a big book. The task of collating all of them and
establishing their family tree is simply impractical. Little wonder that
Heiberg was not keen to make this task even harder. Now, in Arabic, too,
there exists an exceedingly large number of manuscripts with translations
of Euclid’s Elements. In , another young scholar – Martin Klamroth,
born and with an Orientalist PhD from Göttingen from –
argued that some of those Arabic manuscripts were very faithful trans-
lations, based on manuscripts that are superior, in fact, to those now
extant in Greek. That is: Klamroth implied that a scientiﬁc edition of
Euclid should proceed through an edition, ﬁrst, of the Arabic trans-
lations, which then should serve as the basis for reconstructing the
Greek itself. The sociology of all of this is painfully evident, the
Hellenist and the Arabist, each arguing that their own intellectual
resources are the ones most valuable for studying Euclid. It is also
painfully obvious that Heiberg did not want to wait. In an article from
, he objected, politely and ﬁrmly, to Klamroth – and proceeded to
produce his own edition of Euclid, on which we still rely. Knorr argued
in that Heiberg was wrong and that the Arabic tradition is, in fact,
superior. Perhaps, perhaps not: many scholars today think Knorr might
have overstated his case. But it is certainly true that Heiberg was wrong
simply to dismiss the Arabic. We should be grateful to Heiberg, thanks to
whom we have an edition of Euclid, one that is readily available and
provides the information we need for several key Greek manuscripts. But
the fact is that we still do not have ﬁnality on the text. We are contem-
porary with the scribe of Vat. Gr. – faced with multiple sources and,
as yet, unclear as to how to choose from them.

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Should we even “choose”? Vitrac and his collaborators are skeptical: the
text of Euclid is just too open-ended, and perhaps we need to think of it as
a multiplicity (see the Suggestions for Further Reading). Perhaps there
were always many Euclids? This is valid, but we should pause to consider
the sense in which the multiplicity arises. Looked at from the outside, it
might be considered that the text of Euclid should have been in ﬂux
because – so one would think – it was not perceived as authorial literature
but instead was a much more practical, technical document that one could
feel at liberty to transform for practical purposes. At the extreme – so one
would think – the text of Euclid could have been rather like the notes one
keeps from one’s friends along with their recipes. If you copy such a
collection of recipes, you do not bother with their textual ﬁdelity, order,
orthography. The text is a mere tool. And because Euclid was indeed
subsumed, early on, into classroom education, we can see how such a
reduction could have taken place.
In fact, this is not what is suggested by the actual pattern of variation.
Vitrac and his collaborators ﬁnd points of signiﬁcant variation
between the main traditions of Euclid, which is a substantial amount even
for a book as massive as the Elements. However, most of these are not in
the nature of some kind of practical simpliﬁcation. Rather, it seems that in
a great many cases, some traditions (but not others) added extra explica-
tions, alternative proofs, lemmas, and corollaries. This is scholarly addi-
tion, and – what is perhaps the most signiﬁcant – practically all of this
variation is found in the more advanced parts of the text. (Indeed, the great
bulk of the variation involves the theory of irrationality, in Book and
then in its application early in Book : by far the most abstruse part of
the Elements. Such, indeed, is ., the cause of the marginal comment in
Vat. Gr. !)
What makes Euclid’s Elements unique, then, is not that it was made part
of the classroom and so made less than literary. It is that, more than most
other scientiﬁc works, it was at the focus of scholarly works from Late
Antiquity. The many branches and layers of scholarly contribution each
produced their own lemmas and extra explications. These were originally
intended as accompaniments to the text, not as interventions – as Theon
clearly intended for the proposition concerning sectors, marked out as such
as the end of Book and proudly stated to be his own contribution.
The task for us, scholars of the text, is complicated and, indeed, as
Vitrac emphasizes, perhaps not solvable because the very earliest sources
we may reconstruct – tracing the text back to Late Antiquity – are
multiple. But what becomes clear is that the text was never merely
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

technical, and indeed, the very accumulation of commentary is precisely an
expression of the canonization of Euclid. This was recognized as a
supremely authorial text – as, in fact, it should have been: the works of
Greek mathematics were never some kind of collection of recipes, always
the self-conscious contributions to a literary genre.
Our diﬃculty stems, indeed, from the fact that there were many copies
of Euclid made, even as early as the ninth century. The mathematical past
was still venerated; the habits of late paganism did not entirely disappear.
More diﬃcult authors were collected as well, and we have not one, but
three separate collections made, at about this time, of the works of
Archimedes. It is thanks to this eﬀort of recopying that we now have a
substantial survival of this, the most diﬃcult and important of the works of
ancient science.
Heiberg’s PhD dissertation from was a study in the textual history
of Archimedes, and like so many other PhD dissertations, it was mostly
wrong. Heiberg relied on the eighteenth-century printed catalogue of the
Laurentian Library in Florence, according to which the library’s copy of
Archimedes – Laur. .– was from the thirteenth century and, so, much
earlier than all other manuscripts known at the time. Soon after submitting
his dissertation, Heiberg visited Florence and must have immediately
realized that the catalogue was wrong: the script was nothing like that of
the thirteenth century and instead was an obviously late, Renaissance copy
attempting to imitate what a ninth- or tenth-century handwriting should
look like (and so half fooling the original cataloguer). Instead of being the
original, the Florence manuscript must have been one of several copies,
made during the Renaissance, out of a single – now lost – manuscript from
the ninth or tenth century.
That old ninth- or tenth-century Byzantine manuscript was famous in
the Renaissance. Many copies made from that manuscript are extant (ﬁve,
counting only those made directly from the lost early manuscript; this,
without counting Latin translations). These were all produced throughout
the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries, all containing the same works, in the
same order, with a close pattern of errors. One of those – the one that
tripped up Heiberg – is still in Florence; another one is in Venice, one in
the Vatican, and two in Paris.
Incredibly, Heiberg published his edition already in – comparing
the various extant copies and thus reconstructing the lost, original, ninth-
or tenth-century Byzantine manuscript. For Heiberg in , this recon-
struction was tantamount to the recovery of the original text: it was as far
as he could go. Indeed, because there are so many extant copies, and

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

because one of those is an apparent eﬀort at producing a visual facsimile
(which is, in fact, extremely rare), we may say that this manuscript is
almost as good as extant. This lost-but-reconstructable manuscript is now
known as Codex A. It is hard to judge from the “facsimile” of the Florence
copy, but if anything, the handwriting it imitates suggests an early manuscript,
perhaps more ninth than tenth century. Indeed, the same Florence manu-
script also carries, at the end of its text of the Quadrature of the Parabola, an
epigram celebrating one, “Leo the Geometer.” This is a well-known historical
ﬁgure, another member of Photius’s circle who became famous especially for
his knowledge of mathematical texts. (But he is not known – this is hardly
surprising – for any positive contributions to mathematics. To be a scholar, in
this time and place, was mostly to collect books.) And so: Archimedes’s Codex
A, known to originate from Byzantium’s ﬁrst renaissance.
There were more. Just like the dissertation preceding it, Heiberg’s ﬁrst
edition of Archimedes soon crumbled. In , Valentin Rose – a classicist
who worked at the Royal Library in Berlin – visited the Vatican library and
realized that one of the Latin codices – Let. Ottobon. – was in fact a
translation of the works of Archimedes, some of which were not among
those of Codex A. This translation had a colophon: it was made in the
papal court in Viterbo, in ; the translator is not named, but it is
certain that he is William of Moerbeke, a Latin cleric trained in Greek and
a proliﬁc translator, especially of Aristotle (traces of Arethas, there). Rose
published his result in , and it was clear that Heiberg’s edition
required some revision. In , Athanasios Papadopoulos-Kerameus
visited Istanbul as part of his massive catalogue – funded by the Russian
emperors – of Jerusalemite libraries (either those in Jerusalem or subsidiary
to the Jerusalem churches). And so, in the Istanbul subsidiary of the library
of the holy sepulcher, Papadopoulos-Kerameus noted a palimpsest, and
when he published his catalogue in , he provided a few of the lines
still visible. Heiberg came across this catalogue in and rushed to
Istanbul: here was yet another Archimedes manuscript!
You may have heard of it: this was the famous Archimedes Palimpsest
(see Plate ). It turned out to be independent, once again, from Codex A.
And so, in the years –, Heiberg published his second edition of
Archimedes, based on three separate Byzantine traditions. The previously
known tradition – that of the edition – was now, as noted, called
“A.” The independent source of Moerbeke’s translation came to be called
“B” (Moerbeke’s translation, it turns out, was a composite, partly based on
A, partly on B; there is also another ﬁfteenth-century Latin translation,
probably based on A); the Palimpsest is C.
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A palimpsest: that is (in Greek) “scraped-twice-over.” You see: when
parchment is made into a writing surface, the skin of the animal is scraped
(you don’t want to write on rough, hairy skin). Surprisingly frequently,
ancient books could then be recycled: the codex taken apart, its leaves re-
scraped and then written over with a new text. The original Archimedes
Codex C was made in about (judging by features of the handwrit-
ing). Almost certainly, this happened in Constantinople, but we have no
colophon or, indeed, any indications of the context of the manuscript. We
do have a colophon in Codex C as it now stands, but this is a colophon of
the secondary use of the same pages, recycled. We ﬁnd that the
Archimedes book was taken apart in , almost certainly in Jerusalem,
and that a prayer book was then written over the original text. The words
of Archimedes were hidden from view, scraped, faded, folded vertically
into the new sewing of the prayer book. And yet, Heiberg managed to read
most of them, ﬁnding new works by Archimedes and improving the text of
those previously known. Heiberg died in , having done for the
philology of Greek science more than anyone before him or since. His
editions are extremely precise and well thought-out. They were designed as
tools for future scholars, and Heiberg no doubt died expecting others to
follow him to Istanbul and revisit the palimpsest, ﬁlling in the lacunae. In
fact, by , and unbeknownst to Heiberg, the manuscript was already
stolen from Istanbul – in all likelihood, amid the troubles that followed
World War . A Parisian art dealer tried to sell it, without success, between
the two world wars. The art dealer knew that as an Archimedes manu-
script, this was extremely valuable – but he could ﬁnd no one willing to
part with the thousands of British pounds he wanted. During World War
, seven forgeries of Byzantine art were laid over the manuscript, appar-
ently in a desperate attempt – the dealer was Jewish; it was – to sell at
least a few of its pages (he needed fast cash, and old art sells quickly even if
mathematics does not). His heirs, ﬁnally, sold the manuscript in New York
in for two million dollars. It was then that I had the immense luck to
receive a phone call from William Noel – then curator of manuscripts at
the Walters Art Museum. I was invited to edit the palimpsest together with
the great Byzantinist and textual critic Nigel Wilson. Digital technology
could lead us both where even Heiberg did not reach. A team of scientists
led by Roger Easton produced digitally enhanced images of the manuscript
(the most useful technique was multispectral imaging, although further
readings were enabled, by Uwe Bergmann, with X-ray ﬂuorescence). We
now have the full transcription of the Palimpsest, and a critical edition is

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

forthcoming. The journey of philology, for Archimedes just as for Euclid,
is ongoing.
The number of Archimedes manuscripts is not at all comparable to that
of Euclid’s. But we do have witnesses to three early Byzantine traditions,
and the degree of their independence is noteworthy.
We do not have here anything like Arethas’s notes, the scribe’s com-
ments in Vat. Gr. . But the very choices of what to include in a
manuscript may be telling. All the copies made from Codex A contain
the following works, in the following order:
•
Sphere and Cylinder 
•
Sphere and Cylinder 
•
Measurement of the Circle
•
Conoids and Spheroids
•
Spiral Lines
•
On Balancing Planes and 
•
Sand-Reckoner
•
Quadrature of the Parabola
Followed by Eutocius’s commentaries:
•
Sphere and Cylinder 
•
Sphere and Cylinder 
•
Measurement of the Circle
•
On Balancing Planes and 
(And ﬁnally, a small treatise by Hero, On Weights, thrown in for good
measure.)
Now, more can be said of Codex B, the source of Moerbeke’s Latin
translation. After Rose identiﬁed it in , an entry in the papal catalogue
of allowed us to determine that this manuscript contained:
•
On Balancing Planes and 
•
Quadrature of the Parabola
•
On Floating Bodies and 
(And also Ptolemy’s Analemma, as well as the catoptrical works by Hero
and, perhaps, Euclid.)
As for Codex C, its contents (before it was palimpsested) were, in order:
•
On Balancing Planes and 
•
On Floating Bodies and 
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

•
Method
•
Spiral Lines
•
Sphere and Cylinder 
•
Sphere and Cylinder 
•
Measurement of the Circle
•
Stomachion
Each of these codices divides the works of Archimedes between the
physical and purely geometrical. Codex A has ﬁve purely geometrical
books (Sphere and Cylinder and , Measurement of the Circle, Conoids
and Spheroids, Spiral Lines), followed by four physical books (On Balancing
Planes and , Arenarius, Quadrature of the Parabola), and then ﬁve books
of commentary by Eutocius (Sphere and Cylinder and , Measurement of
the Circle, On Balancing Planes and ). Codex C inverts the order: ﬁve
physical books (On Balancing Planes and , On Floating Bodies and ,
Method), then ﬁve geometrical ones (Spiral Lines, Sphere and Cylinder 
and , Measurement of the Circle, Stomachion). Codex B, ﬁnally, is clearly
conceived as a collection of physical works with a core of ﬁve books by
Archimedes (On Balancing Planes and , Quadrature of the Parabola, On
Floating Bodies and ). The repeated scale – four to ﬁve books – is
perhaps meaningful: it is, in fact, the size of a majuscule codex. Are we,
perhaps, glimpsing collections made already in the sixth century?
It is indeed noteworthy that Eutocius still thought that works by
Archimedes could be identiﬁed by their use of Doric dialect – but that
this dialect has been removed, and transformed into the forms of Greek
more familiar to later readers, in many of the transmitted works. Indeed, a
few of the works, but above all, Sphere and Cylinder , carry many
explications interpolated into the text, suggesting a scholiastic intervention
– and ﬁnally, we recall the handful of mentions of Isidore of Miletus, “our
teacher,” inserted into the text of Archimedes.
And so, perhaps, the text of Archimedes was put through the standard-
ization of the school sometime late in the sixth century? But here is the
point: as with Euclid, the standardization did not standardize but, instead,
created a certain plurality. Some works by Archimedes are now in Doric;
some are not. And the three collections of Archimedes of which we know,
made in the ninth and tenth centuries, are all diﬀerent from each other.
There was no established corpus, no established order.
Indeed, it is clear that even if the Archimedes texts did go, once, through
the school, they did not primarily subsist there. The Euclid manuscripts
are typically accompanied by many marginal scholia. When the text ﬂows

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

from one side of the leaf to the next, we often ﬁnd a late hand copying, in
rough outline, the diagram so that one need not ﬂip the page back and
forth. Errors are typically corrected. All of this is missing in the Archimedes
manuscripts. In Codex A, the text of the Arenarius was missing its dia-
grams: the original owners of the manuscript did not bother to insert any
new ones. The same is true for an entire stretch of the diagrams in Codex
C (from the end of Spiral Lines till near the end of Sphere and Cylinder ).
Codex C, in particular, is rife with errors of mathematics and simple
Greek, and in many places, it plainly makes no sense. There are no signs
of any eﬀort to correct any of that. Archimedes, probably, was just too
hard to read anyway. Why bother, then, to collect Archimedes in the ﬁrst
place? The question answers itself: one collected those works because they
were by Archimedes. In the ninth and tenth centuries, Byzantine patrons,
who wished to mark themselves by their familiarity with the classical
tradition of Greek literature, were heirs to values shaped in Late
Antiquity and so continued to value, in particular, the exact sciences.
There, Archimedes’s fame was unrivaled. And so, here and there, the most
sophisticated of
patrons
searched
for
old manuscripts
containing
Archimedes’s works and had them transcribed into new, massive minus-
cule collections. These were not the possessions of scholars but of patrons.
They served merely to adorn libraries. In fact, some of them were worse
than useless, and when, in , a scribe picked up the Archimedes book,
the dust told him all he needed to know. For years, no one did
anything whatsoever with that volume: what further proof do you need
that it better be recycled?
And so, Archimedes was cast away, in Jerusalem, . But what was
Archimedes even doing there? What was it doing in Viterbo in ?
Very brieﬂy, there are two things to note concerning Byzantine learning
from, say, to , one internal to the progress of Greek learning, the
other external, concerning the vicissitudes of the state.
First, then, following the initial impetus of the revival of learning in
the ninth century, Byzantine learning tended in a more strictly literary
direction. We ﬁnd plenty of rhetorical productions, poems, histories,
literary commentaries. (The towering achievement of this era is
Eustathius’s commentaries, late in the twelfth century, to Homer’s epics –
about two million words of commentary!) The key background to all of
this is that Greek – like all languages – keeps changing. To go back in time:
throughout the Roman era, the language spoken by ordinary Greeks was
still quite similar to that of the classics (and continuous, intensive training
made sure that educated Greeks would feel at home when reading and
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

writing in that archaizing and yet familiar language). But throughout Late
Antiquity and beyond, Greek started to change more profoundly. To the
Greeks of the Middle Ages, the classical language was eﬀectively foreign,
and so it was inevitable that once classical learning was reasserted as a mark
of elite status, the emphasis would be on the – remarkably diﬃcult – task
of not only reading the classics but imitating them. Anna Commena was a
twelfth-century princess and heir to the throne who, in political disgrace,
exiled to a monastery, spent her last years writing the Alexiad – the history
of the reign of her father, Alexios (–). Spending one’s exile in
relitigating the past was a classical Greek tradition (Thucydides,
Xenophon, and Polybius were all famous for this), and Anna Commena,
sure enough, writes in direct imitation of the masters (although her
rhetorical prose is even more purple than that of the masters: the standard
peril of imitation). Such was the goal of Byzantine learning.
What histories such as Commena’s reveal – and this is the second
external reality – is a state in decline. The stability achieved early in the
ninth century was maintained for several generations, and the historical
maps reveal an expanded Byzantium, in control of much of present-day
Turkey and the Balkans, early in the eleventh century. In fact, the quasi-
feudal institutions created throughout Byzantium’s crisis meant that the
state never did resume its imperial power. Meanwhile, the continued
pressure from Asian nomads kept destabilizing all powers in the Middle
East. Throughout much of the eleventh century, the Byzantines fought a
losing war against Seljuk Turks (in , in one of the worst defeats, the
emperor himself – Romanos Diogenes – was taken captive). I keep refer-
ring in this book to “present-day Turkey,” referring to a part of the world
that, until now, was mostly Greek. From now on, it is indeed mostly
Turkish, and Constantinople becomes a frontier town. Little wonder that
Christians, everywhere, became alarmed, and the Crusades (launched in
) did, for a while, provide Byzantium with some kind of a buﬀer.
This, however, was, to the Greeks, a terrible bargain. The band of warriors
assembled by Venice for the Fourth Crusade anchored in Byzantium in
. Financing was short; the riches of Byzantium were alluring. On
April , , the crusaders achieved what no barbarian did before: the
walls of Constantinople fell. The city was sacked, and the crusaders found
a better use of their energies in the foundation of new, Frankish kingdoms
through the once-Byzantine lands.
This, then, is how Codices A and B ended up in the papal library in
Viterbo in . Indeed, this is how William of Moerbeke learned
his Greek: born in today’s Belgium, the monk was sent to the

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Peloponnese. It is not far-fetched to see the Crusades as Europe’s ﬁrst taste
of colonialism, and it was as an early-day colonialist that Moerbeke
translated Archimedes. And it is not far-fetched to see Codex C – ﬂung
to Jerusalem, at the far end of the Greek-speaking world, and in this hour
of need, turned into prayer book – as a mark of the depth of the
Byzantine crisis.
Perhaps surprisingly, the empire had one last hurrah in it. The year
ensued with a fragmented Aegean, mostly ruled by Franks but also
including a Greek statelet around Nicaea (which we recall as the birthplace
of Hipparchus), not far from Constantinople. In , Michael 
Palaiologos, king of Nicaea, took Constantinople itself. There was now a
new line of emperors. It is obvious how important it now was, for the city’s
elite, to reassert their Greek identity. It was now not much more than a
city-state, a rump of the old Byzantine state. But the intensity of cultural
identity mattered more than the size of the city’s domains, and Byzantium
now went through yet another – “Palaiologan” – renaissance. George
Pachymeres – born in exile in Nicaea in , died in Constantinople
early in the fourteenth century – is a leading light of this revival, proliﬁc
and encyclopedic. The urge was to recover everything. His Philosophia – in
twelve books – is an epitome of all of Aristotle. He wrote widely in
philosophy, history, and literary commentary, but also – more signiﬁcantly
for us – he wrote a “quadrivium,” a survey of the four Platonic mathe-
matical disciplines. Remarkably, his survey of arithmetic included not only
Nicomachus but also Diophantus; the somewhat younger Maximus
Planudes even wrote scholia on Diophantus’s ﬁrst two books. Maximus
Planudes is also famous as one of the collectors of ancient epigrams,
through whose eﬀort we now possess the Greek Anthology. Epigrams or
arithmetic, it didn’t matter: if it was part of the Greek past, it was
collected, recopied, preserved. Outdoing the monumentality of past col-
lections, we have several manuscripts that aim to collect something like the
totality of mathematics. A manuscript now in Paris, Gr. , written in
the middle of the fourteenth century, is right at the extreme of this new
type of cultural production, and the only way of getting a sense of what
this entails is by surveying the stupefying contents. In order, these are as
follows: Euclid’s Elements, Euclid’s Data with Marinus’s introduction,
Euclid’s Optics, Damian’s Optics (a late ancient summary of the ﬁeld),
Geminus’s excerpts on Optics, Euclid’s Catoptrics, Theodosius’s Spherics,
Autolycus’s On the Moving Sphere, Euclid’s Phaenomena, Theodosius’s On
Habitations, Theodosius’s On Days and Nights, Aristarchus’s On the Sizes
and Distances of the Sun and the Moon, Autolycus’s On Risings and Settings,
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Hypsicles’s Anaphoricus, Apollonius’s Conics with Eutocius’s commentary,
and Serenus’s Cutting of the Cone and Cutting of the Cylinder . . . The same
scribe went on to produce yet another massive tome (now in the Vatican,
Gr. ) with arithmetic and astronomical works.
Indeed, a tremendous amount of our sources for Greek civilization are
from the fourteenth century. (The coming of paper helps: this writing
surface – produced by the crushing of used rags into pulp – was ultimately
cheaper and more plentiful than parchment. Following the long hiatus of
meat-based scarcity – that of parchment – writing resumed, through paper,
its long-lost, papyrus-like, plant-based plenty.) Theon’s Little Commentary
on Ptolemy’s Handy Tables is among the more “practical” of ancient
mathematical works, of use for astrologers (although at this point, it was
often recognized that more recent Islamic tables were superior to those of
Ptolemy). It thus has an especially large number of copies, and I count, in
the modern edition produced by Tihon, thirty-two copies of the
Palaiologan era – and a single fragment (six pages) from the ninth or tenth
century. In the order in which they are listed by Tihon, those thirty-two
Palaiologan copies are now found in Florence, Leiden, Milan, Oxford,
Paris, the Vatican, Venice, and Vienna. It will be noticed that none of
these are now in Istanbul, but it should be emphasized that books entered
and left Constantinople from the beginning. It was a small state, sur-
rounded by Latin and Turkish realms, depending on diplomacy for its very
survival. Cardinal Bessarion – one of its last great intellectual representa-
tives – was born early in the ﬁfteenth century in the Greek city of
Trebizond. He learned his Platonism with Gemistus Plethon, a Greek
living in one of the Latin states of the Peloponnese. As a Catholic cardinal,
he spent his life shuttling between Constantinople and Italy as he was
negotiating between Greeks and Latins. He is remembered most for his
enormous bequest – Greek manuscripts! – left to the city of Venice,
the basis of one of the major collections for classical scholarship today –
including two of the Palaiologan copies of Theon’s Little Commentary and
one of the copies made of Archimedes’s Codex A. Where else would these
books go? By the time Bessarion died – in – Constantinople was
already under Turkish rule. The city fell in , but the Palaiologan
renaissance had already become, well before that, one of the streams
feeding the Renaissance in Italy.
In this section, I oﬀered a very rapid tour through learning in
Byzantium – but I ended up saying more on scholarship than on positive
learning. It is perhaps unfair that we treat Byzantium in such a way, as a
mere passive recipient of antiquity – the locker at the station where Greek

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

civilization is left for safekeeping, awaiting the arrival of the train of
modern Europe. Then again, I am not so sure that Arethas or Bessarion
would have been upset to be remembered as the preservers of classical
Greek legacy. This was an identity they actively chose. Reverence toward
the totality of the Greek past is one of the ﬁxed points of Greek culture
from Late Antiquity onward, and it helps explain why so much remains
and why, ultimately, it remains in reasonably good shape. Nonclassicists
are often alarmed to learn that our knowledge of antiquity depends almost
entirely on copies of copies of copies produced throughout the Middle
Ages. It is worrying that there are so many stages along the way, and it is
worrying that they depend so heavily on the Middle Ages. If you are
interested mostly in the history of science, this is doubly alarming.
Medieval monks: Were they not against science? Well, not really, and more
to the point, classical antiquity always endowed their copied manuscripts
with more value than any views expressed could take away from it. The
church could, and did, burn books it considered blasphemous (thus, the
central text of Jewish book learning was frequently burned in the later
Middle Ages, which is probably why, in spite of its ubiquity in the Jewish
world, the number of extant medieval manuscripts of the Talmud is quite
small). But the church never burned Porphyry or Proclus, whose writings
were so anti-Christian. On the contrary, Byzantine clerics, from Arethas to
Bessarion, took the Neoplatonist synthesis as the cornerstone of their own
intellectual life – precisely because it brought together so much of the
Greek classical tradition.
The problem, if anything, is not one of censorship but of overeager
embrace. Anxious to show their erudition and their mastery of the texts,
scholars would often introduce their own scholia and interpretations. This,
then, is a clearly deﬁned editorial problem (although occasionally it may be
hard to solve): identifying the layers of the text, original and scholia. There
are, of course, even simpler problems. As texts are copied, they certainly
become garbled, and once again, many nonclassicists are stunned to hear
that we depend on a transmission of, often, more than a thousand years for
the recovery of our original texts. For instance, ,years separate
Archimedes from his earliest (mutilated, palimpsested) extant manuscript.
How can any signal survive through the noise of over twelve centuries? For
this, it matters, then, to realize the attitude of reverence toward the past
that prompted, to begin with, the making of the manuscripts. From the
very ﬁrst moment, Archimedes’s works were conceived as literary, polished
works, valued for their authorial status. It was no one’s business to alter
them, and scribes did their best not to. But even more signiﬁcant, for us, is
Byzantium and the Making of “Greek Mathematics”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the realization that, in fact, this game of telephone did not have all that
many stages. The relay race of this book is made of generational events, all
the way down, with many hiatuses. And this, from the perspective of the
reliability of the transmission, is a good thing. More likely than not, a
scientiﬁc manuscript produced in the generation of Arethas would be
based on majuscule copies from Late Antiquity. There were simply too
few scientiﬁc books produced in between. Even when our earliest manu-
scripts are Palaiologan, it is quite likely that they, in turn, are based directly
on early minuscule from the ninth or tenth centuries (it does seem that
more scientiﬁc manuscripts were produced then than in the following
eleventh and twelfth centuries). In short, in the typical case – where we
have several manuscripts, at least one or two of which are from the ninth or
tenth centuries – the archetype we reconstruct is morally certain to be a
late ancient book. In this sense, Late Antiquity is quasi-extant. And then
again: it is likely that authors of Late Antiquity would have relied on
sources not far removed from the imperial era (for this, we are helped by
the hiatus of the third century ). It is likely that authors of the imperial
era would have relied on sources not far removed from the Hellenistic era
(for this, we are helped by the hiatus of the ﬁrst century ). And so, our
circle closes. I began this book reconstructing the genre of Greek mathe-
matics – reading the texts we now have so as to reconstruct what writing
looked like, language and diagrams and all, more than two thousand years
ago. Which we can do, thanks to the ﬁdelity – and, paradoxically, thanks
to the scarcity – of our tradition.
The World Made from Baghdad
Even as the Roman Empire was struggling through the crisis of the third
century, habits of classical education – the mark of the elite – did not die
down but, in fact, expanded: in a more fragmentary empire, local elites
mattered more. It is well known how this happened in the western parts of
the empire. This area produced its own, Latin, classical tradition, issuing
commentaries to Virgil and producing its own separate writings on all
subjects, literary as well as technical. (We recall Boethius’s Latin-language
Introduction to Music, which is also our unique source for Archytas’s
arithmetical proof: it was produced in the early sixth century, in an Italy
no longer ruled by Byzantine emperors.) The journey of Latin Europe
begins here. We may also recall Longinus decamping, after the sack of
Athens in , to Palmyra in the Syrian desert. Indeed, many rhetors and
scholars of Late Antiquity come from this desert borderland. Just as Latin

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

emerged in the West, local languages – especially Syriac – emerged in the
East. Greek works began to be translated: there was Greek-style philoso-
phy and (especially) Greek-style medicine, now, in multiple languages.
The Byzantine Empire was in no condition to venture into the Arabian
Peninsula. Ripples of Greek reached there, but when Muhammad brought
forth his own variation of metropolitan learning – importing, above all, its
unique, transcendent God – he did so in Arabic. It was Muhammad’s
words that brought together the Arabs, and when, in the s, they
conquered all of Persia and most of Byzantium, they were in possession
of the late Muhammad’s sacred words – attributed directly to the divine –
the Quran. They were also heirs to the traditions of Late Antiquity, and so
almost immediately, there emerged an Arabic, book-centered learning of
Muhammad’s words, transcribed into a holy book. Right from the begin-
ning, then, Arab conquest diﬀered from that of all the many other tribes
that descended on the Mediterranean – the Goths and the Huns and the
Vikings and the Magyars and the Mongols and all the rest. In possession of
a book, the Arabs came with a language and a civilization that were there
to stay.
To win an ancient empire, one needed military victories. To keep it, one
needed collaboration from local elites. Muhammad came to the world to
assert monotheism against the pagans of Arabia, and it was easy for the
conquerors to accommodate other believers – Christians and Jews – even if
those did not subscribe to the speciﬁc version of Quranic monotheism.
A small minority in a huge swath of conquered lands, the Arabs kept
themselves to a network of garrison towns, many of them new foundations
(Cairo has its beginning now). This gives rise to the real problem of
maintaining an empire: How to hold it together? The various garrison
towns, spread across an enormous empire, had the supreme self-conﬁdence
of their religion and their victories. Why bow down to others? The ﬁrst
century of Muslim empire is one of nearly uninterrupted civil war between
competing leaders of armies and garrisons. Damascus seemed to be in
charge most often – this was the Umayyad dynasty – but in the middle of
the eighth century, another family, the Abbasids, based in the Persian East,
gained power. Indeed, the Persian-region origins seem signiﬁcant.
Conversion to Islam seems to have picked up in the Persian part of the
empire before it did in the Byzantine part (perhaps because the local
religion in the Persian region was not monotheistic; hence, there was more
of an incentive to convert). The demographic center of gravity tended
East, and it was only natural that, eventually, the Easterners would prevail
in the contest for control over the Islamic lands. In , Al-Mansur, with
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ﬁrm control over the entire Islamic world (only far-ﬂung Iberia remained
Umayyad), founded his new capital – Baghdad – in Mesopotamia. The
city proclaimed the determination of the new dynasty to rule, at long last,
from the top – no more competing garrison towns. The city was set apart
from all other cities – its walls built, extravagantly, as a huge, perfect circle,
enclosing a mighty palace for the ruler. Of course, this did not last all that
much longer. As most empires do, the Abbasids had to delegate power.
The bigger the empire, the more delegation it required. This empire was
bigger than most (from the borders of India as far as the western
Mediterranean; only the Mongols would rule, brieﬂy, a larger domain).
And so, it had to delegate more. Already by the tenth century, local rulers
could be eﬀectively independent. The model of Baghdad remained signif-
icant, however: each local ruler, setting up his own dynasty, aimed to
establish at least the aura of Baghdad’s absolute power. Courts, from now
on, aimed to be radically removed, elevated. A Roman emperor was
always, in theory, no more than the top ﬁgure of the senatorial elite, his
court dispensing a patronage not diﬀerent, qualitatively, from that of all
other senators. The caliph, however – and its many sultan and vizier
imitators – was meant to be radically apart: his patronage, marked by
unparalleled consumption – and unparalleled forms of culture. Hence
Baghdad’s own Renaissance – preceding, indeed, that of Arethas in
Byzantium.
Baghdad was an imposing metropolis – and within it, an even more
imposing palace, set apart from the world. Its culture was similarly struc-
tured, as an outside and an inside, one part more widely available – and
another, more exotic. On the outside was the study of the Quran – with its
allied traditions of Arabic grammar and literature – which could not be
monopolized by the court. Of course: the central assumption of Islam was
always the direct availability of the word of God. The royal courts did have
the best Quranic and literary scholars, but there would always remain an
important tradition of scholarly study in the ﬁelds most directly related to
religious tradition – Muslim law, Arabic language – away from the palaces.
Starting in Baghdad, the sultans set themselves apart by the possession of a
diﬀerent, added layer of knowledge – the one imported from outside the
Arabic sphere. This was, above all, the knowledge brought from the
Greeks.
To begin, this reached the Arab-speaking world via the Syriac trans-
lations, and soon enough, via translations directly from the original. The
ﬁrst translations were done late in the eighth century; by the tenth, Arabic
readers mostly achieved the translated corpus with which they would be

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

content from that point on. The two main branches of Greek science were
medicine, on the one hand, and the exact sciences, on the other hand, and
in Greek antiquity itself, the two branches never cross. A few physicians
(such as Galen) were proud of their modicum of mathematical knowledge,
but no physician authored mathematical texts, while no one whose main
identity was that of an author in the exact sciences made any contributions
to medicine. Arab court scientists, more often than not, contributed to
both mathematics and medicine. Speciﬁcally, many Arabic scholars pos-
sessed knowledge in the key service industries – astrology or medicine –
but they typically were also competent philosophers (besides contributing,
very often, to the more standard Quranic and grammarian sciences, as
well; sometimes, their writing reﬂected more political or bureaucratic
functions). It was rare for an Islamic astrologer not to contribute to more
theoretical astronomy and rare for Islamic astronomers not to show wider
mathematical skills. Encyclopedism was expected. Encyclopedic, these
authors were often proliﬁc – we now come across many authors of dozens
of treatises, of millions of words. Around the court of each dynasty, there
were now its scholars, so many of them massively proliﬁc (from early on,
this was a paper culture), so many of them still extant. I have surveyed
Byzantium extremely rapidly. I shall not even try to “survey” the exact
sciences written in Arabic. The corpus is larger than that of Greek
mathematics itself. I write this History of Greek Mathematics to replace
that of Heath, written a century ago. The “History of Islamic
Mathematics” is yet to be written. We will, instead, merely glimpse at this
history – consider a few examples of the way in which Islamic mathematics
went on to extend, and transform, the Greek legacy.
The case of optics is typical. The ﬁeld was relatively marginal inside
classical mathematics. In particular, while there clearly were “authors in
mechanics,” “authors in music,” and of course, “authors in astronomy,”
there were no “authors in optics.” Archytas, Archimedes, or Ptolemy might
have contributed to the ﬁeld – in a single work, each. It was the kind of
ﬁeld to which one would contribute only as part of a larger project of
writing in the exact sciences – and so checking, so to speak, the optical box
as well. Ibn Al-Haytham (–?) was the author of fourteen diﬀerent
works in optics that are still extant (he certainly authored many more).
There are many particular studies – those, for instance, on burning mirrors
(spherical, as well as paraboloid). Those on refraction or on the optics of
the observation of eclipses are still within the familiar realm of the
geometrical studies of Greek mathematics (although with a much more
pronounced emphasis on actual experiment). But we are struck to ﬁnd
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A Treatise on Light – an empirical, philosophical study – and in particular,
we are struck by Al-Haytham’s major opus, The Optics, in seven books,
covering all aspects of the discipline as developed by Ptolemy but based on
a solid empirical basis in the study of the eye. Al-Haytham describes the
anatomy and physiology of the eye with Galen’s attention and experimen-
tal method – and then uses this as a basis for a geometrical model. This
combination has real scientiﬁc consequences: whereas most Greek writings
in optics assume that vision is aﬀected by an optical ray extending out of
the eye, Al-Haytham’s physiological observations persuaded him that
vision is based on an impact of light, refracted through the eye’s lenses.
Al-Haytham was right, but what is even more important, he hit upon the
truth because he rigorously combined reason and experiment, speciﬁcally
because he combined mathematics and medicine. His inﬂuence, in this
respect, will be important.
The science is encyclopedic and directly critical of the Greek legacy. In
fact, another of Al-Haytham’s treatises is titled Doubts on Ptolemy, going
through what Al-Haytham perceives as Ptolemy’s inconsistencies and
errors in optics – and in astronomy (on which, more in the following
discussion). It is impossible to imagine a “Doubts on Ptolemy” written in
medieval Byzantium (Proclus’s Hypotyposis, however, could have been so
titled). Al-Haytham was deﬁnitely not slavish in his attitude toward the
past. But it is noteworthy that in the eleventh century – after three
hundred years of Islamic science – Ptolemy should still matter so much.
Al-Haytham’s science is deeply original, but the terms against which such
originality is to be measured are the achievements bequeathed from the
Greeks. Al-Haytham’s Completion of the Conics is a perfect example. To
recall, only the ﬁrst four books of Apollonius’s Conics are now extant in
Greek – those transmitted with Eutocius’s commentary. Arabic translators
in Baghdad managed to ﬁnd the ﬁrst seven books, but we know that the
work originally had eight. For this, we have two indications: Apollonius’s
introduction to Book and Pappus’s commentary (which does not go
through the Conics proposition by proposition but instead provides
lemmas helpful for the reading of the books). Pappus is known through
a single Greek manuscript in the Vatican that apparently left Byzantium
early on. There is no indication that it was ever known to Arabic readers.
Al-Haytham read, however, Apollonius’s introduction to Book and
was thus moved to complete the Conics by the addition of his own Book
, based on the slight indications provided by Apollonius. Thanks to
Pappus, we know that Al-Haytham’s proposal was almost certainly histor-
ically wrong. Hogendijk, the modern editor of this treatise, argues that the

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

text we now possess must have been Al-Haytham’s unﬁnished manuscript.
Even so, this is a wonderful book. Al-Haytham had little to work with and
so stated explicitly that his assumption is that Apollonius was looking for
beautiful results. And Al-Haytham got them! Let me sketch the thought of
just one example (Hogendijk’s “proposition ”).
Al Haytham indeed got the spirit of Greek mathematics. Proportions are
key, and so he decided, in his “Book ,” to solve problems deﬁned in
terms of given ratios. In proposition , we are given a parabola, its
tangent DG, and a ratio E:Z. The task is to ﬁnd another tangent, AD,
cutting the tangent DG, so that
AD:DG::E:Z:
A
B
G
H
E
Z
T
D
Figure 
We follow the method of analysis and synthesis (Al-Haytham does so
systematically
in
this
treatise;
in
the
typical
metamathematical,
philosophical tendency of Islamic mathematics, he even wrote a specialized
treatise dedicated to the method). So, we ﬁrst assume that the solution has
been found. Join and bisect AG. We know that the line joining a point
such as H (the bisection of the chord between the touching points of the
two tangents) to a point such as D (where the two tangents meet) is a
diameter of that parabola. Al-Haytham interprets the sense in which the
parabola and the tangent GD are “given” to mean that we know the
absolute position of the original axis of the parabola, and of course, we
also know the position of the line GD. We therefore know the angle they
form, and because all diameters in a parabola are parallel to the axis, we
know the angle between the line GD and the diameter DH, that is, the
J. P. Hogendijk, Ibn Al-Haytham’s Completion of the Conics (New York: Springer, ),
pp. –.
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

angle GDH. We now draw AT parallel to HD and join GDT. Because the
angle GDH is known, so is the angle GTA. Because GH ¼ HA and HD is
parallel to AT, we also have GD ¼ DT. The ratio AD:DG is a given (because
we assume the problem solved), so the ratio AD:DT is a given as well.
Thus, in the triangle ADT, we know one angle, DTA, and the ratio
between two sides: AD:DT. In Euclid’s Data, it is shown that under these
conditions, all angles of the triangle can, in principle, be determined. We
thus know the angle ADT, and hence also the angle ADG. And so, once
again, in the triangle ADG, we know one angle and also the ratio between
two sides, AD:DG. Hence, we know all its angles, and thus we can draw
GA from the known point G and determine point A.
I cited this in detail because the mere statement that Al-Haytham spoke
as an equal to the generation of Archimedes would not suﬃce; we need to
see this in action. The result is remarkably direct and yet surprising. It is
also still very hard (to transform this analysis into a direct construction
required much more eﬀort, which I skip here). Al-Haytham’s scope
was encyclopedic, but his mastery was at the level of individual
mathematical detail.
I started with Al-Haytham because he is one of the greatest Islamic
authors whose contributions are so clearly primarily mathematical. But of
course, he was not just a mathematician, and indeed, the impression
conveyed so far might be misleading. We hear of Al-Haytham feigning
insanity to escape the persecution of the caliph in Cairo. It is hard to
extract any history out of such obvious, Hamlet-like novelistic embellish-
ment, but it is clear that we are dealing with a functionary of the court. We
know little about his activities as a bureaucrat, but we can reconstruct Al-
Haytham’s writing with great conﬁdence: we have extant a bibliography he
composed of his own writings, dated by him to (what we call) February ,
– seventy treatises – supplemented by an addendum, dated July ,
(twenty-one more treatises – he was really working on his résumé!),
and then by another bibliography, compiled by others, after his death,
adding ninety-two more works. Even this is far from exhausting his oeuvre
– the Completion of the Conics, as noted, is not even mentioned in the
bibliographies, probably because it was never “published.” Approximately
seventy-ﬁve treatises by Al-Haytham are still extant. This is a remarkable
rate of survival and a tribute to the high degree to which he was held as a
scientist. These, however, are almost all strictly scientiﬁc works, and it is
clear from his bibliographies that he was also the author of dozens of works
of a more strictly philosophical character, for instance, studies and com-
mentaries on Aristotle. The Treatise on Place – largely a critique of

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Aristotle’s Physics, Book – is still extant, as are several oﬀshoots of his
astronomy that are of more purely cosmological character; it is typical that
later tradition conserved, among his philosophical works, those that were
more closely aligned with the exact sciences. He never became recognized
for the study of philosophy, which meant, above all, here as in Byzantium,
the study of Aristotle: there were other masters for that.
Right at the very beginning of the translation project, in Baghdad of the
ninth century, the ﬁrst major Arabic scientist was also the ﬁrst major
Arabic philosopher – Al-Kindi. Once again, we see the same phenomenon
as in Byzantium – picking up where the tradition stopped, with
Neoplatonism. The philosophical corpus copied and commented upon
by Late Antiquity was Aristotle, through a Neoplatonist interpretation,
and it was this that Al-Kindi learned, commented upon (in his manifold
writings on Aristotle), and produced himself. A proliﬁc scientiﬁc author –
of course – he also wrote works touching on astronomy, astrology, music,
optics, geometry, arithmetic, and medicine – but what is most striking
from our perspective is the manner in which the various technical ﬁelds are
brought together. He writes on pharmacology – and in his recipes, he
applies a system of calculation that is explicitly based on a mathematical
theory of proportion. There is no known precedent for this in the Greek
medical tradition. His grand metaphysical system continued the standard
Neoplatonist system of emanation from the supreme astral beings down
to the earthly and mundane. His contribution was to interpret this as a
quasi-physicalist model of rays carrying inﬂuences down the chain of
being. Metaphysics – turned into an optics of a kind. (This metaphysics
of light – which is merely a metaphor in Platonic and Greek Neoplatonic
writings – becomes an important inﬂuence in Arabic science and philos-
ophy, partly accounting for the rise of optics as a central scientiﬁc ﬁeld
under Islam.) Al-Kindi’s speciﬁc variant of Neoplatonist metaphysics would
not become standard, but most later philosophers would continue to work
within Neoplatonist Aristotelianism. Muhammad was not a philosopher,
but his anti-pagan zeal stamped Islam with an overriding insistence on the
unbridgeable gap between the mundane and the divine. Islamic philosophy
could easily accommodate the emphasis on the transcendent and the dis-
missal of the earthly, pervading Neoplatonism. Aristotle had a number of
troubling notions: that the world was not created, that the individual soul
was not everlasting. This gave Islamic philosophers something to grapple
with. The huge corpora of Al-Kindi or even Al-Haytham pale next to those
of some of the major philosophers. Ibn-Sina, a Persian active early in the
eleventh century – Al-Haytham’s contemporary – wrote over four hundred
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

works, including the major Islamic syntheses of both philosophy and
medicine (it will come as no surprise that he also wrote on some mathe-
matical issues). Ibn-Rushd, active in the twelfth century in Andalus –
present-day Spain – was the major commentator on Aristotle.
We recall Moerbeke translating Archimedes from Greek into Latin in
. This comes at the end of a long tradition of translations into Latin
made mostly throughout the twelfth century and almost entirely from
Arabic. The site for most of those translations was northern Andalus, or
Spain, newly reconquered by Latin Christians. Andalus, captured, cap-
tured the wild captors: Latin Europe now had a scientiﬁc-philosophical
culture that was essentially that of medieval Islam. Indeed, although
Islamic scientiﬁc and philosophical civilization was written in Arabic and
always had the Islamic ﬂavor of radical anti-paganism, it was not a strictly
religious, “Muslim” science. (There was a science of the Quran – but this
was a pursuit distinct from the more courtly combination of science and
philosophy.) Most Islamic scholars were indeed Muslim, but many were
Jews or Christians. Maimonides’s great synthesis of Aristotelianism – and
of medicine – was a twelfth-century Jewish variation of Avicenna;
Aquinas’s own great synthesis of Aristotelianism was a thirteenth-century
Christian variation on the same. We typically do not think of Latin Europe
as constituting part of Islamic science, but this is perhaps a mistake. Today,
we take it for granted that there is a global science, and it makes sense to
call it “Western science” – it is a practice developed mostly in western
Europe throughout the nineteenth century. In the same sense, we should
conceive of Islamic science as the global science of the High Middle Ages.
We may consider the geographical bookends: say, on the East, take Al-
Biruni, an eleventh-century author – the most proliﬁc, perhaps, of all
Islamic authors in the exact sciences, born in present-day Uzbekistan,
active mostly in present-day Afghanistan but especially well traveled in
India (on which he wrote extensively). On the West, say, take Duns
Scotus, a thirteenth-century author, born, as his name states, in
Scotland, who, in his commentaries to Aristotle (and to Aristotle’s com-
mentators), was perhaps the best philosopher of his time. Scotus would
probably have diﬃculties following the details of Biruni’s astronomy, just
as Biruni would probably lose patience with the subtle distinctions Scotus
introduced to his ontology. But their discourses would have been, in
essence, mutually intelligible. They both worked within the same global,
Islamic science.
This global civilization absorbed global traditions. Islam, as noted, was a
culture based on paper – that is, based on a Chinese innovation, learned

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

from the encounter of Muslims and Chinese, already in the eighth century,
in Central Asia. India was even closer, a few of its writings translated in
Baghdad alongside those from Greek sources. The most lasting inﬂuence
coming this way was, of course, the Indian numerals, transformed and now
familiar as Arabic numerals (confusingly, Europeans have further trans-
formed the numerals they learned from the Arabs so that the symbols now
universally used are diﬀerent from those used now only in Arabic script).
The signiﬁcance of this innovation perhaps should not be exaggerated.
People in the Mediterranean were always able to calculate with ease in a
decimal, positional system, by using their abacus (pp. –); perhaps
the origin of Arabic/Indian numerals should be seen precisely as a variation
on abacus practices. Numerals are essentially a kind of orthography, and
although orthographies do have cognitive payoﬀs (it is easier to learn, say,
Italian writing than Chinese), the mind is elastic and can manage with
diﬀerent tools (educated Chinese can read just as well as educated Italians).
For us, it is easier to calculate with the decimal system using Arabic
numerals, but Ptolemy had no problem calculating with sexagesimals
and with the Greek-letter symbols for numbers. What is much more
surprising is that the same was true for all Islamic astronomers: right until
the end of the Middle Ages, they continued to produce their astronomical
calculations (many, and subtle – as we will note in the upcoming discus-
sion), always using the same numerical techniques as Ptolemy, merely
substituting Arabic for Greek letters. Indeed, even now, sexagesimals are
often used in the presentation of astronomical and geographical data: my
latitude as I write this is o 0 00 North. In some ways, sexagesimals are
even better than decimals (it does help that is a factor of ). In other
ways, it just takes getting used to. So: the very introduction of Arabic/
Indian numerals did not constitute a revolution. What was signiﬁcant, in
the long run, was the way in which those numerals were manipulated. The
ﬁrst book to explain this was, once again, by one of the ﬁrst scholars of
Baghdad – Al-Khwarizmi, that is, native of the land of Khwarizm, in
present-day Uzbekistan. His book, known in Latin translation as The Book
of Algorithm on Indian Numbers, taught, well, algorithms (obviously,
“algorithm” is merely how medieval speakers of Latin rendered “Al-
Khwarizmi”). The trick was to arrange numbers on a surface and manip-
ulate them (converting, that is, the manipulations previously produced on
small tokens on the abacus to a manipulation of symbols). This was done
now on written surfaces, and the book itself would present this with two-
dimensional inserts into the written text, showing how calculations are
eﬀected. The culture of the codex made the book, itself, into the subject of
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

study. With innovations such as the algorithm, scientiﬁc work could
become a written practice in the most direct sense: to make an argument,
you would manipulate symbols on the page. Such symbolic manipulation
would become paramount only in modern science, but its roots, indeed,
are in Al-Khwarizmi.
For symbolic manipulation to ﬂourish, mathematics will ﬁrst need to
become algebraic – and this, too, has its roots in early Baghdad and,
indeed, in yet another of Al-Khwarizmi’s works, The Compendious Book
on Calculation by Completion [Al-Jabr] and Balancing [Al-Muqabala]. The
title – abbreviated to Al-Jabr, or in Latin, Algebra – refers, roughly, to the
technique of solving a problem as an equality to which one adds and
subtracts on both sides. Problems are built from three components – roots,
squares, and numbers – and Al-Khwarizmi goes systematically through
their combinations, showing how to solve them with concrete examples:
When you say: a square plus ten roots are equal to thirty nine dirhams [type
of coins]. . . . You have the number of the roots which, in this problem,
yields ﬁve; you multiply it by itself; the result is twenty ﬁve; you add it to
thirty nine; the result is sixty four; you take the root, which is eight, from
which you subtract half of the number of the roots, which is ﬁve. The
remainder is three, that is the root of the square you want, and the square
is nine.
Translating Al-Khwarizmi’s algebra into the symbolic language (the distant
descendant of Al-Khwarizmi’s algorithm), this says that given
x2 þ ax ¼ b,
we may ﬁnd x as
x ¼ √
a=2
ð
Þ2 þ b


 a=2:
Which you may quickly verify if you remember the algebraic formula for a
quadratic equation from school. Al-Khwarizmi himself does provide his
own justiﬁcation, through a geometrical construction, which provides this
operation with a much deeper meaning. Eﬀectively, Al-Khwarizmi took
the step to consider geometrical magnitudes as numerical values. This
epochal event is simply the unintended by-product of the typical Arabic
project of synthesis. Al-Khwarizmi worked from many sources: Indian and
ancient Near Eastern procedures of calculation, Greek geometry. They
were all, for him, valuable as the legacy that needed to be brought into
Arabic and put together inside his own, early, encyclopedic project.
R. Rashed, Al-Khwarizmi: The Beginnings of Algebra (London: Saqi Books, ), p. .

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

To many past Greek scholars, perhaps, such exercises as those dealt by
Al-Khwarizmi would appear as lowbrow, even unscientiﬁc (that déclassé
reference to Dirhams!). The mixing of numerical and geometrical magni-
tudes would appear as a stylistic or perhaps even a theoretical error. From
Al-Khwarizmi’s vantage point, such distinctions mattered less. Once again,
as happened in astronomy from Hipparchus to Ptolemy: Greek mathe-
matics brought together with the calculation techniques of the ancient
Near East – in the process, turned into something new and rich
in potential.
In a sense, this potential was fully achieved in another book of algebra,
by one of the greatest of all Muslim mathematicians: Omar Khayyam
(–). The name is familiar thanks to the poetry – he was the
author of short, epigrammatic poetry (rubaiyat – four lines, all rhymed
other than the third), whose main theme is humanity’s frailty and
limitations:
My mind has never lacked learning,
Few mysteries remained unsolved;
I have meditated for seventy-two years night and day,
To learn that nothing has been learned at all.
A deeply Muslim sentiment: human knowledge as nothing as against the
divine. The response, however, is elegiac rather than tragic:
To escape from the learned schools is best,
And best to hang on the sweetheart’s tresses:
Before fortune drains our blood away,
It is best to empty the bottle into your glass.
This is probably what Khayyam sang in learned symposia, perhaps in the
presence of one of the sultans he served (in Isfahan and in Marv). Elegant
conversation would move back and forth between Persian, the language of
Khayyam’s poetry, and Arabic, the language of his science. If the poetry
admitted human limits, the science pushed right to those boundaries. Al-
Khwarizmi solved six types of problems with roots, squares, and numbers.
Khayyam’s own Algebra started from Aristotelian philosophy and deduced,
from ﬁrst principles, that there are three possible types of magnitudes:
lines, areas, and solids. Once all problems with these magnitudes – as well
as numbers – are solved, then the ﬁeld of algebra is complete (note how the
ﬁeld has become completely identiﬁed with that of geometry). Khayyam
P. Avery and J. Heath-Stubbs, The Ruba’iyat of Omar Khayyam (Harmondsworth: Penguin, ).
I cite from pp. , .
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

then proceeds systematically through all the combinations of the four
terms – what we would call equations up to the third degree – and solves
them all geometrically. Just as Pappus did, he explicitly notes the division
according to the types of geometrical tools required: those that can be
solved with the tools of Euclid’s Elements; those that require, further,
Apollonius’s Conic Sections. He makes special note of how his solution
fulﬁlls the gap in Archimedes’s Sphere and Cylinder, Book – the one we
have noted on pages –, completed by Eutocius. This was the star
example for my book from , The Transformation of Mathematics in the
Early Mediterranean: From Problems to Equations. Archimedes’s problem
has become Khayyam’s equation – above all, by being inserted as one of a
set of equations.
Khayyam’s Algebra is surprisingly brief for such an all-encompassing
project – seventy pages in Rashed’s translation – which seems to be part of
Khayyam’s point. The completeness of the project is underlined by its
quality of synoptic survey. We have lost much by Khayyam, but it seems
that he never aimed to produce very big, or very many, books, aiming
instead at succinct precision. His introduction to Euclid’s Elements is very
brief – a couple of observations, each a few pages long. One of these is on
the theory of proportion. The other, on the parallels’ postulate, carries
great historical signiﬁcance. We recall how Euclid postulated explicitly that
“if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles on
the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced
indeﬁnitely, meet on that side on which are the angles less than the two
right angles.” I suggested that the need to make this into an explicit
postulate arose from Euclid’s choice to present elementary geometry
without the help of proportion theory, which made it necessary to develop,
in Book , the properties of parallelograms. Mathematicians always
felt uneasy with this postulate: this seems like the kind of thing that should
be provable. Euclid, to his glory, realized that he could not prove it.
Ptolemy – so we are told by Proclus – made an attempt to provide a
proof, which, however, is such a weak begging of the question that we
must wonder if Proclus really understood Ptolemy’s purpose. (I suspect
Ptolemy could simply have explained the intuition underlying the postu-
late, without considering this as a valid proof.)
Khayyam, too, believed he had produced a proof, which means he did
commit an error. But in this case, this was a fruitful error. His idea was to
pursue an entire line of reasoning, ensuing from the hypothesis that the
parallels’ postulate need not necessarily hold. He organized this line of
reasoning around a single geometrical object, a quadrilateral, on the given

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

line AB, AC and BD both perpendicular to AB and equal to each other.
The parallels’ postulate is equivalent to the statement that this quadrilateral
has to be a rectangle. Khayyam pursues the consequences that one may
deduce for this quadrilateral independently: for instance, even if we cannot
prove that the angles at C and D are both right, we can still prove that they
are equal to each other. If they are both acute, the same will be true of all
the corresponding angles in all other such quadrilaterals; if they are both
obtuse, the same will also be true universally.
A
B
D
C
Figure 
Khayyam takes this as a starting point for a series of geometrical
deductions, from which he concludes – on what are essentially metaphys-
ical rather than mathematical grounds (and based mostly on Aristotle) –
that the nonrectangular option is impossible. In this, he is wrong. But the
idea of pursuing the negation of the parallels’ postulate in terms of global
geometrical consequences – and the speciﬁc technique of studying this
with that quadrilateral – will be signiﬁcant. Khayyam’s commentary to
Euclid was not known in Europe, but Tusi – on whom, more in the
following discussion – took up the same idea in his own work (hence
the name by which this is often known, Tusi’s Quadrilateral). Saccheri, in
the middle of the eighteenth century, would produce an entire study of the
quadrilateral, with several propositions resulting for each assumption of the
acute and the obtuse angle; it would be down to several mathematicians in
the early nineteenth century – Bolyai, Lobachevsky, and Gauss – to show
that Saccheri’s alternative geometries, that is, Khayyam’s alternative geom-
etries, expanded, were in fact valid alternatives. Besides Euclidean geom-
etry, there were other, non-Euclidean geometries. It took more than two
thousand years for Euclid’s realization – that he needed to turn this assumption
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

into a postulate – to reach its logical conclusion and so to give rise to a new
conception of mathematics. The decisive turn taken, nearly a thousand years
ago, somewhere between Nishapur, Marv, and Isfahan.
It was there – so far away from Syracuse, Athens, or Alexandria – that
Greek mathematics was now advanced. Space and language were trans-
formed, but the cultural project remained. Indeed, the continuity between
Islamic science and that of Late Antiquity is obvious. Khayyam ended up
opening the way to non-Euclidean geometries, but his purpose was not to
open but to close. Everywhere, we see the project of grand survey,
synthesis, completion. Khayyam tries to ﬁnd those last few theorems that
make Euclid’s Elements axiomatically complete; Al-Haytham tries to ﬁnd
the last few theorems missing from the transmitted Conics. Al-Haytham
also produces a synthesis of mathematics and medicine in his study of the
eye, just as Al-Kindi synthesizes geometry and philosophy – and as Al-
Khwarizmi synthesizes geometry and calculation. Aristotelianism, in its
various Islamic treatments, becomes a uniﬁed system, just as do the
algebraic equations of Khayyam, treated together, surveyed and classiﬁed.
This might compare, perhaps, to Pappus, and perhaps of all Greek
mathematical authors, he comes closest to the spirit of Arabic mathematics
(even while falling short of the intellectual level of the best among Arabic
mathematicians). The Greek authors of Late Antiquity, as well as the
Islamic authors of the Middle Ages, took up the same corpus – the extant
Greek mathematics, from its beginnings to the imperial era – and the same
responsibility, of custodians to that corpus. In Late Antiquity, this custo-
dianship took the form of more teacher-like commentary; in the Islamic
world, this custodianship took the form of more creative, encyclopedic
synthesis. In terms of the divisions proposed in this book, Islamic authors
took late ancient mathematics and pursued it with a sophistication equal to
that of the generation of Archimedes. This is an important experiment,
then, by revealing the possibilities, and limits, of the attitude of Late
Antiquity. However sophisticated, there is one thing Islamic mathematics
was not: it was not modern. Through many centuries, it kept itself, largely
speaking, to the conceptual boundaries of Greek mathematics itself. It was
custodianship, after all. This is a science, aware of its position, indebted to
a classical past. Khayyam, after all, was all too aware of the limits of human
knowledge, already largely achieved – and forever bounded by the divine:
The sphere upon which mortals come and go,
Has no end nor beginning that we know;
And none there is to tell us in plain truth:
Whence do we come and whither do we go.

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Knowledge of the spheres could, in fact, have been Khayyam’s livelihood
(it is possible that in the courts at which he served, his main function was
that of an astrologer). The core of the exact sciences in Islam was
astronomy: the mastery they displayed, above all, was that over Ptolemy
– so much so that his major work, the Almagest, is known to us, now, in its
Arabic title! In terms of his inﬂuence, Ptolemy was Arabic.
A stubborn historiographical myth imagines astronomers, following
Ptolemy and faced with the inevitable empirical shortcoming of the model,
gradually introducing more complications to the models so as to produce a
better ﬁt (“epicycles on epicycles”!) – until ﬁnally Copernicus is done with
all of that. I hope it is clear that this myth is wrong from the start. It suﬀers
from the anachronism, as if ancient astronomy – like that of Newton – was
deduced from laws, in this case expressed in the form of, say, “epicycles.”
The geometrical models used by Ptolemy were important, but they provided
no more than the shape of the theory, and one could not use them to
calculate astronomical positions. Positions were calculated, instead, from
tables. The geometrical model was signiﬁcant as physical theory, but above
all, it provided the mechanism whereby a handful of observations (generally
speaking, the absolute minimum required) could be used to derive the
parameters from which the tables ensued. To revise Ptolemy, then, was
not seen primarily as a matter of revising “Ptolemy’s laws” (what was that?)
but of revising his tables. Furthermore, Ptolemy’s system was quite precise
for the main concern of his astronomy – angular position – and if one
confronted the predictions, computed from the tables, with observations,
one would normally ﬁnd errors of less than ten minutes, occasionally a little
more for the recalcitrant case of Mars. (This precision should not be seen as
surprising: whether one chooses a heliocentric or geocentric reference mat-
ters little for predictions; Ptolemy’s chosen combinations of circles approx-
imate Kepler’s ellipses fairly well, and anyway, the planetary orbits in our
solar system are rather circular ellipses.) Finally, no one ever expected
precision. Everyone – beginning with Ptolemy himself but going back to
Hipparchus and, indeed, even to Archimedes – was clear that all observa-
tions contain error. This was, if anything, a reason to be conservative.
(Suppose one ﬁnds discrepancies from Ptolemy’s computed positions:
Why should these be ascribed to Ptolemy’s errors and not to one’s own?)
In short, it is entirely reasonable that Late Ancient authors – and, of course,
their Byzantine followers – were content, on the whole, simply to comment
upon Ptolemy. The remarkable thing is that Islamic astronomers were not.
Here as elsewhere, Islamic authors displayed not merely their knowledge
of a ﬁeld but their mastery over it. The goal was, then, to be able to remake
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

it. This means, above all, remaking the tables. There are, of course, many
specialized Islamic astronomical treatises, and some of these do obtain the
monumental scale of Ptolemy himself. Al-Biruni’s Canon does not merely
derive new tables but also explains the theoretical principles with which
they are achieved: a new Almagest, in short. But this was the exception.
The standard way to remake Ptolemy was simply to produce a new set of
tables, or “Zij” – the central genre of Islamic astronomy. Kennedy
counted, in , more than a hundred types of Islamic Zijes (!), and
more have been noted since; about twenty, by his reckoning, seemed to
have been based, at least in part, on original campaigns of observation. It
goes without saying that this is a state project. This is also team eﬀort – a
theme that is very alien to Greek astronomical practice but that seems
typical of Islamic astronomy. Our evidence consists, mostly, of fairly
novelistic anecdotes, but those refer systematically to groups of astronomers
working together. Abu’l Wafa and Al-Biruni conspired to observe the same
eclipse, far apart from each other, in – ﬁnding a diﬀerence of one hour
between Baghdad and Khwarizm: astronomy, coordinated across an impe-
rial domain. Much earlier, it is said that Al-Mamun – one of the ﬁrst
Abbasids – sent a group of astronomers to make observations in the Syrian
desert, so as to measure precisely the length, on the earth’s surface, of a
single degree of latitude. As noted on pages –, this is the kind of
thing that the Chinese did but the Romans did not: this was state science.
Islamic tables could be, in fact, very precise. Many types of astronomical
tables are purely mathematical (such as those for trigonometry and
spherics), whereas those of the ﬁxed stars are directly observational. Such
tables can be judged on their own merits. They are, on the whole, superior
to Ptolemy, and they progressively improve. Whereas precision in astro-
nomical observation is limited by the power of the naked eye, there is no
such theoretical limit in trigonometry, and the latest Islamic tables provide
values to the ﬁfth sexagesimal position (this involves not only a great eﬀort
of computation but also progress in numerical and trigonometric
technique). As ever, the great bulk of the work produced does not deviate
from the terms established by the Greek legacy, and indeed, most tables, in
most Zijes, are simply copied over from Ptolemy. There are exceptions,
however. To begin with, this is global science, with global inﬂuences. The
earliest among Islamic Zijes seem to have been produced based, at least in
part, on tables distinct from Ptolemy’s, apparently taken over from Persian
or Indian sources; awareness of Indian astronomy never ceases. This is of
historical interest because it is now believed that the Indian tables, them-
selves, ultimately are adaptations of pre-Ptolemaic Greek techniques; to

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

some extent, they even preserve Babylonian methods of calculation (this
hybrid of Greek and Babylonian seems to have been typical of pre-
Ptolemaic astronomy already in the Greek). And so: Indian, Persian, even
Babylonian inﬂuences. And then, of course: the ripples of Islamic astron-
omy, outward. Through the Mongols, Islamic Zijes would reach into
China itself; Christian Europe got its own Zij through Spain – the famous
Toledan Tables, produced in the eleventh century, translated in the twelfth,
and ﬁnally revised in the thirteenth as the Alfonsine Tables, produced
through the patronage of King Alfonso of Castille. (Latin Europe shared
in the global Islamic science, and its kings, too, came to sponsor state
science.)
The project of Islamic science involves mastery – and synthesis. In fact,
Ptolemy poses a diﬃculty for such synthesis, as was clear already to
Proclus. At the most basic level, his science is much later than
Aristotle’s, which will create diﬃculties for anyone trying to bring the
two
together.
We
recall:
Aristotle
explicitly
assumed
Eudoxus’s
homocentric spheres, and so a synthesis of the astronomer and the philos-
opher would necessarily require modifying at least one of the two. Now,
this is not hopeless: Ptolemy himself was, broadly speaking, an author in
the Pythagoreanizing–Platonist tradition, who wished to show the ratio-
nality of the heavens based on circular motions. The technical diﬃculties
of astronomical motions stood, however, in the way. The myth of epicycles
on epicycles has it right that with an indeﬁnite number of circles, it is, in
principle, possible to approximate curves to the desired degree. This,
however, would have become obviously ad hoc and, worse, hard to
calculate, and in fact, no medieval astronomer went down this route.
More to the point, astronomers did not conceive of their problem funda-
mentally as the ﬁtting of curves. What needed to be explained, above all,
was the pattern of changing speeds. Ptolemy found a powerful approxima-
tion to that in the tool of the equant. Let the planet move on its single
epicycle, around its eccenter, producing the rough outline of the move-
ment required, but then let it move in such a way that in equal times it
would cover equal angles, not relative to its center of revolution (itself
eccentric, that is, not the center of the earth) but relative to yet another
point, the equant. Obviously, this is a good way to approximate Kepler-
like motions on an ellipse, so we can understand why Ptolemy’s model is,
after all, nearly precise. And it was nearly precise in a computable manner,
based on circle-like motions alone.
Here’s the rub: these were circle-like motions – but no more. Circles, if
taken seriously as circles, move around their centers, not around some
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

equants. And if one follows Aristotle, one should then wish to have the
astronomical circles to be that – real circles. For if not, whence the rational
account for their motion? From Al-Haytham on, Islamic authors repeat-
edly criticized the irrational character of this part of Ptolemy’s system. So,
an invitation for other astronomers – to come up with their own
alternative tools.
Some Islamic authors approached the tension between Ptolemy and
Aristotelianism from the vantage point of philosophy. This was especially
common in Andalus: Ibn Rushd’s commentaries to Aristotle are skeptical
of the Almagest; Al-Bitruji, a twelfth-century philosopher, went much
further and issued a new cosmology, trying to revive a model of homo-
centric spheres. Such philosophical contributions do not amount yet to a
variation on Ptolemy’s mathematical astronomy, but Al-Bitruji was not
some kind of marginal crank, and it is important to notice this: Islamic
authors felt free to deny all or any of the claims made by an author as
canonical as Ptolemy. They aimed to be the masters of a Greek legacy; they
were not servile to it. And indeed, if one’s problem was strictly with the
equant, this would imply a well-deﬁned mathematical problem – take the
equant, reduce it to circular motions alone. Can this be done?
By the middle of the thirteenth century, Mongols were ﬁrmly in control
of the entire Persian-speaking world (the site, it will be noted, of much of
Islamic science). Hulagu – Genghis Khan’s grandson – sought to trans-
form the brute force of military conquest into the status of a civilized
Muslim monarch. And so, a court, doing what courts do. In ,
astronomers were summoned from all over; an observatory was set up at
Maragha (in today’s northwestern Iran). Chief in this group was Nasir Al-
Din Al-Tusi (the author through whom Saccheri learned of Khayyam’s
quadrilateral), but we can trace an entire group of astronomers, working at
Maragha with Al-Tusi or elsewhere, immediately afterward, taught and
inspired by Maragha masters. The Zij produced based on the Maragha
observations was entirely traditional, but the group as a whole was char-
acterized by the quest for innovative problems and techniques in
mathematical astronomy.
Ibn
Al-Shatir, a fourteenth-century astronomer, noted an empirical
problem that emerged as a kind of epiphenomenon to Ptolemy’s model.
Focused on the angular position, Ptolemy’s epicycles and eccenters also
can be translated as predictions of planetary distance. Those predictions are
not borne out for the sun (it varies in size a little more than Ptolemy’s
eccentric alone predicts), and they are especially problematic for the moon
(Ptolemy’s epicycle would bring the moon much closer to the earth than it

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

gets in reality). It is incredible – and a mark of the Ptolemy-centered way
in which Ptolemy was even criticized – that no one brought those discrep-
ancies up before Ibn Al-Shatir himself. But perhaps this is because Ibn Al-
Shatir, now, had the mathematical tools necessary not merely to criticize
Ptolemy but to reform him. Heir to the Maragha tradition, Ibn Al-Shatir
knew that precise combinations of two epicycles (known as the Tusi
couple) could give rise to an eﬀect equivalent to an equant. And so, Ibn
Al-Shatir removed Ptolemy’s eccentric and instead had the angular posi-
tions of the sun deduced by a combination of epicycles. An entire series of
publications by several authors in Central Asia and the Near East, from the
late thirteenth century to the mid-fourteenth century, produced variations
on this Tusi theme, producing new models, preserving Ptolemy’s empirical
results but removing the equant. This is as far away as Islamic astronomy
ever got from the Ptolemaic legacy – based, however, on the very Greek
route of geometrical analysis and the demonstration of equivalence
between alternative combinations of curves. What Apollonius did to
epicycles and eccentrics, Tusi now did for the double epicycle and the
equant. Greek mathematics – alive and creative, in the fourteenth century!
Ptolemaic astronomy was perfected throughout the fourteenth century,
in ripples extending out of northwestern Iran. How far did those ripples
extend through global Islamic science? Did they reach Andalus – by now,
no more than a rump near the southern tip of the Iberian Peninsula? (In
, the kings of Spain would expel the last of the Moors.) Did they
reach Latin Europe? This is of decisive signiﬁcance to historians of the
scientiﬁc revolution, and I will brieﬂy return to this question in the
following section. But before I get to the last section of this history, a
ﬁnal turn inward – to my own profession of history – and West, to the
Arab Maghreb. Ibn Khaldun was one of the leading political ﬁgures of the
fourteenth century in what is now Tunisia, at one point its eﬀective
political leader; upon his retirement – just how voluntary was it? – he
turned to write a history. So did many others before him; nothing new.
But Ibn Khaldun did something quite unlike Anna Commena, Polybius,
Xenophon . . . The ﬁrst volume (out of seven!) – the Muqaddimah, or
Introduction – is like nothing written before Ibn Khaldun. I said that I turn
to my own profession, and the remarkable thing about the Muqaddimah is
that Ibn Khaldun is, essentially, my colleague. He reads like a modern
historian, and indeed, his Introduction is precisely a sociology of history. Ibn
Khaldun seeks the general rules of Islamic civilization, and so he notes a
particular pattern. I referred earlier to the way in which Hulagu, in the
thirteenth century, sought to transform military conquest into the status of
The World Made from Baghdad

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a civilized monarch. In this interpretation, I simply follow Ibn Khaldun’s
approach: he explained the trajectory of such transformations and their
cyclical pattern – a civilized court falling at the hand of newcomers (often
from the nomadic periphery), who establish themselves in turn as civilized
court . . . The sociology is, I would say, correct. Ibn Khaldun invented a
new kind of science, and he did it well. In the fourteenth century, Islamic
civilization attained supreme achievements in disciplines as far apart as
history and astronomy.
What are we to do with that? What are we to do, indeed, with the
evidence of the legacy of Greek science in Islam?
To a historian of science, early-twenty-ﬁrst-century global politics are
bewildering. Many seemingly knowledgeable observers look at the tensions
between present-day Islam and Western powers and see there an essential
clash of civilizations. This – when, one era back, their ancestors formed
part of the same civilization! What is so wrong with the twenty-ﬁrst
century? I am primarily a historian of Greek mathematics, after all, and
this question is not for me to answer. Perhaps I can make my tiny
contribution by pointing out how historically contingent – how far from
essential – this purported clash of civilizations really is.
It is, however, within my purview – as I survey the legacy of Greek
mathematics – to point out that the scientiﬁc revolution, that is, the ﬁnal
transformation of Greek mathematics, took place not in the Islamic lands
but in Latin Europe. The Needham question – framing much of
twentieth-century scholarship concerning Chinese civilization – was why
the scientiﬁc revolution took place in Europe and not in China. I think
this is the easier question to answer: it is hard to get to the scientiﬁc
revolution without the Greek legacy, and so China – which had its own
brilliant contributions but had nothing like the generation of Archytas,
let alone that of Archimedes – was at a major disadvantage. But the same is
no longer true for Islam. In the High Middle Ages, the Greek scientiﬁc
legacy was much better known and advanced in the Islamic lands than in
its poor relation, Latin Europe. And so: How did the last become ﬁrst?
The question divides into two. The ﬁrst part has to do with what
happened in Europe, to which I shall immediately turn. The second part
has to do with the Islamic world itself, and here I shall no more than
outline my proposed account. (No Ibn Khaldun myself, I speak with little
authority on the sociology of early modern Islam: but the question is
naturally raised at this point of the argument, and I am not aware of
satisfactory explanations.) The one observation that stands out concerning
Islamic science is the centrality of the court. As we have noted, such courts

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

are ephemeral, but this perhaps serves, if anything, to explain their turn to
scientiﬁc patronage. Ever since the Abbasids, the presence of science in the
court seems to be associated, above all, with the campaign of legitimization
of the court’s new authority. The scientiﬁc mastery of the scholars – to
mark the sultan, himself, as a master. We can understand all of this, based
on Ibn Khaldun.
The revolving door of ever-new sultan dynasties, throughout the history
of Islamic societies, was thus accompanied by a steady accumulation of
scientiﬁc knowledge. Is it a coincidence, then, that the signiﬁcance of
scientists at the court seems to diminish right at the moment that the
sultans, ﬁnally, become stable? From the ﬁfteenth century onward, Islamic
states were consolidated into three major imperial powers – Ottomans, in
the Islamic Mediterranean; Savaﬁds, in Persia; Mughals, in India. For
once, those powers stayed – crumbling, at the end, only under the pressure
of European colonialism itself. Indeed, in the very same ﬁfteenth century,
we see the emergence of stable state power in Europe, as well. Global
developments such as these often have a base in shared technology, and it
is likely that the new stability of the state was based on new military
technologies, above all, the creation of more eﬀective guns. Perhaps there is
less need for symbolic power when one is in possession of the real thing?
Why have an entire retinue of astronomers in court to impress lesser rulers
when you can simply cow them with your weapons? More artillery, less
armillary. If so, we begin to hold the thread that might lead to an
explanation for what would soon transpire in Europe: however much the
science of Latin Europe did belong to the sphere of Islamic science, it did
diﬀer from it in its sociology, and in particular, it did not depend on the
state. Let us begin to follow this thread – and visit Greek mathematics’
ﬁnal vanishing act, into modern science.
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances
We start at the margin. There, in Bachet’s edition of , next to
Diophantus’s problem .(which asked to split a square into two squares;
so, for instance, given a number such as , ﬁnding its composition from
and ) – Fermat had these famous words jotted down:
But one cannot split a cube into two cubes, nor a quadratoquadrate into
two quadratoquadrates, nor in general any power in inﬁnitum beyond the
square into two like powers. I have uncovered a marvelous demonstration
indeed of this, but the narrowness of the margin will not contain it.
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

That we do not have Fermat’s Last Theorem proved anywhere else is not
surprising. Fermat tended not to divulge his proofs. Most of his claims
were left as mere challenges. He would send out letters to his circle of
correspondents, goading them to tackle problems that he claimed he,
himself, had already solved. So, for instance: ﬁnd – but through a gener-
alizable method – a cube integer number so that, adding to it the sum of its
divisors, you get a square! Or ﬁnd a cube integer number so that, adding to
it the sum of its divisors, you get a cube! (Both were sent out in the same
letter of January , .) Such challenges are highly reminiscent of
Archimedes’s letter to Conon, as, of course, is the more fundamental
spirit of the mathematical tournament. Fermat was not exactly a marginal
ﬁgure – in fact, he led the comfortable life of a successful lawyer – but he
did not belong to any “School of Mathematics” in the city of Toulouse,
where he spent most of his career. He belonged to a larger community but
mostly through his correspondence, rather infrequently broken by face-to-
face visits. The setting is indeed so reminiscent of Archimedes: the practice
of science – as a network. For Archimedes, so much of our historical
reconstruction is guesswork; for Fermat, we know more, and we can say
this: he never did prove his “Last Theorem.” He was often convinced of
the truth of general claims based on some special, inspired solutions. The
Last Theorem, in particular, was rigorously proved for the ﬁrst time only
in , based on techniques that would have been inaccessible to Fermat
many, many times over. Most likely, in my view, Fermat was simply
assured of the truth of his generalization based on his discovery that a
quadrato-quadrate number – as he called it – could not be divided into
numbers. In our words, there are no integer solutions of
a4 þ b4 ¼ c4:
Fermat’s proof for that is, in fact, known: it is one of those that he did jot
down, next to another of Diophantus’s problems. The proof is based on a
general technique – always a key concern for Fermat – that he was
especially proud of and did discuss explicitly in his correspondence:
inﬁnite descent. Let me sketch the contours of the argument.
If we have aþ b¼ c, it follows that we have a right-angled triangle
such that each of its sides, themselves, are squares. Now, through the
experience one develops in solving problems such as those proposed by
Diophantus, it becomes clear that Pythagorean triplets can be generated
from a couple of integers, p, q: speciﬁcally, where the right-angled triangle
in integers has the hypotenuse equal to pþ qand the sides equal,
respectively, to p– qand pq. Thus, when we have aþ b¼ c, all

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

three expressions (pþ q, p– q, pq) are, each, a square number. I will
now skip the meat of the proof, which is more technical. The key idea is
that it becomes possible to reduce those expressions and ﬁnd factors,
smaller in value from the p and q from which we started, so that those
new values, once again, are integers producing another Pythagorean triplet,
smaller than the ﬁrst, once again with square integers.
This is all that Fermat needs. The assumption of a Pythagorean triplet
where all sides are themselves squares gives rise to a smaller Pythagorean
triplet where all sides are, once again, themselves squares. There is nothing
wrong with that in and of itself, but a moment’s reﬂection shows that this
is not sustainable. For if we did it once, it is clear that we can do this again
and so ﬁnd a smaller triplet still, where all sides are themselves squares –
and so on, inﬁnitely. But obviously, we cannot go on inﬁnitely because,
you see, numbers are bounded on the way down: if you start with a ﬁnite
integer such as, say, a trillion, and keep ﬁnding a smaller integer, sooner or
later – in this case, after no more than a trillion moves – you will be out
of integers.
Hence we prove, by inﬁnite descent, the impossibility of there being
a4 þ b4 ¼ c4
with integers a, b, and c (which, I suspect, Fermat intuited – and was
proven right, centuries later – must therefore hold for all other powers).
The method is brilliantly original, but its inspiration is Greek. In some
ways, this is like Euclid’s proof for the inﬁnity of prime numbers, taken
upside down. (Euclid proves that if a certain set of prime numbers exists,
another, bigger one may be found; hence, there are inﬁnitely many.
Fermat proves the same, going down – but because the way down is
limited, this proves not that there are inﬁnitely many triplets but that
there can be no such triplets at all.) In other ways, it harks right to the
beginning – Archytas’s argument that if there is an integer ratio between
superparticulars, it must be reducible all the way down to their smallest
versions. Fermat is what you get when you start proving results in
arithmetic, again. It seems as if even the generation of Archimedes did
not do that (arithmetic, for them, might have been understood mostly as
music’s handmaiden, hence was frowned upon?). Now, however, the range
of the problems was provided by Diophantus, which ultimately went back
to the practices of the Near Eastern classroom. In a sense, yet another
synthesis of Greece and Babylon.
We might as well take this small example and generalize it: Fermat, we
see, takes the transmitted text of Diophantus – based purely on the
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

solution of arithmetic problems – and expands it many times over by
applying to it Euclidean proof techniques. The arithmetic is transformed
into number theory, and this happens not because Fermat escaped from
the ancient legacy but because he inserted himself within it: applying
Euclid-like proofs, living an Archimedes-like life. (To be clear, Fermat
did much more besides arithmetic: this section is very selective.)
Bachet published his Diophantus in ; Commandino (of whom we
will hear more later in the chapter) published Pappus’s Collection in .
Here was a book that neither the Arabs nor the scholars of the Palaiologan
renaissance ever knew – surviving in a single manuscript of the ninth
century, possibly the direct copy (conceivably, the only medieval copy ever
made?) of the book put together in Alexandria itself, ﬁve centuries earlier.
The manuscript carries no annotations in later hands, and it may well have
been – like the manuscripts of Archimedes – no more than an adornment
to a library of Byzantium’s ﬁrst renaissance, gathering dust for centuries
(and reaching Italy immediately following the Fourth Crusade). Now,
printed! Clearly, there were many more readers now.
We focus on one of them, Descartes. A contemporary of Fermat
and, like him, a gentleman of comfortable means, he, too, found his
own path – comfortably – not far from the margins. He studied at
university but did not seek an academic position; he set out for military
adventure (of which the seventeenth century had many to oﬀer) but never
attained or perhaps never sought political or military glory. By , at
thirty-three years old, he ensconced himself in the Netherlands, by no
means the boondocks but certainly at a remove from French society. So
what? He had his own massive network of correspondence intercrossing
that of Fermat, and unlike the lawyer of Toulouse, Descartes made good
use of his access to Dutch printers, issuing an array of works that
were decisive to the seventeenth century. His Discourse on the Method,
published in , was a key philosophical work, and an appendix to this
discourse – The Geometry – took a problem in Pappus and turned it into a
new mathematics.
Here is what intrigued Descartes so much. In Book , as we recall,
Pappus expressed his displeasure with Apollonius for his – Apollonius’s –
failure to treat Euclid, the teacher of his teachers, with appropriate respect.
What business is it of Apollonius to argue that Euclid did not solve the
problem of three and four lines? What mattered to Descartes is that this
report suggested an open debate from antiquity. This was an obvious
challenge: How can I, Descartes, solve that which neither Euclid, nor
Apollonius, not even Pappus did? Now, Descartes – like most

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mathematicians of the time – believed that the works transmitted from the
Greeks were just the tip of the iceberg and that there was much more
hidden from view. In particular, it was correctly observed that the extant
Greek mathematical works made it hard to see how their results could be
found. (I would say that many ancient mathematical authors, especially in
the generation of Archimedes, sought maximal eﬀect and surprise; hence,
they made less eﬀort to explain the routes leading to their results.) From
there, it is but a small step to a suspicion, common to many of the
mathematicians of Descartes’s time, that the Greeks had possessed some
secret methods, never divulged in their works. A certain historiographical
paranoia (they’re hiding something!) is typical of the seventeenth-century
attitude toward the Greeks.
The project, then, almost determined itself: ﬁnd a solution to Pappus’s
problem – by ﬁrst discovering some kind of secret, more general method,
with which Greek geometrical problems can universally be solved.
Pappus’s problem – known as the three- and four-line locus problem –
is indeed a very general one and so suggests itself for such a treatment:
Having three, four, or more lines given in position, it is required to ﬁnd a
point from which the same number of lines can be drawn, each making a
given angle with one of the given lines, so that the rectangle of two of the
lines drawn bears a constant given ratio to the square of the third line (if
there be only three), or to the rectangle of the other two (if there be four).
Not only is this a very general problem, but it is also quite obviously a
quantitative one (what matters is not the resulting conﬁguration but
certain relations of quantity). This immediately suggests treating the
geometrical elements in terms of the manipulation of quantity, which is
precisely what Arabic mathematicians – and so, following them,
Europeans – had been doing in their algebra. The very fact that there
was no trace of this in any extant Greek mathematical writing dictated – by
the force of historiographical paranoia – that this must have been what the
Greeks were hiding all along. Algebra must have been the secret method.
Descartes begins his treatise with the statement that all problems of
geometry can be seen to require the ﬁnding of the lengths of certain
straight lines and that all geometrical manipulations, such as taking a line
from a line, ﬁnding a line that is the fourth term in a proportion, and so
forth, have analogues in arithmetic operations such as subtraction and
multiplication, so that one can use such arithmetic operations (that is,
D. E. Smith and M. L. Latham, The Geometry of René Descartes (Mineola, : Dover, ), p. .
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eﬀectively, algebra) to solve any geometrical problem. The treatise ensues,
leading to a solution of Pappus’s problem – and to the invention of
analytic geometry. This, then, is the vanishing act. Diophantus became
number theory; Pappus became analytic geometry – all because Fermat
and Descartes fully immersed themselves within the project of reviving a
Greek science.
Let us pause to reﬂect.
I think of this period – the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries – as the
scientiﬁc renaissance. It is most often referred to as the “scientiﬁc revolu-
tion” (although scholars today are usually coy about such terms, with their
implication that history has a simple structure, indeed, even a direction).
We sped through the history of Islamic mathematics, and I noted that,
unfortunately, that history is yet to be written. The history of the scientiﬁc
revolution is written many times over, and we do not need to rewrite it
here. In this section, I merely consider a few vignettes and concentrate on
just one question: What stands out in such vignettes, relative to the long
history of Greek mathematics?
First, a rather obvious thing: this is the science of western and northern
Europe. Consider Descartes in Leiden, even Fermat in Toulouse. Those
spaces did not belong in any signiﬁcant way to the civilization of Greek
science. In a grand historical narrative, it is correct to think of the Middle
Ages as a period of retreat: especially so for the old centers. If one could
produce a time-lapse series of Rome, or of Constantinople, from to
, the images would appear catastrophic. But if you would do the
same time-lapse through the following centuries, and farther away, the
picture would be very diﬀerent. A time-lapse of Oxford, or of Samarkand,
from to would be very upbeat. Things were continuously
improving! The Middle Ages, all told, are a period of expansion for
Mediterranean culture, mostly in two directions: into Central Asia (spear-
headed by Muslims) and into northern Europe (spearheaded by
Christians). Many of the scientiﬁc advances of the Middle Ages came from
that Central Asian region (this is the land of Omar Khayyam, Ibn Sinna, of
the Maragha school, and of Ulugh Beg’s observatory). It is unsurprising
that northern Europe – with its coastline, rivers, and fertile plains – would
ultimately be the more prosperous and populous and so should contribute
even more.
Another thing that pops out of the evidence, compared to Islam, is the
multiplicity of contexts for scientiﬁc practice. We will note a few more
vignettes. Many authors of the scientiﬁc renaissance did rely on princely
patronage. Descartes, as is well known, was lured, toward the end of his

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

career, to Queen Christina’s court in Sweden (where the severity of the
weather, and of Christina’s routine, promptly killed him oﬀ). But this is of
a piece with the peripatetic theme of his life and underlines the multiplicity
of contexts within which science in early modern Europe was pursued,
even by a single person. (Should we even think of Descartes as a
Frenchman – or as Dutch?) And quite simply, there were plenty of princes
to choose from. Islam had its own political instability, but this was more in
time than in space – Ibn-Khaldun’s iteration of rises and falls. As empha-
sized by Scheidel, western Europe stands out, in historical comparison, in
the degree of its political fragmentation.This is especially signiﬁcant,
then, from our perspective, in comparison with Islam.
Political fragmentation was essential to the context in which Greek
science began, and the relative consolidation of Hellenistic monarchies
did not remove the dispersion and multiplicity of ancient science. It was
not essentially produced for patronage, but rather, it was made for status –
seeking the approval of an audience and of one’s peers. It was produced
from many places, from many contexts – which is perhaps related to its
more open-ended creativity. Fermat’s challenge
is reminiscent of
Archimedes’s challenge, for a reason. So, early modern Europe, re-creating
Greek political fragmentation and, with it, Greek authorial practices?
But there is also one further thing that stands out in historical compar-
ison. Fermat and Descartes both passed through universities without,
however, becoming academics. Which was the rule: most scientiﬁc authors
in early modern Europe had a university education, and only a few settled
down as professors (this ﬁnal professionalization, with science becoming a
profession pursued mostly in universities, happened only throughout the
nineteenth century). As a context for one’s overall career, the university
was merely one option among many. But as a trigger, it was ubiquitous.
When still young men, future scientists, in early modern Europe, traveled
to a place of learning, where they met like-minded individuals, leafed
through library collections, and heard lectures that at least touched on
scientiﬁc topics. (Young “men”: a masculine science, embedded now in
gendered institutions.) There is hardly any precedent for that in antiquity,
and although the university – like most aspects of intellectual life in
medieval Europe – is technically an Islamic innovation, it does diﬀer from
its antecedent, the madrasa, in a crucial way. The Islamic madrasa was in a
kind of binary opposition to the Islamic court. So far, it is comparable to
W. Scheidel, Escape from Rome: The Failure of Empire and the Road to Prosperity (Princeton, :
Princeton University Press, ).
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the church. However, as the Islamic court monopolized Greek learning, so
the madrasa found its scope in Quranic learning: literary, grammarian, and
above all, legal scholarship. The Islamic lands did build public institutions
for medicine, separately, in state-funded hospitals, which often became
centers for medical education – and this, too, was later imitated by
Christians. But the exact sciences did not become part of any curriculum:
one typically became a mathematician through private tutoring followed
by service to the sultan.
Medieval European courts were far too weak to become the main site of
culture, à la Baghdad (although not for lack of trying, as witnessed, for
instance, by the ephemeral renaissance of Charlemagne). As we have seen
in Byzantium: culture – all of it, religious, literary, scientiﬁc – remained
the property of the church. And so, as the madrasa of Islamic legal law was
adapted, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, to become the university
of the Catholic Church, it naturally became the site of the entirety of all
available cultural legacy. The exact sciences were still very far from the core
of the mission of the university: in each individual university, science was
at the margins. But there were plenty of universities (reﬂecting, once again,
the massive political fragmentation). And so – plenty of margins for
science to take hold in.
So, on to another vignette – now, at the very geographical edge. We
move much earlier in time, to the ﬁrst years of the sixteenth century, and
farther north and east, to the Polish borderlands: obviously, time to look at
Copernicus. He was born in in Torun, near present-day Gdansk, to a
family well connected in the church. And so he naturally got a good
education, studying at Krakow and then at Bologna and Padua. There
were many universities, with their own local traditions: from this smor-
gasbord, one could fashion for oneself the education one wanted. His
connections secured him the sinecure of a cathedral canon in Frombork,
not far from his native Torun, and he took his work seriously, spending
forty years in the uneventful pursuit of his duties to the church and his
passion for learning. The passion was wide in scope. The only project
Copernicus ever pursued by himself all the way to print was a Latin
translation of an early Byzantine moralistic piece in epistolary form. He
deﬁnitely knew his Greek! He was taught in the universities of the
Renaissance, and he was eager to discover and revive ancient learning in
its pristine form. Above all, ancient astronomy. Like many others before
him – from Proclus through Al-Haytham and Al-Bitruji to the school of
Maragha – he admired Ptolemy but was critical of him. Indeed, the
continuity between Copernicus’s techniques and those of the school of

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Maragha is such that most scholars now assert (although no documents
have yet been found to conﬁrm this) that Copernicus learned some key
technical ideas, including the Tusi couple, in some indirect way, from
that school.
As noted earlier, there were usually two grounds for criticizing Ptolemy.
One was philosophical – his model did not ﬁt well within Aristotelian
cosmology. The other was technical – Ptolemy’s geometry contained ad
hoc assumptions, especially the equant, which, among other things,
seemed inconsistent with the goal (expressly stated by Ptolemy himself )
of reducing all motions to simple circles. Now, Aristotle still reigned
supreme in ﬁfteenth-century Europe, as he did for centuries since his
canonization in Late Antiquity, but the sheer plurality of intellectual sites,
coupled with a quest for erudition, made it far more natural to approach
Aristotle, as it were, from the margins. Copernicus translated, from the
Greek, the obscure Theophylact Simocatta, and he also sought out, from
his readings, the cosmologies of more minor ﬁgures, a Philolaus, an
Aristarchus. He thus took the Maragha project of expunging the equant
and sought to place it within a sound metaphysical project that, for once,
did not necessarily mean that of Aristotle. Now, just as the Ptolemaic
system was marred by the ad hoc use of the equant, there was a potential
redundancy in that each planetary model had to possess, independently, its
own basic motion around the zodiac, rectiﬁed by its own combination of
epicycle, eccentric, and equant. By making the system heliocentric, the
earth’s single motion around the sun could, at a stroke, provide all the
individual planets with their own basic rotation relative to the earth.
Heliocentrism was metaphysically complicated, as long as you were
Aristotelian, but it was mathematically simpler. Hence Copernicus’s
model: Maragha – but with obscure Greek erudition!
Before , Copernicus sent around the Commentariolus – a brief
summary of his system – as a letter to his friends. Print had been around
for decades, although not so commonly for scientiﬁc works. Most schol-
arship was still done in the way it always has been, scholarly networks of
correspondence. The cathedral canon himself might have been stuck in
Frombork, but the work did travel; eventually, an eager young admirer,
Rheticus, extracted Copernicus’s magnum opus from his hands and had it
published in – as Copernicus was nearly on his deathbed – Six Books
on the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres. This was now a printed book,
and a cause célèbre.
Most deﬁnitely not a scandal. On the Revolutions was the most ambitious
work of astronomy to date in Latin and was immediately admired as such.
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Like the best of the Islamic astronomers, it displayed the mastery of the
author by covering the same ground as Ptolemy – the six books compress
Ptolemy’s thirteen, for instance, by having a single book cover all the
planets, but the sequence is essentially the same. The absolute requirement
for a genuine astronomer was, of course, to calculate detailed tables, which
is why Copernicus took his time: this is, indeed, hard work for a mathe-
matician working alone. (Already by , tables based on Copernicus
were issued separately as the Prussian Tables – a Zij! – recalculated by
Erasmus Reinhold.)
Why was Copernicus successful? Modern readers are impressed espe-
cially by Copernicus’s heliocentrism – because it is true and Ptolemy’s
geocentrism isn’t – but this was, of course, not evident to readers in the
sixteenth century. What they saw was, so to speak, not Aristarchus but
Maragha. Copernicus’s technical innovations got rid of the equant, and in
this, they were clearly superior to Ptolemy. (We are less impressed because
to us, the Tusi couple is just as erroneous as the equant – if anything,
perhaps more distant from the truth of the ellipse! Which reminds us of
the danger of anachronistically reading past science through the prism of
what is now known to be true.) It is often remarked that Copernicus’s
system was not empirically superior to that of Ptolemy, but of course, this
was so by design: Copernicus did not start from any worry concerning
Ptolemy’s empirical deﬁciency, and his task was, instead, to recover
Ptolemy by alternative geometrical means. Empirical considerations
were secondary.
Tycho Brahe was one of the ﬁnest – and richest – of Denmark’s
nobility. He had the connections, which mattered immensely within the
burgeoning, many-centered scientiﬁc network. And he had the resources
to pursue science. It was a pluralistic system: science could be found in
many corners, pursued in many ways. It could also be pursued by oﬀering
distinct, alternative models, and Brahe proposed a rather obvious hybrid
model. The elongation, from the sun, of two of the planets – Venus and
Mercury – is bounded; that of the others is not. Brahe proposed that
Venus and Mercury rotate around the sun while the other planets, like the
sun itself – together with its satellites, Venus and Mercury – circle the
earth. Unlike, say, Copernicus, Brahe had the means to set up his obser-
vatory, Oraniborg, on his private island not far from Copenhagen (partly
funded by the Danish king, too – connections!). All this, in a sense, was
nothing new – Islamic courts had been doing this literally for centuries –
but a campaign of observations carried a radically new meaning once
several rivaling astronomies were on oﬀer. All of a sudden, it was back to

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Hipparchus, criticizing rival astronomical models – with Oraniborg as the
new Babylon. The observations came in fast and thick – or rather, fast and
subtle (a genius observer and instrumenter, Brahe could determine posi-
tions down to the minute). By the end of the sixteenth century, Brahe – as
noblemen of the era often did – got in trouble with the Danish court. He
eventually decamped to Prague, where he was supposed to produce for the
Habsburg emperor, Rudolph, a new publication based on all those obser-
vations – the Rudolphine Tables. (Of course! What else are astronomers for,
if not a Zij?) An up-and-coming young scholar, Johannes Kepler, was
recruited to help with the calculations. And then, when Brahe died in
, the thirty-year-old Kepler stayed on: someone had to do something
with all those numbers.
In an era of many-sided geniuses, Kepler was more many-sided than
most. His Neoplatonism was of his own making. He suspected that the
precise details of mathematical astronomy were dictated by precise geo-
metrical patterns – we are reminded of Ptolemy’s Harmonics – and his ﬁrst
eﬀort at an astronomical model ﬁtted the solar system within the ﬁve
regular solids (this is much more Platonist than your average philosophi-
cally motivated astronomy). He was indeed an erudite and brilliant math-
ematician: so, for instance, he was the ﬁrst to make sense of the note in
Pappus, according to which Archimedes discovered the thirteen semi-
regular solids. (Kepler did this by discovering, by himself, a proof – which
is very diﬃcult – for why only those thirteen were possible. Pappus never
reported this. As with Descartes: original mathematics, motivated by
Pappus’s omissions!)
Starting out as a Platonist, Kepler was willing to consider the possibility
of new astronomical systems and to evaluate them according to an array of
considerations, mathematical and metaphysical. Now, one of the observa-
tions that made the heliocentric system attractive, from the metaphysical
point of view, was that one then found that the planets assumed to be
closer to the sun moved faster; the farther ones, slower. This suggested a
certain metaphysics or even physics – the sun, as the cause of the planets’
motion – and Kepler saw that this could generate the eccentric-like
appearance of the motion (a new way, then, of reducing the irrationality
of Ptolemy’s devices). Suppose that the planets move not in a perfect circle
but in some other trajectory, and this trajectory has the nature that the
planet moves faster, closer to the sun, and slower, away from it. Just as the
Maragha school and Copernicus got rid of the equant, so Kepler’s more
physical trajectory, in a sense, would get rid of both eccentrics and
epicycles. It would not be a circle – but it would be a directly motivated
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

curve. The obvious shape to correspond to this description was an egg –
becoming wider in its slow base, elongated in its faster apex. A diﬃcult
curve, but Kepler, the widely read mathematician, knew how to approx-
imate such curves. This was obviously rather similar to an ellipse, and
Archimedes, in his Conoids and Spheroids, had directly shown how to
measure a sector of an ellipse. One could therefore apply Archimedes
and assume – on close analogy of Ptolemy’s equant – that the planet
covered equal sectors of the ellipse (the one approximating the egg) at
equal times. Thus, a combination of techniques from Archimedes and
from Ptolemy could be used to deduce planetary positions.
As Kepler went through the labor of producing the calculations and
making them agree with Brahe’s numbers, the realization gradually
dawned on him: the scaﬀold was, all along, the building itself. The ellipses
were best understood not as tools with which to calculate the real egg-like
trajectory but as the actual curves: planets move, in fact, in elliptic trajec-
tories. When the Rudolphine Tables was ﬁnally published in , the
tables were based on the assumption of elliptic trajectories and speeds
corresponding to elliptic sectors. They were also decisively more precise
than Ptolemy’s tables (this was true for no previous Zij). For a good reason,
too: Kepler has discovered the truth. This, then, is a good moment to
pause again and reﬂect on the scientiﬁc revolution.
The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions was Thomas Kuhn’s second book. The
ﬁrst was titled The Copernican Revolution. The key example for Kuhn – the
paradigm, if you will – of a “scientiﬁc revolution” was the transition from
Ptolemaic to Copernican astronomy. Kuhn’s model stemmed from a wide
tendency, broadly Neo-Kantian, in the early twentieth century, to see the history
of science as the unfolding of overarching conceptual systems. It was thus natural
to look for “the conceptual system of Ptolemy” and “the conceptual system of
Copernicus” and to consider the process through which the ﬁrst conceptual
system was transformed into the second. Kuhn’s contribution – which made his
work so captivating for a large audience in the s – was the relativist
implication of such an understanding of history. If indeed diﬀerent scientiﬁc
theories are each embedded within their own conceptual system (which
is one of Kuhn’s usages of the word paradigm), if important scientiﬁc changes
– “revolutions” – involve an entire paradigm shift, and if, as seems philosoph-
ically plausible, theories are to be judged relative to their conceptual framework,
then it becomes impossible, strictly speaking, to argue that one theory is better
than another. Better, relative to which framework?
One may argue for or against this as a philosophy of science. Speaking as
a historian and focusing just on the question of the legacy of Greek science,

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I have two observations, one relatively minor (as far as Kuhn is concerned),
the other more signiﬁcant.
The minor observation is that the Ptolemaic–Aristotelian paradigm,
overthrown by modern science, was much more recent than Kuhn imag-
ined. Like most nonspecialists, Kuhn supposed that Aristotle was broadly
canonical from the beginning and that although the ancients oﬀered
various astronomical variations, these had all to agree with the
Aristotelian framework. Ptolemy, in this understanding, merely provided
the ﬁnal touch. This is wrong. In fact, Aristotle was not canonized
throughout most of antiquity; Greek philosophers were in continuous,
ever-shifting debate; the very practices of astronomy went through several
stages in antiquity before they became stabilized through the ultimate
canonization of Ptolemy – and of Aristotle – in Late Antiquity. This is
signiﬁcant because Kuhn, mistakenly, imagined a neat dichotomy between
an ancient monolith and its modern replacement. That antiquity was not a
monolith will matter in the discussion to come. But it also matters that the
great Ptolemaic–Aristotelian continuity is to be found in a much narrower
set of practices – those of commentators from Pappus onward but espe-
cially, and more creatively, in Islamic science.
This brings me to the second and more major point. Viewed against this
tradition – of Islamic astronomy – Copernicus is seen not as a radical
departure but as a brilliant culmination. He does exactly the same thing all
creative astronomers were doing throughout the Middle Ages: he masters a
particular book and re-creates it by eliminating diﬃculties having to do
with Ptolemy’s more ad hoc tools and by recalculating, and improving,
Ptolemy’s tables. Now, it is true that Copernicus, besides reinventing (or,
more likely, applying) the Maragha ideas of replacing the equant, also had
the idea of an extra simpliﬁcation of removing one of the circles, in each
planetary model, by reducing it to a single circle of the earth’s rotation.
And it is true that this idea, in Copernicus’s own mind, was embedded
within his brand of philosophical erudition, somehow related to his own
version of Platonism or Pythagoreanism. But this was not a move, in
Copernicus’s mind, away from the Greeks. This was meant, if anything,
as a virtuoso display of Greek erudition, akin to his translation of the
diﬃcult text of Theophylact. This is not the mindset of a revolutionary
trying to overthrow the past. It is the mindset of someone trying to reenact
the past – a person of the Renaissance. Which is, of course, what
Copernicus was. Indeed, this was more than an aspiration: to an extent,
it is fair to say that Copernicus’s success was precisely in that he re-created
a Greek experience.
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

What I mean is the following. Conceive of something akin to
Copernicus’s On the Revolutions – published in around . I hasten
to explain: Copernicus’s work is so deeply Islamic that it would be absurd
just to plop it into the second century . But we may conceive of a
response to Ptolemy, proposed right at the end of that century, recalculat-
ing Ptolemy’s positions without the equant, and with a heliocentric model
instead. This would not have been a revolution at all. (And this is why my
observation on the absence of a scientiﬁc consensus, prior to Late
Antiquity, is signiﬁcant.) This would have been ancient science as it always
was, zigzagging through debate. Had there been a Hipparchus-like mind,
not much later than Ptolemy, then of course, the thing to do would have
been to attack Ptolemy and replace him! Now, Copernicus – in compar-
ison to a typical ancient author – is extremely deferential to Ptolemy
(although recall that Ptolemy, already, was remarkably collegial to his
sources), and in particular, his close adherence to the basic structure of
Ptolemy’s approach would have been very surprising from an ancient
author. In this adherence, Copernicus was still Islamic. But the major
original move – the attitude that science should be made via a critique – is
a revival of a Greek context and is of a piece of Copernicus’s erudition as a
humanist as, indeed, he reveals himself not only in his translation of
Byzantine literature but in his famous introduction:
Some think that the earth remains at rest. But Philolaus the Pythagorean
believes that, like the sun and moon, it revolves around the ﬁre in an
oblique circle. Heraclides of Pontus, and Ecphantus the Pythagorean make
the earth move, not in a progressive motion, but like a wheel in a rotation
from west to east about its own center.
The point is not that Copernicus had ancient antecedents for his
heliocentrism. Those were, in fact, insigniﬁcant. The point is that
Copernicus evoked the full cacophony of ancient debate as the immediate
background for his own bold assertions. In this, he diﬀered from, say, Ibn
Al-Shatir, revealing that he was, in fact, made by the European
Renaissance rather than just by global Islamic science.
The Maragha school did involve a number of astronomers, each pro-
posing their own alternatives (if within fairly constrained parameters).
Copernicus, recalling ancient cacophony, had revived it for Europe. The
point is not that Copernicus’s system gradually won but that, through the
E. Rosen, Nicolaus Copernicus: On the Revolutions (Warsaw–Cracow: Polish Scientiﬁc Publishers,
), p. .

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

process of its victory, it unleashed a variety of alternatives in highly visible
competition. So immediately there came Tycho Brahe – and his rival
Ursus, who beat him to the publication of his own hybrid model – with
new and improved techniques of computation invented along the way.
(Ursus and Brahe quarreled not only over models of the sky but also about
a certain technique of approximation in the construction of tables called
prosthaphairesis. Another technique – that of logarithms, inspired by
Archimedes’s own astronomical calculations – was developed by several
astronomers but ﬁnally published by Napier in ; this technique was
crucial for Kepler.)
Thomas Kuhn, of course, was familiar with the sheer variety of astron-
omies and astronomical techniques on oﬀer through the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. As we will note, in some sense, this variety came to
an end at the close of the seventeenth century, as Newtonianism became
dominant. From Kuhn’s perspective, then, this was a story of crisis and
resolution. In this telling, the hitherto Ptolemaic system reached an impasse
in the late ﬁfteenth century; science was thrown into crisis with ﬁerce
debate and little agreement on the very basic terms of a world system, but
of course, the revolution was over at the end, and order restored.
From our perspective, however, Copernicus was the one who achieved
the restoration – by restoring, that is, the original instability of Greek
science.
The condition for it all is the sheer profusion of writing. This is clearly
related to the rise of print, although the relation of cause and eﬀect is
complicated. After all, Gutenberg would not have printed his Bible had
there not been demand for books, already, on a European scale. Print is
made possible by the abundance of paper, at the very technical level that
one could not have a print industry on parchment but also in that the
massive production of paper manuscripts throughout the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries created the book culture that made print economi-
cally feasible. This, in turn, depended on the fragmented and multisited
network of many princes, cathedrals, universities – and private patrons –
each coveting their own library. Many of our handwritten manuscripts of
Greek literature postdate even the Palaiologan renaissance and were pro-
duced in Latin-speaking Europe for Renaissance patrons throughout the
ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries. With one single exception – the
Palimpsest – this is true, for instance, of all extant Archimedes manu-
scripts. Early in the ﬁfteenth century, Bessarion had one copied for his
collection – ﬁnally deposited in Venice; the Medici sponsored a copy for
their own library in Florence, late in the same century (this is the
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

misleading, quasi-facsimile imitating the early minuscule hand of its
archetype, Codex A). Altogether, Heiberg counted eighteen Renaissance
copies in Greek, but we should also add a Latin translation made in the
middle of the ﬁfteenth century and its own copies (one of those Latin
copies – discovered in by James Banker – was copied in Piero Della
Francesca’s hand;it seems clear that Leonardo da Vinci read it, as well).
Copies of Moerbeke’s translation were known, directly or indirectly, as
well: in there came the ﬁrst printing of works by Archimedes,
produced by the Italian astronomer Luca Gaurico. (This was the
Quadrature of the Parabola and the Measurement of the Circle.) Tartaglia
published in – still in Latin – On Balancing Planes, as well as a very
garbled version of On Floating Bodies, Book ; in the same year there came
out a bilingual printing in Basel, with Regiomontanus’s translation of the
entirety of the contents of Codex A (so, without On Floating Bodies).
Scholars in Italy and beyond were bringing works from the past and
acting out their roles as Greek scientists. Brunelleschi, the famous math-
ematician and architect of the dome of the cathedral in Florence, was “the
Second Archimedes,” a title sought by many. Maurolico was born in
Syracuse (no less!) in – one of the best mathematicians of the
century, he was recognized for his new studies in Archimedean topics,
ﬁnding, for instance, the centers of gravity of solids, which Archimedes
assumes in his writings without proof (new mathematics – as with the case
of Descartes – produced by the sense of loss). Maurolico was – so
Commandino – “so skilled in mathematics that in these times he can with
justice be said to be another Archimedes.” (This speciﬁc praise, we note, is
entirely a cliché: to be a supreme mathematician meant to be an
Archimedes.)
Commandino should have known. The texts issued by Gaurico,
Tartaglia, and Regiomontanus were garbled, thwarted by their faulty
manuscripts as well as by the sheer diﬃculty of so much of Archimedes’s
mathematics; Archimedes aimed, after all, at a certain enigmatic eﬀect, and
he was an enigma to his Renaissance readers. All the more tantalizing! Born
in , Federico Commandino would become master of the entire
breadth of Greek mathematics. Throughout his career, he published
superb Latin translations that may often serve, even now, as the guide
for the edition of the Greek text itself, all thanks to his great skill in
uncovering ancient authorial intentions. He produced the Pappus that
J. R. Banker, “A Manuscript of the Works of Archimedes in the Hand of Piero della Francesca,” The
Burlington Magazine (): –.

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

impelled Descartes; Apollonius’s Conics; and above all, the complete works
of Archimedes, in (most of the works) and – On Floating
Bodies.
Vincenzo Galilei was one of Florence’s leading musicians, respected for
his erudition in harmonic theory and historical lore concerning Greek
music: he belongs to a circle of musicians at the time who tried to revive
the music of ancient Greek tragedy and ended up inventing modern opera
(ancient music: in yet another vanishing act). He never quite reached,
himself, the top rung of Florentine society, never managed entirely to
escape the low status of a mere musician-artisan. Hence, perhaps, the
ruthless ambition of Vincenzo’s son, born in . This son – Galileo
Galilei – would navigate the many facets of the culture of Renaissance
Europe, a tightrope act conducted with great aplomb and with a single
famous error.
As a mere youth, Galileo shone in elegant disputation and poetry,
delighting Florence’s high society. This was followed by a brilliant imita-
tion of Archimedes, the Bilancetta, or Small Balance – the booklet in
manuscript, with which we started this book. We recall: Galileo, in a
display of his historical erudition, recounted Vitruvius’s account of the
problem of the crown; followed this by mathematical erudition, connect-
ing this account to Archimedes’s actual On Floating Bodies; and con-
structed his own balance so as to perform Archimedes’s trick. If the goal
was to become a new Archimedes, what better than to remake his sup-
posed instruments? It was on the strength of such mathematical feats that
Galileo got his university positions, ﬁrst in Pisa, then in Padua. Galileo was
alerted in to a new optical invention – the telescope. He knew best
about mathematical instruments – and so he jumped right in, made his
own telescope, directed it to the sky . . . He was surrounded by the
cacophony of competing theories incited by Copernicus, and this meant
that such observations could gain a new meaning. Galileo supported
Copernicanism, completely bypassing the technical questions of astronom-
ical models (this entire Ptolemaic tradition hardly interested him, his
implicit attitude being, so to speak, “equant schmequant”). Instead,
Galileo concentrated directly on the metaphysical – and, literally, meta-
physical – questions. The telescope had shown mountains and seas on the
surface of the moon, moons surrounding Jupiter . . . surely this all refuted
Aristotle’s philosophical account of a distinct astral realm made of
pure spheres of ether. This was Galileo’s point: he was mathematically
trained – he understood the optics of refraction, the geometry of revolving
moons – and so he was the one most capable of resolving philosophical
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

questions, and all this just because he was mathematically trained. That’s
the metaphysics point of it all, the question of how to study physics – and
who should study physics. As he would later write, in famous words, “The
book of nature is written in the language of mathematics”! The study of
nature – belonging, in Galileo’s view, to the mathematician.
Archimedes and his generation developed an autonomous science
because, in the third century , mathematics and philosophy grew
apart. But as Galileo – like so many before him – tried to revive
Archimedes as an authority, seeking once again the autonomy of his own
science, this was in a setting very diﬀerent from that of third-century
Alexandria. Mathematics and philosophy were woven together, and
Galileo’s remaking of Archimedean autonomy was of mathematics as
superior to philosophy – not science, apart from philosophy, but science,
rather than philosophy, as the route for learning the truth about nature.
A bold claim – made by a shrewd author who knew his way around Italian
courts. The new discoveries were published in a booklet addressed to the
prince of Florence; even better, Jupiter’s moons were called the Medici.
(We recall Conon ﬁnding Berenice’s lock of hair in the sky.) Soon, Galileo
was installed as court philosopher in Florence, one of the most visible
positions in all of European scholarship. The quest for status, ﬁnally
complete!
Of course, his position might have become a little too visible.
Copernicus had conceived of his system even before Martin Luther con-
ceived of his theses, but by the beginning of the seventeenth century, the
Catholic Church was in full ﬁght, seeking to reestablish its authority. Even
more worrisome than the idea of the motion of the earth was the temerity
of mathematicians to dictate truth to philosophers. This could not please
the masters of the church’s doctrines, all trained Aristotelians. Galileo was
nearby; unlucky events followed each other; two trials, in and then in
, gradually constrained his activities. The notion that there is some
kind of inherent antagonism between science and the church rests almost
entirely on the popular legend surrounding this episode. As for Galileo, he
could not publish in Italy now, so his ﬁnal and most important work – the
culmination of his life project – was published in in the Netherlands,
instead. (As ever in early modern Europe: fragmentary politics – beneﬁt-
ting the progress of science.)
Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New
Sciences is as elegant a piece as any written by Galileo. Recalling the
canonical works of Plato and his Latin imitator, Cicero, this is in dialogue
form, and unlike most such imitations, it lives up to its models. The sense

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of place and persons is vivid, and their gradual learning builds up genuine
drama. Indeed, the science itself builds up its surprises and climaxes.
Galileo learned the craft of mathematical narrative from Archimedes
himself. Let us describe one ﬁnal proof from the “ﬁrst day” (the conver-
sation of the two new sciences is supposed to take place over four days).
AFB is a semicircle around center C, contained in the rectangle ABED,
with CD, CE joined and CF perpendicular to AB.
C
B
N
O
L
P
F
D
E
H
I
G
A
Figure 
Have the entire thing rotate around CF, and you have a cylinder arising
out of the rectangle ABED, a cone arising out of the triangle DCE, and a
hemisphere arising out of the semicircle AFB. We are asked to imagine the
cylinder with the hemisphere removed from it – the “bowl” ADFEB. Draw
now an arbitrary parallel to DE, namely, GN, cutting the lines as shown in
Figure . As the main speaker in the dialogue notes, from now on, “the
demonstration is short and easy.” Paraphrasing, we have the following:
IC2 ¼ IP2 þ PC2ðPythagoras’s theoremÞ,
but
IC ¼ AC ðradiiÞ ¼ GP,
and
CP ¼ PH ðbecause CF ¼ DFÞ:
And so, bringing it all together:
GP2 ¼ IP2 þ PH2, or
GP2  IP2 ¼ PH2:
Circles are to each other as the squares on their radii, so that, at the end:
The circle associated with the cylinder, minus the circle associated with the
hemisphere, is equal to the circle associated with the cone.
Now, “the circle associated with the cylinder, minus the circle associated
with the hemisphere” is the ring associated with the “bowl.” Hence, the
ring associated with the bowl is equal to the circle associated with the cone,
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and – because both solids are made of all such planes – we conclude that
the cone is equal to the bowl. This is true, to repeat, plane by plane –
which is most evident “at the bottom.” Around the line DE, the circle DE
is the base of the bowl but also the base of the cone. They just coincide.
But as we go upward, the cone becomes a smaller and narrower circle; the
bowl becomes an ever-more-hollowed ring. They are still equal! Indeed,
they must therefore be equal all the way to the top. Right at the topmost
tip of the arrangement, the cone is a mere point at C; the bowl is a one-
dimensional circle passing through points A and B –
and the point is equal to the circle.
Which is literally the point of this exercise.
Now that’s quite something. Galileo develops an entire array of such
paradoxes of inﬁnity, all marshalled for the sake of a rather wild meta-
physics. (The world is atomist, but each atom is an inﬁnitesimal . . .
Whatever this is, Aristotle it is not.) And we note everything, together:
the very Archimedean mathematical proof – down to the very techniques
of curvilinear measurement; the characteristic Galilean move of deploying
Archimedes – as against Aristotle. Galileo’s particular brand of atomism
was not to last, but the mathematical technique was part and parcel of a
much broader tendency in seventeenth-century mathematics. It was espe-
cially from the series of works sent to Dositheus that mathematicians
learned of the technique of considering a curved ﬁgure as an approxima-
tion from a series of ever-closer rectilinear ﬁgures. They suspected, as ever,
that there was a hidden method underlying it all, and incredibly, they were
more or less right. (The “method” they imagined was in fact very much the
same as that of the treatise of that name – its only extant copy, however,
was then hidden under a prayer book in a monastery not far from
Jerusalem.) Kepler wrote a magniﬁcent New Stereometry of Wine Barrels (!),
with curvilinear measurements of various strange ﬁgures, all achieved by
their consideration slice by slice. Cavalieri, one of Galileo’s pupils, pub-
lished in a much more ponderous volume on the same topic. This
book, Geometry of the Indivisibles, is almost seven hundred pages long (for
his pains, however, Cavalieri was dubbed by Galileo “a new Archimedes”:
of course!). What Cavalieri did achieve was a more formal statement of a
general method with which such measurements, based on indivisibles,
could be obtained. And in this, he was not Archimedes: he went beyond
Archimedes. As ever, trying to recover the lost past, mathematicians
quickly sought methods and generalizations, and this, in and of itself,
constituted a new science. By the mid-seventeenth century, a standard

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

research area in mathematics was the quest for general methods for ﬁnding
the areas contained by curves. Archimedes, in Spiral Lines, had obtained
such an area – and had also shown how the circumference of the circle was
related to the tangent of the spiral. Inspired by Apollonius, especially,
mathematicians were also looking for general methods of ﬁnding tangents
and other lines deﬁned by curves. What else did the ancients discover? (It
is said that one of the reasons attracting Descartes to Leiden was the
knowledge that Golius – a Renaissance scholar of Arabic – had there a
manuscript with Apollonius translated into Arabic, with more of the
Conics than were known in Greek.) Looking for general methods for
ﬁnding areas, general methods for ﬁnding tangents . . . It was evident to
many that the two were connected, and in Barrow showed –
amazingly, Archimedeanly! – that if one curve is area-ﬁnding to another
curve, then that other curve is tangent-ﬁnding to the ﬁrst. Amazing,
Archimedean . . . But once again, not quite: such proofs in the latter
half of the seventeenth century repeatedly refer to “general curves,” a
creature Archimedes never knew. One seeks the ancient, lost methods –
unsurprisingly, erring to the side of generality.
But we are pushing too far ahead. We are still in – we should peer
ahead merely from day one to days three and four of Galileo’s dialogue.
Galileo was impelled onto his scientiﬁc trajectory by Archimedes’s On
Floating Bodies. It all began, after all, from the Small Balance! His ﬁrst
attempt at a major study was tentatively called “De Motu,” and what
Galileo was trying to achieve in this manuscript was a theory whereby all
falling bodies were ruled by considerations similar to Archimedes’s law of
buoyancy. In other words, Galileo’s ﬁrst eﬀort was to generalize On
Floating Bodies from water to air. This is not a silly thought – aerodynamics
is essentially an extension of hydrodynamics – but of course, this cannot
work without a better understanding of the behavior of falling bodies. The
manuscript “De Motu” was aborted, and Galileo put it aside, trying out
alternative approaches. But then again, Galileo knew – as probably
Ptolemy did but surely as Philoponus and many later medieval philoso-
phers knew before him – that Aristotle’s account wouldn’t do, either. The
task was to remake Aristotle’s physics on mathematical – that is,
Archimedean – foundations. Aristotle – not a geometer but heir to the
mathematics of the generation of Archytas – assumed proportions every-
where: so, he assumed that the heavier an object was, the faster it fell.
Whether or not Galileo checked this experimentally, he had good reasons
to doubt this, and he had the good physical intuition: the proportion,
Galileo realized, must hold for a diﬀerent set of relations.
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And so, Galileo found a diﬀerent way of using proportions. Correlated
with the speeds were not the weights but the times. Falling objects
accelerated at a uniform rate: their speeds at a given time could be
described geometrically as growing lines. The distance traversed in the
course of a given time could then be described as the area of a triangle (we
are looking for inﬁnitesimal lines, composing areas: the habit of mathe-
maticians, trying to re-create lost Archimedean insights). This is day three
of the dialogue (Figure ).
A
C
B
D
Figure 
But more than this: suppose a body is pushed sideways; it will tend to
continue horizontally at the constant speed in which it was pushed but
would also be pulled down, vertically, in a uniformly accelerated motion.
As the projectile progresses, the horizontal component grows linearly while
the vertical component grows in the ratio of squares. A curve, where the
linear in one dimension is correlated with the squared on the orthogonal –
well, of course, this is the parabola, the most Archimedean of all geomet-
rical ﬁgures. And this is day four of the dialogue (Figure ).
h
f
g
o
l
n
a
b
c
d
e
i
Figure 

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The rules governing falling bodies are found by Archimedean, not
Aristotelian, notions; the book of nature is written in the language of
mathematics . . .
The denouement is nearby. Falling bodies trace a parabola; planets trace
an ellipse; new geometrical techniques – due to Descartes’s analytic
geometry and due to inﬁnitesimal studies by Cavalieri, Barrow, and many
others – make it natural to generalize across curves as the expression of
more abstract, algebraic relations. In Barrow relinquished his chair of
mathematics at Cambridge to his pupil, Newton. By that time, Newton
was already in possession of his physical system, a synthesis of Kepler and
Galileo, to some extent supported by Newton’s own general method of
inﬁnitesimals, the calculus. Like Archimedes, Newton, too, was an enig-
matic author – although of a more paranoid style – and, like Fermat, he
conducted much of his career by throwing out hints and promises. He
therefore took his time, but ﬁnally, in , he published Mathematical
Principles of Natural Philosophy – the Principia. As the title proclaims,
Galileo was right; mathematics did triumph over philosophy. The system
of the world is given by simple geometrical laws. The law of gravity is
quadratic, and for this reason, it ensues in conic sections: hence the ellipses
of planets and the parabolas of falling bodies and the greatest synthesis,
since Ptolemy, of all science. The Principia was the ﬁnal vanishing act of
Greek mathematics, and we might as well end there.
Let me conclude this survey with two observations, one more contin-
gent, the other more structural.
The contingent point is that without the towering synthesis of the
Principia, there would have been no Newtonianism to deﬁne the eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries, arguably no Enlightenment, and a very
diﬀerent trajectory to modern history. But working backward, without
Galileo and Kepler, there would have been no Principia, and at a very basic
technical level, both Kepler and Galileo would have been strictly impos-
sible without conic sections. (I return to this in the epilogue.)
Well, you might say: had there not been conic sections, one ought to
have invented them! This is all well and good. As a logical possibility,
Kepler and Galileo, had they been forced to, could, of course, have
invented conic sections from scratch. But to state this logical possibility
is to miss the key historical realities. One is that Kepler used conic sections
not because he needed to invent them but, on the contrary – he did so as a
mere scaﬀold, simply because this was the only tool he had available with
which to measure eggs. Another is that Galileo noted and emphasized
the shape of the curve resulting from the fall of a projectile not because
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

this was a necessary corollary but because this was an especially valuable
feature – because it provided Galileo’s science with an Archimedean
respectability.
The same realities could be repeated for all mathematicians of the
seventeenth century. Kepler and Galileo, and their entire generation,
turned to conic sections because they had Archimedes. Had they not
had him, they would have not. Which is indeed obvious, given that conic
sections, as the center of a mathematical research agenda, emerged exactly
once in history – as the parting shot of the generation of Archytas and as
the central theme of the generation of Archimedes. Take away these two
generations, and you take away the tools with which to make a Newton.
This, then, is a contingent fact, a coincidence, if you will. The more
structural point concerning the scientiﬁc Renaissance has to do, more
generally, with its attitude toward the Greeks.
We are reminded, once again, of Descartes, relocating to Leiden so as to
see the manuscript (even if in translation!) of Apollonius’s lost Conics; we
are reminded of Commandino, recovering the text of so many diverse
authors, cleaning them up, and ﬁnding their mathematical signiﬁcance; we
are reminded of Copernicus, translating the absolutely obscure letters of
Theophylact . . . One feature of the Renaissance of early modern Europe
was its philological ambition. The goal was, quite simply, to ﬁnd out
everything knowable about the ancients. This urge, indeed, is noticeable
already with the Palaiologan renaissance, and it becomes systematic and
even professional by the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries. Incredibly, this
project was, on the most part, achieved. Throughout the seventeenth
century at the latest, nearly all the manuscripts were identiﬁed, nearly all
ﬁrst editions printed. (The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries could
dedicate themselves to the task of professional textual criticism based on
the manuscripts and texts that were already known; the twentieth and
twenty-ﬁrst centuries, left with the thankless task of interpretation.)
Contrast this with the Arabic reception of Greek culture. Here the
impetus was much more restricted and short-lived. There was an initial
engagement with a project of translation, much of it mediated by mid-
dlemen (as it were, it was Syriac readers pushing Greek into Arabic, no less
than Arabs seeking to absorb Greek). Once a certain corpus was brought
into Arabic – and once there grew, surrounding that translated corpus, an
original, Arabic library tradition of interpreting and using that selection of
the Greek past – the impetus was gone, and new translations, largely
speaking, were no longer sought. We notice Ibn Al-Haytham, wondering
about the contents of the ﬁnal book of Apollonius’s Conics, trying to

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

reconstruct it, perhaps giving up on the project because he was not sure
that this was the correct reconstruction . . . Al-Haytham was born in Basra
and died in Cairo. Was it that hard to travel, even once, the same distance
so as to visit Constantinople, to seek that which was lost? Of course,
Apollonius could not be found there. But, in the eleventh century, Pappus
was still available – and just what could an Islamic mathematician do with
that? One can imagine a whole new Islamic renaissance out of such what-
ifs. The thing is that they remain as counterfactuals. Al-Haytham did not
cross the Mediterranean. Nor is this some kind of peculiar Islamic deﬁ-
ciency: an exactly analogous story can be told of medieval Latin Europe,
absorbing (once again, mostly via middlemen) many Islamic works but
then showing almost no curiosity for ﬁnding out what more was there in
Arabic. And once we put the two indiﬀerences side by side, the Islamic and
the Latin, they make sense: in both cases, the absorbing culture experi-
enced itself as fundamentally alien from the source culture. Islamic authors
highly valued their Greek scholars, but to them, they were ciphers – as in
Borges’s famous image of Ibn-Rushd, trying in vain to understand what
Aristotle’s distinction between tragedy and comedy even meant . . . Greek
history was known as vague legends, and its main ﬁgures were only very
tentatively put in particular spaces and times. There was no clear map of
inﬂuences, proximities, oppositions: and so, no urge to ﬁll in the gaps
because there was no mental map in which such gaps could present
themselves. Similarly, of course, for Europe’s reception of Islam. (How
many Europeans even realized that, say, the two towering ﬁgures of
Avicenna and Averroes – Ibn-Sina and Ibn-Rushd – came from the
opposite geographical ends of the Islamic world?)
But the reception of classical antiquity in early modern Europe was very
much unlike that. Vincenzo, the father, recovering Athenian tragedy –
followed by Galileo, the son, recovering Syracusan geometry – and the two
are of a piece, part of a similar project where antiquity, as an entire world
of meaning, is vividly present. This explains why Europeans sought to
know more and more of this past antiquity but, even more signiﬁcantly,
why they felt themselves at home in the past. This is the constant theme of
the quest, to ﬁnd and learn all the ancient works – but also, to reconstruct
for oneself the secret methods of the Greeks, now no longer available.
Authors in early modern Europe naturally slid into a reenactment of the
ancient sources. This quality – the live-action role-playing of classical
antiquity – gave the Renaissance of early modern Europe a distinct quality
and meant that, for once, one did not merely survey and master past
achievements, but instead, one sought to insert oneself within the past; one
The Renaissance to End All Renaissances

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sought to become the “new Archimedes.” The new Archimedes they
became; and then, the vanishing trick – and Archimedes was gone. From
now on, he would belong, strictly, to the pages of “A History of Greek
Mathematics.”
Suggestions for Further Reading
It is very clear what you should read for book culture in Byzantium: this is
N. Wilson, Scholars of Byzantium (London: Duckworth, ), an erudite
and readable introduction. There is nothing comparable speciﬁcally on the
tradition of mathematics in Byzantium. The recent edition, R. Netz,
W. Noel, N. Tchernetska, and N. Wilson, The Archimedes Palimpsest
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), adds much more on
book culture and speciﬁcally on the Archimedean tradition.
The ﬁeld of Arab language mathematics is vast, and as yet, there are no
ready syntheses. G. Saliba, A History of Arabic Astronomy (New York: New
York University Press, ), is essential for the Islamic route to non-
Ptolemaic astronomy. On pure mathematics speciﬁcally, J. L. Berggren,
Episodes in the Mathematics of Medieval Islam, nd ed. (New York:
Springer, ), is excellent, although technical and also – by design –
highly selective.
Not enough has been written on Islamic science. There is, on the other
hand, quite a lot to read on science in early modern Europe! You should
read, of course, T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ). Its picture of a normal
Ptolemaic–Aristotelian science thrown into crisis through empirical diﬃ-
culties, ultimately ensuing in a paradigm shift into Newtonian science, is
to be qualiﬁed in several ways. The actual practices of the new science are
the subject of another classic, S. Shapin and S. Schäfer, Leviathan and the
Air-Pump (Princeton, : Princeton University Press, ) – which is
essential for the social realities of science in the era (on which I touch only
very lightly). P. L. Rose, The Italian Renaissance of Mathematics (Geneva:
Librairie Droz, ), remains crucial for the origins of the so-called
scientiﬁc revolution in the Renaissance project of restoration of the past.
For speciﬁc trends and authors, H. J. M. Bos, Redeﬁning Geometrical
Exactness (New York: Springer, ), is essential for the mathematics of
Descartes and his generation, understood on its own terms; for the route
leading to the new astronomy, two books are outstanding in diﬀerent
ways. O. Gingerich, The Book Nobody Read (London: Penguin, )
(warning: an ironic title!), an account of the legacy of Copernicus’s De

Into Modern Science: The Legacy of Greek Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Revolutionibus, is extraordinarily fun for such an intricate and precise book;
J. Voelkel, The Composition of Kepler’s Astronomia Nova (Princeton, :
Princeton University Press, ), is more technical but still an accessible
account of the process leading Kepler to his major astronomical model.
There are so many books to recommend on Galileo and Newton, one
hardly knows where to begin, and perhaps it is best to read a good
biography: J. L. Heilbron, Galileo (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
), and, of course, R. Westfall, Never at Rest (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, ).
Suggestions for Further Reading

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

