
Introduction to
Topological
Quantum Matter
& Quantum
Computation


Introduction to
Topological
Quantum Matter
& Quantum
Computation
Tudor D. Stanescu

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
Version Date: 20160812
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4822-4593-6 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts 
have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers 
have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to 
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has 
not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmit-
ted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.
com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood 
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and 
registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, 
a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used 
only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Names: Stanescu, Tudor D., 1967- author.
Title: Introduction to topological quantum matter & quantum computation / 
Tudor D. Stanescu.
Description: Boca Raton, FL : CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, [2017] | 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016033577| ISBN 9781482245936 (hardback ; alk. paper) | 
ISBN 1482245930 (hardback ; alk. paper) | ISBN 9781482245943 (e-book) | 
ISBN 1482245949 (e-book)
Subjects: LCSH: Quantum theory--Data processing. | Topology. | Quantum 
computing.
Classification: LCC QC174.17.D37 S73 2017 | DDC 530.1201/514--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016033577
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

To Elvira


Contents
Preface
xiii
Part I
Preliminaries: From Quantum Mechanics to
Quantum Computation
Chapter 1 ■Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
3
1.1
THE QUANTUM MEASUREMENT PROBLEM
4
1.2
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
7
1.2.1
Noiseless quantum theory
9
1.2.2
Noisy quantum theory
10
1.3
INTERPRETATIONS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS,
REFORMULATIONS, AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS
17
1.3.1
Interpretations and reformulations of quantum
theory
17
1.3.2
Generic framework for hidden variable theories
20
1.3.3
Weak measurements and weak values
22
1.4
BELL’S THEOREM
25
1.4.1
Quantum entanglement and the EPR argument
25
1.4.2
Local, quantum, and no-signaling correlations
26
1.4.3
Bell inequalities
29
1.5
QUANTUM CATS AND QUANTUM COINS
31
1.5.1
Bell experiments and loopholes
31
1.5.2
The CHSH game
32
1.5.3
The quantum Cheshire cat
34
Chapter 2 ■The Geometric Phase
37
2.1
GEOMETRIC PHASES: EXAMPLES AND OVERVIEW
38
2.1.1
Classical and quantum holonomies
38
2.1.2
Historical overview and conceptual distinctions
43
vii

viii
■Contents
2.2
PHASE CHANGES DURING CYCLIC QUANTUM
EVOLUTIONS
45
2.2.1
The Berry phase
45
2.2.2
The non-Abelian adiabatic phase
51
2.2.3
The Aharonov–Anandan phase
53
2.3
THE MATHEMATICAL STRUCTURE OF GEOMETRIC
PHASES
55
2.3.1
Basic deﬁnitions and examples
55
2.3.2
Elementary introduction to ﬁber bundles
59
2.3.3
Holonomy interpretations of geometric phases
64
Chapter 3 ■Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
67
3.1
INTRODUCTION
68
3.2
CLASSICAL INFORMATION THEORY
73
3.3
CLASSICAL THEORY OF COMPUTATION
79
3.3.1
Computational models: The Turing machine
79
3.3.2
Computational complexity
83
3.3.3
Energy and computation
86
3.4
QUANTUM INFORMATION, QUANTUM COMPUTA-
TION, AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM MATTER
88
Part II Topological Phases of Matter
Chapter 4 ■Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter
Physics
95
4.1
THEMES IN MANY-BODY PHYSICS
96
4.2
LANDAU THEORY OF SYMMETRY BREAKING
99
4.2.1
Construction of the Landau functional
101
4.2.2
Phases and phase transitions
104
4.3
TOPOLOGY: MATHEMATICAL HIGHLIGHTS
108
4.4
TOPOLOGICAL ORDER, SYMMETRY, AND QUANTUM
ENTANGLEMENT
112
4.5
TOPOLOGY AND EMERGENT PHYSICS
117
Chapter 5 ■Topological Insulators and Superconductors
119
5.1
INTRODUCTION
120
5.2
SYMMETRY CLASSIFICATION OF GENERIC
NON-INTERACTING HAMILTONIANS
122

Contents
■ix
5.2.1
Time-reversal symmetry
122
5.2.2
Particle-hole and chiral symmetries
125
5.2.3
Classiﬁcation of random Hamiltonians
127
5.3
TOPOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION OF BAND INSULATORS
AND SUPERCONDUCTORS
129
5.3.1
The origin of topology in gapped non-interacting
systems
131
5.3.2
Classiﬁcation of topological insulators and super-
conductors
134
5.4
TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS: CHERN NUMBERS,
WINDING NUMBERS, AND Z2 INVARIANTS
140
5.4.1
Hall conductance and the Chern number
140
5.4.2
Chern numbers and winding numbers
142
5.4.3
The Z2 topological invariant
147
Chapter 6 ■Interacting Topological Phases
155
6.1
TOPOLOGICAL PHASES: ORGANIZING PRINCIPLES
156
6.1.1
Systems with no symmetry constraints
157
6.1.2
Systems with symmetry constraints
161
6.2
QUANTUM PHASES WITH TOPOLOGICAL ORDER
163
6.2.1
Eﬀective theory of Abelian fractional quantum
Hall liquids
164
6.2.2
The toric code
171
6.3
SYMMETRY PROTECTED TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM
SATES
175
6.3.1
SPT phases in one dimension
176
6.3.2
SPT phases in two and three dimensions
180
Part III Topological Quantum States: Design and En-
gineering
Chapter 7 ■Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
187
7.1
TOPOLOGICAL BAND THEORY: CONTINUUM DIRAC
MODELS
188
7.1.1
Graphene and Dirac fermions
189
7.1.2
Quantum spin Hall state: The Kane–Mele model 191
7.1.3
Three-dimensional four-component Dirac Hamil-
tonian
196

x
■Contents
7.2
TOPOLOGICAL BAND THEORY: TIGHT-BINDING
MODELS
198
7.2.1
Haldane model
199
7.2.2
Mercury telluride quantum wells: The BHZ model 201
7.2.3
p-Wave superconductors in one and two dimen-
sions
203
7.3
TOPOLOGICAL FIELD THEORY
212
Chapter 8 ■Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostruc-
tures
217
8.1
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
218
8.1.1
Majorana zero modes
218
8.1.2
“Synthetic” topological superconductors
222
8.2
REALIZATION OF MAJORANA ZERO MODES: PRACTICAL
SCHEMES
225
8.2.1
Semiconductor-superconductor hybrid structures 225
8.2.2
Shiba chains
234
8.3
EXPERIMENTAL
DETECTION
OF
MAJORANA
ZERO
MODES
237
8.3.1
Tunneling spectroscopy
237
8.3.2
Fractional Josephson eﬀect
241
8.3.3
Non-local transport
243
Chapter 9 ■Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
247
9.1
BRIEF HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
248
9.2
MANY-BODY PHYSICS WITH ULTRACOLD GASES: BASIC
TOOLS
249
9.2.1
Cooling and trapping of neutral atoms
249
9.2.2
Optical lattices
253
9.2.3
Feshbach resonances
256
9.3
LIGHT-INDUCED ARTIFICIAL GAUGE FIELDS
259
9.3.1
Geometric gauge potentials
260
9.3.2
Abelian gauge potentials: The Λ scheme
262
9.3.3
Non-Abelian gauge potentials: The tripod scheme
and spin-orbit coupling
263
9.4
TOPOLOGICAL STATES IN COLD ATOM SYSTEMS
265
9.4.1
Realization of the Haldane model with ultracold
atoms
265

Contents
■xi
9.4.2
Majorana fermions in optical lattices
268
Part IV Topological Quantum Computation
Chapter 10 ■Elements of Quantum Information Theory
271
10.1
BASIC CONCEPTS
272
10.1.1
Quantum bits
272
10.1.2
Quantum operations
274
10.1.3
No cloning
277
10.2
ENTROPY AND INFORMATION
278
10.3
DATA COMPRESSION
281
10.3.1
Schumacher’s noiseless quantum coding theorem 282
10.4
ACCESSIBLE INFORMATION
283
10.4.1
The Holevo bound
284
10.5
ENTANGLEMENT-ASSISTED COMMUNICATION
285
10.5.1
Superdense coding
286
10.5.2
Quantum teleportation
287
10.6
QUANTUM CRYPTOGRAPHY
289
10.6.1
Quantum key distribution
290
Chapter 11 ■Introduction to Quantum Computation
293
11.1
INTRODUCTION: THE UNIVERSAL QUANTUM
COMPUTER
294
11.2
QUANTUM CIRCUITS
297
11.3
QUANTUM ALGORITHMS
300
11.3.1
Deutsch’s algorithm
300
11.3.2
Quantum search: Grover’s algorithm
302
11.3.3
Quantum Fourier transform: Shor’s algorithm
306
11.3.4
Simulation of quantum systems
310
11.4
QUANTUM ERROR CORRECTION
313
Chapter 12 ■Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation 319
12.1
QUANTUM COMPUTATION WITH ANYONS
320
12.1.1
Abelian and non-Abelian anyons
320
12.1.2
Braiding
322
12.1.3
Particle types, fusion rules, and exchange prop-
erties
324

xii
■Contents
12.1.4
Fault-tolerance from non-Abelian anyons
327
12.1.5
Ising anyons
329
12.1.6
Fibonacci anyons
331
12.2
ANYONS AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM PHASES
333
12.2.1
Abelian Chern–Simons ﬁeld theories
335
12.2.2
Non-Abelian Chern–Simons ﬁeld theories
337
12.3
TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTATION WITH
MAJORANA ZERO MODES
339
12.3.1
Non-Abelian statistics
339
12.3.2
Fusion of Majorana zero modes
341
12.3.3
Quantum information processing
343
12.4
OUTLOOK: QUANTUM COMPUTATION AND
TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM MATTER
344
References
347
Index
375

Preface
Quantum topology and quantum computation are relatively new, exciting,
and rapidly developing ﬁelds that have attracted a lot of interest in recent
years. Perhaps more importantly, these areas host some of the most signiﬁcant
research eﬀorts to identify new paradigms for understanding physical reality.
From this perspective, they should be regarded as intimately related aspects of
an interdisciplinary eﬀort that integrates ideas from physics, mathematics, and
computer science and aims to understand how quantum matter is organized
and how the Universe is processing information. Eventually, this eﬀort could
lead to a reﬁnement, if not a revolution, of the fundamental physical theories.
The main goal of this book is to provide the newcomer to the ﬁeld with a
broad perspective of this vast and diverse landscape. Having such a perspective
could facilitate a productive transfer of ideas among diﬀerent related areas,
could help avoiding misconception and false targets, and, ultimately, could
lead to a better understanding of the underlying physics. The book is intended
as a sort of “travel guide” for students who plan to do research in this ﬁeld
and students who have worked for a while on a speciﬁc research problem but
lack a broader perspective. No one is able to “visit” all the interesting places
(i.e., to become an expert in all those related areas). However, it is critical,
I believe, to have an idea about their existence, their signiﬁcance, and their
relationship with the object of one’s immediate interest. After all, climbing a
summit without being able to see the panorama reduces it to a purely technical
exercise that is less likely to lead to future success.
Being mainly about the big picture this book is anything but comprehen-
sive. Each chapter addresses a topic that deserves its own specialized book.
In fact, these books exist and some of them are listed in the reference section.
The list of references is relatively long, but again, far from comprehensive.
My intention was to point the reader in the right direction. Actually reaching
speciﬁc places (i.e., mastering various concepts and techniques) requires a lot
more eﬀort. After all, just reading the travel guide does not get you to the
actual site.
Many of the topics discussed in this book have generated a lot of excitement
in recent years. Unfortunately, with excitement oftentimes come exaggeration
and false hope. I tried to avoid these pitfalls, as much as possible, and provide
warnings when appropriate. I also tried to avoid oversimpliﬁcations, which are
extremely tempting especially when dealing with technically complex prob-
lems. All the material covered is this book is introductory, but not necessarily
xiii

xiv
■Preface
elementary. Some concepts and techniques become (or maybe appear) simple
only after establishing a certain familiarity with that particular topic. There-
fore, readers with diﬀerent backgrounds may ﬁnd certain (unfamiliar) sections
as particularly diﬃcult. If it is unbearable, you can probably skip them; how-
ever, spending some time and eﬀort will deﬁnitely bring a reward.
I assume that writing a book always involves an intense personal experi-
ence. For me, it was, in some sense, similar to self-taught skiing. The weather
is nice, the view is outstanding, other skiers graciously pass by; it cannot be
too bad. You overcome your fear and let go. What follows is a rapid succession
of emotions that mixes genuinely fearing for your life and cursing the moment
when you decided on such a foolish adventure with feeling some hard-to-deﬁne
excitement.
Ultimately, however, a book is ﬁrst and foremost a collective endeavor:
there are the people whose knowledge and ideas have shaped the author,
making the writing of the book possible, there are others who shared some of
the eﬀort and frustration involved by this process, and, ﬁnally, there are the
readers who will taste the fruits of this labor. I can only hope that someone will
beneﬁt from this work, making it meaningful and worthwhile. What is clear, is
that over the years I beneﬁted from the support and example of many people
who have shaped my career and my views; they deserve my unconditional
gratitude. In particular, I am deeply indebted to Gheoghe Ciobanu, Radu
Lungu, Philip Phillips, Eduardo Fradkin, Gabriel Kotliar, Victor Galitski, and
Sankar Das Sarma. I also thank my collaborators Sumanta Tewari, Jay Deep
Sau, and Roman Lutchyn with whom I had many stimulating discussions on
research problems related to some of the topics covered in this book and my
colleagues Alan Bristow and Mikel Holcomb for reading some of the chapters
and providing valuable suggestions. This book would not have been written
without my editor Francesca McGowan luring me into this project, then kindly
and patiently following its progress.
This work could not have been completed without the love and support of
my family, my wife Elvira and my children Alexandru and Irina. My apologies
for depriving them from shared time that rightfully should have been theirs.
I also thank my mom for encouraging me to ﬁnish this work and for her love
of books.
Tudor D. Stanescu
College Park

I
Preliminaries: From Quantum
Mechanics to Quantum
Computation
1


C H A P T E R 1
Quantum Theory: Some
Fundamentals
CONTENTS
1.1
The quantum measurement problem ......................
4
1.2
Operational quantum mechanics ..........................
7
1.2.1
Noiseless quantum theory ..........................
8
1.2.2
Noisy quantum theory .............................
10
1.3
Interpretations of quantum mechanics, reformulations,
and other developments ...................................
17
1.3.1
Interpretations and reformulations of quantum
theory ..............................................
17
1.3.2
Generic framework for hidden variable theories ...
20
1.3.3
Weak measurements and weak values .............
22
1.4
Bell’s theorem ..............................................
25
1.4.1
Quantum entanglement and the EPR argument ..
25
1.4.2
Local, quantum, and no-signaling correlations ....
26
1.4.3
Bell inequalities ....................................
29
1.5
Quantum cats and quantum coins .........................
31
1.5.1
Bell experiments and loopholes ....................
31
1.5.2
The CHSH game ...................................
32
1.5.3
The quantum Cheshire cat .........................
34
T
OPOLOGICAL MATTER IS FUNDAMENTALLY QUANTUM
mechanical, with no correspondent in the classical world. Therefore, it
would be quite natural to begin our journey with a review of topics that
are particularly relevant to understanding the nature of topological quantum
states, such as Berry phases and anyon physics. Yet, even before discussing
those topics, pausing to think about some fundamental aspects of quantum
theory would be extremely worthwhile. For several decades after the triumph
of quantum mechanics in the 1920s and early 1930s, thinking about the foun-
dations of the theory and challenging its standard interpretation were viewed
3

4
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
by a majority of physicists as a waste of time, if not plain heresy. The judg-
ment of the physics community on the value of such an endeavor has drastically
changed after the groundbreaking work of John Bell and the subsequent ex-
perimental tests during the 1970s and 1980s. Today, studying the foundations
of quantum mechanics has turned into a ﬂourishing ﬁeld intimately linked
with the explosive rise of quantum information theory. Yet, the subject still
has a rather marginal place in standard quantum mechanics textbooks, which
focus on the formalism and on the recipes necessary for doing calculations.
This chapter is intended for the reader who is less familiar with the prob-
lems brought to the fore by quantum information theory and the work on the
foundations of quantum mechanics as a brief introduction to these ﬁelds and
a summary of the basic terminology. But why should one bother about such
things when discussing the physics of topological quantum matter? Basically,
because the two areas are intimately connected: on the one hand, quantum
computation is a prominent item on the list of possible applications for topo-
logical quantum states, on the other hand, key concepts in quantum theory,
such as quantum entanglement, play a central role in understanding topologi-
cal matter. Hence, starting the journey with a thought about the foundations
of quantum mechanics should enable us to grasp the delicate root that makes
the quantum world utterly strange and beautiful, then follow it as it grows
out of the sphere of few particle physics into the realm of many-body systems.
1.1
THE QUANTUM MEASUREMENT PROBLEM
There is a certain uneasiness about quantum mechanics that every student
of this ﬁeld has probably experienced in some measure. And it is not just
the insecurity that results from losing the ﬁrm ground of classical intuition;
special relativity also deals with this type of problem and does not generate
similar feelings. Nor is it at the center of any controversy similar in scale
and depth with, for example, the debate [455] between Einstein and Bohr on
the foundations of quantum theory. To better understand the source of the
problem, let us recall the “standard” way of presenting quantum theory, i.e.,
starting from certain principles or postulates [126, 440] — a typical approach
that can be found in most of the commonly used textbooks. More speciﬁcally,
let us focus on the key postulates that deﬁne the state vectors and their
evolution, as well as the observables and the measurements.
(α) The physical states of a quantum system are associated with the one-
dimensional subpaces (rays) of a complex Hilbert space1 H. All predictable
properties of the system are completely deﬁned by the state vector |ψ⟩∈H.
1A (real or complex) Hilbert space H is an abstract vector space endowed with an inner
product. If |φ⟩and |ψ⟩are two elements of H, the inner product associates to this pair of
vectors a complex number ⟨φ|ψ⟩satisfying the following properties: i) conjugate symmetry,
⟨ψ|φ⟩= ⟨φ|ψ⟩∗, ii) linearity, ⟨aφ+bχ|ψ⟩= a⟨φ|ψ⟩+b⟨χ|ψ⟩, where a, b are complex numbers,
iii) positive-deﬁniteness, ⟨ψ|ψ⟩≥0, ⟨ψ|ψ⟩= 0 ⇔|ψ⟩= 0. For details see [366, 369, 374].

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■5
For composite systems, the Hilbert space is the tensor product of the Hilbert
spaces associated with the component systems.
(β) The time evolution of a state vector is determined by a unitary opera-
tor2 U(t, t0), called the evolution operator, so that |ψ(t)⟩= U(t, t0)|ψ(t0)⟩for
any two times t0 and t.
(γ) Every physical observable A is associated with a hermitian operator
A acting on H. The possible results of a measurement are the eigenvalues
ak of the corresponding operator, A|k⟩= ak|k⟩. If the state of the system
is represented by the state vector |ψ⟩, the probability of obtaining ak as the
result of the measurement is given by the squared modulus of the inner product
between |ψ⟩and the eigenvector |k⟩, pk = |⟨k|ψ⟩|2 (the Born rule).
(δ) After a measurement that returns the value ak, the system is left
in a state corresponding to the projection of |ψ⟩onto the subspace of the
eigenvalue ak (projection postulate or wave function collapse). Repeating the
measurement will return the value ak with unit probability.
For simplicity, we have assumed that ak is a nondegenerate eigenvalue and
we have implicitly adopted the Schr¨odinger picture. This framework can be
easily expanded to address the generic case, as we will discuss in the next
section. Here, however, we are only interested in the general structure of these
postulates. More speciﬁcally, on the apparent internal inconsistency between
the state vector postulates (α) – (β) and the measurement postulates (γ) –
(δ). The ﬁrst two postulates depict the quantum system as having determin-
istic, continuous, and reversible dynamics, while the last two characterize the
measurement process as intrinsically nondeterministic and associated with dis-
continuous, irreversible time evolution. Why are there two types of dynamics?
One could argue that the measurement process involves the interaction of the
quantum system with a macroscopic, classical apparatus. But what sets the
boundary between quantum and classical?
Let us assume that the measuring apparatus is, in fact, described by quan-
tum mechanics. Consider a simple two-state quantum system, such as, for
example, a spin-1/2 particle, that is initially in a state |ψ⟩= a| ↑⟩+ b| ↓⟩,
where | ↑⟩(| ↓⟩) is the spin up (down) eigenstate with respect to a certain
axis and |a|2 + |b|2 = 1. When the measurement starts, the quantum system
– apparatus composite is described by the direct product |Φ(0)⟩= |ψ⟩⊗|φ0⟩,
where |φ0⟩is the initial state vector of the apparatus. Next, the composite sys-
tems evolves deterministically according to a certain unitary time evolution
operator into an entangled state of the form
|Φ(t)⟩= a| ↑⟩⊗|φ↑(t)⟩+ b| ↓⟩⊗|φ↓(t)⟩,
(1.1)
where |φ↑(t)⟩and |φ↓(t)⟩are states of apparatus that are macroscopically dis-
tinguishable at times larger than the characteristic time of the experiment and
2A unitary operator is a bounded linear operator U : H →H on a Hilbert space H with
the property U†U = UU† = I, where U† is the adjoint of U and I the identity operator.
Note that ⟨φ|Uψ⟩= ⟨U†φ|ψ⟩and ⟨Uφ|Uψ⟩= ⟨φ|ψ⟩.

6
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
can be registered by a recording device which, eventually, can be read by the
human observer. The generic form of |Φ(t)⟩given by Eq. (1.1) and the fact
that the two states |φ↑(↓)⟩are macroscopically distinguishable — e.g., corre-
spond to distinct locations of a spot on a photographic plate — are ensured
by properly constructing the apparatus. We note here that the states |φ↑(↓)⟩
are not unique, since they depend on the initial state of the apparatus |φ0⟩.
However, all possible states can be divided into two equivalence classes —
e.g., corresponding to spots located in the upper or lower half of the photo-
graphic plate, respectively — with |φ↑⟩belonging to one class and |φ↓⟩to the
other.
While the assumption that quantum mechanics can be uniformly applied to
both the system and the apparatus seems reasonable, we know that Eq. (1.1) is
never the outcome of a measurement; what is actually observed corresponds to
either |Φ↑(t)⟩(with probability |a|2) or |Φ↓(t)⟩(with probability |b|2), where
|Φ↑(↓)⟩are direct product states of the form
|Φ↑(t)⟩
=
| ↑⟩⊗|φ↑(t)⟩,
(1.2)
|Φ↓(t)⟩
=
| ↓⟩⊗|φ↓(t)⟩.
(1.3)
Why is the system evolving into the direct product states (1.2–1.3), when
unitary evolution dictates the entangled state in Eq. (1.1)? This is, basically,
the quantum measurement problem. It is, in fact, the same type of problem
as that raised by the Schr¨odinger’s cat thought experiment [390]. In that case,
the equivalence classes of |φ↑⟩and |φ↓⟩would correspond to the cat being
alive and dead, respectively.
One can argue that nothing was said about the human observer, an ele-
ment that, ultimately, is always involved in the measurement. Here, we can
call upon our favorite gedanken-experimentalists, Alice and Bob. Let us as-
sume that, for the sake of science, Bob volunteers to take the place of the poor
cat inside a completely isolated container lab. Unitary evolution would suggest
that, during the experiment, Bob should experience some weird life-and-death
quantum hallucinations, his fate being ultimately decided at the end of the
experiment, when Alice checks on her colleague. On the other hand, it is
possible that the wave function always collapses during the measurement, a
property that Bob could even record, if he chooses to perform a less extreme
version of the experiment that does not call into question his life. If this is the
case, we are back to square one: what is responsible for this behavior? Maybe
the macroscopic composite system cannot be prepared in a well-deﬁned initial
state but has to be thought of as eﬀectively coupled to the environment. Or
maybe one should abandon the assumption of a deterministic unitary evo-
lution by supplementing the standard Schr¨odinger equation with some small
nonlinear corrections. Or, perhaps, one should just clarify the meaning of ba-
sic concepts, such as measurement and state vector, and show that, when the
terms are properly used, there is no quantum measurement problem.
Quantum mechanics is one of the most successful theories humankind has
ever produced. Its predictions have been conﬁrmed experimentally a countless

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■7
number of times in many diﬀerent types of physical systems. Yet a number
of key questions regarding the foundations of the theory have not received
the ﬁnal answer. Thinking about these problems proved to be a fruitful en-
deavor, as the spectacular recent development of quantum information theory
has shown. With the risk of oversimplifying, one can distinguish two basic
strategies for dealing with the apparent inconsistencies of quantum theory:
i) the operational strategy, which aims to provide a minimalist interpretation
using operationally-deﬁned concepts, without reference to the “real,” “intrin-
sic” properties of the system, and ii) the realist strategy, which views the
measurement postulates as a rather ad hoc construction and aims to deﬁne
measurement in terms of more primitive concepts, with reference to some
objective reality. Within each general strategy there are many diﬀerent ap-
proaches involving various interpretations or reconstructions of the theory.
All this eﬀort toward an adequate interpretation of the quantum formalism is
closely interconnected with attempts to identify a consistent set of physical
principles that would constitute a solid axiomatic basis for the theory and,
also, with sustained theoretical and experimental work on the exploration
of nonclassical phenomena, such as those that violate Bell-type inequalities,
which should provide answers to the problems regarding interpretation and
axiomatics. Despite tremendous progress over the past few decades and even
taking into account the fact that many physicists are quite happy with one
interpretation or another, it is fair to say that the ﬁnal solution for the critical
questions regarding the foundations of quantum theory, including the measure-
ment problem, has not yet been found. In the following sections we introduce
several key concepts that operate in this ﬁeld, summarize a few important
results, and discuss some examples.
1.2
OPERATIONAL QUANTUM MECHANICS
Operational formulations of quantum mechanics [76, 343] associate the basic
concepts of the theory to lists of instructions to be executed in the laboratory.
We use this operational approach to overview the basic formalism because it
provides the natural language for quantum information theory and preserves
a transparent relation with the postulates of quantum mechanics. We note
that, more generally, the formal reﬁnements developed within this approach
provide key insight for constructing an axiomatic basis for the theory and a
solid benchmark for the realist formulations of quantum mechanics.
In the operational approach, notions such as quantum system and quantum
state represent useful abstractions that are not in direct correspondence with
something that really exists in nature. Instead, a quantum system is deﬁned
by an equivalence class of preparations — understood as equivalent, well speci-
ﬁed macroscopic procedures for producing what one typically calls an electron
or a photon with a certain polarization. While every experiment starts with
a preparation, the ﬁnal step is represented by the measurement, a completely
speciﬁed experimental procedure that supplies previously unknown informa-

8
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
P
T
M
ψ
U
k
ψ
FIGURE 1.1: (Top) Idealized Stern–Gerlach experiment: silver atoms evap-
orated in a furnace emerge from a velocity selector (left), pass through an
inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld (center), and hit a detector (right) generat-
ing two narrow strips. (Bottom) Schematic representation of the basic steps
in a typical (noiseless) quantum experiment: preparation (P), transformation
(T), and measurement (M). The thin lines and thick arrows denote quantum
information and classical information, respectively.
tion to the observer. Preparations and measurements are viewed as the prim-
itive notions of quantum theory. The theory itself provides a mathematical
representation of these experimental procedures and the rules for calculating
the probabilities of the outcomes of every conceivable measurement follow-
ing every conceivable preparation. In general, it is useful to regard quantum
experiments as three-step processes consisting of preparation (P), transforma-
tion (T), and measurement (M). The intermediate step, corresponding to the
evolution of the quantum state, can be eﬀectively incorporated into either the
preparation or the measurement, as we will explicitly show below. In quantum
information theory, the state preparation (or initialization), the quantum op-
erations, and the measurement, corresponding to P, T, and M, respectively,
are the three basic steps of a quantum information processing protocol.
To clarify these general ideas, let us consider the idealized Stern–Gerlach
experiment [175] illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1.1. For this experiment,
the preparation consists of evaporating silver atoms in a furnace and passing
them through a velocity selector, both these devices being symbolized by the
left box. The transformation corresponds to the evolution of the atoms that
emerge from the selector, pass through an inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld, and
approach the detection screen. Finally, the measurement corresponds to the
atoms striking the detector and producing impact marks inside two narrow
strips. From an operational point of view, each of these steps represents a well
deﬁned list of procedures to be followed in the laboratory. Schematically, they
can be represented as “black boxes” with classical or quantum mechanical
inputs and outputs, as shown in the bottom panel of Figure 1.1.

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■9
1.2.1
Noiseless quantum theory
The ﬁrst task of quantum theory is to provide a mathematical representation
of the experimental procedures. Thus, the output of the preparation P is rep-
resented by a ray in a certain complex Hilbert space H, i.e., the state vector
|ψ⟩. In addition, as shown in Figure 1.1, P has a classical control (e.g., the
on/oﬀswitch). In the language of quantum information theory, P uses classical
information as an input and outputs quantum information. By contrast, the
transformation unit T has quantum information as both input and output.
Mathematically T is represented by the action of a unitary operator U on the
state vector and the transformation corresponds to |ψ⟩→|ψ′⟩= U|ψ⟩. In
quantum information theory [464] this reversible unitary evolution represents
a quantum operation. The ﬁnal step, the measurement M, takes the quan-
tum information from T as an input and generates a classical output — the
classical variable k representing the result of the measurement. We note that
certain measurement schemes allow for repeated measurements, i.e., M has an
additional quantum information output that can be used as input for another
measurement, as suggested by the symbol for measurement in Figure 1.1.
To identify the mathematical representation of M, we recall that the result
of every measurement is an eigenvalue ak of a certain hermitian operator A
associated with M and acting on the Hilbert space H. For concreteness, let us
assume that the eigenvalue problem for A reads
A|k, j⟩= ak|k, j⟩,
(1.4)
where j labels the degeneracy of ak. Also, recall that the second task of quan-
tum theory is to provide rules for calculating the probability P (P T M)
k
of the
outcome ak when performing the measurement M on the preparation P fol-
lowed by the transformation T. This probability is given by the Born rule,
P (P T M)
k
=
X
j
|⟨k, j|ψ′⟩|2,
(1.5)
where |ψ′⟩= U|ψ⟩. It is convenient to express Eq. (1.5) in terms of the pro-
jection operator Πk = P
j |k, j⟩⟨k, j| onto the subspace corresponding to the
eigenvalue labeled by k. We have
P (P T M)
k
= ⟨ψ′|Πk|ψ′⟩.
(1.6)
Here, our interest is not in the eigenvalues ak themselves, but rather in the
probability Pk ≡P (P T M)
k
of having an eigenvalue labeled by k as an outcome
of M. According to Eq. (1.6), this probability is completely determined by the
set of Πk projectors, called von Neumann’s projection valued measure (PVM).
Consequently, we represent the measurement M by the PVM corresponding to
the set Πk. Note that, in fact, M corresponds to an equivalence class of mea-
surements associated with diﬀerent hermitian operators A that have the same
eigenvectors and eigenvalues labeled by the same set of k labels. For example,

10
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
measurements associated with the hermitian operators A (with eigenvalues
ak) and A3 (with eigenvalues a3
k) belong to the same equivalence class M and
are represented by the same PVM.
The conclusion, so far, is that the mathematical representation of the out-
put of the preparation P is a state vector |ψ⟩, the transformation T is associ-
ated with a unitary operator U, and the measurement corresponds to a PVM
Πk, while the probability for having the output k is given by Eq. (1.6). We note
that the transformation T can be combined with the preparation P, which re-
sults in an eﬀective preparation P′ = PT. Similarly, it can be merged into the
measurement M and the result is an eﬀective measurement M′ = TM. These
operations do not aﬀect the probabilities for the outcomes of measurements
and we have P (P T M)
k
= P (P ′M)
k
= P (P M ′)
k
or, explicitly,
⟨ψ|U †ΠkU|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ′|Πk|ψ′⟩= ⟨ψ|Π′
k|ψ⟩.
(1.7)
From Eq. (1.7) one can easily identify the mathematical representations of the
outcome of the eﬀective preparation P′ and of the eﬀective measurement M′ as
being |ψ′⟩= U|ψ⟩and Π′
k = U †ΠkU, respectively. Note that incorporating the
evolution into the state vector corresponds to the Schr¨odinger picture, while
associating it with the PVM is equivalent to using the Heisenberg picture.3
1.2.2
Noisy quantum theory
We have implicitly assumed, so far, that there is no loss of information associ-
ated with any of the steps involved in a quantum experiment. However, this is
not the case in real-life experiments, which typically involve classical stochas-
tic processes and an uncontrolled coupling between the system of interest and
other quantum systems that we cannot access. These can be viewed as sources
of noise and they may have an impact on any of the basic steps in a real-life
experiment. The natural question is how can one generalize the formalism to
incorporate the eﬀect of noise generated by classical and quantum sources.
Generalized preparations
We start with the preparation, more speciﬁcally with the question: what is the
mathematical representation of the most general preparation? To model the
presence of stochastic processes, we assume that the preparation is randomly
selected from an ensemble of N possible preparations according to the value
of a classical random variable. As shown in Figure 1.2(a), the preparation Pi
represented by |ψi⟩is realized when the random variable takes the value i,
which happens with a probability pi. Let us assume that the experiment is
ﬁnalized by a measurement M represented by the set of projectors Πk. Since
3Basically, in the Schr¨odinger picture (or Schr¨odinger representation) the state vectors
are time-dependent, while the operators are constant. By contrast, in the Heisenberg picture
the time dependence is incorporated into the operators [310, 380].

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■11
RV
P1
P2
P3
{pi}
(a)
P
A
S
(b)
FIGURE 1.2: Schematic representation of a generalized preparation as an
ensemble of preparations (left) and as the preparation of a composite system
(right). (a) A preparation Pi from the ensemble is selected with probability
pi by a random variable (RV). (b) A composite system is prepared in a pure
state |Ψ(SA)⟩and the ancillary component A is discarded by performing a
“measurement of the identity.”
we do not have access to the random variable, the probability of getting the
outcome k will be given by the ensemble average P (P M)
k
= P
i piP (PiM)
k
.
Explicitly, we have
P (P M)
k
=
X
i
pi⟨ψi|Πk|ψi⟩= Tr (ρΠk) ,
(1.8)
where Tr(. . . ) represents the trace and ρ is the density operator,
ρ =
X
i
pi|ψi⟩⟨ψi|.
(1.9)
It is straightforward to show that the density operator is hermitian, ρ = ρ†,
and satisﬁes the following properties
⟨ψ|ρ|ψ⟩≥0
∀|ψ⟩∈H,
(1.10a)
Tr(ρ) = 1,
(1.10b)
Tr(ρ2) ≤1.
(1.10c)
The preparation described by a density operator with Tr(ρ2) < 1 is called a
mixed state, while a preparation represented by a single vector |ψi0⟩, which
implies pi = δii0 and ρ = |ψi0⟩⟨ψi0|, is called a pure state and is characterized
by Tr(ρ2) = 1. It can be shown that any density operator admits a convex
decomposition in pure states, which means that there always exists an ensem-
ble {pi, |ψi⟩}, with |ψi⟩being pure states and pi probabilities, i.e., pi ≥0 and
P
i pi = 1, that satisﬁes Eq. (1.9). Note that the decomposition is not unique.

12
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
A density operator deﬁned by the properties in Eq. (1.10) is the math-
ematical representation of the most general preparation. However, there is
an alternative viewpoint concerning the source of noise in quantum systems
which involves the coupling of the system of interest with another quantum
system that one cannot access. Let us consider the preparation of a composite
system consisting of subsystems S, the system of interest, and A, an auxiliary
(or ancilla) system that we completely disregard. The Hilbert space associ-
ated with the composite system is H(S) ⊗H(A), where H(S) and H(A) are
the Hilbert spaces for the main system and the ancilla, respectively. Having
no information about A is equivalent to a measurement of the identity op-
erator I(A). Indeed, the identity operator can be viewed as a trivial PVM
with a single outcome that is always realized, as evident from Eq. (1.8) upon
the substitution Πk →I and using the property Tr(ρ) = 1. Consequently,
“measuring the identity” provides no information.
Let us assume that the preparation of the composite system is represented
by the state vector |Ψ(SA)⟩and that a measurement Π(S)
k
is performed on
the main system, as shown in Figure 1.2(b). The actual measurement of the
composite system is represented by the direct product Π(S)
k
⊗I(A), where
the two operators act on H(S) and H(A), respectively. The probability of an
outcome k is
P (P M)
k
= ⟨Ψ(SA)|Π(S)
k
⊗I(A)|Ψ(SA)⟩.
(1.11)
Next, let |ψi⟩and |ϕm⟩be basis vectors in H(S) and H(A), respectively. The
vector representing the preparation of the composite system can be written
in terms of these basis vectors as |Ψ(SA)⟩= P
i,m αim|ψi⟩⊗|ϕm⟩, where αim
are complex coeﬃcients. The key observation is that Λij = P
m αimα∗
jm is a
hermitian matrix that can be diagonalized by a unitary transformation U (Λ).
Consequently, one can always change the basis in H(S), |ψi⟩→| eψi⟩, so that
|ψi⟩= P
j U (Λ)
ij | eψj⟩and eαim = P
j U (Λ)
ij αjm, which makes the corresponding
hermitian matrix diagonal, eΛij = P
m eαimeα∗
jm = δij
P
m |eαim|2. Using this
basis and the fact ⟨ϕm|I(A)|ϕn⟩= δnm, Eq. (1.11) becomes
P (P M)
k
=
X
i
 X
m
|eαim|2
!
⟨eψi|Π(S)
k | eψi⟩.
(1.12)
Finally, we observe that Eq. (1.12) has the same form as the ﬁrst equality
in Eq. (1.8) with pi = P
m |eαim|2 being positive quantities that satisfy the
condition P
i pi = 1 dictated by the normalization of |Ψ(SA)⟩. We conclude
that the eﬀective preparation of S involving an ancillary system about which
we have no information is represented mathematically by a density operator
ρ that acts on H(S) and satisﬁes the properties in Eq. (1.10).
A few comments are in order. First, we point out that the density operator
can also be written as a partial trace over the degrees of freedom of the
auxiliary system, ρ = TrA
 |Ψ(SA)⟩⟨Ψ(SA)|

, as one can establish starting from
Eq. (1.11) and using the relation TrSA(. . . ) = TrSTrA(. . . ). The pure state

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■13
|Ψ(SA)⟩is called a puriﬁcation of ρ. Second, we note that ρ represents a mixed
state if S and A are entangled and a pure state otherwise. Indeed, if the state
vector of the composite system can be written as a direct product, |Ψ(SA)⟩=
|ψ(S)⟩⊗|ϕ(A)⟩(i.e., the two systems are not entangled), it follows from our ﬁrst
observation that ρ = |ψ(S)⟩⟨ψ(S)|. Physically, these properties imply that the
lack of information involved in the preparation stems from the entanglement of
the system with another quantum system (e.g., the environment) to which we
have no access. Third, one can prove [329] the following puriﬁcation theorem:
every density operator ρ acting on H(S) admits a puriﬁcation |Ψ(SA)⟩∈H(S)⊗
H(A) on a larger system. The puriﬁcation is not unique.
Generalized measurements
Standard von Neumann projective measurements describe ideal situations in
which noise, such as, for example, the loss of information due to faulty de-
tectors, is completely absent. To incorporate noise, one can generalize the
concept of measurement following the main ideas developed in the context of
the discussion about generalized preparations. As suggested by the schematic
representations in Figure 1.3, one can adopt two points of view: i) the noise
is due to the lack of information about the measurement that is actually
performed and ii) the noise stems from the fact that one also measures an
auxiliary (or ancilla) system A, in addition to the system of interest S.
Consider the ﬁrst point of view: there are m sets of PVMs, Π(i)
k , with the
same number of possible outcomes and, depending on the value of a random
variable, a measurement with an outcome k is performed by the set Π(i)
k
with
probability pi [see Figure 1.3(c)]. The probability of having the outcome k is
Pk = P
i piTr

ρΠ(i)
k

= Tr (ρEk), where the operator Ek = P
i piΠ(i)
k
is the
mathematical representation of the noisy eﬀective measurement. The set Ek is
called a positive operator valued measure (POVM) [343, 354]. Unlike projective
measurements, which satisfy the orthogonality condition ΠkΠk′ = δkk′Πk, the
generalized operators Ek are nonorthogonal. One consequence of this property
is that there is no preparation that would make the outcome of the measure-
ment completely predictable. By contrast, a measurement represented by a
(standard) PVM gives the outcome k with certainty when measuring the pure
state represented by the state vector |ψk⟩or, equivalently, by ρ = |ψk⟩⟨ψk|.
Before summarizing the properties of Ek, we note that the interpretation
of a POVM as a mixture of PVMs is not always possible. A generic POVM
can be realized using the ancilla construction illustrated in Figure 1.3(d).
The system S is measured together with an auxiliary system A prepared in
a state represented by ρA using the projective measurement Π(SA)
k
. Assume
that S is obtained using a preparation ρS. The probability of an outcome k is
Pk = TrSA
h
Π(SA)
k
 ρS ⊗ρAi
= TrS
h
ρSTrA

Π(SA)
k
ρAi
. Consequently, the

14
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
T1
T3
P A
S
A’
S’
M1
M2
M3
P
A
S
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
T
M
T2
FIGURE 1.3: Schematic representation of generalized transformations (a-b)
and generalized measurements (c-d). The source of noise is either our in-
complete knowledge of the transformation (or measurement) that is actually
performed (a-c), or the fact that the system of interest (S) is transformed (or
measured) together with an auxilliary system (A) about which we have no
information (b-d).
generalized measurement is represented by
Ek = TrA

Π(SA)
k
ρA
.
(1.13)
Note that Ek is an operator acting on the Hilbert space H(S) associated with
S. Using Eq. (1.13) one can demonstrate the following properties:
Pk = Tr(ρEk),
(1.14a)
⟨ψ|Ek|ψ⟩≥0
∀|ψ⟩∈H,
(1.14b)
X
k
Ek = I,
(1.14c)
where H ≡H(S) and all operators act of H. Note that a projective measure-
ment Πk also satisﬁes the properties (1.14) but, in addition, the operators
Πk are orthogonal and idempotent, ΠkΠk′ = δkk′Πk. Orthogonality ensures
that for certain preparations (corresponding to pure states |ψk⟩) the outcome
of the measurement is certain, as pointed out above, while idempotence ex-
presses the property that repeated measurements generate the same outcome,
in accordance with postulate (δ) of “standard” (i.e., noiseless) quantum me-
chanics. These properties do not hold for a generic POVM. We conclude that
a general measurement is represented by a positive operator valued measure
Ek satisfying the properties (1.14). Any desired POVM can be generated by

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■15
extending the Hilbert space H(S) in such a way that, in the extended space
H(S) ⊗H(A) there exists a set of orthogonal projectors Π(SA)
k
such that Ek is
the result of projecting Π(SA)
k
onto H(S) (Neumark’s theorem [171, 343]).
Generalized transformations
The evolution of a quantum system in the standard formulation of quantum
theory is represented by unitary maps, as discussed in Section 1.2.1. Generaliz-
ing these transformations to account for stochastic processes and decoherence,
or, in other words, for the loss of quantum information, can be achieved using
the same ideas already discussed in the context of generalized preparations and
measurements. As shown schematically in Figure 1.3(a), the ﬁrst point of view
involves an ensemble of unitary transformations, {pi, Ui}, each transformation
Ui being realized with a certain probability pi. Assuming that the transfor-
mation applies to a preparation ρ and is followed by a measurement Ek, the
probability of an outcome k is Pk = P
i piTr

UiρU †
i Ek

. This probability can
be expressed in terms of a generalized transformation T as Pk = Tr [T (ρ)Ek],
where T (·) is a so-called superoperator deﬁned as a linear map from the space
of operators on H to the space of operators on H′, where, in general, H and
H′ can be diﬀerent Hilbert spaces,
T (·) =
X
i
piUi(·)U †
i .
(1.15)
Note that Eq. (1.15) implies H = H′. However, this is not the most gen-
eral representation of a superoperator. Figure 1.3(b) illustrates schematically
the evolution of an open quantum system that interacts with an auxiliary
system, typically the environment. The evolution of the composite system is
represented by the unitary operator U (SA), while the eﬀective transformation
S →S′ is given by a partial trace over the degrees of freedom of the evolved
ancilla A′,
T (·) = TrA′

U (SA) 
· ⊗ρ(A) 
U (SA)†
,
(1.16)
where ρ(A) is the density operator associated with the auxiliary system. Note
that, in general, A′ ̸= A and S′ ̸= S.
The properties of the superoperator T deﬁned by Eq. (1.16) guarantee
that, when applied to a density operator, the result is a density operator.
More speciﬁcally, the superoperator T is i) convex-linear, ii) trace-preserving,
and iii) completely positive. Formally, these properties can be expressed as

16
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
follows
T
 X
i
wiρi
!
=
X
i
wiT (ρi)
∀wi ≥0,
(1.17a)
Tr [T (ρ)] = 1
∀ρ with Tr(ρ) = 1,
(1.17b)

T ⊗I(A) 
ρ(SA)
> 0
∀ρ(SA) ∈H(S) ⊗H(A),
(1.17c)
where I(A) is the identity operator on H(A). Note that an operator ρ act-
ing on H is positive if ⟨ψ|ρ|ψ⟩≥0 for any vector |ψ⟩∈H. The condition
that T be completely positive is stronger than the positivity condition, which
only requires that any positive operator ρ be mapped to a positive operator
T (ρ). A map satisfying the conditions (1.17), often called a completely pos-
itive trace preserving map, is the mathematical representation of a general
transformation or quantum operation. We note that a completely positive
trace preserving map can be represented in terms of so-called Kraus operators
[274], Ki : H(S) →H(S′), satisfying P
i K†
i Ki = I(S). Using the Kraus rep-
resentation, the quantum operation on the preparation ρ represented by the
superoperator T takes the form
T (ρ) =
X
i
KiρK†
i .
(1.18)
We conclude this section with a summary of the main results. Operational
quantum mechanics is formulated in terms of basic concepts that correspond
to physical procedures to be followed in the laboratory : preparations, trans-
formations (also called evolutions or quantum operations), and measurements
(also called tests). The role of quantum theory is to i) provide a mathemat-
ical representation of these procedures, and ii) to predict the probability of
a certain outcome for the measurement M given the preparation P and the
transformation T. In the standard framework, which corresponds to noiseless
processes, preparations are represented by vectors in a complex Hilbert space,
ψ ∈H, transformations are represented by unitary operators, U : H →H,
and measurements are represented by a set of projectors Πk. To incorporate
stochastic processes and interactions with other quantum systems that we
cannot access, which leads to quantum decoherence, the mathematical repre-
sentations are generalized as follows: preparation →ρ, density matrix satis-
fying the properties in Eq. (1.10), transformation →T , completely positive
trace preserving map satisfying Eq. (1.17), and measurement →Ek, positive
operator valued measure with properties described by Eq. (1.14). Finally, the
general rule for calculating the probability of an outcome k, which corresponds
to Pk = ⟨ψ|U †ΠkU|ψ⟩in the standard formulation, is
Pk = Tr [T (ρ)Ek] .
(1.19)

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■17
1.3
INTERPRETATIONS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS,
REFORMULATIONS, AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS
A plethora of interpretations and reformulations of quantum mechanics has
emerged in an attempt to provide a satisfactory answer to the measurement
problem and the surrounding cloud of apparent inconsistencies and “para-
doxes.” Just listing them all would be beyond the scope of this overview.
The fact that many of these ideas are still on the market is a clear sign
that the main problem has not yet been solved. Probably every physicist has
certain personal favorites among these points of view, most of the time incor-
porated into some vaguely deﬁned hybrid approach, but there are very few
purists who have completely adhered to a particular interpretation, without
any reservation and qualiﬁcation. To someone not particularly interested in
the foundations of quantum mechanics all this eﬀort may seem to be tilting
at windmills. However, the results obtained in this ﬁeld during the past few
decades, both on the theoretical and the experimental fronts, are remarkable.
Below, we provide a ﬂavor of some of these developments and brieﬂy discuss a
few ideas and concepts that will be useful in subsequent sections and chapters.
One can broadly classify various approaches according to their general view
about the ontological and epistemological signiﬁcance of quantum theory. In
other words, one can classify various interpretations according to their an-
swers to questions about i) the relation between quantum theory and the real
world, as it is, and ii) the relation between the theory and our knowledge of
quantum phenomenology. The realist point of view is based on the belief that
a real world exists, independent of any observer, and that the theory should
describe it within the limits of our epistemic access to this reality. Electrons
really exist and quantum mechanics captures (or should capture) certain as-
pects of their behavior. The antirealist position, on the other hand, considers
the ontological problem as superﬂuous and restricts the aim of the theory to
empirical adequacy and predictive power. The electron is just an extremely
convenient theoretical construct that provides a coherent representation for
a vast set of experimental observations. In practice, many physicists are in-
strumentalists in their daily business – “I will shut up and calculate” – but
realists at heart – “I know that there is ‘something’ out there; it has to be
some correspondence between the theory and that something.”
1.3.1
Interpretations and reformulations of quantum theory
To get a ﬂavor of the variety of perspectives on the foundations of quantum
mechanics, let us mention some of the attempts to interpret or reformulate the
theory. The baseline for these constructions is the Copenhagen interpretation
[216], the “standard” interpretation formulated by Bohr and Heisenberg in
the late 1920s and viewed for decades as the orthodox solution of the concep-
tual problems in quantum mechanics. This interpretation considers quantum
theory as complete and postulates a distinction between the quantum and the

18
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
classical worlds. Quantum phenomena do not represent intrinsic properties of
microscopic objects, but rather the result of the interaction with the mea-
suring instruments, which deﬁne the conditions under which the phenomena
appear. Diﬀerent properties may be associated with diﬀerent experimental ar-
rangements and are thus complementary. The key concept of complementarity
provides an extremely useful compass for exploring the quantum world but
has limited explicative power.
Hidden variable theories consider the standard formulation of quantum
mechanics as ultimately incomplete and explain its nondeterministic nature
as a consequence of ignoring some underlying objective foundation — the
hidden variables. The most elaborated hidden variable approach is the de
Broglie–Bohm pilot wave theory developed in the 1950s by David Bohm [58]
based on earlier work by Louis de Broglie. The theory treats the wave function
as a physically real ﬁeld and also includes particles, which have well-deﬁned
positions and are “guided” by the wave function. The theory is deterministic
and provides an elegant treatment of non-relativistic quantum mechanics that
reproduces the predictions of the standard quantum formalism. The approach
is explicitly nonlocal and violates Bell’s inequalities. Considerations about
the possibility of eliminating this nonlocality actually played a key role in the
discovery of Bell’s theorem.
The many worlds interpretation, also called the relative state formulation,
the theory of the universal wave function or the many-universes interpretation,
was originally proposed by Hugh Everett in 1957 [140]. It denies the actual-
ity of wave function collapse and attributes objective reality to a universal
wave function that obeys deterministic, reversible laws. The phenomena asso-
ciated with measurement stem from decoherence. Every time a measurement
is made, all the possible outcomes are actually realized in diﬀerent, mutually
unobservable sectors of reality. For example, in the Schr¨odinger’s cat experi-
ment, upon opening the box the observer “splits” into a “clone” that sees a
dead cat and another “clone” looking at a box with a live cat.
Objective collapse theories regard both the wave function and the collapse
process as ontologically objective. The formalism of quantum mechanics is
considered incomplete and has to be supplemented to account for the collapse
process, hence these theories are reconstructions, rather than interpretations
of quantum mechanics. The collapse is obtained either by modifying the uni-
tary evolution of the wave function, for example by adding a small amount of
non-linearity to the Schr¨odinger equation — e.g., the Ghirardi–Rimini–Weber
theory [176]— or by introducing a speciﬁc collapse mechanism, for exam-
ple by linking the collapse to gravitational stress in relativistic spacetime —
the Penrose interpretation [342]. These additional elements ensure a smooth
connection between the very small and the very large, between the quantum
world and the classical world and provide a mathematical description of the
crossover regime. In these theories superpositions are spontaneously destroyed.
For example, Schr¨odinger’s cat is expected to have evolved into a deﬁnite state
before the box is opened.

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■19
The consistent histories interpretation was developed by Robert Griﬃths
in 1984 [192] and is based on a consistency criterion for the alternative histo-
ries of a system, which allows the assignment to these histories of probabilities
obeying classical rules. In this approach the wave function collapse is not asso-
ciated with any physical process and the measurement is not a key ingredient
of the theory. A history can be viewed as a sequence of properties characteriz-
ing the system at diﬀerent moments of time and can be represented by a time
ordered product of projection operators. A set of consistent histories consists,
basically, of histories that do not interfere with each other. According to this
interpretation, the fate of Schr¨odinger’s cat is the result of a speciﬁc life or
death history. The cat is either dead or alive independent of any observation.
The decoherent histories approach, a variation of Griﬃths’ interpretation pro-
posed by Omnes [333] and by Gell-Mann and Hartle [172], emphasizes the role
of decoherence and regards the universe as a quantum system with decoher-
ence occurring internally and producing “quasiclassical domains.”
Time-symmetric theories, such as the two-state vector formalism [8] and
the transactional interpretation [106], are time-symmetrized approaches to
standard quantum mechanics that involve retrocausality: present events are
caused by a combination of past and future quantum states. The two-state
vector formalism, for example, is particularly helpful when analyzing experi-
ments involving pre- and post-selected ensembles. The system is described by
two states: one deﬁned by the results of past measurements performed on the
system and the other deﬁned by the results of measurements performed on the
system at a subsequent time. The collapse of the wave function corresponds
to a change in our knowledge of the system due to the second measurement.
In the context of experiments involving pre- and post-selected systems, an
extremely useful idea is that of weak measurements, a type of quantum mea-
surement that involves a very weak coupling between the system and the
measuring apparatus. A series of interesting quantum phenomena based on
the weak measurement idea were reported in recent years.
The decoherence program [386, 488] initiated by Hans-Dieter Zeh, Erich
Joos, Wojciech Zurek, John Wheeler, and others [236, 479, 487], aims to pro-
vide an explanation for the emergence of the classical world from quantum
physics. More speciﬁcally, it addresses the question regarding the absence of
macroscopic superpositions of quantum states and the appearance of stable
macroscopic objects. In essence, the decoherence program identiﬁes the mech-
anism responsible for the suppression of quantum interference as something in-
volving the “environment.” Every macroscopic system, for example a measur-
ing apparatus, has to be regarded as an open system that is coupled with the
environment, e.g., with the sea of photons that allows one to see the apparatus.
As a result, certain pointer states are selected preferentially by the environ-
ment (einselected) [488], while the vast majority of possible states correspond-
ing to superpositions of pointer states (for example |live cat⟩±|dead cat⟩) will
decohere into the pointer basis underlying predictable classical states (i.e., ei-
ther |live cat⟩or |dead cat⟩). Objective classical reality emerges as a result

20
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
of the redundant encoding of einselected pointer states of a quantum system
by orthogonal fragments of the environment, so that multiple observers who
have access to these fragments agree on the inferred pointer state without
perturbing it. Several key aspects of the standard quantum theory are also
addressed within the framework of environmental decoherence, such as the
appearance of discontinuous transitions between quantum states (“quantum
jumps”), the apparent collapse of the wave function, and the measurement
problem, which is identiﬁed with the lack of macroscopic superpositions. The
apparent “collapse events” and “quantum jumps,” for example, are obtained
within this framework by tracing out the unobserved variables of a universal
wave function. The main criticism facing the decoherence program concerns
the assumption of distinguishable environmental subsystems having mutually
random phases in the context of an interpretation that also assumes a univer-
sal wave function and unitary-only dynamics.
1.3.2
Generic framework for hidden variable theories
To better understand the basic assumptions underlying the realist interpreta-
tions and to prepare the ground for the discussion of Bell’s theorem in Section
1.4, it is helpful to outline the framework of a generic realist model and to
give a few examples. In contrast with the operational approach, realist in-
terpretations emphasize that quantum physics is about objective reality and
involves quantum systems that exist independent of observation, including
within the spatio-temporal interval between preparations and measurements.
The systems are characterized by well-deﬁned properties that determine the
outcomes of measurements. The physical state of a system is completely de-
scribed by a certain set of parameters λ — the hidden variables — deﬁned
on some manifold Λ. Completely specifying a preparation procedure does not
guarantee that all systems emerging from that preparation will have the same
microscopic state. In general, the states λ of systems generated using a prepa-
ration P will be characterized by a certain probability distribution µ(λ) ≥0
satisfying
R
µ(λ)dλ = 1.
Similar considerations can be made about measurements. In general, one
would expect a correlation between the state of the system and the outcome
of the measurement, but not necessarily a one-to-one correspondence. For a
given measurement M, this generic situation can be modeled by the conditional
probabilities ξk(λ) of getting the outcome k when the system is in a state λ. For
a measurement that always generates an outcome these probabilities satisfy
P
k ξk(λ) = 1, ∀λ ∈Λ.
The third key ingredient concerns the realist modeling of transformations.
How is the state of the system evolving between the preparation and the
measurement? If the evolution is deterministic, a system prepared in a state λ
will have a uniquely determined state λ′ right before the measurement, λ →λ′.
However, more generally, one can include stochastic processes and model the
evolution by the conditional probability Γ(λ′, λ) ≥0 of having the system in a

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■21
ﬁnal state λ′ if its initial state was λ. Since the system will certainly have a ﬁnal
state regardless of its initial state, the probability Γ has to satisfy the condition
R
Γ(λ′, λ)dλ′ = 1, ∀λ ∈Λ. As discussed in Section 1.2, the transformation
can be incorporated into either the preparation or the measurement, which
generates an eﬀective preparation eµ(λ′) =
R
Γ(λ′, λ)µ(λ)dλ or an eﬀective
measurement eξk(λ) =
R
ξk(λ′)Γ(λ′, λ)dλ′, respectively.
To complete the generic realist framework of quantum mechanics, we need
a rule for calculating the outcome probabilities. Using the standard rules for
conditional probabilities, we conclude that the probability Pk of having the
outcome k in a measurement M described by ξk (M→ξk) when one mea-
sures a quantum system generated using the preparation P→µ which evolves
according to the transformation T→Γ is
Pk =
Z
dλ′
Z
dλ ξk(λ′)Γ(λ′, λ)µ(λ).
(1.20)
Equation (1.20) is the realist correspondent of the operational rule given by
Eq. (1.19).
Examples: The Bell–Mermin and Kochen–Specker models
To clarify these ideas, let us consider two simple hidden variable models of a
two-state quantum mechanical system (a qubit). We will call the correspond-
ing quantum mechanical degree of freedom “spin.” The quantum mechanical
state | + n⟩corresponds to a value of the spin projection along the n axis
equal to +1. The ﬁrst model, originally introduced by John Bell [38] and sub-
sequently reﬁned by David Mermin, assumes that the real microscopic state of
the system is completely described by a pair of unit vectors λ = (u, u′). The
probability distribution for a system prepared in the quantum state | + n⟩is
µ|+n⟩(u, u′) = 1
4π δ(u −n).
(1.21)
Note that µ|+n⟩is independent of u′, i.e., there is an inﬁnite number of micro-
scopic states (u, u′) consistent with the preparation | + n⟩. Consequently, the
quantum state vector |ψ⟩= | + n⟩represents an incomplete, coarse-grained
description of reality. Models in which the quantum state vector corresponds
to a coarse-grained description of reality are called ψ-ontic models. In these
models, preparations corresponding to distinct quantum states satisfy the con-
dition µ|ψ1⟩(λ)µ|ψ2⟩(λ) = 0, ∀λ ∈Λ. In other words, each microscopic state λ
corresponds to a unique quantum state |ψ⟩.
Consider now a measurement of the spin along the m axis corresponding
to the projection operators Π± = |±m⟩⟨±m|. In the Bell–Mermin model this
measurement is represented by
ξ±(u, u′) =
 1 for
± m · (u + u′) > 0,
0 otherwise.
(1.22)

22
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Note that standard quantum mechanics does not provide access to any infor-
mation regarding the variable u′ and this incomplete knowledge is the reason
for the random outcomes of the quantum measurement. Using Eqs. (1.20)
with Γ(λ′, λ) = δ(λ′ −λ), i.e., trivial evolution, (1.21), and (1.22), we ﬁnd the
probability of an outcome ±1 in a measurement of the spin along the m axis
for a system prepared in a state | + n⟩:
P±1 =
Z
du
Z
du′ ξ±(u, u′)µ|+n⟩(u, u′) = 1
2(1 ± m · n).
(1.23)
Note that 1
2(1 ± m · n) = |⟨±m|+n⟩|2, i.e., Eq. (1.23) reproduces the stan-
dard quantum mechanics result. In particular, if m = n the outcome of the
measurement is certain, P+1 = 1 and P−1 = 0.
The second model, proposed by Kochen and Specker, [269] assumes that
the microscopic state of the qubit is described by a single unit vector, i.e.,
λ = u. A preparation corresponding to the quantum state | + n⟩is described
by the probability
µ|+n⟩(u) =

1
πn · u for n · u > 0,
0
otherwise.
(1.24)
In addition, the probability of an outcome ±1 for a measurement of the spin
along the m axis is
ξ±(u) =
 1 for m · u > 0,
0 otherwise.
(1.25)
It is easy to verify that this model also reproduces the standard re-
sult for the outcome probability, P±1
= |⟨±m| + n⟩|2. However, since
µ|+n1⟩(u)µ|+n2⟩(u) ̸= 0 for any pair of preparations with n2 ̸= −n1, a mi-
croscopic state u does not uniquely determine the quantum state. In this
type of model, called ψ-epistemic, the wave vector |ψ⟩does not represent
a coarse-grained description of objective reality, but rather reﬂects our in-
complete knowledge of this reality. Finally, we note that currently there is
no functional ψ-epistemic model of quantum mechanics. By contrast, the de
Broglie–Bohm pilot wave theory [58] is a ψ-ontic model capable of reproducing
the results of the standard quantum formalism.
1.3.3
Weak measurements and weak values
The weak measurement [129] is a procedure for accessing information about
quantum systems proposed more than a quarter century ago by Aharonov, Al-
bert, and Vaidman [6] in the context of the two-state vector formalism. While
the exact interpretation of weak measurements and of the associated quantum
weak values has been controversial, this type of protocol has become part of
the mainstream and its utility seems to be conﬁrmed by the recent explo-
sion of experiments involving weak measurements. Here, we sketch the main

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■23
ideas behind this approach, without discussing the thorny issues concerning
its interpretation. Note that the formalism underlying the weak measurement
approach lies within the standard framework of quantum theory.
In essence, a weak measurement involves a system S weakly coupled with
a measuring device M that is a quantum system itself. The information is
extracted by performing a regular “strong measurement” on the measuring
device. As a result, the wave function of the measuring device will collapse
into the eigenstate corresponding to the outcome of the measurement, while
the system S will experience only a small perturbation. Let |Φd⟩denote the
wave function of the measuring device, which is prepared in a symmetric
quantum state with variance σ2. In the position representation we have
Φd(x) = ⟨x|Φd⟩=
 2πσ2−1
4 e−x2
4σ2 ,
(1.26)
where ˆXd|x⟩= x|x⟩with ˆXd being the position operator of the device. We
note that |x⟩can serve as the measuring basis, in which case x represents
the position of the pointer on the measuring device, but this is not the only
possibility. Generically, we will assume that the strong measurement on the
measuring device involves the observable χ.
The system S is prepared in a state |ψi⟩and coupled with the measuring
device through the interaction Hamiltonian
ˆHϵ = ϵg(t) ˆA ⊗ˆPd,
(1.27)
where ˆA is a hermitian operator corresponding to the observable A and ˆPd is
the momentum canonically conjugated to ˆXd. The coupling function g(t) is
nonzero only during a short interval 0 ≤t ≤τ and is normalized,
R τ
0 g(t)dt =
1. For simplicity, we assume that ˆA has N eigenvectors, ˆA|ak⟩= ak|ak⟩, with
a diﬀerence between consecutive eigenvalues ∆ak = ak+1 −ak. The condition
for the measurement to be weak is ϵ∆ak ≪σ, i.e., the standard deviation of
the measurement outcome has to be much larger than the diﬀerence between
the eigenvalues of ˆA times the S–M coupling strength.
Let us consider a position measurement on M (i.e., χ ≡x). At the begin-
ning of the measurement the system is in a state represented by |ψi⟩⊗|Φd⟩and,
as the result of the interaction, it undergoes a unitary evolution described by
ˆUϵ = exp

−i
ℏ
R τ
0 ˆHϵdt

= exp

−iϵ
ℏˆA ⊗ˆPd

. The state of S after a position
measurement on M with outcome x can be obtained by expressing the state
vector |ψi⟩in the eigenbasis of ˆA, |ψi⟩= P
k αk|ak⟩, and using the property
⟨x| exp(−i
ℏx0 ˆPd)|Φd⟩= Φd(x −x0). We have
|ψf⟩=
X
k
αkΦd (x −ϵak) |ak⟩.
(1.28)
In the strong coupling regime, ϵ∆ak ≫σ, the functions Φd (x −ϵak) are
characterized by narrow, non-overlapping peaks centered at xk = ϵak. There

24
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
is a probability |αk|2 for the position of the pointer to be in the vicinity of xk
and such an outcome would result in a ﬁnal state |ψf⟩= |ak⟩for the system
S. In other words, in the strong coupling limit the position measurement on
M represents a standard projective measurement of the observable A on the
system S. By contrast, in the weak coupling limit the functions Φd (x −ϵak)
completely overlap and, consequently, an outcome x of the measurement does
not point to any particular eigenvalue of A and the state of S is not collapsed
but only slightly biased. What information can one extract from such imprecise
measurements?
The full potential of this approach can be realized by analyzing the statisti-
cal distribution of the weak measurement results in a setup that involves both
pre-selection — preparing the system S in a state |ψi⟩— and post-selection
— performing an additional projective measurement on S and selecting only
the sub-ensemble characterized by a certain ﬁnal state |ψf⟩. Let us assume
that the measurement on the device M involves the observable χ. In the weak
coupling regime, the probability distribution of the outcomes with pre- and
post-selection, Pϵ(χ) = |⟨ψf|⊗⟨χ| ˆUϵ|ψi⟩⊗|Φd⟩|2, will deviate slightly from the
zero-coupling distribution P0(χ) = |⟨ψf|ψi⟩|2|⟨χ|Φd⟩|2. The relative correction
to ﬁrst order in ϵ is
Pϵ
P0
= 1 + 2ϵ
ℏIm
"
Aw
⟨χ| ˆPd|Φd⟩
⟨χ|Φd⟩
#
+ O(ϵ2),
(1.29)
where Aw = A1
w is the ﬁrst-order weak value of ˆA. In general, the nth-order
weak value of ˆA on a system with pre- and post-selection represented by |ψi⟩
and |ψf⟩, respectively, has the form
An
w = ⟨ψf| ˆAn|ψi⟩
⟨ψf|ψi⟩
.
(1.30)
Note that the weak values are complex parameters that completely charac-
terize the corrections to detection probabilities that are caused by the S–M
coupling. Also note that one can obtain large values of Aw, even way out-
side the range of eigenvalues ak, by choosing almost orthogonal initial and
ﬁnal states, ⟨ψf|ψi⟩≈0. However, measuring these weak values requires large
ensembles because of the small probability of successful post-selections.
The real and imaginary components of these parameters can be determined
using cleverly chosen experimental setups. For example, consider a position
measurement on M, χ = x. Since ⟨x| ˆPd|Φd⟩/⟨x|Φd⟩= iℏx
2σ2 is purely imagi-
nary, we have Pϵ/P0 ≈1 + xϵReAw
σ2
and we can determine the real part of Aw.
Note that, within the lowest order in ϵ, the perturbed probability distribu-
tion is Pϵ(x) ≈P0(x −ϵAw), i.e., the peak of the distribution is shifted by a
quantity proportional to the ﬁrst-order weak value.

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■25
Consider now a momentum measurement on M, χ = p. The quantity
⟨p| ˆPd|Φd⟩/⟨p|Φd⟩= p is purely real and Eq. (1.29) becomes
Pϵ
P0
≈1 + 2ϵp
ℏImAw,
(1.31)
which shows that the relative correction of the distribution probability pro-
vides information about the imaginary part of the weak value. One can easily
show that Eq. (1.31) generates a shift of the momentum probability distribu-
tion. In other words, the real component of Aw shifts the expectation value of
the ˆXd pointer, while the imaginary part of the weak value shifts the expec-
tation value of the ˆPd pointer.
Weak values are quantities that occur naturally in laboratory situations.
Numerous experiments involving weak measurements and weak values have
been carried out in recent years. Applications include using weak values to
amplify small signals above the background noise [128, 226], measuring the real
and imaginary parts of a complex-valued parameter [300], including geometric
phases [410], and developing a measurable window into non-classical aspects
of quantum mechanics [129]. A speciﬁc example concerning the Cheshire cat
experiment will be discussed in Section 1.5.
1.4
BELL’S THEOREM
Bell’s theorem [38] is not a proposition about quantum mechanics in itself,
but rather about generic theories that satisfy the principle of relativistic local
causality — the requirement that events in one region of space time should
not aﬀect phenomena in space-like separated regions. The implications of this
discovery are profound, both from a foundational perspective and consider-
ing its contribution to the development of concepts and technical tools for
studying non-locality in quantum physics and quantum information theory.
By demonstrating that one can establish quantitative bounds (e.g., an up-
per limit to the correlation of distant events) for theories that satisfy certain
general principles (e.g., local causality), Bell has practically revolutionized
our way of thinking about the foundations of quantum mechanics and about
the experimental implications of this endeavor. Below, we discuss a few basic
ideas and concepts that are relevant in the context of Bell’s theorem, but omit
many important aspects concerning the fascinating historical background, the
profound foundational and philosophical implications, and the wealth of sub-
sequent theoretical and experimental developments.
1.4.1
Quantum entanglement and the EPR argument
In a celebrated 1935 paper, Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR) [133] argued
that, if nonlocal inﬂuences are forbidden, the orthodox quantum mechanical
description of physical reality, which denies the existence of predetermined
values for physical quantities that have not been actually measured, is incom-
plete. Their argument is based on a thought experiment involving an entangled

26
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
quantum state of a pair of spatially separated particles. The original argument
was formulated in terms of continuous variables (speciﬁcally, position and mo-
mentum) and was later reformulated by Bohm in terms of spin (the so-called
EPR-B experiment).
In the EPR-B thought experiment, one considers the decay of a spinless
system into a pair of spin 1
2 particles moving in opposite directions, which
corresponds to the preparation of an entangled singlet state. Once the parti-
cles are far apart, we measure a certain spin component of one of them, say
the left-moving particle. Suppose that Sz was measured and that the outcome
of the measurement was + ℏ
2. Then, according to the predictions of quantum
mechanics, if one immediately measures Sz for the right-moving particle the
result will be, with certainty, −ℏ
2. Since the measurements are performed at
space-like separation, locality requires that no disturbance due to the measure-
ment on the left side can inﬂuence the result on the right side. In Einstein’s
now famous words, there cannot be any “spooky action at a distance” to en-
sure the perfect anti-correlation between the results on the two sides. But in
this case, the only way to account for this anti-correlation is to have each par-
ticle carry a well-deﬁned value of Sz, ﬁxed in advance of observation, which
predetermines the outcomes of the measurements. In particular, Sz for the
right-moving particle can be predicted with certainty without disturbing the
system, so it should correspond to a real property, to an “element of phys-
ical reality.” Finally, because these real properties are not contained in the
quantum formalism, this formalism is necessarily incomplete.
There is nothing special about the z-axis, so the above considerations apply
to the projection of the spin along any axis. Hence, assuming i) locality and
ii) the actual realization of the perfect anti-correlations predicted by quantum
mechanics, one has to admit the existence of pre-determined values for spin
along all possible axes, a conclusion that is incompatible with the orthodox
formulation of quantum theory (since diﬀerent spin components do not com-
mute). Consequently, one has to either accept that the quantum description
by means of a wave function is incomplete, or relinquish locality. For Ein-
stein, it was indisputable that “the real factual situation of the system S2 is
independent of what is done with the system S1, which is spatially separated
from the former,” a physical principle known as the principle of local action
or Einstein locality.
1.4.2
Local, quantum, and no-signaling correlations
The role of locality in the EPR argument was clearly recognized by John Bell
[37]. He was also inspired in his work by the Bohmian mechanics, a hidden
variable theory that is manifestly nonlocal. Bell’s remarkable achievements are
based on constructing a precise formulation of local causality and on deriving
empirically testable bounds for local theories.
To introduce the tools for characterizing locality, let us consider two distant
observers, Alice and Bob, performing measurements on a pair of entangled

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■27
particles. Each observer has a choice of m diﬀerent measurements, labeled x
(for Alice) and y (for Bob), x, y ∈{1, . . . , m}, and each measurement has n
possible outcomes, labeled a (for Alice) and b (for Bob). The measurements
(inputs) are selected locally by each of the observers and the measuring devices
produce certain outcomes (outputs). This type of experiment, referred to as
the Bell scenario, is completely described by the set P of joint probabilities
P(ab|xy) to obtain the output pair (a, b) given the input pair (x, y). The set of
probabilities P = {P(ab|xy)} — also referred to as a behavior — describes the
correlations characterizing the joint measurements and satisﬁes the constraints
P(ab|xy) ≥0 and P
a,b P(ab|xy) = 1. These constraints deﬁne a polytope
(a multi-dimensional generalization of a polygon) P ⊂Rm2n2 of dimension
(n2 −1)m2, so that P ∈P, i.e., each set of joined probabilities can be viewed
as representing the coordinates of a point inside the polytope P.
Let us assume that Alice and Bob are space-like separated. All they can im-
mediately determine are the probabilities associated with their measurements,
P(a|x) and P(b|y), respectively. Learning the joint probabilities takes time for
the information to be passed from one observer to the other. Moreover, Bob
(Alice) should have no way of signaling superluminally to Alice (Bob) by using
his (her) input choice. In other words, P(a|x) should be independent of Bob’s
measurement setting y and P(b, y) has to be independent of Alice’s setting x.
This physical limitation imposes certain no-signaling constraints on the joint
probabilities,
X
b
P(ab|xy)
=
X
b
P(ab|xy′)
for all a, x, y, y′
X
a
P(ab|xy)
=
X
a
P(ab|x′y)
for all b, x, x′, y.
(1.32)
The probability sets that satisfy the no-signaling constraints (1.32) ﬁll a poly-
tope NS of dimension t = 2(n −1)m + (n −1)2m2. If we focus on the case of
binary outcomes relevant for situations involving, for example, spin 1
2 particles
and polarized photons, i.e., n = 2 with a, b ∈{−1, 1}, a convenient way of
parameterizing points in NS is provided by the correlators {⟨ax⟩, ⟨by⟩, ⟨axby⟩}
deﬁned as expectation values for given measurement choices,
⟨ax⟩=
X
a
a P(a|x),
⟨by⟩=
X
b
b P(b|y),
⟨axby⟩
=
X
a,b
ab P(ab|xy).
(1.33)
Note that the joint probabilities P ∈NS can be expressed in terms of corre-
lators as P(ab|xy) = 1
4[1 + a⟨ax⟩+ b⟨by⟩+ ab⟨axby⟩]. Consequently, an arbi-
trary set of no-signaling probabilities satisﬁes the condition a⟨ax⟩+ b⟨by⟩+
ab⟨axby⟩≥−1, for all possible outcomes a, b and input settings x, y.
No-signaling does not imply locality, which requires a more restrictive con-
straint. To understand how the necessary condition for locality can be formu-

28
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
lated mathematically, let us recall that the principle of local causality requires
that events in one region of space time do not aﬀect what happens in space-
like separated regions. In particular, the local probability response function
for Alice, P(a), cannot depend on Bob’s input y and output b, but only on
Alice’s input choice x and, possibly, on a set of variables λ ∈Λ made avail-
able to both systems, e.g., some randomness shared by the two systems and
originating from a common source. In other words, the local probability re-
sponse functions for Alice and Bob are P(a|x, λ) and P(b|y, λ), respectively.
Consequently, the joint probability to obtain the output pair (a, b) given the
input pair (x, y) and the set of variables λ, which includes everything that
existed before the measurements and is relevant for the outcomes, factorizes:
P(ab|xy, λ) = P(a|x, λ)P(b|y, λ). Note that, generally, the set λ varies from
one run of the experiment to another, so it should be modeled as a random
variable with a probability distribution q(λ). We assume that the input set-
tings can be randomly and freely chosen by the experimenters, i.e., that the
probability distribution q(λ) is independent of (x, y) — an assumption known
as the “no conspiracy” condition. With this additional assumption, every prob-
ability set P ∈P that satisﬁes the locality constraint can be written in the
form
P(ab|xy) =
Z
Λ
dλ q(λ)P(a|x, λ)P(b|y, λ).
(1.34)
One can show that the local probability sets represent the points of a polytope
L ⊂P. Note that a behavior P = {P(ab|xy)} that satisﬁes Eq. (1.34) will
automatically satisfy the constraints (1.32). On the other hand, one can show
that there exist no-signaling probability sets that do not satisfy the locality
condition; hence we have L ⊂NS.
Quantum behaviors are formally deﬁned as the elements P = {P(ab|xy)}
of a set Q satisfying the property
P(ab|xy) = Tr[ρABEa|x ⊗Eb|y],
(1.35)
where ρAB acting on a Hilbert space HA ⊗HB represents the preparation,
while Ea|x acting on HA and Eb|y acting on HB are POVM elements that
characterize Alice’s and Bob’s measurements, respectively. We note that an
alternative deﬁnition that replaces the tensor product structure with the re-
quirement that local operators commute, i.e., [Ea|x, Eb|y] = 0, is used in rela-
tivistic quantum ﬁeld theory. The equivalence of the two deﬁnitions remains an
open question, known as the Tsirelson’s problem, except for certain particular
cases, e.g., ﬁnite Hilbert spaces.
Bell’s work has shown that questions pertaining to the foundations of quan-
tum theory, e.g., whether or not quantum mechanics satisﬁes locality, can be
made formally precise and lead to quantitative, experimentally testable pre-
dictions. Using the language introduced above, these questions can be formu-
lated in terms of the properties of Q, L, and NS. On the one hand, one can
show, for example, that any local behavior can be expressed in a form given
by Eq. (1.35), which implies L ⊆Q. On the other hand, the hyperplanes that

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■29
−4
−2
√
2
−2
4
2
√
2
2
local point
Tsirelson’s bound
PRbox
L
Q NS
FIGURE 1.4: Two-dimensional section through the polytope of no-signaling
correlations. The vertical axis corresponds to S, the correlation given by Eq.
(1.37), while the horizontal axis represents a quantity obtained by permuting
the indices in Eq. (1.37). Regions L, Q, and NS represent local, quantum,
and no-signaling behaviors, respectively. Local behaviors satisfy the Clauser–
Horne–Shimony–Holt (CHSH) inequality −2 ≤S ≤2. Tsirelson’s bound rep-
resents the maximum correlation value for a quantum system, |S| = 2
√
2,
while a Popescu–Rohrlich (PR) box is the no-signaling behavior with maxi-
mum correlation value, |S| = 4.
bound L correspond to Bell inequalities and there are quantum correlations
that violate these inequalities, hence L ⊂Q. In general, one can show that
L ⊂Q ⊂NS, as illustrated in Figure 1.4. The boundaries of each set are
determined by Bell-type inequalities.
1.4.3
Bell inequalities
A polytope can be represented as the intersection of a ﬁnite number of half-
spaces. Consequently, a behavior is local, P ∈L, if and only if
s(i) · P =
X
a,b,x,y
s(i)
abxyP(ab|xy) ≤S(i)
L
∀i ∈I,
(1.36)
where I is a ﬁnite set of indices. Equation (1.36) deﬁnes a ﬁnite set of Bell
inequalities that characterize L, while S(i)
L are the local bounds corresponding
to the Bell expressions deﬁned by s(i). The local behaviors P ∈L satisfying
s(i) ·P = S(i)
L deﬁne a facet of the polytope L. The corresponding inequalities,
called facet Bell inequalities, provide a minimal representation of the form
(1.36) for the set L. The positivity conditions P(ab|xy) ≥0, which are never
violated by physical theories, also deﬁne facets of the local polytope L.

30
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
There exist quantum and no-signaling behaviors that are nonlocal, P /∈L.
Each nonlocal behavior necessarily violates one of the Bell inequalities, i.e.,
s(i)·P > S(i)
L . To characterize the sets Q and NS, one has to ﬁnd the quantum
bounds SQ and the no-signaling bounds SN S corresponding to arbitrary Bell
expressions s ∈Rt, where t = dim(NS) = dim(Q) = dim(L). For example,
the quantum set Q, which generally is not a polytope (see Figure 1.4), can
be described by an inﬁnite set of linear inequalities of the form s · P ≤SQ
called quantum Bell or Tsirelson inequalities [96]. We will not address these
problems here, but limit our discussion to a simple example involving the local
bound in the case of a Bell scenario with binary inputs and outputs (m = 2,
n = 2). Note, however, that the sets L, Q, and NS are closed, bounded, and
convex, in other words, if P1 and P2 are behaviors belonging to one of these
sets, the behavior αP1 + (1 −α)P2 with 0 ≤α ≤1 also belongs to that set.
As mentioned above, L and NS are polytopes and can be deﬁned using a
ﬁnite number of linear inequalities, while Q is not a polytope and describing
it requires an inﬁnite number of linear inequalities.
To better understand how locality, as expressed by the decomposition
(1.34), imposes certain constraints on the joint probabilities, let us focus on
the case of binary inputs and outputs with x, y ∈{1, 2} and a, b ∈{−1, 1}. In
this case, the facet inequalities that deﬁne the set L of local correlations are
given by the so-called Clauser–Horne–Shimony–Holt (CHSH) inequality [97],
−2 ≤S ≤2, where
S = ⟨a1b1⟩+ ⟨a1b2⟩+ ⟨a2b1⟩−⟨a2b2⟩,
(1.37)
or a similar expression obtained by permuting the correlators ⟨axby⟩in Eq.
(1.37). Note that, using the deﬁnition of the correlators given by Eq. (1.33),
one can express S in terms of joint probabilities and the CHSH inequality
±S ≤2 takes the generic Bell inequality form (1.36). Equation (1.37) is a
direct consequence of the locality condition (1.34). Indeed, deﬁning the ex-
pectations ⟨ax⟩λ = P
a a P(a|x, λ) and ⟨by⟩λ = P
b b P(b|y, λ) and using
the locality condition (1.34), we can write the correlators in Eq. (1.37) as
⟨axby⟩=
R
dλ q(λ)⟨ax⟩λ⟨by⟩λ and the whole expression as S =
R
dλ q(λ)Sλ,
with Sλ = ⟨a1⟩λ⟨b1⟩λ+⟨a1⟩λ⟨b2⟩λ+⟨a2⟩λ⟨b1⟩λ−⟨a2⟩λ⟨b2⟩λ. But −1 ≤⟨ax⟩λ ≤
1, which implies |Sλ| ≤|⟨b1⟩λ+⟨b2⟩λ|+|⟨b1⟩λ−⟨b2⟩λ| ≤2 max{|⟨b1⟩λ|, |⟨b2⟩λ|}.
Finally, we have |⟨by⟩λ| ≤1 and, consequently, |S| ≤
R
dλ q(λ)|Sλ| ≤2, where
we have taken into account the fact that the probability distribution satisﬁes
the conditions q(λ) ≥0 and
R
dλ q(λ) = 1. Note that the equality |S| = 2 can
be realized, for example when ⟨a1⟩λ = ⟨a2⟩λ = ⟨b1⟩λ = 1 and ⟨b2⟩λ = 0.
We conclude that local causality, formally expressed by Eq. (1.34), implies
that the joint probabilities have to satisfy the constraints given by the CHSH
- Bell inequality |S| ≤2. For scenarios characterized by m = 2, n = 2, this
constraint (and the related constraints obtained by permutations) deﬁne the
set L of local behaviors, as illustrated in Figure 1.4. Theories that violate
the CHSH inequality, including quantum mechanics, are nonlocal. A simple
example of violation of the CHSH inequality is discussed in the next section.

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■31
1.5
QUANTUM CATS AND QUANTUM COINS
In the last section of this chapter we brieﬂy point out some of the key experi-
mental aspects of Bell-type inequalities, including various loopholes opened by
technical limitations, and we discuss two simple examples of experimental se-
tups designed for observing non-classical behavior. These examples are meant
to add some concreteness to the rather general arguments of the preceding
sections and to renew our appreciation for the strangeness of quantum behav-
ior, which refuses to comply with a rather general and reasonable framework
such as the formalism leading to the Bell inequalities. The ﬁnal example —
the quantum Cheshire cat — is also a reminder that we still lack a compre-
hensive solution to the foundational problems of quantum mechanics, an area
of research that continues to raise questions, stir controversies, and, possibly,
oﬀer surprises almost 100 years after the formulation of quantum theory.
1.5.1
Bell experiments and loopholes
Bell’s work shows that certain basic assumptions about the nature of a physical
theory, which may appear as rather philosophical considerations about the
nature of reality, have, in fact, experimentally testable implications. Since
certain predictions of quantum mechanics violate Bell’s inequalities, it follows
that either the theory is incompatible with locality, or it fails to correctly
describe nature. The problem has to be settled experimentally. Many Bell test
experiments have been conducted over the past 40 years. Below, we mention
some of the more notable experiments and comment on the issues that may
aﬀect the validity of the experimental ﬁndings, the so-called loopholes.
Most of the quantum nonlocality experiments involve testing the CHSH
inequality [97] using pairs of entangled photons. The photons are produced
by atomic cascade or spontaneous parametric down conversion and emitted
from the source S in opposite directions (see Figure 1.5). The ﬁrst conclusive
test was done in 1972 by Freedman and Clauser [160]. The results were in
agreement with the predictions of quantum mechanics and showed a violation
of the CHSH inequality by 6 standard deviations. However, in this experiment
the locality loophole (see below) was left wide open because the polarization
analyzers were held ﬁxed. This problem was addressed in 1982 by Aspect,
Dalibard, and Roger [27], who performed the ﬁrst experiment using time-
varying polarization analyzers. The choice between two possible settings was
made during the ﬂight of the photons using acousto-optical switches. Although
this choice was quasi-periodic, rather than purely random, the switches on the
two sides were driven by diﬀerent generators at diﬀerent frequencies and the
experiment, which reported results in agreement with quantum predictions
and a violation of the CHSH inequality by 5 standard deviations, represented
a convincing closure of the locality loophole. An improved version of this
experiment involving the choice of measurement settings using a quantum
random number generator was realized at Innsbruck in 1998 [447] and led to
a violation of the CHSH inequality by over 30 standard deviations. The same

32
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
year, violations of Bell inequalities in a test involving a spatial separation of
more that 10 km were reported by a group in Geneva [427].
Other signiﬁcant developments include Bell-type experiments using more
than two photons, overcoming the detection loophole using entangled trapped
ions [372], superconducting Josephson junction qubits [23], and photons [179],
demonstrating Bell inequality violation using photons entangled in orbital an-
gular momentum or higher dimensional entangled states that combine polar-
ization, spatial, and energy-time degrees of freedom [33]. We note that all these
experiments conﬁrm the predictions of quantum theory and show violations of
Bell inequalities. However, although all loopholes have been closed, this was
not done in a single experiment4. For example, trapped-ion experiments can
easily overcome the detection loophole, but leave the locality loophole open,
while photon-based experiments are plagued by the detection loophole due to
the typical low photon detection eﬃciency.
In essence, the detection loophole is generated by the fact that the mea-
surements do not always yield conclusive outcomes, for example because the
detectors have limited eﬃciency. One typically assumes that the unrecorded
events have the same statistical distribution as the recorded subensemble (the
so-called fair-sampling assumption). However, in principle it is possible to
imagine local models in which the probability to obtain a “no-click” outcome
depends on the choice of measurement. The eﬀective correlations obtained
using such a model could violate a Bell-type inequality.
The other major problem is generated by the requirement that the two
measurements be space-like separated. The choice of measurement settings
has to be made during the ﬂight of the particles and the detection processes
at the two ends have to be completed before a signal can travel from one site
to the other. The locality loophole exploits situations when these requirements
are not satisﬁed, as in such case one can imagine the possibility of the ﬁrst
detection inﬂuencing the second. We note that the problem of closing the
locality loophole has certain subtle aspects, which we will not address here,
generated by the possibility of imagining contrived local scenarios. We also
note the possibility of other, less severe loopholes. For example, any conclusion
about a possible violation of locality is a statistical result that is aﬀected
by ﬁnite statistics and is based on certain assumptions about the statistical
distribution of the ensemble and about the independence of diﬀerent trials.
1.5.2
The CHSH game
Alice and Bob are in their labs on two distant planets one light-minute apart
from each other. They are performing some measurements on ultrarelativistic
particles sent from the mother spaceship positioned halfway between them.
Each of them detects a particle approximately every 30 seconds. They feel
4The ﬁrst Bell experiment that closes both the detection and the locality (communi-
cation) loopholes was reported in 2015 by a group from Delft University of Technology
[218].

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■33
S
CA
MSB
MSB
MSA
MSA
CB
+1
- 1
+1
- 1
MSA
MSB
FIGURE 1.5: Idealized Bell test experiment. A pair of entangled particles
(e.g., photons) are emitted by the source S in opposite directions. The photon
polarization is measured on each side along one of two possible directions, α1
or α2 (left) and β1 or β2 (right), selected randomly by the switches CA and
CB, respectively. The orientations, the outcomes of the measurements, and the
corresponding times are recorded separately on each side by the monitoring
systems MSA and MSB.
lonely and, truthfully speaking, the experiments are rather boring, so they
decide to play a game. Each of them will ﬂip a coin, do the measurement that
they are supposed to do, and quickly give a binary answer, then ﬂip the coin
again before another particle arrives. They play the game as a team, perhaps
against Loneliness itself. The rules for winning the game are very simple: if
both Alice and Bob get tails (x = 2 and y = 2), they have to give opposite
answers, i.e., (a, b) = (+1, −1) or (a, b) = (−1, +1), otherwise, i.e., for (x, y) ∈
{(1, 1), (1, 2), (2, 1)}, they have to give the same answer, (a, b) = (+1, +1) or
(a, b) = (−1, −1). It is required that no communication between the two labs
should be possible during the duration of one round of the game, i.e., the time
interval from the start of the ﬁrst coin ﬂip until both answers are given should
be less than one minute. All heads or tails “questions” (xi for Alice and yi
for Bob) ) and the corresponding answers (ai, bi) are recorded and compared
after returning aboard the main ship at the end of the mission.
The ﬁrst set of experiments involves measuring the angular momenta JA
and JB of two small fragments resulted from the explosion of a micro-bomb
initially at rest. For fun, Alice and Bob agree to link their answers to the results
of the measurements. Their strategy is to give the answers a = sign(αx ·
JA) and b = −sign(βy · JB), where αx = βy = n are unit vectors with a
speciﬁed orientation, independent of the “questions” (x, y). Since JB = −JA,
this strategy results in Alice and Bob always giving identical answers a =
b and, consequently, losing whenever tail-tail questions, (x, y) = (2, 2), are
asked. In fact, the probability of winning the game is Pw = 1
2 + 1
8S, where S is
the CHSH expression from Eq. (1.37). Indeed, for a pair of questions (x, y) ∈
{(1, 1), (1, 2), (2, 1)} the correlator ⟨axby⟩gives the probability of winning (by
giving identical answers, axby = 1) minus the probability of losing (when
the answers are opposite, axby = −1), while ⟨a2b2⟩is the probability of losing
minus the probability of winning. Using the strategy described above, we have

34
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
⟨axby⟩= 1 −2θ/π = 1, where θ = 0 is the angle between αx and βy, hence
the probability of Alice and Bob winning the game is Pw = 3
4. In a classical
world, Alice and Bob cannot do better than this against Loneliness, regardless
of their strategy. This limitation is captured by the CHSH inequality S ≤2.
In a second set of experiments, Alice and Bob measure spin projections for
a pair of spin-1/2 particles in a singlet state |ψ⟩= 1
2(| ↑⟩⊗| ↓⟩−| ↓⟩⊗| ↑⟩).
This time, they decide on a quantum strategy for their game: their answers are
given by the outcomes of the measurements of the spin projections (αx·σ)⊗σ0
and −σ0 ⊗(βy · σ), where αx and βy are unit vectors, σ = (σ1, σ2, σ3) are
Pauli spin matrices, and σ0 is the identity matrix. The correlators that give
the probability of winning the game are
⟨axby⟩= −⟨ψ|(αx · σ) ⊗(βy · σ)|ψ⟩= αx · βy.
(1.38)
Choosing αx = βy = n, i.e., measuring the spin projection along a unique
direction, provides no advantage over the classical strategy. However, Alice
and Bob can each perform their spin-projection measurements along one of
two possible directions, the choice of direction being determined by the coin
ﬂip: α1 = ez, α2 = ex, β1 =
1
√
2(ez −ex), and β2 =
1
√
2(ez −ex), where ex
and ez are unit vectors along the corresponding axes. With this strategy, the
correlators are ⟨axby⟩=
1
√
2 for (x, y) ∈{(1, 1), (1, 2), (2, 1)} and ⟨a2b2⟩= −1
√
2
and the probability of winning the game becomes Pw = 1
2 +
1
2
√
2 ≈0.85 > 3
4.
The quantum strategy increases the chances of Alice and Bob winning the
game. This is a consequence of nonlocality, which leads to the violation of
CHSH inequality |S| ≤2 as, in fact, S = 2
√
2 > 2.
In the real world, this game was played by Alain Aspect and later by others
using experimental setups similar to the idealized setup sketched in Figure 1.5.
The spin projections (or the photon polarizations, when the implementation
of this scheme is done using pairs of entangled photons) for a pair of entangled
particles emitted from the source S are measured along two possible directions
on each side, (α1 and α2) on the left side and (β1 and β2) on the right. The
switches CA and CB, which play the role of the coin ﬂips, randomly select
between the two possible orientations on each side. The detection events are
registered, together with their exact times, by the monitoring systems on the
two sides, MSA and MSB. The orientations αx and βy are also recorded.
When the experiment is completed, the two sets of data, separately collected
on each side, are brought together to determine the correlations. Less than
ideal conditions can open various loopholes, as discussed in Section 1.5.1.
1.5.3
The quantum Cheshire cat
Our ﬁnal example illustrates the implementation of weak measurements in
an experiment involving pre- and post-selection and addresses some questions
posed by the interpretation of the results. In essence, it was suggested that
the measurement of certain weak values can reveal a quantum system that
behaves as if a particle and one of its properties are spatially separated [10].

Quantum Theory: Some Fundamentals
■35
S
BS1
BS2
D1
D2
D3
PBS
HWP
WM
WM
Preparation
Post-selection
A
B
FIGURE 1.6: Schematic setup for implementing the quantum Cheshire cat.
Horizontally polarized photons emitted by the source S and passing through
the beam-splitter BS1 interact weakly with measurement devices (WM)
placed in both arms of a Mach–Zehnder interferometer. Photons detected
in the horizontal output mode (corresponding to D1 clicks) are post-selected.
Such a behavior would be similar to the grin without a cat from the Cheshire
Cat story in Lewis Carroll’s famous novel, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland.
The experimental setup [10] consists of a Mach–Zehnder interferometer
having weak measurement devices placed in its upper and lower arms, as
shown in Figure 1.6. Horizontally polarized photons generated by the source
S are sent through the interferometer. The pre-selected state is represented
by the quantum state of the photon after the 50-50 beam splitter BS1,
|ψi⟩=
1
√
2 (|A⟩+ |B⟩)|+⟩) ,
(1.39)
where |A⟩and |B⟩correspond to the upper and lower modes of the interferom-
eter, respectively, and |+⟩denotes the horizontal polarization of the photon.
The interferometer is equilibrated so that a photon in a quantum state |ψi⟩
incident on BS2 will emerge with certainty in the upper mode (no D3 clicks);
then a half-wave plate (HWP) is introduced in the lower arm to ﬂip the polar-
ization, |+⟩↔|−⟩, with |−⟩indicating the vertically polarized state. Finally,
a polarizing beam splitter (PBS) is added to measure the polarization in the
upper output mode (with horizontal and vertical polarizations detected by D1
and D2, respectively). Only photons detected in the horizontal output mode
(i.e., D1 clicks) are post-selected. The corresponding wave function |ψf⟩inside
the interferometer can be obtained by considering a photon produced at the
location of D1 and propagating backwards. Explicitly, we have
|ψf⟩=
1
√
2 (|A⟩|+⟩+ |B⟩|−⟩) .
(1.40)
Let us consider now weak measurements corresponding to which-path and
polarization measurements in each arm. The which-path measurements are
represented by the operators ΠA = |A⟩⟨A| and ΠB = |B⟩⟨B|, while the po-
larization measurements are represented by σA
x = ΠAσx and σB
x = ΠBσx, for

36
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
the upper and lower arms, respectively, where σx = |+⟩⟨+| + |−⟩⟨−|. Since
the weak value of an operator P for pre- and post-selected states ψi and ψf is
(see Section 1.3.3) ⟨P⟩w = ⟨ψf|P|ψi⟩/⟨ψf|ψi⟩, we ﬁnd that, on the one hand,
the weak values associated with position are ⟨ΠA⟩w = 1 and ⟨ΠB⟩w = 0 and,
on the other, the weak values of the polarization measured in the two arms
are ⟨σA
x ⟩w = 0 and ⟨σB
x ⟩w = 1, respectively. It looks as if the photon (the
cat) can only be found in the upper arm of the interferometer, while its σx
polarization (the grin) is non-zero only in the lower arm.
We will not dwell on the developments inspired by the quantum Cheshire
cat proposal, or on the lively debate concerning its interpretation and, more
generally, the conceptual and experimental virtues of weak measurements.
Enough to say that this brings to the fore a host of questions that touch upon
the very core of foundational problems in quantum mechanics, including the
measurement problem. Are weak values inherently quantum, or just a feature
that could be reproduced by classical models? Do anomalous weak values rep-
resent proofs of contextuality? What is the role of the measurement-induced
disturbance in a weak measurement and how can one quantify this distur-
bance? These questions lead us back to the quantum measurement problem
and the debate about the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Contextual-
ity, for example, is a central idea that goes back to Bohr, who emphasizes the
“impossibility of any sharp distinction between the behavior of atomic objects
and the interaction with the measuring instruments which serve to deﬁne the
conditions under which the phenomena appear.” It is also mentioned by Bell in
the context of Gleason’s theorem [180] — there is no a priori reason to believe
“that measurement of an observable must yield the same value independently
of what other [compatible] measurements may be made simultaneously” —
and it is formalized by the Kochen–Specker theorem, which “asserts the im-
possibility of assigning values to all physical quantities whilst, at the same
time, preserving the functional relations between them.” Certain aspects of
the interaction between a quantum system and the detector’s pointer underly-
ing the weak measurement could also be responsible for other intriguing quan-
tum phenomena, such as the interaction-free measurement, Hardy’s paradox,
the quantum liar paradox, or the Aharonov–Bohm eﬀect.
Instead of a conclusion, let us remark on the enormous progress in foun-
dational quantum physics over the past 50 years and the profound change in
attitude toward research eﬀorts in this area. It is a long way from the days
when John Bell, having silently listened to Alain Aspect’s presentation of a
planned experiment to test his inequalities, ﬁrst asked: “Have you a permanent
position?” Meanwhile, with the accumulation of experimental results and the
advent of quantum information theory, we have learned that questions that
may appear philosophical have, in fact, measurable and, possibly, practical
implications. And, on a Socratic note, we have learned about the measure-
ment problem and other fundamental aspects of quantum theory that there
is still a lot we do not know.

C H A P T E R 2
The Geometric Phase
CONTENTS
2.1
Geometric phases: Examples and overview ................
38
2.1.1
Classical and quantum holonomies ................
38
2.1.2
Historical overview and conceptual distinctions ...
43
2.2
Phase changes during cyclic quantum evolutions .........
44
2.2.1
The Berry phase ...................................
45
2.2.2
The non-Abelian adiabatic phase ..................
51
2.2.3
The Aharonov–Anandan phase ....................
53
2.3
The mathematical structure of geometric phases .........
55
2.3.1
Basic deﬁnitions and examples ....................
55
2.3.2
Elementary introduction to ﬁber bundles .........
59
2.3.3
Holonomy interpretations of geometric phases ....
64
T
HE BERRY PHASE, A CENTRAL CONCEPT IN QUANTUM
physics, is rooted in the state space structure of quantum theory and
has a profound observable impact within a wide range of phenomena. The
remarkably elegant interpretation of this geometric phase as the holonomy of
a ﬁber bundle provides it with a mathematical framework capable of account-
ing for a broad spectrum of classical and quantum phenomena, such as, for
example, the precession of a Foucault pendulum, the parallel transport of a
vector on a sphere, the Aharonov–Bohm eﬀect, the gauge theory of molecular
physics, the electric polarization and orbital magnetization of solids, and the
integer and fractional quantum Hall eﬀects. The Berry phase is the central
concept in topological band theory and provides the mechanism responsible
for anyonic statistics in correlated many-body systems, a key element that
could be used to achieve fault-tolerant quantum computation. In other words,
the Berry phase is not just some fashionable idea useful for explaining a few
exotic phenomena, but a generic feature of quantum mechanics and an es-
sential ingredient necessary for a coherent understanding of basic quantum
phenomena, such as, for example, the electronic properties of materials. It is
therefore rather surprising that the full signiﬁcance of geometric phases was
practically ignored for more than ﬁfty years prior to the publication of Berry’s
work in 1984 [50]. In this chapter we discuss the basic physics that gives rise
37

38
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
to these geometric phases, point out the elements that allow us to distinguish
diﬀerent types of holonomies, summarize the basic concepts relevant to un-
derstanding the mathematical structure of geometric phases, and mention a
few relevant applications. The concepts and the mathematical framework in-
troduced here will be used in subsequent chapters as the basis for describing
the topological properties of condensed matter systems.
2.1
GEOMETRIC PHASES: EXAMPLES AND OVERVIEW
2.1.1
Classical and quantum holonomies
We start our discussion with some simple examples of geometric and topologi-
cal phases emerging during cyclic evolutions in classical and quantum systems.
First, consider the parallel transport of a tangent vector along a loop Γ on the
surface of a sphere. During the transport, the vector is always in the plane
tangent to the surface of the sphere and is not allowed to rotate with respect
to the normal. Yet, after completing the loop, the vector points in a direction
that diﬀers from its initial orientation. For example, let us assume that the
vector is parallel transported starting from the north pole along a meridian
down to the equator, then along the equator and back to the north pole along
a diﬀerent meridian, as shown in Figure 2.1(a). After completing the loop, the
vector points in a direction that is rotated by an angle θΓ with respect to its
initial orientation. This phenomenon is called a holonomy and the angle θΓ is
equal to the solid angle subtended by the surface enclosed by the loop Γ.
Next, consider a M¨obius strip and a vector perpendicular to the surface
[see Figure 2.1(b)]. The vector is transported along closed paths on the surface
of the strip. After one circuit, the direction of the vector gets reversed, as
illustrated in Figure 2.1(b). On the other hand, if the loop returns to the initial
point without completing a full circuit, or if it circles the strip twice, the initial
and ﬁnal directions of the vector coincide. The transport of the perpendicular
vector along a closed path Γ on the M¨obius strip generates a discrete holonomy
with two possible outcomes: θΓ = π (reversed orientation) and θΓ = 0 (same
orientation). In general, θΓ = πnΓ (mod 2π), where the winding number nΓ
represents the number of complete circuits around the strip.
There are important diﬀerences between these two examples. In the case
of the parallel transport over the sphere the holonomy angle depends on the
details of the path; variations of the loop will generally change the angle, since
it is proportional to the area of the enclosed surface. By contrast, in the case of
the M¨obius strip arbitrary variations of the path that preserve the number of
complete circuits do not aﬀect the holonomy. In the ﬁrst case, the holonomy
is linked to the curvature of the underlying space, i.e., the sphere. Parallel
transport of a vector over a plane results in the initial and ﬁnal orientations
being always the same, i.e., no holonomy. In general, the holonomy associated
with parallel transport over curved spaces depends on the geometry of the path
and represents a measure of the curvature, which is a geometric property of

The Geometric Phase
■39
θΓ
θΓ = π
Γ
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.1: (a) Parallel transport of a tangent vector on the surface of a
sphere. (b) Transport of a perpendicular vector on a M¨obius strip.
the underlying space; hence it can be properly called a geometric holonomy.
In the case of the M¨obius strip, on the other hand, the holonomy is due to
the nontrivial topological properties of the underlying space and, therefore,
it is a topological holonomy. Its topological nature is the reason behind the
robustness of the holonomy against deformations of the path that do not
modify the winding number nΓ. Note that the (Gaussian) curvature of the
M¨obius strip is zero. Also note that transport on a topologically trivial surface
with zero curvature (e.g., a cylinder) generates no holonomy.
To further emphasize the distinction between geometric and topological
holonomies, let us consider again the parallel transport of a vector along a
closed path Γ, but this time on the surface of a cone. The curvature is zero ev-
erywhere except the apex, where it is undeﬁned. Unlike the parallel transport
on a sphere, the holonomy angle does not depend on the details of the path,
but only on how many times it circles the apex. Speciﬁcally, θΓ = 2π sin(α)nΓ,
where nΓ is the number of complete circuits around the apex and 2α is the
aperture of the cone. In particular, the vector will return to the initial orien-
tation for any loop that does not circle the apex. Hence, the parallel transport
of a vector on the surface of a cone generates a topological holonomy.
Turning now to quantum systems, let us consider a spin- 1
2 particle in a
rotating magnetic ﬁeld B(t). We assume that the particle has a magnetic
moment µ = g qℏ
2mS, where g is the Land´e factor, q and m are the charge and
mass of the particle, respectively, and S = 1
2⃗σ, with ⃗σ = (σx, σy, σz) being the
Pauli matrices, is the spin operator in units of ℏ. The magnetic ﬁeld precesses
around the z axis at a polar angle θ with constant angular frequency ω, so
that the direction of the ﬁeld at time t is given by the unit vector ˆR = B/B
deﬁned in spherical coordinates by the angles θ and ϕ = ωt. In the laboratory

40
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
frame, the Hamiltonian of the system is
H(t) = ℏωB ˆR(θ, ωt) · S,
(2.1)
with ℏωB = g qℏ
2mB. The time evolution of the quantum state vector |ψ(t)⟩is
determined by the Schr¨odinger equation
iℏ∂
∂t|ψ(t)⟩= H(t)|ψ(t)⟩.
(2.2)
We are interested in solutions of the Schr¨odinger equation (2.2) characterized
by cyclic evolutions, |ψ(τ)⟩⟨ψ(τ)| = |ψ(0)⟩⟨ψ(0)|, where τ is the period of the
cyclic state. Note that |ψ(τ)⟩and |ψ(0)⟩represent the same quantum state,
i.e., they are identical up to a phase factor. Also note that, in general, the
period τ does not have to be the same as the period of the Hamiltonian, T =
2π
ω . However, in this example we will focus on the class of cyclic solutions with
τ = T. To ﬁnd these solutions, it is convenient to change the reference frame by
rotating the state vector about the z axis by an angle ϕ(t) = −ωt. In the new
frame, the state vector |ψ(t)⟩′, which can be obtained from the original state
vector by applying the unitary transformation Uω(t) = eiωtSz, i.e., |ψ(t)⟩′ =
Uω(t)|ψ(t)⟩, evolves according to the time-independent Hamiltonian
H′ = UωH(t)U †
ω −iℏUω
∂U †
ω
∂t
= ℏΩˆR(θ′, 0) · S,
(2.3)
where
Ω= ωB
s
1 −2 ω
ωB
cos θ +
 ω
ωB
2
,
(2.4a)
sin θ′ = ωB
Ωsin θ,
cos θ′ = ωB
Ω

cos θ −ω
ωB

.
(2.4b)
Since H′ is time-independent, the Schr¨odinger equation iℏ∂
∂t|ψ′(t)⟩= H′|ψ′(t)⟩
can be easily integrated and we have |ψ′(t)⟩= e−i
ℏH′t|ψ′(0)⟩. Transforming
back to the laboratory frame, we ﬁnd the solution of the Schr¨odinger equation
(2.2) for an arbitrary initial state vector |ψ(0)⟩= |ψ′(0)⟩as
|ψ(t)⟩= e−iωtSze−iΩt ˆ
R′·S|ψ(0)⟩= U †(t)|ψ(0)⟩,
(2.5)
where
ˆR′ =
ˆR(θ′, 0). A cyclic solution with period τ can be obtained
by choosing |ψ(0)⟩to be an eigenstate of the unitary operator U †(τ) =
e−iωτSze−iΩτ ˆ
R′·S. Focusing on the case τ = T, one can easily show that the
eigenstates of the spin projection along ˆR′, i.e., the solutions of the eigenvalue
problem ˆR′·S|λ, ˆR(θ′, 0)⟩= λ
2 |λ, ˆR(θ′, 0)⟩, with λ = ±1, are also eigenvectors
of the evolution operator U †(T). Consequently, during a cyclic evolution with
period T = 2π
ω and initial condition |ψ(0)⟩= |λ, ˆR(θ′, 0)⟩, the state vector
acquires a phase factor e−iαλ with αλ = λπ(1 + Ω/ω). Explicitly,
|ψ(T)⟩= U †(T)|ψ(0)⟩= e−iπλ(1+ Ω
ω)|ψ(0)⟩
(2.6)

The Geometric Phase
■41
The appearance of a phase factor as a result of time evolution is not at
all surprising. For example, during the time interval 0 ≤t ≤T a stationary
state with energy En acquires a dynamical phase e−iαdyn
n
characterized by an
angle αdyn
n
= EnT/ℏ. For a general cyclic evolution one would expect a similar
dynamical phase. A reasonable generalization of the dynamical phase angle
would be
αdyn = 1
ℏ
Z T
0
⟨ψ(t)|H(t)|ψ(t)⟩dt.
(2.7)
For the Hamiltonian (2.1), the dynamical phase angle associated with the
cyclic state (2.5) with |ψ(0)⟩= |λ, ˆR(θ′, 0)⟩is
αdyn
λ
= λπ
Ω
ω + cos θ′

,
(2.8)
where cos θ′ is given by Eq. (2.4b). Note, however, that the total phase in
Eq. (2.6) does not coincide with the dynamical contribution and we have
e−iαλ = e−iαdyn
λ eiγλ, with the additional contribution given by
γλ = −λπ(1 −cos θ′) = −λπ

1 −ωB
Ωcos θ + ω
Ω

.
(2.9)
Let us remark that the quantity π(1 −cos θ′) represents half of the solid
angle Ω(θ′) subtended by a vector ˆR precessing around the z axis at a polar
angle θ′. Furthermore, for a slowly rotating magnetic ﬁeld, i.e., in the adiabatic
limit characterized by ω ≪ωB, we have Ω→ωB, θ′ →θ and the additional
phase angle γλ = −λ
2 Ω(θ) is solely determined by the geometry of the rotating
ﬁeld. To better understand the signiﬁcance of this phase, let us consider the
adiabatic evolution of a system governed by the Hamiltonian (2.1) that is
initially in the low-energy eigenstate |ψ(0)⟩= |−, ˆR(θ, 0)⟩with energy E−=
−1
2ℏωB (we assume here that ωB ≥0). Since the magnetic ﬁeld varies slowly
in time, the state vector at arbitrary t will be given, up to a phase factor,
by the eigenstate corresponding to spin projection −ℏ
2
along the direction of
ﬁeld, i.e., |−, ˆR(θ, ωt)⟩. The states of the system can be represented as points
on a Bloch sphere1 and a cyclic evolution corresponds to a closed loop on this
sphere. The dynamical phase angle acquired during a cyclic evolution is αdyn
−
=
−πωB/ω, i.e., it depends on the period T. Note that the dynamical phase can
be eliminated by properly shifting the energy, H(t) →H(t) −ℏωαdyn
−/(2π).
On the other hand, the geometric phase γ−= π(1 −cos θ) is not aﬀected by
the energy shift and is determined solely by the geometry of the problem,
more speciﬁcally by the solid angle traced by the rotating magnetic ﬁeld. We
conclude that the adiabatic transport of a spin-half particle on the Bloch
1The Bloch sphere is a geometrical representation of the pure state space of a two-level
quantum mechanical system. Antipodal points correspond to mutually orthogonal state
vectors, e.g., the north and south poles correspond to | + 1⟩and | −1⟩, respectively.

42
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
sphere results in a geometric phase eiγB
λ , the Berry phase, with γB
λ equal to
minus half the solid angle enclosed by the trajectory.
γB
λ = −λπ(1 −cos θ) = −λ
2 Ω(θ).
(2.10)
This is the quantum analog of the classical holonomy generated by the parallel
transport of a vector on the surface of a sphere. The generalization (2.9) of
the Berry phase for non-adiabatic evolutions is called the Aharonov–Anandan
phase [7]. Note the similarity between Eqs. (2.9) and (2.10) and the fact that,
in general, θ′ ̸= θ. The two angles coincide in the adiabatic limit.
The ﬁnal example involves the geometric phase associated with the
Aharonov–Bohm eﬀect [9]. Let us consider a charged particle moving non
relativistically in the presence of a magnetic ﬂux Φ generated by an inﬁnitely
long inﬁnitesimally thin impenetrable solenoid that coincides with the z co-
ordinate axis. The corresponding vector potential is A(r) =
Φ
2πr2 (xˆy −yˆx),
where r = |r|, while ˆx and ˆy are unit vectors along the corresponding direc-
tions. Note that the magnetic ﬁeld is zero everywhere outside the inﬁnites-
imally thin solenoid, i.e., for any point r that is not on the z axis. The
dynamics of the particle is described by the minimal coupling Hamiltonian
H = −ℏ2
2m(∇−i q
ℏA)2 + VR(r), where m and q are the mass and charge of
the particle, respectively, and VR(r) is a potential that conﬁnes the particle
inside a small box centered at R. Assume that in the absence of the magnetic
ﬁeld, the conﬁned particle is in a state ψ0
n(r′) of energy En, where r′ = r −R
represents the position of the particle relative to the conﬁning box. In the
presence of a magnetic ﬂux, the eigenvector corresponding to En will be
ψn(r, R) = e
iq
ℏ
R r
R A(x)·dx ψ0
n(r −R).
(2.11)
If the box containing the particle is adiabatically transported along a closed
loop C that does not intersect the (impenetrable) ﬂux tube, the system ac-
quires a geometric phase given by
γAB(C) = q
ℏ
I
C
A · dR = q
ℏ
Z
S(C)
B · dS = nC
q
ℏΦ,
(2.12)
where S(C) is the surface bounded by the loop C, B is the magnetic ﬁeld, and
nC is the number of times C cycles around the ﬂux line. Note that the system
acquires a nontrivial phase although the box is moving in a region with no
magnetic ﬁeld. This rather unexpected behavior is known as the Aharonov–
Bohm eﬀect [9]. The corresponding phase angle γAB(C) does not depend on
the geometry of the closed path C, being determined solely by the topology
of this path (i.e., by how many times it circles around the ﬂux tube) and by
the ﬂux Φ. The Aharonov-Bohm phase is an example of topological phase and
can be viewed as the quantum analog of the (classical) topological holonomy
generated by the parallel transport of a vector on the surface of a cone.

The Geometric Phase
■43
2.1.2
Historical overview and conceptual distinctions
Historically, the concept of geometric phase has been recognized as a generic
feature of quantum mechanics only relatively recently, particularly after the
publication in 1984 of Michael Berry’s work [50] on phase factors accompany-
ing the adiabatic evolution of quantum systems with slowly varying external
parameters. However, an analog of the quantum geometric phase was ﬁrst dis-
covered in 1956 by Pancharatnam [339] in the context of polarization optics.
This type of geometric holonomy, sometimes called the Pancharatnam phase,
represents a phase diﬀerence associated with polarized beams passing through
crystals. A few years later, in 1959, Aharonov and Bohm showed [9] that the
presence of a vector potential can generate phase factors that modify the inter-
ference pattern of charged particles even though the electromagnetic ﬁeld in
the region accessible to these particles is identically zero. In the same period,
manifestations of the geometric phase were found in molecular systems in the
context of the E ⊗e Jahn–Teller problem [297, 219]. It was noticed that the
electronic wave function changes sign when the nuclear coordinates traverse
a loop in the nuclear coordinate space that encircles a degeneracy point of
the potential energy surfaces. About two decades later, in 1979, Mead and
Truhlar [308] showed that this double-valuedness of the electronic wave func-
tion can be eliminated if one introduces a gauge potential in the eﬀective
electronic Hamiltonian. This ﬁrst concrete derivation of a geometric phase re-
vealed the close relation between the phase and an underlying gauge potential
that emerges naturally in a Born–Oppenheimer type approximation when the
nuclear coordinates are treated as slowly varying quantum observables.
In 1984 Berry [50] carried out an investigation of geometric phases that
accumulate during cyclic evolutions of quantum systems with classical envi-
ronments that change adiabatically. He derived the Mead–Truhlar gauge po-
tential and the corresponding adiabatic geometric phase — the Berry phase —
and showed that the Aharonov–Bohm phase represents a special type of geo-
metric phase. Berry’s derivation was restricted to adiabatic cyclic evolutions of
non-degenerate pure quantum states. This generates Abelian geometric phases
that depend on the geometry of the path traced out by the Hamiltonian in
the parameter space. All these restrictions were subsequently removed. In the
same year, Wilczek and Zee [463] pointed out that adiabatic transport of a
degenerate set of quantum states generates a non-Abelian geometric phase.
The generalization to the case of non-adiabatic unitary cyclic evolutions was
done by Aharonov and Anandan in 1987 [7]. The Aharonov–Anandan phase
depends on the geometry of the path in the state space, rather than the
parameter space. Subsequently, Samuel and Bhandari [381] introduced the
notion of non-cyclic geometric phases based upon Pancharatnam’s work. A
few years earlier, in 1986, Uhlmann [432] investigated the geometric phase, as
a mathematical concept, in the context of mixed states. This rapid progress
was driven, in part, by the remarkably beautiful mathematical structure of the
geometric phase. As Simon [409] realized immediately after Berry’s introduc-

44
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
tion of the concept, the geometric phase can be interpreted as the holonomy
of a ﬁber bundle and the corresponding gauge potential can be viewed as a
connection on this ﬁber bundle (see below, Section 2.3).
Today, geometric phases play a central role in many areas of physics, in-
cluding the study of condensed matter systems. In 1989 Zak [478] introduced
the Berry phase across the Brilloiun zone — sometimes called the Zak phase
— associated with the dynamics of electrons in periodic solids. This led to
a breakthrough in understanding the electric polarization of crystalline insu-
lators [255, 367] in the framework of adiabatic charge transport. Adiabatic
transport in Bloch bands leads naturally to geometric phases, which can suc-
cessfully explain the anomalous Hall eﬀect [239, 323] and can be directly
connected [423] with the topological Chern number associated with the quan-
tized Hall conductance. Beyond Bloch band theory, geometric phases have
important manifestations in interacting many-body systems, including frac-
tional quantum Hall systems [428], spin-wave dynamics in itinerant magnets
[331], and the fractional statistics of anyons [25].
We conclude this section with a summary intended to help the reader to
discriminate among diﬀerent types of geometric holonomies. First, we have
classical versus quantum holonomies. The parallel transport of a vector on
the surface of a sphere, or the rotation of the Foucault pendulum are ex-
amples of classical holonomies, which are described by the so-called Hannay
angles [207]. The quantum analog of these angles are the geometric phases,
sometimes generically called Berry phases. Technically, the Berry phase, e.g.,
that corresponding to the phase angle γB
λ given by Eq. (2.10), is associated
with adiabatic cyclic evolutions of non-degenerate pure quantum states. Its
non-adiabatic generalization is the Aharonov–Anandan phase, e.g., the phase
corresponding to γλ given by (2.9). Other generalizations of the Berry phase
involving non-cyclic evolution, non-Abelian structure, or mixed states, were
mentioned above. Second, one can distinguish between holonomies that are
purely geometrical and holonomies that have a topological nature, such as
the transport of a vector on a M¨obius band, or the Aharonov–Bohm phase
angle γAB(C) from Eq. (2.12). Note that, unlike the more familiar dynamic
phase, the geometric phase is independent of the rate of change along the
loop in the parameter space or the state space. In addition, the topological
phases are invariant with respect to smooth deformations of the loop that
do not change its topological properties, e.g., the number of times it circles
a certain singularity. Finally, note that there are two distinct concepts that
bear the same name: topological phase. The ﬁrst concept refers to geometric
phases that are topological in nature, such as the Aharonov–Bohm phase.
The second concept refers to phases of matter that have nontrivial topological
properties (e.g., topological insulators or quantum Hall ﬂuids). The classiﬁ-
cation and properties of these topological phases of matter are discussed in
Chapters 4–9.

The Geometric Phase
■45
2.2
PHASE CHANGES DURING CYCLIC QUANTUM
EVOLUTIONS
In this section we discuss the formal derivation of the quantal phase factors
associated with cyclic evolutions focusing on the adiabatic Abelian case origi-
nally considered by Berry. We also discuss the main ideas behind the non-
Abelian Wilczek–Zee extension and the non-adiabatic Aharonov–Anandan
generalization. For a more detailed account of geometric phases see, for exam-
ple, Shapere and Wilczek [401] and Bohm et al. [57], and references therein.
2.2.1
The Berry phase
We consider a quantum system described by a Hamiltonian H = H(R) that
depends on a set of parameters R = (R1, R2, . . . ) characterizing the environ-
ment. Each value of R represents a particular environment conﬁguration and
corresponds to a point in the parameter space M, which is a smooth manifold
(see Section 2.3.1 for a deﬁnition of this concept). A changing environment is
described by a time-dependent set of parameters R(t) and the adiabatic evo-
lution of the system corresponds to R(t) moving slowly along a certain path
C in the parameter space, C : [0, T] →M. The initial and ﬁnal environment
conﬁgurations are R(0) = R0 and R(T) = RT , respectively.
We postulate that the space H of physical states is the same for all pa-
rameters R ∈M. Consequently, the basis for the (unique) space of physical
state vectors (i.e., the basis for H) can be chosen, for each R ∈M, as the
orthonormal basis |n; R⟩given by the eigenstates of H(R),
H(R)|n; R⟩= En(R)|n; R⟩.
(2.13)
We assume that the observables, including the eigenvalues En(R) and the
projectors |n; R⟩⟨n; R|, are single-valued functions of R over the whole pa-
rameter space M. In particular if C is a closed path, i.e., RT = R0, we
have En(RT ) = En(R0) and |n; RT ⟩⟨n; RT | = |n; R0⟩⟨n; R0|. Note, however,
that this does not imply that the state vectors |ψ(t)⟩∈H are single-valued
functions over the whole M. In general, it is necessary to use diﬀerent param-
eterizations over diﬀerent patches Oi ⊂M that cover the parameter space,
which leads to diﬀerent functional dependencies. On the other hand, since
Eq. (2.13) determines the state vectors up to a phase factor, one can deﬁne
equivalent sets of solutions related by the phase transformation,
|n; R⟩′ = eiζn(R)|n; R⟩,
(2.14)
where ζn(R) are arbitrary phase angles. We will only consider transforma-
tions corresponding to phase factors eiζn(R) that are single-valued functions
over M, which are called gauge transformations. In the overlap region Oi ∩Oj
between two neighboring patches the eigenvectors corresponding to the two
diﬀerent parameterizations are related by a gauge transformation. To sim-
plify the discussion, we will restrict ourselves to the case when the path C is

46
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
contained inside a single patch O ⊂M, so that the basis vectors |n; R⟩are
smooth and single-valued functions of R.
Next, we focus on the adiabatic evolution of the system as R(t) moves
along the path C. According to the adiabatic theorem [61, 250], if the sys-
tem starts in a state described by |n; R0⟩, it will remain in the instantaneous
eigenstate corresponding to En(R(t)). The only degree of freedom in the prob-
lem, the phase, can be determined by solving the time-dependent Schr¨odinger
equation
iℏd
dt|ψn(t)⟩= H(R(t))|ψn(t)⟩.
(2.15)
One can easily verify that the solution of Eq. (2.15) corresponding to the
initial condition |ψn(0)⟩= |n; R0⟩is
|ψn(t)⟩= eiγn(t) exp

−i
ℏ
Z t
0
dt′ En(R(t′))

|n; R(t)⟩,
(2.16)
where the second exponential represents the familiar dynamical phase. The
additional phase is characterized by a phase angle γn(t) =
R t
0 dR · An(R),
where the vector-valued function An(R), called the Berry connection or the
Mead–Berry vector potential, is given by
An(R) = i⟨n; R| ∂
∂R|n; R⟩.
(2.17)
The Berry connection is a gauge-dependent quantity. Indeed, as a result
of a gauge transformation (2.14) the Berry connection changes according
to An(R) →An(R) −
∂
∂Rζn(R). Consequently, the additional phase angle
acquired during the evolution along the path C will also change, γn(T) →
γn(T) + ζn(R0) −ζn(RT ). This property was noticed by V. A. Fock in 1928
[151]. Addressing the case of non-cyclic evolutions, he concluded that a suit-
able choice of ζn(R) can completely eliminate the additional phase accumu-
lated along the path C. This conclusion induced the idea that γn can always be
neglected; the additional phase was overlooked for more than half a century.
It was Berry who discovered that the above argument does not hold for
cyclic evolutions. For a closed path C, i.e., for RT = R0, the single-valuedness
of the phase factor eiζn(R) associated with a gauge transformation implies
ζn(RT ) −ζn(R0) = 2π×(integer). Consequently, since the phase angle ac-
quired along a closed path can only be changed by an integer multiple of 2π,
it cannot be removed. The additional phase angle γn = γn(T), known as the
Berry phase angle or the geometric phase angle, is gauge invariant (modulo
2π) and represents a physical observable. The Berry phase angle is given by
γn =
I
C
dR · An(R)
(mod 2π),
(2.18)
with the Berry connection An(R) given by Eq. (2.17).

The Geometric Phase
■47
The Berry curvature
The Berry connection (2.17) is a gauge-dependent quantity analogous to the
vector potential from electrodynamics. The circulation of the vector potential
along a closed loop C, i.e., an expression similar to Eq. (2.18), represents the
magnetic ﬂux through a surface bounded by C. Therefore, exploiting further
the analogy with electrodynamics, we introduce a gauge ﬁeld tensor Ωn
µν and
express the Berry phase in terms of this gauge invariant quantity. Explicitly,
we have
Ωn
µν(R)
=
∇µAn
ν(R) −∇νAn
µ(R)
(2.19)
=
i [⟨∇µ(n; R)|∇ν(n; R)⟩−⟨∇ν(n; R)|∇µ(n; R)⟩] ,
where we used the notations ∇µ =
∂
∂Rµ and |∇µ(n; R)⟩=
∂
∂Rµ |n; R⟩. The
gauge invariant ﬁeld Ωn
µν is called the Berry curvature tensor. If the parameter
space M is three dimensional, we can deﬁne the Berry curvature vector Ωn =
∇× An(R), which is related to the Berry curvature tensor by Ωn
µν(R) =
ϵµνλΩn
λ(R), where ϵµνλ is the antisymmetric Levi–Civita tensor. This provides
a powerful intuitive picture of the Berry curvature as a “magnetic ﬁeld” in
the parameter space. Furthermore, using the Stokes theorem one can recast
Eq. (2.18) as
γn =
Z
S(C)
dS · Ωn(R)
(mod 2π),
(2.20)
with S(C) ⊂M being a surface bounded by the closed path C. In other words,
the Berry phase is the ﬂux of the Berry curvature through the surface S(C).
Returning to the general case of arbitrary dim(M), one can express Ωn
µν
in terms of all energy eigenstates as
Ωn
µν(R) = i
X
m̸=n
⟨n; R|∇µH(R)|m; R⟩⟨m; R|∇νH(R)|n; R⟩−(µ ↔ν)
[En(R) −Em(R)]2
.
(2.21)
Equation (2.21) can be obtained from (2.19) using the relation⟨n;R|∇µH|m;R⟩
= ⟨∇µ(n; R)|m; R⟩(En −Em). Again, using the Stokes theorem one can
rewrite Eq. (2.18) in the form
γn =
Z
S(C)
dRµ ∧dRν
1
2Ωn
µν(R)
(mod 2π),
(2.22)
where ∧is the wedge product and dRµ ∧dRν represents the area of an in-
ﬁnitesimal oriented surface (see Section 2.3 for details).
Several remarks would be appropriate at this point. First, unlike γn, which
is associated with a closed path, the Berry curvature is a local quantity that
characterizes certain geometric properties associated with the dependence of
the state on the parameter set R. Second, the Berry curvature is gauge inde-
pendent and can be globally deﬁned on M. By contrast, the Berry connection
(2.17) has to be calculated using smooth single-valued eigenvectors |n; R⟩

48
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
deﬁned on a certain patch in the parameter space. This condition is not re-
quired when using Eqs. (2.21) and (2.22) to calculate the geometric phase.
Third, Eq. (2.21) suggests that the Berry curvature can be thought of as the
result of a “residual interaction” of the nth energy level with the other en-
ergy levels that were projected out as a result of the adiabatic approximation.
Note that the total Berry curvature P
n Ωn
µν(R) is identically zero. Also note
that Ωn
µν(R) becomes singular at a degeneracy point R∗of two energy bands,
En(R∗) = Em(R∗). As shown below, such a degeneracy point behaves like
a monopole in the parameter space. Finally, the formalism developed above
is valid for a non-degenerate energy level En(R). In the case of degenerate
levels, the dynamics has to be projected onto the subspace spanned by the
corresponding states and the Berry connection becomes a non-Abelian matrix
of dimension equal to the degeneracy (see below, Section 2.2.2).
Degeneracy points
To illustrate the general formalism, we consider a basic example of signiﬁcant
practical importance: the two-level system. The generic Hamiltonian of a two-
level system has the form
H(R) = ϵ(R)σ0 + d(R) · σ,
(2.23)
where σ0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix and σ are the Pauli matrices. A speciﬁc
example was discussed in Section 2.1.1, namely the Hamiltonian in Eq. (2.1)
describing a spin- 1
2 particle in a rotating magnetic ﬁeld. The two energy levels
are E± = ϵ±
√
d · d, where the dependence on the parameter set R was omit-
ted for simplicity. Note that the additive term ϵ(R) can be neglected without
loss of generality. Also, it is convenient to re-parameterize the Hamiltonian
in terms of three independent parameters: d = (dx, dy, dz) or, using spherical
coordinates, d = d(sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ). Note that the point d∗= 0 is a
degeneracy point with E−(d∗) = E+(d∗) = 0. The eigenstates corresponding
to E± = ±d are
|−; d⟩=
 sin θ
2e−iφ
−cos θ
2

,
|+; d⟩=

cos θ
2
sin θ
2eiφ

.
(2.24)
Using these eigenstates and Eq. (2.17) we can calculate the Berry connection.
For the low-energy level we have
A(−)
d
= 0,
A(−)
θ
= 0,
A(−)
φ
= sin2 θ
2.
(2.25)
Note that the eigenstates (2.24) are not single-valued for θ = 0, as they have
undeﬁned phases. Changing the gauge, e.g. |∓; d⟩→e±iφ|∓; d⟩, generates
eigenstates that are smooth and single-valued everywhere except at θ = 0.
Using this gauge, we get A(−)
d
= A(−)
θ
= 0 and A(−)
φ
= −cos2 θ
2. However, the
Berry curvature is gauge independent and we have for any d ̸= 0
Ω(−)
θφ = ∇θA(−)
φ
−∇φA(−)
θ
= 1
2 sin θ,
(2.26)

The Geometric Phase
■49
all other tensor components being zero. For an arbitrary set of parameters R,
the Berry curvature can be calculated using the relation
Ω(−)
µν = Ω(−)
θφ
∂(θ, φ)
∂(Rµ, Rν) = 1
2
∂(φ, cos θ)
∂(Rµ, Rν),
(2.27)
where
∂(θ,φ)
∂(Rµ,Rν) =
∂θ
∂Rµ
∂φ
∂Rν −
∂θ
∂Rν
∂φ
∂Rµ is the Jacobian of the corresponding
parameter transformation. In the particular case R = (dx, dy, dz), we obtain
Ω(−)
ij
=
1
2d3 ϵijkdk or, in terms of the Berry curvature vector,
Ω(−) = 1
2
d
d3 .
(2.28)
One can recognize Ω(−) as the ﬁeld generated by a monopole of strength
1/2 placed at the origin (in the parameter space), which coincides with the
degeneracy point d∗= 0. Note that the curvature of the positive-energy band
has opposite sign, Ω(+) = −Ω(−). If the system is adiabatically transported
along a closed loop C ⊂M, the state vector will acquire a geometric phase
γ±(C) =
Z
S(C)
dS · Ω± = ∓1
2Ω(C),
(2.29)
where Ω(C) is the solid angle subtended by C at the degeneracy point. This
result conﬁrms Eq. (2.10), where the Berry phase for a 1
2-spin in a rotating
magnetic ﬁeld was determined directly by calculating the evolution of the wave
function. Finally, we note that the integral of the Berry curvature over any
closed manifold is quantized in units of 2π. For example, we have
R
dθdφ Ωθφ =
2π. In general, the integer ν± =
1
2π
H
dRµ ∧dRν 1
2Ω(±)
µν , called the Chern
number, is equal to the net number of monopoles enclosed by the manifold.
The Aharonov–Bohm phase
It would be instructive to brieﬂy revisit the Aharonov–Bohm eﬀect from the
perspective of the general formalism developed in this section. We have shown
(see Section 2.1.1) that, in the presence of an impenetrable ﬂux line (which
we choose to coincide with the z coordinate axis), the nth eigenstate of a
particle conﬁned inside a box is given by ⟨r|n; R⟩= ψn(r, R), where r is the
particle position vector, R represents the position of the box, and ψn(r, R) is
given by Eq. (2.11). The Hamiltonian of the system depends parametrically
on R, so that the parameter space associated with this problem is M =
R3 −{(0, 0, z)|z ∈R}. As the box containing the particle is adiabatically
transported along a closed loop, i.e., R(t) ∈C, the state vector acquires a
geometric phase γn. To determine it, we ﬁrst calculate the corresponding Berry
connection using Eq. (2.17) and the wave function ψn(r, R). We have
An(R)
=
i
Z
d3r

ψ0
n(r −R)
∗
−iq
ℏA(R)ψ0
n(r −R) + ∇ψ0
n(r −R)

=
q
ℏA(R),
(2.30)

50
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
where ψ0
n(r −R) is the nth energy eigenstate of the conﬁned particle in the
absence of a magnetic ﬂux and we have used the property ⟨ψ0
n|∇|ψ0
n⟩= 0. Note
that the Berry connection is proportional to the vector potential associated
with the external magnetic ﬁeld. Again, we emphasize that the magnetic ﬁeld
B(R) = ∇× A(R) is zero for any R ∈M, i.e., everywhere except inside
the inﬁnitesimally thin ﬂux tube. Finally, to calculate the geometric phase
associated with the adiabatic transport of the box along a closed path C, we
use Eq. (2.18) with An(R) determined above and the Stokes theorem. We get
γn = γAB(C), where γAB(C) is the Aharonov–Bohm phase given by Eq. (2.12).
The Berry phase in Bloch bands
The geometric phase is a critical concept in the modern theory of crystalline
systems. Here we introduce the basic ideas that will enable us to apply the
generic Berry phase formalism to band theory. For more details see, for ex-
ample, Chang and Niu [81] and Xiao et al. [474].
The electronic properties of the crystal are described within the indepen-
dent particle approximation by the single-particle Hamiltonian
H = −ℏ2
2m0
∇2 + V (r),
(2.31)
where m0 is the electron mass and V (r) = V (r + ai) is a periodic potential,
ai being the primitive lattice vectors. An eigenstate of the Hamiltonian with
eigenvalue En(q) will satisfy the Bloch condition
ψnq(r + ai) = eiq·aiψnq(r),
(2.32)
where n is the band index, while q is the Bloch wave number (i.e., ℏq is the
crystal momentum) and takes values inside the Brillouin zone (BZ). Equa-
tion (2.32) can be regarded as a q-dependent boundary condition. To fully
exploit the periodicity of the problem, we reduce the Hilbert space to that
associated with a single unit cell. Since the q-dependent condition (2.32) will
generate a multitude of Hilbert spaces, we perform a unitary transformation
and introduce the cell-periodic function
unq(r) = e−iq·rψnq(r),
unq(r + ai) = unq(r).
(2.33)
The price for this is a q-dependent Hamiltonian, H →H(q) = e−iq·rHeiq·r,
H(q) = −ℏ2
2m0
(∇+ iq)2 + V (r).
(2.34)
At this point, we can make the connection with the general Berry phase for-
malism. We have a parameter dependent Hamiltonian, H(R) →H(q), and a
single Hilbert space H, so that for each value of the parameter R →q the set
|n; R⟩→|un(q)⟩represents an orthonormal basis for H. The parameter space
is the Brillouin zone, M →BZ. A slow cyclic variation of q in the Brillouin

The Geometric Phase
■51
zone, which may by caused by an external ﬁeld that enters the Schr¨odinger
equation as a time-dependent variation of the wave vector, q →q+∆q(t), will
result in the wave function acquiring a geometric phase. For example, applying
a magnetic ﬁeld generates cyclotron motion along closed orbits in the BZ. In
this case, the Berry phase will be manifested in various magneto-oscillatory
eﬀects [313, 314]. If, on the other hand, one applies an electric ﬁeld, ∆q is
linear in t and q sweeps the entire Brillouin zone (which has the topology of a
torus). The corresponding geometric phase, called the Zak phase [478], plays
an important role in, for example, adiabatic transport [422, 355] and electric
polarization of crystalline solids [255, 367, 336].
To account for these eﬀects, we introduce the Berry connection and the
corresponding Berry curvature vector
An(q)
=
i⟨un(q)|∇q|un(q)⟩,
(2.35)
Ωn(q)
=
∇q × An(q) = i⟨∇qun(q)| × |∇qun(q)⟩,
(2.36)
where |∇qun(q)⟩= ∇q|un(q)⟩. The corresponding Berry phase is given
by Eq. (2.18) or Eq. (2.20). Similarly, the Zak phase can be written as
γn =
R
CBZ dq · ⟨un(q)|i∇q|un(q)⟩, where CBZ is a path across the Brillouin
zone, e.g., (0, qy, qz) →(2π/a, qy, qz) for a simple cubic lattice. Finally, we
note that introducing a slow time-dependence in V (r), so that it preserves
the spatial periodicity, results in the Hamiltonian H(q, t) and the eigenstates
|un(q, t)⟩becoming explicitly time dependent. In this case, we treat q and t
as independent parameters, i.e., we have R →(q, t). The Berry connection
(2.35), which can be viewed as a geometric vector potential, becomes time
dependent, An = An(q, t). In addition, there is a component associated with
the parameter t, which can be interpreted as a geometric scalar potential
χn(q, t) = i⟨un(q)| ∂
∂t|un(q)⟩.
(2.37)
All these quantities play key roles in the dynamics of the Bloch electrons
under slowly varying external perturbations. For example, the semiclassical
equations of motion for a wave packet with crystal momentum ℏqc involve an
extra contribution, known as the anomalous velocity, ∆v = −˙qc × Ωn(qc) +
∂An
∂t
+ ∇qχn. In this equation, the Berry curvature vector Ωn(qc) acts as
a “magnetic” ﬁeld in k-space, while the last two terms are due to the time
dependence of the band structure.
2.2.2
The non-Abelian adiabatic phase
In the previous section we have considered the cyclic adiabatic evolution of
a quantum system with non-degenerate energy levels En(R). For example,
the non-degeneracy condition is a manifest requirement in Eq. (2.21), where
it ensures a ﬁnite Berry curvature. Here, we lift this requirement and allow
the nth energy level to be gn-fold degenerate. We assume that the degeneracy

52
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
is R-independent. This generalization of Berry’s construction to the case of
degenerate energy levels, ﬁrst done by Wilczek and Zee [463] in 1984, leads to
non-Abelian gauge ﬁelds.
For any given value of the parameter R ∈M the set of eigenstates |n, a; R⟩
with a = 1, 2, . . . , gn provides an orthonormal basis for the degeneracy sub-
space Hn(R) associated with the nth energy level En(R). The basis states are
assumed to be single-valued, i.e., for a cyclic evolution with R(T) = R(0) we
have |n, a; RT ⟩= |n, a; R0⟩. The adiabatic condition ensures that any eigen-
state vector |n, a; R0⟩∈Hn(R0) will evolve in such a way that it remains
an element of the degenerate subspace Hn(R(t)) at any t ∈[0, T]. Note that
the subspace Hn(R) is parameter dependent, while the total Hilbert space
H = N
n Hn(R) is not. Also note that the choice of basis for Hn(R) is arbi-
trary, but any two choices are related by a unitary transformation
|n, a; R⟩′ =
gn
X
b=1
|n, b; R⟩Un
ba(R),
(2.38)
where Un
ba(R) are the matrix elements of a unitary matrix Un(R) ∈U(gn).
Note that Eq. (2.38) is a generalization of the gauge transformation (2.14),
which involves the phase factor eiζn(R) ∈U(1), with U(N) designating the
unitary group of degree N (for the deﬁnition of a group see page 100).
Next, we are considering a cyclic evolution of the quantum system corre-
sponding to a closed curve C in the parameter space M. We assume that the
initial state belongs to the nth energy eigenspace, |ψn(0)⟩∈Hn(R0). The adi-
abatic theorem ensures that the state vector will belong to Hn(R(t)) at any
later time t and that after one cycle it will return to the initial subspace, since
Hn(RT ) = Hn(R0). However, the ﬁnal state vector |ψn(T)⟩∈Hn(R0) is not
required to be parallel to |ψn(0)⟩. Hence, as the result of its evolution, the
state vector undergoes a rotation in the degeneracy subspace Hn(R0), in ad-
dition to acquiring the standard dynamical phase e−i
ℏ
R T
0 dtEn(R(t)). Formally,
this holonomy can be expressed as
|ψn(T)⟩= exp
"
−i
ℏ
Z T
0
dt En(R(t))
#
ˆUn
C |ψn(0)⟩,
(2.39)
where ˆUn
C is a unitary operator that rotates the basis vectors in the degen-
eracy subspace Hn(R0), more speciﬁcally ˆUn
C |n, a; R0⟩= |n, a; R0⟩′, with
the rotated vectors related to the original basis through a unitary matrix
Un
C ∈U(gn), as given by Eq. (2.38). Note that the summation in Eq. (2.38) is
over the ﬁrst index of the matrix element. Comparing Eqs. (2.39) and (2.16),
we note that the unitary transformation associated with the operator ˆUn
C (or,
equivalently, the matrix Un
C ) represents the non-Abelian generalization of the
Berry phase eiγn ∈U(1). The unitary matrix Un
C can be expressed in terms
of the non-Abelian analog of the Berry connection, which is a vector-valued

The Geometric Phase
■53
matrix with matrix elements
[An]ab(R) = i⟨n, a; R| ∂
∂R|n, b; R⟩.
(2.40)
One can show that the non-Abelian Berry connection An
µ is a gn×gn hermitian
matrix that transforms under a gauge transformation (2.38) according to
An
µ →[Un]−1An
µ Un + i[Un]−1
∂
∂Rµ
Un.
(2.41)
The non-Abelian generalization of the Berry phase can be formally expressed
in terms of An as a path-ordered exponential,
Un
C = P exp
I
C
dR · An(R)

,
(2.42)
where P is the path-ordering operator. Note that, in general, the matrices
An
µ(R) do not commute and their order in the series expansion representing
the exponential is determined by P. Also, unlike its Abelian counterpart, the
non-Abelian geometric phase is gauge covariant, Un
C →[Un]−1(R0)Un
C Un(R0),
hence it is not directly observable. However, quantities such as the eigenvalues
of Un
C or its trace Tr[Un
C ], also called a Wilson loop, are gauge invariant and
thus experimentally measurable.
As a ﬁnal remark, we note that this formalism can be easily adapted to
the case of degenerate Bloch bands. For example, the Berry connection (2.35)
becomes the vector-valued matrix [An]ab(q) = i⟨una(q)|∇q|unb(q)⟩. The cor-
responding Berry curvature, deﬁned as Ωn = ∇q × An −iAn × An, contains
a second term that vanishes in the Abelian case. Remarkably, these quantities
have the same structure as the gauge potential (An) and the gauge ﬁeld (Ωn)
in a non-Abelian SU(2) gauge theory [463].
2.2.3
The Aharonov–Anandan phase
The Berry phase formalism introduced so far was developed based on the
assumption that the quantum system evolves adiabatically. Here, we examine
the phenomenon of geometric phase for non-adiabatic cyclic evolutions. This
generalization of the Berry phase was proposed in 1987 by Aharonov and
Anandan [7]. A speciﬁc example — the geometric phase acquired by a spin- 1
2
particle in a rotating magnetic ﬁeld — was discussed in Section 2.1.1.
We consider a quantum system described by the Hamiltonian H(t) =
H(R(t)) with a time-dependence given by the path CR ∋R(t), 0 ≤t ≤τ, in
the parameter space M. The physical states of the system represent equiva-
lence classes (rays) in a complex Hilbert space H. The set of these equivalence
classes corresponds to the projective Hilbert space P(H). The density operator
ρ(t) = |ψ(t)⟩⟨ψ(t)|, where ψ ∈H is a solution of the Schr¨odinger equation,
carries no redundant phase information and represents an element of P(H).

54
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
We deﬁne the projection map π : H →P(H) by the relation π(|ψ(t)⟩) = ρ(t),
which means that all state vectors |ψ(t)⟩representing a given physical state
are projected onto the corresponding density operator ρ(t) ∈P(H).
An arbitrary cyclic evolution of the quantum system with period τ corre-
sponds to a closed path C ⊂P(H) in the projective Hilbert space. This means
that the evolution of the system C : ρ(0) →ρ(t) →ρ(τ) satisﬁes the condition
ρ(0) = ρ(τ). Note that C, which is a closed curve in the space of physical
states P(H), is distinct from CR, which is a path (not necessarily closed) in
the parameter space M. During the cyclic evolution along C, the state vec-
tor |ψ(t)⟩, which is the solution of the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation,
evolves along the associated curve Cψ ⊂H. Of course, we have π(Cψ) = C,
i.e., at any time t the state vector is mapped onto the corresponding physical
state. However, generally the curve Cψ is not closed, because the condition
for cyclic evolutions, ρ(τ) = ρ(0), does not imply |ψ(τ)⟩= |ψ(0)⟩, but rather
|ψ(τ)⟩= eiα|ψ(0)⟩.
(2.43)
To identify the phase eiα acquired by the state vector during the cyclic evo-
lution of the quantum system, we introduce the smooth and singe-valued
function |φ(t)⟩= |φ(R(t))⟩∈H that satisﬁes the property ρ(t) = |φ(t)⟩⟨φ(t)|.
Note that |φ(R(t))⟩is deﬁned up to a gauge transformation, |φ(R(t))⟩→
eiζ(R(t))|φ(R(t))⟩. Also, since |φ(τ))⟩= |φ(0)⟩, as dictated by the single-
valuedness condition, the path Cφ ⊂H deﬁned by |φ(t)) during the evolution
of the system is closed. The curves Cψ and Cφ are called the dynamical lift
and the closed lift of C, respectively, and we have π(Cφ) = π(Cψ) = C. The
state vectors |ψ(t)⟩and |φ(t)⟩represent the same physical state, hence they
can diﬀer only by a phase factor, |ψ(t)⟩= eiα(t)|φ(t)⟩. We introduce this re-
lation into the Schr¨odinger equation and solve for α(t). Using the property
⟨φ(t)|H(t)|φ(t)⟩= ⟨ψ(t)|H(t)|ψ(t)⟩, we obtain
|ψ(t)⟩= exp

−i
ℏ
Z t
0
dt′⟨ψ(t′)|H(t′)|ψ(t′)⟩

eiγ(t)|φ(t)⟩,
(2.44)
where the ﬁrst exponential represents the dynamical phase and the addi-
tional phase angle is γ(t) =
R t
0 dt′i⟨φ(t′)| d
dt′ |φ(t′)⟩. Note that Eq. (2.44) is
the non-adiabatic generalization of (2.16). The additional phase acquired dur-
ing the cyclic evolution corresponding to the closed path C in P(H), called
the Aharonov–Anandan (AA) phase, is given by the phase angle
γ(C) =
I
i⟨φ(t)| d
dt|φ(t)⟩dt,
(2.45)
where |φ(t)⟩corresponds to any of the gauge-dependent closed lifts Cφ.
Equation (2.45) represents the non-adiabatic generalization of the Berry
phase angle. In the particular case of a spin- 1
2 particle in a rotating magnetic
ﬁeld (see Section 2.1.1), the closed lift corresponds to the states |φ(t)⟩=
|λ, ˆR(θ′, ωt)⟩and the AA phase angle is given by Eq. (2.9). Reproducing

The Geometric Phase
■55
this result using Eq. (2.45) is left as an exercise. Note that the phase angle
γ(C) is gauge independent (although |φ(t)⟩is not) and independent of the
speed with which |φ(t)⟩traverses the path Cφ. Also, while the Berry phase
depends on the geometry of the parameter space M and on the path CR,
the AA phase depends on the curve C and the geometry of the projective
space P(H). The name geometric phase expresses this relation between eiγ(C)
and the geometric properties of the space of physical states. Finally, we note
that the geometric phase introduced here requires the cyclic evolution of the
physical state of the system, but not a cyclic Hamiltonian. In other words,
we can deﬁne the geometric phase even for evolutions with H(τ) ̸= H(0),
provided that ρ(τ) = ρ(0).
2.3
THE MATHEMATICAL STRUCTURE OF GEOMETRIC PHASES
The geometric phase can be interpreted as the holonomy of a ﬁber bundle over
a certain manifold. In this section, we provide an elementary introduction to
basic concepts in diﬀerential geometry that are relevant in the context of
geometric phases. For a more in-depth treatment of this material the reader is
referred to introductory textbooks, for example Refs. [229, 324, 326, 395]. Our
goal here is to provide the reader with the basic language and simplest ideas
necessary to appreciate the signiﬁcance, universality, and aesthetic appeal of
the mathematical structure underlying the geometric phase. For simplicity,
we will limit our discussion to the Abelian case.
2.3.1
Basic definitions and examples
We start with a few highlights centered on the concept of diﬀerential manifold,
a central concept in modern mathematical physics. The reader is probably
familiar with the notions of open and closed subsets. The open and closed
intervals in R, (a, b) and [a, b], respectively, or the open neighborhood of a
point p ∈Rn (also called the open ball centered at p), are well-known examples.
We note that an arbitrary union of any collection of open sets is open, as well
as any ﬁnite intersection of such sets. The empty set ∅and the universal set
(e.g., X = Rn for the example given above) are both open and closed.
Topological space. Let T be a family of subsets of X such that: (1) ∅and X
are in T ; (2) any union of elements from T is in T ; (3) any ﬁnite intersection
of elements from T is in T . The collection T is called a topology on the set
X, the elements of T are called open sets, and the pair (X, T ) is said to be a
topological space (see also Section 4.3). A subfamily B ⊂T of the topology is
called a basis of the topological space if all the open subsets (i.e., elements of T )
can be expressed as unions of the elements of B. Other important subfamilies
of T are the open coverings of X. The family of open subsets C = {Oα} ⊂T
is called an open covering of X if ∪αOα = X.
Homeomorphism. A key notion that characterizes functions between topo-
logical spaces is continuity. Let f : X1 →X2 be a function and (X1, T1) and

56
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
(X2, T2) two topological spaces. The function f is said to be continuous if for
any open subset O2 ⊂X2 the inverse image f −1(O2) ⊂X1 is an open subset
of X1. The function f : X1 →X2 is said to be a homeomorphism if it is a
continuous bijection (a one-to-one correspondence between X1 and X2) with
a continuous inverse. A homeomorphism preserves the topological structure
and deﬁnes an equivalence relation between the two topological spaces, which
are said to be homeomorphic. This equivalence relation divides the collection
of all topological spaces into equivalence classes. The members of a class share
the same topological properties (see also Section 4.3).
Topological manifold. A manifold is, in essence, a topological space that lo-
cally resembles the Euclidian space Rn. The manifold is obtained by patching
together open pieces of Rn, more precisely open subsets that are homeomor-
phic to open subsets of Rn. Formally, a topological space (M, TM) is said to
be a topological manifold of dimension n if there exists an open covering {Oα}
of M such that each element of the covering is homeomorphic to an open set
Uα of Rn. The homeomorphism
φα : Oα →Uα,
φ(u) = (x1(u), . . . , xn(u))
(2.46)
is called a coordinate system, while the pair (Oα, φα) is called a chart on M.
The complete collection of charts is called an atlas. For a pair of overlapping
charts, Oα ∩Oβ ̸= ∅, the homeomorphism gαβ : φβ(Oα ∩Oβ) →φα(Oα ∩Oβ)
between open subsets of Rn deﬁned as
gαβ = φαφ−1
β |Oα∩Oβ
(2.47)
is called a transition map (overlap function or coordinate transformation).
Note that the topology TM of a manifold can be reconstructed from the inverse
images φ−1
α (U) of open subsets of Rn. As a consequence, all n-dimensional
manifolds have the same local properties. However, the global topological
properties of a manifold depend on how the open subsets {Oα} are patched
together, which is determined by the transition maps.
Diﬀerentiable manifold. Consider the subsets U ⊆Rn and V ⊆Rm. A
function g : U →V is said to be a CN function (1 ≤N ≤∞) if g is N-times
diﬀerentiable. A diﬀerentiable homeomorphism g is called a CN diﬀeomor-
phism if g and its inverse g−1 are CN functions. If the transition functions
gαβ of a manifold M are CN diﬀeomorphisms, M is said to be a CN manifold.
In this section we will consider C∞manifolds, also called smooth manifolds.
Note that the notion of CN diﬀerentiability can be generalized to homeomor-
phisms between CN manifolds that satisfy certain properties. This introduces
an equivalence relation on the collection of CN diﬀerentiable manifolds.
Example: the sphere S2. A simple example of smooth manifold is the space
Rn. However, this is a trivial manifold, as it can be covered by a single chart.
A nontrivial smooth manifold is, for example, the sphere S2, which can be
covered using at least two charts. To deﬁne these charts, one possibility is to
use the so called stereographic projection of S2 on R2. Let N and S denote

The Geometric Phase
■57
N
S
p
φ2(p)
Π1
Π2
FIGURE 2.2: Stereographic projection of the sphere.
the north and south poles of the sphere, respectively. We choose a covering
of S2 consisting of the open subsets O1 = S2 −{S} and O2 = S2 −{N}.
The homeomorphisms φi : Oi →R2, φi(p) = ri are deﬁned by the projection
procedure illustrated in Figure 2.2. The planes Π1 and Π2 are tangent to the
sphere at the north and south poles, respectively. Using Cartesian coordinates
on Π1 and Π2, we can easily show that the transition function g21 : R2−{0} →
R2 −{0} is
g21(x1, y1) =

x1
x2
1 + y2
1
,
−y1
x2
1 + y2
1

.
(2.48)
Note that g21 is a smooth diﬀeomorphism, hence S2 is a smooth manifold.
In fact, the sphere is a representative of an inﬁnite class of smooth manifolds
that can be obtained by smooth deformations of S2, i.e., are related to one
another by a diﬀeomorphism. For example, the surface of an ellipsoid and the
sphere are diﬀeomorphic to one another.
Tangent and cotangent spaces. The stereographic projection discussed
above involves the notion of a plane tangent to a sphere embedded in R3.
Diﬀerentiability allows us to generalize this concept to arbitrary smooth man-
ifolds. Let C : [0, T] −→M be a smooth curve on a smooth manifold M of
dimension m embedded in Rn, with C(0) = p ∈M. The vector v = d
dtC(t)|t=0
is called the tangent vector to C ⊂M at p ∈M. The set of all tangent vectors
to all curves originating at p ∈M represents an m-dimensional vector space
(isomorphic to Rm) denoted by TpM and called the tangent space of M at p.
The space of all linear real-valued functions on TpM (i.e., the dual vector space
of TpM) is called the cotangent space of M at p and is denoted by TpM ∗. The
elements of TpM and TpM ∗are called tangent (or contravariant) and cotan-
gent (covariant) vectors, respectively. Intuitively, TpM can be thought of as
the space of velocities at p ∈M corresponding to all “trajectories” C(t) on
the manifold M that pass through p. Also, the action of a cotangent vector (or
covector) ωp ∈TpM ∗on vp ∈TpM generates a scalar that can be expressed
as an inner product, ωp(vp) = (ωp, vp) = (ωp)i(vp)i, where the components of

58
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
vp associated with a local coordinate chart (Oα, φα) that maps the portion of
the curve C(t) ⊂Oα to the curve x(t) = (x1(t), . . . , xm(t)) ⊂Rm are
(vp)i = dxi(t)
dt

t=0
.
(2.49)
Consider now two intersecting charts (Oα, φα) and (Oβ, φβ) with x = φα(p)
and x′ = φβ(p) = gβα(x). The transformation rules for the components of
contravariant and covariant vectors are
(v′
p)i = ∂x′i
∂xj (vp)j,
(ω′
p)i = ∂xj
∂x′i (ωp)j.
(2.50)
A convenient way of accounting for these transformation rules is to use the
symbols
∂
∂xi = ∂i and dxi for the local coordinate basis vectors and covectors,
respectively. Using this notation, we have vp = (vp)i ∂
∂xi and ωp = (ωp)idxi.
The duality of the contravariant and covariant basis vectors can be expressed
as dxi(∂j) = (dxi, ∂j) = δi
j.
One-form. The set of all tangent spaces of a manifold is called the tangent
bundle of M and is denoted by TM. An element of TM can be represented
as a pair of the form (p, vp), with p ∈M and vp ∈TpM. Similarly, the
set of all cotangent spaces is called the cotangent bundle and is denoted by
TM ∗∋(p, ωp). A smooth function V : M −→TM such that V (p) = (p, v(p))
for every p ∈M is called a vector ﬁeld. Note that, usually, V (p) is identiﬁed
with its value v(p). Similarly, a smooth function Ω: M −→TM ∗such that
Ω(p) = (p, ω(p)) for every p ∈M is called a diﬀerential one-form (or simply
a one-form). Typically, Ω(p) is identiﬁed with ω(p). Since any point p ∈M is
represented by its coordinates x = (x1, . . . , xm) = φα(p), we can locally (i.e.,
for p ∈Oα) express a vector ﬁeld and a one-form using the notations for the
basis vectors and covectors mentioned above,
v(x) = vi(x) ∂
∂xi ,
ω(x) = ωi(x)dxi.
(2.51)
Wedge product. The vector ﬁelds mentioned above are particular examples
of tensor ﬁelds. An important class of such mathematical objects contains the
totally antisymmetric covariant tensor ﬁelds, also called diﬀerential forms. In
general, the tensor product of two forms is not antisymmetric. The corre-
sponding antisymmetric operation for diﬀerential forms is the so-called wedge
product, or the antisymmetric tensor product. For example, the basis for a
diﬀerential two-form is given by
dxµ ∧dxν = dxµ ⊗dxν −dxν ⊗dxµ = −dxν ∧dxµ.
(2.52)
Using this operation, we can write the electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor as a dif-
ferential two-form, F = 1
2Fµνdxµ ∧dxν. Note that the wedge product of two
vectors, say A1, A2 ∈R3, is related to the signed area of the parallelogram
deﬁned by the two vectors, similar to the cross product A1 × A2. However,

The Geometric Phase
■59
while A1 ×A2 ∈R3, the product A1 ∧A2 does not belong to the same vector
space as the two vectors. Moreover, unlike the cross product, we can general-
ize the relation between A1 ∧A2 and the signed area of the parallelogram to
higher dimensions. For example, A1 ∧A2 ∧A3 is related to the signed volume
deﬁned by the three vectors.
Exterior derivative. Consider the space Ωp of all diﬀerential p-forms on a
smooth manifold. The exterior derivative is the map d : Ωp −→Ωp+1 deﬁned
(locally) by
dω =
 ∂
∂xj ωi1...ip

dxj ∧dxi1 ∧· · · ∧dxip,
(2.53)
where ωi1...ipdxi1 ∧· · · ∧dxip ∈Ωp. Note that d2 = 0. In electromagnetism,
for example, we can write the diﬀerential two-form F as F = dA, where
A = Aµdxµ is a one-form with components given by the 4-potential Aµ. The
equation dF = d2A = 0 corresponds to the homogeneous Maxwell equations.
Push-forward and pullback maps. Consider two smooth manifolds M1 and
M2 and a smooth function f : M1 →M2 between them. This function in-
duces certain maps between the vector ﬁelds deﬁned on the two manifolds.
Speciﬁcally, for p ∈M1 let vp ∈TpM1 be an arbitrary (contravariant) vector
deﬁned by the curve C1(t), vp = dC1
dt |t=0. The image of C1 under f is the curve
C2 = f ◦C1 in M2, where (f ◦C1)(t) = f(C1(t)) represents the composition
of the functions C1 and f. Then, f induces the linear map
f∗: TpM1 −→Tf(p)M2,
f∗(vp) = dC2
dt

t=0
,
(2.54)
called the push-forward or the diﬀerential map. Similarly, starting from the
cotangent vectors and the diﬀerential forms of M2 we can “pull” them “back”
on M1. Let ωf(p) ∈Tf(p)M ∗
2 be an arbitrary cotangent vector at f(p) ∈M2.
Then, the map
f ∗: Tf(p)M ∗
2 −→TpM ∗
1 ,
f ∗(ωf(p))[vp] = ωf(p)[f∗(vp)],
(2.55)
called the pullback map, deﬁnes the cotangent vector f ∗(ωf(p)) ∈TpM ∗
1 . In the
above equation f∗(vp) is the push-forward of an arbitrary vector vp ∈TpM1.
2.3.2
Elementary introduction to fiber bundles
In this section we introduce some basic elements of ﬁber bundle theory. A
thorough treatment of this subject can be found in the literature, for example
Refs. [229, 324, 326]. Here, we focus on main concepts and ideas, particularly
those that are relevant to the holonomy interpretation of the geometric phase.
A ﬁber bundle E consists of a total space E (note that we use the same
symbol as for the ﬁber bundle), a base manifold M and a set of ﬁbers Fx, with
x ∈M. All ﬁbers belong to the same class of smooth manifolds, i.e., they
are diﬀeomorphic copies of an N-dimensional manifold F called the typical
ﬁber. The total space E can be thought of as the collection of ﬁbers. More

60
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
speciﬁcally, let the projection map π : E →M be a surjective (onto) function
so that for any point p ∈E we have π(p) = x ∈M if and only if p ∈Fx.
Then, the ﬁber Fx over x ∈M is the inverse image of x under π, Fx = π−1(x)
(see Figure 2.3). In other words, we associate a ﬁber Fx to every point x of
the base space and the collection of all these ﬁbers represent the total space
E.
A ﬁber bundle is locally diﬀeomorphic to the Cartesian product of an open
subset of M with the typical ﬁber F. Explicitly, π−1(Ux) ≃Ux × F, where
Ux ⊂M is an open neighborhood of x, π−1(Ux) ⊂E is the ﬁber bundle
over Ux, and “≃” means “diﬀeomorphic.” Moreover, we can cover the base
manifold M with a collection {Uα} of open subsets such that there exist
diﬀeomorphisms
φα : π−1(Uα) −→Uα × F.
(2.56)
The pair (Uα, φα) is called a chart, or a set of local coordinates, or a local
trivialization of the bundle E. Restricting φα to a point x ∈Uα, we obtain a
diﬀeomorphism from the ﬁber Fx to the typical ﬁber, φα(x) : {x} × Fx −→
{x} × F, or, for simplicity, φα(x) : Fx −→F.
Similarly to the case of manifolds, the global topological structure of the
bundle is determined by how the charts are patched together, i.e., by the
transition functions
gαβ(x) : F −→F,
gαβ(x) = φα(x)φ−1
β (x)|Uα∩Uβ,
(2.57)
where the product φα(x)φ−1
β (x) denotes the composition of two functions, i.e.,
φα(x) ◦φ−1
β (x). The transition functions satisfy two important conditions,
g−1
αβ(x) = gβα(x),
∀x ∈Uα ∩Uβ
(2.58a)
gαβ(x)gβγ(x)gγα(x) = 1,
∀x ∈Uα ∩Uβ ∩Uγ
(2.58b)
where 1 is the identity function on F. As a consequence, the transition func-
tions gαβ form a group under composition, a subgroup of the so-called struc-
ture group G of the bundle E, which is a Lie group of diﬀeomorphisms (smooth
transformations) of F.
To summarize, the main ingredients of a ﬁber bundle E : (E, M, π, G) are
the total space E, the base space M, the ﬁbers Fx = π−1(x) and the structure
group G. The simplest examples of ﬁber bundles are the so-called trivial bun-
dles, which are direct products of two smooth manifolds, E ≃M × F. For a
trivial bundle we can choose a single chart φα with Uα = M and the transition
function becomes gαα = 1. The cylinder, for example, is a trivial ﬁber bundle
S1 × R with base manifold S1 (the circle) and ﬁbers that are copies of the
real line R. A related nontrivial bundle having the same base manifold and
principal ﬁber is the M¨obius strip (see Figure 2.1). Note that the cylinder is
orientable while the M¨obius strip is not, which reﬂects their diﬀerent topolog-
ical structures. Also, while the cylinder can be constructed using one chart,
the M¨obius strip requires (at least) two charts, which are patched together via

The Geometric Phase
■61
M
CM(t)
x0
p0
P
HpP
M
Px
x
VpP
M
E
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 2.3: (a) The cylinder as a (trivial) ﬁber bundle with base manifold
M = S1 (the unit circle) and typical ﬁber F = R. Note that the M¨obius strip
(Figure 2.1) is a nontrivial ﬁber bundle having the same base manifold and
typical ﬁber. (b) Decomposition of the tangent space into vertical (VpP) and
horizontal (HpP) subspaces. (c) Horizontal lift CP (t) of a closed curve CM(t)
in the base manifold M. The lift is characterized by a holonomy g.
transition functions belonging to the group Z2. Intuitively, this can be easily
understood if we think about the construction of the M¨obius strip using two
oriented bands that are glued together with the same orientation at one end
and the opposite orientation at the other. Finally, note that Z2 is a subgroup
of the general linear group GL(1, R), the group of non-zero real number under
multiplication, which is the structure group of the M¨obius strip.
The cylinder and the M¨obius strip are examples of vector bundles. These
are bundles with the typical ﬁber a real (or complex) vector space and the
structure group the general linear group, GL(N, R) or GL(N, C) (i.e., the sets
of real or complex N ×N invertible matrices with the operation of matrix mul-
tiplication). Another important class, the principal ﬁber bundles, are bundles
whose typical ﬁber is identical with the structure group, F ≃G. Here “iden-
tical” means that, as smooth manifolds, the two objects are diﬀeomorphic.
As we will discuss in the next section, the geometric phase can be naturally
interpreted as a geometric property of certain principal ﬁber bundles.
The geometric structure of a ﬁber bundle can be investigated using the
notion of parallelism. Consider ﬁrst a smooth manifold M embedded in a
Euclidean space Rn and two tangent vectors v1 ∈TMx1 and v2 ∈TMx2
at x1 and x2, respectively. In what sense can we say that the two vectors are
parallel? The idea is to associate with v1 a vector that belongs to TMx2, which
then can be directly compared with v2. To determine this vector, we use the
following procedure. Let C(t) with C(0) = x1 and C(T) = x2 be a smooth
curve that joins x1 and x2 and xdt = C(dt) a point nearby x1. As an element
of Rn, the vector at xdt parallel to v1 is uniquely deﬁned but, in general, does
not belong to TMxdt. We deﬁne the vector ¯vC
1 (dx) ∈TMxdt associated with
v1 as the tangent component of this parallel (in the sense of Rn) vector. The

62
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
procedure is carried out successively for all points x ∈C between x1 and x2 to
determine the vectors ¯vC
1 (x) ∈TMx associated with v1. Finally, we compare
v2 with ¯vC
1 (x2). The vector v1 is said to be parallel transported to x2 along the
curve C. Note that this notion of parallelism, unlike the familiar Euclidean
case, is not absolute, but depends on the particular choice of the curve C.
Nonetheless, similar to parallelism in Euclidean geometry, parallel transport
along a curve deﬁnes an equivalence relation on the set of tangent vectors
vx ∈TMx with x ∈C. All vectors ¯vC
1 (x) constructed as described above
belong to the same equivalence class, i.e., they are parallel to each other.
Next, we apply this notion of parallelism to principal ﬁber bundles. To
better understand the idea of parallel transport on a principal ﬁber bundle
P : (P, M, π, G), we ﬁrst introduce the concepts of vertical and horizontal
vectors. Consider the smooth curves C : [0, T] −→P with C(0) = p that lie
entirely on the ﬁber Px. The tangent vectors to these curves, vp = d
dtC(t)|t=0,
are called vertical vectors and form a subspace VpP of the tangent space TpP
called the vertical subspace. The tangent vectors that have a zero vertical
component are called horizontal vectors and form a subspace HpP called the
horizontal subspace (see Figure 2.3). The vector space TpP is the direct sum
of the vertical and horizontal subspaces,
TpP = VpP ⊕HpP.
(2.59)
This decomposition of the tangent space is unique.
Consider now a smooth curve CM ⊂M with C(0) = x0 and a point
p0 ∈Px0. The concept of parallel transport on P implies ﬁnding a smooth
curve in the total space,CP ⊂P, that satisﬁes the following properties:
i) CP is projected onto CM under the projection map π, i.e., π(CP (t)) =
CM(t), and CP (0) = p0.
ii) The tangent vectors vp ∈TP to Cp are projected onto tangent vectors ux ∈
TM to CM under the push-forward map π∗: TP −→M, i.e., π∗(vp) = ux.
iii) The tangent vectors vp ∈TP to Cp are horizontal vectors, i.e., vp ∈HpP.
The structure that enables one to uniquely determine CP is called a ge-
ometry or a connection on the principal ﬁber bundle P, while the curve CP
is called the horizontal lift of CM associated with this connection (see Figure
2.3). We note that there are several equivalent deﬁnitions of a connection on a
principal ﬁber bundle [57, 324, 326] and many developments based on this no-
tion, some directly related to physical problems of signiﬁcant current interest.
Here, we will not address any of these technical aspects.
In essence, a connection on a principal ﬁber bundle P is the collection
of horizontal subspaces HpP. In other words, the connection describes the
“bending” of the ﬁbers, i.e., the geometry of the bundle, by deﬁning the hor-
izontal subspace at each point p ∈P. In practice, we need a mathematical
object that yields these horizontal subspaces algebraically. This object, the
so-called connection one-form ω, is a diﬀerential one-form with values in the

The Geometric Phase
■63
Lie algebra2 g of the structure group G that has the property ω(vp) = 0 if
(and only if) vp ∈HpP. Hence, the horizontal subspace at p can be deﬁned
as the set of all tangent vectors vp ∈TpP that satisfy ω(vp) = 0.
Furthermore, the one-form ω can be represented locally by a one-form
on M. More speciﬁcally, let sα : Uα −→P be a smooth function such that
π(s(x)) = x for all x ∈Uα ⊆M, where (Uα, φα) is an open chart (the function
s is called a local section of the ﬁber bundle). Then, the connection one-form
ω is represented by the so-called local connection one-form Aα = s∗
αω, where
s∗
α is the pullback map induced by π. Acting on P with a group element g(x)
transforms the local section, s(x) →s′(x) = s(x) · g(x) and, consequently, the
corresponding local connection one form, Aα →A′
α. Explicitly, we have
A′
α(x) = g−1(x) · Aα(x) · g(x) + g−1(x) · dg(x),
(2.60)
Also, for two overlapping charts (Uα, φα) and (Uβ, φβ) we have Aβ(x) =
g−1
αβ(x) · Aα(x) · gαβ(x) + g−1
αβ(x) · dgαβ(x), where x ∈Uα ∩Uβ. In terms
of its components, we can write the local connection one-form as Aα = Aidxi.
Note that physicists deﬁne the “connection” as iAα = A = Aidxi. Finally,
let us mention that the related two-form F = dA −iA ∧A, called the local
curvature two-form F, represents the mathematical counterpart of the ﬁeld
strength in gauge theories. In terms of its components, the curvature two-form
can be written as F = 1
2Fijdxi ∧dxj with
Fij = ∂Aj
∂xi
−∂Ai
∂xj
−i[Ai, Aj].
(2.61)
Consider now a closed curve CM(t) in the base manifold M with CM(T) =
CM(0) = x0. Its horizontal lift CP (t) staring at CP (0) = p0 ∈Px0 is uniquely
deﬁned and, in general, open (see Figure 2.3). More speciﬁcally, we have
CP (T) = CP (0) · g,
with g ∈G.
(2.62)
In other words, the end point pT = CP (T) ∈Px0 and the starting point p0
diﬀer by an element of the structure group G. Note that both points belong
to the same ﬁber Px0. The element g ∈G is called the holonomy element
associated with the point p0, the connection ω, and the curve CM. The set
of all holonomy elements associated with diﬀerent curves CM ∋p0 is called
the holonomy group of the connection ω associated with the point p0. We can
express the holonomy g in terms of the local connection one-form as
g = P exp

i
I
CM
A

,
(2.63)
2A Lie algebra-valued one-form is a linear function that maps tangent vectors to elements
of a Lie algebra [268]. Consider, for example, a principal bundle P with G = U(N) or
G = SU(N). Every element h ∈G can be obtained as the exponential of some element
of the associated Lie algebra, h = exp(X), where X ∈g can be represented as an N × N
anti-Hermitian matrix (e.g., for G = SU(2), X = iλjσj, with σj being Pauli matrices).
Note that the vector spaces g and TeP, where e ∈G is the identity element, are isomorphic.

64
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
where P is the path-ordering operator and we have used the physicist’s con-
vention for A. In the Abelian case, we have g = eiγ with γ =
H
CM A.
2.3.3
Holonomy interpretations of geometric phases
The elementary introduction presented in the previous two sections, although
rather technical and largely incomplete, gives us a ﬂavor of ﬁber bundle the-
ory, a very powerful formalism that captures important aspects of the physical
reality, such as those underlying gauge theories. Here, we go back to the con-
cept of geometric phase from the perspective of this general formalism and
interpret it as the holonomy of a certain connection.
The ﬁrst holonomy interpretation of the Berry phase, proposed by Simon
[409], is based on a ﬁber bundle constructed over a parameter space M. Con-
sider a quantum system described by the parameter-dependent Hamiltonian
H(R) undergoing a cyclic evolution with R(t) ∈C, where C ⊂M is a closed
path, as discussed in Section 2.2.1. We assume that the eigenvalues En(R)
and the corresponding eigenstates |n; R⟩are smooth functions of R ∈M. In
addition, we assume that En(R) are non-degenerate for all R ∈M and that
the time dependence of the Hamiltonian, H(t) = H(R(t)), is consistent with
the adiabatic approximation. At t = 0, the system is assumed to be in a state
|n; R(0)⟩⟨n; R(0)| corresponding to the nth energy level.
We construct a ﬁber bundle λn over M by attaching to each point R of
the base manifold a ﬁber deﬁned by
λn
R = {|ψ⟩∈H : |ψ⟩= eiϕ|n; R⟩, ϕ ∈[0, 2π]},
(2.64)
where |n; R⟩are single-valued normalized eigenvectors. Of course, the corre-
spondence between the parameter set R and the ﬁber λn
R can be expressed
in terms of a projection map, π(|ψ⟩) = R if and only if |ψ⟩∈λn
R. Note
that the ﬁbers are normalized rays in the Hilbert space H associated with
the quantum system. Since any two vectors |ψ⟩, |ψ′⟩∈λn
R diﬀer by a phase
factor, the ﬁber λn
R represents a copy of the unit circle or the group U(1).
In other words, as manifolds, these mathematical objects are diﬀeomorphic.
Also note that the single-valued vectors |n; R⟩are only deﬁned locally, i.e.,
on open neighborhoods Uα ⊂M, while the ﬁber λn
R is uniquely determined
by the eigenvalue equation (2.13). Let |n; R, α⟩and |n; R, β⟩designate the
single-valued eigenvectors associated with the overlapping neighborhoods Uα
and Uβ, respectively. For any R ∈Uα ∩Uβ the two eigenvectors may only
diﬀer by a phase factor,
|n; R, β⟩= eiζβα(R)|n; R, α⟩.
(2.65)
We deﬁne these phase factors to be the transition functions of λn, gβα(R) =
eiζβα(R) ∈U(1). Since the typical ﬁber and the structure group U(1) are
diﬀeomorphic (hence “identical”), we conclude that the ﬁber bundle that we
have constructed is a U(1) principal bundle over the parameter space M,
λn : (λn, M, π, U(1)).

The Geometric Phase
■65
(a)
(b)
M
R
R
R0
C
R0
ei
P(H)
C
ei
(0)
FIGURE
2.4:
Schematic
representation
of
the
Berry–Simon
(a)
and
Aharonov–Anandan (b) ﬁber bundles. The base manifolds are the parame-
ter space M and the projective Hilbert space P(H) (i.e., the space of physical
states), respectively. The ﬁbers λR and ηρ deﬁned by Eqs. (2.64) and (2.66),
respectively, are copies of the unit circle, but are represented as line segments.
Consider now the cyclic evolution along C ∈M with the initial condition
|ψ(0)⟩= |n; R(0)⟩. The ﬁnal state will belong to the same ﬁber λn
R(0), but will
diﬀer from the initial state by an element of the structure group g = eiγ ∈
U(1). This holonomy can be expressed in terms of a local connection one-form
as given by Eq. (2.63). One can show that this connection is, in fact, related
to the Mead–Berry vector potential (2.17). More speciﬁcally, we can express
this potential as the local connection one-form An = i⟨n; R|∇j|n; R⟩dxj =
i⟨n; R|d|n; R⟩. Hence, the Berry phase eiγn with γn given by Eq. (2.18) can
be identiﬁed as the holonomy of the (local) connection An over the principal
ﬁber bundle λn.
Another holonomy interpretation of the geometric phase, suggested by
Aharonov and Anandan [7], is based on a ﬁber bundle η over the projective
Hilbert space P(H). We consider the non-adiabatic cyclic evolution of a quan-
tum system, as discussed in Section 2.2.3. The physical states of the system
are represented by ρ(t) = |ψ(t)⟩⟨ψ(t)| ∈P(H), where |ψ(t)⟩is a (normalized)
solution of the Schr¨odinger equation. To each point ρ of the base manifold
P(H) we attach a ﬁber
ηρ = {|ψ⟩: |ψ⟩⟨ψ| = ρ, ⟨ψ|ψ⟩= 1}.
(2.66)
The projection map π(|ψ⟩) = ρ if and only if |ψ⟩∈ηρ expresses the fact that
all the vectors that belong to a given ﬁber represent the same physical state.
As in the Berry–Simon construction, the ﬁber ηρ represents a copy of the unit
circle or of the group U(1) (i.e., they are diﬀeomorphic). The total space S(H)
is the set of all normalized state vectors, which, as a manifold, is identical with
the unit sphere S2N−1, where N ≤∞is the dimension of the Hilbert space H.
Finally, the structure group of the ﬁber bundle is again U(1). Consequently,

66
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
e-i
dyn
ei
P(H)
C
C
C
CAA
FIGURE 2.5: Close path C in the space of physical states and its lifts: the
closed lift Cφ, the Aharonov–Anandan lift CAA, and the dynamical lift Cψ.
the Aharonov–Anandan (AA) construction results in a U(1) principal bundle
over the projective Hilbert space, ηρ : (S(H), P(H), π, U(1)).
The evolution of a cyclic state corresponding to the closed loop C ∈P(H)
with ρ(T) = ρ(0) will result in a holonomy g = eiγ determined by a lo-
cal connection one-form. We identify this connection as the integrand in Eq.
(2.45), i.e., the AA local connection one-form A = i⟨φ| d
dt|φ⟩= i⟨φ|d|φ⟩. Note
that A depends on the single-valued function |φ(t)⟩, which represents a lo-
cal section s of the ﬁber bundle ηρ. Moreover, under a gauge transformation
|φ(t)⟩→eiζ(t)|φ(t)⟩, the transformation rule for A, i.e., A →A −dζ, repre-
sents a special case of the transformation (2.60) for a local connection one-form
corresponding to the Abelian case G = U(1). We conclude that the Aharonov–
Anandan phase eiγ(C) with γ(C) given by Eq. (2.45) can be identiﬁed as the
holonomy of the (local) connection A over the principal ﬁber bundle ηρ. For
the relationship between the Berry–Simon and the AA constructions in the
limit of the adiabatic approximation we refer the reader to Bohm et al. [57].
As a ﬁnal note, let us mention that the holonomy g = eiγ (i.e., the
Aharonov–Anandan phase) is an element of the structure group U(1) of the
principal ﬁber bundle ηρ that connects the initial and ﬁnal points of the so-
called Aharonov–Anandan lift
CAA : | ˜ψ(0)⟩→| ˜ψ(t)⟩→| ˜ψ(T)⟩= eiγ| ˜ψ(0)⟩.
(2.67)
The open path CAA is a curve in the total space ηρ of the ﬁber bundle with
the property that it projects onto C in the base manifold P(H). There are
two other important curves that project onto C: the dynamical lift Cψ de-
ﬁned by the state vector |ψ(t)⟩and the closed lift Cφ deﬁned by the single-
valued function |φ(t)⟩(see Figure 2.5). Note that | ˜ψ(t)⟩= eiγ(t)|φ(t)⟩, where
γ(t) =
R t
0 dt′i⟨φ(t′)| d
dt′ |φ(t′)⟩, while the relation between the state vector
|ψ(t)⟩⟨and the single-valued function φ(t)⟩is given by Eq. (2.44) and we
have |φ(t)⟩⟨φ(t)| = | ˜ψ(t)⟩⟨˜ψ(t)| = |ψ(t)⟩⟨ψ(t)| = ρ(t).

C H A P T E R 3
Quantum Mechanics
and Information Science
CONTENTS
3.1
Introduction ................................................
68
3.2
Classical information theory ...............................
73
3.3
Classical theory of computation ...........................
79
3.3.1
Computational models: The Turing machine ......
79
3.3.2
Computational complexity .........................
83
3.3.3
Energy and computation ...........................
86
3.4
Quantum information, quantum computation, and
topological quantum matter ...............................
87
T
HE FUNDAMENTAL KNOWLEDGE BEHIND MODERN IN-
formation technology, the most visible side of science which permeates
almost every aspect of our daily lives, rests on two pillars: information science
and quantum mechanics. Knowing how to eﬃciently communicate and process
information and understanding the physical phenomena and material prop-
erties that are essential to building functional devices have provided us with
unprecedented convenience and mastery over nature, possibly with the price of
becoming the slaves of our computers and gadgets. Nevertheless, information
science and quantum mechanics enter the backbone of current technologies
as distinct and independent ﬁelds. Therefore, one is naturally tempted to ask
several questions. Is there land between these two realms? If yes, what can
grow out of that land? In particular, can information theory tell us something
relevant about the foundations of quantum mechanics? On the other hand,
can one formulate a quantum information science and in what sense would
this be diﬀerent from the classical version? In this chapter we introduce sev-
eral basic concepts that will allow us to better understand the implications
of these questions and grasp the essential ideas behind the answers formu-
lated so far. Discussing these fundamental concepts will also shed light on the
role of topological quantum matter in the economy of quantum computation.
Here we focus on the key ideas that were launched into the arena by classical
information theory and classical computation science. The metamorphosis of
67

68
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
these ideas after the encounter with quantum mechanics will be discussed in
the ﬁnal three chapters of this book.
3.1
INTRODUCTION
Quantum information theory and quantum computation are extremely lively
research areas situated at the crossroads of quantum mechanics, computer
science, information theory, and cryptography. The central concern of these
relatively new ﬁelds, which is to identify information processing tasks that
are classically hard or impossible but could be eﬃciently accomplished using
quantum systems, is nothing but the archetypal theme of quantum mechanics
(What is, essentially, the diﬀerence between the quantum and the classical
worlds?) grafted onto the task-oriented spirit of computer science and infor-
mation theory.
The emergence of quantum information and quantum computation has re-
vealed that any physical theory (quantum mechanics being one example) may
constitute the basis for a theory of communication and information process-
ing. One should think physically about computation. This idea has provided
a new paradigm to be explored, beyond classical computation and classical
information theory, yet the full range of new capabilities that quantum de-
vices may possess is, perhaps, still waiting to be discovered. In turn, informa-
tion theory may have something to oﬀer to physics. Thinking computationally
about physics could reveal something useful about the fundamental structure
of quantum theory and could provide new analytic tools for investigating that
structure. Moreover, quantum computation and information could provide a
new conceptual framework for dealing with complexity in a fundamentally sys-
tematic way. This could have profound implications, since ﬁelds that tradition-
ally deal with complex systems, such as chemistry, biology, and engineering,
have not yet generated anything comparable with the powerful mathemat-
ical description of nature that constitutes the core of what we call physics.
Physics, on the other hand, has been focused on understanding simple systems
and elementary processes and is just starting to address complexity. To get a
clearer picture of these implications and to understand the main motivations
leading to these developments, we provide an elementary introduction to the
key ideas underlying quantum information and quantum computation.
Let us begin with a brief historical perspective. The fundamental ideas that
have contributed to the development of quantum information and quantum
computation originate from quantum mechanics, on the one hand, and infor-
mation science, on the other. Here (and in several other places throughout this
chapter), by information science we designate several related areas, including
computer science, information theory, and cryptography. We will follow in
turn each of the historical strands that have converged into the development
of quantum information science.
The modern theory of quantum mechanics was essentially created in the
1920s after about a quarter century of profound crisis marking the limits of

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■69
classical physics. Most generally, quantum theory can be viewed as a mathe-
matical framework for constructing physical theories, such as non-relativistic
quantum mechanics and quantum electrodynamics. The ﬁrst steps toward a
quantum theory of information came almost half a century later, in 1964,
with Bell’s analysis [37] of the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen (EPR) thought ex-
periment [133]. Bell’s work has shown that the correlations between two quan-
tum systems that have interacted in the past are inconsistent with the laws
of classical physics. This profound insight was subsequently conﬁrmed exper-
imentally by a sequence of improved tests, starting with the 1972 work of
Freedman and Clauser [160] and the 1982 experiment by Aspect, Dalibard,
and Roger [27]. These evolutions generated a serious eﬀort to understand the
foundations of quantum mechanics, including its possible relation with infor-
mation theory, and led to remarkable experimental advances, including the
possibility of controlling single quantum systems, such as a single atom in an
“atom trap.” We emphasize that the ability to control quantum systems is a
critical requirement in quantum computation and represents a major common
theme shared by quantum theory and quantum information science. Some of
the key elements in the development of quantum theory, including the opera-
tional formulation of quantum mechanics (the natural language for quantum
information theory) and Bell’s theorem, are summarized in Chapter 1.
Modern computer science is founded on the work of Alan Turing and was
heralded by a remarkable paper in 1936 [430]. While the origin of algorithmic
ideas is lost in the depths of history and most of the key elements of a modern
computer were conceived a century earlier by Charles Babbage (1791–1871)
who designed the analytical engine — a proposed mechanical general-purpose
computer — it was Turing who clariﬁed and developed in detail the abstract
notion of a programmable computer. He elaborated a simple computational
model, now known as the Turing machine, and showed that there exists a
universal Turing machine (UTM) that can be used to simulate any other
Turing machine, hence it completely captures what it means to perform an
algorithm. In other words, if an algorithm can be performed on some piece of
hardware (e.g., a modern PC), there is an equivalent algorithm for the UTM
that fulﬁlls the same task, a statement known as the Church–Turing thesis.
It is worth noting that Turing’s work was motivated by an abstract, fun-
damental mathematical question, which is perhaps surprising from today’s
perspective, considering the almost self-evident association between comput-
ers and practical applications. During the ﬁrst decades of the 20th century
David Hilbert had emphasized the importance of investigating the nature of
mathematics [220]. Rather than only being concerned with proving or dis-
proving mathematical propositions, one should consider what general type
of propositions are even amenable to mathematical proof. Hilbert, as most
other mathematicians, hoped that mathematics is complete, meaning that,
in principle, every conjecture could be proven true or false. This hope was
brought to an end by Kurt G¨odel [169], who established the existence of un-
decidable mathematical propositions — propositions that cannot be either

70
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
proved or disproved. G¨odel’s work on Hilbert’s decision problem was contin-
ued by Alonzo Church [93] and Alan Turing, who were looking for alternate
techniques for addressing this type of problem. The Turing machine is a the-
oretical construct that establishes the idea of automated mathematical proof,
something way beyond the scope of an “arithmetic calculator.” Using this
construct, Turing was able to show that decidability can be formulated as a
“halting problem,” i.e., a question of the type “given an input, would a Turing
machine ever halt?” Assuming that there is a general algorithm that can solve
the halting problem for any input leads to a contradiction, which means that
the halting problem is uncomputable.1 This result, which is similar in spirit
to G¨odel’s theorem, reveals mathematics as being a rich and, in some sense,
“free” domain containing many diﬀerent ideas that cannot be encapsulated
within a single “grand algorithm.”
While uncomputable problems represent impossible tasks for a computer,
more generally one faces the critical problem concerning the eﬃciency of var-
ious algorithms. In essence, an eﬃcient algorithm is solvable in polynomial
time, i.e., it requires a number of steps that grows polynomially with the size
of the input. By contrast, an ineﬃcient algorithm requires a number of steps
that grows exponentially with the size of the problem to be solved. Any com-
putational task that admits an eﬃcient algorithm is deemed tractable and
belongs to a certain complexity class (e.g., class P in the case of decision
problems that can be solved on a deterministic Turing machine in polynomial
time), while those that do not satisfy this condition are said to be “hard” and
belong to a diﬀerent complexity class. Classifying computational problems ac-
cording to their inherent diﬃculty is a very important problem in computer
science, which is the focus of computational complexity theory [340].
From this perspective, quantum mechanics seems to be computationally
hard, because one has to deal with (exponentially large) Hilbert spaces. In 1982
Feynman suggested [146] that building computers based on the principles of
quantum mechanics could allow us to overcome these diﬃculties. What Feyn-
man had in mind was a quantum simulator, a purpose-built quantum system
that could eﬃciently simulate the physical behavior of other quantum systems.
Such a task is believed to be impossible for a classical computer. After all,
one can argue that Turing’s model of computation contains implicitly classic
assumptions, hence it is not the most general possible model. This idea was
explored by David Deutsch [120], who attempted to deﬁne a computational
device capable of eﬃciently simulating arbitrary physical systems — the uni-
versal quantum computer. The fundamental question is whether a quantum
1An undecidable problem is a decision problem for which there is no algorithm (i.e.,
Turing machine) that always gives a correct yes-or-no answer. Uncomputable functions are
mathematically well-deﬁned functions that no Turing machine (TM) can compute. The
existence of uncomputable functions can be established using a cardinality argument: every
TM can be thought of as a ﬁnite string over some ﬁnite alphabet, hence the set of all
possible TMs is countably inﬁnite; on the other hand, the set of all characteristic functions
f : N →{0, 1} is uncountably inﬁnite; hence, there are not “enough” TMs to compute all
characteristic functions.

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■71
computer can eﬃciently solve computational problems that are hard for clas-
sical computers, e.g., for a (probabilistic) Turing machine. At the time of this
writing there is no rigorously proven answer to this question. However, there
are strong reasons to believe that the answer is aﬃrmative. A spectacular re-
sult indicating that quantum computers could be more powerful than Turing
machines is Peter Shor’s 1994 demonstration [406, 408] that the problem of
ﬁnding the prime factors of an integer can be solved eﬃciently on a quantum
computer. There is no known classical algorithm for this problem that runs in
polynomial time. So far, there are only a few other examples of computational
problems that admit eﬃcient quantum algorithms but have no known eﬃcient
classical solutions. Should the impossibility of an eﬃcient classical solution be
proven for any of these problems, it would demonstrate that the quantum
classiﬁcation of complexity is diﬀerent from the classical classiﬁcation — a
result that would place computer science on a diﬀerent foundation.
Information theory has its roots in a remarkable pair of papers published by
Claude Shannon in 1948 [399]. Shannon revolutionized our understanding of
communication by introducing the technical, mathematically deﬁned concept
of information (which diﬀers substantially from the corresponding everyday
term) and by providing answers to two basic questions: i) how much resources
are required to send a certain amount of information over a communication
channel, in particular what is the irreducible complexity below which a signal
cannot be compressed, and ii) how can one transmit information so that it is
protected against noise in the communication channel? The answers to these
questions represent the content of two fundamental theorems in information
theory, the noiseless coding theorem, which provides the mathematical tool
for assessing data compaction (i.e., the limits for lossless data compression),
and the noisy coding theorem, which establishes the ultimate transmission rate
for reliable communication over a noisy channel. Reliable transmission in the
presence of noise requires error-correcting codes for protecting the information
being sent and Shannon’s theorem provides the upper limit for the protection
that can be provided by such codes.
The development of quantum information theory followed a similar path,
starting in 1995 with the work of Ben Schumacher [393] who introduced the
concept of quantum information and provided the quantum analog of Shan-
non’s noiseless coding theorem. No analog of the noisy coding theorem has yet
been proven, but the theory of quantum error-correction [293, 122] has rapidly
developed since 1996, starting with the work of Calderbank and Shor [78] and
Steane [416]. These developments have played a crucial role in establishing
the feasibility of quantum computation — a very serious concern, given the
extreme fragility of coherent quantum states in the presence of noise. Quan-
tum error correction was further advanced by the discovery of the so-called
stabilizer codes by Calderbank et al. [77] and by Gottesman [188]. Another
important step forward was the demonstration by Shor [407] and Kitaev [256]
that error-correction can be achieved using imperfect corrective operations,
which lead to the general concept of fault tolerant computation [353]. A par-

72
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Quantum
Computation
Classical
Computation
Turing machine
Cryptography
Error
correction
Quantum key
distribution
Quantum error
correction
Quantum 
algorithms
Data 
compression
Maxwell’s 
demon
FIGURE 3.1: A nondeﬁnitive and incomplete “pirate map” of the new “ter-
ritories” at the frontiers of quantum mechanics and information science.
ticularly interesting direction is the development of topological stabilizer codes
[262, 72], which are able to attain superior protection from decoherence by en-
coding the quantum information using topologically non-trivial states. Under-
standing the physics of topological quantum matter is an essential component
of this extremely promising route to quantum computation.
Cryptography is the venerable science of safe information processing in
a world of untrust. A well-known cryptographic problem concerns the safe
communication between two parties in the possible presence of a malevolent
third party. “Traditional” cryptographic protocols are based on a private key
that is shared by the two parties and used for encrypting and decrypting
the messages transmitted over an unsafe channel. Such cryptosystems face
the basic problem of key distribution — the key may be intercepted by the
malevolent third party and used to decrypt some messages. The ﬁrst ideas for
solving this problem using quantum key distribution were proposed by Stephen
Wiesner in the late 1960s (but not accepted for publication!) and expanded
almost 15 years later by Bennet and Brassard [42]. A second major type of
cryptosystem — the public key or asymmetric key cryptosystem — is based on
one party having a public key that allows encryption and is made available to
the general public and a private key that allows decryption and is kept secret.
There is an algorithm relating the public and private keys, but running it is a
computationally hard problem, e.g., factoring a large integer. The ideas behind
public key cryptography were (publicly) proposed during the mid-1970s by
Diﬃe and Hellman [124] and by Ralph Merkle [309] and later reﬁned by Rivest,
Shamir, and Adleman [370] who developed the RSA cryptographic system
(currently the most widely used public key cryptosystem). Similar ideas were

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■73
developed a few years earlier by scientists working for a British intelligence
agency. Since the security of the RSA system relies on factoring being a hard
computational problem, the possibility of breaking the cryptographic codes
by running Shor’s algorithm on a quantum computer accounts for some of the
current interest in quantum information and quantum computation.
These historical considerations can only provide a glimpse of this rapidly
developing ﬁeld that has emerged at the frontiers of quantum mechanics and
information science. Some of these emerging research areas and their approx-
imate “position” relative to the “mother” ﬁelds are sketched in Figure 3.1. In
the subsequent sections, we give a more technical but simple introduction to
some of the key concepts and ideas in information science, focusing on the clas-
sical ideas. More details on quantum computation and quantum information
are provided in the ﬁnal three chapters of the book.
We close this section with two general remarks. First, it seems extremely
likely that quantum computation will only work in combination with quantum
error-correction. Hence, there is an intrinsic relationship between quantum
computation and quantum information theory, a relationship that is much
more intimate than its classical analog between computer science and Shan-
non’s theory. Second, the development of quantum computation and quantum
information have clearly revealed the need to think physically about compu-
tation and, more generally, about information processing. A really exciting
possibility would be to discover a fundamental information-theoretic principle
that constrains all possible physical theories. Something like “No physical the-
ory can allow an eﬃcient solution of class X computational problems.” This
would be another huge step in the series of grand syntheses that includes ac-
tion principles, symmetry principles, and thermodynamics principles, which
are at the core of our understanding of the physical world.
3.2
CLASSICAL INFORMATION THEORY
What is information? The answer is not simple, as this term has a large variety
of technical and non-technical uses, including diﬀerent everyday life connota-
tions. It is, therefore, a crucial task to develop a concept of “information”
that i) is general enough to cover all technical aspects related to transmit-
ting messages and processing data and ii) can be made quantitative. This
task was brilliantly accomplished by Shannon in the context of addressing
the technical problem of communication. In Shannon’s own words [399], “the
fundamental problem of communication is that of reproducing at one point
either exactly or approximately a message selected at another.” From this per-
spective, information is what a communication protocol aims to transmit, i.e.,
something produced by a source that has to be reproduced at the destination.
For concreteness, let us imagine that our friend Bob is preparing to leave his
windowless lab carrying some sensitive piece of equipment, when he receives
the following message from Alice: “It rains.” What is the information here,
how much of it was transmitted, and what are the fundamental problems con-

74
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
cerning the communication process? These key questions were ﬁrst asked and
answered in Shannon’s 1948 seminal work.
Information is contextual. How much information is acquired by Bob
through successfully receiving Alice’s message depends on his prior knowledge
and expectations. Learning that “it rains” provides more information if, for
example, there were three other equally likely possibilities (e.g., “it’s sunny,”
“it’s windy,” “it snows”) than in the case when there is only one (equally
likely) alternative (e.g., “it doesn’t rain”). The key aspect here is that the
actual message is one selected from a set of possible messages. We express this
idea mathematically by saying that the message a =“it rains” belongs to a set
of possible (weather-related) messages A = {a1, a2, . . . }. Furthermore, Alice’s
message carries almost no information if the lab is somewhere in a jungle and
the communication occurs during the rainy season (“yeah, of course it rains”).
By contrast, Bob would be extremely surprised to hear this message if the lab
were located in the Atacama desert. To quantify this degree of “surprise,” we
ascribe an a priori probability pk ∈[0, 1] to every possible message ak ∈A and
deﬁne a measure of the information carried by ak using a (decreasing) func-
tion of this probability. In other words, the less likely the message, the more
information it carries. Following Shannon, we deﬁne the information content
of ak as
I(ak) = −log(pk).
(3.1)
The quantity I(ak), which is also called self-information or surprisal, is mea-
sured in units determined by the base of the logarithm in Eq. (3.1). We
adopt the convention log(x) = log2(x), which corresponds to measuring the
information content in bits. One bit represents the information content of
a message that occurs with 50% probability, e.g., the outcome of a (fair)
coin ﬂip. The information source is completely described by the ensemble
A = {a1, a2, . . . ; p1, p2, . . . } of possible messages to be transmitted and cor-
responding a priori probabilities. To characterize the information source, we
deﬁne the expected information content of the information source as
H(A) = −
X
k
pk log(pk),
(3.2)
where the logarithm (here and throughout this chapter) is understood to have
base two. The quantity deﬁned in Eq. (3.2) is called entropy (or Shannon en-
tropy) and plays a crucial role in information theory. Note that the entropy of
an information source that can send M possible messages, A = {a1, . . . , aM},
is maximum when all messages have the same probability pk = 1/M, explic-
itly H(A) = log(M). Skewed probability distributions have lower entropies,
which means that the corresponding sources contain less information.
Information is coded. Information is not a type of “physical substance,”
a material “thing,” but an abstract concept that captures something related
to the structure of physical matter. The message “it rains” will provide Bob
with the same information regardless of how he receives it: as a modulated

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■75
sound wave (e.g., Alice shouts from outside the lab), as ink spots on paper
or dark pixels on a screen (e.g., Alice sends Bob an email), or as electromag-
netic pulses (e.g., Alice calls Bob). In general, the same message is encoded
in several diﬀerent ways as it travels from the source (Alice) to the receiver
(Bob), e.g., in the case of a phone call, as sound waves, electromagnetic waves,
and sound waves again. Moreover, Alice could have transmitted the same in-
formation by saying “il pleut,” “es regnet,” or “plou˘a,” provided Bob pos-
sesses the right decoder. Hence, the diﬀerences among various distinct ways
to encode information stem from i) information being stored and transmitted
using diﬀerent physical media (e.g., ink spots, sound waves, and electromag-
netic pulses) and ii) the use of diﬀerent codes (e.g., diﬀerent languages). These
aspects are intimately interconnected in the context of the technical problem
of communication. Engineered communication channels, such as, for example,
telephone lines, represent ﬁnite resources characterized by a limited capacity
for transmitting information (e.g., a maximum number of bits per second).
To maximize the ﬂux of information transmitted through the channel, it is
essential to optimize the coding of this information. In other words, one has to
address the following question: how much can one compress the transmitted
data without losing any information? The answer to this fundamental prob-
lem in information theory represents the content of Shannon’s source coding
theorem (also called the noiseless coding theorem).
In general, a message can be viewed as a string xk1xk2 . . . xkL of sym-
bols (called letters) chosen from an alphabet X = {x1, . . . , xM}. The letters
themselves are messages of length L = 1. We assume that the letters in the
message are statistically independent and occur with a priori; probabilities pk,
1 ≤k ≤M, so that the information source is characterized by the ensem-
ble X = {x1, . . . , xM; pi, . . . , pM}. As a concrete example, suppose that Alice
wants to communicate to Bob the results of a quantum measurement that
has four possible outputs, xk ∈X = {a, b, c, d}, occurring with probabilities
pa = 1/4, pb = 1/8, pc = 1/8, and pd = 1/2. The experiment is repeated
many times and the results are sent to Bob using a noiseless channel that
only accepts bits, i.e., zeros and ones. Consequently, Alice has to encode the
information using the binary alphabet Y = {0, 1}. A straightforward coding
scheme is the following
a →00,
b →01,
c →10,
d →11,
(3.3)
i.e., each letter of the alphabet X is represented using the binary alphabet
Y as a two-letter codeword. Using this scheme, the message “daadcbdd” will
be received by Bob as “1100001110011111.” The performance of the coding
scheme can be measured by the expected length of a codeword, ⟨L⟩= P
k pkLk,
where Lk is the length of the codeword for xk. More generally, if we consider
a large number of messages (or a long message) consisting of n ≫M letters,
we can deﬁne the compression rate as the average number of code bits per
letter. For the above example, the expected length is ⟨L⟩= 2, the same as
the compression rate. Can one do better than that? The answer is yes, and

76
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
the basic idea is to use a variable-length code: shorter code words for letters
(i.e., measurements outputs) that occur with high probability and longer code
words for letters that occur with low probability. For example, the coding
scheme
a →00,
b →010,
c →011,
d →1,
(3.4)
is characterized by an expected codeword length ⟨L⟩= 7
4 < 2. Using this code,
the message “daadcbdd” becomes the sequence “10000101101011,” which can
be unambiguously parsed and decoded by Bob. Note that the length of each
code word is equal to the information content I(xk) of the corresponding letter
and the expected length (which is the same as the compression rate) is equal
to the entropy of the source, H(X) = −P
k pk log(pk) = 7
4. Also, note that
the letters of the binary code occur with equal probabilities, p0 = p1 = 1
2.
The optimized coding scheme in (3.4) is possible because the probability
of each symbol xk is the reciprocal of a power of two. What about the general
case? The basic idea is that Alice should group the data to be sent into long
sequences of n ≫M letters and, instead of encoding each letter separately,
encode the sequence. There is a total of M n possible sequences, where M is
the number of letters in the alphabet X. However, in the limit of large n, a ran-
domly chosen sequence will likely be a so-called typical sequence, which is char-
acterized by a number of occurrences of the letter xk that is proportional to the
corresponding a priori probability, i.e., n1 = np1 occurrences for x1, n2 = np2
for x2, etc. The number of typical sequences is NT S = n!/n1! n2! . . . nM!. Using
the Stirling approximation, log n! ≈n log n −n, we have
log NT S ≈n log n −n −
M
X
k=1
[npk log npk −npk] = −n
M
X
k=1
pk log pk = nH(X),
(3.5)
where H(X) is the entropy of the information source. In other words, for any
skewed probability distribution (which implies H(X) < log M), the number
of typical sequences, NT S = 2nH(X), is exponentially smaller than the to-
tal number of sequences, M n = 2n log M. Furthermore, the probability that
an actual message is a speciﬁc typical sequence is (p1)n1(p2)n2 . . . (pM)nM ≈
2−nH(X) = 1/NT S. Note that this probability is the same for all typical sets.
Hence, the probability that an emitted sequence is atypical vanishes in the
limit n →∞, although the number of possible atypical sequences is, in gen-
eral, exponentially larger than NT S. Consequently, Alice could just encode the
typical sequences and ignore the rest. The encoding of the typical sequences
can be done using binary strings of length nH(X). There are 2nH(X) such
binary code words, the same as the number of typical sequences. The corre-
sponding compression rate (average number of code bits per letter) is H(X).
This result, which establishes the limits to possible data compression, repre-
sents Shannon’s source coding theorem. There exists a coding scheme that
can achieve lossless data compression with a rate greater than, but arbitrarily
close to the Shannon entropy. If the compression rate is less than H(X), one
can virtually be certain that information is lost.

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■77
Source
encoder
Channel
encoder
Information
source
Channel
Channel 
decoder
Source
decoder
Receiver
noise
Alice
Bob
FIGURE 3.2: The “standard model” of a communication channel. An informa-
tion source randomly delivers symbols from an alphabet. The source encoder
compresses the data from the source by eliminating redundancy, while the
channel encoder adds redundancy to protect the transmitted signal against
noise. The received values are decoded to extract the information.
Information is sensitive to noise. Let us return to our friends, Alice and
Bob. Suppose that the communication takes place in a noisy environment. To
ensure that Bob gets the correct message, Alice can i) speak louder or/and ii)
repeat the message several times. If the message is sent over a binary chan-
nel, there is a ﬁnite probability for a 0 to become 1, or vice versa, due to
the presence of random ambient noise and imperfections in the signaling pro-
cess. In this case, “speaking louder” would imply engineering a new, more
reliable channel, which may not be an option for Alice and Bob. On the other
hand, “repeating the message,” i.e., redundantly encoding the information,
increases the probability that Bob correctly determines the message sent by
Alice without altering the physical channel. However, this “systems engineer-
ing” solution comes at a price: one needs to use more physical bits in the
code, which reduces the rate of the encoding scheme, i.e., the rate at which
information is transmitted through the channel. Is there an optimal way to
encode the information so that one does not exceed a certain probability of
error while maintaining a good communication rate?
The answer, which represented a breakthrough in communication science,
is provided by Shannon’s second important theorem, the noisy channel coding
theorem. In essence, Shannon demonstrated that, as long as there is a nonzero
correlation between input and output, a channel can be used for arbitrarily
reliable communication at nonzero rate. He also found an expression for the
optimal rate that can be achieved.
To appreciate the signiﬁcance of Shannon’s result without delving into the
mathematical aspect of the problem, let us consider a simple example. Assume
that Alice and Bob use a so-called binary symmetric channel, i.e., they use a
binary alphabet with 1 and 0 occurring with a priori; probabilities p0 = p1 = 1
2
and a channel that acts on each bit independently ﬂipping it with probability
p. To protect the data, Alice uses the following encoding scheme
0 −→000,
1 −→111,
(3.6)
i.e., she repeats each bit three times. Some of the transmitted bits will be
ﬂipped during transmission, so Bob applies a majority rule to decode the
message, e.g., codewords containing more zeros than ones are decoded as “0.”

78
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Consequently, when Alice transmits a “0” (using the code word “000”), Bob
interprets correctly the message if he receives “000” (which happens with
probability (1−p)3) or if he receives one of the combinations “001,” “010,” and
“100” (each occurring with probability p(1 −p)2). On the other hand, if two
or three bits are ﬂipped during transmission (e.g., if Bob receives “101”), the
message is decoded incorrectly. The probability of error is Pe(p) = 3p2 −2p3.
This is less than p, the probability of error without coding, when 0 < p < 1/2.
However, this comes at a price: for each bit of useful information one has to
transmit three bits. As a measure of the eﬃciency of the coding scheme, we
deﬁne the rate R as the number of information bits per bit transmitted
R = k
n.
(3.7)
For the above example the rate is R = 1/3. To further reduce the proba-
bility of error, Alice could use a concatenation scheme: each transmitted bit
from (3.6) is represented by a three-bit codeword, e.g., 0 −→000 000 000.
The probability of error becomes Pe(Pe(p)) = O(p4), but the rate drops to
R = 1/9. Continuing the concatenation procedure makes the probability of
error arbitrarily small, but this reliable communication will be at a rate that
approaches zero.
In the light of this discussion, Shannon’s theorem may come as a surprise.
In spite of what the above example seems to suggest, it is in fact possible
to attain reliable communication at nonzero rate. The key idea is to consider
long strings of n bits carrying the information contained in k data bits at a
rate R = k/n and take the limit n →∞(with R constant). To encode the
data, we choose 2k code words among the available 2n long strings. During
transmission, about np bits will ﬂip due to noise, hence each given code word
will “diﬀuse” into one string from a certain set of about n!/(np)!(n −np)! ≈
2nH(p) typical output strings, where H(p) = −p log p −(1 −p) log(1 −p) is
the entropy function. To avoid errors, the code words should be “far apart,”
so that the “diﬀusion sets” of two diﬀerent code words do not overlap. To ﬁt
2k = 2nR “diﬀusion sets” (each of size 2nH(p)) without overlap, one has to
satisfy the condition 2nR2nH(p) ≤2n, which implies
R ≤1 −H(p) ≡C(p).
(3.8)
The quantity C(p), called the capacity of the channel, represents the upper
bound of the rate at which information can be reliably transmitted over the
noisy channel. Shannon’s theorem, the central result of classical information
theory, demonstrates the existence of error-correcting codes2 that allow reli-
able communication at a rate less than (but arbitrarily close to) the channel
capacity, k/n < C(p) with n suﬃciently large.
2An error-correcting code is an algorithm for adding redundant data to a message, so
that it can be correctly recovered even when errors occur during transmission. In essence,
the code provides a recipe for ascribing 2k robust code words using the available 2n strings.

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■79
3.3
CLASSICAL THEORY OF COMPUTATION
What is a computation and what is an algorithm? What are the limitations of
computation, e.g., what is computable, and what resources are necessary to
achieve a given computational task? Answering these fundamental questions
is the main object of the theory of computation. Intuitively, an algorithm is
understood as a self-contained step-by-step set of operations to be performed
for calculating a function. Algorithmic computations transform a ﬁnite input
(given at the start of the computation) into a ﬁnite output (available at the
end of the computation) using a ﬁnite number of steps (i.e., ﬁnite amount of
time). Historically, the notion of algorithm3 goes back to antiquity, but the
modern concept was formalized in the 1930s by G¨odel (in terms of recursive
functions [169]), Church (λ–calculus [93]), and Turing (Turing machine [430])
in response to Hilbert’s conjecture [220] that any mathematical proposition
could be decided (proved true or false) by mechanistic logical methods (the
so-called Entscheidungsproblem).
Having constructed a model of computation — such as, for example, the
Turing machine — the fundamental question concerns the resources required
to perform a given computational task. First, one has to understand what
computational tasks are possible, which constitute the object of computability
theory; second, one needs to identify the limitations on our ability to accom-
plish a given computational problem. Intuitively, a computational problem is
understood to be “hard” if the amount of required resources (e.g., number of
necessary algorithmic steps) rises exponentially with the size of the problem
(i.e., amount of information required to specify the input). Classifying com-
putational problems according to their degree of “diﬃculty” and proving that
a given problem belongs to a certain complexity class are the main tasks of
complexity theory. Computational complexity [340] provides lower bounds on
the time and space resources required by the best possible algorithm that can
solve a given task. This is complementary to algorithm design [267], since the
best possible algorithm may not be known.
Below, we ﬁrst introduce the Turing machine as a fundamental model for
computation. Next, we sketch a few key concepts in computational complexity.
We close this section with some remarks on the energy resources required to
perform a computation.
3.3.1
Computational models: The Turing machine
To capture in a mathematical deﬁnition the intuitive idea of an algorithm
and show that there is no algorithm that can solve all mathematical prob-
lems, Turing introduced a model of automatic machines [430], now known as
Turing machines. As shown in Figure 3.3, a Turing machine has four basic
3The word “algorithm” comes from the Latin translation of the name al-Khwarizmi
(Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Musa) — a 9th-century Persian mathematician, astronomer,
and geographer.

80
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0
q1
q2
q3
q4
Read-Write Head
Tape
Finite State Control
Program
FIGURE 3.3: The basic structure of a Turing machine.
elements: (1) a one-dimensional, inﬁnitely long erasable tape divided into cells
and capable of storing one symbol per cell; (2) a read-write head capable of
reading/writing one symbol at the current location and moving (left or right)
on the tape; (3) a ﬁnite state control that coordinates the operations of the
machine and has a bounded number of available states; and (4) a transition
table or a program, which, given the current state and the symbol at the cur-
rent location on the tape, speciﬁes the new state and the next action of the
read-write head. We assume that the tape stretches oﬀto inﬁnity in one di-
rection and we label the cells by integers i ∈{0, 1, 2, . . . }. The cells contain
symbols from a ﬁnite alphabet Σ that includes the “blank” symbol (which
we denote by “b”). The state control mechanism consists of a ﬁnite set of in-
ternal states Q = {qs, qh, q1, q2, . . . , qm} and represents the central processing
unit. It also provides temporary information storage. The special state qs (the
starting state) corresponds to the beginning of the computation; the operation
is completed when the machine reaches the halting state qh.
The Turing machine (TM) always starts in the initial state qs with the
head over the leftmost cell i = 0 and the tape containing a ﬁnite number of
non-blank symbols (the input). We assume that the (ﬁnite) input is written on
the tape starting with cell i = 1. The computation proceeds in a step-by-step
manner according to the transition table. At each step of the computation the
head reads the symbol x ∈Σ from the current cell then, depending on this
reading and the current internal state q ∈Q, the program indicates i) the new
internal state q′, ii) the new symbol x′ ∈Σ to be written on the current cell,
and iii) the movement s of the tape head, which can be s = +1 (move right
one cell), s = −1 (move left), or s = 0 (stand still). The program (or transition
table) is a ﬁnite list of instruction lines of the form ⟨q, x; q′, x′, s⟩. During each
computation cycle, the TM identiﬁes the program line containing q and x and
executes it. This can lead to four possible outcomes. 1) The TM loops or runs

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■81
forever and does not halt. 2) The TM tries to move left from the cell i = 0:
the TM halts and fails (i.e., the output is undeﬁned). 3) The pair (q, x) is
not in the list of instructions (i.e., the instruction is not applicable): the TM
halts and fails. 4) The TM reaches the halting state qh: the computation is
successful and the output is given by the (non-blank) tape content.
As a simple example, let us consider the addition of two non-negative
integers. The simplest implementation uses a unary numeral system in which a
number n is represented by a string containing one symbol (e.g.,“1”) repeated
n times, for example, 2 →11, 3 →111, etc. The symbols on the tape belong
to the alphabet Σ = {b, 1} and the input (i.e., the numbers m and n) is
represented by two strings of cells (of lengths m and n, respectively) containing
the symbol “1” separated by a blank cell. We assume that the ﬁrst string starts
at cell i = 1 (i.e., the cell i = 0 is blank). A zero is represented by a blank
cell. With these conventions, the inputs for the additions 1 + 2, 0 + 4, and
3 + 0 are [b, 1, b, 1, 1, b, b, . . . ), [b, b, b, 1, 1, 1, 1, b, b, . . . ), and [b, 1, 1, 1, b, b, . . . ),
respectively, where b, . . . ) is an inﬁnite string of blank cells. The program
contains the following lines:
1 :
⟨qs, b; q1, b, +1⟩
2 :
⟨q1, 1; q1, 1, +1⟩
3 :
⟨q1, b; q2, 1, +1⟩
4 :
⟨q2, 1; q2, 1, +1⟩
5 :
⟨q2, b; q3, b, −1⟩
6 :
⟨q3, 1; qh, b, 0⟩
Note that the line numbers are used for reference and are not part of the
program. At the start, the internal state is qs and the tape head reads a
blank from the leftmost cell i = 0; the ﬁrst cycle is completed by the TM
executing program line 1, i.e., the state changes to q1 and the head moves to
the right. During the next m cycles the TM executes line 2 as the head moves
through the cells containing the integer m. Next, the blank separating the
input integers is changed into a 1 and the internal state becomes q2 (line 3).
The tapehead continues to move to the right (line 4) until it reaches a blank
cell (the cell i = m + n + 2). At this point, the internal state changes to q3
and the tape head moves left one cell (line 5). Finally, the content of the cell
i = m + n + 1 is changed to a blank and the TM halts (line 6). The output,
representing the sum m+n, is a string of m+n cells containing the non-blank
symbol “1.”
The Turing machine model of computation can be used to calculate more
complicated functions. In fact, it can simulate all computational operations
performed by a modern computer. Furthermore, it can be shown that the class
of functions computable using a TM is equivalent to other classes of functions
that were introduced to deﬁne computability, e.g., the recursive functions
deﬁned by G¨odel and the λ-calculus invented by Church. Other computational

82
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
models, such as the circuit model, 4 which has signiﬁcant practical importance
and is most useful in the context of quantum computation, were shown to be
equivalent to the Turing machine model. This equivalence suggests that an
algorithm is, in fact, what a Turing machine implements. In other words, a
function is computable if and only if it can be solved by a Turing machine.
This is known as the Church–Turing thesis:
Church–Turing thesis: Every function which would naturally be re-
garded as computable by an algorithm can be computed by a Turing ma-
chine.
Note that this is a conjecture (hypothesis), not a theorem. The thesis is sup-
ported by many examples of algorithmic computations that can be simulated
by a Turing machine; there is no known counterexample, which would disprove
the thesis. Also note that we didn’t say anything about the eﬃciency of the
computation, an issue that we will address later.
There are diﬀerent variations of the basic TM model described above; for
example, one can deﬁne Turing machines equipped with multiple tapes. One
can also include randomness in the model, e.g., choose a new internal state
randomly (out of two possible state) by “tossing a coin.” Nonetheless, one can
show that all these models of computation are equivalent in the sense that
diﬀerent types of machines can simulate each other, although, possibly, with
some computational overhead. Let us note that two machines from the same
class (e.g., single tape deterministic Turing machines) correspond to diﬀerent
algorithms and have diﬀerent programs and, possibly, diﬀerent numbers of
internal states. The information about the transition tables and internal states
can be encoded, so that each Turing machine T is uniquely speciﬁed by a
binary number d[T] called the Turing number of machine T. Then, one can
imagine a universal Turing machine U with the property that on input d[T]
followed by any ﬁnite string of symbols x (separated by a blank) it gives the
same output as the output T(x) given by T on input x,
U(d[T], x) = T(x).
(3.9)
In other words, the universal Turing machine (UTM) is capable of simulating
any other Turing machine. The UTM has ﬁxed program and state control
(analogous to the ﬁxed hardware of a modern computer) and the action to
be taken — the TM to be simulated, i.e., algorithm to be implemented — is
determined by the string d[T] stored on the tape (analogous to the program
to be executed by a modern computer, which is stored in the memory).
How did Turing use these ideas to solve Hilbert’s problem? Consider the
following question: does the Turing machine T with Turing number d[T] halt
if it were fed d[T] as input? Let us assume that there is an algorithm that
solves this problem. In other words, there is an algorithm that, given any
4The circuit model consists of logical gates (e.g., NOT, AND, OR, etc.) connected by
wires; the gates perform simple logical operations (i.e., simple computations) and the wires
carry the information.

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■83
Turing machine T, could tell us whether or not T halts when fed d[T] as
input. Then, it is possible to make a Turing machine H with the property
that H(d[T]) halts if and only if T(d[T]) does not halt. However, for T →H
this implies that H(d[H]) halts if and only if H(d[H]) does not halt, which
is a contradiction. It follows that the initial assumption about the existence
of an algorithm that solves the halting problem is false. We say the halting
problem is uncomputable, i.e., cannot be solved algorithmically.
3.3.2
Computational complexity
Calculating uncomputable functions represents an impossible task for a com-
puter. However, there are other, non-absolute limitations on the computa-
tional tasks that a computer can perform. These limitations are dictated by
the time and space resources required to perform a computation. Computa-
tional complexity studies these time (i.e., number of computational cycles)
and space (i.e., memory) requirements and determines lower bounds on the
resources needed to run the best (i.e., most eﬃcient) algorithm that solves a
given problem. Note that this algorithm may not be known. Based on the
proven lower bounds, each computational task is placed into a certain com-
plexity class.
There are many complexity classes [24, 340]. In essence, when deﬁning a
complexity class one has to specify the resource of interest (time, space, . . . ),
the underlying computational model (deterministic TM, probabilistic TM,
quantum computer, . . . ), and the type of computational problem we want to
address (decision problem, optimization problem, . . . ). Finally, one has to dis-
tinguish between easy and hard problems based on how the resources required
to solve them scale with the size n of the input. The most basic distinction is
between polynomial and exponential dependence on n, although, in practice,
ﬁner distinctions may be of interest. A computational problem is deemed easy,
(or tractable) if there exists an algorithm for solving the problem that uses
polynomial resources; the problem is regarded as hard, (or intractable) if the
best possible algorithm requires exponential resources.
Let us focus on computational problems that can be formulated as decision
problems, i.e., questions that can be answered yes or no. For example, the pri-
mality decision problem: is a given integer n a prime number? To address this
type of problem, it is convenient to slightly modify the deﬁnition of the Turing
machine by replacing the halting state qh with two states: the accept (or yes)
state qA and the reject (or no) state qR, which represent the “yes” and “no”
answers, respectively. Complexity cases can be deﬁned using various computa-
tional models, including many types of Turing machines, such as determinis-
tic TMs, probabilistic TMs, non-deterministic TMs, quantum TMs, etc. These
machines can simulate each other, but some may require more resources than
others. We note that, unlike deterministic TMs (which have unique transitions
at each step of the computation), a probabilistic TM can randomly choose the
transition at each step (from two or more available transitions) according to

84
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
some probability distribution. Similarly, a non-deterministic TM has a set of
rules that prescribes more than one action for a given situation. However, by
contrast with the probabilistic TM, one can view the non-deterministic TM
as branching into diﬀerent computational paths and simultaneously explor-
ing them. This branching captures an essential feature of many mathematical
models we want to analyze. The decision problem is solved if qA is reached
along one of the paths (and in this case the answer is “yes”), or if all the paths
end with qR (the answer being “no”). Figure 3.4(a) illustrates schematically
the structure of the computational models corresponding to diﬀerent types of
Turing machines. We emphasize that the non-deterministic TM is not a model
of physically realizable computation, but rather an abstract machine useful in
the study of computational complexity.
During the 1970s, it was noticed by the computer science community that
any problem solvable in n steps (i.e., using n elementary operations) within
a certain “realistic” computational model, can also be solved in at most p(n)
steps on a probabilistic Turing machine, where p is a polynomial function.
Consequently, if the problem is easy in some “realistic” computational model,
it will be easy for a probabilistic TM. This led to the following “stronger”
version of the Church–Turing thesis:
Modiﬁed Church–Turing thesis: Every realistic (or “reasonable”)
model of computation can be simulated eﬃciently (i.e., with at most a
polynomial increase in the number of required steps) using a probabilistic
Turing machine.
This thesis has been challenged from several diﬀerent directions. From the
perspective of classical computer science, for example, it has been pointed
out that the thesis is based on implicitly assuming algorithmic computational
models: a (given) ﬁnite input is transformed (inside a closed-box) into a ﬁ-
nite output in a ﬁnite amount of time. However, one can argue [182] that
this type of model does not apply to all possible computations; an example
of non-algorithmic computation could be an interactive process (instead of a
function-based input-to-output transformation) in which communication (in-
teraction) with the outside world happens during the computation. For us,
the interesting challenge comes from quantum computation: if, for example,
the factorization problem5 does not have an eﬃcient classical solution, then a
quantum computer cannot be eﬃciently simulated using a probabilistic Turing
machine.
Returning to our discussion regarding complexity classes, let us consider
time (i.e., number of elementary computational steps) as the resource of inter-
est. A computational problem is said to be in class P if there is a (determinis-
tic) Turing machine that can solve it in polynomial time O(p(n)), where p is a
polynomial function and n is the size of the input. Class P is considered to be
the set of “eﬃciently” solvable problems. In addition to problems in class P,
5Shor’s algorithm provides an eﬃcient solution for the factorization problem on a quan-
tum computer. See Chapter 11 for more details.

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■85
P
PSPACE
NPC
NP
BQP
DTM
PTM
NTM
(a)
(b)
A/R
A/R
R
R
A
FIGURE 3.4: (a) Schematic representation of a (successful) computation
within diﬀerent Turing machine models: deterministic TM (DTM — one possi-
ble branch), probabilistic TM (PTM — multiple possible branches, one actual
branch per run), and non-deterministic TM (NTM — computational tree). In
general, a computational branch may end with an accept (or reject) state, or
it may halt and fail, or it may never halt. (b) Suspected relationship of the
quantum complexity class BQP with basic classical complexity classes.
some decision problems may be hard to solve, but the instances where the an-
swer is “yes” have eﬃciently veriﬁable proofs, i.e., proofs that can be veriﬁed
by a deterministic TM in polynomial time. Consider, for example, the factor-
ing decision problem: given an integer n and k < n, does n have a non-trivial
factor smaller than k? If someone provides such a factor, we call it a witness
to the fact that n has a factor that is smaller than k. The types of problems
that admit easily checkable witnesses belong to an important complexity class
known as NP. We note that an alternative deﬁnition (which is equivalent to
the veriﬁer-based deﬁnition) characterizes the NP class as the set of decision
problems that can be solved by a non-deterministic TM in polynomial time;
hence the name — non-deterministic polynomial time (NP) problems.
The relation between P and NP is one of the greatest unsolved questions
in computer science. More speciﬁcally, it is trivial to prove that P⊆NP, but
whether or not there are problems in NP that are not in P, is not known.
Most experts believe that the two classes are diﬀerent. However, in the absence
of a proof, the possibility that P=NP cannot be excluded. In addition, some
computer scientists conjecture that the P=NP problem is undecidable (i.e.,
cannot be proved or disproved).
An important subset of NP problems is the so-called NP-complete (NPC)
problems. A decision problem p ∈NP is NP-complete if every problem in NP
is reducible to p in polynomial time. An example of NP-complete problem
is the traveling salesman problem (TSP): given a list of cities, the distances
between each pair of cities, and a bound B, is there a route that starts and
ends at a given city, visits every city exactly once, and has a total length less
than B? Note that if any NP-complete problem can be solved eﬃciently (i.e.,
in polynomial time), then every problem in NP can (i.e., NP=P). On the
other hand, if NP̸=P, one can show that there are problems p ∈NP (called

86
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
NP-intermediate) that are outside P but are not NP-complete. The factoring
problem is believed to be an example of such a problem.
What is the place of quantum complexity classes within this picture? We
can deﬁne BQP as the class of computational problems that can be solved on
a quantum computer in polynomial time, if a bounded probability of error is
allowed. It is known that P⊆BQP, i.e., quantum computers could eﬃciently
solve problems in P. It is also known that quantum computers cannot solve
eﬃciently problems that are outside the class PSPACE — decision problems
solvable on a Turing machine using polynomial space (i.e., a number of work-
ing bits that grows polynomially with the size of the input), with no time
limitation. Where exactly BQP lies between P and PSPACE is not known.
The most prevalent belief concerning the relationship of BQP with the main
classical complexity classes is represented schematically in Figure 3.4(b).
3.3.3
Energy and computation
Everybody knows a laptop may become very hot during operation. Hence,
the natural question: what are the energy requirements for performing a given
computational task? Surprisingly, the answer is none. In other words, com-
putation can be done in principle without energy consumption. The key con-
dition that needs to be satisﬁed is reversibility: a reversible computation can
be performed (in principle) without energy consumption. The possibility of
reversible computation may not be obvious when thinking in terms of the
Turing machine model. On the other hand, using the circuit model, which is
equivalent to the TM in terms of computational power, one can link reversible
computation to having reversible logic gates. The NOT gate,6 for example,
is manifestly reversible (given the output xout = x one can uniquely deter-
mine the input xin = ¯x). On the other hand, the AND gate is irreversible —
given the output xout = 0, the input could have been (0, 0), (0, 1), or (1, 0).
Nonetheless, one can show that the AND gate (as well as other irreversible
gates) can be replaced by reversible gates, such as, for example the Fredkin
and Toﬀoli gates [154] — universal reversible logic gates with 3-bit inputs and
outputs. So, in principle, reversible computation without energy consumption
is possible. However, all models of reversible computation are highly sensitive
to noise and, consequently, require some form of error correction. In turn, the
error-correction process generates additional information (e.g., from measure-
ments done on the system to establish whether or not an error has occurred),
which, eventually, has to be discarded. This erasure of information, which is
an irreversible, dissipative process, would cost energy.
In 1961 Rolf Landauer pointed out [278] that there is a connection between
irreversibility in the computation process (e.g., operations involving erasure
6The NOT gate takes one bit x ∈{0, 1} as input and outputs ¯x (i.e., inverts x, x =
1 →¯x = 0, etc.). The AND gate takes two bits as input and outputs one: (1, 1) →1 and
(x, x′) →0 if x = 0 or x′ = 0.

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■87
of information) and energy consumption. This connection is captured by the
following principle:
Landauer’s principle: Consider a computational operation in which
a single bit of information is erased. The entropy of the environment
increases by at least kB ln 2, i.e., the amount of energy dissipated into
the environment (having temperature T) is at least kBT ln 2.
The principle was veriﬁed experimentally in 2012 [30]. We note that Lan-
dauer’s principle provides lower bounds. In fact, existing computers dissipate
hundreds of times more than the Landauer limit kBT ln 2 for each elementary
logical operation. Here, however, we are not concerned with the potential rel-
evance of this principle for computer technologies. Instead, we emphasize that
Landauer’s principle provides a new perspective on the profound relationship
between information and physics. We have already seen that information is
always encoded in the states of physical systems, while computation involves
information processing that is carried out on physically realizable devices.
Landauer’s principle suggests that general physics principles (e.g., thermody-
namic principles) constrain our ability to manipulate information.
A suggestive illustration of this idea is provided by the solution to the
Maxwell’s demon “paradox.” In 1871 Maxwell proposed a thought “experi-
ment” that apparently violates the second law of thermodynamics. Consider
a chamber separated into two compartments by a middle partition having a
small controllable door. The chamber contains a gas, initially at equilibrium,
and the door is controlled by a little “demon.” The demon measures the ve-
locities of the molecules and separates the fast and slow moving molecules
by appropriately opening and closing the door. These actions can be done,
in principle, with arbitrarily low energy cost. The ﬁnal result is a chamber
with a “hot” compartment and a “cold” compartment having a total entropy
lower than the initial (equilibrium) value, in apparent violation of the second
law of thermodynamics. Progress toward solving this problem was made by
Szilard in 1929 [419], but the ﬁnal answer came almost 50 years later [40].
In essence, the demon has to collect information regarding the movement of
the molecules. Eventually, this information has to be erased and, according to
Landauer’s principle, this erasure increases the entropy of the combined sys-
tem (i.e., chamber + demon + environment) so that the net entropy balance
satisﬁes the constraints imposed by the second law of thermodynamics.
From this perspective, if the laws of physics have indeed an impact on
how information can be manipulated, a natural question arises: how deep
is this connection between information and physics? In particular, since the
fundamental laws that govern physical systems are, as far as we know, the
laws of quantum mechanics, what is the impact of these laws on the ability
to transmit information and to perform computational tasks?

88
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
3.4
QUANTUM INFORMATION, QUANTUM COMPUTATION,
AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM MATTER
The idea of encoding and processing information using the laws of quantum
mechanics may nowadays look “natural,” but in reality it captured the at-
tention of physicists and computer scientists only after a series of conceptual
breakthroughs that demonstrated i) the existence (or the strong possibility) of
a fundamental diﬀerence between the classical and the quantum regimes and
ii) the feasibility of quantum information processing. One turning point is rep-
resented by Bell’s work, which showed that the degree of correlation between
spatially separated entangled quantum systems exceeds the values predicted
by any theory that describes the system in terms of classical variables. This
discovery to intense research into problems concerning the foundation of quan-
tum mechanics, which, on the one hand, led to major experimental advances
in controlling single quantum systems and, on the other, revealed the aﬃnity
of quantum mechanics for ideas coming from classical information theory. An
important step was the realization that quantum properties, such as the ex-
istence of entangled states or the random change of the quantum state as a
result of a measurement, can be exploited and used in practical applications.
Quantum cryptography (particularly quantum key distribution) is the ﬁrst re-
markable example of how an information-related task can be better performed
when taking full advantage of the structure of the natural world.
Quantum computation appears as a much more daunting endeavor. A
critical contribution that stimulated the development of this ﬁeld was the dis-
covery by Shor of a quantum algorithm for the factorization problem that can
run in polynomial time. This discovery plays a conceptual role similar to that
played by Bell’s inequalities: computation based on manipulating quantum
states might represent a new type of computation capable of solving eﬃ-
ciently certain (relevant) computational tasks that are classically intractable.
It is tempting to see a parallel between the quantum complexity class BQP
being larger than the set of problems that can be eﬃciently solved using classi-
cal computers (see Figure 3.4) and the set of quantum behaviors being larger
than the set of local behaviors (Figure 1.4). But quantum computation in-
volves large-scale interference eﬀects, which are notoriously sensitive to noise
and imperfections. So, is it feasible, even in principle? The discovery of quan-
tum error correction represented a decisive step toward an aﬃrmative answer
to this question. The concept of fault-tolerance demonstrates that error cor-
rection can be achieved even using imperfect corrective operations, provided
that the degree of imperfection is not “too high.” The next piece of the puz-
zle is the idea to implement fault-tolerance using topological quantum states.
Encoding information and performing operations using the topology of the
system oﬀers, in principle, signiﬁcant protection against errors associated with
processing quantum information (e.g., performing unitary transformations) or
errors caused by interactions with the environment. A better understanding
of topological quantum matter and, most importantly, an enhanced ability to

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■89
control topological states are key requirements for progress along this direc-
tion. Whether or not this will lead to the realization of an actual quantum
computer may still depend on the discovery of some as-yet-unknown quan-
tum phase or of a new fundamental limitation. Either way the ﬁght is worth
ﬁghting and the reward great (although not necessarily the expected one).
The basic concepts in quantum information and quantum computation
and some of the key results in these areas are summarized in Chapters 10–12.
Here, we just list the main themes of quantum information science and point
out some of the critical tasks that need to be addressed. We note that the
basic structures of quantum information and quantum computation parallel
those characterizing their classical counterparts. The recurring theme is the
identiﬁcation of new resources and capabilities made available by the laws of
quantum physics.
The term quantum information is used either broadly, encompassing all
subjects related to information processing using quantum states, or in a more
specialized manner, as referring to the study of elementary quantum informa-
tion processing tasks. We will use the terms quantum information theory or
quantum Shannon theory to refer to the specialized meaning. The fundamental
goals in this ﬁeld are:
1. Identify and characterize the static information resources made available
by quantum mechanics. In other words, how can one encode information
using quantum states and what are the measures of this information? Ba-
sic examples include quantum states in a two-dimensional Hilbert space
(the so-called qubit), classical bits (classical physics is a special limit of
quantum behavior), and entangled Bell-type states shared by two spa-
tially separated parties. The von Neumann entropy (which generalizes
the Shannon entropy) provides a method of quantifying the information
content.
2. Identify the dynamical processes of quantum mechanics that can be
exploited to perform quantum information tasks. What types of “infor-
mation processing” are available in quantum mechanics? Basic exam-
ples include unitary transformations representing quantum gates (the
quantum correspondent of classical logic gates), measurements (which
represent the interface between the quantum and the classical worlds,
“translating” quantum information into classical information), trans-
mission of information along quantum channels (formally represented
by completely positive trace-preserving maps), etc.
3. Quantify the resource requirements necessary for performing elementary
dynamical processes using static resources. For example, what are the
resources necessary to achieve optimal compression of a quantum in-
formation source, i.e., what is the fundamental limit on quantum data
compression? Or the quantum version of the noisy channel problem:
what are the minimal resources required to reliably transfer quantum
information over a noisy communications channel?

90
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Note that in quantum information theory there are certain types of resources
(e.g., entanglement) that have no classical correspondent. This translates into
a larger variety of problems that need to be addressed. An incomplete list of
problems include: constructing tools for the characterization and quantiﬁca-
tion of resources (e.g., entropy and distance measures — how much informa-
tion is encoded in a set of quantum states and how “close” are two quantum
states?); source coding (e.g., Schumacher compression — what is the limit
on quantum data compression?); determining the accessible information (e.g.,
the Holevo bound — the upper bound to the amount of information which
can be known about a quantum state); determining the classical capacity of
a quantum channel (how much classical information can be transmitted over
a quantum channel?); determining the quantum channel capacity (how much
quantum information can be reliably transmitted over a noisy quantum chan-
nel?); optimizing the use of “unique” quantum resources (e.g., entanglement
— what can be achieved using entanglement as a resource?); identifying pos-
sible applications (e.g., the quantum key distribution, a protocol that enables
secure distribution of private information). Some of the basic aspects of these
problems will be addressed in Chapter 10. Note that we did not mention an
important area, the theory of quantum error-correction, which is shared by
quantum information theory and quantum computation.
Quantum computation focuses on the problems associated with accom-
plishing computational tasks using quantum mechanical systems. While clas-
sical computer science tends to regard computations as abstract processes,
quantum computation emphasizes their physical aspect. In the words of David
Deutsch, “What computers can or cannot compute is determined by the laws
of physics alone, and not by pure mathematics.” The fundamental tasks of
quantum computation are:
I. Develop quantum computational models. The fundamental model of
quantum computation is the quantum circuit model, which deﬁnes a
computation as a sequence of quantum gates — the quantum analog
of classical logic gates. It can be demonstrated that there is a small set
of so-called universal gates with the property that any quantum compu-
tation can be expressed in terms of these gates.
II. Design quantum algorithms. The fundamental underlying question con-
cerns the ultimate limits of quantum computation. What class of com-
putations can be performed using a quantum computer? Are there com-
putational tasks that a quantum computer can perform better than a
classical computer? So far, there are only a few examples of quantum al-
gorithms that provide an advantage over known classical algorithms. Ex-
amples include the Deutsch–Jozsa and Shor algorithms, quantum search
algorithms (e.g., the Grover algorithm), and quantum simulations (sim-
ulating a physical quantum mechanical system).
III. Develop quantum error-correction codes. The underlying fundamental
question is: how can one reliably perform quantum information process-

Quantum Mechanics and Information Science
■91
ing in the presence of noise? The concept of fault-tolerant quantum com-
putation reveals that the encoding and decoding of quantum states can
tolerate errors and, in addition, one can perform logical operations on
encoded quantum states using imperfect underlying gate operations. An
important result is the so-called threshold theorem: it is possible to eﬃ-
ciently perform an arbitrarily large quantum computation provided the
noise in individual quantum gates is below a certain constant threshold.
IV. Identify speciﬁc physical systems and quantum properties to be used for
the realization of quantum computers. The basic requirements for quan-
tum computation concern the abilities to a) robustly represent quantum
information, b) prepare the initial states, c) perform universal unitary
transformations, and d) measure the output. What physical systems are
potentially good candidates for satisfying these requirements? Since the
noise level of elementary components should not exceed a certain level
(according to the threshold theorem), exploiting the intrinsic robustness
of topological quantum states appears as a promising path forward.
A discussion of key aspects concerning tasks I–III is provided in Chapter 11.
Basic elements of quantum computation using topological quantum states are
presented in Chapter 12. In the next few chapters, we will take a journey
through the topological quantum world. Whether or not the riches of that
world will help humankind to build a quantum computer — assuming that
such a machine can be constructed — depends, in part, on how well topological
quantum matter is understood theoretically and controlled experimentally.
However, regardless of the outcome, the bringing together of quantum physics
and information science has already proven extremely fertile and is likely to
possess long-lasting value.


II
Topological Phases of Matter
93


C H A P T E R 4
Symmetry and Topology
in Condensed Matter
Physics
CONTENTS
4.1
Themes in many-body physics .............................
96
4.2
Landau theory of symmetry breaking .....................
99
4.2.1
Construction of the Landau functional ............
101
4.2.2
Phases and phase transitions ......................
104
4.3
Topology: Mathematical highlights ........................
108
4.4
Topological order, symmetry, and quantum entanglement
112
4.5
Topology and emergent physics ...........................
117
U
NIFYING THEMES, CONCEPTS, STRUCTURES, AND IDEAS
are the cornerstones of understanding physical reality. The remarkable
success of condensed matter physics is intimately related to the existence of
a few powerful paradigms that operate throughout a vast ﬁeld with rather
blurry boundaries stretching from the realm of atomic physics to the gates
of astrophysics and from fundamental problems that, typically, constitute the
object of particle physics or cosmology to applied problems addressed, for ex-
ample, by materials science and biophysics. Condensed matter, this Middle
Earth of physics, is a rich and diverse ﬁeld that provides wide avenues for
transferring themes among diﬀerent areas and serves as the battleground of
reality for many great ideas. This is also an extremely successful ﬁeld due to
the experimental accessibility of condensed matter systems, which promotes
a fruitful synergy between theory and experiment. The knowledge acquired
in this ﬁeld enables exquisite control of materials properties and constitutes
the bedrock of present-day information technology. Historically, the ability to
control and exploit condensed matter systems was always intimately linked to
the technological progress of humankind, from the Stone Age to the “Silicon
Age.” Recent developments in condensed matter physics clearly illustrate the
95

96
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
antinomy between our desire for complete understanding and the joy of dis-
covering something new. As a result of these developments, the researcher’s
status of “being on the road” will be preserved, at least in the foreseeable
future. This should be great news, for who would really want to reach the end
of the road, the theory of everything, the One Ring?
4.1
THEMES IN MANY-BODY PHYSICS
The main task in condensed matter physics is to describe and predict the
physical properties of many-body systems. The problem involves a macro-
scopically large number of degrees of freedom, a feature that is also a deﬁning
attribute of quantum ﬁeld theories in particle physics. Thus, not surprisingly,
the two areas share many key components of their theoretical frameworks. But
the link between the two ﬁelds is, perhaps, much deeper. The key question is
what does it mean to understand the physics of a system containing 1023 par-
ticles? Finding the solution of the corresponding Schr¨odinger equation would
be not only a practical impossibility, but an utterly meaningless enterprise,
since the resulting predictions cannot be experimentally tested in any detail.
Understanding the system means, in fact, being able to describe and predict
the correlations among its observable properties. These correlations can be
captured by eﬀective theories containing degrees of freedom typically associ-
ated with the low-energy excitations of the system. In a broad sense, every
theory in physics is an eﬀective theory that captures the correlations among
various observable properties of a system corresponding to a set of measure-
ments that operate at certain length scales and within a certain energy range.
To predict the trajectory of a crystal moving in a gravitational ﬁeld there
is no need to incorporate into the theory information about the constituent
atoms or about the lattice structure of the crystal. Similarly, to understand
the electrical transport properties of that crystal one does not have to consider
nuclear forces, which are completely irrelevant in this context.
The paradigmatic eﬀective theory in traditional condensed matter physics
is the Landau–Fermi liquid theory [3, 275, 276, 295]. Landau’s main idea is
that the low-energy excitations of an interacting Fermi system — the so-called
quasiparticles – are in a one-to-one correspondence with the excited states of a
free fermion system. A quasiparticle can be viewed as a fermion “dressed” by
interactions, which preserve the particle spin and momentum but renormalize
the eﬀective mass and the eﬀective particle–particle interaction. The Landau–
Fermi liquid theory is, probably, the most successful renormalized ﬁeld theory.
The theory accounts for the low-temperature properties of most normal metals
and, in combination with band theory, the concept of the quasiparticle sits
at the core of our understanding of semiconductors, superconductors, and
superﬂuids. This theoretical framework has great appeal because it reduces
a complicated interacting many-body problem to the familiar free-fermion
picture of “ﬁlling the bands.”

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■97
The quasiparticle concept can be generalized to include the low-energy
excitations of arbitrary systems. In general, quasiparticles have properties
that are very diﬀerent from the properties of the basic constituents. For ex-
ample, the lowest-energy excitations in a crystal are collective modes, called
phonons, that represent noninteracting bosonic quasiparticles with an energy-
independent velocity. These quasiparticles are strikingly diﬀerent from the
atoms or molecules that form the system by interacting with each other
through speciﬁc and, typically, rather complicated interactions. By contrast,
the quasiparticles are governed by much simpler and esthetically appealing
laws. One can view the phonons as an example of emergent physics. Quite
generally, many-body systems acquire qualitatively new properties — emer-
gent properties — that have no correspondent at the microscopic level. A
familiar example is temperature, a macroscopic physical observable that be-
comes meaningless at the microscopic level. By contrast, the momentum of a
macroscopic object can be viewed as the sum of the momenta of all its mi-
croscopic constituents. The whole is, in some sense, more than the sum of its
parts — this is, in essence, the principle of emergence, one of the fundamental
principles of many-body physics. From this perspective, constructing eﬀective
theories to describe the low-energy physics of a macroscopic system is quite
natural, since a system characterized by a large number of degrees of freedom
has low-energy excitations (quasiparticles) that are governed by basic laws
diﬀerent from and, typically, simpler than those governing the original con-
stituents of the system. As a result, it is often the case that a hopeless-looking
problem involving complicated interactions among the original microscopic
constituents of the system can be mapped into a manageable eﬀective theory
containing degrees of freedom associated with the low-energy quasiparticles.
Another main theme in condensed matter physics concerns the classiﬁca-
tion of diﬀerent states of matter and the characterization of systems in the
vicinity of a phase transition. A state (or phase) of matter is deﬁned as a
distinct form in which the constituents of a many-body system are organized
and assembled together, which corresponds to a qualitatively distinct set of
physical properties. For example, a (homogeneous) gas is a compressible ﬂuid
that takes the shape of its container, occupies the entire available volume,
and is characterized by a position-independent probability of ﬁnding a con-
stituent particle at a given position. By contrast, a crystalline solid has a
deﬁnite shape and a deﬁnite volume and its constituents are spatially ordered
following a well-deﬁned repeating pattern. Within a given phase, the prop-
erties of a system as functions of parameters such as temperature, external
ﬁelds, and microscopic coupling constants vary smoothly, while transitions
among diﬀerent phases are signaled by discontinuities in the functional de-
pendence of certain properties on some of these parameters. The key question
is how many diﬀerent phases of matter exist and, most importantly, what are
the principles that would enable one to classify them? The classical answer
is based on the observation that the properties of a macroscopic system are
governed by conservation laws and broken symmetries. This observation sits

98
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
at the core of Landau’s symmetry breaking theory [177]. In essence, two states
of a many-body system that have diﬀerent symmetries are manifestly distinct
and, consequently, represent diﬀerent phases. For example, upon lowering the
temperature, a rotationally invariant paramagnetic system can undergo a tran-
sition to a ferromagnetic state characterized by a net magnetization oriented
along a speciﬁc direction. In the ferromagnetic state, the constituent spins
are preferentially oriented along that speciﬁc direction and, as a result, the
system breaks rotational symmetry. The magnetization, which is nonzero in
the low symmetry, ordered phase (i.e., the ferromagnetic phase ) and van-
ishes in the high symmetry, disordered phase (paramagnetic), can be viewed
as a local order parameter that represents a measure of the “degree of order”
corresponding to the two phases.
The “Standard Model” of condensed matter theory is based on the Landau
Fermi liquid theory and the Landau theory of symmetry breaking. The main
challenges to this “Standard Model,” which has dominated many-body physics
for several decades, seem to come from disorder and strong correlations. For
example, glassy phases have nonzero shear rigidity, like crystalline solids, but
no long-range order and, consequently, these phases have the same symmetry
as their liquid counterparts. The glass is not in thermodynamic equilibrium
and can be viewed as practically “frozen” in a metastable state. Strong cor-
relations, on the other hand, call into question Landau’s concept of fermionic
quasiparticle. For example, a one-dimensional system of interacting fermions,
which is described by the Tomonaga–Luttinger model [307], is characterized
by two types of low-energy excitations, one carrying spin and the other one
charge (the so-called spin-charge separation), instead of Landau-type quasi-
particles (which are charged spin- 1
2 fermions). Mott insulators [319] — systems
that according to band theory are characterized by partially ﬁlled bands and,
consequently, should be good conductors — provide another striking example.
It was a class of strongly correlated systems discovered in the early 1980s
— the fractional quantum Hall (FQH) liquids [428] — that decisively opened
the way toward a new paradigm in condensed matter physics. The study of
FQH systems has shown that the classiﬁcation based on symmetry breaking
is not complete and has revealed that phases of matter should also be dis-
tinguished based on their topological properties. In conformity with Landau’s
theory, if two phases cannot be continuously connected without crossing a
phase boundary, they must have diﬀerent symmetries. Nonetheless, diﬀerent
FQH states have the same symmetry, despite being separated by phase tran-
sitions. This discovery demands a new principle for classifying distinct phases
of matter. It turns out that the distinctiveness of FQH states (and of many
other states of matter) stems from topology, rather than symmetry.
In the remainder of this chapter, after summarizing the main ideas behind
Landau’s theory of symmetry breaking, we address a few general questions
that every newcomer into the realm of topological quantum matter would
probably ask. What do we mean by “topological” when talking about these
quantum states? How important is quantum mechanics in the topological

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■99
world? What about interactions? How can one distinguish diﬀerent topological
states and how do we classify them? What kind of emergent physics can
one ﬁnd in this topological “New World”? Are there implications beyond
condensed matter physics? Here, we will sketch the contour lines of the answers
to these questions, focusing on generic, qualitative aspects. More detailed
answers will be provided in the subsequent chapters. Also, since the study of
topological matter is a developing ﬁeld, we will try to clarify the terminology,
which is not yet standardized and may generate confusion.
4.2
LANDAU THEORY OF SYMMETRY BREAKING
A phase transition [277, 181] between two states of matter corresponds to
singularities in the functional dependence of the system properties on param-
eters such as temperature, external ﬁelds, and coupling strengths. Considering
the nature of these singularities, one can distinguish two types of transitions:
ﬁrst-order phase transitions, which involve energy exchange as latent heat, and
second-order or continuous phase transitions, which are characterized by con-
tinuous ﬁrst-order derivatives of the thermodynamic potential and divergent
susceptibilities. Further insight can be gained by considering the symmetries
of the states separated by the phase transition.
One possibility is that the two phases have the same symmetry. As we will
see below, this case includes transitions between states of matter with diﬀerent
topological properties. For now, we only consider topologically trivial phases
that can be addressed within the traditional framework for understanding
critical phenomena. A familiar example of transition between same-symmetry
states is the liquid-gas phase transition, a ﬁrst-order transition corresponding
to a line in the temperature-pressure plane that ends at a critical point. In this
case, there is a weak distinction between the two phases, in the sense that the
liquid can always be smoothly connected with the gas (i.e., without crossing
the phase transition line) by going around the critical point (see Figure 4.2
on page 106). Since there is no qualitative distinction between the two phases,
in some sense one can view them as a single state.
A second possibility is that the two phases have diﬀerent symmetries.
Consider the situation when one of the phases has the same symmetry as
the Hamiltonian describing the many-body system, for example the high-
temperature paramagnetic phase of the Heisenberg ferromagnet. Upon varying
a certain parameter (in this case lowering the temperature), the system under-
goes a phase transition from the high-symmetry disordered state (paramagnet)
to a lower-symmetry ordered state (ferromagnet). This is a so-called sponta-
neous symmetry breaking phase transition. Unlike weakly distinct isosymmet-
ric phases, states with diﬀerent symmetries are distinct in the strong sense
and cannot be smoothly connected, i.e., without going through a phase tran-
sition. Spontaneous symmetry breaking, which represents a major pillar of
both condensed matter and high-energy physics, sits at the core of Landau’s
paradigm.

100
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Landau’s approach includes three key steps. First, one has to identify an
appropriate order parameter ψ(r) as a measure of the “degree of order” in
the broken symmetry phase. This quantity is zero in the disordered phase
and nonzero in the ordered phase, hence clearly distinguishing them. The
order parameter can be deﬁned as the average of a certain local operator and,
within Landau’s theory, is assumed to be small and uniform near the phase
transition. Familiar examples include the magnetization in a ferromagnet and
the amplitudes of the Fourier components of the density in a crystal. Second,
one assumes that the equilibrium thermodynamics is completely determined
by a free energy obtained by minimizing the functional
F[ψ(r), T] = F0(T) + FL[ψ(r), T]
(4.1)
with respect to the order parameter. In Eq. (4.1) F0(T) represents a smooth
function of temperature and the Landau functional FL is assumed to be an
analytic function of ψ and T with FL[0, T] = 0. Close to the phase transition,
where the order parameter is small, FL is typically written in terms of a
polynomial expansion in ψ.
The third step involves the construction of the free energy functional.
Landau used a phenomenological approach based on the observation that the
functional has to be invariant under all possible symmetry transformations
associated with the symmetry group1 G of the Hamiltonian. At this stage,
the powerful machinery of group theory provides valuable insight into the
physics of the phase transition and the very principle for classifying diﬀer-
ent phases. For example, if the disordered phase has symmetry group G, the
same as the Hamiltonian, a spontaneous symmetry breaking transition will
reduce the symmetry of the system to one of the possible subgroups Ui of G.
We note that, upon varying the external parameters (e.g., lowering the tem-
perature), the system may undergo successive symmetry breaking transitions
corresponding to the symmetry sequence G ⊃Ui ⊃Vj. For example, upon
lowering the temperature a ﬂuid crystallizes and the symmetry of the system
is reduced from a continuous translation invariance to invariance with respect
1A group G is a collection of elements equipped with an operation • (called the group
law of G) that satisﬁes the following properties (known as the group axioms — closure,
associativity, identity element, and inverse element):
(a) If g1 and g2 are elements of G (i.e., g1, g2 ∈G), then g1 • g2 ∈G
(b) For all g1, g2, g3 ∈G, (g1 • g2) • g3 = g1 • (g2 • g3)
(c) There exists an identity element e ∈G such that g • e = e • g = g for every g ∈G
(d) For each g ∈G, there exists an inverse element g−1, such that g • g−1 = g−1 • g = e
Two groups (G, •) and (H, ◦) are said to be isomorphic if there exists a bijective (one-
to-one) mapping f : G →H with the property f(g1 • g2) = f(g1) ◦f(g2) for all g1, g2 ∈G
(i.e., the two groups have the same “multiplication table”). Isomorphic groups are usually
considered to be “the same.”
A symmetry operation is a transformation that leaves a certain object (e.g., a geometric
ﬁgure, a physical system, or the Hamiltonian that describes it) invariant. Two symmetry
operations can be composed (by applying them successively), the resulting transformation
being another symmetry operation. The symmetry group of an object is the group of all its
symmetry operations with composition as the group law.

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■101
to a discrete set of translations. At a lower temperature, the full spin-rotation
symmetry of the paramagnetic crystal may be spontaneously broken and re-
duced to a symmetry with respect to rotation about an axis parallel to the
magnetization, while the system becomes a ferromagnet.
In addition to providing tools for constructing the Landau free energy func-
tional and “selection rules” for identifying the allowed broken-symmetry phase
transitions, group theory gives valuable information concerning the properties
of the low-energy excitations in the ordered phase. Without going into details,
we emphasize the importance of distinguishing i) between continuous and dis-
crete broken symmetries and ii) between global and local symmetries. For
example, translation and rotation symmetries are continuous symmetries that
are spontaneously broken in a liquid-solid transition, while time reversal and
inversion symmetries are examples of discrete symmetries that are broken in,
e.g., a ferromagnetic phase. All these are examples of global symmetries, in
the sense that the corresponding Hamiltonians and disordered phases are in-
variant under any such symmetry operation acting identically at every point
in space. By contrast, local symmetries, such as gauge symmetries, impose
the stricter constraint of invariance under local group transformations. For
example, the Hamiltonian describing a system of spin-1/2 charged fermions
coupled to an electromagnetic ﬁeld is characterized by a local gauge symmetry
that becomes spontaneously broken when the system undergoes a transition
to a superconducting state.
The importance of correctly identifying the nature of the broken symme-
try is nicely illustrated by Goldstone’s theorem [186, 325]. The theorem states
that for each spontaneously broken continuous global symmetry there is a low-
energy gapless mode, i.e., a massless quasiparticle, called a Goldstone boson.
Physically, one can view Goldstone modes, such as phonons and spin waves
(magnons), as long-wavelength ﬂuctuations of the corresponding order param-
eter that attempt to restore the full symmetry of the system. We emphasize
that Goldstone’s theorem does not apply when discrete symmetries or local
symmetries are broken.
4.2.1
Construction of the Landau functional
To better understand the main ideas underlying the subsequent development
of Landau’s theory, as well as the intimate connection with the ﬁeld theories
of particle physics, it is instructive to brieﬂy discuss some examples. Consider
ﬁrst an Ising ferromagnet described by the Hamiltonian
HI = −1
2
X
i,j
JijSiSj,
(4.2)
where Jij is the short-range exchange coupling, Si = ±1, and the summations
are over all lattice sites. Under time reversal Si →−Si and the Hamiltonian
(4.2) remains invariant, hence the system is characterized by a Z2 symme-

102
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
try.2 At low temperatures, the spins will spontaneously break this symmetry
and will preferentially point either up or down. The natural order parameter
associated with this transition is the average spin value ψ = ⟨Si⟩. Note that
under time reversal ψ →−ψ. The phenomenological Landau functional can
be constructed in terms of a polynomial expansion in ψ that is invariant un-
der a Z2 symmetry operation, i.e., an expansion containing only even powers
of ψ. Instead, to gain further insight, we sketch a diﬀerent route that starts
from the microscopic lattice Hamiltonian (4.2). The main steps are: i) Con-
struct a lattice ﬁeld theory. Such a theory will accurately describe the physics
at all length scales and arbitrarily far away from the phase transition, but
may be technically challenging. ii) Obtain a continuum ﬁeld theory by coarse
graining the lattice theory. The result is an eﬀective theory that captures the
long wavelength physics arbitrarily far away from the phase transition. iii)
Perform a mean-ﬁeld approximation and a power expansion in the order pa-
rameter. This provides the Landau functional, including the dependence of
the expansion coeﬃcients on model and external parameters (e.g., Jij and
temperature).
One can construct a lattice ﬁeld theory for the Ising model (or any other
Hamiltonian that can be expressed in a quadratic form) by writing a func-
tional integral representation of the partition function Z = Tre−βHI using the
Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation
e−βHI = A
Y
i
Z
dψi exp

−1
2
X
i,j
ψiKijψj +
X
i,j
ψiKijSj

,
(4.3)
with Ki,j = βJij and A = (2π)N/2(det K)−1/2, where N is the number of lat-
tice sites. The linear (rather than quadratic) dependence on Sj in the exponent
allows for an exact evaluation of the trace over spins. Adding an interaction
term −P
i hiSi that couples the spins to an external ﬁeld and evaluating the
trace gives
Z = A
Y
i
Z
dψi exp

−1
2
X
i,j
ψiKijψj +
X
i
ln[2 cosh(Kψi + βhi)]

,
(4.4)
where K = P
j Kij. Note that the average of the constrained variable Si = ±1
is equal to the average of the unconstrained ﬁeld ψi, ⟨Si⟩= ∂ln Z/∂βhi = ⟨ψi⟩,
as one can see by changing the derivative with respect to βhi into a derivative
2A group G is called cyclic if there exists an element g1 ∈G such that every element
gm of the group can be generated as gm = gm
1 ≡g1 • g1 • · · · • g1 (m times). The identity
is e ≡g0 = g0
1. For example, the set {0, 1, . . . , n −1} with addition modulo n is a cyclic
group with g1 = 1 and e = 0; this group is isomorphic with the group of complex numbers
zm = exp(2πim/n), where 0 ≤m ≤n −1, (i.e., the solutions of the equation zn = 1) with
multiplication, or with the group of rotations of a regular n-sided polygon; these isomorphic
groups are usually denoted by Zn. In particular, the Z2 symmetry group is the set {e, g}
(with composition ◦) that contains the identity e (i.e., no transformation) and one symmetry
operation g (e.g., inversion or time reversal) with the property g2 ≡g ◦g = e.

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■103
with respect to P
j Kijψj, followed by an integration by parts. To obtain the
continuum limit, we ﬁrst express Eq. (4.4) in terms of the Fourier components
of the ψ ﬁeld. Then, after retaining only the lowest order contributions in
k, we rewrite the functional integral in terms of a continuum ﬁeld ψ(x). This
approximation amounts to neglecting short-range ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld, i.e.,
imposing a short-range (large wavenumber) cutoﬀkmax ∼2πΛ−1/d, where Λ is
a certain volume larger than the volume of the unit cell (v0) but much smaller
than the volume of the d-dimensional macroscopic system. Consequently, one
can view the continuum ﬁeld ψ(x) as the average of ψi over all the lattice
sites inside a domain Λ centered at x. We have
X
i
f[ψi] →1
v0
Z
ddxf[ψ(x)],
(4.5)
where f[ψ] is an arbitrary function. Also, approximating the Fourier transform
of the coupling as K(k) ≈K −wk2, with w = (1/2d) P
j R2
0jK0j, we have
X
i,j
ψiKijψj ≈
Z
ddk
(2π)d (K −wk2)|ψ(k)|2 →1
v0
Z
ddx
h
Kψ2 + w(∇ψ)2i
.
(4.6)
Using these relations, we can write an approximate partition function for the
Ising system in terms of a functional integral over the continuum ﬁeld ψ(x),
Z =
Z
Dψ e−βF [ψ(x)],
(4.7)
where the functional F[ψ(x)] (often called eﬀective Hamiltonian) has the ex-
pression
F[ψ(x)] =
1
βv0
Z
ddx
1
2w(∇ψ)2 + 1
2Kψ2 −ln[2 cosh(Kψ + βh)]

.
(4.8)
The approximate free energy F(T) of the Ising system can be obtained by
evaluating the functional integral in Eq. (4.7) using a saddle point approxima-
tion, i.e., replacing the integral by a constant times the maximum value of the
exponential, which is given by the minimum of the free energy functional F[ψ]
with respect to ψ. Explicitly, F(T) = F0(T) + minψ{F[ψ(x)]}. Comparison
with Eq. (4.1) suggests that F[ψ] in Eq. (4.8) represents, in fact, the Landau
functional, while the ﬁeld ψ(x) is the order parameter. In the vicinity of the
phase transition the order parameter is small and, assuming weak external
ﬁelds, one can expand the logarithm from Eq. (4.8) in a Taylor series. After
relabeling the coeﬃcients, the Landau functional takes the familiar form
F[ψ(x)] =
Z
ddx
1
2w(∇ψ)2 + fL(ψ)

,
with
fL(ψ) = 1
2aψ2 + 1
4bψ4 −hψ,
(4.9)
where a = K(1 −K)/βv0, b = K
4/3βv0, w/βv0 →w, and Kh/v0 →h.

104
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Ψ
fLHΨL
T < Tc
T  Tc
T > Tc
(a)
Ψ
fLHΨL
T > T2
T < T1
T  Tc
T¢
(b)
FIGURE 4.1: Evolution of the Landau free energy fL(ψ) across a contin-
uous (second-order) phase transition (a) and a discontinuous (ﬁrst-order)
phase transition (b). For T1 < T < T2 fL has local minima corresponding
to metastable states (e.g., superheated liquid at T = T ′).
This construction reveals several important points. The order parameter
ψ(x) represents the average spin value over all the sites within a region Λ
around point x, ψ(x) = ⟨Si⟩i∈Λ(x). At low temperatures, in the absence of an
external ﬁeld, the order parameter will ﬂuctuate around one of the two possi-
ble mean values corresponding to the nonzero minima of fL, ψ0 = ±
p
−a/b.
These values characterize the broken symmetry states with spins oriented
preponderantly up or down, respectively, and require the condition a < 0.
Note that a ∼T −T0, where T0 =
1
kB
P
j J0j is the mean ﬁeld transition
temperature. Typically, T0 has a value larger than the ferromagnetic transi-
tion temperature Tc, as the mean ﬁeld treatment becomes inaccurate below a
certain (upper) critical dimension. This problem also aﬀects the critical expo-
nents and is properly addressed within the framework of the renormalization
group. So, below the critical temperature, a < 0 and fL(ψ) has two nonzero
minima corresponding to the two possible values of the average spin in the
broken symmetry phase, as illustrated in Figure 4.1(a). By contrast, for a > 0
(i.e., when T > Tc), the unique minimum of fL obtains for ψ0 = 0; the system
is in a disordered (paramagnetic) phase. Also note that for h = 0 (i.e., in the
presence of time reversal symmetry) the Landau free energy density fL(ψ)
contains only even powers of the order parameter, as required by the invari-
ance under time-reversal operations (ψ →−ψ). Finally, we observe that the
contribution to F[ψ] proportional to w has the role of suppressing the spatial
variations of the order parameter. In fact, Landau’s construction assumes a
uniform order parameter near the phase transition.
4.2.2
Phases and phase transitions
The Landau free energy given by Eq. (4.9) describes a continuous (second-
order) phase transition characterized by a scalar order parameter with ψ0 →0
when T →T0 (from below). The general framework can be naturally adapted

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■105
to address other types of phase transitions, including ﬁrst-order transitions,
transitions between weakly distinct isosymmetric states, and transitions char-
acterized by more complex order parameters. For example, a Landau free
energy of the form
fL(ψ) = 1
2aψ2 −1
4bψ4 + 1
6cψ6,
(4.10)
with b > 0 (and c > 0), will describe a ﬁrst-order phase transition. The ψ6 term
was included to ensure that fL is bounded from below (i.e., has a ﬁnite absolute
minimum). The dependence of fL on ψ for diﬀerent temperatures is illustrated
in Figure 4.1(b). Deep inside the broken symmetry phase fL has two nonzero
minima, while for high-enough temperature (i.e., deep inside the disordered
phase) there is a unique minimum at ψ = 0. However, in contrast with the
continuous transition [Figure 4.1(a)], there is a certain temperature range T1 <
T < T2 in which the Landau free energy has three local minima. For T1 < T <
Tc the lowest minima, which characterize the thermodynamically stable state,
correspond to ψ0 ̸= 0 (i.e., an ordered state), but there is a third minimum
at ψ = 0 that corresponds to a metastable (disordered) state of the system.
For Tc < T < T2 the stable (disordered) state corresponds to the minimum at
ψ = 0, while the higher local minima at ψ0 ̸= 0 describe metastable ordered
states. Note that, the order parameter (i.e., ψ0 corresponding to the lowest
degenerate minima) does not vanish as one approaches the critical temperature
(from below), as is the case in a continuous phase transition [see Figure 4.1(a)].
The case of weakly distinct isosymmetric states (e.g., the liquid-gas tran-
sition) can be incorporated within this framework by identifying an appro-
priate order parameter that does not break the symmetry of the system. For
the liquid-gas transition, a possible choice is ψ = n −nc, where nc is the
particle density at the critical point. We emphasize that the condition ψ = 0
at high-enough temperature is not a symmetry requirement in this case. The
situation is analogous to that of an Ising ferromagnet in the presence of an
external ﬁeld, as illustrated in Figure 4.2. When h ̸= 0, the “up” and “down”
states of the system have the same symmetry as the Hamiltonian and can be
smoothly connected by going around the critical point.
The Ising ferromagnet discussed above is a system with discrete Z2 sym-
metry. Consider now, as an example of a system characterized by a continuous
symmetry, the classical xy model
HXY = −1
2
X
i,j
Jij ⃗Si · ⃗Sj,
(4.11)
where ⃗Si are unit vectors in the x−y plane. The order parameter, given again
by the average “spin,” ⃗ψ(x) = ⟨⃗Si⟩i∈Λ(x), is a two-component vector, while
the Hamiltonian has global O(2) symmetry, i.e., it is invariant with respect to
in-plane rotations and reﬂections of the spins. The Landau free energy has to
be invariant with respect to the symmetry operations and, consequently, will

106
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
T
P
solid
gas
liquid
(a)
T
h
y0
0
y0
0
y0
0
(b)
FIGURE 4.2: Schematic phase diagrams for (a) a classical ﬂuid (in
the temperature-pressure plane) and (b) an Ising ferromagnet (in the
temperature-magnetic ﬁeld plane). The full lines represent ﬁrst-order (dis-
continuous) phase transitions and the black dots are critical points. Phases
with the same symmetry, i.e., the liquid and the gas in (a) and states with
opposite magnetization in (b), can be smoothly connected along the dashed
lines without encountering a phase transition.
only contain even terms,
fL(⃗ψ) = 1
2a⃗ψ · ⃗ψ + 1
4b(⃗ψ · ⃗ψ)2 + . . . .
(4.12)
In the broken symmetry phase, fL(⃗ψ) has a “Mexican hat” proﬁle and the
minima, rather than being isolated points, form an entire circle, as shown in
Figure 4.3. The implications are major. In particular, there are two types of
excitations: those associated with ﬂuctuations of |⃗ψ| (the magnitude of the
order parameter) and those corresponding to ﬂuctuations of the direction of
⃗ψ. Since the energy cost to change the direction of the order parameter (i.e.,
move ⃗ψ around the circle of minima of fL) is zero, the corresponding excita-
tions (“spin” waves) dominate the low-energy physics and represent gapless
Goldstone bosons associated with the broken O(2) symmetry. Note that the
zero mass of the Goldstone bosons can be associated with the vanishing cur-
vature of fL(⃗ψ) along the azimuthal direction at the minima. By contrast,
the excitations associated with magnitude ﬂuctuations are gapped and the
corresponding quasiparticles have a mass proportional to the square root of
the curvature of fL(⃗ψ) in the radial direction.
At this point, a comment about the fate of Goldstone bosons in systems
with gauge symmetry would be appropriate. Consider ﬁrst the case of a system
with global U(1) symmetry. The order parameter is now a complex function,
ψ(x) = |ψ(x)|eiθ(x), and the free energy functional has the form F(ψ) =
R
ddx
 1
2∇ψ∗· ∇ψ + fL(ψ)

, with fL = 1
2a|ψ|2 + 1
4b|ψ|4. Note that fL has the
same form as Eq. (4.12), as one can easily establish using the parameterization

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■107
fL(⃗ψ)
ψx
ψy
FIGURE 4.3: Landau free energy fL(⃗ψ) for a system with spontaneously bro-
ken O(2) symmetry. Long wavelength ﬂuctuations that move ⃗ψ around the
circle of minima involve no energy cost (Goldstone bosons).
ψ = ψ1 + iψ2. The Goldstone boson corresponds to ﬂuctuations of the phase
θ. The free energy density fL has local U(1) symmetry (i.e., it is invariant
to local changes of θ(x)), but the term containing the derivatives is only
invariant to global changes of the phase. Next, let us assume that the system
consists of charged particles interacting electromagnetically. We have ∇→
∇−iqA and the global U(1) symmetry is promoted to a local gauge symmetry.
For q = 2e the resulting eﬀective theory describes a superconductor. The
local phase ﬂuctuations can be “absorbed” into the vector ﬁeld through the
gauge transformation A →A + 1/q∇θ, which results in a contribution to
the free energy density of the form (q|ψ0|)2A2, where ψ0 is the magnitude
of the order parameter in the broken symmetry phase (i.e., the radius of
the circle of minima of the Mexican hat). In the broken symmetry phase
(|ψ0| ̸= 0), this term generates a massive low-energy excitation with mass
m = q|ψ0|. Physically, this massive “photon” corresponds to the magnetic ﬁeld
being expelled out of the superconductor (the Meissner eﬀect). We conclude
that, in the gauge theory, the phase angle θ(x) combines with the redundant
gauge degrees of freedom and, instead of producing a gapless Goldstone boson,
results in massive low-energy excitations. This is the famous Higgs mechanism,
which is key to explaining the mass of gauge bosons in particle physics.
Landau’s theory, which is equivalent to a mean ﬁeld approximation, as
argued above, does not provide accurate values for the transition temperature
and the critical exponents. While transition temperatures are system-speciﬁc
and depend on the details of the interaction, critical exponents describing the
behavior of the system near continuous phase transition (e.g., near critical
points) may be the same for completely diﬀerent physical systems, which are
said to be in the same universality class. In fact, critical exponents only depend

108
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
on the spatial dimension (d), the symmetry of the order parameter (e.g., ψ),
and the symmetry (and range) of the interaction (e.g., Jij). For example, the
liquid-gas, the binary ﬂuid, and the uniaxial (anti)ferromagnetic transitions
belong to the Ising universality class and are characterized by the same set of
critical exponents.
In essence, this remarkable behavior stems from the fact that the cor-
relation length, i.e., the characteristic length scale ξ associated with corre-
lated ﬂuctuations of the order parameter, diverges as the system approaches a
second-order phase transition. Consequently, the system becomes scale invari-
ant at the critical point, i.e., its properties appear to be the same regardless of
the scale at which one examines them. This suggests that valuable information
about the system could be obtained if one steps back from the microscopic
level and examines the physics at larger and larger length scales. The idea led
to the development of the renormalization group by L. P. Kadanoﬀ[242] and
K. G. Wilson [466]. The approach, which has been implemented in various
forms, involves a sequence of transformations consisting in a coarse graining
(thinning) of the degrees of freedom followed by a rescaling of the relevant
variables. The renormalization group illustrates the power of the “eﬀective
theory” concept and, in fact, can be viewed as a method for calculating the
evolution of the eﬀective theory with the spatial length scale on which we
examine the system. As a ﬁnal note, we point out that within this framework
there is no fundamental diﬀerence between classical (or thermal) phase transi-
tions and quantum (i.e., zero temperature) phase transitions. For example, the
scaling of the order parameter near the critical temperature, ψ0 ∼(Tc −T)β,
is similar to the behavior at T = 0 near a critical value of some coupling
constant ψ0 ∼(gc −g) ¯β, where β and ¯β are critical exponents that depend
on the universality classes of the classical and quantum phase transitions,
respectively. In general, a quantum phase transition in d dimensions has a
ﬁeld-theoretical description that looks the same as the description of a clas-
sical phase transition in d + 1 dimensions, imaginary time representing the
extra dimension.
These highlights on Landau’s theory of symmetry breaking, which barely
scratch the surface of a vast, well-established ﬁeld, are intended to empha-
size the novelty of the topological quantum world, but also to underline its
formal links with the ﬁeld theories initially developed within the traditional
paradigm. Next, before entering this new world, it is useful to clarify a basic
question: What is topology?
4.3
TOPOLOGY: MATHEMATICAL HIGHLIGHTS
To paraphrase a well-known mathematical joke, a topologist is someone capa-
ble of realizing that a doughnut and a coﬀee cup are, in some sense, identical.
Indeed, topology can be described as the mathematical study of the properties
(called topological properties) that remain invariant under continuous defor-
mations (i.e., deformations that do not involve any “cutting” and “tearing”)

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■109
of certain objects (called topological spaces). Topology is not restricted to the
study of geometrical objects, such as spheres, tori, Klein bottles, and knots,
but also deals with structures that have no geometrical correspondent. Point-
set (or general) topology deals with the basic aspects related to the construc-
tion of topological spaces and with fundamental concepts, such as continuity,
compactness, connectedness, countability, and separability. Specialized areas,
such as diﬀerential topology, low-dimensional topology, and algebraic topol-
ogy, focus on certain types of topological spaces, e.g., smooth (diﬀerentiable)
manifolds or low-dimensional manifolds (with up to four dimensions), or use
speciﬁc tools (e.g., algebraic objects such as groups and rings) to characterize
the topological properties of these spaces. Here, we sketch a few basic mathe-
matical ideas and give some simple examples with the goal of shedding light on
a key question: what is “topological” about the topological quantum matter?
As deﬁned in Chapter 2 (see Section 2.3.1), a topological space (X, T ) is
a set X together with a collection T of subsets of X having the following
properties: (1) ∅and X are in T . (2) Any union of elements from T is in
T . (3) Any ﬁnite intersection of elements from T is in T . The collection
T is called a topology on the set X and the elements of T are called open
sets. We emphasize that for any given set X ̸= ∅there are many possible
topologies. For example, if X = {a, b, c}, the collections of sets T1 = {∅, X},
T2 = {∅, {a}, {a, b}, {a, c}, X}, and T3 = {∅, {a}, {b}, {a, b}, X} satisfy the
deﬁnition and hence are topologies on the three-element set X. The collection
{∅, {a, b}, {b, c}, X}, on the other hand, does not satisfy property (3) (since
{a, b} ∩{b, c} = {b} is not an element of the collection), hence it is not a
topology. The collection of all subsets of X is called the discrete topology,
while T1 (the topology consisting of X and ∅only) is called the trivial or the
indiscrete topology.
Often times, rather than describing the entire collection, a topology is
speciﬁed by a smaller collection of subsets called a basis. If (X, T ) is a topo-
logical space, B is a basis for T if and only if T contains the empty set and
all the subsets of X that are unions of elements of B. For example, the so-
called standard topology on the real line R is generated by the collection of all
open intervals (a, b), with a < b. On the other hand, the basis consisting of
all half-open intervals [a, b) generate the lower-limit topology on the set R and
the corresponding topological space (sometimes denoted by Rℓ) has diﬀerent
properties (e.g., Rℓis not locally compact). An interval [a, b] is closed in the
standard topology (i.e., its complement R −[a, b] belongs to the topology),
but is not closed nor open in Rℓ; by contrast, [a, b) is not closed nor open in
the standard topology but is both open and closed in Rℓ.
Continuous functions represent key tools for comparing topological spaces
and for identifying their topological properties. A function f : (X, TX) →
(Y, TY ) is said to be continuous if for each open subset V ⊂Y the inverse
image f −1(V ) is an open set of X. We emphasize that continuity depends on
the speciﬁc topologies TX and TY , although sometimes they are not explicitly
present in the deﬁnition of the function. For example, let R and Rℓdenote

110
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
the set of real numbers with the standard topology and with the lower-limit
topology, respectively, and f : Rℓ→R be the identity function, f(x) = x for
every real number x. Since the inverse image of an open set (a, b), which is
equal to itself, is open in Rℓ, f is continuous. By contrast, the identity function
f ′ : R →Rℓis not continuous, because the inverse image of [a, b) is not open
in R. This is a consequence of R and Rℓbeing diﬀerent topological spaces.
But when do we say that two spaces are topologically the same?
We deﬁne a homeomorphism as a bijective function f : X →Y with
the property that both f and its inverse f −1 : Y →X are continuous. A
homeomorphism provides a bijective correspondence between the collections of
open sets of the two topological spaces and, as a result, any property of X that
is entirely expressed in terms of its topology (i.e., collection of open sets) will
be preserved under f (i.e., Y will be characterized by the same property). Such
properties that are invariant under homeomorphisms are called topological
properties. A simple example of homeomorphism is the function g : (−1, 1) →
R (both sets having the standard topology), with g(x) = x/(1 −x2). This
homeomorphism stretches the segment (−1, 1) into the real line. By contrast,
the identity function f ′ = f −1 discussed in the previous paragraph is not
continuous, hence f is not a homeomorphism. In fact, two topological spaces
cannot be homeomorphic if there is any topological property that holds for
one space but not for the other (e.g., for R but not for Rℓ) . Hence the
natural question: what exactly are these topological properties? Some of them
can be easily grasped at the intuitive level, others require a rather complex
mathematical apparatus. A few simple examples are discussed below.
Connectedness. Intuitively, a space is connected if it consists of a single
“piece” and cannot be separated into disjoint open sets. More formally, we
deﬁne a separation of a topological space X as a pair U, V of nonempty,
disjoint open sets of X with the property U ∪V = X. The space X is said to be
connected if no separation of X exists. Since it is formulated entirely in terms
of the collection of open sets of X, connectedness is a topological property
of X. For example, the open interval (−1, 1) (with the standard topology) is
connected, while the open interval [−1, 1) (with the lower limit topology) is
not connected, since [−1, 1) = [−1, 0) ∪[0, 1), i.e., it has a separation. Similar
properties hold for R and Rℓ, respectively. Since R is connected and Rℓis not,
the two spaces cannot be homeomorphic.
Compactness. A collection A of open subsets is said to be a covering of X
if the union of the elements of A is equal to X. The space X is said to be
compact if every open covering of X contains a ﬁnite subcollection that is a
covering of X. Similarly, a subset K ⊆X is said to be compact if every open
covering of K has a ﬁnite subcovering. For example, the interval [0, 1] ⊂R
(with the standard topology) is compact, while the interval (0, 1] is not; the
open covering A = {(1/n, 1]|n ∈Z+} contains no ﬁnite subcollection that
covers (0, 1]. The real line R itself is not compact. However, one can construct a
compact space by adding one point, ˆR = R∪{∞}, and expanding the topology
with open sets U = {x ∈R∪{∞}|x < a or x > b} containing ∞. The space ˆR,

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■111
called the one-point compactiﬁcation of the real line, is homeomorphic with a
circle. Similarly, the one-point compactiﬁcation of R2 is homeomorphic with
a sphere.
There are other topological properties associated with connectedness (e.g.,
path and local connectedness) and compactness (e.g., limit point compact-
ness), as well as topological properties associated with separability (e.g.,
Hausdorﬀspaces), countability (e.g., ﬁrst- and second-countable spaces), and
metrizability. However, none of these topological properties can distinguish
between, let’s say, a sphere and a torus. In this context, as a note of caution,
we emphasize that topological properties should not be understood as always
characterizing some sort of “global” feature of the topological space; for ex-
ample, the distinct ways in which the open sets “ﬁt” inside each other result
in diﬀerent local (rather than global) structures for R and Rℓ.
The fundamental group. To address the problem of the sphere-torus distinc-
tion, we deﬁne a path in X from x0 to x1 as the continuous map (i.e., function)
f : [0, 1] →X with the property f(0) = x0 and f(1) = x1. Two paths f and
f ′ are said to be path homotopic (and we write f ≃P f ′) if they have the same
initial and ﬁnal points (x0 and x1, respectively) and there is a continuous map
F : [0, 1] × [0, 1] →X such that F(s, 0) = f(s), F(s, 1) = f ′(s), F(0, t) = x0,
and F(1, t) = x1. In other words, F represents a continuous “deformation” of
the path f into the path f ′. One can show that ≃P is an equivalence relation,
i.e., all paths that are path homotopic with f belong to the same equivalence
class, which we will denote by [f]. Furthermore, one can create an algebraic
structure by deﬁning the product f ∗g of two paths. Speciﬁcally, if f is a path
in X from x0 to x1 and g is a path from x1 to x2, then h = f ∗g is the path
from x0 to x2 deﬁned by
h(s) =
 f(2s)
for s ∈[0, 1
2],
g(2s −1) for s ∈[ 1
2, 1].
(4.13)
One can show that this introduces an operation on the path-homotopy classes
deﬁned by [f] ∗[g] = [f ∗g]. If we consider only paths that start and end
at x0 (called loops based at x0), the corresponding path-homotopy classes
with product operation ∗form a group called the fundamental group of X
relative to the base point x0 and denoted by π1(X, x0). Note that the identity
element of the group is [f0] with f0(s) = x0 (i.e., the class of loops that can
be continuously shrunk to a point). One can show that, in certain conditions
(speciﬁcally, when X is path-connected), π1(X, x0) is independent of x0 and
can be denoted by π1(X). The fundamental group of the Euclidian n-space,
π1(Rn), is the trivial group consisting of the identity alone (i.e., all loops can
be continuously shrunk to a point). The same is true for a sphere and, in fact,
for all topological spaces that are simply connected. By contrast, for a circle
(X = S1), each path-homotopy class consists of loops that wind around the
circle n times, where n ∈Z is positive or negative depending on the winding
direction. The product of two loops that wind n and m times, respectively,
will wind n + m times. Consequently, π1(S1) = Z, meaning that π1(S1) is

112
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
FIGURE 4.4: Evolution of the Fermi surface in a Lifshitz phase transition:
neck collapsing (top) and pocket formation (bottom).
isomorphic with the group of integers endowed with the addition operation.
For a torus (X=T), which can be viewed as the direct product of two circles,
the fundamental group is π1(T) = Z × Z. Hence, the fundamental group of
the torus is diﬀerent from the fundamental group of the sphere and represents
a topological property that clearly distinguishes the two objects.
With the fundamental group we have stepped inside the realm of algebraic
topology. Using its tools, one can assign more subtle topological invariants to
a given topological space, such as the so-called homology groups, a sequence
of Abelian groups Hn(X) that, basically, allows one to categorize the diﬀerent
kinds of “holes” associated with X. The classiﬁcation of topological quantum
matter requires the use of some of these rather complex mathematical tools.
However, our goal here was just to provide a “taste” of this ﬁeld and, most
importantly, to convey the following core ideas: 1) topology characterizes a
class of mathematical objects (topological spaces) regarding how the elements
of a set are “packed” together based on information about the neighborhoods
(open subsets) of these elements, but regardless of relative distances or direc-
tions, which may be meaningless, and 2) this “packing structure” is charac-
terized by a set of properties (topological invariants) that are preserved under
transformations (homeomorphisms) that “stretch,” “twist,” and “deform” the
system or completely change the nature of its elements.
4.4
TOPOLOGICAL ORDER, SYMMETRY, AND QUANTUM
ENTANGLEMENT
What do we mean by “topological” in the context of condensed matter phases
and phase transitions? The term has several diﬀerent meanings, some of them
not yet completely standardized. In this section we sketch a broad view of
the “topological quantum world” focusing on several key aspects of its “ge-
ography”: neighbors (what was left out), regions (main classes of topological
quantum states), and toponyms (basic terminology).
There are many-body phenomena that involve topological aspects, yet they
are not included in our “topological world.” For example, Lifshitz transitions
[294] are continuous quantum phase transitions not associated with symme-
try breaking that are characterized by a change of the Fermi surface topology,

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■113
FIGURE 4.5: Vortices in a two-dimensional xy model.
more speciﬁcally, a change of the Fermi surface connectedness. There are two
types of Lifshitz transitions: neck-collapsing and pocket-vanishing transitions,
as illustrated in Figure 4.4. Originally proposed for noninteracting fermions,
this type of “topological” quantum phase transition has more recently been
considered in the context of interacting electron systems, such as electron-
doped iron arsenic superconductors, heavy fermion systems, NaxCoO2, and
underdoped cuprates. Another example is the Kostelitz–Thouless transition
— a vortex unbinding transition that occurs without spontaneous symmetry
breaking in two-dimensional systems with O(2) or U(1) symmetry [46, 272].
As we have seen in Section 4.2, states with a broken continuous symmetry are
characterized by low-energy ﬂuctuations (Goldstone bosons) that tend to re-
store the full symmetry of the system. In fact, it was shown that the symmetry
of a many-body system cannot be spontaneously broken at any ﬁnite temper-
ature in dimensions d ≤2. This result, which holds in systems with suﬃciently
short-range interactions, is called the Mermin–Wagner theorem. However, the
emergence of Goldstone bosons is not the only mechanism for restoring the
symmetry of the system; an alternative mechanism involves the creation of
topological defects, i.e., ﬁnite energy distortions of the order parameter ﬁeld
(such as vortices in superﬂuid helium, dislocations in periodic crystals, and
disclinations in nematic liquid crystals) that cannot be eliminated by any
continuous change of the order parameter. For example, the low-temperature
phase of the xy model (4.11) is characterized by ﬁnite spin stiﬀness (i.e.,
nonzero magnitude of the order parameter, |⃗ψ0| ̸= 0) and by the presence
of bound vortex-antivortex pairs, which results in a power-law decay of the
spin-spin correlation (i.e., quasi long-range order). At the Kostelitz–Thouless
transition, the pairs unbind and the vortices proliferate resulting in a state
with no spin rigidity (|⃗ψ0| = 0) and exponentially decaying correlations.
At this point, it is instructive to take a closer look at the characterization
of topological defects. In the case of the two-dimensional xy model, a vortex
is characterized by a position-dependent order parameter that vanishes at
the vortex core and rises to the bulk magnitude |⃗ψ0| over a certain ﬁnite
length scale (see Figure 4.5). To further characterize the vortex conﬁguration,

114
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
it is convenient to introduce the order parameter space M — the space of
parameters that deﬁne all the values ⃗ψ0 of the order parameter corresponding
to the ground state (i.e., given by the minima of the Landau free energy).
For the xy model, this manifold is the unit circle S1, which is in a one-to-one
correspondence with the minima of the “Mexican hat.” The direction of the
order parameter along any contour Γ surrounding the vortex core deﬁnes a
closed path (i.e., a loop) in M (i.e., a continuous map from Γ to M having
the same initial and ﬁnal points). Moreover, two diﬀerent contours Γ and Γ1
correspond to path homotopic loops. As discussed in the previous section, the
corresponding path homotopy classes form the fundamental group of M. For
the circle, we have π1(S1) = Z. We conclude that the vortices of the two-
dimensional xy model are classiﬁed by an integer topological number ν ∈Z.
Physically, this winding number corresponds to the number of times a loop
(deﬁned by the direction of the spin as one goes around the vortex core) wraps
around the unit circle (i.e., the order parameter space). For example, going
(counterclockwise) around either of the two vortices shown in Figure4.5 results
in the direction of the spin cycling the unit circle once (e.g., starting at the
rightmost side of the ﬁgure and going around the right vortex, the spin points
right–up–left–down–up, i.e., one cycle of the order parameter space, which
means ν = 1).
Physical phenomena such as the Lifshitz and the Kostelitz–Thouless phase
transitions clearly involve elements that can be characterized as topological.
However, we are not primarily concerned with this type of phenomena. In-
stead, our “topological quantum world” will include only zero temperature
fully gapped states. In other words, we focus on systems with many-body
ground states that are separated from the excited states by ﬁnite energy gaps.
Diﬀerent phases correspond to ground states characterized by diﬀerent sets
of topological invariants and the transitions between them, called topological
quantum phase transitions, are associated with the vanishing of the energy
gap. These states, which evade the standard classiﬁcation based on Landau’s
paradigm and cannot be described using local order parameters, have recently
burst into the arena of condensed matter physics with the discovery of topolog-
ical insulators. However, topological insulators represent a rather small region
inside a vast and diverse territory; they are a sort of “garden variety” topo-
logical state — not the ﬁrst discovered, nor the most interesting, not even
possessing full “topological protection,” but, probably, the simplest to under-
stand. So, what are the main classes of topological quantum states?
Historically, the incompleteness of the theoretical framework based on the
symmetry breaking paradigm has been revealed by the discovery of the quan-
tum Hall eﬀect (QHE) [265, 428]. Diﬀerent quantum Hall states, although
clearly distinct, have the same symmetry as the Hamiltonian and cannot be
described using local order parameters. Discriminating between two quantum
Hall states cannot be done based on symmetry, but requires considering the
topological properties of the ground states, i.e., those properties that remain
invariant under suﬃciently small but otherwise arbitrary adiabatic deforma-

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■115
tions of the Hamiltonian. The remarkably well-deﬁned value of the Hall con-
ductance is a consequence of the relationship between this quantity and the
topological invariant that characterizes the quantum Hall state [423].
The topological properties that deﬁne diﬀerent phases of matter are in-
trinsically quantum mechanical and have a rather subtle relationship with
the concept of quantum entanglement. There are two main categories of topo-
logically nontrivial quantum phases: 1) states characterized by patterns of
long-range quantum entanglement and possessing a so-called intrinsic topo-
logical order [448], and 2) states with short-range quantum entanglement (i.e.,
no topological order). Topologically ordered phases emerge in strongly inter-
acting many-body systems and are protected against any type of adiabatic
deformation of the Hamiltonian. Topological order is revealed by the degener-
acy of the ground state in systems deﬁned on compact (multiply connected)
manifolds (e.g., on a torus) and is characterized by the emergence of (bulk)
excitations with fractional statistics and fractional quantum numbers. The
standard example of topologically ordered quantum states is provided by the
fractional quantum Hall eﬀect (FQHE) [428]. By contrast, topologically non-
trivial states with short-range quantum entanglement are supported by both
interacting and noninteracting many-body systems and require the presence of
certain symmetries. These symmetry-protected short-range entangled states
are characterized by topological properties that are robust only against adia-
batic deformations of the Hamiltonian that preserve the symmetry and have
unique ground states on all closed manifolds. Typical examples of topologi-
cally nontrivial short-range entangled states include the quantum spin Hall ef-
fect [302], and the three dimensional topological insulators [211, 48]. Note that
the symmetry-protected topological states have the same symmetry as the
Hamiltonian, in contrast with the Landau symmetry breaking states, which
are also short-range entangled states, but are topologically trivial and break
the symmetry of the Hamiltonian.
In the next two chapters, we will return to the problem of classifying
topological quantum phases with details concerning various subclasses and
the criteria used in the classiﬁcation, including the characterization of several
topological invariants. The diagrams in Figure 6.1 (page 161) provide a quick
general idea about the basic structure of the topological quantum world.
A short-range entangled quantum state can be connected to a real space
direct product state through smooth local deformations. By contrast, the long-
range entangled states do not have this property. Note that this behavior
has no relation with the correlation length of local operators. For example, a
gapped spin liquid is a topologically ordered state characterized by long-range
entanglement and by exponentially decaying correlation functions for all local
operators, which makes diﬀerent topological phases locally indistinguishable.
By contrast, a Landau symmetry breaking state (e.g., a ferromagnet) has
short-range entanglement, but the correlation length of certain local operators
(e.g., spin) diverges. A useful theoretical tool for characterizing the entangle-
ment of a many-body quantum state is the entanglement entropy [260, 288].

116
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
This quantity can be deﬁned by dividing the system into complementary sub-
systems A and B and tracing out the degrees of freedom in B. Speciﬁcally, if
|Ψ⟩is the normalized ground state wave function and ρA = TrB|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ| is the
reduced density matrix for subsystem A, the entanglement entropy is deﬁned
as the von Neumann entropy
S = −Tr [ρA log ρA] .
(4.14)
The leading term in Eq. (4.14) is proportional to the area of subsystem A, a
property called the area law. However, the entanglement entropy of a topolog-
ically ordered state acquires a universal sub-leading contribution. For a disc
with circumference L the entanglement entropy has the form
S = αL −γ + O(L−1),
(4.15)
where α is a non-universal coeﬃcient and γ ̸= 0 is a universal constant that
(partially) characterizes the topologically ordered phase. Note that γ, also
called topological entanglement entropy, does not provide a unique criterion
for classifying topologically ordered states and that it vanishes in all short-
range entangled phases. However, the topological entanglement entropy clearly
discriminates between the two main classes of topological quantum states, i.e.,
the long-range and short-range entangled states.
The classiﬁcation of topologically ordered phases represents an outstand-
ing open question. On the other hand, signiﬁcant progress has been made in
understanding short-range entangled phases with symmetry-protected topo-
logical properties, particularly the topological phases of free fermions (i.e., the
topological insulators). We note that, in the presence of interactions, topolog-
ical phases with short-range entanglement, which can be viewed as general-
izations of the topological insulators, can be realized in fermionic systems as
well as bosonic and spin systems. An example of interacting short-range en-
tangled topological state is the Haldane phase of a spin S = 1 Heisenberg
chain [202]. We emphasize that all topological phases with short-range entan-
glement require symmetry protection. If the relevant symmetries are broken,
the phase can be adiabatically connected to a topologically trivial state that
can be expressed as a direct product in real space (i.e., an atomic insulator).
We also note that topological phases are often characterized as states with a
gapped bulk and a gapless boundary. However, gapless boundary modes are
always present only in noninteracting topologically nontrivial systems and are
not generically required in interacting systems.
In conclusion, we distinguish two main categories of topological quantum
states: (1) topologically ordered phases and (2) topological states with short-
range entanglement. Category (1) contains only (strongly) interacting systems
and its members (sometimes called topological phases) are characterized by
long-range entanglement, which results in a non-vanishing topological entan-
glement entropy, degenerate ground states for systems deﬁned on multiply
connected manifolds, and nontrivial bulk excitations. Typical examples are

Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Physics
■117
fractional quantum Hall ﬂuids and gapped spin liquids. Category (1) states
are robust against any type of perturbation and do not require symmetry
protection. However, in the presence of symmetry, each class of category (1)
states will be divided into distinct subclasses of so-called symmetry enriched
topological phases. Category (2) contains both interacting (e.g., the Haldane
phase of a spin-1 chain) and noninteracting systems (e.g., the topological
insulators). The category (2) states have vanishing topological entanglement
entropy, non-degenerate ground states, and, typically gapless boundary states.
These states — also called symmetry protected topological states — require
symmetry protection, i.e., they are robust only against perturbations that
preserve the symmetry of the Hamiltonian.
A few ﬁnal notes. We will use the term topological phases (or states) for
both category (1) and category (2) quantum systems. In the literature, the
term topological phase is sometimes used to speciﬁcally denote category (1)
phases. Topological order (intrinsic or without any qualiﬁcation) applies to
category (1) phases. Again, sometimes category (2) states are said to possess
symmetry protected topological order, but we will try to avoid this term. The
condition requiring the existence of a gap can be relaxed; in Weyl semimet-
als, for example, topological phases can exist in the absence of a bulk energy
gap. We will not discuss this type of quantum state, but only consider gapped
topological phases. Also, long-range entanglement is not a feature that charac-
terizes only the topologically ordered gapped phases; gapless spin liquids and
string-net condensates are also long-range entangled non-symmetry-breaking
phases. The larger family of non-symmetry-breaking phases are sometimes
said to possess quantum order. Intrinsic and symmetry-protected topological
orders are speciﬁc types of quantum orders.
4.5
TOPOLOGY AND EMERGENT PHYSICS
We end this chapter with a brief discussion about the potential impact of
topology on the physics of emergent behavior. Is there anything new that
topological quantum matter brings to the table? But, ﬁrst, what do we mean
by emergent physics? Consider, for example, a system of atoms that, at low-
enough temperature, condense and form an insulating crystal. The low-energy
physics of the crystal is governed by the longitudinal and transverse acoustic
phonons. We distinguish two levels: the microscopic level (L1), which can be
described in terms of “elementary” particles, e.g., electrons and, say, nuclei,
that obey the laws of quantum mechanics and interact via the Coulomb in-
teraction, and the “macroscopic” level (L2), which can be characterized in
terms of noninteracting phonons. The “elementary” particles of L2 and the
laws that govern them can be viewed as emergent phenomena. Using the laws
of L1 to solve the many-body problem and derive the “elementary” particles
and the “fundamental” laws of L2 (i.e., solving the Schr¨odinger equation for
the interacting many-body system) is a practical impossibility. On the other
hand, we know that the emergent behavior (i.e., the existence of low-energy

118
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
phonons) is a consequence of the fact that the L1 particles are organized in a
structure that breaks a continuous symmetry, which results in the emergence
of gapless Goldstone bosons.
This simple example can be interpreted in several diﬀerent registers, rang-
ing from “strong emergentism” (the physics at level L2 is fundamentally irre-
ducible to the properties of the L1 constituents; there are extra laws/principles
that do not operate at and do not originate from level L1) to “reductionism”
(the physics at level L2 is in principle determined by the fundamental laws
that govern L1 and can be derived from them; it may be diﬃcult to recon-
struct theoretically the phenomenology of L2 starting from the fundamental
principles, but there is nothing really “new” operating at L2). We will not
dwell on these interpretations or on the possible variations and nuances, nor
will we mention any of the fascinating philosophical implications. After all,
stepping into this territory may be a “lone theorist” temptation. Instead, let
us notice that one of the main diﬀerences between the two levels is that the
entities and the laws of L1 are simple, robust, and beautiful, while those of L2
may be simple, but not as robust and, consequently, not as beautiful as the
“fundamental” ones. This is where topological quantum matter comes into
the picture. Topological protection endows the low-energy quasiparticles of
a topologically ordered state with a robustness qualitatively similar to that
enjoyed by their “fundamental” counterparts. Moreover, while in the “Landau
world” the collective excitations (e.g., the phonons) are always scalar bosons,
the discovery of the fractional quantum Hall eﬀect and the subsequent devel-
opments have revealed other possibilities, such as elementary excitations with
fractional quantum numbers and fractional or non-Abelian statistics.
An intriguing proposal by Levin and Wen suggests the possibility of hav-
ing fermions and boson-mediated gauge interactions as emergent phenomena
in a purely bosonic long-range entangled system — the so-called string-net
condensed liquid [289]. In essence, one can start with a spin model character-
ized by interactions that i) allow strong ﬂuctuations of large nets formed by
intersecting and/or overlapping closed strings of spins and ii) inhibit local spin
ﬂips or the formation of open strings. The ﬂuctuations of closed string-nets
condensed in the ground state are gauge bosons, while the topological defects
associated with the ends of open strings are fermions carrying the charge of
the corresponding gauge ﬁeld. On a more speculative note, this suggests the
possibility that photons and electrons have a uniﬁed origin and represent the
low-energy excitations of a highly entangled vacuum. Then, maybe all “ele-
mentary” particles and the laws the govern their interactions are nothing but
emergent phenomena in a “vacuum” whose constituents are inaccessible bel-
low some extremely large energy scale. Ultimately, the standard model may
be just a phenomenological description of emerging low-energy behavior, but
this will remain an intriguing hypothesis as long as we do not have clear falsiﬁ-
able predictions and experimental access to the underlying microscopic reality.
Meanwhile, the wonders and mysteries of the topological quantum world await
closer to us in condensed matter systems, our “Universe in a box.”

C H A P T E R 5
Topological Insulators
and Superconductors
CONTENTS
5.1
Introduction ................................................
120
5.2
Symmetry classiﬁcation of generic non-interacting
Hamiltonians ...............................................
122
5.2.1
Time-reversal symmetry ...........................
122
5.2.2
Particle-hole and chiral symmetries ................
125
5.2.3
Classiﬁcation of random Hamiltonians ............
127
5.3
Topological classiﬁcation of band insulators and
superconductors ...........................................
129
5.3.1
The origin of topology in gapped non-interacting
systems
............................................
131
5.3.2
Classiﬁcation of topological insulators and
superconductors ...................................
134
5.4
Topological invariants: Chern numbers, winding numbers,
and Z2 invariants ..........................................
140
5.4.1
Hall conductance and the Chern number ..........
140
5.4.2
Chern numbers and winding numbers .............
142
5.4.3
The Z2 topological invariant .......................
147
T
HE CLASSIFICATION OF DISTINCT PHASES OF MATTER
is a central theme in condensed matter physics. A phase of matter can
be viewed as an equivalence class of physical states that share a certain set
of properties. In the case of topological quantum matter, these properties are
associated with topological invariants that take speciﬁc values for each equiva-
lence class. Perturbing a gapped state that corresponds to a given topological
phase (i.e., smoothly deforming the Hamiltonian of the system) does not aﬀect
the topological invariant, as long as the energy gap remains ﬁnite. The value
of this invariant changes only if the system undergoes a quantum phase tran-
sition, which is signaled by the collapse of the gap. Full topological protection
119

120
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
can only emerge in interacting systems and requires the presence of long-range
entanglement, which is at the origin of intrinsic topological order. However,
topological properties protected by symmetries emerge even in noninteracting
systems and, perhaps surprisingly, can be described within the framework of
good old band theory of solids. Systems belonging to this category are gener-
ically called topological insulators, after the class of materials that is largely
responsible for the recent surge in research activity on topological matter. In
addition, topological band theory considerations can also be applied to su-
perconductors (and superﬂuids), as described at the mean-ﬁeld level using
Bogoliubov–de Gennes theory. This chapter summaries the key ideas behind
the topological classiﬁcation of noninteracting systems and discusses the basic
properties of various classes of topological insulators and superconductors. For
in-depth discussions and related developments the reader is referred to a num-
ber of books [48, 402, 153] and review papers [211, 212, 357, 22] speciﬁcally
dedicated to this subject.
5.1
INTRODUCTION
Topological insulators (TIs) represent a subset of the set of non-interacting
insulating phases, which are equivalence classes of fermionic many-body quan-
tum states characterized by a bulk energy gap. According to the band theory
of solids, the insulating gap separates the occupied valence-band states from
the empty conduction-band states. The simplest example of an insulator, the
atomic insulator, is characterized by narrow, nearly ﬂat bands with energies
corresponding to the electronic spectrum of an isolated atom. Note that, in
general, the ground state properties of an insulator do not depend on the
core bands. Adding or subtracting a number of trivial core bands generates
an equivalent insulating state that belongs to the same phase as the original
system. With this in mind, we introduce the following equivalence relation
on the set of insulating states. Consider the insulating states A and B cor-
responding to the ground states of Hamiltonians HA and HB, respectively.
The two insulators are said to be topologically equivalent if (and only if) by
tuning HA one can continuously interpolate between the ground states A and
B (modulo trivial core bands) without closing the energy gap.
According to this deﬁnition, solid argon and solid xenon belong to the same
insulating phase. Moreover, these atomic insulators are topologically equiva-
lent with all the other conventional insulators and semiconductors, such as,
for example, silicon, as one can continuously interpolate (modulo trivial core
bands) from one state to another without closing the energy gap. Interpo-
lations are done by smoothly deforming the Hamiltonian of the system, for
example by changing the inter-atomic distance. We also note that conventional
insulators are topologically equivalent to the vacuum, which can be viewed as
an insulator characterized by a conduction band (electrons), a valence band
(positrons), and a large energy gap (associated with pair production).

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■121
Are there any other classes of insulating states? In other words, are there
non-interacting gapped electronic states that are not topologically equiva-
lent to the vacuum? The answer is yes, provided we introduce a constraint
in the deﬁnition of topological equivalence. Speciﬁcally, instead of interpo-
lating between two states by considering arbitrary continuous deformations
of the Hamiltonian, we require these deformations to preserve certain sym-
metries. Then, preserving time-reversal symmetry, for example, one cannot
continuously interpolate between a quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulator and a
trivial two-dimensional insulator without closing the energy gap, i.e., without
going through a quantum phase transition. However, the two states can be
continuously connected without closing the gap if deformations of the Hamil-
tonian that break time-reversal symmetry are allowed. Hence, with a deﬁ-
nition of topological equivalence that includes the requirement of preserving
time-reversal symmetry, the QSH insulator and the trivial two-dimensional
insulator belong to diﬀerent topological classes. In fact, the QSH state is an
example of a topological insulator, i.e., a non-interacting symmetry-protected
topological state. In general, TIs are deﬁned as the non-interacting insulating
phases representing the symmetry-protected equivalence classes topologically
distinct from the trivial insulator (i.e., the atomic insulator or the vacuum).
Below we discuss the main ideas behind the classiﬁcation of topological
insulators and superconductors. The basic question is the following. Given a
certain spatial dimension and a set of generic symmetries (e.g., time-reversal
and particle-hole symmetries), how many distinct topological phases (i.e.,
symmetry-protected equivalence classes) are there? Before presenting the ba-
sic ideas and the main results, let us make a few observations.
First, one can view a superconductor (SC), described at the mean-ﬁeld
level, as a gapped system of non-interacting fermionic (Bogoliubov) quasi-
particles endowed with particle-hole (or charge conjugation) symmetry. Con-
sequently, the scheme used for classifying band insulators can also be used
for the classiﬁcation of superconductors. In particular, two superconducting
states are said to be topologically equivalent if and only if one can smoothly
interpolate between them (modulo certain trivial core bands) without closing
the superconducting quasiparticle gap and while preserving the appropriate
symmetries (e.g., the particle-hole symmetry).
Second, all TIs and topological SCs are characterized by topologically pro-
tected gapless boundary modes. Since this feature is generic, it is often used
in the deﬁnition of topological insulators (superconductors). More speciﬁcally,
these are deﬁned as gapped phases of non-interacting fermions characterized
by gapless boundary modes that are robust against any symmetry-preserving
perturbation of the Hamiltonian that does not close the bulk gap.
Third, since preserving certain symmetries of the Hamiltonian is a key re-
quirement in the deﬁnition of topological equivalence, classifying the topolog-
ical insulators and superconductors is a twofold task. First, one has to classify
the single-particle Hamiltonians in terms of the presence or absence of general
symmetries, such as time-reversal and particle-hole symmetries. Then, within

122
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
each of the symmetry classes, one has to determine the topologically distinct
sectors corresponding to the equivalence classes of insulating quantum ground
states. Diﬀerent equivalence classes (i.e., topological phases) are characterized
by diﬀerent values of a suitable topological invariant (e.g., the Chern number
in the case of the integer quantum Hall eﬀect). Note that, in view of the bulk-
boundary correspondence mentioned above, one can alternatively characterize
the topological properties of a system by looking at its boundary states, which
holographically reﬂect the topological features of the bulk.
5.2
SYMMETRY CLASSIFICATION OF GENERIC
NON-INTERACTING HAMILTONIANS
The topological properties of the ground state of a gapped Hamiltonian char-
acterized by certain symmetries are not aﬀected by perturbations that pre-
serve these symmetries, as long as the gap remains ﬁnite. Since we are partic-
ularly interested in topological features that are robust against disorder, we
need to identify the symmetry classes of Hamiltonians that are not transla-
tion invariant. Furthermore, in the presence of “ordinary” symmetries, which
are represented by unitary operators that commute with the Hamiltonian,
the (ﬁrst-quantized) Hamiltonian can be written in a block-diagonal form.
The symmetry classiﬁcation that concerns us refers to these “irreducible”
blocks. The symmetry classes are determined by the presence or absence of
spatial dimensionality and by the presence or absence of time-reversal and
charge conjugation (or particle-hole) symmetries. Speciﬁcally, following Zim-
bauer and Altland [485, 17], there are ten distinct symmetry classes of random
matrices, which can be interpreted as ﬁrst-quantized Hamiltonians of certain
non-interacting fermionic systems. Below, we review the main implications of
having time-reversal (TR) or particle-hole (PH) symmetries and summarize
the generic properties of the ten symmetry classes of non-interacting Hamil-
tonians.
5.2.1
Time-reversal symmetry
Time-reversal (TR) symmetry is a fundamental property of a system associ-
ated with the invariance of the Hamiltonian with respect to a time reversal
transformation, T : t −→−t, i.e., reversing the arrow of time. Formally, TR
invariance is expressed by the condition
[H, T ] = 0.
(5.1)
This implies that, if |ψ⟩is an eigenstate of H with energy E, then T |ψ⟩is
also an eigenstate of H corresponding to the same eigenvalue E. The answer
to the question regarding whether or not |ψ⟩and T |ψ⟩represent the same
physical state depends on the spin carried by the constituents of the many-
body system described by H. Before discussing this point, let us notice that
the TR operator commutes with the position operator, T ˆxT −1 = ˆx, but ﬂips

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■123
the sign of the momentum operator, T ˆpT −1 = −ˆp. Consequently, we have
T [ˆx, ˆp]T −1 = −[ˆx, ˆp], or T iT −1 = −i, which shows that T is proportional to
the complex conjugation operator K. Moreover, one can show that the scalar
product of any two states |φ⟩and |ψ⟩transforms under TR into its complex
conjugate, ⟨φ′|ψ′⟩= ⟨φ|ψ⟩∗, where |φ′⟩= T |φ⟩and |ψ′⟩= T |ψ⟩. We conclude
that T is an anti-unitary operator. In general, we can represent an anti-unitary
operator as the product of a unitary operator and the complex conjugation
operator. Explicitly, we have
T = UtK,
(5.2)
with U †
t = U −1
t
. Note that applying the TR operator twice should leave the
system invariant, i.e., we have T 2 = UtKUtK = UtU ∗
t = eiφ. This implies
that Ut = eiφU T
t = eiφ(eiφU T
t )T = e2iφUt, which means that eiφ = ±1 and,
consequently, the TR operator squares to plus or minus the identity, T 2 = ±1.
Consider now the simple case of a spinless particle in a quantum state
determined by the Schr¨odinger equation iℏ∂
∂t|ψ(t)⟩= H|ψ(t)⟩. Under TR we
have t −→−t, H −→T HT −1 and |ψ(t)⟩−→T |ψ(−t)⟩. To identify a suit-
able representation of the TR operator, it is convenient to deﬁne the complex
conjugation operator K = K−1 with respect to the position representation.
In this “conventional” representation the Hamiltonian H and the state vec-
tor |ψ(t)⟩are represented by the operator H(x, p) (with p = −i ∂
∂x) and the
wave function ψ(x, t), respectively. Also, the complex conjugation K acts on
a position eigenvector as K|x⟩= |x⟩and on a generic state vector as
K|ψ⟩=
Z
dx ψ∗(x)|x⟩.
(5.3)
Using this deﬁnition, it is straightforward to show that KˆxK−1 = ˆx and
K ˆpK−1 = −ˆp. For example, the second equality can be obtained by acting
with the transformed momentum operator on an arbitrary position eigenvec-
tor. Explicitly, we have K ˆpK−1|x⟩= K ˆp|x⟩= K

−iℏ∂
∂x|x⟩

= iℏ∂
∂x|x⟩=
−p|x⟩for any |x⟩∈H. Since the eigenvectors |x⟩represent a basis of the
Hilbert space H, we conclude that K ˆpK−1 = −ˆp. Consequently, for a spinless
particle we can represent the TR operator using the complex conjugation op-
erators deﬁned with respect to the position representation as T = K. Indeed,
we have KH(x, p)K−1 = H(x, −p) and Kψ(x, −t) = ψ∗(x, −t), which rep-
resent the canonical relations for the TR transformed Hamiltonian and wave
function, respectively. Note that for spinless particles we have T 2 = K2 = 1,
i.e., the TR operator squares to the identity operator.
The “conventional” representation discussed above is not the only possible
representation. It is illustrative to consider the alternative representation K′ of
the complex conjugation operator based on a discrete basis |µ⟩. For example,
let us assume that the state vectors |µ⟩correspond to localized Wannier-type
states associated with a particle moving in the presence of a periodic potential.
Then, the single-particle Hamiltonian is represented by the N × N matrix
Hµν = ⟨µ|H|ν⟩, where the µ = (i, α) and ν = (j, β) represent combined labels

124
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
for the lattice sites i and j and (possibly) some additional orbital degrees of
freedom (α and β). The complex conjugation operator acts as
K′|ψ⟩= K′ X
ν
ψν|ν⟩=
X
ν
ψ∗
ν|ν⟩.
(5.4)
It is straightforward to show that Uµν = ⟨µ|K|ν⟩=
R
dx ⟨µ|x⟩⟨ν|x⟩is a sym-
metric unitary matrix, U = U T = (U ∗)−1. Hence, in this new representation
we have T = UK′. Note that the property T 2 = UU ∗= 1 holds, i.e., for spin-
less particles the TR operator squares to the identity operator (independent
of representation). In fact, one can show that T 2 = 1 for any quantum system
with integer total spin.
Next, let us consider the case of a spin- 1
2 particle. In addition to the
transformations discussed above, the time-reversal operation ﬂips the spin,
S −→T ST −1 = −S, where S = ℏ
2(σx, σy, σz) is the spin operator expressed
in terms of Pauli matrices σα. The change in the spin direction is equivalent to
a rotation around an arbitrary axis — say, for concreteness, the y-axis — by
an angle π, which is represented by the operator exp[−i
ℏπSy] = −iσy. With
this choice, the TR operator for a spin- 1
2 particle becomes
T = −iσyK.
(5.5)
Indeed, one can easily check that T ST −1 = σyS∗σy = −S. Note that in
this case T 2 = −iσyiσ∗
yK2 = −1, where “1” designates the identity matrix.
More generally, one can show that the TR operator of a quantum system with
half-integer total spin squares to minus the identity operator.
For a particle moving in a periodic potential, translation symmetry allows
us to block-diagonalize the Hamiltonian. For a block labeled by the crystal
momentum k, i.e., the Bloch Hamiltonian H(k), time-reversal invariance is
expressed by the condition
T H(k)T −1 = UtH∗(k)U −1
t
= H(−k),
(5.6)
where T 2 = Ut(U T
t )−1 = 1 for spinless particles (or systems with integer
total spin) and T 2 = −1 for spin- 1
2 particles (or half-integer total spin). If
ψ(k) is an eigenstate of H(k) with energy E(k), T ψ(k) is an eigenstate of
H(−k) with energy E(−k) = E(k). If k and −k are distinct momenta, TR
symmetry implies that E(k) is (at least) double degenerate. However, for TR
invariant momenta kT R, such as (0, 0, 0) or ( π
a, 0, 0) (for a cubic lattice), i.e.,
when kT R and −kT R diﬀer by a reciprocal lattice vector, the states ψ(kT R)
and T ψ(kT R) are not necessarily distinct. Speciﬁcally, for a spinless system
with T 2 = 1 the state with energy E(kT R) is, generally, nondegenerate. In
particular, the system can have a single band with E(k) = E(−k) and a
minimum (or maximum) at k = kT R. By contrast, the condition T 2 = −1
ensures that E(k) is at least double degenerate for any value of the momentum.
This property is a consequence of the so-called Kramecs theorem, which states
that the ground state of a TR invariant quantum system with an T 2 = −1

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■125
(i.e., a system with half-integer total spin) is at least twofold degenerate.
Consequently, in the presence of TR symmetry, the spectrum of a spin- 1
2
particle is necessarily (at least) double degenerate, which, in the presence of
translation invariance, results in the twofold degeneracy of E(k). Furthermore,
the ground state of any (noninteracting or interacting) TR invariant system
with odd number of electrons, i.e., with half-integer total spin, is at least
double degenerate. Kramers’ theorem is a direct consequence of the property
T 2 = −1. Indeed, let |ψ⟩represent an energy E eigenstate of a TR invariant
Hamiltonian that describes a system with half-integer total spin. The state
T |ψ⟩will also be an eigenstate with the same energy E. Since T is anti-
unitary, we have ⟨ψ|T ψ⟩= ⟨T ψ|T 2ψ⟩∗= −⟨ψ|T ψ⟩= 0, i.e., |ψ⟩and T |ψ⟩
are orthogonal. Hence, the energy level E is (at least) twofold degenerate.
5.2.2
Particle-hole and chiral symmetries
The other symmetry that plays a critical role in the classiﬁcation of single-
particle Hamiltonians is the particle-hole (PH) (or charge conjugation) sym-
metry. In particle physics, charge conjugation is a transformation that changes
a particle into its antiparticle. For example, in the case of a system described
by the Dirac equation [126], charge conjugation transforms a spinor ψ(x) that
describes the motion of a particle with charge e and mass m0 in a potential
Aµ(x) into the spinor ψc(x) describing a particle with charge −e and mass
m0 moving in the same potential Aµ(x).
In condensed matter physics, PH can emerge as an approximative symme-
try between electrons (i.e., occupied states above the Fermi level) and holes
(empty states below the Fermi level) that holds within a certain energy win-
dow. Within this energy range, the system can be modeled using a Dirac-type
Hamiltonian, as, for example, in the case of graphene [79]. Furthermore, PH
symmetry is an intrinsic property of the mean ﬁeld theory of superconduc-
tivity. The single-particle s-wave pairing mean ﬁeld Hamiltonian — the so-
called Bogoliubov - de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian — has the generic form
H = 1
2 ˆΨ†HBdG ˆΨ, where
HBdG =

H0
−iσy∆
iσy∆∗
−HT
0

(5.7)
is the (ﬁrst quantized) BdG Hamiltonian, while the four-component Nambu
spinor ˆΨ† = ( ˆψ†, ˆψ) = ( ˆψ†
↑, ˆψ†
↓, ˆψ↑, ˆψ↓) represents the (second quantized) ﬁeld
operator and ∆= ⟨ˆψ↑, ˆψ↓⟩is the pair potential. One can interpret HBdG as
the Hamiltonian that governs the dynamics of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles,
iℏ∂
∂tΨ = HΨ, with Ψ = (u, v)T = (u↑, u↓, v↑, v↓)T , where u(x, t) and v(x, t)
are the particle and hole components, respectively. Note that the BdG theory
contains an intrinsic particle-hole redundancy, in the sense that each eigen-
function ΨE with E > 0 has a negative energy correspondent, Ψ−E = τxΨ∗
E,
where the Pauli matrix τx acts on the particle-hole space and switches the
electron and hole components. At the level of the BdG Hamiltonian, this

126
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
particle-hole symmetry can be expressed in terms of the charge conjugation
operator C = τxK as the condition
CHBdGC−1 = τxH∗
BdGτx = −HBdG.
(5.8)
The charge conjugation operator C is anti-unitary and squares to +1. In
the presence of SU(2) spin symmetry, we have H0 = diag{h0, h0} and
the Hamiltonian (5.7) can be rearranged into block-diagonal form, HBdG =
diag{H+, H−}, with the blocks
H± =

h0
±∆
±∆∗
−hT
0

(5.9)
acting on (u↑, v↓) and (u↓, v↑), respectively. In this case, the charge conjugation
operator can be represented as C = iτyK and we have C2 = −1.
To summarize, the time-reversal and particle-hole transformations can be
represented by anti-unitary operators that square to either +1 or −1. We
describe a non-interacting fermionic system by the single-particle Hamiltonian
H, which represents a pN ×pN hermitian matrix corresponding to N site and
orbital degrees of freedom and p spin and particle-hole degrees of freedom. If
the system is translation-invariant, we describe it using the Bloch Hamiltonian
H(k), which is a pM ×pM hermitian matrix, with M representing the number
of orbital degrees of freedom. The time-reversal operation is represented by
T = UtK, with K being the complex conjugation operator and Ut a pN ×
pN (or pM × pM, with translation invariance) unitary matrix. Similarly, the
charge-conjugation operation is represented by C = UcK, with Uc being a
pN×pN (pM×pM) unitary matrix. The presence of time-reversal and particle
hole symmetries is expressed by the conditions
UtH∗U −1
t
= +H,
UtU ∗
t = T 2 = ±1,
(5.10a)
UcH∗U −1
c
= −H,
UcU ∗
c = C2 = ±1,
(5.10b)
where 1 represents the pN ×pN unit matrix. For a translation invariant system
these conditions become
UtH∗(k)U −1
t
= +H(−k),
UtU ∗
t = T 2 = ±1,
(5.11a)
UcH∗(k)U −1
c
= −H(−k),
UcU ∗
c = C2 = ±1,
(5.11b)
where all quantities are now pM ×pM matrices. Finally, we note that the pres-
ence of TR symmetry implies Kramers degeneracy (for half-integer spin) and,
for translation invariant systems, a symmetric spectrum with E(k) = E(−k).
In addition, PH symmetry implies an energy spectrum that is symmetric
about zero. In particular, every state with wave vector k and positive energy
E+(k) > 0 has a correspondent at −k with energy E−(−k)=−E+(k).
When the Hamiltonian has both TR symmetry and PH symmetry, the
product S = T · C corresponds to the unitary operation UtU ∗
c acting on H.

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■127
Note, however, that S does not represent an “ordinary” symmetry since it
does not commute but rather anti-commutes with the Hamiltonian,
SHS−1 = UtU ∗
c H U T
c U −1
t
= −H,
S2 = 1.
(5.12)
This unitary operation is called chiral or sublattice (SL) symmetry and rep-
resents an additional key ingredient for the classiﬁcation of the Hamiltonian
blocks. Similarly to PH symmetry, the presence of SL symmetry implies a sym-
metric spectrum. In particular, every state with wave vector k and positive en-
ergy E+(k) > 0 has a negative energy correspondent with E−(k) = −E+(k).
It is worth noting that the presence of two chiral symmetries S and S′, i.e.,
two operations that satisfy Eq. (5.12), allows us to construct the conserved
quantity SS′, [H, SS′] = 0. This implies that H can be block-diagonalized
and that we can apply our classiﬁcation scheme to each block. Consequently,
it is enough to consider only one SL-type symmetry. Similarly, we can assume
without loss of generality that there is a single TR-type operator T and a
single PH-type operator C. As in the case of SL-type symmetry, the presence
of two charge-conjugation (or time-reversal) operations allows us to construct
the unitary symmetry operator Uc1U ∗
c2 (or Ut1U ∗
t2) that commutes with the
Hamiltonian, which, consequently, can be block-diagonalized. Also, we note
that the presence of both TR and PH symmetries automatically implies the
presence of SL symmetry, while the presence of TR (PH) symmetry and the
absence of PH (TR) symmetry automatically implies the absence of chiral-
ity. However, the absence of both TR and PH symmetries allows for chiral
symmetry to be either present or absent.
5.2.3
Classification of random Hamiltonians
After these considerations, it is easy to understand the basic idea behind the
symmetry classiﬁcation of generic single-particle Hamiltonians according to
their behavior under time-reversal symmetry (TRS), charge-conjugation (or
particle-hole) symmetry (PHS), and chiral (or sublattice) symmetry (SLS).
There are three distinct possibilities for a system to respond to the time-
reversal operation: i) no time-reversal invariance (TRS = 0), ii) time-reversal
invariance with a TR operator T
that squares to the identity operator
(TRS = +1), and iii) time-reversal invariance with a TR operator T that
squares to minus the identity operator (TRS = −1). Similarly, there are three
distinct possibilities for a system to respond to the particle-hole operation,
which we denote by PHS = 0 (no symmetry), PHS = +1 (PH symmetry
with C2 = +1), and PHS = −1 (PH symmetry with C2 = −1). Hence, there
are 3 × 3 = 9 distinct ways for the Hamiltonian H to respond to the com-
bination of time-reversal and charge conjugation (particle-hole) symmetries.
In addition, a system with TRS = 0 and PHS = 0 may possess chiral (sub-
lattice) symmetry (SLS = 1) or not (SLS = 0). Consequently, there are ten
symmetry classes corresponding to the distinct ways in which single-particle
Hamiltonians behave under TRS, PHS, and SLS. The existence of precisely

128
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
TABLE 5.1: The ten symmetry classes of single-particle Hamiltonians classi-
ﬁed according to their behavior under time-reversal symmetry (TRS), particle-
hole symmetry (PHS), and chiral (sublattice) symmetry (SLS)
Cartan label
TRS
PHS
SLS
Standard classes
A (unitary)
0
0
0
(Wigner–Dyson)
AI (orthogonal)
+1
0
0
AII (symplectic)
−1
0
0
Chiral classes
AIII (chiral unitary)
0
0
1
(sublattice)
BDI (chiral orthogonal)
+1
+1
1
CII (chiral symplectic)
−1
−1
1
BdG classes
D
0
+1
0
C
0
−1
0
DIII
−1
+1
1
CI
+1
−1
1
ten symmetry classes, as listed in Table 5.1, is a fundamental result due to
Altland and Zirnbauer [17, 485]. This completes an earlier classiﬁcation done
by Wigner and Dyson [131] in the context of random matrix theory, which
contains the unitary, orthogonal, and symplectic symmetry classes.
The ten generic symmetry classes of single-particle Hamiltonians provide
the framework for the classiﬁcation scheme of topological insulators and super-
conductors, as we will discuss in the next section. These classes are typically
grouped in three categories, i.e., standard (Wigner–Dyson), chiral, and BdG
classes, as shown in Table 5.1. Note, however, that classes CI and DIII are
closely related to the chiral classes, since they are characterized by SLS = 1.
Furthermore, in certain conditions a Hamiltonian that belongs to class A or
class AIII can be thought of as a BdG superconductor. Indeed, consider a
superconductor described by a BdG Hamiltonian that is invariant under spin
rotations about the z axis, [HBdG, Sz] = 0. In the presence of this U(1) sym-
metry, one can show [87] that, up to a term proportional to the identity matrix,
the (second quantized) Hamiltonian can be written in the form
H = ( ˆψ†
↑, ˆψ↓) H
 ˆψ↑
ˆψ†
↓
!
,
H =
 h↑
∆
∆†
−hT
↓

,
(5.13)
where h†
σ = hσ. Without further constraints, H is a member of the unitary
symmetry class (class A). A spinful 2D chiral p ± ip wave superconductor
with an order parameter ∆(k) = ∆0(kx + iky) represents a speciﬁc physical
realization of this class. If we impose the additional constraints ∆† = ∆and
hT
↓= h↑, H becomes a member of the chiral unitary class (AIII). The chiral
symmetry S is represented by the Pauli matrix ry associated with the spin-up

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■129
particle – spin-down hole space and we have ryHry = −H and r2
y = 1. The
spinful p wave superconductor is a speciﬁc physical realization of this class.
As a ﬁnal remark, let us emphasize the relation between the ten symmetry
classes of single-particle Hamiltonians and the compact symmetric spaces (of
arbitrarily large dimension) identiﬁed by ´Elie Cartan in 1926. More specif-
ically, if H is a member of a certain symmetry class, the quantum me-
chanical time-evolution operator exp[itH] is an element of the symmetric
space designated by the corresponding Cartan label. The compact symmet-
ric spaces consist of the orthogonal, unitary, and symplectic groups, O(N),
U(N), and Sp(2N), respectively, as well as cosets,1 such as U(N)/O(N) or
U(N +M)/U(N)×U(M) [217]. If, for example, the system has no symmetry,
(TRS, PHS, SLS) = (0, 0, 0), H is a generic N ×N hermitian matrix and, con-
sequently, exp[itH] will be an element of the unitary group U(N), which is a
symmetric space corresponding to the Cartan label A. Imposing time-reversal
symmetry, e.g., for spinless particles (TRS = +1), results in the existence of
a basis in which H is represented by a real symmetric N × N matrix. The
corresponding time-evolution operator is an element of the coset U(N)/O(N),
the symmetric space with the Cartan label AI. Similar considerations apply
for the remaining symmetry classes [299].
5.3
TOPOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION OF BAND INSULATORS
AND SUPERCONDUCTORS
In the previous section we have classiﬁed the Hamiltonians of non-interacting
fermion systems according to their behavior under certain generic symme-
try operations. Consider now a d-dimensional fermionic system with speciﬁed
symmetry properties that is characterized by the (ﬁrst quantized) Hamilto-
nian H belonging to the appropriate symmetry class. In general, H possesses
either a gapless or a gapped ground state. The question that we address is the
following: given the symmetry class of H and the spatial dimension d, how
many distinct gapped phases (i.e., insulating or superconducting) are there?
First, let us clarify the expression “distinct gapped phases.” As we already
mentioned in Section 5.1, we deﬁne two gapped states as topologically equiv-
alent if (and only if) they can be adiabatically connected without closing the
gap (up to the addition of a number of trivial bands). The “adiabatic con-
nection” that deﬁnes this equivalence relation involves only deformations of
the Hamiltonian that preserve its symmetry. The resulting equivalence classes
are precisely the “distinct gapped phases” we want to identify and classify.
Assume that the Hamiltonian H is parameterized by two sets of parameters,
{p1, p2, . . . , pn} and {q1, q2, . . . , qm}, so the H(p1, . . . , pn; 0, . . . , 0) belongs to
a given symmetry class for arbitrary values of {pi}, but corresponds to some
1If H is a subgroup of G and g is an element of G, we deﬁne a (left) coset of H in G
as gH = {gh|h ∈H}. Note that any two cosets g1H and g2H are either equal (as sets) or
disjoint. We deﬁne G/H as set of all (left) cosets. Also, we deﬁne the index of H in G as
the number of distinct cosets of H in G.

130
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
p1
p1
p1
pn
pn
pn
A
B
X
…
…
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 5.1: Schematic topological phase diagram in the parameter space
{p1, . . . , pn} of the Hamiltonian. White domains and gray regions/lines corre-
spond to gapped and gapless ground states, respectively. Two Hamiltonians
that belong to the same connected region Φν can be continuously deformed
into each other without closing the gap, while Hamiltonians from distinct re-
gions, e.g., HA and HB in panel (b), can only be connected by going through a
quantum phase transition associated with a vanishing gap (e.g., point X). (a)
All insulators are topologically trivial. (b) Two distinct phases labeled by a
Z2 topological invariant. (c) Gapped phases with Z topological classiﬁcation.
other class if any of the parameters qj is nonzero. In other words, {qj} param-
eterize perturbations that break the symmetry of the Hamiltonian. We deﬁne
the equivalence classes of gapped ground states (i.e., the distinct insulating
and superconducting phases) under the condition qj = 0, with 1 ≤j ≤m.
Anticipating the result, let us note that there are three generic possibil-
ities characterizing the structure of the equivalence classes, i.e., the phase
diagram of topological band insulators and SCs. More speciﬁcally, for any
given spatial dimension d, the topological phase diagram of a system described
by H(p1, . . . , pn; 0, . . . , 0) will correspond to one of the situations illustrated
schematically in Figure 5.1. Panel (a) corresponds to the situation when all
possible gapped ground states can be continuously connected without closing
the gap. In this case, there is a single equivalence class (the trivial insulating
phase Φ0) and all gapped states are equivalent to the atomic insulator (or
the vacuum). Panel (b) illustrates the case when two distinct gapped phases
are possible: Φ0, which corresponds to the trivial insulator/superconductor,
and Φ1, which includes all gapped ground states that cannot be continuously
connected with the Φ0 states without closing the gap. For example, by varying
the parameter p1 the system can be driven from A ∈Φ1 to B ∈Φ0 through
the gapless state X, which corresponds to a topological phase transition. As
we will discuss below, the two phases are labeled by a Z2 topological invariant,
i.e., a quantity that takes one value (e.g., ν = 0) for all the states in Φ0 and
another value (e.g., ν = 1) for all the states belonging to the other equivalence
class. The quantum spin Hall states (in 2D) and the 3D topological insulators
are speciﬁc examples of Φ1-type phases. The third possibility is illustrated in
panel (c). In this case, there is an inﬁnite number of equivalence classes (i.e.,
distinct gapped phases) that can be labeled by a Z topological invariant, i.e.,

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■131
a quantity that takes a speciﬁc integer value for all the states belonging to
a given equivalence class (e.g., ν = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . ). Again, the system can be
driven from one phase to another only through topological phase transitions
characterized by a vanishing energy gap. The best-known example of Z-type
gapped phases are the integer quantum Hall states.
In the remainder of this section we ﬁrst discuss the origin of topology in
band insulators (superconductors), then we sketch the main ideas behind the
topological classiﬁcation of band insulators and superconductors by focusing
on one of the possible equivalent approaches, the bulk-boundary correspon-
dence. We close with a discussion of some of the caveats and implications of
this topological classiﬁcation.
5.3.1
The origin of topology in gapped non-interacting systems
To understand the key elements that lead to the appearance of topological
properties in insulators (and SCs), it is instructive to begin with the trans-
lationally invariant case. In the presence of translation invariance, a band
insulator can be described in terms of Bloch states satisfying the eigenvalue
equation
H(k)|uak⟩= Ea(k)|uak⟩,
(5.14)
where the momentum k takes values inside the Brillouin zone (BZ) and a
labels diﬀerent bands. The Fermi level EF lies inside an energy gap that
separates the ﬁlled (valence) bands from the empty (conduction) bands, as
shown schematically in Figure 5.2. The many-body ground state of the system
is determined by the ﬁlled Bloch states; hence it corresponds to the map
k −→P(k) from the BZ to the space of projector operators
P(k) =
(ﬁlled)
X
a
|uak⟩⟨uak|.
(5.15)
To better capture the bare bones of the underlying topological structure, it is
convenient to introduce the operator
Q(k) = 1 −2P(k),
(5.16)
where 1 denotes the identity operator. The Q operator, also called the “Q
matrix” or the “projector,” has the following properties
Q† = Q,
Q2 = 1,
Tr[Q] = m −n,
(5.17)
where m and n represent the number of empty and occupied bands, respec-
tively. The Q matrix has n negative eigenvalues, λν = −1, and m positive
eigenvalues, λν = +1. Note that Q(k), which can be viewed as a “simpliﬁed
Hamiltonian” having the same ground state as the original Hamiltonian, can
be obtained by continuously deforming H without closing the gap (Figure
5.2).

132
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
k
k
k
E(k)
(a)
(b)
(c)
E(k)
EF
(k)
FIGURE 5.2: (a) Schematic band structure of a band insulator represented
by a 4 × 4 Hamiltonian H(k) (full lines). Adding two trivial bands (dashed
lines) results in a 6 × 6 Hamiltonian H′(k) that describes the same insulating
phase. (b) Spectrum of the reduced Hamiltonian Q(k) obtained by continu-
ously deforming H (or H′). (c) Gapless spectrum associated with a quantum
phase transition, e.g., point X in Figure 5.1(b).
Consider now a band insulator in the symmetry class A (i.e., no additional
constraints imposed on the Hamiltonian) so that the Hamiltonian H is rep-
resented by a generic n + m Hermitian matrix. Consequently, the simpliﬁed
Hamiltonian Q is represented by the unitary matrix constructed using the
set of n + m eigenvectors of H, Q = {−φ1, . . . , −φn, φn+1, . . . , φn+m}T , each
eigenvector φν being an (n + m)-dimensional vector. Since rotations within
the degenerate subspaces spanned by the ﬁlled and the empty states do not
change the physics, there is a natural gauge symmetry represented by block
diagonal unitary matrices that are elements of U(n) × U(m). Consequently,
the simpliﬁed Hamiltonian is an element of the coset U(n+m)/U(n)×U(m),
which is also called a Grassmannian and denoted Gn,n+m(C),
Q ∈U(n + m)/U(n) × U(m).
(5.18)
Coming back to our original question concerning the existence of inequiva-
lent phases, we note that answering it amounts to ﬁnding the equivalence
classes of maps k −→Q(k) from the Brillouin zone to the Grassmannian,
Q : BZ −→Gn,n+m(C). Indeed, if two maps Q(k) and Q′(k) can be con-
tinuously deformed into each other, then the original Hamiltonians H(k) and
H′(k) can be continuously connected and, consequently, the corresponding
systems are in the same phase. Mathematically, the problem reduces to ﬁnd-
ing the homotopy group of the map k −→Q(k), i.e., πd[Gn,n+m(C)], where d
is the dimension of the Brillouin zone.
As a speciﬁc example, in two dimensions (d = 2) we have π2[Gn,n+m(C)] =
Z, which means that there is an inﬁnite set of inequivalent gapped phases (i.e.,
insulators that cannot be continuously deformed into each other without cross-
ing a quantum phase transition) labeled by an integer topological number, as
in Figure 5.1(c). The integer quantum Hall insulators, which are ground states
of a 2D Hamiltonian belonging to the symmetry class A (no TRS, PHS, or
SLS), are physical realizations of these distinct topological phases. Note that
the quantized Hall conductance σxy is proportional to the Z topological in-

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■133
variant (see Section 5.4). If instead we consider the three-dimensional case
(d = 3), the homotopy group π3[Gn,n+m(C)] = {1} is the trivial group con-
sisting of only one element. This means that all the maps can be continuously
deformed into each other, i.e., in d = 3 spatial dimensions there is only one
phase (the trivial insulator) in symmetry class A, as in Figure 5.1(a).
Next, let us impose some additional discrete symmetry on the Hamilto-
nian. For example, let us assume that the system has chiral symmetry, which
means that H belongs to the symmetry class AIII (see Table 5.1). In a system
deﬁned on a bipartite lattice, this chiral symmetry can be realized as a sublat-
tice symmetry that is represented by the Pauli matrix λz associated with the
sublattice degrees of freedom and we have λzHλz = −H. It is straightforward
to show that, as a consequence, H takes a block oﬀ-diagonal form when repre-
sented using a local basis with the ﬁrst n entries corresponding to sublattice
A and the other n to sublattice B. Furthermore, in this basis we have
Q(k) =

0
q(k)
q†(k)
0

,
with qq† = q†q = 1.
(5.19)
For Hamiltonians in the symmetry class AIII, q(k) are arbitrary unitary ma-
trices, i.e., elements of the unitary group U(n). Hence, the number of inequiv-
alent phases is given by the homotopy group of the map q : BZ −→U(n).
In two dimensions, for example, there are no topologically nontrivial phases,
π2[U(n)] = {1}. By contrast, in d = 3 there is an inﬁnite sequence of distinct
phases indexed by an integer topological invariant,2 π3[U(n)] = Z. Finally,
we note that for Hamiltonians in symmetry classes other than A and AIII,
the matrix Q(k) (or the oﬀ-diagonal block q(k) if SLS= 1) has to satisfy ad-
ditional conditions. For example, in the symplectic class (AII), the projector
Q(k) ∈G2n,2n+2m(C) has to satisfy the TRS condition σyQ∗(k)σy = Q(−k).
Again, identifying topologically distinct phases amounts to determining Q
maps that cannot be continuously deformed into each other. However, be-
cause of the additional condition, the number of inequivalent Q maps cannot
be obtained directly from the homotopy group of the Grassmannian and one
has to use a diﬀerent strategy, as discussed below.
Let us summarize. Two gapped states are deﬁned as equivalent (i.e., be-
longing to the same phase) if the corresponding Hamiltonians (which are in
the same symmetry class) can be continuously deformed into each other with-
out closing the gap and while preserving the symmetry. Consequently, each
connected component Φν of the manifold Φ of gapped Hamiltonians corre-
sponds to a distinct phase (see Figure 5.1). Adding a number of trivial bands
generates an equivalent state that belongs to the same phase (see Figure 5.2).
To determine the topology of Φ in the presence of translation invariance, it is
convenient to continuously deform the Bloch Hamiltonian H(k) into the pro-
jector Q(k): the problem of ﬁnding inequivalent insulating phases amounts to
identifying how many diﬀerent maps k −→Q(k) there are that cannot be con-
2The explicit form of this invariant, called the winding number, is given in Section 5.4.

134
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
tinuously deformed into each other. In other words, one has to determine the
homotopy group of the map from the Brillouin zone to the space of projectors.
For Hamiltonians in symmetry class A, Q(k) is an element of the Grassman-
nian, Gn,n+m(C) and the relevant homotopy group is πd[Gn,n+m(C)], which
is the trivial group {1} for odd spatial dimensions and Z for d even. Con-
sequently, integer quantum Hall-type states exist only in spaces with even
dimensionality (e.g., d = 2). By contrast, for Hamiltonians in the chiral sym-
metry class AIII, the relevant homotopy group is πd[U(n)], which is {1} for d
even and Z for d odd. Adding time-reversal symmetry and/or charge conju-
gation symmetry imposes additional constraints on Q(k). A general strategy
for determining the homotopy classes is discussed below.
5.3.2
Classification of topological insulators and superconductors
There are several methods [258, 379, 389] for establishing the classiﬁcation of
noninteracting topological insulators and superconductors, in particular the
approach proposed by Kitaev [258] based on K-theory and the scheme pro-
posed by Schnyder et al. [389] that exploits the bulk-boundary correspondence.
Remarkably, all these methods, which are ultimately equivalent, establish a
link between the existence of distinct topological phases and the nontrivial
homotopy groups of symmetric spaces.
The K-theory classiﬁcation [258] is based on a systematic study of the
homotopical structure of gapped bulk Hamiltonians. Roughly speaking, the
key idea in topological K-theory is to classify vector bundles not just up
to a homotopy equivalence, but up to a stable equivalence, which essentially
means that, when comparing two objects, it is allowed to augment them by
(direct sum) trivial bundles. Consequently, bundles of diﬀerent rank, which
cannot be directly deformed into each other, can be in the same equivalence
class after augmentation. Physically, this corresponds to the addition of trivial
bands discussed above (see, for example, Figure 5.2). These trivial bands, e.g.,
those associated with inner atomic shells, always exist, but they are often
ignored when considering ﬁnite dimensional Hamiltonians. It is common to
have situations when two Hamiltonians cannot be continuously deformed into
each other, but such a deformation becomes possible after the augmentation
(i.e., addition of trivial bands). In these situations, the Hamiltonians must
physically describe the same phase.
Without going into technical details, we note that for each symmetry class
the zero-dimensional simpliﬁed Hamiltonian (5.16), basically Q(0), deﬁnes
a so-called classifying space. The “periodic table” of topological insulators
follows from the homotopy group of the classifying spaces and the insight that
it obeys a certain periodicity that originates from the Bott periodicity in K-
theory [62]. Remarkably, the classifying spaces are exactly the ten symmetric
spaces that appear in the symmetry classiﬁcation of generic Hamiltonians. For
example, in symmetry class A, i.e., for quantum mechanical systems with a
time evolution operator exp(itH) that is an element of the symmetric space

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■135
TABLE 5.2: The ten Cartan symmetric spaces in the context of i) basic quan-
tum mechanics, where they describe the time evolution operator exp(itH), ii)
K-theory, where they characterize the classifying spaces, and iii) NLσM ﬁeld
theories, where they describe the target spaces.
Time evolution
Classifying space
Fermionic replica
operator exp(itH)
NLσM target space
A
U(n)×U(n)/U(n)
U(n+m)/U(n)×U(m) U(2n)/U(n)×U(n)
AIII U(n+m)/U(n)×U(m) U(n)×U(n)/U(n)
U(n)×U(n)/U(n)
AI
U(n)/O(n)
O(n+m)/O(n)×O(m) Sp(2n)/Sp(n)×Sp(n)
BDI O(n+m)/O(n)×O(m) O(n)×O(n)/O(n)
U(2n)/Sp(2n)
D
O(n)×O(n)/O(n)
O(2n)/U(n)
O(2n)/U(n)
DIII SO(2n)/U(n)
U(2n)/Sp(2n)
O(n)×O(n)/O(n)
AII U(2n)/Sp(2n)
Sp(n+m)/Sp(n)×Sp(n) O(2n)/O(n)×O(n)
CII Sp(n+m)/Sp(n)×Sp(m)Sp(n)×Sp(n)/Sp(n)
U(n)/O(n)
C
Sp(2n)×Sp(2n)/Sp(2n) Sp(2n)/U(n)
Sp(2n)/U(n)
CI
Sp(2n)/U(n)
U(n)/O(n)
Sp(2n)×Sp(2n)/Sp(2n)
U(N)×U(N)/U(N), the reduced Hamiltonian Q(0) is, according to Eq. (5.18),
an element of the symmetric space VA = U(n + m)/U(n) × U(m). Similarly,
the classifying space associated with a class AIII Hamiltonian is VAIII =
U(N) × U(N)/U(N). The complete list is given in Table 5.2.
Having identiﬁed the classifying space for each Altland–Zirnbauer sym-
metry class, one can determine the number of equivalence classes (i.e., topo-
logically distinct phases) corresponding to a zero-dimensional Hamiltonian
H that belongs to a given symmetry class using the homotopy group π0(V )
of the corresponding classifying space V . Note that π0(V ) indexes the path-
connected subspaces of V , each subspace corresponding to a distinct phase.
For example, in symmetry class A we have π0(VA) = Z, i.e., there is an inﬁnite
number of d = 0 distinct phases classiﬁed by an integer topological invariant.
On the other hand, in symmetry class AIII π0(VAIII) = {1}, i.e., there is only
the trivial phase. The complete list of homotopy groups of classifying spaces
corresponds to the column d = 0 in Table 5.3. Extending the classiﬁcation
to arbitrary dimensions d ≥1 reveals a pattern that originates in the Bott
periodicity of the homotopy groups [258]. K-theory predicts that there are
two families of complex classifying spaces, C0 = VA and C1 = VAIII, corre-
sponding to Hamiltonians without time-reversal or particle-hole symmetries,
and eight families of real classifying spaces, i.e., R0 = VAI, . . . , R7 = VCI,
which correspond to Hamiltonians having at least one reality condition (T or
C). According to Bott periodicity [62], the dependence on q for the complex
(Cq) and real (Rq) classifying spaces enters modulo two and modulo eight,

136
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
respectively,
Cq+2 = Cq,
Rq+8 = Rq.
(5.20)
Furthermore, for each symmetry class Λ and given space dimension d the
classifying space VΛ(d) corresponds to the solution of an extension problem of
a Cliﬀord algebra3 [258]. Speciﬁcally, one can show that for the complex case
VA(d) = C0+d and VAIII(d) = C1+d, while for the real case VAI(d) = R0−d,
VBDI(d) = R1−d, etc. Finally, the topological classiﬁcation is done in terms of
the zeroth homotopy group4 of the corresponding classifying spaces π0(Vλ(d)).
The resulting “periodic table” of topological insulators and superconductors is
listed in Table 5.3. Below, we will comment on the structure of this table, after
brieﬂy discussing a diﬀerent strategy for obtaining it. Here, we note that the
physical meaning of the higher homotopy groups πn(V ) with n ≥1 is related
to the classiﬁcation of defects. Speciﬁcally, the classiﬁcation of defects that can
be surrounded by a D-dimensional sphere SD (e.g., point, line, and surface
defects in d-dimensional space corresponding to D = d −1, D = d −2, and
D = d−3, respectively), is done by the homotopy group πD(VΛ(d)). Also note
that these homotopy groups satisfy the relation πD(VΛ(d)) = π0(VΛ(d −D)).
An alternative derivation of Table 5.3 proposed by Schnyder et al. [389]
is based on the so-called bulk-boundary correspondence. A deﬁning property
of topological insulators and superconductors is that gapless states necessar-
ily exist at the boundary (interface) between the system and a “topologically
trivial” state, such as, e.g., vacuum. There is a one-to-one correspondence
between the topological properties of the bulk and the properties of the gap-
less boundary degrees of freedom. Hence, topological insulators are inherently
“holographic” systems: the topological nature of the bulk state is “revealed”
by the gapless boundary modes.
The existence of robust gapless states at the boundary of a TI is a non-
trivial property, as in general quantum states tend to become localized in
the presence of disorder because of the phenomenon of Anderson localization
[20]. Hence, establishing a classiﬁcation of d-dimensional topological insulators
and superconductors is equivalent to classifying the systems of non-interacting
fermions that completely evade the phenomenon of Anderson localization at
the d −1 dimensional boundary. The absence of Anderson localization can
3Let K be a ﬁeld and A a vector space over K equipped with an additional binary
operation (which we denote by ·). A is said to be an algebra over K (or a K-algebra) if for
all vectors x, y, z ∈A and scalars a, b ∈K we have:
(i) Right distributivity: (x + y) · z = x · z + y · z
(ii) Left distributivity: x · (y + z) = x · y + x · z
(iii) Compatibility with scalars: (ax) · (by) = (ab)(x · y)
A Cliﬀord algebra [99] is a type of associative K-algebra that generalizes the concepts of
real numbers, complex numbers, and quaternions. A familiar example of Cliﬀord algebra is
the algebra generated by the Dirac matrices.
4Recall that the homotopy group πn(X) is the set of homotopy classes of maps f :
Sn −→X between the unit sphere Sn and the topological space X. Note that S0 = {−1, 1}
and π0(X) indexes the distinct subspaces of X that are path-connected.

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■137
TABLE 5.3: The “Periodic Table” of topological insulators and superconduc-
tors. All possible topologically non-trivial (gapped) quantum ground states of
non-interacting Hamiltonians are listed as a function of symmetry class (left
column) and spatial dimension (d). The symbols Z and Z2 indicate that the
topologically distinct phases within a given symmetry class and spatial dimen-
sion are characterized by an integer or a Z2 topological invariant, respectively.
An “0” indicates that all ground states belong to the same (topologically triv-
ial) phase.
Cartan
d
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
A
Z
0
Z
0
Z
0
Z
0
Z
AIII
0
Z
0
Z
0
Z
0
Z
0
AI
Z
0
0
0
Z
0
Z2
Z2
Z
BDI
Z2
Z
0
0
0
Z
0
Z2
Z2
D
Z2
Z2
Z
0
0
0
Z
0
Z2
DIII
0
Z2
Z2
Z
0
0
0
Z
0
AII
Z
0
Z2
Z2
Z
0
0
0
Z
CII
0
Z
0
Z2
Z2
Z
0
0
0
C
0
0
Z
0
Z2
Z2
Z
0
0
CI
0
0
0
Z
0
Z2
Z2
Z
0
be understood using a variety of theoretical approaches [132, 281]. In general,
the problem is described by a random Hamiltonian that belongs to one of the
symmetry classes listed in Table 5.1. In the low-energy, long wavelength limit,
the physics of the disordered system is captured by an eﬀective theory that
can be formulated in terms of a nonlinear sigma model5 (NLσM) [173, 152].
Within this eﬀective theory, the property of the boundary degrees of freedom
to completely evade Anderson localization can be incorporated by adding cer-
tain extra terms of topological origin to the action of the NLσM. There are
two such terms which contain no adjustable parameter: the Wess–Zumino–
Witten (WZW) term and the Z2 topological term [144]. Hence, a topological
insulator (superconductor) exists in d dimensions whenever including a WZW
or a topological term in the action of the (d−1) dimensional NLσM is allowed.
Finally, whether adding such an extra term is allowed or not depends on the
spatial dimensionality ¯d = d−1 of the boundary and on the target space G/H
of the NLσM, more speciﬁcally on its homotopy groups. A WZW term can
be included when π ¯d+1(G/H) = Z, while adding a topological term is allowed
when π ¯d(G/H) = Z2.
5A simple example of NLσM is the O(3) nonlinear sigma model with Lagrangian density
L = 1
2 ∂µ ˆn · ∂µ ˆn, which describes the classical statistical mechanics of Heisenberg magnets.
In general, the unit vector ˆn ∈S2 = U(2)/U(1) × U(1) (note that S2 is an example of a
symmetric space) is replaced by an element of one of the symmetric spaces listed in the last
column of Table 5.2, which is called the target space of the NLσM and is denoted by G/H.

138
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
To summarize, the approach proposed by Schnyder et al. [389] exploits
the holographic nature of topological insulators and maps the problem of
classifying them into a problem concerning the existence of robust gapless
boundary states. Remarkably, as in the K-theory approach, the solution of
this problem involves the homotopy groups of symmetric spaces. A topological
insulator (superconductor) of either i) Z-type or ii) Z2-type exists in a given
symmetry class in d = ¯d + 1 spatial dimensions if and only if the target
space G/H of the NLσM on the ¯d-dimensional boundary allows the addition
of either i) a WZW term, which is possible when π ¯d+1(G/H) = Z, or ii) a
Z2 topological term, which is the case when π ¯d(G/H) = Z2. For example, the
NLσM target space for a system in symmetry class A is G/H = U(2n)/U(n)×
U(n) (see Table 5.2), which has a nontrivial homotopy group π ¯d+1(G/H) =
πd(G/H) = Z in each even spatial dimension d = 0, 2, . . . (i.e., odd boundary
dimension ¯d = d −1). For d odd, we have πd(G/H) = {1}. Consequently,
in even dimensions a Hamiltonian belonging to symmetry class A has robust
gapless boundary states protected by a WZW term, hence it has nontrivial
(bulk) topological phases classiﬁed by an integer invariant. By contrast, in
odd dimensions all class A insulators are topologically trivial.
Consider now the “real case” category, for example class AII. The tar-
get space is G/H = O(2n)/O(n) × O(n) and we have π0(G/H) = Z and
π1(G/H) = π2(G/H) = Z2. Consequently, a WZW term is allowed for
¯d + 1 = 0, while a Z2 topological term can be included in the action of
the NLσM on boundaries with ¯d = 1 and ¯d = 2. Hence, a Z-type TI exists
in zero dimensions ( ¯d + 1 = 0), while Z2 TIs exist in two and three spatial
dimensions (with ¯d = 1 and ¯d = 2, respectively). The complete list of topolog-
ical insulators (superconductors) corresponding to each symmetry class and
spatial dimension is given in Table 5.3.
A few comments on the structure of Table 5.3 are appropriate. We note
that the symmetry classes have been reordered as compared to the list given
in Table 5.1. This reorganization reveals the underlying periodicity [258] orig-
inating from the Bott periodicity of K theory [62], i.e., the alternating pattern
(period 2) of the “complex” classes (A and AIII) and the 8-fold periodic-
ity in d of the remaining “real classes.” We also note that there are exactly
ﬁve classes of topological insulators (superconductors) in each spatial dimen-
sion: three characterized by integer (Z) topological invariants and two having
Z2 topological numbers. The columns in Table 5.3 corresponding to d > 3
may become relevant in situations when the Hamiltonian depends on exter-
nal parameters that can be changed adiabatically (e.g., along closed loops in
parameters space — a process referred to as “adiabatic pumping”); these pa-
rameters can be interpreted as additional momentum components, so that the
system has an “eﬀective dimension” d > 3.
In any “real case” symmetry class, a Z2 TI appears as part of a triplet
consisting of a d-dimensional Z TI and a pair of Z2 TIs of dimensions d−1 and
d −2. This structure reﬂects a connection among the members of the triplet,
which can be exploited to derive the Z2 classiﬁcation in d−1 and d−2 spatial

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■139
dimensions from a d-dimensional “parent” Z topological insulator through a
procedure called dimensional reduction [356].
Table 5.3 can also be used to determine whether or not localized zero-
energy modes are supported by r-dimensional topological defects inside d-
dimensional topological insulators (superconductors) [379]. A topological de-
fect hosted by a system that belongs to a certain symmetry class can support
zero modes if the entry of Table 5.3 at the intersection of the corresponding
row with the column d = r + 1 is diﬀerent from zero. For example, point-like
defects (r = 0) in symmetry class D (e.g., vortex cores in a two-dimensional
p±ip) superconductor) can bind zero-energy modes (Majorana bound states).
Similarly, a dislocation line (r = 1) in a three-dimensional lattice hosting a
so-called weak topological insulator — basically a stack of two-dimensional
topological insulator (superconductor) layers — in symmetry classes A, D,
DIII, AII, or C is predicted [359, 379] to bind an extended gapless mode.
We emphasize that Table 5.3 contains the classiﬁcation of topological in-
sulators and superconductors with generic symmetries such as time reversal
(TR) and particle hole (PH). However, solid state systems often have addi-
tional spatial symmetries, such as parity, reﬂection, and discrete rotations.
In this case, the topological quantum states can be protected by a combina-
tion of generic symmetries (e.g., TR) and spatial symmetries (e.g., inversion).
The classiﬁcation of topological insulators and superconductors protected by
spatial symmetries or combinations involving spatial and generic symmetries
can be determined based on the general ideas sketched in this section. For
example, consider inversion symmetry and another discrete symmetry (e.g.,
TR or PH) [379]. When the Hamiltonian is invariant under inversion, H(k)
and H(−k) can be related by a k-independent unitary transformation,
UH(k)U −1 = H(−k).
(5.21)
We combine the inversion operation with a discrete symmetry satisfying the
conditions given by Eq. (5.11), i.e., V H∗(k)V −1 = ϵV H(−k) with V = Ut,
ϵV = 1 or V = Uc, ϵV = −1. More speciﬁcally, we consider systems that are
invariant under the combined transformation W = UV ,
WH(k)W −1 = ϵW H(−k),
(5.22)
where ϵW = ϵV . Since WW ∗= ηW = ±1, we have four distinct symmetry
classes of noninteracting Hamiltonians that are symmetric under a W-type
symmetry labeled by (ϵW , ηW ) = (±1, ±1). Note that the system may not be
symmetric under the separate action of U (inversion) and V (TR or PH). One
can show that the projector (or the Q-matrix) associated with a Hamiltonian
satisfying Eq. (5.22) is an element of a symmetric space, e.g., of the real Grass-
mannian, Gm,n+m(R) = O(n + m)/O(n) × O(m) for (ϵW , ηW ) = (+1, +1).
Consequently, the topological classiﬁcation of d-dimensional insulators and
superconductors protected by a W-type symmetry with (ϵW , ηW ) = (+1, +1)
will be given [379] by the homotopy group πd(Gm,n+m(R)). For d = 0, 1, 2,

140
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
and 3 the homotopy group that yields the classiﬁcation is Z, Z2, Z2, and {1},
respectively. Similar considerations apply for the other symmetry classes.
As a ﬁnal note, we reiterate that the topological insulators (superconduc-
tors) classiﬁed in Table 5.3 are robust against disorder, i.e., against perturba-
tions that break the translational symmetry of the underlying crystal lattice.
Quantum states that possess this property are often referred to as strong topo-
logical insulators (superconductors). In the presence of translation invariance,
additional topological states — the so-called weak topological insulators (su-
perconductors) — become protected by translation symmetry. Of course, a
weak TI becomes trivial in the presence of disorder. An example of weak TI
is the 3D weak integer quantum Hall insulator [270], which, basically, consists
of layered 2D integer quantum Hall states. Similarly, a weak 3D topological
insulator in class AII can be viewed as a k = 1 dimensional array of d = 2 di-
mensional strong TIs (i.e., spin quantum Hall states). In general, a weak TI of
“codimension” k exists in a given symmetry class and in d spatial dimensions
whenever there is a d −k dimensional strong TI in the same class. Speciﬁc
cases can be identiﬁed using the “Periodic Table” 5.3.
5.4
TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS: CHERN NUMBERS, WINDING
NUMBERS, AND Z2 INVARIANTS
The topological invariants of a topological space X are properties that de-
pend only on the topology of the space and, consequently, are shared by all
topological spaces that are homeomorphic to X. Examples include compact-
ness, connectedness, orientability, as well as algebraic invariants such as the
homology and homotopy groups. There is no unique “formula” for calculat-
ing the topological invariants associated with various topological insulators
and superconductors. The procedure for determining these algebraic invari-
ants may depend, for example, on the symmetries of the Hamiltonian, the
spatial dimensionality, and the presence or absence of disorder. Moreover, for
a given class of topological insulators (superconductors) there may be several
equivalent approaches for determining the topological invariant. We will not
analyze all these issues in detail; instead, we will discuss the basic ideas and
provide a few examples. For simplicity, we focus on systems without disorder,
i.e., systems with translation invariance. In this case, the eigenstates |unk⟩cor-
responding to the occupied (valence) bands (or the corresponding projectors
|unk⟩⟨unk|) can be viewed as deﬁning a ﬁber bundle over the Brillouin zone.
Topological insulators (superconductors) correspond to nontrivial ﬁber bun-
dles and the powerful mathematical machinery sketched in Chapter 2 can be
used for calculating the topological invariants associated with these bundles.
5.4.1
Hall conductance and the Chern number
We start with a classic example: the topological invariant that characterizes
the integer quantum Hall (IQH) states, i.e., the two-dimensional TI in class A.

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■141
Historically, the ﬁrst insight into the topological nature of the IQH states was
provided in 1982 by Thouless, Khomoto, Nightingale, and den Nijs (TKNN),
who realized that the quantum number n in the Hall conductivity σxy = n e2
h
is, in fact, the ﬁrst Chern number associated with a principal U(1) bundle
over the (magnetic) Brillouin zone [423]. To better understand the main idea,
let us consider a 2D electron system of size L × L in the presence of a per-
pendicular magnetic ﬁeld B (oriented along the z axis) corresponding to a
rational number p/q of magnetic ﬂux quanta per unit cell and an in-plane
electric ﬁeld E (oriented along the y axis). Working in the Landau gauge, one
can show [423] that kx and ky are good quantum numbers with values in the
magnetic Brillouin zone, which corresponds to an enlarged unit cell with an
integer number (p) of magnetic ﬂux quanta going through. The Schr¨odinger
equation for the 2D electrons in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld can be written in
the form
H(k)|unk⟩= En|unk⟩,
(5.23)
with En being the energy of the nth Landau level and
H(k) =
1
2m (−iℏ∇+ ℏk + eA)2 + U(x, y),
(5.24)
where U(x, y) is a periodic potential and B = ∇× A. The eigenfunctions
unk(r) = ⟨r|unk⟩, with r in the magnetic unit cell, satisfy generalized peri-
odic boundary conditions [423]. For a small applied electric ﬁeld E = Ey ˆy
corresponding to the potential V (r) = −eEy, a perturbed eigenstate can be
approximated as
|uα⟩E = |uα⟩+
(β̸=α)
X
β
⟨uβ|(−eEy)|uα⟩
Eα −Eβ
|uβ⟩+ . . . ,
(5.25)
where α = (n, k) and β = (m, k′). Equation (5.25) can be used to express the
expectation value of the current density along the x axis in the presence of
the perturbation, ⟨jx⟩E = P
α f(Eα) E⟨uα| evx
L2 |uα⟩E, in terms of unperturbed
matrix elements (v)αβ = ⟨uα|v|uβ⟩of the velocity operator. We note that
the Heisenberg equation of motion vy =
1
iℏ[y, H] leads to (vy)βα =
1
iℏ(Eβ −
Eα)⟨uβ|y|uα⟩. By putting together all these ingredients we arrive at the linear
response (Kubo) formula for the Hall conductance σxy = ⟨jx⟩E/Ey. Explicitly,
σxy = e2ℏ
iL2
(Eα<EF )
X
α
(β̸=α)
X
β
(vx)αβ(vy)βα −(vy)αβ(vx)βα
(Eα −Eβ)2
,
(5.26)
where EF is the Fermi energy. Furthermore, in Eq. (5.26) we can replace the
components of velocity operator v = (−iℏ∇+ eA)/m by partial derivatives
of the Hamiltonian (5.24), since we are considering only oﬀ-diagonal matrix
elements,
(vj)βα = 1
ℏ⟨uβ|∂H
∂kj
|uα⟩= (Enk −Emk′)⟨umk′| ∂
∂kj
|unk⟩.
(5.27)

142
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Using these identities and replacing the summation over k by an integral over
the Brillouin zone, P
k →
L2
(2π)2
R
d2k, one can rewrite Eq. (5.26) as
σxy = e2
h
(En<EF )
X
n
Z d2k
2πi
 ∂
∂kx
⟨unk| ∂
∂ky
|unk⟩−
∂
∂ky
⟨unk| ∂
∂kx
|unk⟩

. (5.28)
The integral runs over the entire Brillouin zone and the summation is over
the occupied bands. We notice that the quantity inside the parentheses is
the Berry curvature6 vector Ωn(k) = ∇× An(k) corresponding to the Berry
connection An(k) = i⟨unk|∇k|unk⟩. Hence, the Hall conductivity reduces to
σxy = e2
h ν,
(5.29)
where ν = P
n νn and the contribution νn from the nth occupied band is
related to the Berry phase associated with encircling the Brillouin zone,
νn = −1
2π
Z
BZ
d2k ˆe3 · Ωn(k) = −1
2π
I
∂BZ
dk · An(k) = −γn[∂BZ]
2π
, (5.30)
where ˆe3 is the unit vector perpendicular to the (kx, ky) plane and ∂BZ is
the boundary of the Brillouin zone. Because of the single-valued nature of the
wave function, the Berry phase factor associated with encircling the Brillouin
zone has to be an integer multiple of 2π, i.e., γn[∂BZ] = 2πm with m ∈Z.
The integer m — the so-called ﬁrst Chern number — given by the integral of
the Berry curvature over the Brillouin zone (divided by 2π) is a topological
invariant. We conclude that the Hall conductance is quantized to integer mul-
tiples of e2/h, with the integer ν (also called the TKNN invariant) being the
topological invariant that characterizes the IQH system.
5.4.2
Chern numbers and winding numbers
It is instructive to move this discussion about the Chern invariant into a
broader perspective. First, let us consider another example, the two-level
system described by the Hamiltonian H(k) = h(k) · σ, which was already
discussed in Section 2.2.1. For concreteness, let h(k) = (sin kx, sin ky, m +
cos kx + cos ky), which corresponds to a tight-binding model with nearest-
neighbor hopping on a square lattice. Note that for m = 0, ±2 the vector
h(k) vanishes at certain values of k, e.g., h∗= h(0, 0) = 0 for m = −2, which
results in degeneracy points with E+(h∗) = E−(h∗) = 0. When m ̸= 0, ±2,
h(k) ̸= 0 over the entire Brillouin zone and we can deﬁne a ﬂat band model
with E±(k) = ±1 through the substitution h(k) →d(k) = h(k)/|h(k)|.
Note that d(k) can be viewed as a map from the Brillouin torus to the unit
6See Chapter 2 for details, particularly Section 2.2.1 starting on page 45 and the discus-
sion leading to Eqs. (2.35) and (2.36).

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■143
sphere, d : T2 −→S2. As shown in 2.2.1, the Berry curvature vector for
the low-energy band is Ω= 1
2
h
|h|3 (or 1
2d for the ﬂat-band model) and the
corresponding curvature two-form7 can be written as
F = 1
2ϵijkΩidhj ∧dhk = 1
4ϵijk hi
h3
∂hj
∂kα
∂hk
∂kβ
dkα ∧dkβ.
(5.31)
A similar expression holds for the ﬂat-band model. The ﬁrst Chern number,
deﬁned as the integral of the curvature two-form divided by 2π, reads
C1 = 1
2π
Z
BZ
F = 1
4π
Z
T2 d ·
 ∂d
∂kx
× ∂d
∂ky

dkx ∧dky.
(5.32)
Geometrically, when k covers the Brillouin torus, d(k) describes a closed sur-
face Σ on the unit sphere. The Chern number C1 given by Eq. (5.32) repre-
sents the number of times the surface Σ wraps around the unit sphere (which
is sometimes called a winding number). Mathematically, this represents the
homotopy class of Σ in the punctured space R3 −{0}. Alternatively, one can
view the Berry curvature vector Ωas the ﬁeld generated by a monopole of
strength 1/2 placed at the degeneracy point h∗= 0 (or d∗= 0, i.e., the center
of the sphere). Then, C1 represents the ﬂux of this ﬁeld through the surface
Σ. Note that for the speciﬁc model considered above we have C1 = −1 for
−2 < m < 0, C1 = +1 for 0 < m < 2, and C1 = 0 for |m| > 2.
The bulk-boundary correspondence dictates the existence of gapless states
at interfaces between two insulators characterized by diﬀerent values of the
topological invariant. Consider, for example, a semi-inﬁnite strip of a Chern
insulator described by the Haldane model8 [205], as shown in Figure 5.3. A chi-
ral (i.e., propagating in one direction only) edge state is bound to the interface
between the Chern insulator (with ν ≡C1 = +1) and vacuum (ν ≡C1 = 0).
Note that edge state corresponding to an insulator with C1 = −1 will prop-
agate in the opposite direction (i.e., left). These chiral edge states are robust
against disorder because there are no states available for backscattering, a
property that is intrinsically linked to the quantized electronic transport of
IQH systems. If the system is perturbed near the boundary, the dispersion of
the edge mode can change leading to the appearance of counter-propagating
modes at the Fermi energy, as shown in Figure 5.3. However, the diﬀerence
NR −NL between the number of right and left moving modes remains the
same, as it is uniquely determined by the topological properties of the bulk.
In fact, the bulk-boundary correspondence is formally expressed by the rela-
tion
NR −NL = ∆ν,
(5.33)
where ∆ν is the diﬀerence in Chern number across the interface. In general,
ν = P
n C(n)
1
, the summation being over the occupied bands.
7See Section 2.2.1.
8For a detailed discussion of the Haldane model see Section 7.2.1 starting on page 199.

144
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
k
EF
Chern Insulator
Trivial Insulator
Chiral Edge State
Valence Band
Conduction Band
Edge Mode
FIGURE 5.3: Left: Semi-inﬁnite strip of Chern insulator (with Chern number
ν = +1) having a chiral edge mode at the boundary with a trivial insula-
tor (vacuum). Right: Schematic energy spectrum of the Chern insulator strip
showing the bulk bands and the chiral (right-propagating) edge mode. Per-
turbing the system may create counter-propagating modes (dashed line), but
the diﬀerence NR −NL between left and right movers is uniquely determined
by the topological properties of the bulk (see main text).
From a more abstract perspective, the Chern number can be viewed as
an “obstruction” to Stokes theorem over the whole Brillouin zone (BZ). In
Eq. (5.30) we implicitly treated the BZ as an open surface with a boundary
(e.g., the square −π/a ≤kx, ky ≤π/a). However, considering the periodic
dependence of physical quantities on the reciprocal lattice vectors, the BZ
is, in fact, a torus. Since the torus has no boundary, applying the Stokes
theorem to the integral over the BZ gives νn = 0. Nonetheless, this can be
done only if the Berry connection An(k) is smooth over the entire torus, which
is not the case when νn ̸= 0. For example, gluing the open BZ of Eq. (5.30)
into a torus necessarily results in discontinuities of An(k) across the juncture
lines whenever νn ̸= 0. In general, the Berry connection is a gauge-dependent
quantity that can be smoothly deﬁned on subsets Oα ∈T2 representing an
open covering of the torus.9 Let us assume that {O1, O2} represents such a
covering with the eigenstates |unk⟩1 and |unk⟩2 smoothly deﬁned over O1 and
O2, respectively. In the overlap region O1 ∩O2 the two states are related by
a gauge transformation
|unk⟩2 = eiχ(k)|unk⟩1.
(5.34)
As we argue below, the state vectors |unk⟩can be viewed as representing a ﬁber
bundle over the BZ, with g21(k) = eiχ(k) ∈U(1) being the transition functions
9See Chapter 2 for a discussion of the Berry connection in the context of ﬁber bundles.

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■145
that patch together the two charts. The relation between the smoothly deﬁned
Berry connections in the overlap region is
An
2(k) = An
1(k) −∇χ(k).
(5.35)
Consider now the closed path C ⊂O1 ∩O2 that separates the torus into two
regions M1 ⊂O1 and M2 ⊂O2. The integral of the Berry curvature over the
BZ can be written using the Stokes theorem as
Z
T2 d2k ˆe3·Ωn(k) =
Z
M1
∇×An
1(k) +
Z
M2
∇×An
2(k) =
I
C
dk·[An
1(k) −An
2(k)] .
(5.36)
Hence, the Chern number of the nth band can be written as the winding
number of the transition function around the path separating regions of the
BZ where the Berry connection can be smoothly deﬁned
νn = 1
2π
I
C
dk · ∇χ(k).
(5.37)
At this point it is helpful to pause for a moment and consider explicitly the
mathematical structure associated with the Chern number. A d-dimensional
non-interacting insulator can be naturally associated with a vector (or a prin-
cipal) ﬁber bundle. The base manifold is the d-dimensional k-space of the
system, i.e., the Brillouin zone torus Td if the insulator is described using a
lattice model or the sphere Sd in the case of continuum models. For each k in
the base manifold, there is an eﬀective Hilbert space Hk ∼= Cm on which the
Bloch Hamiltonian H(k) operates. The collection of spaces Hk forms a vector
bundle over the Brillouin torus (or over the sphere Sd). However, this Bloch
bundle is always trivial, i.e., isomorphic to Td×Cm. Nonetheless, in an insula-
tor there are (at least) two well-deﬁned sub-bundles that can have nontrivial
topological properties: the valence and conduction bundles corresponding to
all ﬁlled and empty states, respectively. We are particularly interested in the
topology of the valence Bloch bundle. A ﬁber over k ∈Td of the valence Bloch
bundle corresponds to the space of occupied states or, alternatively, the pro-
jector P(k) deﬁned by Eq. (5.15). With no further symmetry conditions, the
structure group of the bundle is U(n), where n is the dimension of the occu-
pied subspace. Hence, the occupied states of a class A insulator form a Bloch
bundle Bn : (Bn, Td, π, U(n)) with ﬁbers π−1(k) = P(k), where k ∈Td is a
point in the Brillouin zone. Determining whether or not the insulator is topo-
logically nontrivial amounts to determining the topological properties of Bn.
For example, if the base manifold can be covered with one open set, the ﬁber
is trivial. For non-trivial ﬁber bundles the base manifold can only be covered
by two or more open sets with transition functions in the overlap regions that
are diﬀerent from the identity function.
For d = 2 (i.e., for IQH systems), the topology of the (valence) Bloch bun-
dle is described by the ﬁrst Chern number. More generally, the Z topological

146
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
invariant of a class A insulator in even spatial dimensions d = 2ν is the Chern
number
Cν =
1
ν!(2π)ν
Z
BZ
Tr (Fν) ,
(5.38)
where F is the curvature two-form of the corresponding Bloch bundle and
the integrand chν(F) = 1
ν!
  F
2π
ν represents the νth Chern character.10 When
d = 2 this expression reduces to the TKNN invariant C1 given by Eq. (5.32),
while the second Chern number C2 describes class A topological insulators in
d = 4, or certain “adiabatic pumping” processes in d < 4 spatial dimensions.
Finally, we note that four of the “real” symmetry classes in Table 5.3, specif-
ically those classes that break chiral symmetry (AI, D, AII, and C), have Z
topological insulators in even spatial dimensions. The topological invariants
that characterize these insulators are the Chern numbers given by Eq. (5.38).
The winding number. What about odd-dimensional base manifolds? For ex-
ample, how do we characterize the Z-type TIs in class AIII or in a “real”
symmetry class with chiral symmetry, i.e., class BDI, DIII, CII, or CI (see
Table 5.1 and Table 5.3)? In the presence of chiral (sublattice) symmetry,
one can ﬁnd a unitary matrix Γ that anticommutes with the Hamiltonian,
{H(k), Γ} = 0. As a consequence, the spectrum is symmetric with respect
to zero energy and, using a basis in which Γ is diagonal, the Hamiltonian,
as well as the Q matrix (i.e., the projector), can be brought into block oﬀ-
diagonal form, e.g., Eq. (5.19). For a Hamiltonian in symmetry class AIII,
the oﬀ-diagonal component q(k) deﬁnes a map from the BZ onto the group
of unitary matrices U(N), where N is the number of occupied bands (equal
to the number of empty bands). Consequently, the topological classiﬁcation
of class AIII insulators is given by the homotopy group πd(U(N)), which is
nontrivial (and equal to Z) in odd spatial dimensions and trivial in even di-
mensions. The corresponding Z topological invariant, which can be deﬁned in
odd spatial dimensions d = 2n + 1, is the winding number
ν2n+1[q] =
Z
BZ
ω2n+1[q],
(5.39)
where the winding number density is given by
ω2n+1[q] = (−1)nn!
(2n + 1)!
 i
2π
n+1
ϵα1α2...α2n+1 Tr[q−1∂α1q · q−1∂α2q . . . ]d2n+1k.
(5.40)
The number ν2n+1[q] counts the nontrivial winding (wrapping) of the map
q : BZ −→U(N), where BZ is either the Brillouin torus T2n+1 (for lattice
models), or the sphere S2n+1 (for continuum models). We note that in class
AIII the winding number ν2n+1[q] can be any integer, while in the case of
“real” classes with chiral symmetry additional constraints may impose the
realization of speciﬁc integer values.
10Here we use the physicist’s deﬁnitions of connection and curvature (see Chapter 2). The
corresponding mathematical quantities can be obtained by taking A →iA and F →iF.

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■147
5.4.3
The Z2 topological invariant
We turn our attention to a diﬀerent kind of TI, the Z2 topological insulator,
focusing on class AII systems in two and three dimensions. This type of time-
reversal invariant TI was discovered in 2005 by Kane and Mele [244, 245], who
considered a model of spin- 1
2 particles with spin-orbit interaction on a honey-
comb lattice.11 The corresponding 2D phase, dubbed quantum spin Hall eﬀect
(QSHE), is characterized by pairs of counter-propagating edge states (see Fig-
ure 5.4) that preserve time-reversal symmetry (TRS). From the perspective of
the bulk-boundary correspondence, the Z2 index represents the parity of the
number of edge state pairs. The ﬁrst experimental realization of the QSHE
was achieved by the Molenkamp group in 2007 using HgTe quantum wells
[49, 251]. The same year, it was discovered by three independent theoretical
groups [166, 318, 373] that, unlike Chern topological insulators, TIs charac-
terized by a Z2 invariant also exist in 3D. The discovery was subsequently
conﬁrmed experimentally [227, 473] and triggered intense research activity.
Similarly to the Z invariant, the Z2 index can be constructed in several
diﬀerent ways and can be understood using diﬀerent perspectives. Before dis-
cussing speciﬁc constructions, let us emphasize the key role played by the
additional constraint imposed by TRS. First, we note that for time-reversal
symmetric 2D systems the Bloch bundle Bn associated with the occupied
states is trivial. Indeed, one can easily show that in the presence of TRS the
Berry connections A(k) and A(−k) diﬀer by a gauge transformation ∇χ(k),
while the Berry curvature satisﬁes the condition
F(−k) = −F(k).
(5.41)
Consequently, the Chern character is subjected to the constraint chn[F(−k)] =
(−1)nchn[F(k)] and the Chern number (5.38) vanishes in 4n −2 dimensions
(i.e., for ν = 2n −1), but not in 4n dimensions (ν = 2n). Hence, for a d = 2
time-reversal invariant system the ﬁrst Chern number vanishes, C1 = 0, and
there is no obstruction to globally deﬁne the eigenstates |unk⟩over the Bril-
louin torus T2, i.e., the Bloch bundle Bn is trivial. However, TRS imposes
additional constraints on the eigenstates and it is when these constraints are
considered that non-trivial topology emerges. Speciﬁcally, the Bloch Hamil-
tonians at k and −k satisfy the relation T H(k)T −1 = H(−k), which implies
that the time-reversal image of any eigenstate of the Bloch Hamiltonian at
k, T |unk⟩, is an eigenstate of the Bloch Hamiltonian at −k having the same
energy (Kramers theorem). Note that, as a consequence of T 2 = −1 (TR op-
erator for spin- 1
2 particles), the two Kramers partners are orthogonal, i.e., the
matrix
Mij = ⟨uik|T |ujk⟩= −⟨ujk|T |uik⟩
(5.42)
contains only oﬀ-diagonal elements. In the presence of TRS the band structure
11This model corresponds to doubling the Haldane model [205] of a Chern insulator by
introducing spin into the problem. See Chapter 7 for details.

148
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
k
EF
Z2 Topological Insulator
Trivial Insulator
Edge States
Valence Band
Conduction Band
Edge
Modes
(n+1,II)
(n+1,I)
(n,I)
(n,II)
FIGURE 5.4: Left: Semi-inﬁnite strip of Z2 topological insulator support-
ing counter-propagating edge modes at the boundary with a trivial insulator
(e.g., vacuum) Center; Schematic representation of the energy spectrum of the
semi-inﬁnite strip showing the bulk bands and the counter-propagating edge
modes. Right: Typical band structure of a spin- 1
2 TR-invariant system. The
small black circles represnt a Kramers pair, while Λ1 nd Λ2 are TR-invariant
momenta (TRIM).
is characterized by the existence of Kramers pairs, as illustrated schematically
in Figure 5.4. While there always exists a global basis |uik⟩for the valence
bands that is smoothly deﬁned over the whole Brillouin torus, it is impossible
to continuously deﬁne Kramers pairs on the whole Brillouin torus when the
insulator is nontrivial. In other words, there is no global basis that satisﬁes
T |ui,k⟩= e−iχ(k)|uj,−k⟩with e−iχ(k) being a smooth function of k over the
Brillouin torus (e.g., χ(k) = 0 everywhere). This obstruction is, in essence,
the source of nontrivial topology in TR invariant insulators. To capture it,
one has to explicitly consider the Kramers constraint. In the language of ﬁber
bundles, one has to replace the (trivial) bundle Bn (having ﬁbers correspond-
ing to the subspace spanned by the n occupied states |uik⟩) with the rank 2
TRS Bloch bundle BT
n with ﬁbers deﬁned as the subspaces spanned by the
(valence band) Kramers pairs |Ψi(k)⟩= (|uik⟩, T |uik⟩). Note that the sub-
space spanned by |Ψi(k)⟩can be viewed as a quaternionic Hilbert space with
quaternionic elements i, j = T , and k = iT . 12
As pointed out by Freed and Moore [155], the Z2 index can be deﬁned as a
topological invariant of the BT
n bundle. Without going into technical details,
we note that this construction of the Z2 index involves the orientations of a
so-called determinant line bundle at the TR invariant points of the Brillouin
zone. The product of these orientations is constrained by the topology of the
TR symmetric bundle BT
n [155]. The TR invariant points, usually called high-
symmetry points or time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIM), Λ = −Λ + G,
with G a reciprocal lattice vector, play an important role in TR invariant
12A generic quaternion reads q = a + bi + cj + dk with a, b, c, and d real numbers and
i2 = j2 = k2 = ijk = −1.

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■149
systems. Note, for example, that at a TRIM the Kramers partners have the
same momentum and the spectrum is (at least) double degenerate.
The zeros of the Pfaﬃan. The original Kane and Mele construction [245] of
the Z2 index is based on the observation that the parity of the number of zeros
of the Pfaﬃan Pf[M], where the matrix M is given by Eq. (5.42), in half of
the BZ is a topological invariant. In general, the Pfaﬃan Pf[A] of a 2n × 2n
skew-symmetric matrix A is deﬁned as
Pf[A] =
1
2nn!
X
σ∈Π2n
sign
n
Y
i=1
Aσ(2i−1),σ(2i),
(5.43)
where Π2n is the permutation group of 2n elements. For example, for a 2 × 2
skew-symmetric matrix A =

0
a
−a 0

, we have Pf[A] = a. Among the proper-
ties of the Pfaﬃan we mention (PfA)2 = DetA and Pf[BABT ] = Det[B]Pf[A]
for any 2n × 2n square matrix B.
The vanishing of the Pfaﬃan signals the orthogonality between Kramers
related eigenspaces of the ﬁlled bands. Let us assume that Pf[M] has a simple
zero at kα, i.e., the Pfaﬃan has a vortex with winding number13 ±1 at kα.
As time reversal maps the eigenspaces at k and −k, the Pfaﬃan will also
have a zero at −kα and, in general, there is a redundancy in the description
of the system on the whole Brillouin torus. To circumvent this redundancy,
we introduce the TR eﬀective Brillouin zone (EBZ) consisting of half of the
Brillouin torus and containing one member of each Kramers pair (k, −k),
except at the boundary. Note that the EBZ has the topology of a torus with a
boundary consisting of two homotopic TR invariant closed curves connecting
two TRIM.
At TR invariant points, |uiΛ⟩and T |uiΛ⟩are orthogonal eigenstates and
M(Λ) is a unitary matrix containing only oﬀ-diagonal elements. Consequently,
|Pf[M(Λ)]| = 1. On the other hand, Pf[M(kα)] = Pf[M(−kα)] = 0, i.e.,
the Pfaﬃan has vortices at k = ±kα. Note that if there is only one pair
of vortices it is not possible to remove it, as the only points where kα =
−kα (i.e., points where the vortices could annihilate) are TR invariant points
characterized by |Pf[M(Λ)]| = 1. For two pairs of vortices, on the other hand,
it is always possible to continuously deform the Hamiltonian and remove them
by merging the vortices with opposite vorticity at kα = ±kβ (i.e., at points
on the boundary of the EBZ that are not TRIM). This merging procedure
results in the parity of the number of vortices in the EBZ being an invariant.
Hence we can deﬁne the Z2 index in terms of the total vorticity associated
with the zeros of the Pfaﬃan in half of the BZ as
ν =
1
2πi
I
∂EBZ
dk · ∇log Pf[M]
(modulo 2),
(5.44)
13Let f(z) = r(z)eiθ(z) be a complex function with r(z0) = 0. The winding of the phase
as one goes around z0 on a closed path C is given by the integer W[C] =
1
2πi
H
C dlog[f(z)].

150
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
kx
ky
kx
ky
FIGURE 5.5: Vortices of the Pfaﬃan in a topological insulator (left) and in a
trivial insulator (right). The empty and ﬁlled squares represent vortices with
opposite winding numbers (e.g., +1 and −1, respectively). In the trivial case
one can move (arrows) and annihilate the vortices without crossing the TRIM
(black circles).
where ∂EBZ is the boundary of the eﬀective BZ. The relation between the
zeros of the Pfaﬃan and the Z2 topological invariant is illustrated in Figure
5.5. Note that breaking TRS removes the constraint |Pf[M(Λ)]| = 1 and the
zeros are no longer prevented from annihilating at TRIM, i.e., the topological
distinction between ν = 1 and ν = 0 is lost. In the presence of TRS the
parity of the number of zeros of the Pfaﬃan can only change through phase
transitions in which the bulk gap collapses.
The sewing matrix invariant. An alternative construction of the Z2 index, in-
troduced by Fu and Kane [162], provides additional physical insight by formu-
lating the problem in the context of the modern theory of polarization [368].
The construction uses the so-called sewing matrix deﬁned as
wij(k) = ⟨ui,−k|T |uj,k⟩.
(5.45)
This matrix is unitary, w†(k)w(k) = 1, and relates the eigenvectors at −k to
the Kramers partners of the eigenstates at k,
|ui,−k⟩=
X
j
w∗
ij(k)T |uj,k⟩.
(5.46)
The sewing matrix has the property wij(k) = −wji(−k) and at the TRIM it
becomes antisymmetric, wij(Λ) = −wji(Λ). Also, considering the set of Berry
connection matrices Aij(k) = i⟨uik|∇k|ujk⟩one can show that
Tr[A(−k)] = Tr[A(k)] + i Tr[w†(k)∇kw(k)].
(5.47)
Eq. (5.47) can be obtained using the relation ⟨T ψ|T φ⟩= ⟨φ|ψ⟩and the prop-
erties of the sewing matrix.

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■151
First, let us introduce the charge and time-reversal polarizations. Consider
a one-dimensional TR invariant system of spin- 1
2 particles on a lattice with
lattice constant a = 1 and suppose that there are no degeneracies other than
those required by TRS. The bands corresponding to a Kramers pair are labeled
(n, I) and (n, II), as in Figure 5.4, and we have
T |uII
n,k⟩= e−iχn(k)|uI
n,−k⟩,
T |uI
n,k⟩= −e−iχn(−k)|uII
n,−k⟩.
(5.48)
Note that the sewing matrix w is block-diagonal with 2×2 blocks of the form
wn(k) =

0
eiχn(k)
−eiχn(−k)
0

.
(5.49)
The charge polarization can be calculated as an integral over the BZ of the
Berry connection of the occupied states [368],
Pρ = 1
2π
Z π
−π
dk Tr[A(k)] =
X
s∈{I,II}
i
2π
Z π
−π
dk
X
n
⟨us
nk|∇k|us
nk⟩= P I + P II,
(5.50)
where the contributions P s (with s = I or s = II) are called partial polariza-
tions. If Sz is conserved, these can be viewed as the spin-up and spin-down
contributions to the charge polarization. Note that under a gauge transfor-
mation Pρ changes by an integer, which reﬂects the fact that the polarization
is deﬁned only up to a lattice vector. However, changes in the polarization
induced by cyclic adiabatic evolutions of the Hamiltonian are gauge invari-
ant. For example, let us assume that the Hamiltonian depends on an extra
parameter R(t) that changes between R(0) = R0 and R(T) = RT . We have
Pρ(T) −Pρ(0) = 1
2π
I
CT
dkTr[A(k, RT )] −
I
C0
dkTr[A(k, R0)]

,
(5.51)
where CT and C0 are loops corresponding to −π ≤k ≤π for t = T and
t = 0, respectively. Following the general ideas discussed in Chapter 2 in
the context of Berry phases, we can view k and R as the components of a
vector belonging to a two-dimensional parameter space M. The correspond-
ing (diagonal) components of the Berry connection are i⟨us
nkR|∇k|us
nkR⟩and
i⟨us
nkR|∇R|us
nkR⟩, while the associated Berry curvature vector is Ωs
n(k, R) =
i[⟨∇R us
nkR|∇k us
nkR⟩−c.c.]. Using the Stokes theorem, we can write Eq. (5.51)
in the form Pρ(T) −Pρ(0) =
1
2π
R
MdkdR Ω(k, R), where Ω= P
n,s Ωs
n. For
a cyclic evolution, RT = R0 and the parameter space M becomes a torus,
e.g., the Brillouin torus if the parameters represent the components of a two-
dimensional momentum, (k, R) →(kx, ky). Hence, the diﬀerence Pρ(T)−Pρ(0)
representing the charge pumped across the system during one cycle is given
by the integral of the Berry curvature over the parameter space torus, which
is nothing but the ﬁrst Chern number.

152
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
For a TR invariant system C1 = 0. However, instead of considering the
charge pumping process we can consider the spin pumping associated with
the change during an adiabatic cyclic evolution of the so-called time-reversal
polarization PT = P I −P II. We note that
AI(−k) = AII(k) −
X
n
∇kχn(k),
As(k) = i
X
n
⟨us
nk|∇k|us
nk⟩,
(5.52)
and the fact that the sewing matrix is antisymmetric for k = 0 and k = π, so
that from Eq. (5.49) we have
Pf[w(π)]
Pf[w(0)] = exp
(
i
X
n
[χn(π), −χn(0)]
)
.
(5.53)
Using these properties, we can express the partial polarization as
P I = 1
2π
Z π
0
dk Tr[A(k)] + i ln Pf[w(π)]
Pf[w(0)]

.
(5.54)
A similar expression holds for P II. The TR polarization PT = 2P I −Pρ has
a term of the form
1
2π
R π
0 {Tr[A(k)] −Tr[A(−k)]} that can be written using
Eq. (5.47) as
1
2πi
R π
0 dk Tr[w†(k)∇kw(k)]. Since w(k) is block-diagonal, brute
force calculation gives Tr[w†∇kw] = ∇k ln Det[w(k)]. Finally, using Det[w] =
(Pf[w])2, we obtain the TR polarization as
PT = 1
πi log
"p
Det[w(π)]
Pf[w(π)]
Pf[w(0)]
p
Det[w(0)]
#
.
(5.55)
Since the argument of the logarithm is +1 or −1, PT is 0 or 1 (mod 2). Note
that in Eq. (5.55) the sewing matrix is evaluated at the 1D TRIM points
Λ1 = 0 and Λ2 = π.
Consider now a cyclic adiabatic process of period T controlled by some
parameter R(t) that is odd under time-reversal, R(−t) = −R(t). Eventually,
we will interpret this parameter as the second momentum component for a 2D
system. Since H[k, R + RT ] = H[k, R], the points (k, R) ∈M corresponding
to the values Λ1 = (0, 0), Λ2 = (π, 0), Λ3 = (0, RT /2), and Λ4 = (π, RT /2)
are TR invariant points. The Z2 invariant can be deﬁned as the change in TR
polarization in half a cycle, ∆= PT (RT /2) −PT (0) (mod 2). Explicitly, we
have
(−1)∆=
Y
i
Pf[w(Λi)]
p
Det[w(Λi)]
.
(5.56)
We note that in this formula the sewing matrix is to be calculated using
wave functions that are smoothly deﬁned over the parameter space torus,
which is always possible because the Chern number is equal to zero, hence
there is no obstruction. For a d = 2 dimensional system in class AII we have

Topological Insulators and Superconductors
■153
(k, R) →(kx, ky), RT /2 →π and Eq. (5.56), with Λi being the TRIM, gives
the Z2 invariant for a quantum spin Hall system. The same expression applies
to 3D topological insulators (class AII), with Λi representing the eight TR-
invariant momenta, (0, 0, 0), (π, 0, 0), . . . , (π, π, π).


C H A P T E R 6
Interacting Topological
Phases
CONTENTS
6.1
Topological phases: Organizing principles .................
156
6.1.1
Systems with no symmetry constraints ............
157
6.1.2
Systems with symmetry constraints ...............
161
6.2
Quantum phases with topological order ...................
163
6.2.1
Eﬀective theory of Abelian fractional quantum
Hall liquids .........................................
164
6.2.2
The toric code ......................................
171
6.3
Symmetry protected topological quantum sates ..........
175
6.3.1
SPT phases in one dimension ......................
176
6.3.2
SPT phases in two and three dimensions ..........
180
T
he “ten-fold way” underlying the classification of non-in-
teracting topological insulators and superconductors maps the infras-
tructure of the “civilized” part of the topological world. With interactions,
we step into the wild. The main challenges that stem from the presence of
interactions can be organized into three categories. The ﬁrst set of problems
is generated by the lack of a general classiﬁcation of interacting topological
phases (i.e., the interacting analog of the “ten-fold way”), which could be used
as the basis for a systematic understanding of these quantum states. More-
over, it is not even clear what type of mathematical structure should underlie
such a classiﬁcation. Nonetheless, signiﬁcant progress has been made in the
past few years involving partial classiﬁcations of certain types of interacting
topological states based on tensor categories [429], group cohomology theory
[82, 200], cobordism [246], and other “scary mathematical beasts.”
The second type of challenge stems from the intrinsic diﬃculty of describ-
ing theoretically a many-body system with interactions, particularly a strongly
correlated one. Topological quantum ﬁeld theories, which may be describing
the low-energy physics of some yet undiscovered physical systems that support
topological phases, have been studied for decades. However, the long journey
155

156
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
of topological quantum matter from the ivory tower of ﬁeld theory to the
lab should probably pass through some understanding of realistic topological
models that could be realized in well-deﬁned physical systems. Generating
such models and understanding their physics are formidable tasks.
Finally, the experimental study of interacting topological phases is still
in its infancy. The discovery of the fractional quantum Hall eﬀect more than
three decades ago stormed into the heart of condensed matter physics taking
everybody by surprise. Many of the subsequent theoretical advances that de-
ﬁne our current understanding of topological quantum phases were stimulated
by this discovery. The experimental ﬁeld, however, has since remained silent,
for the most part. One could only hope that the theoretical progress and
the discovery of (noninteracting) topological insulators will eventually trigger
some positive developments regarding the experimental study of interacting
topological phases.
In this chapter we will present a few highlights of the recent advances
in understanding the topological quantum states of interacting many-body
systems. Since this is a rapidly developing ﬁeld and because any detailed
description would involve a rather complex mathematical apparatus, we will
only consider basic ideas and relatively simple examples. A more in-depth
discussion can be found in specialized books and review articles, such as, for
example [152, 377, 398, 431, 480].
6.1
TOPOLOGICAL PHASES: ORGANIZING PRINCIPLES
Broken symmetry and the associated long-range order form the foundation for
classifying diﬀerent phases of matter in traditional many-body physics. This
paradigm fails in the case of topological quantum phases, which are distinct
gapped ground states that have the same symmetry as the Hamiltonian of
the many-body system and, consequently, cannot be distinguished from one
another based on their symmetry. Yet intertwined with topology, symmetry
still plays a central role as a guiding principle for organizing quantum matter,
although in a dramatically diﬀerent way. Within the new paradigm, quantum
phases are distinguished based on their topological properties, but symmetry
may be required to ensure the very existence of distinct topological proper-
ties. In other words, for some topological classes, two quantum states that are
topologically distinct in the presence of a certain symmetry can be adiabati-
cally deformed into one another in the absence of that symmetry. In this case,
we say that the topological states are symmetry protected.
But symmetry protection is not an absolute requirement for having distinct
topological phases. There is, in fact, another concept that plays a critical
role in organizing topological quantum matter: quantum entanglement. In
the presence of long-range entanglement, quantum states acquire so-called
intrinsic topological order, which makes them topologically distinct even in

Interacting Topological Phases
■157
the absence of a symmetry constraint. At the time of this writing, the most
widely accepted perspective on topological quantum states of matter is based
on the triplet entanglement — symmetry — topology. Below we provide a
sketch of the “big picture” that emerges from this perspective.
6.1.1
Systems with no symmetry constraints
In Chapter 5 we have seen that many-body Hamiltonians can be organized
into classes based on the dimensions of the underlying systems and on the
symmetry constraints that they satisfy. We will call such a class of Hamiltoni-
ans having a given dimension and speciﬁed symmetry constraints an H-class.
Within a given H-class, we deﬁne diﬀerent quantum phases as the equivalence
(sub)classes generated by a certain equivalence relation. Focusing on gapped
phases, the equivalence relation is deﬁned by the gap-preserving continuous de-
formations: we say that two Hamiltonians H1 and H2 are equivalent if they can
be continuously deformed into each other (within the given H-class) without
closing the gap that characterizes their excitations above the corresponding
ground states.
Consider now the class of Hamiltonians describing d-dimensional systems
without any symmetry constraint, i.e., the class of all (local) Hamiltonians of
dimension d. How many distinct gapped phases are there within this H-class?
At the time of this writing we do not have a complete answer to this question.
However, it is known that the key element responsible for the existence of
distinct quantum phases in this H-class is quantum entanglement. Note that
these phases completely evade a classiﬁcation based on Landau’s symmetry
breaking paradigm (since there is no symmetry to break).
Many-body entanglement. Entanglement is perhaps the most non-classical
(hence, counterintuitive) manifestation of quantum mechanics. We have en-
countered it in Chapter 1 in the context of the EPR thought experiment (see
Section 1.4.1) and we will show later that entanglement plays a key role in
quantum information, where it can be viewed as a new type of resource for
information processing (see Chapter 10). Here, we focus on a few aspects re-
garding the characterization of many-body entanglement in quantum systems.
We have already introduced the entanglement entropy (4.14) as a measure of
quantum entanglement in bipartite pure systems. We note that more com-
plex situations involving multi-partite systems or mixed quantum states may
require other entanglement measures (for a review, see [225, 348]).
A key observation is that entanglement is a property of a quantum state
relative to a given set of subsystems [108]. Consider, for example, a system
consisting of two fermions that occupy spatially separated orbitals centered
around two sites. We can either consider the particle partition of the system
[209] — in which case the subsystems are the two particles — or its spatial
partition (the subsystems being the two sites). Relative to the spatial par-
titioning, the state |αβ⟩= |α⟩⊗|β⟩is a direct product state with orbital
φα centered around the ﬁrst site and φβ centered around the second. On the

158
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
other hand, relative to the particle partitioning, this is the maximally en-
tangled Bell state [φα(1)φβ(2) −φα(2)φβ(1)]/
√
2. This simple example shows
that particle partitioning entanglement and spatial partitioning entanglement
represent diﬀerent properties. Note also that particle partitioning entangle-
ment is sensitive to quantum statistics, i.e., in the case of fermions, to the
anti-symmetrization of the wave function.
A second observation concerns the quantitative measures of entanglement.
How can one characterize many-body entanglement and how can one dis-
tinguish among diﬀerent types of entangled states? These are key questions
because the presence of diﬀerent types of entanglement is what diﬀerentiates
(topological) quantum phases that otherwise cannot be distinguished by any
local order parameter. It was conjectured [83] that all gapped quantum ground
states described by the Landau symmetry breaking theory have short-range
quantum entanglement. By contrast, quantum phases that are beyond the
Landau paradigm, such as the fractional quantum Hall states, have deeply
entangled ground states characterized by various patterns of long-range en-
tanglement. But how can one formally distinguish between these types of
entanglement? While a complete characterization of diﬀerent types of entan-
glement and the classiﬁcation of the corresponding quantum phases are objects
of ongoing research, signiﬁcant progress has been made in the past few years.
One approach [83] is based on the observation that two gapped ground
states are in the same phase if (and only if) they are connected by a local
unitary evolution.1 In other words, local unitary transformations deﬁne an
equivalence relation on a given H-class, the corresponding equivalence classes
representing diﬀerent quantum phases. Furthermore, with no symmetry condi-
tion imposed, local unitary transformations can “remove” local entanglement
and evolve a short-range entangled state into a direct product state [83]. By
contrast, states with long-range entanglement cannot be connected by a lo-
cal unitary transformation to short-range entangled states. Consequently, in
the absence of any symmetry constraint, the equivalence classes deﬁned by
local unitary transformations correspond to phases characterized by diﬀerent
patterns of long-range entanglement, in addition to one class containing all
short-range entangled states.
Another approach is based on the so-called topological entanglement en-
tropy introduced by Kitaev and Preskill [260]. In essence, if we consider the
spatial partition of a system with ground state |Ψ⟩into two subsystems (A and
B), the von Neumann entropy S = −TrA[ρAlogρA], where ρA = TrB|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ|,
has the form S = αL−γ +O(L−1). Here, L is the length of the boundary (as-
sumed to be large compared to the correlation length) and γ — the topological
entanglement entropy — is a constant reﬂecting the topological properties of
the entanglement that survive at arbitrarily long distances. In other words, a
non-vanishing γ signals long-range entanglement. We note that the low-energy,
1Note that a local unitary evolution is equivalent to a ﬁnite-depth local unitary quantum
circuit [83] (see also Chapter 11).

Interacting Topological Phases
■159
long-wavelength observable properties of a many-body system with long-range
entanglement are invariant under smooth deformations of space-time. Conse-
quently, the low-energy eﬀective theory of the system is a topological quantum
ﬁeld theory (TQFT). Remarkably, the properties of the (gapped) quasiparti-
cles that emerge in such a system are part of the universal low-energy physics
of the system and can be obtained within the framework of the TQFT (see
Chapter 12 for more details).
Returning to the topological entanglement entropy, one can show [260]
that it is related to the so-called total quantum dimension of the system.
Speciﬁcally, we have [260]
γ = log D,
(6.1)
where the total quantum dimension is given by
D =
sX
a
d2a.
(6.2)
Here da (called the quantum dimension of type a quasiparticles) can be
thought of as the asymptotic degeneracy per particle for a system contain-
ing N type a quasiparticles. For example, in a fractional quantum Hall sys-
tem with ﬁlling factor ν = 1/q (where q is an odd integer) there are q distinct
types of particles that are Abelian anyons. Abelian anyons always have da = 1,
while non-Abelian particles have quantum dimension da > 1 (not necessarily
an integer). Hence, the total quantum dimension for the ν = 1/q fractional
quantum Hall system is D = √q. More details and examples can be found in
[327] and [337] (see also Chapter 12).
Intrinsic topological order. The presence of long-range entanglement leads
to the emergence of a new type of quantum order dubbed topological order
[448]. Quantum states characterized by diﬀerent types of topological order
cannot change into each other without a phase transition. One cannot dif-
ferentiate topological orders using local order parameters, i.e., two quantum
states characterized by diﬀerent topological orders may have the same local
properties. This situation is analogous to comparing a sphere and a torus:
the two manifolds are locally identical and what diﬀerentiates them are their
global topological properties, e.g., the fundamental groups, π1(S2) = 1 and
π1(T 2) = Z × Z. Similarly, topological orders are characterized by certain
topological invariants, which are universal quantum numbers that are indepen-
dent of details regarding interactions, eﬀective masses, perturbations, etc. It
is worth noting that most of the theoretical work on topological order assumes
zero temperature. The stability of topological order at non-zero temperature
is an unsolved problem in condensed matter physics.
One topological invariant that can be used for characterizing topologi-
cally ordered states is the ground state degeneracy of a system deﬁned on
topologically non-trivial compact manifolds (e.g., on a torus). For example, a
fractional quantum Hall state with ν = 1/q has qg degenerate ground states
on a Riemann surface of genus g [451]. Another invariant is the topological

160
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
entanglement entropy [260]. As mentioned above, for a ν = 1/q fractional
quantum Hall state we have γ = 1
2 log q. A set of topological invariants of crit-
ical importance for quantum computation [256] characterizes the properties of
the anyonic excitations that emerge in topologically ordered states. Note that
these quasiparticles emerge in the bulk and have fractional quantum numbers
(e.g., fractional charge). A brief summary of the key properties of anyonic
excitations can be found in Chapter 12.
Classiﬁcation and examples. In the absence of symmetry constraints, all
short-range entangled (SRE) states belong to the same phase. On the other
hand, there are many distinct phases of long-range entangled (LRE) quantum
states, each characterized by a speciﬁc topological order. Diﬀerent topolog-
ical orders are characterized by distinct sets of topological invariants, such
as ground state degeneracies on compact manifolds, non-Abelian geometric
phases, and topological entanglement entropy. At the time of this writing, a
general theory that would provide a complete classiﬁcation of topologically
ordered phases is not known. Also, various alternative approaches may not
necessarily be equivalent.2 Nonetheless, a lot is known about various speciﬁc
cases, for example about the classiﬁcation of Abelian fractional quantum Hall
ﬂuids [454]. Discussing these results in detail is beyond the scope of this in-
troductory book. A schematic representation of possible gapped phases in
the absence of symmetry, which summarizes the main ideas of this section, is
shown in Figure 6.1(a). Some simple examples of quantum states with intrinsic
topological order are brieﬂy discussed in Section 6.2.
We conclude with a short list of known topologically ordered phases. Su-
perconductivity, discovered experimentally in 1911, is a topologically ordered
state characterized by Z2 topological order [208]. Note that, strictly speaking,
superconductivity is described by a Ginzburg–Landau theory with dynamical
U(1) electromagnetic gauge ﬁeld. It can be shown [208] that the corresponding
eﬀective low-energy theory is a topological Z2 gauge theory. However, super-
conductivity is often described as a state with non-dynamical electromagnetic
gauge ﬁeld, which is a symmetry-breaking state with no topological order. The
mean-ﬁeld description of superconductivity that forms the basis for the clas-
siﬁcation of “topological” superconductors presented in Chapter 5 belongs to
the second (i.e., symmetry-breaking) perspective. The fractional quantum Hall
states provide the “standard” example of topologically ordered phases. Their
2Integer quantum Hall ﬂuids — the archetype of topological quantum matter — are
examples of LRE states, if characterized as states which cannot be disentangled into a
product state by a ﬁnite-depth local unitary quantum circuit; however, they do not possess
topological order as measured by the topological entanglement entropy or the non-trivial
topological ground state degeneracy. Also, as noninteracting systems of fermions, they share
many features with other topological band insulators (which are short-range entangled, sym-
metry protected topological states), but there is no symmetry that protects their topological
properties (e.g., the quantized value of the thermal Hall conductance), hence they cannot be
properly classiﬁed as symmetry protected topological phases. It is probably ﬁtting to leave
the integer quantum Hall states in limbo, as a reminder of our incomplete understanding of
topological quantum matter.

Interacting Topological Phases
■161
AI
FQH fluids
Spin liquids
Toric code
… 
NO SYMMETRY CONSTRAINTS
SYSTEMS WITH SYMMETRY
(a)
(b)
LRE1
LRE2
LRE3
…
SRE (topologically trivial)
Atomic insulator
Non-interacting
fermions
… 
Topological order
SB
TBI
SB-SPT
SPT
Landau phases
SET
SB-LRE
Non-interacting
Interacting
FIGURE 6.1: The “topological quantum world” (a) without symmetry con-
straints and (b) in the presence of symmetry. (a) All short-range entangled
(SRE) states are topologically trivial and belong to the same phase. There
are distinct long-range entangled (LRE) phases with (intrinsic) topological
order. (b) Topologically trivial SRE states are either equivalent to the atomic
insulator (AI) or belong to “standard” symmetry-breaking (SB) phases. Topo-
logically non-trivial SRE phases either preserve the symmetry of the Hamil-
tonian — the symmetry protected topological (SPT) phases — or break it
(SB-LRE). The non-interacting SPT phases are the topological (band) insu-
lators and superconductors (TBI). LRE phases either preserve the symmetry
of the Hamiltonian — the symmetry enriched topological (SET) phases — or
break it (SB-LRE).
discovery in 1982 [428] has stimulated signiﬁcantly the theoretical progress
in this area. The discovery of the non-Abelian ν = 5/2 fractional quantum
Hall state in 1987 [465] has provided the ﬁrst example of a physical system
that may support non-Abelian excitations, which could be used for topological
quantum computation. Other examples of topologically ordered phases that
were proposed theoretically are various types of spin liquids [21, 385], such as
the chiral spin liquids [243, 452] and the Z2 spin liquids [364]. Kitaev’s toric
code [261], a two-dimensional spin lattice model with Z2 topological order, is
also an example of topological quantum error correcting code.
6.1.2
Systems with symmetry constraints
Consider d-dimensional systems described by many-body Hamiltonians that
are invariant under some symmetry group G. The corresponding H-class con-
tains all Hamiltonians that satisfy this symmetry constraint. How many dis-
tinct gapped phases (i.e., equivalence sub-classes deﬁned by G-invariant gap-
preserving continuous deformations) are there within this H-class?
It turns out that in the presence of symmetry the structure of the phase di-
agram becomes much richer [see Figure 6.1(b)]. The class of SRE states, which
now contains diﬀerent phases, has a nontrivial structure that depends on the
speciﬁc group G. First, there are the “standard” Landau symmetry-breaking
phases (SB) corresponding to topologically trivial ground states that have a

162
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
lower symmetry than the Hamiltonian. More speciﬁcally, for each SB phase
the symmetry of the ground state is described by a speciﬁc subgroup U of G.
Second, there are states that do not break any symmetry but have distinct
topological properties that are protected by the symmetry group G. We will
call them symmetry-protected topological (SPT) phases. The (non-interacting)
topological insulators and superconductors discussed in the previous chapter
are examples of SPT states. In addition, there are interacting SPT phases, such
as, for example, the Haldane phase of the spin-1 chain. The interacting SPT
phases, which can be viewed as a direct generalization of the non-interacting
topological phases, occur in both fermionic and bosonic many-body systems.
Their basic properties and some examples are discussed in Section 6.3. Note
that SPT states do not possess (intrinsic) topological order and, for a given
H-class, they all have the same symmetry. If the symmetry constraint is re-
moved (i.e., if we allow for arbitrary deformations of the Hamiltonian), one can
continuously deform an SPT state into the trivial band insulator. Finally, we
note that symmetry protection can coexist with (partial) symmetry breaking.
For example, there can be several topologically distinct phases with symme-
try described by a (non-trivial) subgroup of G. In Figure 6.1(b) we use the
notation SB-SPT to designate these states.
While LRE states can belong to distinct phases even in the absence of any
symmetry, imposing symmetry constraints results in a richer structure. On
one hand, LRE can intertwine with symmetry breaking resulting in distinct
phases with broken symmetry and long-range entanglement [denoted SB-LRE
in Figure 6.1(b)]. On the other hand, in the presence of symmetry constraints
there may be several distinct ground states that have the same symmetry as
the Hamiltonian and cannot be continuously connected to one another (i.e.,
without a phase transition), but reduce to a single phase in the absence of
symmetry. We will call them symmetry-enriched topological (SET) phases [138,
442, 449]. These are distinct phases of matter sharing the same topological
order and symmetry group; upon breaking the symmetries the topological
order is unaﬀected, but the distinctions among the SET phases disappear.
A key property of non-interacting fermion topological insulators (super-
conductors) is the presence of robust gapless states at the boundary between
topologically distinct phases (e.g., between the system and vacuum). Since
(interacting) SPT phases can be viewed as the minimal generalizations of
non-interacting topological states, it is natural to ask about the fate of their
boundary modes. We emphasize that, unlike LRE phases, SPT phases do not
possess bulk topological order (i.e., no topological entanglement entropy, no
ground state degeneracies, no bulk excitations with fractional quantum num-
bers, etc.). However, the boundary of a d-dimensional SPT phase is always
non-trivial, in the sense that it cannot be realized in isolation, as a purely
(d −1)-dimensional object. For example, the surface states of 3D topological
insulators cannot be realized on a two-dimensional lattice. This impossibility
stems from the fact that certain properties of the boundary would be ill-deﬁned
for a (d −1)-dimensional system existing in isolation. These properties are re-

Interacting Topological Phases
■163
lated to the so-called quantum anomalies known from work in quantum ﬁeld
theory [18] and can be used to identify and classify SPT phases [378, 377].
The properties of the boundary states can be summarized as follows [299]:
i) The 0-dimensional boundary of a 1-dimensional (1D) SPT phase is always
gapless (i.e., the system has zero-energy bound states localized near its ends).
ii) The 1D boundary of a 2D SPT phase is either gapless or spontaneously
breaks the symmetry that protects the phase. iii) The 2D surface of a 3D
SPT phase is gapless or, if it has a gap, it either spontaneously breaks the
symmetry or carries intrinsic (boundary) topological order. Note that non-
interacting SPT phases are always gapless. Also note that the topologically
ordered states that emerge at the surface of a 3D interacting SPT phase are
LRE states that cannot be realized in a purely 2D system.
6.2
QUANTUM PHASES WITH TOPOLOGICAL ORDER
Topological order is a type of order that characterizes gapped quantum phases
of matter, such as quantum spin liquids [243, 364, 452] and fractional quan-
tum Hall ﬂuids [279, 428]. Here, we deﬁne a gapped quantum phase as the
equivalence class of ground states that can be continuously deformed into
one another by varying the parameters of a (local) Hamiltonian in such a
way as to maintain a non-zero energy gap for all excitations above the ground
state. Topological order is, in some sense, the very essence of topological quan-
tum matter: a type of order that is beyond the symmetry-breaking paradigm,
cannot be captured by any local order parameter, and is insensitive to local
perturbations. Note, however, that many topological phases (i.e., the SPT
phases) do not possess topological order and can be viewed as distinct phases
only in the presence of certain symmetries (i.e., they are not robust against
perturbations that break those symmetries).
The essential ingredient of a topologically ordered state is the presence of
long-range entanglement; distinct phases correspond to diﬀerent “patterns” of
long-range entanglement. At the time of this writing the general classiﬁcation
of topologically ordered phases is an open question, although interesting par-
tial results have been obtained in recent years. We will refrain from discussing
these results, which typically involve sophisticated mathematical formalisms.
Instead, we focus on two paradigmatic examples of topologically ordered sys-
tems: the fractional quantum Hall liquids and the toric code. These examples
will allow us to identify most of the key features that characterize topologically
ordered phases, which can be summarized as follows:
• Robust ground state degeneracy for systems deﬁned on (topologically non-
trivial) compact manifolds (e.g., on a torus). Degeneracies are typically
associated with symmetry; remarkably, in the presence of topological order
all symmetries may be broken, yet the ground state has a degeneracy that
only depends on the topology of space and cannot be lifted by any local
perturbation.
• Non-local excitations. While “typical” quasiparticles are created by local

164
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
operators, in a topologically ordered state excitations can only be created
by inﬁnite products of local operators. As a result, these excitations have
intrinsically non-local properties, such as non-trivial statistics. The ground
state degeneracy and the existence of non-local excitations are related prop-
erties stemming from the presence of long-range entanglement.
• The low-energy dynamics of systems deﬁned on compact spaces depends
only on the topology of the space and can be described in the framework
of topological ﬁeld theory. The theory completely captures the universal
low-energy physics of the system, including the ground state degeneracy
and the properties of the non-local excitations. All these properties reveal
the existence of long-range order (stemming from long-range entanglement)
without the presence of any long-range correlations for local operators.
• In the presence of global symmetries a topological phase can split into sev-
eral symmetry-enriched topological phases. Moreover, the interplay between
symmetry and topology leads to the emergence of non-local quasiparticle
excitations that carry fractionalized quantum numbers of the global sym-
metry group (as compared to the corresponding numbers carried by local
excitations). For example, the quasiholes in a ν =
1
m Laughlin state carry
electric charge
e
m. The phases that support this type of excitations are of-
ten called fractional topological phases, e.g., fractional quantum Hall liquids,
fractional Chern insulators, and fractional topological insulators.
6.2.1
Effective theory of Abelian fractional quantum Hall liquids
One possible approach to understanding topologically ordered systems is to
construct an eﬀective theory that captures the universal low-energy proper-
ties and provides labeling for (hence, classiﬁes) diﬀerent topological orders.
A prominent example is the so-called K-matrix formulation [454] of two-
dimensional topological phases with Abelian topological order, which is be-
lieved to provide a complete classiﬁcation of all Abelian fractional quantum
Hall (FQH) states [54, 361, 454]. In this section we sketch the construction of
the eﬀective theory and point out some of its key implications. Details can be
found in, for example, Refs. [287, 454, 450]. Systematic reviews of the FQH
eﬀect can be found in many books, for example Refs. [113, 141, 476].
The FQH eﬀect [428] is a physical phenomenon that occurs at low temper-
atures in two-dimensional electron systems in the presence of a high magnetic
ﬁeld. Its most striking manifestation is the emergence of precisely quantized
Hall conductance plateaus at fractional values of e2/h. A key step in under-
standing the FQH eﬀect was the discovery by Laughlin of a many-body trial
function for the ground states of FQH ﬂuids with ﬁlling fraction ν = 1/m
(where m is an odd integer) [279]. The Laughlin states support quasiparticle
excitations that have fractional charge q = e/m and satisfy anyonic statistics3
3For details on the deﬁnition and properties of anyons see Chapter 12.

Interacting Topological Phases
■165
with statistical angle θ = π/m [25]. Another key development involves the
understanding of FQH states at ﬁlling fractions other than ν = 1/m using
the so-called hierarchical construction proposed by Haldane [203] and further
clariﬁed by Halperin [206]. An alternative approach was proposed by Jain
[231], in which a FQH liquid is viewed as an integer quantum Hall state of
composite particles consisting of electrons having attached an even number of
quantized vortices [215]. Note that diﬀerent constructions may lead to diﬀerent
wave functions corresponding to the same ﬁlling fractions ν ̸= 1/m. Whether
or not these states belong to the same universality class can be determined
within the K-matrix formalism described below.
Effective theory of the Laughlin states
We start with the eﬀective theory for the Laughlin state [451]. At ﬁlling frac-
tion ν = 1/m, the ground state of a two-dimensional interacting system con-
sisting of N particles (bosons or fermions) moving in a strong perpendicular
magnetic ﬁeld is described by the Laughlin wave function [279]
Ψ(z1, . . . , zN) =
Y
i<j
(zi −zj)m exp
 
−
X
i
|zi|2
4l2
B
!
,
(6.3)
where zi = xi +iyi represents the coordinates of the ith particle, l2
B = ℏ/eB is
the magnetic length, and m is an even integer if the particles are bosons and
an odd integer for fermions. Note that all particles are in the ﬁrst Landau level
and that there is an mth order zero for every pair of particles that approach
each other, which indicates that the state (6.3) is highly correlated. The highly
organized nature of the Laughlin state, which is not associated with any broken
symmetry and cannot be captured by any local order parameter, reﬂects the
topological order of the corresponding phase.
Consider now a small change δAλ of the external electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Here, we use Greek letters to represent space-time indices; the quantities A0 =
−ϕ and (A1, A2) = A represent the scalar and vector potentials, respectively.
In response to the perturbation, the charge current changes by
(−e) δJµ = −σxyϵµνλ∂νδAλ,
(6.4)
where σxy = νe2
h
is the quantized Hall conductance and Jµ is the (conserved)
particle number “current,” with J0 = P
i δ(r −ri) and J ≡(J1, J2) =
P
i viδ(r −ri) being the particle number density and current, respectively.
In addition, we assumed that each particle carries electric charge −e and that
the uniform magnetic ﬁeld applied to the system has Bz = B > 0. For sim-
plicity, in this section we will choose ℏ= 1 (i.e., h = 2π). The conservation of
the particle number current, ∂µJµ = 0, is automatically satisﬁed if we express
Jµ in terms of a U(1) gauge ﬁeld aµ,
Jµ = 1
2π ϵµνλ∂νaλ.
(6.5)

166
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
The dynamics of the gauge ﬁeld will be given by some Lagrangian that gen-
erates Eq. (6.4) as an equation of motion. The eﬀective Lagrangian (density)
that satisﬁes this condition has the form
L = m
4π ϵµνλ aµ∂νaλ −e
2π ϵµνλ Aµ∂νaλ,
(6.6)
where Aµ represents the external electromagnetic ﬁeld that couples to the
charge current (−e)Jµ. One can easily check that the Lagrange equations
∂ν

∂L
∂(∂νaµ)

= ∂L
∂aµ
(6.7)
produce the desired response to an external perturbation, i.e., Eq. (6.4). We
note that, in the absence of a perturbation, the equation corresponding to
µ = 0 reads mJ0 =
e
2πB. Since eB/2π = 1/2πl2
B represents the number of
degenerate (single particle) states per unit area, this equation tells us that the
ﬁlling factor is ν = J02π/eB = 1/m.
We have constructed an eﬀective theory for the quantum Hall state at
ﬁlling fraction ν = 1/m that describes the linear response of the ground state
to an external electromagnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁrst term in Eq. (6.6) is referred to
as the Chern–Simons term and the eﬀective theory deﬁned by the Lagrangian
(6.6) is a Chern–Simons topological quantum ﬁeld theory4 [85]. Note, however,
that the eﬀective theory is not complete without specifying the local particle
excitations, i.e., the excitations corresponding to the underlying fermions or
bosons.
Let us ﬁrst consider an excitation that carries a (dimensionless) gauge
charge l associated with aµ, which corresponds to adding a source term
−la0δ(r −r0). The Lagrange equation for µ = 0 becomes
J0 ≡1
2π ϵij∂iaj =
e
2πmB + l
mδ(r −r0),
(6.8)
where ϵij = ϵ0ij. Eq. (6.8) indicates that the particle density has increased
due to the presence of the excitation by ∆J0 =
l
mδ(r −r0). The additional
electromagnetic charge carried by the quasiparticle is
ql = −e l
m.
(6.9)
Furthermore, we can deﬁne the aµ-ﬂux through a surface S as
R
S d2r b, with
b = ϵij∂iaj. Hence, Eq. (6.8) tells us that, in addition to having a gauge charge
l, the excitation carries a gauge ﬂux 2πl/m (which means l/m aµ-ﬂux quanta,
when expressed in units of h = 2π). This has profound implications for the
4A general discussion of the Chern–Simons theory can be found in Chapter 7. Its relation
to the properties of anyonic excitations is mentioned in Chapter 12. More details can be
found in books on quantum ﬁeld theory, for example [152] and [450].

Interacting Topological Phases
■167
exchange statistics of the quasiparticles. Taking an excitation that carries aµ-
charge l1 around another excitation with aµ-charge l2 will induce a phase θl1l2
that characterizes the mutual statistics of the two quasiparticles. Explicitly
we have [450]
θl1l2 = 2π l1l2
m .
(6.10)
When l1 = l2 = l, interchanging the two (identical) excitations will induce
half of the angle in Eq. (6.10) representing the statistical angle of the type-l
quasiparticles,
θl = π l2
m.
(6.11)
Based on the above considerations, we can identify the fundamental parti-
cles that form the FQH ﬂuid as the excitations that carry m units of aµ-charge.
Indeed, such a particle carries electromagnetic charge qm = −e and has a sta-
tistical angle θm = πm, which corresponds to a fermion if m is odd and to a
boson if m is even. This identiﬁcation of the fundamental underlying particles
completes the construction of the eﬀective theory.
Remarkably, the identiﬁcation of the fundamental particles with the exci-
tations that carry m units of aµ-charge imposes a constraint on the allowed
excitations. First, note that a quasihole located at ζ = x+iy can be described
by multiplying the ground state wave function (6.3) by a factor Q
i(ζ −zi).
Taking a fundamental particle around this quasihole excitation results in a
phase change of 2π. In other words, the fundamental particle and the quasi-
hole excitation have trivial mutual statistics. In general, the single-valuedness
of the wave function requires the allowed excitations to have trivial mutual
statistics with the fundamental particles. Consequently, for an allowed excita-
tion that carries aµ-charge l, the angle θml has to be a multiple of 2π. Using
Eq. (6.10), we conclude that the aµ-charge of an allowed excitation must be
an integer. For example, the elementary quasihole excitation corresponds to
l = −1, carries fractional electromagnetic charge q−1 = +e/m, and has frac-
tional statistics θ−1 = π/m, while the elementary quasiparticle excitation has
aµ-charge l = 1, carries electromagnetic charge q1 = −e/m, and has statistics
θ1 = π/m. These results reproduce the well-known properties of the quasipar-
ticles in the Laughlin state [25]. The full eﬀective theory of the Laughlin state
with ν = 1/m in the presence of quasiparticles is given by the Lagrangian
L = m
4π ϵµνλ aµ∂νaλ −e
2π ϵµνλ Aµ∂νaλ −laµjµ,
(6.12)
where the quasiparticle current has j0 = P
i δ(r −ri) and j = P
i viδ(r −ri).
Effective theory of the hierarchical states and general formulation
Starting with a Laughlin state, we can construct a hierarchy of FQH ﬂuids
[203, 206]. Consider a system with ﬁlling fraction ν ≳1/m, so that we create
a certain number of elementary excitations with l = 1. Following Haldane’s

168
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
approach, we can view the gauge ﬁeld aµ, at the mean-ﬁeld level, as creating a
background “magnetic” ﬁeld b = ϵij∂iaj for the quasiparticles, which behave
like bosons in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld. When the quasiparticle density satis-
ﬁes j0 = (1/p)2π/b, where p is an even integer, the ground state of the bosons
is again described by a Laughlin wave function. Thus, we can retrace the main
steps from the previous section, starting with the introduction of a new U(1)
gauge ﬁeld ¯aµ and the representation of the (conserved) quasiparticle current
in a form analog to Eq. (6.5),
jµ = 1
2π ϵµνλ∂ν¯aλ.
(6.13)
The dynamics of the new gauge ﬁeld will be given by a Chern–Simons term
with coeﬃcient p. The total eﬀective theory, which includes the original par-
ticle condensate and the quasiparticle condensate, has the form
L = m
4π ϵµνλ aµ∂νaλ −e
2π ϵµνλ Aµ∂νaλ + p
4π ϵµνλ ¯aµ∂ν¯aλ −1
2π ϵµνλ aµ∂ν¯aλ.
(6.14)
The total ﬁlling factor, which can be determined from the Lagrange equations
for aµ and ¯aµ corresponding to µ = 0, is
ν =
1
m −1
p
.
(6.15)
Thus, we have constructed an eﬀective low-energy theory of a second-level
hierarchical state [203]. We can write Eq. (6.14 in a more compact way using
the notations (a1
µ, a2
µ) = (aµ, ¯aµ), tT ≡(t1, t2) = (1, 0) and introducing the
integer matrix
K =

m
−1
−1
p

.
(6.16)
With these notations, Eq. (6.14) becomes
L = 1
4π ϵµνλaI
µKIJ ∂νaJ
λ −e
2π tI ϵµνλ Aµ∂νaI
λ,
(6.17)
where I, J ∈{1, 2} and summation over repeated indices is implied.
The generalization of Eq. (6.17) to the case of N gauge ﬁelds aI
µ, I =
1, 2, . . . , N, represents the low-energy eﬀective theory of a generic Abelian
quantum Hall state [454] with ﬁlling fraction
ν = tT K−1t,
(6.18)
where tT = (t1, t2 . . . , tN). This so-called K-matrix formulation describes the
bulk of a two-dimensional Abelian topological system in terms of an N-
component U(1) Chern–Simons theory that involves the N × N symmetric,
nondegenerate integer matrix K and the N-component integer vector t (often
called the charge vector). If the underlying particles are bosons, all diagonal

Interacting Topological Phases
■169
elements of K are even integers, while in the case of fermions at least one
diagonal entry is an odd integer.
The topological order of the FQH state is characterized, in part, by the
degeneracy of the ground state for systems deﬁned on topologically non-trivial
compact manifolds. In the K-matrix formulation, the ground state degeneracy
on a Riemann surface of genus g is given by |det K|g. Note that certain
states with no topological order (i.e., SPT states) can be described in the
K-matrix formalism by matrices with |det K| = 1 [298]. In addition, the
eﬀective theory (6.17) describes the properties of the quasiparticle excitations.
A generic quasiparticle is characterized by an integer vector l with components
representing the integer gauge charge lI carried by the excitation under each
of the gauge ﬁelds aI
µ. The quasiparticles can be introduced by adding to the
Lagrangian (6.17) a term of the form −lIaI
µjµ
l , where jµ
l is the current of
type-l quasiparticles. The physical electric charge carried by each excitation
is given by
ql = −e lT K−1t,
(6.19)
This generalizes the result given by Eq. (6.9). Note that in the K-matrix
formalism the Laughlin states correspond to N = 1, K = m and t = 1.
Furthermore, the mutual statistics corresponding to taking quasiparticle l1
around quasiparticle l2 is characterized by the phase
θl1l2 = 2πlT
1 K−1l2.
(6.20)
Finally, the statistical angle θl of the type-l quasiparticle is given by an ex-
pression that generalizes Eq. (6.11),
θl = πlT K−1l.
(6.21)
What are the “local” excitations corresponding to the fundamental parti-
cles in this generic K-matrix formalism? One can easily check that the quasi-
particles with gauge charge l = Kλ, where λ is an N-component integer
vector, have electric charge ql = −e λT t, which is an integer multiple of e.
Hence, the quasiparticle with l = Kλ are local composites of the fundamental
particles. Since at least one local excitation has to have the electric charge of
the fundamental particle, the charge vector must satisfy the constraint
gcd[t1, t2, . . . , tN] = 1,
(6.22)
where “gcd” denotes the greatest common divisor. Indeed, assuming that tI =
1, the local excitation with λI = 1 and λJ = 0 for all J ̸= I has charge −e.
Furthermore, the statistical angle of a local excitation with l = Kλ is
θl = πλT Kλ = π
X
I
KIIλ2
I
(mod 2π).
(6.23)
If the underlying particles are bosons, the diagonal elements KII must be

170
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
even integers. If, on the other hand, the fundamental particles are fermions,
we require that all local excitations with even charge λT t (in units of −e) must
be bosons, while those with odd charge must be fermions. This requirement
imposes the constraint
KII = tI
(mod 2).
(6.24)
In the absence of additional symmetries (e.g., time reversal) the K-matrix and
charge vector are unconstrained, except for the requirements discussed above.
Can two diﬀerent K-matrices represent the same phase? The answer is yes.
One can obtain an equivalent K-matrix through a redeﬁnition of the gauge
ﬁelds aI
µ. However, it is important to emphasize that an Abelian topological
phase is described by the Lagrangian (6.17) together with the quantization
condition of the aI
µ-charges.5 The transformations that keep the quantization
condition unchanged are N × N integer matrices with unit determinant, i.e.,
elements of the group SL(N, Z). Consequently, two eﬀective theories described
by (K1, t1) and (K2, t2), respectively, belong to the same equivalence class
(i.e., describe the same FQH state) if there exists W ∈SL(N, Z) such that
K2 = WK1W T ,
t2 = Wt1.
(6.25)
The corresponding gauge ﬁelds transform according to aI
µ →P
J WIJaJ
µ.
We close with a few important remarks. First, we note that FQH sys-
tems with boundaries always contain one-dimensional gapless edge excitations.
These excitations should be distinguished from the gapped bulk excitations.
The structure of the edge states reﬂects the bulk topological order and, con-
sequently, there is a bulk-edge correspondence that allows us to analyze some
of the properties of the topological system in terms of either bulk or edge
degrees of freedom [152, 450]. For example, the chirality of the edge (i.e., the
diﬀerence between the number of right and left moving modes) is given by
the signature of the K-matrix (number of positive minus number of negative
eigenvalues). In addition, the edge excitations provide a convenient way to
probe the topological order of the bulk. Second, we note that non-Abelian
FQH states (such as, for example, the ν = 5/2 state) are not classiﬁed by K-
matrices. On the other hand, the K-matrix formalism can be used to discuss
topological phases in the absence of topological order (i.e., SPT phases) [298].
Finally, we note that two fractional excitations that diﬀer by ∆l = Kλ (i.e.,
by a local excitation vector) are equivalent. The number of distinct fractional
quasi-particles is equal to the number of linearly independent, non-equivalent
vectors l, which is given by the determinant of K. For example, the Laughlin
state ν = 1/m supports m distinct quasiparticle excitations.
5A U(1) gauge theory equipped with a quantization condition on the allowed gauge
charges is called a compact U(1) theory.

Interacting Topological Phases
■171
6.2.2
The toric code
The toric code is an exactly solvable spin-1/2 model on a two-dimensional
lattice (typically a square lattice). The model, proposed by Alexei Kitaev
[261], provides the canonical example of a topological phase. When deﬁned on
a surface of genus g (e.g., a torus6), the model has a ground state degeneracy
of 4g, which reveals the underlying topological order. More speciﬁcally, the
toric code has Z2 topological order, a type of quantum order that was ﬁrst
studied in the context of spin liquids [364]. This highly entangled topological
state supports emergent excitations that turn out to be Abelian anyons. In
addition, the toric code is the simplest example of a so-called quantum double
model [256]. There is a direct relation between this type of model and quantum
error correction (see Chapter 11). In this context, the toric code is an example
of a so-called stabilizer code [188, 77].
Consider a set of spin-1/2 degrees of freedom deﬁned on the links of a two-
dimensional square lattice, as shown in Figure 6.2. The local operator acting
on each link “i” is the spin operator σi = (σx
i , σy
i , σz
i ). We introduce the vertex
(or “star”) operator Av and the plaquette operator Bp as the products
Av =
Y
i∈v
σx
i ,
Bp =
Y
i∈p
σz
i ,
(6.26)
where the star (or vertex) label “v” is associated with the four bonds that meet
at a vertex and the plaquette label “p” corresponds to the bonds surrounding
a plaquette (see Figure 6.2). The toric code is deﬁned by the Hamiltonian
Htc = −J
X
v
Av −K
X
p
Bb,
(6.27)
where J and K are positive coupling constants and the sums are over all sites
v and plaquettes p. All star operators Av commute with each other, as do the
plaquette operators Bp. Moreover, since any given star and plaquette share
either two edges or none, we also have [Av, Bp] = 0, which means that all
terms in the Hamiltonian commute. In addition, the operators Av and Bp
square to one, so that their eigenvalues are ±1. Consequently, to minimize
the energy of the system one should identify the many-body states that are
eigenstates of Av and Bp with eigenvalue +1 for every star and plaquette.
The ground states
Consider the σx basis, which contains all the states |s⟩= |s1s2 . . . sN⟩with
the property
σx
j |s⟩= sj|s⟩,
(6.28)
where sj = ±1. From this basis, we select a subset L of states characterized
by an even number of negative eigenvalues sj = −1 on every star, i.e., states
6The torus is the natural geometry for a translation-invariant system, i.e., when imposing
periodic boundary conditions. The “toric code” gets its name from this geometry.

172
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Bp
Av
ℓy
ℓx
L1
L2
FIGURE 6.2: A piece of the square lattice on which the toric code is deﬁned.
Spin-1/2 degrees of freedom are associated with each link of the lattice. The
star and plaquette operators Av and Bp deﬁned by Eq. (6.26) are products
of σx
i operators (black squares) and σz
i operators (black circles), respectively.
The “trivial” loop L1 is generated by acting with Bp for the gray plaquettes
on the state |11 . . . 1⟩. For a system with periodic boundary conditions, the
“nontrivial” loop L2 cycles the torus in the y direction. The large cycles ℓx
and ℓy are independent, non-contractible loops on the torus. Note that L1 has
(πx, πy) = (1, 1), while L2 has (πx, πy) = (−1, 1) (see main text).
that satisfy the property Q
j∈v sj = 1 for every star v. Note that the links with
sj = −1 necessarily form closed loops (since an open string would imply the
existence of stars with only one negative eigenvalue at the ends of the string).
We will refer to the elements of L as “loop states.”
Clearly, the loop states are eigenstates of the star operator with eigenvalue
+1, i.e., Av|s⟩= |s⟩for every star v. On the other hand, all states |s⟩/∈L
have at least two sites v such that Av|s⟩= −|s⟩. Consequently, the ground
state should be constructed as a linear superposition of loop states,
|Ψ⟩=
(|s⟩∈L)
X
s
αs|s⟩,
(6.29)
where the coeﬃcients αs have to be determined so that |Ψ⟩is also an eigenstate
of the plaquette operators with eigenvalue +1.
Acting with σz
j on an eigenstate of σx
j will ﬂip the spin, sj →−sj. Con-
sequently, since a plaquette operator Bp will ﬂip two spins on each adjacent
star, its action will transform a loop state into another loop state. Let us focus
ﬁrst on systems deﬁned on the plane. We notice that in this case all the loops
of a given loop state |s⟩can be viewed as the boundaries of a certain set of
plaquettes (see Figure 6.2). We use the notation PL(s) to designate this set.

Interacting Topological Phases
■173
Based on these observations, we can write a generic loop state in the form
|s⟩=


p∈PL(s)
Y
p
Bp

|11 . . . 1⟩≡BPL(s)|11 . . . 1⟩,
(6.30)
where the operator BPL(s) is the “creation operator” for the loops of state
|s⟩.
Let us now consider the states of the form
|ψ(s)⟩=
Y
p
1
√
2(1 + Bp)|s⟩,
(6.31)
with |s⟩being an arbitrary loop state. Acting with products of plaquette
operators on |s⟩will generate other elements of L, hence |ψ(s)⟩is a superpo-
sition of loop states, i.e., it has a form given by Eq. (6.29). Moreover, since
Bp(1 + Bp) = Bp + 1, the state |ψ(s)⟩is an eigenstate of the plaquette oper-
ator (with eigenvalue +1) for every plaquette p. We conclude that |ψ(s)⟩is a
ground state of the toric code Hamiltonian (6.27). Note that the ground state
(6.31) is a massive superposition of loop states and that it is highly entangled.
How many distinct ground states are there? For a system deﬁned on the
plane, we can write the state |s⟩in Eq. (6.31) in the form given by Eq. (6.30)
and use the property Q
p(1 + Bp) BPL(s) = Q
p(1 + Bp), which holds for an
arbitrary set PL(s) because B2
p = 1. We conclude that in this case the ground
state is unique and can be written in the form
|Ψ⟩=
Y
p
1
√
2(1 + Bp)|11 . . . 1⟩.
(6.32)
With periodic boundary condition, i.e., on the torus, we have to reconsider the
arguments leading to Eq. (6.30). Indeed, a single non-trivial loop that winds in
the x or y direction around the torus cannot be represented as the boundary of
a set of plaquettes. The BPL operator can only create pairs of non-trivial loops,
i.e., it cannot change the parity of the number of nontrivial loops. If ℓx and
ℓy are two independent large cycles on the torus (see Figure 6.2), we describe
this parity by deﬁning the parameter πµ(s) = (−1)Mℓµ, where ℓµ = ℓx, ℓy
and Mℓµ is the number of times the cycle ℓµ intersects a loop. Note that
πµ(s) is invariant to the action of plaquette operators. Consequently, we have
four distinct classes of loop states characterized by (πx, πy) = (1, 1), (−1, 1),
(1, −1), and (−1, −1), respectively.
The loop states given by Eq, (6.30) and the ground state (6.32) belong to
the (1, 1) class. There are three more ground states that belong to the other
classes of loop states. We choose |0⟩11 ≡|11 . . . 1⟩as the representative of the
(1, 1) class. Similarly, we choose |0⟩−11 (the state with one loop along ℓx),
|0⟩1−1 (the state with one loop along ℓy), and |0⟩−1−1 (the state with one
loop along ℓx and one along ℓy) are representatives of the other three classes.
With these notations, the four degenerate ground states of the toric code are
|Ψ⟩πxπy =
Y
p
1
√
2(1 + Bp)|0⟩πxπy.
(6.33)

174
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
a
a
a
a
m
m
e
e
W (e)
γ
W (m)
γ∗
γ∗
FIGURE 6.3: Anyons in the toric code. A pair of e-particles is created at the
ends of a string W (e)
γ
of σz operators, while a pair of m-particles is created by
applying σx operators along a string γ∗deﬁned on the dual lattice.
We note that these degenerate states cannot be distinguished locally, i.e., for
any local operator7 O we have πxπy⟨Ψ|O|Ψ⟩π′
xπ′
y = δπxπ′
xδπyπ′
y. As a result, the
fourfold degeneracy of the toric code is robust against arbitrary perturbations
(as long as they are below some threshold) and provides an invariant that
characterizes the topological order of the system.
The excitations
The lowest energy excitations of the toric code can be generated by choosing
one star or one plaquette to be negative. We refer to these excitations as “elec-
tric” (e) and “magnetic” (m) quasiparticles, respectively. The energy cost for
creating an e-particle is 2J, while for an m-particle the excitation energy is
2K. For simplicity, we restrict our attention to the planar system. Interest-
ingly, the quasiparticles can only be created in pairs. For example, applying
σz
j to the ground state creates two e-particles, since the link j is shared by
two stars. Applying σz along a string of links will create two e-particles at
the ends of the string (see Figure 6.3). Similarly, a pair of m-particles can
be generated by applying σx operators along a certain string deﬁned on the
dual lattice, as indicated in Figure 6.3. The wave functions that describe these
states can be obtained by acting on the ground state (6.32) with the following
path operators
W (e)
γ
=
Y
j∈γ
σz
j ,
W (m)
γ∗
=
Y
j∈γ∗
σx
j ,
(6.34)
where γ is a path on the lattice between sites v1 and v2, and γ∗is a path on
the dual lattice between plaquettes p1 and p2 (see Figure 6.3).
7A local operator is deﬁned as a product of σµ
j operators over a ﬁnite cluster of links.

Interacting Topological Phases
■175
The e- and m-particles have trivial bosonic self-statistics. For example,
taking an e-particle around another e-particle does not change the wave func-
tion of the system. However, their mutual statistics is non-trivial. Consider,
for example, a state |ψi⟩with an m-particle at the origin and an e-particle far
away. We can move the e-particle from one site to the next by acting with σz
on the link connecting the two sites. Completing a closed loop C around the
origin corresponds to acting with W (e)
C
on the initial state. But, repeating the
arguments that led to Eq. (6.30), we have Q
j∈C σz
j = Q
p∈A Bp, where A is
the area bounded by C. Since, there is exactly one negative contribution to
the product over plaquettes (the one involving the m-particle), we have
|ψf⟩=
Y
j∈C
σz
j |ψi⟩= −|ψi⟩.
(6.35)
Hence, bringing an e-particle around an m-particle induces a π phase shift
(i.e., the two types of particles are mutual “semions”).
We conclude that the toric code is a model characterized by the emergence
of quasiparticles with non-local properties, such as non-trivial mutual statis-
tics. This can be viewed as the deﬁning characteristic of the model, fundamen-
tally connected to the underlying topological order. We note that all the other
topological properties of the system, including the ground state degeneracy,
can be understood based on the properties of the quasiparticles [259].
6.3
SYMMETRY PROTECTED TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM SATES
Symmetry-protected topological (SPT) phases [199] are short-range entangled
(SRE) gapped states whose topological properties rely on the presence of
symmetries. SPT states do not possess intrinsic (bulk) topological order (i.e.,
they have no ground state degeneracies, topological entanglement entropy,
exotic bulk excitations, etc.), but may have non-trivial surface states. With
symmetry constraints, they represent distinct phases separated from trivial
states (and from one another) by quantum phase transitions, but once the
symmetry constraints are removed, SPT phases are continuously deformable
to a trivial state (e.g., the atomic insulator).
SPT phases can be viewed as the minimal generalization of the concept of
free fermion topological insulator (TI) to the interacting regime. For concise-
ness, we will refer to the free fermion TIs and superconductors as topological
band insulators (TBIs). Clearly TBIs are special cases of SPT phases. Adding
interactions generates qualitatively new features and changes the classiﬁca-
tion of topological phases. In essence, interactions can i) cause some (non-
interacting) phases to merge, thus reducing the free fermion classiﬁcation for
certain symmetry classes, ii) allow for new topological phases to exist that
necessarily require the presence of interactions, and iii) allow for the appear-
ance of new types of boundary physics. In addition, interacting topological
phases emerge in both fermionic and bosonic (or spin) systems. Below, we
consider a few examples that illustrate these generic features, focusing on one-

176
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
dimensional systems. We note that the general classiﬁcation of SPT phases in
dimensions higher than one is still an outstanding open problem, despite the
signiﬁcant progress made in recent years. Surveys of the progress in under-
standing and classifying SPT phases can be found in Refs. [377, 398, 431].
6.3.1
SPT phases in one dimension
In one (spatial) dimension (1D), there is no topological order, i.e., all gapped
phases are SRE phases [435]. Consequently, without symmetry constraints all
gapped states belong to the trivial phase, while in the presence of symmetry
the gapped 1D ground states are either symmetry-breaking (topologically triv-
ial) phases or SPT phases (with or without symmetry-breaking). The bound-
ary states of 1D SPT phases are always gapless. Examples of 1D SPT states
include noninteracting phases of fermions, such as the p-wave superconduc-
tor (class D) or the time-reversal symmetric 1D superconductor (class BDI),
as well as interacting states, such as the Haldane phase of spin-1 Heisenberg
antiferromagnetic chains.
The Haldane phase of spin-1 quantum spin chains
In 1983 Haldane suggested that the 1D antiferromagnetic Heisenberg spin
chain has gapless (bulk) excitations for half-odd integer spins, while for in-
teger spins the ground state is separated from all (bulk) excited states by
a ﬁnite gap [204]. It turns out that the gapped states of integer spin chains
can be topologically non-trivial. The spin-1 chain provides one of the canon-
ical examples of SPT phase. In the Haldane phase, the ground state has the
remarkable property that, although the system consists of spin-1 spins, it sup-
ports a spin-half moment at each end of the wire. Note that this fractional
moment is robust against perturbations that do not break the symmetries
protecting the SPT state (e.g., time-reversal) and cannot be “built” using
a ﬁnite number of spin-1 spins. We emphasize, however, that this type of
fractional excitation occurs only at the boundary of the system and has to
be distinguished from bulk quasiparticles with fractional quantum numbers,
which emerge in topologically ordered states (i.e., LRE states). Furthermore,
for an open spin chain there are four degenerate ground states — the same
number as one would expect for a pair of spin- 1
2 particles — but, when deﬁned
on a compact manifold (i.e., with periodic boundary conditions), the system
has a unique ground state. Again, this property is to be distinguished from the
ground state degeneracy of topologically ordered phases deﬁned on compact
manifolds.
Consider the simple model of a spin-1 chain with nearest-neighbor ex-
change interactions and on-site single-ion anisotropy described by the Hamil-
tonian
H = J
X
⟨i,j⟩
Si · Sj + D
X
i
(Sz
i )2.
(6.36)

Interacting Topological Phases
■177
One can show [312] that for −0.2 ≲D/J ≲1 the system is in the Haldane
phase with a gapped ground state characterized by short-range antiferromag-
netic spin correlations, ⟨Sα
0 Sβ
n⟩∝(−1)nδαβ n−1/2e−nξ, where the correlation
length ξ is of the order of a few lattice constants. The lowest energy (bulk)
excitations form a massive magnon triplet.
The properties of Hamiltonian (6.36) and of related models have been
investigated using a variety of theoretical tools and some of the predictions
have been tested experimentally on quasi-one-dimensional S = 1 quantum
magnets (see, for example, [312, 456] and references therein). We note that, in
the large-S limit, the Heisenberg chain model can be mapped to a continuum
ﬁeld theory, the non-linear sigma model (NLσM) with a topological term
[4, 152]. This mapping provides a basic understanding of the spin-1 chain,
including its topological properties.
Further insight into the nature of the Haldane phase can be obtained from
the ground state of a related spin model proposed by Aﬄeck, Kennedy, Lieb,
and Tasaki — the so-called AKLT model [5]. Let P2(S1 + S2) denote the
projection operator onto the subspace spanned by the states of S1 + S2 with
total spin S = 2. We can express the projector in terms of spin operators as
P2(S1 + S2) = 1
2S1 · S2 + 1
6(S1 · S2)2 + 1
3,
(6.37)
where we took into account that S1 · S2 acting on states with S = 0, S = 1,
and S = 2 has eigenvalues (in units of ℏ) −2, −1, and 1, respectively. The
AKLT model is deﬁned by the Hamiltonian
H = 2J
X
i
P2(Si + Si+1) = J
X
i

Si · Si+1 + 1
3(Si · Si+1)2 + 2
3

,
(6.38)
where J is a positive constant. Clearly, a state that would only contain com-
binations with total spin S = 0 and S = 1 for each pair of neighboring sites
would be the exact ground state of the AKLT Hamiltonian (6.38).
To construct such a state, the main idea [5] is to represent the spin-1 at
each site in terms of two 1/2 spins, then put two of the 1/2 spins associated
with each bond into a singlet state. Speciﬁcally, we have Si = P1( eS2i−1+ eS2i),
where eSj are spin-1/2 operators and P1 is the projector onto spin-1 states.
At each site, the standard spin-1 basis can be written in the form
|−⟩= | ↓↓⟩,
|0⟩=
1
√
2 [| ↑↓⟩+ | ↓↑⟩] ,
|+⟩= | ↑↑⟩,
(6.39)
where | ↑⟩and | ↓⟩are spin-1/2 eigenstates. Next, we construct the ground
state of the AKLT Hamiltonian by imposing the condition that the spins 1/2
from adjacent sites labeled by 2i and 2i + 1 form a singlet. Since two of the
four 1/2 spins associated with sites i and i+1 form a singlet, the spins 2i−1,
2i, 2i + 1, and 2i + 2 will be in a mixture of states with total spin 0 and 1.
Acting with P2(Si + Si+1) on this state will give zero, which means that it is

178
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
α
β
α
= α↑|↑⟩+α↓|↓⟩
spin- 1
2 state
= 1
√
2(|↑↓⟩−|↓↑⟩)
singlet pair
= P
projection onto S = 1
FIGURE 6.4: Schematic representation of the VBS wave function representing
the ground state of the S = 1 AKLT model (6.38). Each spin-1 degree of
freedom (shaded ellipse) is represented by a pair of S = 1/2 spins (black
circles). Pairs of 1/2 spins from neighboring sites form singlets, i.e., valence
bonds (thick lines). In an open chain, unpaired S = 1/2 degrees of freedom
are present at each boundary.
indeed the ground state of Hamiltonian (6.38). The AKLT ground state can
be represented diagrammatically as in Figure 6.4. We note that similar ground
states can be constructed for any integer spin S > 1; the resulting states are
called valence bond solid (VBS) states.
To write down the AKLT state in terms of the original spin states, it is
convenient to introduce the so-called matrix product state (MPS) representa-
tion of 1D ground states [142, 349, 84]. In general, a quantum state |Ψ⟩of a
1D lattice system (with periodic boundary conditions) can be represented as
|Ψ⟩=
X
s1,s2,...
Tr [As1As2 . . . ] |s1s2 . . . ⟩,
(6.40)
where |s1s2 . . . ⟩is a many-body basis state representing the direct product
of spin states |si⟩associated with each site and Asi are m-dimensional ma-
trices. We note that the ground state of any gapped 1D Hamiltonian can
be represented as a MPS [434]. Furthermore, the MPS representation can be
used to distinguish SPT phases and provides a complete classiﬁcation of these
phases in d = 1 dimensions [349, 84, 392]. For the AKLT model, we have
|si⟩→|−⟩, |0⟩, |+⟩and m = 2. The corresponding Asi matrices are
A−= −1
√
6σ−,
A0 = −1
√
3σz,
A+ = −1
√
6σ+,
(6.41)
where σ± = σx ± iσy and σα represent Pauli matrices. One can easily check
that for any two matrices As1 and As2 the state As1As2|s1s2⟩does not contain
any component with total spin S = 2.
While the trace in Eq. (6.40) corresponds to periodic boundary condi-
tions, the four degenerate ground states of a (long) open chain are given by
the four matrix elements of the product As1As2 . . . AsN acting on the state
|s1s2 . . . sN⟩. These degenerate ground states can be understood intuitively

Interacting Topological Phases
■179
based on the schematic representation shown in Figure 6.4 as corresponding
to the four boundary states associated with the unpaired S = 1/2 spins at
the ends of the chain. In the thermodynamic limit (N →∞), these bound-
ary modes become gapless. Also, using the MPS representation (6.40), one
can show that the spin correlation function of the AKLT model decays expo-
nentially. However, there are quantitative diﬀerences between the correlation
functions that characterize the AKLT model and the spin-1 Haldane chain.
Nonetheless, the two models belong to the same topological phase and can be
adiabatically connected to one another.
Class BDI Majorana chain: The collapse of the non-interacting Z classification
To illustrate how the classiﬁcation of topological band insulators and super-
conductors can be changed by interactions, we brieﬂy discuss the collapse of
the Z classiﬁcation down to Z8 for the time reversal invariant Majorana chain
(BDI symmetry class), which was ﬁrst investigated by Fidkowski and Kitaev
[148, 149]. Let us ﬁrst consider the so-called Kitaev chain model8 [263], a lat-
tice model for1D topological superconductors involving nearest-neighbor hop-
ping and pairing of spinless fermions. The model Hamiltonian can be written
in terms of two real parameters u and v as HK[c†; c] = uH1[c†; c] + vH2[c†; c],
where
H1[c†; c]
=
1
2
X
i
h
−

c†
ici+1 + c†
i+1ci

+ c†
ic†
i+1 + ci+1ci
i
.
H2[c†; c]
=
X
i

c†
ici −1
2

.
(6.42)
Here, c†
i and ci are the creation and annihilation operators for spinless fermions
on site i. One can easily verify that HK has particle-hole symmetry with
C2 = +1 and time-reversal symmetry for spinless particles (T 2 = 1), hence it
belongs to the BDI symmetry class (see Table 5.1). As we will show explicitly
in the next chapter, when |u| < |v| the system is topologically trivial, while
for |u| > |v| it is in a topological superconducting phase. The two phases are
separated by a topological quantum phase transition at |u| = |v|, when the
energy spectrum becomes gapless.
Next, consider Nf parallel Kitaev chains, each described by a Hamilto-
nian HK[(cα)†; cα], with cα
i representing the fermion (annihilation) operator
for chain α site i. In the absence of interaction, the topological phase corre-
sponding to |u| > |v| will be characterized by the winding number ν = Nf.
However, when Nf = 0 (mod 8) one can adiabatically connect the noninter-
acting ν = Nf topological phase to the topologically trivial phase by adding
interactions [148, 149]. In the presence of interaction, the system is described
8A more detailed analysis of this model can be found in Chapter 7 starting on page 206.

180
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
by the Hamiltonian
H =
Nf
X
α=1
 uH1[(cα)†; cα] + vH2[(cα)†; cα]

+ wH3,
(6.43)
where H3 describes the interaction and can be written as a sum of terms
each containing four fermion operators. For Nf = 8 and considering in-
teractions that couple the same site i from diﬀerent chains, i.e., for H3 =
P
i W[(c1
i )†, . . . , (c8
i )†; c1
i , . . . , c8
i ], one can identify an interaction W such that
the energy spectrum remains gapped as the parameters u and v are varied, as
long as w ̸= 0 [148, 149]. The key simpliﬁcation that allows an exact solution
to this interacting problem is that in the Majorana representation (see Chap-
ter 7 for details) the noninteracting system corresponding to u = 0, v ̸= 0
(trivial phase) and u ̸= 0, v = 0 (topological phase) becomes a collection of
disconnected dimers. The interaction W does not couple the dimers along the
chains, so the problem reduces to a ﬁnite size interacting problem (involving
8 dimers from diﬀerent chains) that one can easily tackle.
The adiabatic evolution of the Hamiltonian (6.43) takes place in the pa-
rameter space (u, v, w). Starting from a noninteracting topological state with
|u| > |v|, one can reach the trivial state (0, v, 0) along the path (u, v, 0)
1−→
(u, 0, 0)
2−→(u, 0, w)
3−→(0, 0, w)
4−→(0, v, w)
5−→(0, v, 0). Note that during steps
2 −5, which involve the presence of interactions, the system is a collection of
dimers and can be explicitly shown to be gapped. We conclude that, in the
presence of interactions, all ground states of a system of 8 Kitaev chains can
be adiabatically connected to the trivial state, hence they belong to a sin-
gle phase. The arguments sketched above can be generalized to an arbitrary
number Nf of parallel chains, which can be shown to possess ν = Nf (mod 8)
distinct phases. For example, one can show that 9 copies of the Kitaev chain
coupled by quartic interactions have two distinct states, similar to a single
Kitaev chain. As a consequence, the non-interacting Z classiﬁcation of the
topological phases for 1D systems in the BDI symmetry class reduces to a Z8
classiﬁcation in the presence of interactions.
6.3.2
SPT phases in two and three dimensions
The 1D examples discussed in the previous section illustrate some of the
generic features of SPT phases in the presence of interactions, more speciﬁ-
cally the possibility that these phases emerge in systems of both fermions and
bosons (or spins) and the interaction-induced collapse of certain free fermion
classiﬁcations. There are many higher dimensional examples that illustrate
these properties. In addition, interactions can generate new topological phases
that are not possible in noninteracting systems and induce new types of sur-
face physics, including topologically ordered states that can only exist on the
surface of an interacting 3D SPT phase. Below, we brieﬂy mention a few
results on the eﬀect of interactions in two and three dimensions.

Interacting Topological Phases
■181
K-matrix classiﬁcation of bosonic SPT phases in two dimensions. One ap-
proach to classifying and describing topological phases of interacting bosons in
2D is based on the K-matrix formulation [298], a theory originally formulated
in the context of Abelian fractional quantum Hall ﬂuids (see Section 6.2.1).
To describe SPT phases (i.e., topological phases without intrinsic topological
order), K has to be a unimodular matrix, i.e., | det K| = 1. This condition
ensures that the ground state is unique when the system is deﬁned on topo-
logically non-trivial compact manifolds (see Section 6.2.1). Furthermore, to
describe bosons, all diagonal elements of K have to be even integers. Addi-
tional conditions incorporate information about the chirality of the state to
be described and the symmetries of the system [298].
Consider ﬁrst the chirality of the edge, i.e., the diﬀerence between the
number of right and left moving modes. As mentioned in Section 6.2.1, this
quantity is given by the signature of the K-matrix, i.e., number of positive
minus number of negative eigenvalues n+ −n−. For example, a maximally
chiral phase characterized by edge states propagating in a single direction
would be described by a matrix K with all eigenvalues having the same sign.
Note that the lowest dimension of a K matrix that describes maximally chiral
states for bosons (without topological order) is 8 [298]. Without additional
symmetry requirements, this leads to an integer classiﬁcation of the chiral
bosonic phases, which are characterized by an integer multiple of eight (i.e.,
8n, with n ∈Z) chiral edge modes and can be distinguished by the quantized
value of the thermal Hall conductance, κxy/T = 8n(π2k2
B/3h). A non-chiral
state, on the other hand, is described by a K-matrix having the same number
of positive and negative eigenvalues, n+ = n−. It was shown [298] that a large
class of non-chiral bosonic SPT phases can be described by the very simple
K-matrix
K =
 0
1
1
0

,
(6.44)
which satisﬁes the necessary requirements, i.e., det K = 1, even integers on
the diagonal, and n+ = n−.
The Lagrangian of the low-energy eﬀective theory, L =
1
4πϵµνλaI
µKIJ∂νaJ
λ−
aI
µjµ
I , should be invariant under symmetry transformations. One can show
[298] that a unitary symmetry, for example, can be implemented by a set
(W, δφI), where W ∈SL(N, Z) is an integer matrix that leaves the K ma-
trix invariant, W T KW = K and δφI are phase shifts (deﬁned modulo 2π)
associated with a global U(1) phase transformation on the quasiparticle op-
erator. These quantities satisfy certain constraints imposed by the condition
that physical excitations (which are bosonic quasiparticles) must transform
trivially under the identity element of the symmetry group.
The formalism leads to a classiﬁcation of 2D SPT phases of bosons in
the presence of various internal symmetries (e.g., time-reversal, U(1) charge
conservation, etc.). For example, the presence of U(1) symmetry, leads to an
integer classiﬁcation; diﬀerent phases can be distinguished by quantized values

182
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
TABLE 6.1: Classiﬁcation of 3D fermionic SPT phases for ﬁve symmetry
classes. The second column shows the collapse of the free-fermion classiﬁcation
in the presence of interactions. The third column contains new (interacting)
phases that correspond to bosonic composites of fermions. The suspected full
classiﬁcation is given in the fourth column.
Symmetry
Class
Interactions
Bosonic SPT
Complete
U(1) ⋊ZT
2
(T 2 = +1)
AI
0 →0
Z2
Z2
U(1) ⋊ZT
2
(T 2 = −1)
AII
Z2 →Z2
Z2
2
Z3
2
U(1) × ZT
2
AIII
Z →Z8
Z2
Z8 × Z2
ZT
2
(T 2 = −1)
DIII
Z →Z16
0
Z16
SU(2) × ZT
2
(T 2 = +1)
CI
Z →Z4
Z2
Z4 × Z2
of the Hall conductance, which for bosonic systems with no topological order
are even integer multiples of the universal conductance, σxy = 2n(q2/h).
Fermionic SPT phases in three dimensions. The above considerations are
meant to provide a ﬂavor of the type of problems one has to deal with when
trying to understand (interacting) SPT phases and to give a sense of the
richness and complexity of this ﬁeld. In the same note, we end this section
with a brief remark on some results regarding 3D interacting SPT phases. For
a survey of recent progress in this area see Ref. [398].
Table 6.1 shows the classiﬁcation of 3D fermionic SPT phases in the pres-
ence of interactions for ﬁve symmetry classes. The symmetry groups9 are listed
explicitly in the ﬁrst column; U(1) typically indicates the presence of charge
conservation, SU(2) corresponds to spin rotation symmetry, while ZT
2 denotes
time-reversal (or TR-like) symmetry. The presence of interactions has three
main consequences [441, 311, 147]: (1) All free fermion Z classiﬁcations (see
also Table 5.3) are reduced by interactions to smaller classiﬁcations. This col-
lapse of the integer classiﬁcations is illustrated in the second column of Table
6.1. Note that the 3D TBIs (class AII) are stable to weak electron-electron
interactions [356]. (2) New phases emerge that are equivalent to bosonic SPT
phases and cannot be adiabatically connected to the free-fermion topological
states (column three of Table 6.1). Since SPT phases have a group struc-
ture [431], the “new” and “old” phases can be combined, resulting in the
full classiﬁcation of 3D fermionic SPT phases shown in column four. (3) The
surface of a 3D interacting SPT phase may have intrinsic topological order
[147, 311, 436, 441]. If it does, the surface is fully gapped and preserves the
symmetry, but in a manner that is forbidden in strictly two-dimensional sys-
tems. For example, the surface of a 3D TR-invariant TBI can be gapped
9Time-reversal is anti-unitary and does not commute with the U(1) phase rotations
corresponding to charge conservation. Consequently, the symmetry group of TBIs (class
AII), for example, is U(1) ⋊ZT
2 (not U(1) × ZT
2 ), where ⋊denotes the semi-direct product.

Interacting Topological Phases
■183
by strong interactions, which results in a symmetry-preserving surface with
non-Abelian topological order. By contrast, the surface of a topological super-
conductor with spin SU(2) and time-reversal symmetries (class CI) is always
gapless, as long as the symmetries are preserved [441].


III
Topological Quantum States:
Design and Engineering
185


C H A P T E R 7
Theories of Topological
Quantum Matter
CONTENTS
7.1
Topological band theory: Continuum Dirac models .......
188
7.1.1
Graphene and Dirac fermions ......................
189
7.1.2
Quantum spin Hall state: The Kane–Mele model .
191
7.1.3
Three-dimensional four-component Dirac
Hamiltonian ........................................
196
7.2
Topological band theory: Tight-binding models ...........
198
7.2.1
Haldane model .....................................
199
7.2.2
Mercury telluride quantum wells: The BHZ model
201
7.2.3
p-Wave superconductors in one and two
dimensions .........................................
203
7.3
Topological ﬁeld theory ....................................
212
W
HAT THEORETICAL APPROACHES ARE APPROPRIATE
for describing topological quantum matter? The answer depends on
the type of topological phase we want to study, e.g., non-interacting or inter-
acting, and on the type of information we are interested in, e.g., system-speciﬁc
properties in the case of a theory designed to provide support for a particular
experiment or type of experiment. Non-interacting topological phases can be
described within topological band theory using the basic tools of the band the-
ory of solids. However, the complexity of the model, i.e., how much detail has
to be included, depends on whether we are only interested in the topological
properties of the system or, in addition, we need to consider certain non-
topological features. For example, predicting whether or not a speciﬁc mate-
rial is a topological insulator requires detailed knowledge of its band structure,
which can be acquired using density functional theory (DFT) methods. Sim-
ilar treatments may be required to account for certain experimental features
involving both topological and non-topological contributions. On the other
hand, to understand the classiﬁcation of topological insulators, it is suﬃcient
to consider “bare bone” eﬀective models, such as continuum Dirac models or
187

188
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
simple tight-binding models. Topologically, these descriptions with extremely
diﬀerent levels of complexity are equivalent whenever one can smoothly con-
nect the corresponding Hamiltonians (up to the addition/subtraction of trivial
bands) without closing the insulating gap. However, the eﬀective models pro-
vide only a crude description of experimentally relevant properties such as
energy gaps, band dispersion, and real space properties of boundary states.
In some sense, the situation is analogous to the characterization of a given
mathematical object within topology, which only deals with properties that
are robust against deformations, and geometry, which accounts for properties
described by distances, angles, and shapes.
In the low-energy long-wavelength limit the properties of the system can
be described using topological ﬁeld theories. These theories are similar to their
non-topological counterparts but involve certain topological terms that ac-
count for the universal topological properties of the system. Field theoretical
approaches can be used for both non-interacting systems (as an alternative
to topological band theory) and interacting topological phases. Of course, in-
teracting lattice models of various degrees of complexity can also be used to
investigate topological order and other aspects of topological phases in the
presence of correlations. In general, problems involving interacting topologi-
cal phases are extremely diﬃcult. Currently, this class of problems represents
the main theoretical battleground for expanding the known topological realm
into unexplored territory. In this chapter we discuss a few examples of theo-
retical approaches to topological quantum matter focusing on simple models
that capture the essential (topological) properties of the system.
7.1
TOPOLOGICAL BAND THEORY: CONTINUUM DIRAC
MODELS
Non-interacting topological phases (i.e., topological insulators and supercon-
ductors) can be described within band theory. However, instead of only fo-
cusing on the band dispersion, as was “traditionally” the case in band theory,
one has to also consider the properties of the eigenvectors, which ultimately
determine the topological properties of the system. Since smooth deforma-
tions of the Hamiltonian that preserve the gap, plus additions/subtractions
of trivial bands, do not aﬀect the topological invariants, one can focus on
the low-energy states (as measured relative to the Fermi energy) near the
minimum of the bulk gap. The dispersion of the corresponding bands can be
conveniently modiﬁed away from the minimum gap, while additional higher
energy bands can be ignored altogether. In the continuum limit, the system
will be described by a Dirac-type model with a minimum number of com-
ponents that depends on symmetry class of the Hamiltonian. Note that the

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■189
corresponding momentum space is the d-dimensional sphere1 Sd, rather than
the Brillouin torus Td. Below, we discuss a few speciﬁc examples.
7.1.1
Graphene and Dirac fermions
Graphene is a two-dimensional (2D) form of carbon consisting of a honeycomb
lattice with one atom at each vertex. The study of graphene has received a
lot of attention in recent years [332, 483, 170, 79] due, in part, to the re-
markable properties of this material, including its interesting electronic band
structure characterized by two distinct Dirac points where the conduction and
valence bands meet. Near these points, the electronic spectrum resembles the
dispersion of massless relativistic particles. Graphene itself is not a topological
insulator. We discuss it here because, on the one hand, it provides a paradigm
for the emergence of quasiparticles with Dirac-like dispersion in solid state
systems and, on the other hand, the simple two-band model of graphene rep-
resents the backbone for the Haldane model [205] of a Chern insulator and
the Kane–Mele model [244] of a 2D quantum spin Hall insulator.
The simplest theoretical description of graphene is based on a two-band
model corresponding to the pz orbitals occupying the two equivalent sites in
the unit cell of the honeycomb lattice (see Figure 7.1). Choosing the transla-
tion vectors a1 = a(
√
3, 0) and a2 = a
2(
√
3, 3), we have the reciprocal lattice
vectors b1 =
2π
3a(
√
3, −1) and b2 =
4π
3a(0, 1) and the Brillouin zone can be
taken as the hexagon with vertices at points K and K′, where
K = 4π
3a
 1
√
3, 0

,
K′ = 2π
3a
 1
√
3, 1

,
(7.1)
up to translations by reciprocal lattice vectors. In a tight-binding approxima-
tion with nearest-neighbor hopping, the Bloch Hamiltonian takes the form
H(k) = h(k) · σ,
(7.2)
where σ = (σx, σy, σz) are 2 × 2 Pauli matrices. Note that here we ignore the
spin degree of freedom. Including spin results in the Bloch Hamiltonian being
represented by a block-diagonal 4 × 4 matrix with each spin block given by
Eq. (7.2). The vector h(k) has in-plane components given by
hx(k) + ihy(k) = −t
 1 + eik·a1 + eik·a2
,
(7.3)
where −t is the nearest-neighbor hopping matrix element. The corresponding
spectrum is shown in Figure 7.1. In the presence of inversion symmetry (I) and
time-reversal symmetry (T ) the out-of-plane component vanishes, hz(k) = 0.
Indeed, for spinless particles the time-reversal (TR) operator is represented
by the complex conjugation operator2 and for a TR invariant system we have
1We map the momentum space Rd onto the punctured sphere Sd −{NP}, then we
compactify it by associating the point “at inﬁnity” with the north pole (NP).
2See Chapter 5 (Section 5.2.1) for details.

190
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
FIGURE 7.1: Honeycomb lattice, Brillouin zone, and the energy spectrum of
graphene.
T H(k)T −1 = H∗(k) = H(−k). In particular, hz(k) = hz(−k). On the other
hand, inversion symmetry changes the sign of both position and momentum
(hence, unlike T , leaves the commutator [x, px] unchanged) and maps onto
each other sites belonging to diﬀerent sub-lattices, Ici,αI−1 = (σx)αα′c−i,α′,
where α ∈{A, B} represents the sub-lattice index. For the Hamiltonian (7.2)
we have
IH(k)I−1 = σxH(−k)σx = H(k).
(7.4)
For the z-component we have hz(k) = −hz(−k), which combined with the
condition imposed by TR symmetry results in hz(k) being identically zero.
Next, we notice that h(k) actually vanishes at K and K′. These Dirac
points are locally stable against any (small) perturbation that preserves TR
and inversion symmetries. In other words, any small perturbation δH = ϵ(k)+
d(k) · σ with dz(k) = 0 will only shift the position of the Dirac points in
momentum space, but will not open a gap. If, in addition, the perturbation
preserves the C3 rotation symmetry of the Hamiltonian, the points K and K′
are stable Dirac nodes. In the vicinity of a Dirac node, i.e., for small q = k−K,
we have h(K + q) = ℏvF q = ℏvF (qx, qy, 0), where vF = 3
2ta/ℏ. Similarly, we
have h(K′+q) = ℏvF (−qx, qy, 0). Hence, the low-energy physics in the vicinity
of K is described by the eﬀective 2D massless Dirac Hamiltonian
H(q) = ℏvF q · σ,
(7.5)
while a similar description with (qx, qy) −→(−qx, qy) holds in the vicinity
of K′. We note that breaking the inversion symmetry allows hz(k) to be
non-zero, which results in the opening of an energy gap. The eﬀective Dirac

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■191
Hamiltonian (7.5) becomes massive,
H(q) = ℏvF q · σ + mσz,
(7.6)
where m = hz(K), and the dispersion E(q) = ±
p
|ℏvF q|2 + m2 is character-
ized by an energy gap 2|m|. Since TR symmetry requires hz(K′) = hz(−K) =
hz(K), the Dirac quasiparticles near K′ will have a mass with the same mag-
nitude and sign, m′ = hz(K′) = m. Breaking TR symmetry, on the other
hand, induces mass terms that have opposite signs at K and K′, m′ = −m.
This condition is a consequence of Eq. (7.4), in other words a property required
by inversion symmetry.
7.1.2
Quantum spin Hall state: The Kane–Mele model
Graphene with a mass term induced by breaking TR symmetry is a 2D Chern
insulator. This was ﬁrst realized in the late 1980s by Haldane [205], who aimed
to obtain the integer quantum Hall eﬀect without Landau levels, in fact with-
out any net magnetic ﬂux through the unit cell, so that the electron states
retain their usual Bloch character. We will discuss the key features of the
Haldane model in Section 7.2. Here, we note that this historical breakthrough
reveals that the essential ingredient for getting quantized Hall conductance is
breaking time-reversal symmetry, rather than having a non-zero net ﬂux. But
can one realize a system with nontrivial topological properties without break-
ing TR symmetry? More that 15 years after Haldane’s work, in 2005, Kane
and Mele answered this question in the aﬃrmative [244, 245]. The proposed
model — the Kane–Mele model — describes a quantum spin Hall insulator,
i.e., a two-dimensional Z2 insulator in the symplectic symmetry class (AII).
Here, we discuss the continuum version of this model.
In the low-energy, long-wavelength limit, the Haldane Hamiltonian can be
written [48, 402] in the form
H = −iℏvF (σxτz∂x + σy∂y) + (M + τzλ)σz,
(7.7)
where the Pauli matrices σi are associated with the sub-lattice degree of free-
dom, while the matrix τz acts in the space of the Dirac points K and K′. To
simplify notation, here and below we systematically omit the corresponding
identity matrices σ0 and τ0. In Eq. (7.7) we have used the space representa-
tion by taking q →−i∂. The mass term M, which corresponds to a staggered
sub-lattice potential with values +M for sub-lattice A and −M for sub-lattice
B, breaks inversion symmetry, while the λ term breaks TR symmetry and can
be generated by a nonuniform magnetic ﬁeld with zero ﬂux through the unit
cell. One can show (see Section 7.2) that the ﬁrst Chern number of a system
described by Eq. (7.7) is ν = 1
2[sign(M +λ)−sign(M −λ)], hence for |λ| > |M|
the system is in a topologically nontrivial phase with ν = ±1.
The Haldane Hamiltonian (7.7) describes spinless fermions. To obtain a
non-trivial topological phase without breaking TR symmetry, one has to ex-
plicitly include spin, which results in an eﬀective Hamiltonian represented by

192
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
an 8 × 8 matrix. The basic idea of Kane and Mele was to introduce a λ-type
mass term that has opposite signs for opposite spin orientations. This would
be equivalent to having two copies of the Haldane model, one for each spin,
with opposite orientations of the nonuniform magnetic ﬁeld. Physically, such
a mass term can be generated by a mirror-symmetric spin-orbit coupling,
HSO = λSOσzτzsz,
(7.8)
where the Pauli matrix sz is associated with the spin degree of freedom. To
demonstrate that HSO is a TR invariant term, we note that the representation
of the TR operator for spin- 1
2 fermions is (see Chapter 5) T = −isyK, were K
is the complex conjugation operator. In addition, under time-reversal k →−k,
hence K+q →−K−q = K′−q. In other words, the point q from the K sector
is mapped onto point −q from the K′ sector. In our matrix representation,
switching the K and K′ sectors is done by σx, so the TR operator can be
represented in the form
T = −iσxsyK,
(7.9)
where the unit matrix τ0 corresponding to the sub-lattice degree of freedom
was omitted for simplicity. It is straightforward to verify that T HSOT −1 =
HSO, i.e., the spin-orbit coupling gap-opening term is TR invariant. In a
system with broken mirror symmetry — e.g., in the presence of an applied or
substrate-induced electric ﬁeld in the z-direction — a Rashba type [51, 360]
term, (s × k) · ˆz is also allowed by TR symmetry, HR = λR(σxτzsy −σysx).
Putting together all these TR invariant contributions, we obtain the following
continuum version of the Kane–Mele model
H = −iℏvF (σxτz∂x +σy∂y)+λSOσzτzsz +λR(σxτzsy −σysx)+Mσz. (7.10)
Solving the Schr¨odinger equation corresponding to Eq. (7.10) with ﬁxed
boundary conditions gives a complete low-energy description of the 2D system,
including possible edge states. The Kane–Mele Hamiltonian for a translation-
invariant system (i.e., a system with no boundaries), which describes the low-
energy physics of the bulk, can be obtained from Eq. (7.10) through the substi-
tution −i∂→k. We emphasize that these continuum models are low-energy
eﬀective models that approximately describe the electronic properties of a lat-
tice system within a certain energy window near the Fermi level. To better
appreciate this point, let us also consider the lattice version of the Kane–Mele
model,
H = −t
X
⟨i,j⟩
c†
icj + iλSO
2
√
3
X
⟨⟨i,j⟩⟩
νijc†
iszcj + iλR
2
√
3
X
⟨i,j⟩
c†
i(s × dij)zcj + M
X
i
ϵic†
ici,
(7.11)
where c†
i = {c†
i,↑, c†
↓}, while ⟨. . . ⟩and ⟨⟨. . . ⟩⟩designate nearest-neighbor and
next-nearest-neighbor pairs, respectively. The ﬁrst term represents the nearest
neighbor hopping on a graphene lattice with an energy spectrum as shown in

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■193
FIGURE 7.2: (A) Energy dispersion of the lattice Kane–Mele model as a
function of kx for ky = 0 (black lines) and ky = 2π
3a (gray lines). The model
parameters (in units of λSO) are t = 5, M = 0.5, and λR = 0.25 and the unit
length is
√
3a = 1. (B) Comparison between the low-energy spectra obtained
using the continuum model (7.10) (full lines) and the corresponding lattice
version (dashed lines). (C) Dependence of the bulk gap ∆on the strength of
the Rashba trem for M = 0 (black), M = 0.5λSO, (gray), and M = λSO
(dashed gray). (D) Phase diagram of the Kane–Mele model.
Figure 7.1. The next term, which involves second neighbor spin-dependent
hopping, is a mirror symmetric spin-orbit interaction. Here, νij =
2
√
3(dkj ×
dik)z = ±1, where dkj and dik are unit vectors along the two bonds (j →k
and k →i, respectively) connecting the next-nearest neighbors j and i through
the intermediate site k. At the low-energy points K and K′ this term reduces
to HSO given by Eq. (7.8) and opens a gap ∆= 2|λSO| in the spectrum.
The inversion-symmetry-breaking M-term, with ϵi = +1 for A-type sites and
ϵi = −1 for B sites, also opens a gap ∆= 2|M|. By contrast, the Rashba term
(by itself) does not open a full gap in the spectrum. For example, at K the
Rashba term becomes HR = λR(σxsy −σysx) and the low-energy spectrum is
(approximately) given by the four eigenvalues −λR ±
p
|ℏvF q|2 + λ2
R, λR ±
p
|ℏvF q|2 + λ2
R, where q = k −K and vF is the Fermi velocity of graphene.
The numerical factors appearing in Eq. (7.11) were chosen so that for k = K
and k = K′ each term of the lattice model reduces to the corresponding term
of the continuum model (7.10).
The dispersion of the lattice Hamiltonian (7.11) along kx cuts through
K and K′ is shown in Figure 7.2(A). For |t| ≫max{|λSO|, |λR|, |M|} the
low-energy sector (i.e., the portion of the spectrum inside the dashed rectan-
gle) is well approximated by the continuum model (7.10), as shown in Figure
7.2(B). Note that for λR = 0 one can block-diagonalize the Hamiltonians
(7.10) and (7.11) into spin-dependent blocks corresponding to two copies of

194
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
the Haldane model. The continuum Hamiltonian (7.10), for example, can be
split into two blocks Hs given by Eq. (7.7) with λ = ±λSO for spin ↑(s = +)
and spin ↓(s = −), respectively. The energy gap ∆= 2||λSO| −|M|| is dom-
inated by M in the inversion-symmetry-breaking dominated phase, vanishes
when |λSO| = |M|, and is dominated by the λSO in the spin-orbit-coupling
dominated phase. We note that for λR = 0 we can deﬁne spin-dependent
Chern numbers νs associated with the spin ↑and spin ↓sectors described
by Hs with s = + and s = −, respectively. For |λSO| < |M| we have
ν+ = ν−= 0, while for |λSO| > |M|, the spin-dependent Chern numbers are
nonzero, νs = sign(sλSO), signaling the presence of two counter-propagating,
spin-polarized edge modes. In this case, the system is in a topological phase
with vanishing (charge) Hall conductance (since the total Chern number is
ν = ν+ + ν−= 0) and quantized spin-Hall conductance ν+ −ν−= ±2 (in
units of e2/h).
For λR ̸= 0, the Sz symmetry is broken and the two spin orientations get
mixed together. One can no longer talk about two separate sectors, one with
spin ↑and one with spin ↓, characterized by spin-dependent Chern numbers
and the spin conductance is not quantized. However, the topological phase and
the associated low-energy edge states survive in the presence of ﬁnite Rashba
coupling, as long as the bulk gap does not close. The topological invariant
that characterizes this phase is the Z2 invariant introduced by Kane and Mele
[245] (see Section 5.4.3). To calculate the Z2 invariant one needs to describe
the system over the entire Brillouin zone, i.e., to use the lattice version of the
model. Nonetheless, knowing that M (by itself) generates a trivial insulator,
while λSO (by itself) generates a QSH insulating state, we can determine the
full phase diagram using the continuum version of the Kane–Mele model. Ba-
sically, upon continuously varying the model parameters, the system remains
in the same phase as long as the bulk gap does not close. Quantitatively, the
eigenvalues of Hamiltonian (7.10) corresponding to q = 0 are λSO ± M and
−λSO ±
p
M 2 + 4λ2
R, each value being double degenerate. Consequently, in
the spin-orbit-coupling dominated phase the system is characterized by an
energy gap
∆= 2|λSO| −|M| −
q
M 2 + 4λ2
R.
(7.12)
The dependence of the gap on the model parameters is illustrated in Fig-
ure 7.2(C). The energy gap vanishes at the topological phase transition be-
tween the topological (spin-orbit-coupling dominated) phase and the triv-
ial (inversion-symmetry-breaking dominated) phase. The corresponding phase
boundary is given by the equation |M/λSO| = (λR/λSO)2 −1 and is shown in
Figure 7.2(D).
We close this section with a comment on the bulk-boundary correspon-
dence. Figure 7.3 shows the energy bands for the lattice Hamiltonian (7.11)
on a quasi one-dimensional strip with zigzag edges (i.e., cut along the a1 direc-
tion, see Figure 7.1). The left panel is for a set of parameters corresponding to
the trivial phase, while the right panel is calculated in the topological regime.

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■195
FIGURE 7.3: Energy bands for the lattice Kane–Mele model on a quasi one-
dimensional strip with zigzag edges. The model parameters (in units of λSO)
are t = 5, λR = 0.25, and M = 1.35 (panel A) or M = 0.5 (panel B). The
location of these parameters in the phase diagram is shown in the inset. We
take
√
3a = 1. In the QSH phase (panel B) two pairs of edge states (one on
each edge) cross the gap and connect the valence and conduction bands.
We notice the presence of edge states in both regimes. However, it is only in
the topological (QSH) phase that these edge states are gapless, as they cross
the gap connecting the valence and conduction bands. There are two pairs of
counter-propagating edge modes, one for each edge. These modes cross at a
time-reversal (TR) invariant point (kx = π) and the crossings are protected by
TR symmetry. Consequently, for a single pair of counter-propagating modes
(per edge) one can never open a gap as long as i) TR symmetry is preserved
and ii) the bulk gap remains ﬁnite. The situation is completely diﬀerent for
a system with two pairs of counter-propagating modes on the same edge.
By analogy with the Kane–Mele construction, one can realize such a system
starting with two copies of a Chern insulator that has two chiral edge modes
(propagating in a given direction for the ﬁrst copy and in the opposite direc-
tion for the second). In this case, there will be intersection points away from
the TR invariant momenta. These intersections are not protected by TR sym-
metry and the corresponding modes can scatter between one another, thus
opening a gap in the spectrum. We emphasize that this is not the case in
Figure 7.3(B) because the intersection points at kx ̸= π (i.e., at E(kx) = 0)
are between modes located on opposite edges (hence, all scattering matrix el-
ements vanish). The above considerations can be generalized to an arbitrary
number of edge pairs: an odd number of pairs (per edge) ensures the protec-
tion of at least one pair of edge modes. This reveals the topological nature

196
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
of the underlying bulk state. By contrast, an even number of edge pairs can
always be gapped. At the bulk level, this even-odd property is captured by
the topological invariant, which is a Z2 integer.
7.1.3
Three-dimensional four-component Dirac Hamiltonian
In this section we construct an example of continuum 3D massive Dirac Hamil-
tonian and brieﬂy discuss its symmetries and topological properties. The min-
imal number of components of the Dirac Hamiltonian for symmetry classes
AII, DIII, and AII is four, while for classes CI and CII this number is eight
[389]. Here, we discuss the four-component case.
Let us consider the following four-component Dirac Hamiltonian [389]
H(k) = τxσµkµ + mτz =

m
k · σ
k · σ
−m

,
(7.13)
where µ = x, y, z and τµ, σµ are two sets of Pauli matrices. As usual, we omit
the unit matrices, τ0 and σ0, and use the notation τµ ⊗σν ≡τµσν. The real-
space correspondent of Eq. (7.13), which can be used, for example, to calculate
the boundary modes, is obtained through the substitution kµ →−i∂µ. The
energy spectrum of H(k) is given by E(k) = ±
√
k2 + m2 (twofold degenerate)
and corresponds to a double degenerate gapped Dirac cone.
What is the symmetry class of Hamiltonian (7.13)? To answer this ques-
tion, we ﬁrst notice that it satisﬁes the following relations
iσyH∗(k)(−iσy) = +H(−k),
iσ(iσy)∗= −1,
(7.14a)
τyσyH∗(k)τyσy = −H(−k),
τyσy(τyσy)∗= +1.
(7.14b)
Comparison with Eq. (5.15) leads to the interpretation of these relations as
representing time-reversal symmetry for half-integer spin (with Ut = iσy)
and (triplet) particle-hole symmetry (with Uc = τyσy), respectively. Since
the Hamiltonian has both time-reversal (TR) and particle-hole (PH) symme-
tries, it also has chiral (sub-lattice) symmetry corresponding to the product
S = T · C. This symmetry can be represented by τy, which anti-commutes
with the Dirac Hamiltonian, τyHτy = −H. Consequently, according to the
symmetry classiﬁcation of single-particle Hamiltonians (see Table 5.1), the
Dirac Hamiltonian (7.13) is a member of class DIII. We note that DIII is one
of the Bogoliubov–de Gennes (BdG) classes, so we can interpret Eq. (7.13)
as describing the dynamics of quasiparticles in a superconductor (or a super-
ﬂuid). The generic form of a BdG Hamiltonian in momentum space is
H(k) =

h(k)
∆(k)
∆†(k)
−hT (−k)

,
(7.15)
where h = h† is a hermitian matrix. Also, as a result of Fermi statistics,
the oﬀ-diagonal block has the property ∆T (−k) = −∆(k), which implies
∆†(k) = −∆∗(−k). We can bring the Dirac Hamiltonian (7.13) into the

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■197
canonical form (7.15) through a unitary transformation H →U −1HU, with
U = diag(σ0, −iσy), which yields
H(k) =

m
k · σ(iσy)
(−iσy)k · σ
−m

.
(7.16)
One can easily check that ∆(k) = k · σ(iσy) satisﬁes the condition imposed
by Fermi statistics and that PH symmetry is now represented by Uc = τx.
When identifying the symmetry class to which the Dirac Hamiltonian be-
longs, we have to keep in mind that the continuum model (7.13) represents a
low-energy approximation of the lattice Hamiltonian describing the physical
system and that the symmetry of this lattice Hamiltonian may be lower than
the symmetry of (7.13). For example, the lattice Hamiltonian could have TR
symmetry only, while the PH symmetry is just an approximate symmetry of
the low-energy sector. In this case, the Dirac Hamiltonian (7.13) can be viewed
as describing a topological insulator in class AII.
Similarly, the lattice Hamiltonian could have chiral symmetry only (TR
and PH being approximate symmetries of the low-energy sector). Then, the
3D Dirac Hamiltonian (7.13) should be interpreted as describing an insu-
lator in class AIII. Note that, in the presence of chiral symmetry, we can
bring the Hamiltonian into block oﬀ-diagonal form by a rotation (τx, τy, τz) →
(τx, −τz, τy). The 3D Dirac Hamiltonian (7.13) becomes
H(k) =

0
k · σ −i m
k · σ + i m
0

.
(7.17)
The topological properties of the model can be determined from the eigen-
functions of the Hamiltonian (7.17). We have
u1,3(k) =
1
√
2λ


∓k−
±(im + kz)
0
λ

,
u2,4(k) =
1
√
2λ


±(im −kz)
∓k+
λ
0

, (7.18)
where k± = kx ± ky and λ(k) =
√
k2 + m2. In Eq. (7.18) the upper signs
correspond to eigenfunctions with negative energy E1 = E2 = −λ, whereas
the lower signs are for eigenfunctions with positive energy E3 = E4 = +λ.
The projector (Q matrix) Q(k) = 1−2P(k), with P(k) = P2
i=1 |ui⟩⟨ui|, takes
the oﬀ-diagonal form
Q(k) =

0
q(k)
q†(k)
0

,
with q(k) =
1
λ(k)(k · σ −i m).
(7.19)
We note that the class DIII massive Dirac Hamiltonian (7.16) can also be
brought into block oﬀ-diagonal form, since it has chiral symmetry (see Chapter
5). The corresponding Q matrix is given by q(k) =
1
λ(k)(k·σ−im)(iσy), which
satisﬁes qT (−k) = −q(k), similar to the condition satisﬁed by ∆(k). A block

198
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
oﬀ-diagonal Q matrix allows us to calculate the winding number ν associated
with the map k →q(k) from the momentum space (which for a 3D continuum
model is the sphere S3) to the space of projectors. For the projector (7.19),
this space is the unitary group U(2) and H(k) corresponds to a class AIII
Hamiltonian.3 Using Eqs. (5.39) and (5.40) we get
ν[q] =
Z
d3k
24π2 ϵµνρ Tr[(q−1∂µq)(q−1∂νq)(q−1∂ρq)] = 1
2
m
|m|.
(7.20)
This rather puzzling result — a half integer winding number — is a common
occurrence when using continuum descriptions and represents a consequence
of the fact that Dirac models do not capture the correct structure of the
wave functions at high energy [48, 205]. A continuum Dirac fermion spectrum
does not have a ﬁnite bandwidth. In reality, the high energy dispersion of
the bands is not linear, since they have to bend in order to accommodate
a ﬁnite bandwidth. This results in additional contributions to the winding
number, which becomes an integer. The same considerations apply to the
Chern number of a continuum Dirac model. The conclusion is that one cannot
fully determine the topological number of a ﬁlled band by analyzing only the
low-energy part of the band, which can be described using a continuum Dirac
model. To determine the topological invariant one has to use a lattice model.
However, the change in topological number upon closing and reopening the
gap is determined by the low-energy sector and can be calculated using a
continuum description. For example, knowing that m > 0 corresponds to a
trivial insulator (i.e., ν = 0), Eq. (7.20) tells us that the Dirac Hamiltonian
(7.17) with m < 0 describes a topological phase with ν = −1. Another example
— the calculation of the ﬁrst Chern number for the Haldane model — is
discussed in the next section.
7.2
TOPOLOGICAL BAND THEORY: TIGHT-BINDING MODELS
Continuum models are eﬀective low-energy theories that capture the long
wavelength physics in the vicinity of critical points associated with topolog-
ical quantum phase transitions (where the bulk gap vanishes). To reveal the
electronic band structure of a solid over the entire Brillouin zone for arbitrary
values of the control parameters (e.g. external ﬁelds) requires a lattice de-
scription of the system. Knowing the band structure properties for the whole
Brillouin zone allows us to calculate the relevant topological quantum numbers
and identify the topological phase of the system. The simplest lattice models
can be constructed in the tight-binding approximation, which corresponds to
the limit of small overlap between orbitals associated with neighboring atoms
in a lattice. Below, we brieﬂy review a few basic tight-binding models of topo-
logical insulators.
3For details on the Q matrix see Section 5.3. The winding number is deﬁned in Section
5.4.2.

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■199
7.2.1
Haldane model
The ﬁrst model of a topological insulator was introduced by Haldane in 1988
[205]. The model consists of spinless fermions on a honeycomb lattice in the
presence of a nonuniform (periodic) magnetic ﬁeld with zero ﬂux per unit cell,
Φ = 6(Φa + Φb) + Φc = 0 (see Figure 7.4). This condition ensures that the
full (nonmagnetic) translational symmetry of the lattice is preserved, while
TR symmetry is broken. In fact, broken TR symmetry is the essential in-
gredient for having non-zero Hall conductance. The magnetic ﬁeld does not
aﬀect the nearest-neighbor (n.n.) hopping t1, but the next-nearest-neighbor
(n.n.n.) hopping t2 acquires a phase e±iϕ, with ϕ = 2π(2Φa + Φb)/Φ0, where
Φ0 = h/e is the ﬂux quantum. The hopping directions corresponding to e+iϕ
are indicated by arrows in Figure 7.4. An on-site energy term with values +M
for A sites and −M for B sites is included to break the inversion symmetry of
the system. Explicitly, the Haldane model Hamiltonian can be written in the
form
H = t1
X
⟨i,j⟩
c†
icj + t2
X
⟨⟨ij⟩⟩
e−iνijϕ c†
icj + M
X
i
ϵic†
ici,
(7.21)
where c†
i (ci) are creation (annihilation) operators for spinless fermions and
all other notations are the same as in Eq. (7.11). After Fourier transforming
Eq. (7.21), the Haldane Hamiltonian can be expressed in the two-component
representation (c†
kA, c†
kB) associated with sub-lattices A and B as
H(k) = ε(k) + d(k) · σ,
(7.22)
where σi are Pauli matrices corresponding to the sublattice degree of freedom.
Choosing the lattice vectors a1 and a2 as in Figure 7.1, we have
ε(k)
=
2t2 cos(ϕ)[cos(k · a1) + cos(k · a2) + cos(k · (a1 −a2))],
d1(k)
=
t1[1 + cos(k · a1) + cos(k · a2)],
d2(k)
=
−t1[sin(k · a1) + sin(k · a2)],
(7.23)
d3(k)
=
M + 2t2 sin(ϕ)[sin(k · a1) −sin(k · a2) −sin(k · (a1 −a2))].
Note that TR symmetry, iσyH∗(k)(−iσy) = H(−k), requires d3(k) = d3(−k),
which is satisﬁed only for ϕ = 0 or ϕ = π. Also, inversion with respect to the
center of a hexagonal cell (represented by σx) demands d3(k) = −d3(−k),
which is satisﬁed only for M = 0. Hence, in general, the Hamiltonian (7.22)
breaks both TR and inversion symmetries. The two energy bands can be
easily determined by diagonalizing the 2× 2 matrix in Eq. (7.22) and we have
E±k = ε(k)±d(k), where d(k) =
p
d(k) · d(k). The corresponding eigenstates
are
|k, +⟩=

cos θ
2e−iφ
sinθ2

,
|k, −⟩=

sin θ
2e−iφ
−cosθ2

,
(7.24)
with θ = arccos dz(k)
d(k) and φ = arctan dy(k)
dx(k). Assuming |t2| < |t1|/3, which
is consistent with the physical intuition than the n.n.n. hopping should be

200
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
FIGURE 7.4: (Left) Haldane’s model of a Chern insulator on the honeycomb
lattice. The thick (full) and thin (dashed) lines designate nearest-neighbor and
next-nearest-neighbor hoppings, respectively. Arrows correspond to hopping
terms t2eiϕ. (Right) The phase diagram of the Haldane model.
much smaller that the n.n. hopping, the energy spectrum is either gapped, or
the two bands touch at K and K′. A linear expansion around these points
provides the following low-energy eﬀective Hamiltonians
H(K + δk) = −3t2 cos ϕ + 3
2
t1a
ℏ(δk2σx −δk1σy) + (M −3
√
3t2) sin ϕ)σz,
H(K′ + δk) = −3t2 cos ϕ −3
2
t1a
ℏ(δk2σx + δk1σy) + (M + 3
√
3t2) sin ϕ)σz,
where the components δk1 and δk2 of δk are measured with respect to ref-
erence frame rotated (clockwise) by an angle π/6 with respect to the axes in
Figure 7.1 (i.e., δk1 =
√
3
2 δkx−1
2δky, etc.). Note that these equations are equiv-
alent (up to an energy shift ∆E = −3t2 cos ϕ) with the continuum Haldane
Hamiltonian given by Eq. (7.7), with vF = 3
2t1a/ℏand λ = −3
√
3t2 sin ϕ.
To determine the phase diagram of the Haldane model, we calculate the
corresponding Chern number. First, let us consider the low-energy contri-
butions due to the Berry curvature of the occupied band in the vicinity of
K and K′. These contributions are captured by the continuum model. We
note that the Berry curvature of a generic Dirac Hamiltonian of the form
H(k) = kaΛabσb + Mσ3, with a, b = 1, 2, is Fxy(k) = Ωz(k) =
1
2d3 MDet(Λ),
where d2 = kakbΛacΛbc + M 2. Integrating over k ∈R2 we obtain the Chern
number for the generic Dirac Hamiltonian as,
ν = 1
2 sign(M) sign[Det(Λ)].
(7.25)
Note that ν is a half-integer because we ignored contributions from the Berry
curvature at high energy, as discussed in the previous section. For the (contin-
uum) Haldane model, we have two contributions of the form (7.25), one from

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■201
K and the other from K′, and the total Chern number becomes
νH = 1
2[sign(M + λ) −sign(M −λ)],
(7.26)
with λ = −3
√
3t2 sin ϕ. Note that νH is an integer, which suggests that in this
particular case the high-energy contribution to the Chern number vanishes.
Indeed, in the limit |M| →∞we have νH = 0, which is consistent with
the wave function being localized on either A-type or B-type sites, i.e., the
system being topologically trivial. In general, νH is zero for |M| > 3
√
3|t2 sin ϕ|
(trivial insulator) and ±1 otherwise (Chern insulator). To conﬁrm this result,
we can use the solution (7.24) of the lattice model to calculate the Berry
connection and the corresponding curvature over the entire Brillouin zone.
The Chern number, obtained by integrating the Berry curvature over the BZ,
is identical with the outcome of the continuum model calculation. The phase
diagram of the Haldane model is shown in Figure 7.4.
7.2.2
Mercury telluride quantum wells: The BHZ model
The model that led to the discovery of the ﬁrst 2D TI material [251] was
proposed by Bernevig, Hughes, and Zhang (BHZ) in 2006 [49] as an eﬀective
four-band model for a CdTe/HgTe/CdTe quantum well. The system undergoes
a band inversion at the Γ point as a function of the well width. In this struc-
ture, the electronic states closest to the Fermi level contain s and p orbitals.
However, the HgTe well is characterized by an inverted band progression (as
compared to CdTe and other “normal” semiconductors, e.g., GaAs) with the
s-type Γ6 band lying below the p-type Γ8 band. To capture the low-energy
physics, one can construct a minimal tight-binding Hamiltonian with a four-
state basis [49]. Also, since the quantum well is a quasi-2D system and HgTe
has a cubic (zinc-blende) crystal structure, it is natural to deﬁne the eﬀective
tight-binding model on a 2D square lattice with translation vectors a1 = aˆx
and a2 = aˆy. The corresponding Hamiltonian is
HBHZ =
X
i,α,σ
ϵαc†
iασciασ +
X
i,j
X
α,β
X
σ
tαβ
σ (i, j) c†
iασcjβσ,
(7.27)
where i and j are n.n. sites on the square lattice, α, β ∈{s, p} are band indices,
and σ = ± is the z component of the spin. In the orbital basis, the hopping
matrix has the form
tσ(i, j) =

−tss
−tspeiσθij
−tspe−iσθij
tpp

,
(7.28)
where θij ∈{0, π
2 , π, 3π
2 } is the angle between the x axis and the n.n. bond
j →i. To study the topological properties of the BHZ model it is convenient to
Fourier transform the lattice Hamiltonian (7.27). We deﬁne the Dirac matrices
Γ1 = σx ⊗sx,
Γ2 = σx ⊗sy,
Γ3 = σx ⊗sz,
Γ4 = σy ⊗s0,
Γ5 = σz ⊗s0,
(7.29)

202
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
where σi and si are Pauli matrices associated with the orbital and spin de-
grees of freedom, respectively. Using these matrices, we can write the Fourier
transform of the BHZ Hamiltonian as
H(k) = d0(k) +
5
X
a=1
da(k)Γa.
(7.30)
The coeﬃcients in Eq. (7.30) are d1(k) = d2(k) = 0 and
d0(k) = 1
2(ϵs + ϵp) −(tss −tpp)(cos k · a1 + cos k · a2),
d3(k) = 2tsp sin k · a2,
d4(k) = 2tsp sin k · a1,
(7.31)
d5(k) = 1
2(ϵs −ϵp) −(tss + tpp)(cos k · a1 + cos k · a2).
The eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian (7.30) are E(k) = d0(k) ±
pP
a[da(k)]2,
both double degenerate.
The BHZ model has both TR symmetry and inversion symmetry. The
Z2 invariant for this type of topological insulator is determined, within the
framework developed by Fu and Kane [163] (see Chapter 5), by the product
of the parities of the Kramers pairs at the TR invariant momenta (TRIM),
(−1)ν =
4
Y
i=1
N
Y
n=1
ξ2n(Λi),
(7.32)
where ξ2n = ξ2n−1 is the parity of the nth Kramers pair, 2N is the total
number of occupied bands, and Λi are the TRIM. Speciﬁcally, for the Kramers
partners |u2n−1,Λi⟩and |u2n,Λi⟩we have Π|uα,Λi⟩= ξ2n|uα,Λi⟩, where Π is the
parity operator and α = 2n −1, 2n. We note that in our Γ representation the
TR operator is constructed as T = −iσ0 ⊗syK, with K being the complex
conjugation operator. On the other hand, since the s orbital is parity even
and the p orbital is parity odd, the inversion operator is represented as Π =
σz ⊗s0 = Γ5. Consequently, we have T ΓaT −1 = −Γa and Π ΓaΠ−1 = −Γa
for a = 1, 2, 3, 4, while T Γ5T −1 = +Γ5 and ΠΓ5Π−1 = −Γ5. At a TRIM, the
Hamiltonian satisﬁes the condition ΠH(Λi)Π−1 = H(Λi), so it must have the
form
H(Λi) = d0(Λi) + d5(Λi)Γ5.
(7.33)
The Hamiltonian in Eq. (7.33) is diagonal and its eigenstates are the basis
states of the model. These eigenstates form two Kramers pairs: the pair |s, ↑⟩,
|s, ↓⟩with even parity and energy E+(Λi) = d0(Λi) + d5(Λi) and the pair
|px+ipy, ↑⟩, |px−ipy, ↓⟩with odd parity and energy E−(Λi) = d0(Λi)−d5(Λi).
If d5(Λi) > 0, we have E+ > E−and the odd-parity p band is occupied. On
the other hand, if d5(Λi) < 0, we have E+ < E−and the even-parity s band
is occupied. Finally, using the expression of d5(k) from Eq. (7.31) and taking
into account that (k·a1, k·a2) takes the values (0, 0), (0, π), (π, 0), and (π, π)
at the four TRIM, we arrive at the following conclusions:

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■203
1. If ϵs −ϵp > 4(tss −tpp) we have E+(Λi) > E−(Λi) for all Λi and
the Z2 invariant given by Eq. (7.32) is ν = 0, i.e., the system is a trivial
insulator. Note that in this case the p-bands lie below the s-bands, which
is the typical situation for a band insulator/semiconductor.
2. If ϵs −ϵp < 4(tss −tpp) we have E+(Λi) < E−(Λi) at Λi = (0, 0) (the Γ
point of the 2D BZ) but E+(Λi) > E−(Λi) for the other three TRIM.
The Z2 invariant is ν = 1, which means that the system is a topological
insulator. Note that in this case the band order ﬂips at the Γ point, i.e.,
the top of the valence band has s character, while the bottom of the
conduction band has p character.
7.2.3
p-Wave superconductors in one and two dimensions
Superconductivity is an essentially interacting quantum phenomenon charac-
terized by the vanishing of static electrical resistivity and the emergence of
perfect diamagnetism (the Meissner eﬀect) at low temperatures. In essence,
the phenomenon is driven by an attractive eﬀective interaction between elec-
trons near the Fermi surface. This leads to the formation of bound states with
energy lower than the energy of two free electrons, which produces an instabil-
ity of the normal state (i.e., the Fermi sea). In conventional superconductors
the attractive eﬀective interaction between electrons is phonon-mediated, i.e.,
it is a consequence of the electron-phonon interaction. The basic theory of
superconductivity was formulated by Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieﬀer (BCS)
in 1957 [32]. In the past few decades the focus has been on understanding the
microscopic pairing mechanism in unconventional superconductors, such as,
for example, the high temperature cuprates [34, 252], and on studying quasi-
particle phenomena in various types of superconductors. Remarkably, there
is a close analogy between the mean-ﬁeld description of quasiparticles in a
superconductor (or a superﬂuid) and the Hamiltonian of a noninteracting in-
sulator. Below, we introduce the mean-ﬁeld formulation of the quasiparticle
physics in superconductors and discuss a few simple examples of tight-binding
models.
The Bogoliubov–de Gennes formalism. We introduce the mean-ﬁeld quasipar-
ticle formalism by considering, for concreteness, the case of s-wave supercon-
ductors. We start with the many-body Hamiltonian of an interacting electron
system
H =
X
k,σ
ξk c†
kσckσ + Vint,
(7.34)
where Vint is an eﬀective electron-electron interaction and ξ(k) = ϵ(k) −µ,
with µ being the chemical potential and ϵ(k) the single-particle dispersion,
e.g., ϵ(k) = ℏ2k2/2m for free electrons. We assume that the electrons interact
attractively within a small energy window ωD in the vicinity of the Fermi
surface, which leads to an instability of the normal metal due to scattering
between electrons in single-particle states |k, ↑⟩and | −k, ↓⟩. Speciﬁcally, we

204
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
have
Vint = 1
N
X
k,k′
Vkk′c†
k↑c†
−k↓c−k′↓ck′↑,
(7.35)
where N is the number of (discrete) k values and Vkk′ = −V0 < 0 for
|ξk|, |ξk′| < ωD, while Vkk′ = 0 otherwise. Within the BCS mean-ﬁeld ap-
proximation, the product of operators in Vint is replaced by
⟨c†
k↑c†
−k↓⟩c−k′↓ck′↑+ c†
k↑c†
−k↓⟨c−k′↓ck′↑⟩−⟨c†
k↑c†
−k↓⟩⟨c−k′↓ck′↑⟩,
(7.36)
where ⟨. . . ⟩designates the thermodynamic average. This approximation leads
to the following mean-ﬁeld BCS Hamiltonian
HBCS = EBCS +
X
k,σ
ξk c†
kσckσ +
X
k
[∆kc†
k↑c†
−k↓+ ∆∗
kc−k′↓ck′↑],
(7.37)
where ∆k =
1
N
P
k Vkk′⟨c−k′↓ck′↑⟩represents the superconducting order pa-
rameter and EBCS is the energy of a pure condensate, which, in the limit
T →0, is the BCS ground state energy. The last two terms in Eq. (7.37), which
describe the dynamics of the quasiparticles in the superconducting state, can
be diagonalized by deﬁning a new set of fermionic operators constructed as
linear combinations of electron creation and annihilation operators,
γk↑= u∗
kck↑+ vkc†
−k↓,
(7.38a)
γ†
−k↓= ukc†
−k↓−v∗
kck↑,
(7.38b)
with |uk|2 = 1
2(1 + ξk/Ek), |vk|2 = 1
2(1 −ξk/Ek), and ukvk = ∆k/(2Ek),
where Ek =
p
ξ2
k + |∆k|2. Note that s-wave pairing (∆−k = ∆k) implies
u−k = uk and v−k = vk. Using this mapping, called the Bogoliubov (or
Bogoliubov–Valatin) transformation, the BCS Hamiltonian takes the simple
form HBCS = EBCS + P
k,σ Ekγ†
kσγkσ, where Ek =
p
ξ2
k + |∆k|2 is the quasi-
particle excitation energy (see Figure 7.5). Note that the presence of a quasi-
particle increases the energy of the system by at least |∆kF | over the energy
of a pure condensate, EBCS. Also note that deep inside the Fermi sea |uk| ≈0
and |vk| ≈1, i.e., the Bogoliubov quasiparticles are hole-like, far above EF
|uk| ≈1 and |vk| ≈0, i.e., the quasiparticles are particle-like, while in the
vicinity of the Fermi surface the Bogoliubov quasiparticles are combinations
of holes and electrons with comparable amplitudes (|uk| = |vk| exactly at
EF ).
To describe the quasiparticle dynamics in a non-homogeneous system
and to make explicit the analogy with topological insulators, it is conve-
nient to deﬁne a ﬁrst-quantized Hamiltonian for the single-particle excita-
tions. First, we note that, using the fermion anticommutation relations, we
can write the second term in Eq. (7.37) as 1
2
P
k,σ[ξk c†
kσckσ −ξ−k ckσc†
kσ +ξk].
Also we have ∆kc†
k↑c†
−k↓=
1
2[∆kc†
k↑c†
−k↓−∆kc†
−k↓c†
k↑] and a similar re-
lation for ∆∗
kc−k′↓ck′↑. Second, we introduce the four-component spinor

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■205
FIGURE 7.5: (Left) Single-particle band dispersion for a non-interacting elec-
tron system. The many-body ground state corresponds to a full Fermi sea.
An excitation of energy Ek = |ξk| is created by adding an electron with
ξk = ϵ(k)−µ > 0 into an empty single-particle state or removing one electron
from an occupied state with energy ξk < 0 (i.e., creating a hole). Deexcitation
processes are symbolized by dashed arrows. (Center) Excitation and deexcita-
tion spectra for a normal metal, Ek = |ξk|. (Right) Excitation (deexcitation)
spectrum for an s-wave superconductor, Ek =
p
ξ2
k + ∆2
k (black lines).
Ψ†
k = (c†
k↑, c†
k↓, c−k↑, c−k↓). Note that by doing this we artiﬁcially double the
number of degrees of freedom of the system. Consider, for example, the many-
body ground state of the normal system (∆k = 0): each occupied (empty)
electron state with ξk < 0 (ξk > 0) is also represented as an empty (occupied)
hole state with energy ξk > 0 (ξk < 0). The energies Ek = |ξk| of the empty
states (both electron-type and hole-type) give us the excitation spectrum (see
Figure 7.5). Using this so-called Nambu spinor representation, we can write
the BCS mean-ﬁeld Hamiltonian in the form
HBCS = 1
2
X
k
Ψ†
kHBdG(k)Ψk + const.,
(7.39)
where HBdG is a ﬁrst-quantized Hamiltonian called the Bogoliubov–de Gennes
(BdG) Hamiltonian. For non-magnetic superconductors, the Bloch (i.e., k
space) BdG Hamiltonian has the form
HBdG(k) =




ξk
0
0
∆k
0
ξk
−∆−k
0
0
−∆∗
−k
−ξ−k
0
∆∗
k
0
0
−ξ−k



.
(7.40)
The eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonian (7.40) are Ek = ±
p
ξ2
k + |∆k|2 (each
being double degenerate) and correspond to the quasiparticle excitation (de-
excitation) energies shown in Figure 7.5. We emphasize that the BdG de-
scription given by Eq. (7.40) is intrinsically redundant. Indeed, the positive

206
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
energy eigenfunctions φ(+)
k↑
= (uk, 0, 0, v∗
k)T and φ(+)
k↓
= (0, uk, −v∗
k, 0)T de-
scribe quasiparticles corresponding to the creation operators Ψ†
k · φ(+)
k↑= γ†
k↑
and Ψ†
k · φ(+)
k↓
= γ†
k↓, respectively. On the other hand, the negative energy
solutions φ(−)
k↑= (−vk, 0, 0, u∗
k)T and φ(−)
k↓= (0, vk, u∗
k, 0)T correspond to the
associated annihilation operators Ψ†
k · φ(−)
k↑
= γ−k↓and Ψ†
k · φ(−)
k↓
= γ−k↑,
respectively, i.e., they do not describe independent excitations.
As a ﬁnal remark on the BdG formalism, we note that the Hamiltonian
(7.40) can be written in the form
HBdG(k) = ξkτz ⊗s0 −Re[∆] τy ⊗sy −Im[∆] τx ⊗sy,
(7.41)
where τi and si are Pauli matrices associated with the particle-hole and spin
degrees of freedom, respectively, and we have used the properties ξ−k = ξk,
∆−k = ∆k. From Eq. (7.41) it is evident that the BdG Hamiltonian has
particle-hole symmetry, UcH∗(k)U −1
c
= −H(−k), with Uc = τx ⊗s0. The fact
that ξk and ∆k are even functions of momentum plays no role in this result,
i.e., particle-hole symmetry is a property of the BdG Hamiltonian (7.40) with
no additional conditions.
One-dimensional p-wave superconductor. Consider a 1D superconducting sys-
tem consisting of spinless fermions. At the mean-ﬁeld level, pairing is described
by
1
2
P
k(∆kc†
kc†
−k + ∆∗
kc−kck), where the pairing potential must have odd
parity, ∆−k = −∆k (since even parity contributions from k and −k cancel
each other). In the basis Ψ†
k = (c†
k, c−k), the BdG Hamiltonian has the form
HBdG(k) = ξkτz + Re[∆] τx −Im[∆] τy, where ξk = ϵk −µ is the 1D non-
interacting band dispersion. For simplicity, we assume that ∆is either real or
purely imaginary, which we can always realize via a global phase rotation.
To construct a lattice model for this 1D superconductor, we consider spin-
less fermions with creation operators c†
i hopping between the nearest-neighbor
sites of a 1D wire with hopping amplitude −t (t > 0) in the presence of a
nearest-neighbor pairing potential ∆. Explicitly, we have
HK =
X
i
h
−t

c†
ici+1 + c†
i+1ci

−µc†
ici + ∆

c†
ic†
i+1 + ci+1ci
i
.
(7.42)
We assume, for simplicity, that ∆is real. The Hamiltonian in Eq. (7.42)
is the so-called Kitaev model for a 1D p-wave superconductor [263]. For a
homogeneous system, we can write the Hamiltonian HK, after performing
a (lattice) Fourier transform and neglecting the energy constant, as HK =
1
2
P
k Ψ†
kHBdG(k)Ψk, where the BdG Hamiltonian is
HBdG(k) =
 −2t cos k −µ
−2i∆sin k
2i∆sin k
2t cos k + µ

.
(7.43)
Using our “standard” notation, this becomes HBdG(k) = ξkτz + ∆kτy, with

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■207
ξk = −2t cos k −µ and ∆k = 2∆sin k. The BdG Hamiltonian (7.43) has two
energy bands, E±(k) = ±Ek with Ek =
p
ξ2
k + ∆2
k.
To identify the topological phases of this 1D system, we ﬁrst determine
the symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian. As a result of the particle-hole redun-
dancy of the BdG representation, the Hamiltonian (7.43) has particle-hole
symmetry represented by Uc = τx. Note that C2 = UcU ∗
c = +1. In addition,
the model has time-reversal symmetry for spinless particles, T HBdG(k)T −1 =
HBdG(−k), with T = K (the complex conjugation). Note that T 2 = +1. Ac-
cording to Table 5.1, the BdG Hamiltonian (7.43) can be viewed as a represen-
tative of the BDI symmetry class. Consequently, we can identify the distinct
phases of this 1D (i.e., odd dimension) system by calculating the corresponding
winding number. The BdG Hamiltonian (7.43) has chiral symmetry (repre-
sented by the product S = T · C) and can be brought into block oﬀ-diagonal
form by a rotation (τx, τy, τz) →(−τz, τy, τx). The corresponding projector
(Q matrix) is also block oﬀ-diagonal with q(k) = (ξk −i∆k)/Ek. We calculate
the winding number using Eqs. (5.39) and (5.40). We have
ν = i
2π
Z π
−π
dk q−1(k) d
dk q(k) = −1
2π
Z π
−π
dk
∆(2t + µ cos k)
(µ + 2t cos k)2 + ∆2 sin2 k . (7.44)
Evaluating the integral we obtain ν = 0 for |µ| > 2t and ν = −sign(∆)
for |µ| < 2t, i.e., the system has two diﬀerent phases. In the so-called strong
coupling regime, which is characterized by the chemical potential being outside
the band (|µ| > 2t), the system is topologically trivial (ν = 0) and, in the
absence of pairing, it is a gapped band insulator. Note that in this regime
superconductivity is characterized by the formation of “molecule-like” fermion
pairs and does not emerge as a weak-coupling instability of the Fermi surface.
On the other hand, in the weak coupling regime, which corresponds to µ being
inside the band (|µ| < 2t), the system is a BCS-like superconductor in a
topologically non-trivial phase (ν = ±1).
The spinless fermion model (7.42) can be viewed as a simpliﬁed model
for a 1D spin-polarized electron system. The source of spin polarization can
be, for example, an applied magnetic ﬁeld. As a result, time-reversal (TR)
symmetry is not an intrinsic property of the physical system, but rather a
feature of our simpliﬁed model. In other words, more detailed models of the
1D p-wave superconductor are not TR invariant. From this perspective, we
can ignore the “accidental” TR symmetry of Hamiltonian (7.43) and view
it as a representative of the symmetry class D. Table 5.3 tells us that in this
case the system modeled by HBdG is a one-dimensional Z2 superconductor. To
distinguish the topological and trivial phases, we can calculate the so-called
Majorana number, a Z2 invariant introduced by Kitaev [263].
To deﬁne the Z2 topological invariant and to reveal the consequence of the
bulk-boundary correspondence — the emergence of unpaired Majorana bound
states at the ends of the chain — we address the physics of the p-wave su-
perconducting chain from a diﬀerent perspective by introducing the so-called
Majorana representation. The concept of the Majorana fermion [305] will be

208
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
discussed in more detail in Chapter 8. Here, we pursue a formal approach and
simply replace each complex fermion (represented by the creation and annihi-
lation operators c†
i and ci) by two real fermions, γ2i−1 and γ2i, deﬁned by the
relations
γ2i−1 = c†
i + ci,
γ2i = i(c†
i −ci).
(7.45)
The operators γj representing these real fermions, which are called Majorana
fermions, have the property γ†
j = γj and satisfy {γi, γj} = 2δij. In other words,
each Majorana fermion is its own antiparticle and two distinct fermions are
represented by operators that anticommute. Using the Majorana representa-
tion, the Hamiltonian (7.42) becomes (up to an energy constant)
HK = i
2
X
j
[−µγ2j−1γ2j + (t −∆)γ2jγ2j+1 −(t + ∆)γ2j−1γ2j+2] .
(7.46)
Note that this Hamiltonian has the form HK =
i
2
P
l,m γlAlmγm, where A
is a real, anti-symmetric matrix. For a translation-invariant system, we have
A(2i+α)(2j+β) = Bαβ(i −j), where α, β = 1, 2 and i, j label the lattice sites.
After performing a Fourier transform, we obtain
˜B(k) =

0
ξk + i∆k
−ξk + i∆k
0

,
(7.47)
with ξk = −2t cos k−µ and ∆k = 2∆sin k. The matrix ˜B(k) satisﬁes ˜B†(k) =
˜BT (−k) = −˜B(k). The ‘Majorana number’ M (also called the Pfaﬃan Z2
invariant) introduced by Kitaev can be expressed in terms of the Majorana
representation matrix ˜B(k) as [263]
M = sign
n
Pf
h
˜B(0)
i
Pf
h
˜B(π)
io
,
(7.48)
where Pf[. . . ] denotes the Pfaﬃan of an anti-symmetric matrix.4 For the ma-
trix in Eq. (7.47) we have Pf
h
˜B(0)
i
= −(2t + µ) and Pf
h
˜B(π)
i
= 2t −µ.
Hence, the Majorana number takes the values M = +1 in the trivial (strong
coupling) phase and M = −1 in the topological (weak coupling) phase.
Equation (7.48) allows us to calculate M for a closed chain. In the case of
open boundary conditions, M = −1, which corresponds to a non-trivial topo-
logical superconductor, signals the presence of an isolated Majorana bound
state at each of the ends of the wire. To gain some intuition, we consider the
Hamiltonian (7.46) on a ﬁnite lattice, 1 ≤j ≤N, in two special limits.
1. Trivial phase with ∆= t = 0 and µ < 0. The Hamiltonian reduces to
HK = −µ i
2
P
j γ2j−1γ2j, which couples the Majorana operators on each
site j but leaves the operators deﬁned on neighboring sites uncoupled.
The ground state corresponds to the eigenvalue +1 of the parity operator
4For a deﬁnition of the Pfaﬃan see Eq. (5.43) on page 149.

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■209
FIGURE 7.6: Schematic representation of the lattice p-wave Hamiltonian
(7.46). The empty and ﬁlled circles represent the Majorana fermions γ2j−1
and γ2j, respectively, corresponding to each physical site j. When t = ∆= 0
and µ ̸= 0 the Majoranas “pair up” on the same site and the system is topolog-
ically trivial (M = +1). In the limit µ = 0 and ∆= t > 0, which corresponds
to the topological phase with M = −1, the Hamiltonian couples Majoranas
from adjacent sites leaving two “unpaired” Majoranas, γ1 and γ2N.
Pj = −iγ2j−1γ2j = 1 −2c†
jcj, which means that the ground state is the
vacuum of cj fermions. Adding a spinless fermion costs a ﬁnite energy
|µ| and there are no low-energy states at the ends of the chain.
2. Topological phase with −∆= t > 0 and µ = 0. The Hamiltonian reduces
to HK = it P
j γ2jγ2j+1, which only couples Majorana operators deﬁned
on adjacent physical sites. The ends of the chain support two “unpaired”
Majorana modes that have zero-energy, since γ1 and γ2N are explicitly
absent from the Hamiltonian. Deﬁning the new fermion operators aj =
1
2(γ2j+1 + iγ2j) and f = 1
2(γ1 + iγ2N), we have HK = t PN−1
j=1 a†
jaj. The
‘bulk’ is still gapped, since adding an aj fermion implies an energy cost
t. However, adding the highly nonlocal fermion f costs no energy, which
results in a two-fold ground state degeneracy. Indeed, if |0⟩is a ground
state that satisﬁes f|0⟩= 0 (no f fermion), then |1⟩= f †|0⟩is also a
ground state, but with opposite fermion parity. By contrast, the ground
state of a trivial gapped superconductor is nondegenerate and has even
parity (since all fermions form Cooper pairs).
As one tunes the system away from these special points, the physics revealed
by each of the two cases (which are schematically represented in Figure 7.6)
survives as long as the (bulk) gap is preserved. We conclude that the boundary
modes of a 1D topological p-wave superconductor are zero-energy Majorana
bound states localized at the ends of the wire.
Two-dimensional chiral p-wave superconductor. Many aspects of the 1D su-
perconductor physics discussed above can be generalized to higher dimen-
sions. The simplest example is a 2D chiral p-wave superconductor described

210
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
by a lattice model similar to the Hamiltonian in Eq. (7.42),
H = −µ
X
i
c†
ici +
X
i,δ
h
−t

c†
ici+δ + h.c.

+ ∆

λδc†
ic†
i+δ + h.c.
i
,
(7.49)
where i = (ix, iy) are sites in a square lattice of lattice constant a = 1,
δ = (±1, 0), (0, ±1) are nearest-neighbor displacements, and λ(±1,0) = 1 while
λ(0,±1) = i. We assume that ∆is real and t > 0. Performing a Fourier trans-
form leads to a BdG Hamiltonian of the form
HBdG(k) =

ξk
−i∆k
i∆∗
k
−ξk

,
(7.50)
with ξk = −2t(cos kx + cos ky) −µ and ∆k = 2∆(sin kx + i sin ky). Note that
HBdG has particle-hole symmetry (with Uc = τx) but, unlike the 1D case in Eq.
(7.43), it has no time-reversal symmetry because ∆k is intrinsically complex.
Hence, HBdG is a 2D representative of symmetry class D and, according to
Table 5.3, it describes a Z topological superconductor. Calculating the Chern
number reveals that the strong-coupling regime (|µ| > 4t) corresponds to
the trivial phase, while the weak-coupling regime (|µ| < 4t) supports two
topological superconducting phases (with µ < 0 and µ > 0, respectively)
characterized by opposite values of the Chern number, C = ±1.
By analogy with the 2D Chern insulator, we expect the emergence of
low-energy chiral edge modes when an open boundary system described by
Hamiltonian (7.49) is in a topologically non-trivial phase. Remarkably, these
edge states are not only chiral (i.e., for a given edge they propagate only in
one direction), but they also satisfy the Majorana condition, hence they are
chiral Majorana edge modes. To study these edge modes, we solve the lat-
tice model (7.49) on a strip consisting of Ny inﬁnite parallel chains (i.e.,
−∞< ix < ∞and 1 ≤iy ≤Ny). Note that we can still perform a
Fourier transform along the x direction. The corresponding BdG Hamilto-
nian HBdG(kx) is a 2Ny × 2Ny matrix deﬁned in the representation given by
the spinor Ψ†
kx = (c†
kx1, . . . , c†
kxNy, c−kx1, . . . , c−kxNy) = (ψ†
kx, ψ−kx), where
ckxjy = P
jx eikxjxc(jxjy). The energy spectrum of HBdG(kx) for a strip with
Ny = 50, ∆= 0.45t, and µ = −2.5t is shown in Figure 7.7(a). As expected
in the weak-coupling regime (|µ| < 4t), the superconducting gap is crossed by
gapless modes, a feature that signals the non-trivial topological nature of the
system.
From the numerical solution we can also determine the properties of
the states χα(kx) associated with these gapless modes, where χα(kx) =
(uα
kx1, . . . , uα
kxNy, vα
kx1, . . . , vα
kxNy) = (Uα
kx, Vα
kx) with α = L (α = R) for the left
(right) moving mode. We ﬁnd the following generic features: i) The states are
localized near the boundaries of the system, i.e., the amplitudes |uR(L)
kxjy | and
|vR(L)
kxjy | decay with an exponential envelope away from the top (bottom) edge
of the strip. In other words, the two gapless modes are chiral edge modes; see

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■211
FIGURE 7.7: (a) Energy spectrum for a chiral p-wave superconductor de-
scribed by the lattice Hamiltonian (7.49) on an inﬁnite strip of width Ny = 50.
The model parameters are ∆= 0.45t and µ = −2.5t. The states with
Ek ≥0 (black lines) represent independent physical states. (b) Comparison
between the edge states of a chiral p-wave superconductor (chiral Majorana
or Majorana–Weyl modes) and those of a helical superconductor (spin-ﬁltered
counter-propagating Majorana modes). (c) Energy spectrum versus angular
momentum (in units of ℏ) for a trivial disk surrounded by a topological p + ip
superconductor. Threading a ﬂux Φ = h/2e through the disk leads to states
with integer angular momentum and a spectrum that includes a zero-energy
Majorana mode.
Figure 7.7(b). ii) The particle and hole components of the wave function, uα
kxjy
and vα
kxjy, diﬀer only by a constant phase factor. With a convenient choice
of the overall phase, we have χα(kx) = (eiθαUα
kx, e−iθαUα
kx), with Uα
kx being a
real vector. iii) The states at kx and −kx are identical, χα(kx) = χα(−kx),
which means that only edge modes with energy Ek ≥0 are physically distinct
(see Figure 7.7). In terms of edge mode operators, (γα
kx)† = χα(kx) · Ψ†
kx,
these properties imply (γα
−kx)† = eiθαUα
kx · ψ†
−kx + e−iθαUα
kx · ψkx = γα
kx. The
corresponding real-space operators
γα
jx =
X
kx
eikxjxγα
kx =
X
kx
eikxjx(γα
−kx)† =
X
kx
e−ikxjx(γα
kx)† = (γα
jx)†, (7.51)
satisfy explicitly the Majorana condition. We conclude that the topological
phase of a 2D chiral p-wave superconductor is characterized by the emergence
of chiral Majorana modes localized near the boundaries of the system. The
modes with positive energy are physically distinct, while the negative energy
states reﬂect the redundancy of the BdG formalism.
The chiral Majorana edge modes become gapless when the boundary be-
tween the topological and trivial regions is (inﬁnitely) long. For ﬁnite bound-
aries, on the other hand, the spectrum is discrete. For example, the modes
propagating around a small (trivial) disk embedded into a large topological

212
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
region are gapped and are characterized by half-integer values of the angu-
lar momentum, as shown in Figure 7.7(c). Threading a magnetic ﬂux h/2e
through the disk changes the boundary conditions and shifts the angular mo-
mentum to integer values [14]. As a result, a zero-energy Majorana mode
becomes localized at the disk boundary. Physically, this situation can be re-
alized when a magnetic ﬂux penetrates the bulk of a (type II) topological
superconductor. The core of the resulting vortex, which consists of normal
metal, becomes gapped due to the small size of the normal region and can
be adiabatically connected to a trivial insulator. Hence, in a spinless p + ip
2D superconductor, each h/2e vortex threading a topological region binds a
localized zero-energy Majorana mode.
As a ﬁnal remark, we mention that one can generate models for time-
reversal invariant superconductors (in symmetry class DIII) following the
strategy leading from the Haldane model of a Chern insulator to the Kane–
Mele model for the quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulator. We have seen (see
Section 7.1) that a QSH insulator can be viewed as two copies of the Chern
insulator, one for each spin and having opposite orientations of the TR break-
ing ﬁeld. Similarly, a TR invariant superconductor (also called helical super-
conductor) can be constructed using two copies of the chiral superconductor
having opposite chiralities: a px + ipy superconductor made of spin-up elec-
trons and a px−ipy superconductor with spin-down electrons. The topological
and trivial phases are distinguished by the two values of a Z2 topological in-
variant. In systems with boundaries, the topological phase is characterized
by the presence of robust counter-propagating, spin-polarized edge modes. A
comparison between the edge modes in chiral and helical superconductors is
shown schematically in Figure 7.7(b).
7.3
TOPOLOGICAL FIELD THEORY
Quantum ﬁeld theory is the native language of topological quantum matter.
Field theory is the very birthplace of the fundamental ideas about the nature
of topological quantum phases, which were developed long before topological
insulators reached the radar of mainstream condensed matter physics. These
ideas — the result of a fruitful relation between physics and topology — re-
vealed the important role that global (rather than local) properties play in
certain quantum systems. A topological quantum ﬁeld theory (TQFT) is a ﬁeld
theory that is insensitive to the metric of space-time and is characterized by
correlation functions that are topological invariants. Essentially, a many-body
condensed matter system is in a topological quantum phase if its low-energy,
long wavelength eﬀective theory is a TQFT. The role of TQFTs in describ-
ing topological phases of matter is, basically, similar to the role of Landau–
Ginzburg ﬁeld theories in describing symmetry-breaking phases of matter.
Having pointed out the signiﬁcance of this theoretical tool, we should also
mention that this is an area of considerable technical complexity. For the pur-
pose of this introductory book, it would be probably meaningless to attempt

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■213
to summarize it. Instead, we will just mention a few aspects concerning a spe-
ciﬁc type of TQFT — the Chern–Simons quantum ﬁeld theories. Our goal is
to provide some perspective for the ﬁeld-theoretic description of the Abelian
fractional quantum Hall states in Chapter 6 (see Section 6.2.1 starting on page
164) and the discussion of anyonic properties in Chapter 12 (Section 12.2 on
page 333). In addition, we would like to show that ﬁeld theory represents
a convenient tool for describing not only interacting topological phases, but
also non-interacting topological band insulators (like those discussed in the
previous section). For a systematic introduction to quantum ﬁeld theoretical
methods in condensed matter physics the reader is referred to the books by
E. Frandkin [152], Altland and Simons [16], and X.-G. Wen [450].
Chern–Simons quantum field theories
Chern–Simons theories are examples of Schwarz-type TQFTs [396]. We note
that a second general class of TQFTs includes the so-called Witten-type
TQFTs, e.g., the topological Yang–Mills theory in four dimensions [469]. In
a Schwarz-type theory, the correlation functions of the system can be writ-
ten as path integrals of metric independent action functionals. For example,
the Abelian 2D BF theory — another example of Schwarz-type TQFT — is
described by an action of the form
SBF = k
2π
Z
d3x ϵµνλaµ∂νbλ,
(7.52)
where µ, ν, λ ∈{0, 1, 2} are space-time indices, a and b are U(1) gauge ﬁelds,
and k is a parameter that describes the braiding statistics of the quasipar-
ticles. Note that the action does not contain a metric tensor (unlike, e.g.,
the action corresponding to an electromagnetic ﬁeld), but the Levi–Civita
symbol. Since ϵµνλ is manifestly invariant under coordinate transformations,
the action (7.52) deﬁnes a TQFT. We note that the gauge ﬁelds a and
b behave diﬀerently under time-reversal, (a0, a1, a2) →(a0, −a1, −a2) and
(b0, b1, b2) →(−b0, b1, b2). Consequently, the BF theory (7.52) is time-reversal
symmetric and could be regarded as an eﬀective low-energy description of
TR-invariant topological insulators [88]
A Chern–Simons (CS) theory in (2+1) dimensions is deﬁned by the action
SCS[a] = k
4π
Z
M
d3x ϵµνρ Tr

aµ∂νaρ + i2
3aµaνaρ

,
(7.53)
where the gauge ﬁeld aµ is an element of a certain Lie group G, which can be
Abelian (i.e., commutative, for example U(1)) or non-Abelian (e.g., SU(2)).
In the Abelian case, the second term in the action vanishes. The trace in
Eq. (7.53) is over the so-called fundamental representation of the gauge group
G. If g ∈G is a generic element of the group, it can be expressed in terms
of n generators T a as g = exp(iλaT a), where λa are real parameters. The
generators T a satisfy the normalization condition Tr(T aT b) = 1
2δab and the

214
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Lie algebra commutation relations
[T a, T b] = if abcT c,
(7.54)
where the parameters f abc are the structure constants of the Lie algebra.5 For
example, in the case of the group G = SU(2), the generators T a = Ja are
the components of the total angular momentum, which satisfy the algebra
[Ja, Jb] = iϵabcJc. In the Abelian case, f abc = 0. Note that the gauge ﬁeld
can be expressed in terms of generators as aµ(x) = aa
µ(x)T a.
The action (7.53) is manifestly metric-independent. To describe a physi-
cal system, it has to generate gauge invariant expectation values for all the
observables, when the theory is deﬁned on a compact manifold M. On a mani-
fold with a boundary, the gauge invariance requirement demands the presence
of an additional term, which describes the gapless boundary physics. In the
Abelian case, a gauge transformation corresponds to aµ →aµ + ∂µω and es-
tablishing the gauge invariance of SCS is straightforward. For non-Abelian
ﬁelds, the gauge transformation reads
aµ →U †aµU −iU †∂µU,
(7.55)
with U(x) ∈G. Under this gauge transformation, the action acquires two
additional terms: a total derivative, which vanishes for a system deﬁned on a
compact manifold, and a term 2πkw[U], with w(U) being the winding number
of the gauge transformation,
w[U] =
1
24π2
Z
M
d3x ϵµνρ Tr
 U †∂µUU †∂νUU †∂ρU

.
(7.56)
The winding number is an integer that counts how many times the gauge
transformation U(x) covers the whole group G as x covers the manifold M
(once). Note that w[U] is a unique characteristic of the gauge transformation
U and cannot be changed by local continuous coordinate transformations (i.e.,
w[U] is a topological invariant).
What are the physical observables in a Chern–Simons theory? In accor-
dance with the general requirements of the theory, the operators representing
these observables have to be gauge-invariant and metric-independent. The so-
called Wilson loop — which is obtained from the holonomy of the gauge ﬁeld
5The Lie algebra can be represented by sets of Hermitian matrices satisfying the nor-
malization condition and Eq. (7.54). Given G, many matrix representations having diﬀerent
dimensions are possible. The Pauli matrices, for example, are a two-dimensional represen-
tation of the generators of SU(2). For SU(N), the N-dimensional representation is called
fundamental. In general, a representation of a group assigns to every element g ∈G a
matrix ρ(g) in such a way as to preserve the multiplication structure of the group, i.e.,
g = g1g2 →ρ(g) = ρ(g1)ρ(g2). Note that a matrix ρ(g) of dimension d can be viewed as a
linear transformation acting on a d-dimensional Hilbert space. For SU(2), the eigenstates
|j, mj⟩of the total angular momentum operator J2 and J3 provide a basis for the Hilbert
space associated with the d = 2j + 1 dimensional representation, where j is a non-negative
integer or half integer.

Theories of Topological Quantum Matter
■215
aµ around a given loop C — satisﬁes these conditions. The Wilson loop is
deﬁned by the trace of the path-ordered exponential of the gauge ﬁeld
WC = Tr

P exp

i
I
C
dxµaµ

,
(7.57)
where P is the path-ordering operator. Physically, the action of a Wilson
loop operator corresponds to the creation and subsequent annihilation of a
pair of elementary particle-antiparticle excitations of the quantum ﬁeld. The
expectation value of WC can be calculated as a path integral of the form
R
Da WC exp(iSSC[a]), which, of course, has to be gauge invariant. Since un-
der a gauge transformation U the CS action acquires an extra contribution
2πk w[U], with w[U] integer, gauge invariance requires k to be an integer,
i.e., e2πik w[U] = 1. We conclude that the coupling k of a non-Abelian Chern–
Simons theory (also known as the level of the theory) satisﬁes the quantization
condition k ∈Z. Note that such a condition does not exist in the Abelian case.
A speciﬁc example of CS ﬁeld theory is the eﬀective theory of Abelian
fractional quantum Hall liquids discussed in Chapter 6 (Section 6.2.1, page
164). The relation between CS theories and the properties of Abelian and
non-Abelian anyons is brieﬂy mentioned in Chapter 12 (see Section 12.2, page
333). Here, we would like to point out that CS theories (and, more generally,
TQFTs) can also describe the response of a topological quantum system to
an external gauge ﬁeld. More speciﬁcally, assume that a 2D Chern insulator
is coupled to an external electromagnetic ﬁeld and that we integrate out the
degrees of freedom associated with the 2D quantum system. The response of
the system is described by the CS ﬁeld theory
Seﬀ= C1
4π
e2
ℏ
Z
d3x ϵµνρ Aµ∂νAρ,
(7.58)
where Aµ is the external ﬁeld. The response equations are jµ = δSeﬀ/δAµ =
C1(e2/h)ϵµνρ ∂νAρ, where jµ is the particle number current density of the 2D
system. The parameter C1 is the topological invariant of the Chern insulator,
which for a band insulator is the sum of the ﬁrst Chern numbers [see Eq.
(5.38)] corresponding to the occupied bands. More generally, the topological
invariant can be expressed in terms of the single-particle Green’s function
G(k) = G(k, ω) of an interacting system as [444]
C1 = π
3
Z
d3k
(2π)3 Tr

ϵµνρ G∂µG−1G∂νG−1G∂ρG−1
,
(7.59)
where the trace is over band indices.
These considerations can be generalized to higher odd space-time dimen-
sions [357]. For example, in (4+1) dimensions the eﬀective theory that de-
scribes the low-energy physics acquires a topological CS-type term of the
form
Seﬀ=
C2
24π2
e2
ℏ
Z
d5x ϵµνρστ Aµ∂νAρ∂σAτ.
(7.60)

216
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
The system described by this action represents the 4D generalization of the
quantum Hall eﬀect. Note that, unlike the 2D case, this theory describes the
nonlinear response to an external ﬁeld, jµ ∝ϵµνρστ ∂νAρ∂σAτ. In general, the
coupling constant C2 can be written in terms of the single-particle Green’s
function of the system [444], while in the noninteracting limit it reduces to
the second Chern number.
A signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the 2D action in Eq. (7.58) and the 4D
action in Eq. (7.60) is their behavior under time-reversal (TR). Since under TR
we have (A0, A1, A2) →(A0, −A1, −A2), the 2D term breaks time-reversal,
while the 4D action is explicitly TR invariant. In fact, Eq. (7.60) describes
the “fundamental” TR invariant topological insulator from which all lower-
dimensional topological insulators (i.e., the familiar 3D and 2D TIs) can be
derived systematically by a procedure called dimensional reduction [356, 48].
We close with a remark on the eﬀective action of 3D insulators [356].
Assume that the dimension µ = 4 is compact (i.e., x4 forms a small circle)
and that the integral θ = C2
H
dx4 A4(x) is a constant. The eﬀective ﬁeld
theory in (3+1) dimensions obtained by performing the integral over x4 in
Eq. (7.60) is
Sθ =
θ
8π2
e2
ℏ
Z
d3x ϵµνρσ ∂µAν∂ρAσ = θ
2π
e2
h
Z
d3x E · B.
(7.61)
This topological term generates the so-called axion electrodynamics [460]. We
note that the integrand in Eq. (7.61) is a total derivative, so it does not
modify the equations of motion, but can have important consequences on the
boundary. In addition, the physics should be invariant under a shift of θ by
2π. This property can be understood in terms of invariance with respect to
adding a ﬂux quantum Φ0 that threads the compactiﬁed circle (since taking
C2 = 1 implies θ = Φ while Φ0 = 2π, in units of e2/ℏ). On the other hand,
under TR we have θ →−θ (which is inherited from the behavior of A4 under
TR). Consequently, TR invariance is consistent with either θ = 0 or θ = π,
i.e., only two values of θ.
We therefore conclude that in 3D there are two diﬀerent classes of TR in-
variant insulators: the topologically trivial insulator with θ = 0 and the topo-
logically nontrivial insulator characterized by θ = π. The arguments sketched
above represent a ﬁeld-theoretical route for deriving the Z2 classiﬁcation of 3D
TIs in symmetry class AII. Of course, the parameter θ/π is the corresponding
Z2 topological invariant. For a noninteracting system, θ can be expressed in
terms of the Berry connection Aαβ
j
= i⟨uα(k|∂j|uβ(k)⟩, where |uα(k)⟩is the
cell-periodic Bloch function and ∂j = ∂/∂kj. Explicitly, we have [356, 139]
θ = 1
2π
Z
BZ
d3k ϵijk Tr

Ai∂jAk −i2
3AiAjAk

,
(7.62)
where the trace is over occupied bands. Equation (7.62) expresses the Z2
topological invariant as the integral of the Chern–Simons 3-form over the 3D
momentum space.

C H A P T E R 8
Majorana Zero Modes
in Solid State
Heterostructures
CONTENTS
8.1
Theoretical background ....................................
218
8.1.1
Majorana zero modes ..............................
218
8.1.2
“Synthetic” topological superconductors ..........
222
8.2
Realization of Majorana zero modes: Practical schemes ..
225
8.2.1
Semiconductor-superconductor hybrid structures .
225
8.2.2
Shiba chains ........................................
234
8.3
Experimental detection of Majorana zero modes
.........
237
8.3.1
Tunneling spectroscopy ............................
237
8.3.2
Fractional Josephson eﬀect ........................
241
8.3.3
Non-local transport ................................
243
D
eep in the heart of the topological world lives the Majo-
rana fermion. There are several reasons the Majorana quasiparticle occu-
pies a focal point within topological quantum matter. Of course, conceptually,
it is a classical example of boundary mode that reveals the topological prop-
erties of the bulk, in this case a topological superconductor; an example that
captures extremely well the very character of topological matter: simple yet
subtle, hiding in plain view. But what enables the Majorana to play an impor-
tant symbolic role is its conspicuous position at the crossroad that deﬁnes the
new paradigm underlying the study of topological quantum matter. A child
of particle physics, the Majorana was reborn in condensed matter physics and
grew under the guidance of quantum computation. Lost before it was even
found, it is fervently searched for in solid state and cold atom systems because
it carries the promise to revolutionize the manner in which we process infor-
mation and understand the foundations of the quantum world. Whether or
not the Majorana will ever fulﬁll this promise is a minor detail; its main role is
217

218
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
that of a legend, to give hope and move things forward. Practically, the search
for zero-energy Majorana modes will play an important role in achieving the
key condition for getting experimental access to topological quantum matter
and quantum computation: an unprecedented level of control over quantum
systems. At the time of this writing (spring 2016), the technological impact
of these developments cannot be clearly foreseen.
Below, we provide a brief overview of the rapidly developing ﬁeld that fo-
cuses on the realization of Majorana zero modes in solid state systems. This
material should be viewed in connection with a number of closely related
topics presented in this book, in particular the simple models of topological
superconductors discussed in Chapter 7, the realization of Majorana modes in
cold atom systems (Chapter 9), the properties of non-Abelian anyons (Chapter
12), and the implementation of topological quantum computation with Majo-
rana zero modes (Chapter 12). The interested reader can ﬁnd more technical
details in review articles, such as Refs. [14, 283, 36, 414, 115, 137].
8.1
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
What is a Majorana zero mode? Is there any diﬀerence between a Majorana
zero mode and a Majorana fermion? Is it possible to have non-Abelian anyons
emerging in a symmetry-protected topological state, i.e., in a quantum phase
that does not possess (intrinsic) topological order? Is there any connection
between the concept of non-Abelian anyon and the particle hypothesized by
Ettore Majorana in 1937? Before discussing speciﬁc schemes for the realiza-
tion of Majorana zero modes in solid state systems, we brieﬂy address these
basic questions, as they touch upon some important issues regarding the ter-
minology used in this ﬁeld and, more importantly, address several fundamental
aspects of topological quantum matter.
8.1.1
Majorana zero modes
Ettore Majorana’s name is linked to concepts associated with three diﬀerent
strands that thread particle physics, condensed matter physics, and quantum
computation. The key idea originated in relativistic quantum mechanics and
was motivated by a critical analysis of the Dirac equation [125], which de-
scribes spin- 1
2 fermions. A complex solution ψ of this equation is not an eigen-
state of the charge conjugation operator C and the bi-spinors ψ and ψc = Cψ
describe a particle (e.g., an electron) and its antiparticle (positron), respec-
tively. Majorana discovered that real solutions of the Dirac equation with the
property ψc = ψ are possible and suggested that neutral fermions, such as
neutrons and neutrinos, might be represented by such solutions [305]. A par-
ticle described by a spinor that satisﬁes the Majorana property — dubbed
Majorana fermion — is identical with its antiparticle. We know that this is
not the case for the neutron, but for the neutrino the jury is still out [29]. In
addition, supersymmetric theories postulate the existence of Majorana super-

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■219
symmetric partners associated with each bosonic particle [462]. Still awaiting
experimental conﬁrmation, the “original” Majorana fermion is a neutral ele-
mentary particle that is identical with its antiparticle and obeys (standard)
Fermi–Dirac statistics.
The Majorana fermions of condensed matter physics are not elementary
particles, but quasiparticle excitations emerging in certain types of many-
body systems. In metals and semiconductors, the fermionic quasi-particles and
their antiparticles, the holes, are always charged and, therefore, distinct. In
superconductors, on the other hand, charge conservation is violated due to the
presence of a Cooper-pair condensate and the quasiparticle excitations (the so-
called Bogoliubov quasiparticles) become superpositions of electrons and holes.
Thus, superconductors provide a natural environment for the emergence of
Majorana fermions. In fact, we have already seen in Chapter 7 (Section 7.2.3)
that the gapless boundary states of a topologically non-trivial p-wave super-
conductor are Majorana modes. Let γj denote the corresponding real space
operator [see Eq. (7.51)]. The object created by γ†
j is its own antiparticle in
the sense that γ†
j = γj and γ2
j = 1, as one can easily verify following the dis-
cussion leading to Eq. (7.51). In addition, γj are fermionic operators satisfying
the anti-commutation rule {γi, γ†
j} = 0 for any i ̸= j. Hence, in the context
of condensed matter physics, one can view the Majorana fermions as bound-
ary modes emerging in topological superconductors and being represented by
second quantized operators that satisfy the Majorana condition
{γi, γj} = 2δij,
γ†
j = γj.
(8.1)
We emphasize that these Majorana boundary modes are propagating modes
that become gapless in the limit of an inﬁnitely long boundary. If the wave vec-
tor k is a good quantum number (e.g., in the strip geometry, with k = kx), the
corresponding operator γk = P
j eikjγj satisﬁes the k-space “Majorana condi-
tion” γ†
k = γ−k, which expresses the intrinsic redundancy of the Bogoliubov–
de Gennes (BdG) description. Indeed, consider the (time independent) BdG
equation
HBdG ψn = Enψn,
(8.2)
where n is an integer that labels the quasiparticle energies and ψn(r) =
(un↑, un↓, vn↑, vn↓)T are 4-component spinors. As a consequence of particle-
hole symmetry, we have E−n = −En and the corresponding spinors are
not independent, so that (with a convenient choice of phases) we have
v−nσ(r) = [unσ(r)]∗. In the language of second quantization, the Bogoliubov
quasiparticle described by ψn(r) is created by the operator
ˆψ†
n ≡
X
r,σ

unσ(r)ˆc†
rσ + [u−nσ(r)]∗ˆcrσ
	
= ˆψ−n,
(8.3)
where ˆc†
rσ and ˆcrσ are the electron creation and annihilation operators (corre-
sponding to position r and spin σ), respectively. Based on Eq. (8.3), one can

220
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
naturally establish a correspondence between Bogoliubov quasiparticles and
the Majorana fermions described by the operators
γn1 ≡ˆψ†
n+ ˆψn = ˆψ†
−n+ ˆψ−n,
γn2 ≡i( ˆψ†
n−ˆψn) = −i( ˆψ†
−n−ˆψ−n). (8.4)
Hence, as a result of the equivalence modulo 2e of charge +e and charge
−e excitations1 and because only half of the degrees of freedom associated
with the BdG equation are independent (which can be understood in terms
of a set of “particles” that are indistinguishable from their “antiparticles”),
Majorana fermions appear rather naturally in the mean-ﬁeld description of
a generic superconductor [80]. The Majorana representation is useful when
addressing physical phenomena such as, for example, the pair annihilation of
Bogoliubov quasiparticles [35]. There is a close formal analogy between the
propagating Majorana fermions that emerge in a superconductor and their
(hypothesized) particle physics cousins [137]. Furthermore, given the excellent
agreement of theoretical predictions based on the BdG formalism with a large
body of experimental data, the existence of this type of Majorana fermion is
well established.
There is, however, a related and much more remarkable phenomenon that
emerges in a topological superconductor: the Majorana zero mode (MZM). In
essence, MZMs are midgap excitations occurring at exactly zero energy that
are localized in the vicinity of topological defects, such as vortices and domain
walls. MZMs are represented by Majorana operators γj that, in addition to
satisfying the condition (8.1), commute with the Hamiltonian,
[H, γj] = 0
(8.5)
The “composite” consisting of a MZM and the associated topological defect
has nontrivial statistical properties and represents a non-Abelian anyon. In
turn, non-Abelian anyons constitute the foundation of topological quantum
computation. It is the property that MZMs give rise to this type of quantum
objects that motivates the strong interest in the study of a variety of condensed
matter systems predicted to support topological superconducting phases. We
note that in the literature the term “Majorana fermion” is often used when
referring to a “Majorana zero mode.” We emphasize, however, that generically
Majorana fermions do not have zero energy and do not exhibit non-Abelian
statistics.
The basic properties of anyons and their relation to (topological) quantum
computation will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 12. Here, we just
point out a few key ideas, to better understand the nature of MZMs and their
signiﬁcance in the context of quantum computation.
• Anyons are (quasi)particles that occur in two-dimensional systems and
have statistical properties that are neither fermionic nor bosonic. Ex-
changing a pair of anyons twice (say, counter-clockwise) does not leave
1The Bogoliubov quasiparticle–Majorana fermion correspondence breaks down if the
Coulomb interactions become signiﬁcant and remove this equivalence modulo 2e.

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■221
the wave function invariant (unlike the double exchange of bosons and
fermions). If the quantum state describing a system of 2N anyons at
ﬁxed positions is non-degenerate, any exchange of an anyon pair results
in a non-trivial phase factor (i.e., a factor diﬀerent from einπ, with n
integer) and the anyons are called Abelian, since the order of the ex-
changes is not important. If, on the other hand, the quantum state is
degenerate, exchanging a pair of anyons corresponds to a rotation in the
Hilbert space of degenerate states. In this case, the ﬁnal state depends on
the order of the exchanges and the anyons are called non-Abelian. Topo-
logical quantum computation is an approach to fault-tolerant quantum
computation based on the non-trivial braiding of non-Abelian anyons.
• Anyons can occur either i) as ﬁnite energy excitations of an interact-
ing system that is in a quantum phase with (intrinsic) topological or-
der, or ii) as extrinsic defects, e.g., vortices, lattice dislocations, and
domain walls, occurring in ordered systems that host some topologi-
cally non-trivial phase (e.g., a topological superconducting state). The
(bulk) excitations of a fractional quantum Hall ﬂuid and the excitations
of the toric code (see Chapter 6) are examples of anyons that are in-
trinsic topological quasiparticles. A defect supporting a Majorana zero
mode is an example that illustrates the second mechanism for generating
anyons. We emphasize that a (mean-ﬁeld) topological superconductor
is a symmetry-protected topological phase and, consequently, does not
support anyonic excitations. The non-Abelian statistics of the MZMs
requires the presence of defects, which are not quantum excitations but
semiclassical objects that rely on the winding of some global textures.
• MZMs localized near defects in a topological superconductor are ex-
amples of a particular type of non-Abelian anyons called Ising anyons
(see Chapter 12). Ising anyons can also emerge as quasiparticles in a
topological ordered state, e.g., as bulk excitations in a ν = 5/2 frac-
tional quantum Hall ﬂuid. We note that these intrinsic excitations have
ﬁnite energy. By contrast, the defects (e.g., vortices) that bind MZMs
involve an energy cost that grows logarithmically with the distance be-
tween them. We say that the defects are conﬁned. In practice, creating
a pair of defects (e.g., vortex-antivortex) involves tuning some external
parameters and requires energy proportional to the system size.
• Loosely speaking, a pair of Majorana zero modes (γ1, γ2) forms an or-
dinary Dirac fermion,
c = 1
2(γ1 + iγ2),
c† = 1
2(γ1 −iγ2).
(8.6)
In other words, a Majorana operator γi can be viewed as a fractional-
ized zero-mode representing “half” of an ordinary fermion. One cannot
meaningfully say that γi is occupied or unoccupied. However, a pair of
MZMs has two well-deﬁned states labeled by the fermion parity (−1)n,

222
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
where n = 0, 1 are the eigenvalues of the occupation number opera-
tor c†c = 1
2(1 + iγ1γ2) (equivalently, the fermion parity is given by the
eigenvalues ±1 of the operator iγ2γ1). Note that the two states have
the same energy. Again, loosely speaking, we can say that the pair of
MZMs is unoccupied (c†c = 0) or occupied (c†c = 1) by one regular
fermion. These two states (corresponding to even and odd fermion par-
ity, respectively) can be used to encode a qubit. Remarkably, the spatial
separation between the two MZMs can be arbitrarily large, so that the
quantum information is stored in a highly non-local manner. This key
property endows the qubit with (topological) protection against local
perturbations.
• A system containing 2N Majorana zero modes has degenerate ground
states labeled by the eigenvalues ±1 of the operators iγ2j−1γ2j, where
j = 1, . . . , N. Assuming that the (overall) parity of the system (i.e.,
the product of all these eigenvalues) is ﬁxed, there are 2N−1 distinct
ground states that can be used to encode N −1 qubits. Braiding the
MZMs enables unitary transformations within the 2N−1 dimensional
low-energy subspace spanned by the degenerate ground states. Since the
unitary operations depend only on the topological class of the braid, the
corresponding quantum computation is endowed with fault-tolerance.
8.1.2
“Synthetic” topological superconductors
Majorana zero modes are predicted to occur near defects in one- and two-
dimensional (1D and 2D) topological superconductors [362, 263, 438]. Accord-
ing to the general classiﬁcation of topological insulators and superconductors
summarized in Chapter 5, such topological superconducting phases can occur
in several symmetry classes (see Table 5.3). In Chapter 7 we have discussed
two simple models of p-wave superconductors that have topological phases: the
1D Kitaev model given by Eq. (7.42) and the 2D chiral p-wave superconductor
corresponding to the Hamiltonian (7.49). The MZMs occur as unpaired Majo-
rana modes at the ends of the Kitaev chain or as zero-energy modes bound by
vortices in the 2D topological superconductor (see Section 7.2.3). Both models
involve spinless fermions (which implies a time-reversal operator T = K that
squares to +1) and have particle-hole symmetry with Uc = τx (i.e., C2 = +1).
Generically, the models belong to symmetry class D (see Table 5.1), which
has topologically non-trivial phases in 1D and 2D. Note that the Hamiltonian
(7.42) of the Kitaev model has an “accidental” time-reversal symmetry that
places it in symmetry class BDI (which hosts 1D topological phases). These
general considerations bring us to the key question: Are there actual physical
systems that realize these topological phases?
Materials in which p-wave superconductivity emerges “intrinsically”
through many-body interactions are rare. The best known candidates are the
superﬂuid phases of 3He [282, 437, 439] and the spin-triplet superconductor
Sr2RuO4 [303, 304]. However, the experimental realization of half-quantum

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■223
vortices capable of hosting MZMs represents a serious challenge in both su-
perﬂuid 3He-A thin ﬁlms and Sr2RuO4 [315]. In addition, it is not clear how
one can practically detect and manipulate Majorana zero modes in these sys-
tems. Furthermore, the realization of spin-polarized p-wave superﬂuidity in
ultracold atom systems [420] (see also Chapter 9) poses serious challenges
due to the extremely short lifetime of p-wave bound pairs [86]. These prob-
lems make the actual realization, detection, and manipulation of MZMs in
“intrinsic” topological superconductors a daunting experimental task.
An appealing and, so far, very promising alternative is to engineer “syn-
thetic” topological superconductors by combining ordinary superconductors
with other materials, such as semiconductors and topological insulators. The
pioneering proposals by Fu and Kane envisioned the realization of topological
superconductivity using conventional s-wave superconductors in combination
with topological insulators [164, 165]. What these proposals have shown is
that one can rely on rather abundant and (some of them) well studied ma-
terials, instead of having to deal with “exotic” superconductors. This was a
real breakthrough. The next step was to replace the topological insulators
(which are still experimentally quite challenging) with semiconductors (the
most technologically friendly materials) [383, 13, 301, 334]. A more recent
development involves a proposal [321] for the realization of MZMs in ferro-
magnetic atomic chains (e.g., Fe) on superconductor substrates (e.g., Pb). We
will brieﬂy discuss these schemes in the next section. Here, we focus on the
basic idea on which these proposals are formulated.
Let us try to identify a physical system that realizes the Kitaev chain
model. The necessary ingredients are i) spinless fermions and ii) p-wave super-
conductivity. Of course, the fermions in a real solid state system are electrons
and they carry spin-1/2. Therefore, the ﬁrst problem we need to address is
how to “freeze out” half of the spin degrees of freedom, so that the system be-
comes eﬀectively spinless. A straightforward approach is to fully spin-polarize
the electrons and ensure that a single spin-split band is occupied. However,
it would be diﬃcult (if not impossible) to drive such a system into a super-
conducting state. An alternative approach is to exploit the property of strong
spin-orbit coupling to lock the electron’s spin to its momentum. The surface
(or edge) states of topological insulators and the spin-split bands of semicon-
ductors with strong spin-orbit coupling are ideal candidates.
Consider, for example, the low-energy spectrum of a 1D semiconductor
wire near the bottom of the conduction band (see Figure 8.1). In the absence
of spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman splitting the band is double degenerate, as
shown in panel (a). Adding Rashba-type spin-orbit coupling [Figure 8.1(b)]
removes this degeneracy, except at k = 0, where it is protected by the Kramers
theorem. The remaining degeneracy can be removed by breaking time-reversal
symmetry, e.g., using a Zeeman ﬁeld [Figure 8.1(c)]. If the Fermi energy is
suﬃciently close to ϵ = 0, only the lowest energy band is occupied and the
system is eﬀectively spinless, i.e., it has only one active fermionic species. Note
that the combination of (strong) spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman splitting

224
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
ε(k)
ε(k)
ε(k)
ε(k)
k
k
k
k
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 8.1: Energy spectrum for a 1D wire modeled by the Hamiltonian in
Eq. (8.7) with ∆= 0. (a) No spin-orbit coupling and no Zeeman ﬁeld. (b) Non-
zero spin-orbit coupling and Γ = 0. (c) Zeeman ﬁeld oriented perpendicular to
the spin-orbit coupling ﬁeld (αR ̸= 0, Γ ̸= 0). (d) Zeeman ﬁeld Γσy oriented
parallel to the spin-orbit coupling ﬁeld. The arrows show the spin orientation;
by convention a horizontal arrow correspond to the spin parallel to the y axis.
gives rise to a non-trivial spin texture in momentum space, as shown in Figure
8.1.
Obtaining the second ingredient (p-wave superconductivity) seems more
challenging, since, as discussed above, one cannot rely on “intrinsic” p-wave
superconductors. Fortunately, the task can be accomplished with ordinary s-
wave superconductors. In essence, coupling the semiconductor (or topological
insulator) wire to a long-range ordered superconductor results in the “spin-
less” electrons acquiring Cooper pairing through superconducting proximity
eﬀect. In addition, as a result of the nontrivial spin texture generated by the
combination of spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman ﬁeld, the induced supercon-
ductivity is a mixture of s-wave and p-wave components. Thus, a topological
superconducting regime can be achieved in the 1D wire by tuning the chemical
potential (to ensure single-band occupancy) and the Zeeman ﬁeld.
We conclude that synthetic topological superconductors can be engineered
by combining a) strong spin-orbit coupling, b) Zeeman splitting, and c)
proximity-induced superconductivity. The ﬁrst two ingredients provide an ef-
fectively spinless fermion system with a non-trivial spin texture, while the
third provides (proximity-induced) Cooper pairing. More details on speciﬁc
implementations and variations of this basic scheme are discussed in the next
section. The essential components of a synthetic topological superconducting
wire are captured by a simple eﬀective model of the form
Heﬀ=
Z dk
2π

ψ†
k
ℏ2k2
2m −µ + αRkσy + Γσx

ψk + ∆ψk↑ψk↓+ h.c.

, (8.7)
where ψk = (ψk↑, ψk↓)T is the electron annihilation operator, m is the eﬀective
mass, αR is the Rashba spin-orbit coupling coeﬃcient, Γ is the Zeeman ﬁeld,
and ∆is the induced pair potential. The chemical potential µ can be changed
using external gates, while the Zeeman spin splitting can be modiﬁed by tuning
an external magnetic ﬁeld, Γ = gµBB, where g the eﬀective Land´e g-factor, B

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■225
the applied magnetic ﬁeld, and µB the Bohr magneton. We emphasize that,
to be able to drive the system into a topological regime, it is essential that
the magnetic ﬁeld be perpendicular to the spin-orbit ﬁeld. In Eq. (8.7), for
example, the magnetic and spin-orbit ﬁelds are oriented along the x and y
directions, respectively. If the two ﬁelds are parallel, the degeneracy of the
spin-split sub-bands is not completely removed and the condition of having
an eﬀectively spinless system cannot be satisﬁed, as shown in Figure 8.1(d).
At Γ = 0 the superconducting wire described by Eq. (8.7) is topologically
trivial and is characterized by a quasiparticle gap equal to ∆, the induced pair
potential. Applying a Zeeman ﬁeld reduces the gap, which eventually vanishes
at the critical value [301, 334]
Γc =
p
|∆|2 + µ2.
(8.8)
The vanishing of the quasiparticle gap signals a topological quantum phase
transition [362, 383]. For Γ > Γc the gap opens again and the system enters
the topological superconducting phase.
8.2
REALIZATION OF MAJORANA ZERO MODES: PRACTICAL
SCHEMES
Various schemes for engineering topological superconductors by skilfully com-
bining conventional s-wave superconductors with other materials have been
proposed following the seminal work of Fu and Kane [164, 165]. Below, we
touch upon some key features associated with two types of heterostructures
that have received most of the experimental attention so far, focusing on semi-
conductor wires proximity coupled to conventional superconductors.
8.2.1
Semiconductor-superconductor hybrid structures
In 2012 the search for Majorana zero modes in solid state structures entered a
new phase when, following earlier theoretical predictions [301, 334], an experi-
mental group in Delft published evidence consistent with the existence of these
modes in InSb nanowires proximity-coupled to a superconductor (NbTiN)
[320]. More speciﬁcally, it was found that a zero-bias tunneling conductance
peak (see below, Section 8.3.1) develops when the magnetic ﬁeld applied par-
allel to the wire exceeds a certain value, consistent with the emergence of
MZMs when the topological criterion Γ > Γc is satisﬁed. The ﬁnding was
subsequently conﬁrmed by other groups [94, 112, 119, 150].
Figure 8.2(a) illustrates the basic structure of a semiconductor wire-based
Majorana device: a semiconductor wire with strong spin-orbit coupling (e.g.,
InAs or InSb) is proximity-coupled to a conventional s-wave superconductor
(e.g., Nb or Al) and placed in a magnetic ﬁeld, typically oriented parallel
to the wire. A normal metal lead may be added to probe the system by
performing charge tunneling measurements. Back gates are used to generate
potential barriers and control the chemical potential. Real wires are quasi one-

226
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
⃗B
metallic
lead
s-wave
SC
SM
wire Vb
Vg
k
ε(k)
1−
1+
2−
2+
3−
3+
(a)
(b)
(c)
En
En
En
0
0
0
Γ = 0
Γ ≈Γc
Γ > Γc
FIGURE 8.2: (a) Basic architecture of a semiconductor (SM) wire – supercon-
ductor (SC) device. The back gate Vg controls the chemical potential, while
Vb creates a tunnel barrier. (b) Schematic structure of a multi-band energy
spectrum. The energies of the α−(α+) sub-bands decrease (increase) with
increasing Zeeman ﬁeld. When the chemical potential is tuned within the
shaded regions, the system is topologically non-trivial. (c) Low-energy BdG
spectrum of a ﬁnite wire showing the energies of the states ψn with |n| ≤7.
The quasiparticle gap vanishes at the critical Zeeman ﬁeld Γc; two zero-energy
modes emerge when Γ > Γc.
dimensional systems that, typically, have several active conﬁnement-induced
bands. The bands are spin-split due to the spin-orbit coupling and applied
Zeeman ﬁeld, as shown in Figure 8.2(b). In general, the BdG spectrum of the
system is characterized by a ﬁnite quasiparticle gap. If the chemical potential
is tuned close to the bottom of a conﬁnement-induced band, a pair of zero-
energy Majorana modes emerge when the applied Zeeman ﬁeld exceeds a
certain critical value, as illustrated in Figure 8.2(c). The MZMs are localized
at the two ends of the wire segment covered by the superconductor.
The low-energy physics of an ideal semiconductor (SM) wire proximity-
coupled to a superconductor (SC) is described by the eﬀective Hamiltonian
(8.7). However, the real world happens to be slightly more complex. Quite
generally, the physical systems that support topological phases are governed
by an interplay of topological and non-topological features. For the synthetic
topological SCs that host MZMs this is both a curse and a blessing: a curse
because it opens paths for circumventing the topological protection and a
blessing because it provides knobs for probing and controlling the system,
thus facilitating its experimental study and the implementation of operations
necessary for quantum computation. Below we discuss a few examples of “real
world” theoretical problems that need to be addressed if we want to make a
connection between the “ideal picture” and the physics of the structures real-
ized and observed in the laboratory. We note that this is not an exhaustive list
of experimentally relevant issues. Other important problems (not addressed

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■227
here) include understanding the role of diﬀerent types of disorder, disentan-
gling topologically trivial and nontrivial features, and incorporating details
regarding the geometry of the heterostructure, speciﬁc material properties,
and the presence of non-homogeneous ﬁelds (e.g., applied magnetic ﬁelds and
eﬀective conﬁning potentials).
Proximity effect in semiconductor-superconductor hybrid structures
Proximity-induced superconductivity is central to most of the proposed
schemes for realizing synthetic topological SCs. Consider, for example, a
semiconductor-superconductor (SM-SC) structure. The Hamiltonian that de-
scribes the hybrid system has the general form
Htot = HSM + HZ + HV + HSC + HSM−SC,
(8.9)
where the terms on the right-hand side describe the SM subsystem (e.g., a
SM wire), the applied Zeeman ﬁeld, disorder and gate potentials, the SC
subsystems, and the coupling between the SM and the SC, respectively. To
account for the eﬀect of the SC on the SM subsystem, we need to model (at a
certain level) the superconductor and the coupling term; then we can integrate
out the SC degrees of freedom. For simplicity, we describe the system using
a simple tight-binding Hamiltonian and incorporate superconductivity, at the
mean ﬁeld level, through a constant pairing amplitude ∆0. Explicitly, we have
HSC = −tsc
X
⟨i,j⟩,σ
a†
iσajσ −µsc
X
i,σ
a†
iσaiσ + ∆0
X
i
(a†
i↑a†
i↓+ ai↓ai↑),
HSM−SC = −
X
m,σ
X
⟨l0,j0⟩

λmσc†
l0maj0σ + λ∗
mσa†
j0σcl0m

, (8.10)
where i and j label the lattice sites associated with the bulk SC, l0 and
j0 designate lattice sites on the SM and SC sides of the SM-SC interface,
respectively, ⟨. . . ⟩designates nearest-neighbors, a†
iσ is the creation operator
for a single-particle state with spin σ localized inside the SC, and c†
lm creates
a single-particle state inside the SM characterized by the set of quantum
numbers m = (α, s) associated with orbital and spin degrees of freedom. The
model parameters are the SC hopping (tsc), the chemical potential of the SC
(µsc), the pairing amplitude (∆0), and the hopping across the SM-SC interface
(λmσ). If the SM is described by a single-band model (corresponding to the
conduction band), m = ±1 labels the spin projection along the z-axis and
we have λmσ = λ δmσ. The low-energy physics of the SM is described by
an eﬀective action obtained by integrating out the SC degrees of freedom. In
terms of Green functions, the coupling to the SC induces an interface self-
energy contribution to the SM Green function [351, 414]. Neglecting non-local
terms, the superconducting proximity eﬀect is captured by the (local) self-

228
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
energy [414]
Σmm′(l0; ω) = −νF
X
s,s′
λms
"
ω + ∆0σyτy
p
∆2
0 −ω2 + ζτz
#
ss′
λm′s′,
(8.11)
where νF is the surface density of states of the SC subsystem in the normal
state (at the Fermi energy), σµ and τµ are Pauli matrices associated with the
spin and Nambu spaces, respectively, and ζ is a proximity-induced shift of the
chemical potential. For a single-band model, the superconducting proximity
eﬀect depends on the coupling constant eγ = νF |λ|2, i.e., on the SC density
of states and the transparency of the interface. In addition, the strength of
the proximity eﬀect is determined by the spatial proﬁle of the wave functions
corresponding to the low-energy states of the semiconductor. More speciﬁcally,
assuming (for simplicity) that the characteristic amplitude of the electron wave
functions at the SM-SC interface is ψ0, the strength of the proximity eﬀect is
given by the eﬀective SM-SC coupling
γ = νF |λ|2|ψ0|2.
(8.12)
Note that, more generally, the wave functions associated with diﬀerent
conﬁnement-induced bands have diﬀerent amplitudes at the interface and,
consequently, the eﬀective SM-SC coupling is a matrix γαβ, where α and β
are band indices [414].
The main consequences of the superconducting proximity eﬀect become
transparent in the low-energy, weak coupling limit deﬁned by ω ≪∆0 and
γ < ∆0. In this limit, the self-energy can be considered within the static ap-
proximation
p
∆2
0 −ω2 ≈∆0 and the SM Green function becomes [351, 414]
G−1 ≈Z−1(ω −Heﬀ), where Z = (1 + γ/∆0)−1 is the reduced quasiparticle
weight and Heﬀis the eﬀective low-energy BdG Hamiltonian describing the
SM sub-system. Explicitly, we have
Heﬀ= Z
2 [(τz + 1)H0 + (τz −1)HT
0 ] + ∆indσyτy,
(8.13)
where H0 = HSM + HZ + HV is the (ﬁrst quantized) Hamiltonian for the
semiconductor, which includes the Zeeman ﬁeld and gate (and/or disorder)
potential, and ∆ind = γ∆0/(γ + ∆0) is the induced pairing potential.
Based on this simpliﬁed analysis, we can formulate several observations
regarding the superconducting proximity eﬀect. (i) The eﬀective Hamiltonian
describing a proximity-coupled SM wire has, indeed, the general structure of
the simple model given by Eq. (8.7), but only in the low-energy, weak-coupling
limit. For energies comparable to the bulk SC pairing amplitude ∆0 the ex-
plicit frequency-dependence of the self-energy has to be taken into account. (ii)
The parameters of the Hamiltonian H0 describing the semiconductor (and the
external ﬁelds) are renormalized by the coupling to the superconductor. The
renormalization factor Z < 1 can be interpreted as the probability of ﬁnding

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■229
k
k
k
E(k)
E(k)
E(k)
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 8.3: BdG spectra for an inﬁnite quasi-1D wire with the chemical
potential at the bottom of the second band [sub-bands 2+ and 2−in Figure
8.2(b)]. Shaded regions correspond to energies |E(k)| > ∆. (a) No Zeeman
ﬁeld (Γ = 0); the qp gap is equal to the induced pair potential ∆. (b) Topo-
logical quantum phase transition (Γ = Γc applied parallel to the wire); the top
occupied band (i.e., sub-band 2−) becomes gapless at k = 0. The dispersion
of the low-energy sub-bands (1+ and 1−) is weakly dependent on the applied
Zeeman ﬁeld. For Γ > Γc the qp gap reopens and the SC phase becomes
topologically non-trivial. (c) Zeeman ﬁeld parallel to the spin-orbit ﬁeld. The
system becomes gapless for Γ > Γ∗.
an electron (which occupies a certain low-energy single-particle state) inside
the semiconductor, rather than the SC. In the strong-coupling limit (γ > ∆0)
the electrons “live” mostly inside the SC (i.e., Z ≪1). (iii) In a multi-band
system the SM-SC coupling γαβ is a non-diagonal matrix [414], which results
in an eﬀective inter-band coupling via the superconductor. Consequently, the
band structure of the eﬀective Hamiltonian may diﬀer signiﬁcantly from that
of the bare SM Hamiltonian. (iv) If the transparency of the SM-SC interface
is spatially nonuniform, the coupling constant eγ becomes position dependent.
In turn, this generates not only a position-dependent induced pair potential,
but also a highly non-trivial renormalization of the low-energy physics. Both
eﬀects represent important sources of disorder.
Multi-band occupancy and phase diagram
In a strictly one-dimensional (1D) wire the topological superconducting phase
is realized when the Zeeman ﬁeld exceeds the critical value given by Eq. (8.8)),
i.e., Γ >
p
|∆|2 + µ2. In a real, quasi-1D wire several conﬁnement-induced
bands may be occupied. To understand the structure of the corresponding
topological phase diagram, let us focus on the ideal case of an inﬁnitely long
wire. We assume that the spin-orbit ﬁeld is oriented in the y-direction. For
Γ=0, the BdG spectrum is gapped (see Figure 8.3) and the corresponding
superconducting phase is topologically trivial. As mentioned before, driving
the system into a topological superconducting state requires a Zeeman ﬁeld

230
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
oriented perpendicular to the spin-orbit ﬁeld and exceeding a certain critical
value. Note that applying an external magnetic ﬁeld along the direction of
the spin-orbit ﬁeld (i.e., the y-direction) reduces the quasiparticle gap, which
eventually vanishes at Γ∗= |∆|. However, the gap does not open again upon
further increasing the Zeeman splitting so that for Γ > Γ∗the system remains
in a gapless state, as shown in Figure 8.3.
Consider now a Zeeman ﬁeld oriented perpendicular to the spin-orbit ﬁeld,
i.e., along the x- or z-direction. In this case, the quasiparticle gap correspond-
ing to any ﬁnite momentum is non-zero, |Eα(k)| > 0 for k ̸= 0, where α is
the band index. However, the quasiparticle gap at k = 0 vanishes when the
system undergoes a topological quantum phase transition (see Figure 8.3).
If the Zeeman ﬁeld Γ is small compared to the inter-band spacing and the
chemical potential is near the bottom of the conﬁnement-induced band αm,
the topological criterion for the ideal wire holds, but the chemical potential
has to be measured relative to the top-most occupied band αm (also called
the “Majorana band”). Explicitly, we have
Γ > Γc =
p
|∆αm|2 + (δµαm)2,
δµαm = µ −ϵαm(0),
(8.14)
where ϵαm(k) is the energy of the αm band in the absence of induced su-
perconductivity and applied Zeeman ﬁeld , i.e., when ∆αm = 0 and Γ = 0.
In essence, for low-enough Zeeman ﬁelds, the pairs of spin-split sub-bands
corresponding to low-energy occupied bands are “passive” — both sub-bands
from each pair cross the chemical potential and are gapped by proximity eﬀect
— and the topological properties of the system are determined by the “ac-
tive” Majorana band: if only one active spin-split sub-band is occupied, the
system is eﬀectively spinless and the superconducting phase is topologically
non-trivial; otherwise, the wire is a trivial SC.
With increasing Zeeman ﬁeld, i.e., when Γ is comparable to (or larger
than) the inter-band spacing, spin-split sub-bands corresponding to diﬀerent
conﬁnement-induced bands cross, as shown in Figure 8.4. At this point, it
is worth noting that in a quasi-1D wire the Rashba spin-orbit coupling has
both a longitudinal contribution (proportional to the wave vector k) and a
transverse term that couples diﬀerent conﬁnement-induced bands. In a basis
ψασ(k), where α is the band index, the Rashba spin-orbit coupling has the
generic form
[HSOI]αβ = δαβ αR kσy + iqαβ σx,
(8.15)
where qαβ = −qβα are matrix elements that can be evaluated using speciﬁc
models [414]. The existence of the transverse Rashba term impacts the topo-
logical phase diagram in two major ways.
First, it changes the symmetry of the Hamiltonian. Indeed, without the
transverse Rashba coupling, the eﬀective Hamiltonian has, in addition to
particle-hole symmetry, an artiﬁcial “time-reversal” symmetry with T = K,
where K is the complex conjugation. More speciﬁcally, the eﬀective Hamil-
tonian satisﬁes the condition H∗
eﬀ(k) = Heﬀ(−k). Consequently, the Hamil-
tonian belongs to the symmetry class BDI and its distinct 1D topological

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■231
0
1
2
0
2
µ
δE
µ
δE
Γ/δE
Γ/δE
0
1
2
0
1
2
N =0
N =1
N =1
N =2
N =2
N =3
N =3
FIGURE 8.4: Topological phase diagram of a multiband nanowire with Zee-
man ﬁeld oriented along the wire (left) and in the z-direction (right). Thick
black lines show the dependence of the sub-band energies ϵα±(k = 0) on the
Zeeman ﬁeld. Energies are in units of inter-band spacing δE. In the absence of
transverse Rashba coupling (qαβ = 0) the two diagrams become identical and
the topological phases are indexed by the Z invariant N. The inset shows the
change of the phase boundaries in the presence of inter-band pairing, ∆12 ̸= 0.
phases are classiﬁed by a Z topological invariant. Let α+ and α−denote the
spin-split bands corresponding to the conﬁnement-induced band α and let us
assume that the energy of α+ (α−) increases (decreases) with Γ. Also, assume
that for a given value of the Zeeman ﬁeld Γ > 0 we have ν−occupied α−
sub-bands and ν+ occupied α+ sub-bands. Then, the Z topological invariant
of the corresponding phase is, basically, N = ν−−ν+, as shown in Figure 8.4.
Furthermore, in a long (but ﬁnite) wire there will be N MZMs localized at
each end, as a manifestation of the bulk-boundary correspondence.
In the presence of the transverse Rashba term the artiﬁcial time-reversal
symmetry is broken and the Hamiltonian belongs to symmetry class D with
distinct 1D topological phases labeled by a Z2 invariant. Suﬃciently far from
the phase boundaries, the Z2 topological invariant is given by the parity of
the sub-band occupation number, N2 = ν−+ ν+ (mod 2). An odd number
of occupied sub-bands corresponds to a topological SC phase (N2 = 1), while
an even number corresponds to a trivial SC (N2 = 0). In a long (but ﬁnite)
wire, there will be exactly N2 MZMs at each end. Note, however, that if the
symmetry is weakly broken — e.g., when the relevant matrix elements qαβ are
small — the wire will still host N low-energy modes localized near each end;
N2 of these modes have zero energy, while N −N2 of them can be viewed as
weakly energy-split Majorana modes.
The second way in which the transverse Rashba term impacts the topo-

232
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
logical phase diagram is to introduce a dependence of the sub-band energies
ϵα±(0) on the orientation of the Zeeman ﬁeld. More speciﬁcally, when the ﬁeld
is parallel to the wire the crossing of the sub-bands α+ and β−is not aﬀected
by the transverse Rashba coupling. By contrast, when Γ is oriented along the
z direction the two sub-bands anticross if qαβ ̸= 0, as illustrated in Figure 8.4.
Other important factors that impact the location of the phase boundaries
are the orbital eﬀect of the external magnetic ﬁeld, the presence of disor-
der and non-homogeneous conﬁnement, the strength of the semiconductor-
superconductor coupling, and the oﬀ-diagonal induced pairing. Strong SM-
SC coupling (γ), for example, renormalizes the low-energy physics of the
nanowire, including the eﬀective value of the Zeeman ﬁeld. In general, the
ratio (ZΓ)/∆ind decreases with γ and the phase boundary between the trivial
(N = 0) and non-trivial (N = 1) phases is pushed to higher values of Γ. Also,
oﬀ-diagonal induced pairing ∆αβ (where α ̸= β are band indices) emerges
generically in a SM-SC structure with no particular spatial symmetry [see Eq.
(8.11)]. Inter-band pairing leads to an expansion of the topological SC phase
near “crossing points,” as illustrated in the inset of Figure 8.4.
Finite size effects and topological protection
We deﬁned the Majorana zero modes in terms of Majorana fermion operators
that commute with the Hamiltonian. However, Eq. (8.5) corresponds to the
idealized case when the MZMs are inﬁnitely far away from one another. In
real physical systems, there is always a ﬁnite characteristic length L associ-
ated with the separation between two MZMs. For example, in the case of a
superconducting wire that supports MZMs at its ends, L is the length of the
wire. More generally, consider a physical system supporting 2N modes local-
ized near points rj and described by Majorana operators γj. The operational
deﬁnition of the Majorana zero modes replaces Eq. (8.5) with the requirement
that the commutator of γj with the Hamiltonian be exponentially small,
[H, γj] ∼exp
L
ξ

,
(8.16)
where L = mini(|rj −ri|) and ξ is a length scale associated with the Hamilto-
nian H that characterizes the “size” of the MZMs. The characteristic length
ξ depends on microscopic parameters, such as the induced pairing potential,
the Zeeman ﬁeld, and the chemical potential; it diverges at the topological
quantum phase transition and has a minimum at values of the Zeeman ﬁeld
slightly higher than the critical ﬁeld, Γ ≳Γc. In the limit L ≫ξ, Eq. (8.16)
ensures the quasi-degeneracy of the system of 2N MZMs and generates a
2N−1-dimensional low-energy subspace. This property allows using the sys-
tem as a platform for topological quantum computation.
The eﬀective Hamiltonian obtained by projecting H onto the low-energy
subspace has the form Heﬀ= −i P
j,k ϵjkγJγk, where ϵjk = −ϵkj are expo-
nentially small energy splittings, ϵjk ∝e−|rj−rk|/ξ. If the distances between

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■233
Γ/∆
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
Γ/∆
En
∆
0
−∆
short wire
Γ/∆= 2
FIGURE 8.5: Dependence of the low-energy spectrum of Hamiltonian (8.17)
on the Zeeman ﬁeld. Left: Long wire. The spectrum is quasi-continuous and
the bulk gap closes at Γc = ∆(for µ = 0). Two MZMs emerge when Γ > Γc.
Right: Short wire. The bulk gap does not close and the MZMs exhibit energy
splitting oscillations. Inset: Spatial proﬁles of the Majorana wave functions.
every two MZMs are much larger than ξ, the low-energy subspace becomes
eﬀectively degenerate and can be used for encoding quantum information non-
locally, as occupied or unoccupied states of the non-local Dirac fermion modes
(8.6) constructed using pairs of MZMs. For this to work, it is essential that
the global fermion parity of the system be preserved. This can be realized
by having a ﬁnite quasiparticle gap above the 2N−1-dimensional low-energy
subspace. The existence of such a gap suppresses exponentially the rate of
changing the fermion parity (e.g., due to thermal ﬂuctuations).
Let us consider a simple 1D tight-binding model of a proximitized semicon-
ductor wire. The eﬀective Hamiltonian, including the superconducting prox-
imity eﬀect and the applied Zeeman ﬁeld, has the form
H = −t0
X
⟨i,j⟩
c†
icj −µ
X
i
c†
ici + iαR
2
X
⟨i,j⟩

c†
iσycj −c†
jσyci

+ Γ
X
i
c†
iσxci −
X
i

∆c†
i↑c†
i↓+ ∆∗ci↓ci↑

,
(8.17)
where σµ are Pauli matrices and c†
i = (c†
i↑, c†
i↓) represents the creation operator
in spinor form corresponding to lattice site i, where 1 ≤i ≤N. The model
parameters are the nearest-neighbor hopping t0, the chemical potential µ, the
Rashba spin-orbit coupling coeﬃcient αR, the Zeeman ﬁeld Γ, and the induced
pairing potential ∆= |∆|eiφ.
The dependence of the low-energy BdG spectrum on the applied Zeeman
ﬁeld is shown in Figure 8.5. In the long wire limit (left panel), the quasi-
continuous spectrum is characterized by a quasiparticle (qp) gap ∆at Γ = 0.
Upon increasing the Zeeman ﬁeld the qp gap decreases and eventually vanishes
at the critical ﬁeld Γc =
p
µ2 + ∆2 corresponding to the topological quantum

234
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
phase transition. For Γ > Γc the bulk qp gap reopens, but two localized mid-
gap modes emerge — the MZMs localized at the ends of the wire. Additional
in-gap states can occur in the presence of disorder. These states reduce the
qp gap ∆qp that protects the fermion parity of the low-energy MZM sector.
In a short wire (right panel), the spectrum is discrete and the bulk qp
gap does not completely close, signaling that we can distinguish two diﬀerent
phases (i.e., topologically trivial and non-trivial) only operationally (e.g., by
deﬁning a ﬁnite energy resolution δE and considering any state with |En| < δE
as an eﬀectively zero-energy state). The eﬀective MZMs are not well separated
spatially (i.e., L ≳ξ) and have an energy splitting ϵ that oscillates as a
function of the Zeeman ﬁeld. The spatial proﬁles of the MZMs are shown in
the inset. Again, the presence of disorder reduces the qp gap ∆qp. To be useful
as a platform for topological quantum computation, the system has to be long
enough and clean enough so that ϵ < δE ≪∆qp.
8.2.2
Shiba chains
In addition to the signiﬁcant progress toward the experimental demonstration
of topological superconductivity and Majorana zero modes in semiconductor
nanowire structures, a recent study [322] has reported preliminary evidence
consistent with the presence of MZMs in chains of magnetic atoms (Fe) on a
conventional superconductor substrate (Pb). More speciﬁcally, using scanning
tunneling spectroscopy (STS), it was found [322] that zero-bias peaks quali-
tatively similar to the expected signature of MZMs develop near the ends of
the atomic chains. If validated as a viable platform for topological supercon-
ductivity, chains of magnetic atoms could provide a signiﬁcant boost to the
study of Majorana excitations by i) giving direct access to the Majorana end
states using STS (which provides information on both the spectral and real
space properties of the MZMs) and ii) opening the possibility to manipulate
the adatoms using a scanning tunneling microscope (which is potentially use-
ful for studying topological phase transitions by varying the distance between
atoms and for realizing more complex structures that may enable braiding).
In essence, the emergence of MZMs in chains of magnetic atoms relies on
the same basic recipe that we discussed in the context of semiconductor Ma-
jorana wires: realizing a 1D helical electron system that is proximity coupled
to a conventional s-wave superconductor (SC). Below, we brieﬂy summarize
the key ideas underlying the theoretical understanding of this alternative plat-
form for engineering topological superconductivity and MZMs in solid state
systems [89, 306, 264, 321, 346, 292, 74].
Consider a single magnetic impurity in a conventional superconductor, a
classical problem in superconductivity well studied since the 1960s [477, 404,
376]. Assuming that the impurity d-levels are far from the Fermi energy of the
host SC, they are electronically inert and the atom can be viewed as a local
moment S that couples to the spin of electrons in the SC. If S is large, it can
be treated as a classical degree of freedom. The eﬀect of the magnetic atom

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■235
is to create a bound state within the SC gap (i.e., a bound state of energy E0
with |E0| < ∆0), known as a Shiba state (or a Yu–Shiba–Rusinov state). The
Shiba states are perfectly spin polarized along the direction of S and can be
represented as linear combinations of spin-up electrons and spin-down holes.
Their wave functions decay as 1/r at short distances and exponentially above
a certain length scale (which is of the order of the superconducting coherence
length ξ0 = ℏvF /∆0 for deep Shiba states, |E0| ≪∆0).
Next, we consider a chain of magnetic impurities. Depending on the dis-
tance between adjacent adatoms, we have two diﬀerent regimes: i) the atomic
wire limit (dense chain with large hopping between the d-levels of neighbor-
ing atoms; the resulting d-bands cross the Fermi energy of the SC substrate)
and ii) the Shiba chain limit (dilute chain with small hopping; the d-band is
electronically inert, but the Shiba states hybridize into a Shiba band).
Atomic wires. In this regime, the mechanism responsible for the emer-
gence of topological superconductivity is very similar to the generic mech-
anism summarized in Section 8.1.2. Basically, hopping between neighboring
magnetic adatoms leads to the formation of spin-split d-bands that cross the
Fermi level of the SC at diﬀerent hopping amplitudes. In a certain parameter
range (i.e., when the distance between neighboring adatoms is within a certain
range), only one band crosses the Fermi energy and the atomic chain becomes
a 1D system of eﬀectively spinless fermions. The superconducting correlations
are provided by the SC substrate.
We note that for the atomic wire the Zeeman ﬁeld is “built in,” so it does
not require an applied magnetic ﬁeld. In addition, the Zeeman splitting is
very large. This reduces the eﬃciency with which the spin-orbit coupling in
the wire generates p-wave superconductivity by a factor approximately equal
to the ration between the spin-orbit coupling strength and the spin splitting.
Nonetheless, one can still induce a signiﬁcant p-wave gap if there is strong
spin-orbit coupling in the SC substrate [92].
Another speciﬁc aspect of the atomic wire concerns the localization length
ξM of the MZM. Naively, one expects it to be of the order of the supercon-
ducting coherence length, ξM = ℏvF /∆, where vF is the Fermi velocity of the
1D electron systems and ∆the (induced) topological gap. Furthermore, vF
should be comparable to the Fermi velocity in typical metals (i.e., comparable
to the Fermi velocity of the substrate) and ∆< ∆0, which implies ξM ≳ξ0,
where ξ0 is the SC coherence length. This estimate is in sharp contrast with
the recent experimental observation [322], which suggests that ξM is of the
order of the interatomic distance, i.e., orders of magnitude smaller that ξ0.
A possible explanation of this observation involves the renormalization
of the Fermi velocity in the 1D wire due to the superconducting proximity
eﬀect [341]. As discussed in Section 8.2.1, coupling to the SC induces a renor-
malization of the energy scale in the wire by a factor equal to the reduced
quasiparticle weight Z ≈∆0/γ, where γ is eﬀective wire-superconductor cou-
pling. For the atomic wire, γ ∼1eV, while the SC gap is of the order of 10K.
This generates a substantial renormalization of the Fermi velocity which, in

236
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
E
∆0
E0
0
E
∆0
E0
0
FIGURE 8.6: Excitation spectrum of a Shiba chain. Left: Dilute system. The
atomic Shiba levels (of energy E0) broaden into narrow bands that do not cross
the chemical potential. Right: Dense chain. The broad Shiba bands overlap
at the center of the gap, but pairing correlations reopen the SC gap. The
corresponding topological SC phase hosts MZMs at the ends of the chain.
turn, leads to a reduction of ξM that can be consistent with the experimental
observation.
Shiba chains. If the broadening of the d-levels is small, they remain elec-
tronically inert and the low-energy physics is controlled by overlapping Shiba
states forming a “Shiba band.” To get some intuition, we consider a chain
of deep Shiba states with energy E0 and include only the hybridization be-
tween neighboring states, which is characterized by an amplitude t. We note
that a more detailed model has to take into account the slow 1/r decay of
the Shiba states at short distances, which implies that hybridization beyond
nearest-neighbors may be relevant. This feature can be accounted for using
a tight-binding model with long range hopping [346], but does not change
qualitatively the conclusions based on the simpliﬁed analysis sketched below.
The key problem is understanding the emergence of induced pairing cor-
relations in a chain of Shiba states. Recall that a Shiba state is spin-polarized
along the direction of the impurity spin. Consequently, pairing should nec-
essarily involve diﬀerent sites. But how are diﬀerent impurity spins oriented
with respect to one another?
One possibility is that the spins, which interact via superconductor-
mediated RKKY interactions, order ferromagnetically [74]. In this case, in-
ducing pairing correlations requires spin-orbit coupling in the superconduct-
ing substrate, as in the atomic wire regime. A second scenario relies on the
magnetic impurities forming a spin helix [68, 321, 346, 433]. In this case,
two neighboring Shiba states are polarized along slightly diﬀerent directions,
making possible a proximity coupling to the singlet Cooper pairs of the host
SC. An eﬀective low-energy model that captures the hybridization of adjacent
Shiba states (with amplitude t) and the emergence of pairing correlations (of
strength ∆) has the form
H = E0
X
j
c†
Jcj −t
X
j
h
c†
j+1cj + c†
jcj+1
i
+ ∆
X
j
h
cj+1cj + c†
jc†
j+1
i
. (8.18)

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■237
Remarkably, Eq. (8.18) is nothing but the Kitaev model (7.42) discussed in
Sec. 7.2.3 (with µ →−E0). Based on this observation and on the analysis
of the Kitaev model in Section 7.2.3, the following basic picture emerges.
For very dilute chains, the bandwidth of the Shiba band is 2t < |E0|, which
corresponds to the strong coupling regime of the Kitaev chain; the system
is topologically trivial. Reducing the distance between atoms enhances the
hybridization of the Shiba states and, consequently, the bandwidth. When
2t = |E0| the quasiparticle gap closes, then (i.e., for 2t > |E0|) it reopens; now,
the system is in a topological p-wave superconducting state. This dependence
on the distance between adatoms is illustrated schematically in Figure 8.6.
We note that the topological superconducting states realized in the two
regimes discussed above (i.e., the atomic wire and Shiba chain limits) are
adiabatically connected, i.e., they represent the same topological phase. This
phase is expected to host MZMs at the ends of the atomic chain. There are
indications [322, 341] that the localization length of the MZMs might be very
short (of the order of the distance between adatoms). Direct access to the
MZMs (by STS) and the possibility of manipulating the adatoms and engi-
neering more complex structures are probably the most attractive features of
this proposal.
8.3
EXPERIMENTAL DETECTION OF MAJORANA ZERO MODES
Being able to probe the Majorana zero modes is not only a requirement for
their experimental investigation, but a key step toward their controlled ma-
nipulation, which is necessary for quantum computation. The properties that
need to be demonstrated experimentally can, roughly, be divided into three
categories: (i) MZMs are zero-energy bound states localized at topological de-
fects in a topological SC, (ii) a pair of MZMs corresponds to a highly non-local
Dirac fermion, and (iii) MZMs have non-Abelian statistics. Property (iii) would
represent the ultimate validation of the predicted MZMs. However, probing
these diﬀerent properties involves measurements of increasing diﬃculty and
complexity, so demonstrating the existence of a zero-energy bound state, al-
though not a deﬁnitive demonstration of MZM, represents a natural ﬁrst step.
At the time of this writing (spring 2016) there is strong experimental evidence
for (i). The main eﬀort is to improve the experimental conditions (e.g., reduce
disorder and temperature, enhance the nanostructure design, etc.) and cor-
roborate the existing evidence with measurements of non-local properties and,
eventually, non-Abelian statistics. Below we review some basic types of mea-
surement schemes that can be used to detect the presence of MZMs.
8.3.1
Tunneling spectroscopy
A Majorana zero-mode is a neutral object that does not couple to an external
electric ﬁeld. Also, the MZM does not carry spin and, consequently, does not
couple to an external magnetic ﬁeld. However, because of the charge non-

238
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
N
TSC
TB
V
2e
(a)
(b)
(c)
dI/dV
dI/dV
eV/∆
eV/∆
2e2
h
2e2
h
0.02
0.04
T = 0
T =0.02 ∆
kB
FIGURE 8.7: (a) Normal lead (N) coupled to a topological superconductor
(TSC) with MZMs at its ends. When the bias voltage across the tunnel barrier
(TB) is V ≈0, an incoming Ψ1 electron with speciﬁc spin orientation is
reﬂected as a hole with the same spin, while 2e charge is transfered to the
TSC. Electrons with opposite spin (Ψ2) are totally reﬂected as electrons. (b)
Diﬀerential conductance at zero temperature for eﬀective coupling constant ˜g
(black line), 2˜g (dashed) and 3˜g (gray). (c) Finite temperature dI/dV .
conservation associated with the presence of the superconducting condensate,
electrons tunneling into a topological superconductor do couple to a MZM.
Thus, charge and spin tunneling provide powerful and conceptually simple
tools for detecting Majorana zero-modes.
To understand the basic idea, let us consider the measuring scheme shown
schematically in Figure 8.7. The system consists of a normal lead (N) cou-
pled to a topological superconductor (TSC) with Majorana zero-energy end
modes (e.g., a semiconductor wire proximity-coupled to a bulk s-wave SC).
In practice, the tunnel barrier (TB) between the normal lead and the SC can
be controlled using a gate potential. We model the system using an idealized
tight-binding model on a 1D lattice, with sites i ≤0 representing the normal
metal and i ≥1 the SC wire. Within this model, the NM-SC coupling has the
form
Hc =
X
σ
(˜t c†
0σa1σ + ˜t∗a†
1σc0σ),
(8.19)
where ˜t is the eﬀective coupling parameter, ciσ (with i ≤0) is the electron
annihilation operator for the normal metal, and aiσ (with i ≥1) the annihi-
lation operator for the SC. To get further insight, it is convenient to deﬁne a
low-energy eﬀective coupling Hamiltonian by projecting Eq. (8.19) onto the
zero-energy Majorana subspace. Let ψn (with n = ±1, ±2, . . . ) be the ﬁnite
energy solutions of the BdG equation (8.2) for the superconducting wire and
En = −E−n the corresponding energies. If the superconducting phase is topo-
logically non-trivial, there are two additional zero-energy solutions, ψL
0 and
ψR
0 , representing the MZMs localized at the ends of the wire. The creation

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■239
operators for these modes are
ˆψ†
n =
X
i,σ
h
unσ(i) a†
iσ + vnσ(i) aiσ
i
= ˆψ−n,
(8.20)
γ†
L(R) =
X
i,σ
h
uL(R)
0σ
(i) a†
iσ + vL(R)
nσ
(i) aiσ
i
= γL(R),
where we have used the property v−nσ = u∗
nσ, which is a consequence of
particle-hole symmetry and, to simplify notation, we omit the hats on the
Majorana operators γL and γR. Note that for the Majorana modes the particle
and hole components have equal amplitude, |uα
0σ| = |vα
0σ|, with α = L, R.
Choosing the overall phase so that (vα
0σ)∗= uα
0σ, the zero-energy solutions of
a BdG Hamiltonian given by Eq. (8.17) can be written in the form
ψL
0 =

uL
0↑ei φ
2 , uL
0↓ei φ
2 , uL
0↑e−i φ
2 , uL
0↓e−i φ
2
T
,
(8.21)
ψR
0 =

iuR
0↑ei φ
2 , iuR
0↓ei φ
2 , −iuR
0↑e−i φ
2 , −iuR
0↓e−i φ
2
T
,
where φ is the phase angle of the SC order parameter and uα
0σ(i) are now
real functions of the position along the wire. Note that using this notation,
we need to change uR
0σ →iuR
0σ ei φ
2 , etc., in Eq. (8.20). Taking φ = 0 and
considering the quasiparticle operators from Eq. (8.20), we can express the
original fermion operator in the form
aiσ = uL
0σ(i) γL + iuR
0σ(i) γR +
X
n≥1
h
unσ(i) ˆψn + v∗
nσ(i) ˆψ†
n
i
.
(8.22)
When projecting onto the low-energy subspace only the ﬁrst two terms survive.
In addition, uR
0σ(1) = 0 (since that MZM is localized near the other end of the
wire). Consequently, the eﬀective coupling Hamiltonian becomes
Hc = ˜t γ (u∗
↑c†
0↑+ u∗
↓c†
0↓−u↑c0↑−u↓c0↓) = ˜g γ [Ψ†
1(0) −Ψ1(0)],
(8.23)
where we used the simpliﬁed notations γ ≡γL and uσ = uL
0σ(1) and introduced
the eﬀective coupling constant ˜g = ˜t(|u↑|2 +|u↓|2). The new fermion operators
for the lead, Ψ1(2)(i), are deﬁned through the unitary transformation Ψ1(i) =
(u↑ci↑+u↓ci↓)/(|u↑|2+|u↓|2) and Ψ2(i) = (−u↓ci↑+u↑ci↓)/(|u↑|2+|u↓|2). Note
that the MZM couples only to the Ψ1 electrons, while the Ψ2 electrons are
completely decoupled from the SC wire in the low-energy limit. Regarding the
two species of fermions as electrons with opposite spin orientation along the
direction determined by the spinor (u↑, u↓)T /(|u↑|2 + |u↓|2), i.e., a direction
dictated by the properties of the topological SC, we conclude that the coupling
to the MZM is spin selective.
Based on this simple analysis, we can understand the tunneling of charge
into a topological superconductor as a MZM-induced selective equal spin An-
dreev reﬂection [214]. As shown in Figure 8.7, an incoming Ψ1 electron (with

240
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
energy close to zero) is reﬂected as a hole with the same spin orientation,
while 2e charge is transfered to the superconducting condensate. An incoming
Ψ2 electron, on the other hand, is reﬂected as a Ψ2 electron and does not
contribute to transport. We emphasize that this mechanism is diﬀerent from
ordinary Andreev processes [55], in which the reﬂected holes have opposite
spin as compared to the incoming electrons and there is no spin selection.
The electrical conductance of a 1D wire with NM-SC coupling given by
Eq. (8.23) takes the form
G(V, T) = 2e2
h f(T, V ; ˜g, Γ, µ),
(8.24)
where T is temperature, V the bias voltage between the NM lead and the SC,
and f a function that depends implicitly on the coupling strength ˜g and the
properties of the SC phase (presence/absence of MZMs, amplitudes uL
0σ, etc.),
which are controlled by the Zeeman ﬁeld Γ and the chemical potential µ.
Consider ﬁrst the zero temperature case, T = 0. In the topologically trivial
regime (e.g., Γ = 0), ordinary (double degenerate) Andreev processes are al-
lowed, but they are strongly suppressed in the high barrier, low-coupling limit.
The resulting low-bias conductance is non-universal, 0 ≤G(0, 0) ≤4e2/h.
Next, we assume that the tunnel barrier height is set to a weak tunneling
regime corresponding to G(0, 0) ≈0 for Γ = 0 and apply an external Zeeman
ﬁeld. The conductance remains practically zero as long as the system is in
the trivial SC regime (Γ < Γc). By contrast, when Γ > Γc, the emergence
of MZMs induces selective equal spin Andreev processes, with perfect (spin-
selected) Andreev reﬂection in the limit T →0 and V = 0. Consequently, the
presence of a MZM at the end of the wire is signaled by a zero-bias conduc-
tance peak with a quantized maximum height G(0, 0) = 2e2/h.
The emergence of a quantized zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP) for
Γ > Γc represents a unique signature of the Majorana zero mode. We note
that the weight of the ZBCP depends on the NM-SC coupling strength, as
illustrated in Figure 8.7. Also, the ZBCP is robust against further increasing
the Zeeman ﬁeld, as long as the system is in a topologically non-trivial SC
phase. However, at ﬁnite temperatures, the height of the ZBCP is no longer
quantized (see Figure 8.7), making it diﬃcult to unambiguously identify the
ZBCP as a signature of Majorana zero-modes, since other (non-topological)
mechanisms such as disorder [296] and smooth conﬁnement [253] can lead to
similar (non-quantized) features.
Tunneling spectroscopy is an appealing method of detecting the presence
of MZMs because, basically, it is relatively straightforward to implement. The
observation of perfect Andreev reﬂection, which corresponds to a quantized
ZBCP, and its robustness against variations of the control parameters (e.g., Γ),
would constitute solid evidence for the presence of MZMs. The main problem
with this type of measurement is that realizing the experimental conditions
necessary for the observation of quantized conductance is non-trivial, while
non-quantized ZBCPs can be generated by alternative mechanisms. Nonethe-

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■241
less, this method can provide additional information if implemented using
setups other than the simple one described above. For example, tunneling
into a MZM from a spin-polarized lead is predicted to be strongly depen-
dent on the spin polarization of the lead [214]. By contrast, tunneling into
an ordinary low-energy fermionic state is not spin-selective (in general) and
is expected to result in a weak dependence on the spin polarization. Perhaps
even more interesting are the proposals for probing non-local features associ-
ated with MZMs. For example, observing the splitting oscillations generated
by the overlap of two MZMs localized at the ends of a short wire [117] pro-
vides basic information about the spatial properties of these modes (e.g., their
characteristic length scale). More “exotic” transport properties emerge when
both MZMs are explicitly involved in the tunneling process (see Section 8.3.3).
8.3.2
Fractional Josephson effect
In the previous section we have discussed signatures of MZMs that occur in
out-of-equilibrium charge transport. Another useful probe of MZMs involves
the equilibrium electrical current that ﬂows between two superconductors in
the absence of an applied voltage, more speciﬁcally the supercurrent generated
by Cooper pairs tunneling across the weak link between the SCs, i.e., the
Josephson current [426].
Consider ﬁrst two normal SCs separated by a thin insulator (or a weak
link) and characterized by a superconducting phase diﬀerence φ. Speciﬁcally,
we assume that the pairing potentials for the left and right SCs are ∆L = ∆
and ∆R = eiφ∆, respectively. The matrix element for single-electron tunnel-
ing across the junction is ˜t. Note that the BdG Hamiltonian describing the
junction depends on the phase diﬀerence (through the pairing term contain-
ing eiφ∆) and is 2π periodic in φ. The corresponding energy of the junction,
which has the form E(φ) = −J cos φ, is also periodic in φ with period 2π. The
parameter J, called the Josephson coupling, is proportional to the square of
the tunneling amplitude, J ∝˜t2. The supercurrent IJ can be determined as
the derivative
IJ = 2e
ℏ
dE(φ)
dφ
,
(8.25)
and, consequently, is periodic in φ with period 2π. The current is generated
by Cooper pairs tunneling through the insulator and carrying charge 2e.
Next, consider a junction between two topological superconductors. In
this case, MZMs are generated on both sides of the Josephson junction. The
key diﬀerence from the standard Josephson eﬀect is that the presence of the
MZMs enable the tunneling of single electrons carrying charge e. In turn, these
processes give rise to the so-called fractional Josephson eﬀect characterized by
a 4π periodicity in φ. We emphasize that the doubling of the period is not
a consequence of changing the Hamiltonian, but of modifying the physical
state. For simplicity, let us focus on the 1D case. The full Hamiltonian is
H = HL + HR + Hc, with the two superconductors being modeled by 1D

242
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
E
∆
0
−∆
∆
0
−∆
E
π
2π
2π
4π
φ
φ
|0⟩
|1⟩
FIGURE 8.8: Energy as function of the phase diﬀerence across a Josephson
junction. The shaded areas correspond to higher energy excited states. Left:
Topologically trivial SCs (Γ = 0). Right: Topological SCs (Γ > Γc). The
crossings at φ = π, 3π are protected by quasiparticle parity conservation.
Transitions between the states |0⟩and |1⟩are possible if a fermion is transfered
to/from stray quasiparticles or the ‘outer pair’ of MZMs (see main text).
tight-binding Hamiltonians given by Eq. (8.17) with c†
i →c†
ai = (c†
ai↑, c†
ai↓)
representing the creation operator (in spinor form) for electrons in the left
(a = L) and right (a = R) SCs and ∆→∆a representing the corresponding
pair potentials. The single-electron tunneling across the barrier is described
by the coupling term
Hc = −˜t

c†
LNL cR1 + c†
R1cLNL

,
(8.26)
where NL (NR) is the number of lattice sites of the left (right) SC wire and we
assume ˜t > 0. Since φ enters only through ∆R = eiφ∆, the total Hamiltonian
is manifestly 2π periodic in the phase diﬀerence.
The low-energy modes can be obtained by simply diagonalizing the total
Hamiltonian. In the topologically trivial regime (e.g., Γ = 0), E(φ) has period
2π, as shown in Figure 8.8. By contrast, in the topological regime (Γ > Γc)
the period doubles (see Figure 8.8). We can better understand this feature
if we consider the structure of the low-energy Hilbert space corresponding to
HL + HR. In the topological phase, a pair of MZMs emerges at the ends of
each wire. Let γL and γR denote the MZMs form the left and right wires
adjacent to the junction. The tunneling term Hc couples these MZMs and
splits their energy, 0 →±E(φ). We can evaluate the splitting by projecting
Hc onto the low-energy subspace spanned by the Majorana modes, similar to
the derivation of Eq. (8.23). Assuming identical wires, we have |uL
0σ(NL)| =
|uR
0σ(1)| ≡|uσ|, but there is a relative phase, which is half the superconducting
phase diﬀerence φ. Consequently, with a convenient choice for the overall
phase [see the discussion leading to Eq. (8.22)], we have cLNL σ →iuσγL and
cR1σ →uσeiφ/2γR (with uσ real) and the eﬀective low-energy Hamiltonian

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■243
becomes
Heﬀ= iγLγR Λ cos
φ
2

= 2Λ (ˆn −1/2) cos
φ
2

,
(8.27)
where Λ = ˜t(u2
↑+ u2
↓) and ˆn = f †f is the occupation number of the fermionic
state corresponding to the pair of MZMs adjacent to the junction, f = (γL +
i γR)/2. Note that [Heﬀ, ˆn] = 0, which means that the fermion occupation
number is conserved (as long as the low-energy subspace is protected by a
ﬁnite gap) and can be used to label the states of the junction, |n⟩.
Assuming that the system is in a state with ﬁxed parity iγLγR = ±1 (i.e.,
n = 0 or n = 1), the single-electron component of the current across the
junction is
IJ = 2e
ℏ
dEeﬀ
dφ
= 4eΛ
ℏ(1/2 −n) sin
φ
2

.
(8.28)
The current in Eq. (8.28) exhibits 4π periodicity in φ as a result of Majorana-
mediated single-electron tunneling (instead of the conventional Cooper-pair
tunneling). Observing this phenomenon, known as the fractional Josephson
eﬀect, would provide strong evidence for the presence of MZMs. However, such
an observation is not trivial. First, in addition to the 4π component (8.28), the
Josephson current has a “regular” 2π-periodic component that, potentially,
can be much larger. Hence, the current measurement has to be precise-enough
to be able to disentangle the two components. Second, 4π periodicity in Eq.
(8.28) relies on the conservation of the occupation number n (i.e., on the parity
iγLγR remaining ﬁxed during the measurement). Fermions localized in low-
energy states or thermally excited quasiparticles can modify this parity (thus
reducing the measured periodicity to 2π). The (exponentially small) overlap
of the MZMs localized at the junction with the MZMs at the “free” ends of
the wires, γ′
L and γ′
R, can also change this parity, even in the absence of stray
quasiparticles. The total parity γLγRγ′
Lγ′
R is conserved, but a fermion can be
transfered from the inner pair of MZMs to the outer pair. To circumvent this
problem, the observation has to involve an AC measurement with a frequency
high-enough compared to the splitting energy but low relative to the (bulk)
quasiparticle gap. This is expected to lead to the observation of Shapiro steps2
with missing odd conventional values. A 2012 experiment [371] has reported
one missing odd step.
8.3.3
Non-local transport
Another class of measurements that can be used to probe Majorana zero
modes addresses their non-local nature, in essence the fact that two spa-
tially separated MZMs correspond to one regular fermion. For example, cou-
2A Josephson junction subjected to an electromagnetic wave of frequency ω develops a
DC voltage across the junction characterized by steps Vn = n h
2eω, n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . In the
presence of MZMs, the height of the steps is expected to double, Vn = n h
e ω, as a result of
single-electron tunneling. This corresponds to the “disappearance” of the odd conventional
Shapiro steps.

244
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
pling both ends of a grounded topological SC nanowire to quasi 1D metallic
leads generates Majorana-mediated crossed Andreev reﬂection (also known as
Cooper pair splitting). In essence, an electron injected at one end of the wire
is accompanied by a hole emitted at the other end, the net result being the
(non-local) injection of a Cooper pair into the topological SC wire [330]. Such
processes generate a cross-correlation of the currents in the two leads, which
could be detected in a current noise measurement [280, 330].
Non-local tunneling processes involving both Majoranas occur when the
two modes are coupled [59, 421, 161]. In a two-lead conﬁguration, one electron
is injected into, say, the left end of the wire ﬂipping the fermion parity. Subse-
quently, the electron escapes into the right lead and the fermion parity returns
to its initial value. This process can be viewed as Majorana-assisted electron
transfer (also referred to as electron “teleportation”) and can be detected in
a transport measurement. The coupling between the two Majoranas may be
due to the overlap of the wave functions in a (relatively) short wire, or the
ﬁnite charging energy of the (isolated) superconductor. In the second case the
length of the wire is irrelevant, but the s-wave SC that induces the supercon-
ducting correlations in the wire has to be a very thin superconducting island.
The coupling of the two Majoranas is characterized by an energy splitting
δEM (which is given by the overlap splitting ϵ or the charging energy EC),
while the coupling to the leads induces level broadening. Nonlocal tunneling
requires the level splitting to be large compared to the level broadening.
Transport measurements, while relatively straightforward, raise some ques-
tions concerning possible ambiguities in the interpretation of the experimen-
tal results. For example, non-quantized zero-bias peaks (ZBPs) could also
be generated by localized low-energy states in a topologically-trivial system,
ss mentioned above. Similarly, one can imagine scenarios in which non-local
properties expected to occur in a system hosting MZMs are “simulated” by a
trivial wire with (regular) bound states localized near its ends. However, we
emphasize that corroborating several of these potentially “ambiguous” obser-
vations (e.g., the emergence of ZBPs above a critical Zeeman ﬁeld, correlated
splitting oscillations in short wires, Majorana-assisted electron transfer, etc.)
and conﬁrming their expected dependence on the relevant parameters (e.g.,
external magnetic ﬁeld, gate potentials, etc.) would practically demonstrate
the realization of Majorana zero modes in solid state systems. Nonetheless,
this is not the end of the journey. The most remarkable theoretical prediction
about MZMs is that they have non-Abelian statistical properties; this requires
direct experimental conﬁrmation. In addition, if we want to make progress to-
ward quantum computation with MZMs, we have to be able to control and
take advantage of these properties. This would involve being able to braid
and fuse MZMs in a controlled manner — tasks that pose signiﬁcantly greater
technical challenges than the experiments realized so far. Implementing, for
example, interferometric schemes [11, 116, 194, 384] to detect the Majorana
modes could be an important step in the right direction. In Chapter 12 we
discuss the nature and origin of the non-Abelian properties of MZMs from the

Majorana Zero Modes in Solid State Heterostructures
■245
more general perspective of the physics of non-Abelian anyons and sketch how
these properties could be used in the implementation of topological quantum
computation.


C H A P T E R 9
Topological Phases in
Cold Atom Systems
CONTENTS
9.1
Brief historical perspective ................................
248
9.2
Many-body physics with ultracold gases: Basic tools .....
249
9.2.1
Cooling and trapping of neutral atoms ............
249
9.2.2
Optical lattices .....................................
253
9.2.3
Feshbach resonances ...............................
256
9.3
Light-induced artiﬁcial gauge ﬁelds .......................
259
9.3.1
Geometric gauge potentials ........................
260
9.3.2
Abelian gauge potentials: The Λ scheme ..........
262
9.3.3
Non-Abelian gauge potentials: The tripod scheme
and spin-orbit coupling ............................
263
9.4
Topological states in cold atom systems ...................
265
9.4.1
Realization of the Haldane model with ultracold
atoms ..............................................
265
9.4.2
Majorana fermions in optical lattices ..............
268
U
ltracold atomic gases have emerged as an ideal testground
for fundamental many-body physics. The “quantum revolution” trig-
gered by the work of John Bell and the subsequent advances in the exper-
imental control of few-body quantum systems has nowadays entered a new
phase associated with the rise of quantum information science and the quest
for control over macroscopic quantum systems. The exceptional level of con-
trol enabled by cold atom systems has placed them at the frontier of modern
quantum physics as a promising route to realizing quantum simulators, engi-
neering topological quantum matter, and emulating interacting gauge ﬁelds.
By allowing the realization of tunable interactions and synthetic spin-orbit
couplings, cold atom systems oﬀer the possibility of engineering topological
phases that are not supported by solid state systems, including experimental
realizations of ideal models. In this chapter we brieﬂy summarize the recent
247

248
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
developments in this ﬁeld and point out some of the basic physical ideas behind
these advances. For a more detailed survey of the ﬁeld the reader is referred
to specialized books and review articles, for example Refs. [53, 184, 290, 291].
9.1
BRIEF HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
The experimental observation of Bose–Einstein condensation (BEC) in 1995
[19, 65, 118] marked a breakthrough moment in which the atomic, molecu-
lar, and optical (AMO) physics has reached the frontiers of condensed mat-
ter physics. This signiﬁcant achievement was made possible by the earlier
development of eﬃcient methods to cool and trap atoms using laser light
[90, 100, 345]. With the observation of BEC, the study of many-body sys-
tems took central stage in AMO physics. Nonetheless, the condensed matter
community remained rather reserved, mainly because the BEC phenomenon
can be well understood within an eﬀective Ginzburg–Landau picture [177] in
which the coherent many-body state of the quantum system is described by a
macroscopic wave function Ψ(r, t), a very familiar concept in superconductiv-
ity and superﬂuidity. A complete and quantitative description of the static and
time-dependent properties of a BEC can be obtained by solving the so-called
Gross–Pitaevskii equation [195, 347], a nonlinear Schr¨odinger-type equation
for the macroscopic wave function,
iℏ∂Ψ(r, t)
∂t
=

−ℏ2
2m∇2 + V (r) + g|Ψ(r, t)|2

Ψ(r, t),
(9.1)
where V (r) is an external potential (e.g., the trapping potential) and g is
a coupling constant describing the weak interaction between two particles.
The elementary excitation of the BEC can be described by considering small
ﬂuctuations δΨ with respect to the equilibrium wave function, which leads to
the well-known Bogoliubov theory of weakly interacting Bose gases.
The birth of quantum information was a signiﬁcant driving force behind
the unprecedented level of quantum engineering (i.e., preparation, manipula-
tion, control, and detection of quantum systems) developed in AMO physics.
For example, systems of cold trapped ions were investigated with the goal of
realizing quantum gates, such as the Cirac–Zoller controlled-NOT gate [95],
and building a scalable quantum computer [222, 387]. Perhaps more interest-
ingly, cold atom systems can naturally be employed as quantum simulators
[75], following the idea originally suggested by Feynman [146]. Trapped ions,
for example, can be used to simulate interacting spin chains [388]. Since the
computational power of classical computers is likely to be limited (at least
in the foreseeable future) to simulations of about 50 qubits [358], using ana-
log quantum simulators provides a solution for dealing with certain types of
classically intractable problems and an appealing route toward a deeper un-
derstanding of (strongly) interacting quantum systems consisting of O(102)
qubits (e.g., 100 spin-1/2 particles). We should think about an analog quan-
tum simulator as a many-body quantum system that mimics a simple model

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■249
(or family of models). In turn, the model is relevant to understanding a certain
challenging problem in condensed matter (or in other areas, e.g., high-energy
physics). The system has to satisfy certain requirements. More speciﬁcally, we
assume that i) the initial state and its dynamics can be precisely controlled,
ii) the relevant parameters can be manipulated, and iii) the readout of the im-
portant characteristics of the ﬁnal state can be eﬃciently performed. However,
compared to quantum computers, analog quantum simulators are predicted to
have substantially lower constraints regarding the number of required qubits
and the ﬁdelities of quantum operations [75].
Ultracold atoms have become prime candidates for the realization of quan-
tum simulators as a result of three major developments that have consider-
ably enlarged the range of physics that is accessible to AMO systems: (i) the
ability to tune the interaction strength using Feshbach resonances [105, 228],
(ii) the possibility of generating strong periodic potentials through optical
lattices [191], and (iii) the possibility of engineering laser-induced gauge po-
tentials [184], including non-Abelian ﬁelds that generate an eﬀective spin-
orbit coupling [167, 481] and dynamical gauge ﬁelds for simulating interacting
gauge theories with cold atoms [457]. These advances opened wide possibil-
ities for addressing interesting problems in condensed matter physics, quan-
tum electrodynamics, or quantum chromodynamics using the cold atoms tool-
box and have attracted the attention of diﬀerent physics communities. In
principle, studying cold atom systems could shed light on challenging prob-
lems, such as, for example, understanding the eﬀects of strong correlations
in many-body quantum systems using Hubbard-type [233] and spin models
[130, 168], understanding disorder eﬀects and the interplay between disorder
and interactions [271, 391], realizing topologically non-trivial quantum phases
[12, 47, 104, 185, 400, 413] and Majorana bound states [235, 420], and inves-
tigating various quantum chromodynamics phenomena (e.g., the conﬁnement
of dynamical quarks) [486]. The future will tell us how fruitful this path really
is and whether or not using cold atom systems as quantum simulators can
provide fundamentally new insight into some basic open questions in physics.
9.2
MANY-BODY PHYSICS WITH ULTRACOLD GASES: BASIC
TOOLS
In this chapter we brieﬂy describe the basic tools for creating trapped cold
atom systems. Here, we only sketch some key ideas; the interested reader
can ﬁnd the relevant details in specialized books and review articles (see, for
example, [102] and [290] and references therein).
9.2.1
Cooling and trapping of neutral atoms
The molecules and atoms in a gas at room temperature have speeds on the
order of the speed of sound. Cooling the gas down to, say, 4 K (the condensa-
tion temperature of helium) will reduce this thermal velocity to tens of meters

250
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
ℏΓ
|e⟩
|g⟩
ℏωL
ℏω0
|δ|
E
Ee
Eg
FIGURE 9.1: Schematic representation in terms of a two-level model of an
atomic transition via red-detuned light.
per second. If the system is at equilibrium, cooling it further will produce the
condensation of the gas. It appears that studies of free atoms have to be done
with fast moving particles. This, however, limits the observation time (and,
consequently, the spectral resolution) and generates Doppler shifts and rela-
tivistic eﬀects that cause the displacement and broadening of spectral lines,
a major limitation for precision measurements and atomic clocks. Further-
more, observing any collective quantum phenomenon (e.g., BEC) requires low
particle densities n (to prevent the transition to a solid phase) and thermal
de Broglie wavelengths λdB of the order of the inter-atomic spacing, so that
the waves of neighboring atoms overlap and interfere constructively. Realizing
this quantum degenerate regime requires a phase space density nλdB > 2.6.
The path to realizing this condition involves slowing down an atomic beam,
trapping the atoms, then cooling the system further.
Doppler cooling. When placed in a laser ﬁeld, neutral atoms experience a
velocity-dependent dissipative force generated by light scattering processes.
In certain conditions, the scattered light carries away more energy than the
amount of energy absorbed by the atoms.This leads to the so-called Doppler
cooling scheme, which was proposed independently by H¨ansch and Schawlow
[213] and by Wineland and Dehmelt [467] in 1975, and to the concept of optical
molasses.
Consider an atom that absorbs (or emits) a photon of momentum ℏk. As
a result of this process, the momentum p of the atoms shifts to p ± ℏk. The
corresponding atomic recoil velocity is ℏk/m, where m is the mass of the atom;
in the case of cesium, for example, the recoil velocity is of the order of 3 mm/s.
Since spontaneous emission occurs with the same probability in all directions,
for an atom in a laser ﬁeld the average change in atomic momentum (after
many absorption-spontaneous emission cycles) is ⟨δp⟩= ℏkL, where kL laser
photon wavenumber. The resulting radiative force is ℏkL times the rate of
absorption-spontaneous emission cycles.

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■251
⟨dN
dt ⟩
ω
ω0
ωL
ωL+v·kL
ωL−v·kL
Laboratory Frame
ωL
ωL
v
Atom Frame
ωL−v·kL
ωL+v·kL
FIGURE 9.2: Left: Atom moving in the ﬁeld created by two counter-
propagating lasers with frequency ωL and wave vectors kL and −kL, respec-
tively. In the reference frame of the atom the frequencies of the lasers are
Doppler shifted in opposite directions. Right: The frequency dependence of
the mean scattering rate ⟨dN/dt⟩. The imbalance between the radiation pres-
sure forces of the two counter-propagating lasers results in a drag-like force.
Next, consider an idealized two-level atom with ground state |g⟩and un-
stable excited state |e⟩of energy ℏω0 and lifetime Γ−1, as shown in Figure
9.1. For an atom at rest, the mean scattering rate has a Lorentzian depen-
dence on the frequency of the laser with a maximum at ωL = ω0 [102]. The
key idea is to use the Doppler eﬀect to make this scattering rate (hence, the
corresponding radiative force) velocity dependent. For a given direction, the
scheme involves two counter-propagating lasers having the same amplitude
and the same, slightly red detuned frequency ωL = ω0 + δ, with δ < 0. As
illustrated schematically in Figure 9.2, for an atom moving with velocity v,
the counter-propagating laser beam (with wave vector −kL in the laboratory
frame) is perceived with a frequency ωL + v · kL closer to ω0, while the co-
propagating beam (+kL) is perceived with a frequency ωL −v · kL that is
further detuned from the atomic transition frequency. This results in more
photons being absorbed from the counter-propagating wave than from the
co-propagating wave and generates a friction-like force that, for slow-enough
atoms, has the form [102]
F = −αv,
(9.2)
where α is a positive coeﬃcient. Of course, to provide cooling along all direc-
tions, one has to use three (relatively orthogonal) pairs of counter-propagating
lasers. Note that Eq. (9.2) describes the motion of a particle in a viscous
medium, the solution corresponding to an exponential damping of the veloc-
ity towards v = 0. The viscous medium created by the lasers is the so-called
optical molasses [91].
Since Doppler cooling involves absorption and spontaneous emission pro-
cesses, equilibrium corresponds to a Brownian motion of the atom (rather
than a particle at rest). Consequently, there is a limit for the minimal temper-

252
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
me = 1
me = 0
me = −1
mg = 0
ωL
E
z
0
σ+
σ−
Bz = βz
FIGURE 9.3: Magneto-optical trap. An atom with jg = 0 and je = 1 is
placed in a magnetic ﬁeld Bz = βz in the presence of two circularly polarized
counter-propagating lasers. For z > 0 (z < 0) the σ−(σ+) beam, which drives
the ∆m = −1 (∆m = +1) transition, is Zeeman shifted towards resonance
and pushes the atom back towards z = 0.
ature TD that can be reached using this scheme. Explicit calculations using
the two-level model give [187, 468]
kBTD = ℏΓ
2 .
(9.3)
For cesium atoms, for example, TD ≈120 µK.
Magnetic and magneto-optical trapping. The methods used for trapping
atoms can be roughly divided into three groups. The corresponding key el-
ements that enable the trapping of neutral particles are (i) induced atomic
dipole moments, (ii) non-homogeneous magnetic ﬁelds, and (iii) a combina-
tion of radiation pressure and static ﬁelds. Below, we brieﬂy summarize the
main ideas behind the last two types of traps; dipole traps, which are based
on induced atomic dipole moments, will be discussed later in the context of
optical lattices. Note that, in general, wall-free conﬁnement is necessary to
prevent the atoms from sticking to the surface of the container.
Once the atoms are cold enough (i.e., after Doppler cooling the system),
they can be conﬁned in a magnetic trap. The basic idea is to create a non-
homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld that has a local minimum and use neutral parti-
cles that have non-zero magnetic moment. The atoms with magnetic moments
aligned opposite to the ﬁeld (the so-called “low-ﬁeld-seekers”) will try to min-
imize their energy by occupying locations with lower ﬁeld strengths. Conse-
quently, the local minimum of the magnetic ﬁeld will trap low-ﬁeld-seeking
atoms that do not have enough kinetic energy to escape.
Another trapping method is based on the idea of making the radiative force
not only v-dependent but also position-dependent. Assume that the ground

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■253
state has angular momentum jg = 0, while the excited level has je = 1, and
the corresponding states are |e, me⟩, where me = −1, 0, 1 is the projection
of the angular momentum along the z axis. The counter-propagating lasers
are σ+ and σ−circularly polarized, respectively, and a position-dependent
magnetic ﬁeld Bz = βz is applied along the quantization axis z, as shown in
Figure 9.3. The σ+ laser couples the ground states to the excited state |e, 1⟩,
while the σ−laser couples it to |e, −1⟩. In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld,
the energies ϵme of the excited states are Zeeman shifted, so that ϵ+ is closer
to the resonance frequency for z < 0, while ϵ−is closer to resonance when
the atom is in the region z > 0. Consequently, the radiative force will acquire
an additional, position-dependent term ∆Fz = −κz, which corresponds to an
eﬀective harmonic trapping potential.
Sub-Doppler cooling. Since 1988, systematic experimental investigations
of atoms cooled in optical molasses have found temperatures well below the
Doppler limit [210, 285, 403]. In addition, these low temperatures were ob-
served at large laser detunings , δ ≫Γ (instead of the optimal value δ = Γ/2
predicted for Doppler cooling). The mechanism responsible for these eﬀects
involves, in essence, the following components [101]: In the presence of a laser
ﬁeld, the (bare) atomic levels shift and mix; this is the so-called ac-Stark eﬀect
or light shift illustrated schematically in Figure 9.4(a). The light shifts depend
on the laser polarization. Since two counter-propagating lasers can give rise to
a (periodic) position-dependent polarization, the corresponding light shifts are
equivalent to a periodic, state-selective potential. If, for example, the ground
level has jg = 1/2, the potential “hills” of |g, −1/2⟩will coincide spatially with
the “valleys” of |g, +1/2⟩(and vice versa). Finally, a transition to the excited
states is more likely when the atom is on top of a |g, m⟩hill; this is followed by
a spontaneous emission that brings the atom into the |g, −m⟩valley, as shown
in Figure 9.4(b). The net result is that the atoms keep climbing potential hills,
but end up in potential valleys, thus losing kinetic energy. The mechanism is
called Sisyphus cooling or polarization gradient cooling [101].
As a ﬁnal note, we mention that the Sisyphus cooling limit is given by the
height of the potential hills and is of the order of 102ER, where ER = ℏ2k2/2m
is the recoil energy. In general, for multi-level atoms the fundamental laser
cooling limit is characterized by the recoil energy. Schemes to overcome the
recoil limit include velocity selective coherent population trapping [26], stim-
ulated Raman cooling [248], and forced evaporative cooling [254]. To achieve
Bose–Einstein condensation, for example, one can use laser cooling to “pre-
cool” the gas, which is then trapped in a magnetic trap; next, forced evapora-
tive cooling is applied as a second cooling stage. This is realized by reducing
the trap depth and allowing the most energetic atoms to escape.
9.2.2
Optical lattices
Optical lattices are artiﬁcial crystals of light consisting of hundreds of thou-
sands of dipole microtraps created by interfering optical laser beams. In

254
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
E
z
|g⟩
|e⟩
|φe⟩
|φg⟩
|δ|
Ω
≃Ω2
4δ
(a)
(b)
|φg−⟩
|φg+⟩
FIGURE 9.4: (a) ac-Stark shift induced by atom-light interaction. The en-
ergies of the “dressed states” |φg⟩and |φe⟩are shifted with respect to the
energies of the corresponding bare states |g⟩and |e⟩by the light shifts (9.7).
(b) Sisyphus cooling. An atom climbs the “hills” of the position dependent
light shifts of a ground state sub-level (thus losing kinetic energy), but is
optically pumped to the lower sub-level and has to climb again.
essence, the electric ﬁeld E of the laser induces an atomic dipole moment
p, which, in turn, interacts with the ﬁeld. As a result, in the presence of
the laser ﬁeld the atom acquires a (dipole) potential energy Vd = −p · E.
The strength of the induced dipole moment is determined by the interaction-
induced change of the internal states of the atom, i.e., the ac-Stark eﬀect
mentioned above in the context of sub-Doppler cooling, which depends on
the laser frequency, light intensity, and polarization. Linear response gives
p = α(ωL)E(r, t), where α(ωL) is the polarizability of the atom and ωL the
frequency of the laser. Since the center-of-mass motion of the atom is much
slower than the inverse laser frequency, ω−1
L , the eﬀective potential will be
given by the time-averaged laser intensity I(r) ∝⟨E2(r)⟩t = 1
2|E(r)|2, and
we have Vd(r) = −1
2α(ωL)|E(r)|2. Consequently, a spatially dependent inten-
sity induces a potential energy that can be used to trap atoms. An optical
lattice corresponds to a periodic potential energy landscape induced by the
standing wave pattern generated by interfering laser beams.
To get better insight, let us consider an atom described by the two-level
toy model introduced above in the presence of a classical electromagnetic ﬁeld
E(r, t) = E(r)e−iωLt +E∗(r)eiωLt. Since the atom does not have a permanent
dipole moment, the dipole operator ˆd = −e P
k rk, where rk designates the
position of the kth electron, is oﬀ-diagonal in the two-level basis:
ˆd = µ|e⟩⟨g| + µ∗|g⟩⟨e|,
(9.4)
where µ = ⟨e| ˆd|g⟩. Consequently, the Hamiltonian H = H0 −ˆd · E of the
atom-laser ﬁeld system can be written as
H = ℏω0|e⟩⟨e| −(µ|e⟩⟨g| + µ∗|g⟩⟨e|) ·
 E(r)e−iωLt + E∗(r)eiωLt
,
(9.5)
In the limit of small detuning |δ| = |ωL −ω0| ≪ω0, it is convenient to work

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■255
in the rotating frame of the laser by performing the unitary transformation
U(t) = exp (−iωLt ˆσz/2), with ˆσz = |e⟩⟨e|−|g⟩⟨g|. Neglecting rapidly oscillat-
ing terms ∝e±i(ωL+ω0)t, which generate eﬀects that average out to zero over
relevant timescales, we obtain the time-independent Hamiltonian
H′ = −ℏ
2δ ˆσz + ℏ
2 [Ω(r)|e⟩⟨g| + Ω∗(r)|g⟩⟨e|] ,
(9.6)
where Ω(r) = −2
ℏE(r) · µ is the so-called Rabi frequency. When the detuning
is large compared to the Rabi frequency, |δ| ≫|Ω|, the ac-Stark shifts given
by second-order perturbation theory are
∆Eg = ℏ|Ω(r)|2
4δ
,
∆Ee = −ℏ|Ω(r)|2
4δ
.
(9.7)
We conclude that the ac-Stark shifted energy of an atom (in the ground
state) is, in general, position-dependent and corresponds to an optical po-
tential Vd(r) = ℏ|Ω(r)|2
4δ
. Note that, as expected, the potential is proportional
to the laser intensity, |Ω(r)|2 = (2/ℏ)2|⟨e| ˆdE|g⟩|2|E|2 ∝|E|2, where ˆdE is the
dipole operator in the direction of the ﬁeld. Also, within this simpliﬁed model,
the polarizability takes the form α(ωL) ≈−1
ℏ|⟨e| ˆdE|g⟩|2/(ωL −ω0). Since the
atom experiences a force F = −∇Vd, it will be attracted to the minima or to
the maxima of the laser intensity for blue-detuned (ωL > ω0) or red-detuned
(ωL < ω0) laser light, respectively. This property is often described in the
literature by calling the atoms “weak ﬁeld seekers” and “strong ﬁeld seekers”
for the cases of blue and red detuning, respectively.
The simplest periodic optical potential is obtained by overlapping two
counter-propagating laser beams of equal frequency that create a standing
wave interference pattern. The resulting trapping potential has the form
Vlatt(x) = V0 sin2(kx),
(9.8)
where k = 2π/λ is the wave vector of the laser light and V0 is the lattice
depth (which is determined by the Rabi frequency and the detuning, as shown
above). Equation (9.7) deﬁnes a one-dimensional (1D) lattice of parallel con-
ﬁning planes (or, more precisely, conﬁning disks, if we take into account the
proﬁle of the laser) with a lattice constant a = λ/2. A two-dimensional lat-
tice of tightly conﬁning potential tubes can be created using two orthogonal
sets of counter propagating laser beams. Similarly, a 3D simple cubic array
of conﬁning centers is obtained by superimposing three orthogonal standing
waves. Note that using laser beams with two diﬀerent wavelengths gives rise
to superlattice structures.
A large variety of optical lattices can be created by controlling the number
and the geometry (i.e., relative angles) of the lasers, their frequencies, intensi-
ties and polarizations, as well as the type of atom to be loaded in the optical
lattice. For example, one can create diﬀerent eﬀective optical potentials for dif-
ferent magnetic sublevels, thus obtaining spin-dependent optical lattices [234].

256
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
The interested reader can ﬁnd more details in specialized books and review
articles, for example [52, 198, 290]. The versatility of these periodic potential
landscapes makes optical lattices a critical element in the eﬀort to estab-
lish cold atom systems as eﬀective quantum simulators for condensed matter
systems. In this context, we note that, in contrast to real materials, optical
lattices are free of disorder, structural defects, and lattice vibrations, which
makes them perfect candidates for simulating idealized quantum models.
9.2.3
Feshbach resonances
The ability to control the particle-particle interaction strength is another key
feature of cold atom systems. Feshbach resonances represent an essential tool
that enables this type of control and the most direct way of reaching a strong-
interaction regime. Below, we sketch the basic physics of the Feshbach reso-
nance and make a few general remarks on the role of this phenomenon in cold
atom physics. For a detailed discussion of Feshbach resonances in ultracold
gases see, for example, the review article by Chin et al. [86].
Basic scattering theory. One of the best approaches to understanding the
interaction between particles is to scatter them oﬀeach other. Consider ﬁrst
the collision of two structureless atoms of masses m1 and m2 that interact
through a potential V (R), where R = r2 −r2 is the relative position vector.
For simplicity, we consider the case of a potential with spherical symmetry,
V (R) = V (R). The relative motion of the pair is described by the wave
function ψk(R) and we assume that the system is prepared in a plane wave
with relative momentum ℏk and relative kinetic energy E = ℏ2k2/2µ, where
µ = m1m2/(m1+m2) is the reduced mass. In the limit of large separation, the
wave function is a superposition of the incident plane wave and a scattered
spherical wave,
ψk(R) ≃eik·R + fk(θ)eikR
R ,
(9.9)
where θ is the angle between the initial and ﬁnal directions of relative motion
and the function fk(θ), called the scattering amplitude, provides information
about the relative amplitude and phase of the scattered wave along a given
direction. Below, to simplify the notation, we drop the k-dependence in fk(θ).
We note that the scattering amplitude is related to the diﬀerential cross sec-
tion1,
dσ
dΩ= |f(θ)|2. The scattering amplitude can be represented as a sum
over partial waves,
f(θ) =
∞
X
ℓ=0
(2ℓ+ 1)fℓ(k)Pℓ(cos θ),
(9.10)
where Pℓare Legendre polynomials and fℓ(k) are partial scattering ampli-
tudes that characterize the scattering in states with (relative) angular mo-
1The diﬀerential cross section represents the number of particles scattered into direction
(θ, φ) per unit time per unit solid angle, divided by the incident ﬂux.

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■257
mentum ℓ= 0, 1, 2, . . . . We note that in the case of identical particles the
wave function (9.9) has to be properly symmetrized (for bosons) or antisym-
metrized (for fermions). In particular we have eik·R →eik·R ± e−ik·R and
f(θ) →f(θ) ± f(π −θ), consistent with the fact that one cannot say which
one of the particles scatters in the direction θ and which one in the opposite di-
rection (i.e., π−θ). Consequently, for identical bosons or fermions only partial
scattering amplitudes with even or odd values of ℓare possible, respectively.
Usually, at low temperatures (i.e., in the sub-millikelvin regime) the lowest
angular momentum collisions dominate, more speciﬁcally s-wave collisions for
ultracold bosons and p-wave collisions for fermions.
It is convenient to express the partial scattering amplitudes in terms of
the so-called S-matrix element Sℓ= e2iδℓand the scattering phase shift δℓ.
Speciﬁcally, we have
fℓ(k) = eiδℓsin δℓ
k
=
1
k cot δℓ−ik = Sℓ−1
2ik
.
(9.11)
For s-wave scattering in the low-energy regime, which is relevant for ultracold
bosonic systems, we have k cot δ0(k) ≈−1
a, where a is the so-called scatter-
ing length. In other words, in this limit the two-body scattering problem is
uniquely speciﬁed by a single parameter, the scattering length a, and we have
f0(k) = −
a
1 + ika.
(9.12)
Note that the total scattering cross section is σ ≃4πa2, i.e., the scattering
length a characterizes the eﬀective “size of target.” Moreover, a can be either
positive or negative, corresponding to an eﬀectively repulsive or attractive
interaction, respectively. One can show that Eq. (9.12) is the exact scattering
amplitude for the pseudopotential
eV (R) = 2πℏ2a
µ
δ(R).
(9.13)
Hence, the two-body interactions in ultracold gases can be described by the
pseudopotential eV (R) with a strength determined by the scattering length a,
which is typically an experimentally determined parameter.
In general, the poles of the scattering amplitude in the upper complex k-
plane are related to the bound states of the interaction potential V (R). More
speciﬁcally, the pole k = i/a, with a > 0, corresponds to the highest energy
bound state with wave function ∝exp(−R/a) and energy E10 = −ℏ2/2µa2,
where 0 > E1ℓ> · · · > ENℓℓare the energies of the discrete set of Nℓbound
states with relative angular momentum ℓ(see Figure 9.5). Note that the top
bound state has to be within a certain energy range Ec below the continuum
threshold, |E10| < Ec; if such a bound state does not exist (e.g., if E10 < −Ec),
the interaction will be eﬀectively attractive with a < 0. Finally, if there is a
zero-energy bound state, E10 ≲0, the two-particle collision is characterized by
a divergent scattering length, a →∞, i.e., an inﬁnitely strong pseudopotential.

258
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Atomic separation R
Energy
E(cl)
1
E(op)
1
E(op)
2
E(op)
3
bound state
Vop(R)
Vcl(R)
ϵα1+ϵα2
ϵβ1+ϵβ2
E
open channel
closed channel
FIGURE 9.5: Two-channel model for a Feshbach resonance. The energy diﬀer-
ence ∆ϵ = (ϵβ1+ϵβ2)−(ϵα1+ϵα2) between the closed and open channels can be
tuned by a magnetic ﬁeld. When the energy of the top molecular bound state
supported by the closed channel approaches zero, E(cl)
1
→0, it couples reso-
nantly to the open channel and, as a result, the scattering length for collisions
near zero energy, E →0, becomes very large.
Collision channels. Real atoms have non-trivial internal structures, in par-
ticular nontrivial spin structures. For example, the total electronic angular
momentum J = L + S may be coupled to the nuclear spin I to give the
total angular momentum F = J + I. In this case, the eigenstates of the atom
are labeled (at zero magnetic ﬁeld) by the quantum numbers f and m cor-
responding to the total angular momentum and its projection along the z
axis, respectively. In general, the states of the atom are indexed by a com-
posite label α and the corresponding energies are ϵα. The set of quantum
numbers that characterize a pair of atoms in the limit of large separation,
e.g., (α1; α2) = (f1, m1; f2, m2), deﬁnes a certain scattering channel. If the
energy of the system is E > ϵα1 + ϵα2, the channel is open, otherwise (i.e., for
E < ϵα1 + ϵα2) the channel is said to be closed (see Figure 9.5).
Consider now a simpliﬁed two-channel model corresponding to the states
|α1; α2⟩and |β1; β2⟩. We assume that the atoms are prepared in the open
channel (α1; α2) and that the second channel is closed, i.e., ϵα1 + ϵα2 < E <
ϵβ1 + ϵβ2. Since, in general, the interaction potential V (R) is spin-dependent,
the two channels are coupled. More speciﬁcally, the eﬀective Hamiltonian that
describes the scattering process takes the form
H =
 
−ℏ2
2µ∇2 + Vop(R)
W(R)
W(R)
−ℏ2
2µ∇2 + Vcl(R)
!
,
(9.14)
where Vop(R) = ⟨α1; α2|V (R)|α1; α2⟩and Vcl(R) = ⟨β1; β2|V (R)|β1; β2⟩are

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■259
the potentials of the open and closed channels, respectively, and W(R) =
⟨α1; α2|V (R)|β1; β2⟩is the coupling between the two channels.
Feshbach resonances. In a two-channel model the scattering length has a
background component abg that is solely determined by the properties of the
open channel (i.e., the scattering length corresponding to the absence of any
coupling to the closed channel, W(R) = 0) and a resonant component that
becomes very large when the energy of the system is nearly resonant with a
bound state of the closed channel potential Vcl (see Figure 9.5). If the magnetic
moments corresponding to the two channels are diﬀerent, we can shift the
closed-channel energy with respect to the open-channel energy by varying the
magnetic ﬁeld, thus changing the scattering length. The dependence of the
s-wave scattering length on the magnetic ﬁeld B near a magnetically tuned
Feshbach resonance is described by the expression [316]
a(B) = abg

1 −
∆B
B −B0

,
(9.15)
where the parameter B0 gives the resonance position and ∆B characterizes the
resonance width. Note that ∆B can be positive or negative. At the magnetic
ﬁeld B∗= B0 + ∆B, the scattering length crosses zero.
Feshbach resonances arise from the coupling of a discrete (bound) state to
the continuum. This type of phenomenon was systematically investigated by
Ugo Fano, in the context of atomic physics [143], and Herman Feshbach, in the
context of nuclear physics [145]. Sometimes the phenomenon is referred to as a
Fano–Feshbach resonance, although Fano’s name is typically associated with
the asymmetric line-shape of such a resonance. In cold atom systems, Feshbach
resonances are particularly useful as they enable the tuning of the scattering
length by changing the magnetic ﬁeld [424], which is possible due to the dif-
ference between the magnetic moments of the closed and open channels. In
practice, the realization of a many-body system with tunable interactions re-
quires the additional condition that the relaxation rate into deep bound states
(due to three-body collisions) be negligible. This condition is well satisﬁed by
fermions [344], but in dilute bosonic gases the three-body recombinations are
important and make highly correlated states unstable [417].
9.3
LIGHT-INDUCED ARTIFICIAL GAUGE FIELDS
Gauge theories are central components of our understanding of elementary
particle interactions and condensed matter physics. In particular, the emer-
gent gauge ﬁelds associated with the eﬀective low-energy theory of certain
condensed matter systems play a key role in understanding the non-trivial
topological properties of many-body quantum states. For example, the adia-
batic motion of quantum particles with internal structure can be described in
terms of geometric gauge potentials, as ﬁrst pointed out by Mead and Truhlar
[308] and Berry [50]. This type of gauge potential can be engineered in a cold
atom system by making the Hamiltonian governing the internal dynamics of

260
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
the atom parametrically dependent on its position via, for example, the inter-
action with a position-dependent laser ﬁeld. In this section we provide a brief
overview of the main ideas behind the realization of light-induced gauge ﬁelds
in cold atom systems. For comprehensive reviews, see Refs. [109, 184].
9.3.1
Geometric gauge potentials
Geometric gauge potential emerge naturally in cold atom systems when the
center of mass motion of an atom is coupled to its internal degrees of freedom.
Consider an atom in the presence of a position- and time-dependent laser
ﬁeld. The position of the atom is given by the the atomic center of mass
position vector r and the corresponding momentum operator is p = −iℏ∇.
The dynamics of the internal degrees of freedom is described by the atomic
Hamiltonian H0, while the atom-light coupling is given by the position- and
time-dependent term H1(r, t). Assuming that the atom moves in a (state-
independent) trapping potential V (r, t), the total Hamiltonian takes the form
Htot = −ℏ2∇2
2m + V (r, t) + H0 + H1(r, t).
(9.16)
Note that the ﬁrst two terms act trivially on the internal degrees of freedom
of the atom. Let |α⟩be the eigenstates of H0, i.e., the atomic bare states.
Diagonalizing the atomic Hamiltonian in the presence of the laser ﬁeld, i.e.,
H0 + H1, generates a set of eigenstates, called atomic dressed states, that de-
pend parametrically on the position of the atom and on time, |φα⟩≡|φα(r, t)⟩.
Note that we can use the same set of labels to designate the bare and dressed
states and, in the limit of vanishing atom-light coupling, H1 →0, we have
|φα⟩→|α⟩. The position- and time-dependent operator
U(r, t) =
X
α
|φα⟩⟨α|,
(9.17)
is a unitary transformation that connects the bare and dressed basis states,
U|α⟩= |φα⟩. Note that U diagonalizes the operator H0 + H1,
U †(H0 + H1)U =
X
α
ϵα(r, t)|α⟩⟨α| ≡Λ(r, t),
(9.18)
where ϵα(r, t) are the position- and time-dependent “energies” of the atomic
dressed states, (H0 + H1)|φα⟩= ϵα|φα⟩. If |ψ⟩is a solution of the time-
dependent Schr¨odinger equation deﬁned by the total Hamiltonian Htot, the
transformed state |ψ′⟩= U †|ψ⟩will be a solution of the time-dependent
Schr¨odinger equation deﬁned by the transformed Hamiltonian H′
tot
=
U †HtotU −iℏU †∂tU. Explicitly, we have
H′
tot = [p −A(r, t)]2
2m
+ V (r, t) + Λ(r, t) + Φ(r, t),
(9.19)

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■261
where A = iℏU †∇U and Φ = −iℏU †∂tU. Note that in the derivation of Eq.
(9.19) we have exploited the fact that U is a unitary operator, which leads to
the identities (∇U †)U +U †(∇U) = 0 and U †∇2U = ∇·(U †∇U)+(U †∇U)2.
Next, we assume that a subset q of atomic dressed states is well separated
in energy from the other dressed states and that the trapped atom evolves adi-
abatically within the subspace spanned by the q-states. The eﬀective Hamilto-
nian that describes the adiabatic evolution of the system is ePqHtot ePq, where
ePq = P
α∈q |φα⟩⟨φα| is the projector onto the subspace of dressed q-states.
Note, however, that the unitary operator U given by Eq. (9.17) realizes a one-
to-one mapping between the dressed states |φα⟩and the bare states |α⟩. Con-
sequently, in terms of transformed states the “dressed” q-subspace becomes a
“bare” q-subspace spanned by the states |α⟩with α ∈q. If Pq = P
α∈q |α⟩⟨α|
is the projector onto the bare q-subspace, we have ePqU = UPq and the ef-
fective (transformed) Hamiltonian that describes the dynamics of the system
within the adiabatic approximation takes the form
Heﬀ= PqH′
totPq =
h
p −A(q)i2
2m
+ V + Λ(q) + Φ(q) + W (q),
(9.20)
where A(q) , Λ(q) and Φ(q) are the projections of the corresponding operators
onto the q-subspace. The additional term has the form
W (q) =
1
2m

PqA2Pq −

A(q)2
=
1
2mPqA(1 −Pq)APq.
(9.21)
In terms of atomic bare states, the operators associated with the geometric
vector potential A(q) and the scalar potentials W (q) and Φ(q) are
A(q)
=
X
α,β∈q
|α⟩Aαβ ⟨β|,
Aαβ = iℏ⟨φα|∇|φβ⟩,
Φ(q)
=
X
α,β∈q
|α⟩Φαβ ⟨β|,
Φαβ = −iℏ⟨φα| ∂
∂t|φβ⟩,
(9.22)
W (q)
=
X
α,β∈q
|α⟩Wαβ ⟨β|,
Wαβ =
1
2m
X
λ/∈q
Aαλ · Aλβ.
Note that the geometric vector potential and the scalar potential W (q) are
generated by the spatial dependence of the dressed states, while Φ(q) is gener-
ated by their time dependence. If the q subspace is one-dimensional or if the
matrices Aαβ, Φαβ, and Wαβ are diagonal, they represent Abelian geometric
potentials. In general, however, these matrices do not commute and represent
non-Abelian potentials. Below, we discuss two examples of setups that can be
used to generate these types of geometric potentials.

262
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
−δ
δ
Ω1
Ω2
|g1⟩
|g2⟩
(a)
|e⟩
Ω1
Ω2
Ω3
|e⟩
|g1⟩
|g2⟩
|g3⟩
(b)
FIGURE 9.6: (a) The Λ scheme. Two laser beams induce atomic transitions
|g1⟩→|e⟩and |g2⟩→|e⟩characterized by Rabi frequencies Ω1 and Ω2,
respectively, and generate a dressed dark state. (b) The tripod scheme. The
atomic state |e⟩is coupled resonantly to the atomic states gi via three laser
beams resulting in two degenerate dark states.
9.3.2
Abelian gauge potentials: The Λ scheme
Consider a simpliﬁed atom structure consisting of three atomic states: |g1⟩,
|g2⟩, and |e⟩, where, typically, the ﬁrst two are nearly degenerate ground states
and the third is an excited state. Two laser beams couple the states |g1⟩and
|g2⟩to the excited state resulting in the so-called Λ scheme of the atom-light
coupling, which is schematically illustrated in Figure 9.6(a). We assume that
the detunings of the lasers are δ1 = −δ and δ2 = δ, respectively. The dynamics
of the atom-light system is described by a Hamiltonian H = H0 + H1 similar
to that from Eq. (9.5), but containing two interaction terms. In the rotating
wave approximation, the eﬀective atom-light Hamiltonian is time-independent
and can be obtained following the steps leading to Eq. (9.6). Explicitly, we
have
H′ = ℏδ
2 [|g2⟩⟨g2| −|g1⟩⟨g1|] + ℏ
2[Ω1(r)|e⟩⟨g1| + Ω2(r)|e⟩⟨g2| + h.c.],
(9.23)
where Ω1 and Ω2 are Rabi frequencies characterizing the two transitions.
The three eigenstates of H′ represent the dressed atomic states |φα⟩of
an atom-light system with Λ-type level structure. Assuming exact resonance,
δ = 0, we have
|D⟩= |g1⟩−ζ |g2⟩
p
1 + |ζ|2 ,
|B±⟩= |g1⟩+ ζ∗|g2⟩
p
2(1 + |ζ|2)
± |e⟩
√
2,
(9.24)
where ζ ≡Ω1/Ω2 = |ζ|eiS gives the relative magnitude and phase of the two
Rabi frequencies, i.e., |ζ| and S, respectively. Note that the state |D⟩, called
the dark state, contains no contribution from the excited state |e⟩. In practice,
this property is important because for a system in state |D⟩the excited level

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■263
does not become populated and the spontaneous decay is suppressed. Fur-
thermore, the dark state, which is characterized by a zero eigenvalue ϵD = 0,
is well separated in energy from the other two states, which have eigenvalues
ϵB± = ± ℏ
2
p
|Ω1|2 + |Ω2|2. If |ϵB±| exceeds the characteristic kinetic energy of
the atomic motion, the atoms will evolve adiabatically within the dark state
subspace q = D. The corresponding geometric vector potential deﬁned by
(9.22), i.e., A ≡ADD = iℏ⟨D|∇|D⟩, takes the form
A = −ℏ
|ζ|2
1 + |ζ|2 ∇S.
(9.25)
In the general language of geometric phases summarized in Chapter 2, A is the
Mead–Berry vector potential (or Mead–Berry connection) given by Eq. (2.17).
The corresponding Berry curvature vector B ≡ΩD(r) = ∇× A, which can
be interpreted as an artiﬁcial magnetic ﬁeld, has the form
B = ℏ∇S × ∇|ζ|2
(1 + |ζ|2)2 .
(9.26)
Note that B ̸= 0 only if the gradients of the relative intensity |ζ|2 and the
relative phase S are both non-zero and not parallel to each other. This requires
a non-vanishing relative orbital angular momentum of the two light beams,
which can be realized, for example, using two counter-propagating Gaussian
beams with an oﬀset between their propagation axes [241, 109]. Finally, we
note that in the rotating wave approximation the dressed states are time-
independent and, consequently, we have Φ = 0. On the other hand, the scalar
potential W is, in general, non-zero and can be determined explicitly using
Eq. (9.22), i.e., W ≡WDD =
1
2m(ADB+ · AB+D + ADB−· AB−D), and the
explicit expressions for the dressed states given by Eq. (9.24).
9.3.3
Non-Abelian gauge potentials: The tripod scheme and spin-orbit
coupling
When the atom-light system evolves adiabatically within a manifold of degen-
erate (or quasi-degenerate) q-states, the emerging geometric potentials (9.22)
are non-Abelian. A generic way to obtain a degenerate subspace is to cou-
ple N ≥3 states |gi⟩, where i = 1, 2, . . . , N to a single level |e⟩via laser
ﬁelds with Rabi frequencies Ωi [375, 109]. The case N = 3 — the so-called
tripod scheme — is illustrated in Figure 9.6(b). The non-Abelian gauge po-
tentials created using this type of scheme couple the center of mass motion
of the atom to its internal (spin-like) degrees of freedom, thus generating an
eﬀective “spin-orbit” coupling [167].
Consider N states |gi⟩coupled resonantly to an excited state |e⟩via laser
ﬁelds. In the rotating ﬁeld approximation the eﬀective atom-light Hamiltonian
is
H′ =
N
X
i=1
ℏ
2Ωi|e⟩⟨gi| + h.c. = ℏΩ(r)
2
[|e⟩⟨B(r)| + |B(r)⟩⟨e|],
(9.27)

264
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
where Ω=
p
|Ω1|2 + · · · + |ΩN|2 and |B⟩= 1
Ω
P
i Ωi|gi⟩is the bright coupled
state. The dressed states are obtained by diagonalizing H′. This gives two
states |B±⟩= (|B⟩± |e⟩)/
√
2 with energies ϵB± = ± ℏ
2Ω, which generalize the
|B±⟩states from Eq. (9.24), and N−1 dark states with energy ϵDn = 0 that are
orthogonal to the bright state |B⟩. These dark states provide the degenerate
subspace q = {D1, . . . , DN−1} in which the system can evolve adiabatically.
Experimentally, the tripod scheme can be realized using, for example, the
atomic transition between a ground level with angular momentum jg = 1
and an excited state with je = 0. This level structure occurs in alkali-metal
species such as 23Na and 87Rb. A proper choice of laser ﬁelds leads to a
geometric vector potential Anm with non-commuting Cartesian components.
The artiﬁcial non-Abelian potential can be equivalent to the presence of an
eﬀective magnetic monopole [375] or, more interestingly, to the presence of an
eﬀective “spin-orbit” coupling [167, 412, 484].
To illustrate the generation of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in cold-atom
systems, let us consider a simple example involving a spatially uniform vector
potential. We assume N = 3 ground states coupled resonantly to an excited
state via three plane waves of equal amplitude propagating in the xy plane.
The corresponding Rabi frequencies and wave vectors are
Ωj(r) =
1
√
N
Ωeikj·r,
kj = k(−ˆex cos αj + ˆey sin αj),
(9.28)
where ˆex and ˆey are unit vectors along the x and y directions, respectively,
and αj = 2πj/N. A convenient basis for the q subspace, which has N −1 = 2
dimensions, is given by the following set of orthonormal dark states
|Dn⟩=
1
√
N
X
j
|gj⟩eiαjn−ikj·r.
(9.29)
Substituting this expression in Eq. (9.22), we obtain the geometric vector and
scalar potentials
A12 = −ℏk
2 (ˆex −iˆey) = A∗
21,
A11 = A22 = 0,
(9.30)
W11 = W22 = ℏ2k2
4m ,
W12 = W21 = 0.
(9.31)
Note that, although these are constant potentials, the eﬀect of the vector
potential on the dynamics of the system is non-trivial because the Carte-
sian components of A do not commute. Assuming that the atoms move
in a constant potential, the solutions of the Schr¨odinger equation deﬁned
by the eﬀective Hamiltonian Heﬀfrom (9.20) are plane waves |ψq(r, t)⟩=
|ϕq⟩exp[i(q · r −Eqt)], where the amplitudes |ϕq⟩are solutions of the eigen-
value problem Heﬀ(q)|ϕq⟩= Eq|ϕq⟩. Note that the eﬀective Hamiltonian is a
2×2 matrix and that the terms Λ(q) and Φ(q) vanish, while V and W (q) are pro-
portional to the unit matrix. Choosing for simplicity V = −ℏ2k2/4m = −W,

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■265
we have
Heﬀ(q) = (ℏq −A)2
2m
= ℏ2q2
2m −ℏk
4m(qxσx + qyσy) + ℏ2k2
8m ,
(9.32)
where σ = (σx, σy, σz) are Pauli matrices. Note that the vector potential is
proportional to the in-plane spin-1/2 operator, A = −k(Sxˆex + Sy ˆey), where
S = ℏ
2σ. The second term in Eq. (9.32) couples the (pseudo) spin to the center
of mass motion of the atom, i.e., it represents an eﬀective spin-orbit coupling.
Several other schemes were proposed to realize similar linear Dresselhaus or
Rashba type spin-orbit coupling [240, 375, 484]. Engineering such couplings
in cold atom systems represents a key step in the development of quantum
simulators for a variety of interesting condensed matter systems, including
systems that support topologically non-trivial phases.
9.4
TOPOLOGICAL STATES IN COLD ATOM SYSTEMS
There is a large variety of theoretical proposals for realizing topological phases
in cold atom systems (see, for example, [184] and references therein). Below, we
brieﬂy discuss one example and touch upon another to illustrate some of the
speciﬁc ingredients, tuning knobs, and probes associated with the preparation
and detection of topological phases in a cold atom environment.
9.4.1
Realization of the Haldane model with ultracold atoms
The Haldane model [205] discussed in Chapter 7 (see Section 7.2 starting on
page 198) cannot be naturally realized in a condensed matter system. Cold
atoms, on the other hand, appear to be better suited for its implementation
[12, 183]. In essence, a state-dependent honeycomb optical lattice generated
by a three-beam laser conﬁguration traps atoms with two diﬀerent internal
pseudospin states at the nodes of two intertwined triangular lattices, as shown
in Figure 9.7(a). The state-dependent potential corresponds to an eﬀective
“Zeeman shift” that has minima on the A lattice and maxima on the B lattice
for pseudo-spin up atoms, while for pseudo-spin down atoms the shift has the
opposite sign. Additional lasers are used to coherently transfer atoms from one
internal state to the other, thus causing laser-induced hopping [232] between
nearest neighbor (n.n.) sites.
For a suﬃciently deep optical potential (and no additional lasers) only hop-
ping between neighboring sites on each triangular lattice — i.e., next nearest
neighbors (n.n.n.) on the honeycomb lattice — are allowed. The corresponding
Hamiltonian takes the form
H0 = −tA
X
⟨⟨iA,jA⟩⟩
a†
iAajA −tB
X
⟨⟨iB,jB⟩⟩
b†
iBbjB,
(9.33)
where aiA and biB are annihilation operators for atoms at lattice sites riA and
riB on lattice A and B, respectively, and ⟨⟨ix, jx⟩⟩designates n.n.n. sites on

266
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
a3
a2
a1
δ1
δ2
δ3
teiφ
tB
tA
B
A
laser
(a)
(b)
|gA⟩
|gB⟩
VB
VA
teﬀ
FIGURE 9.7: (a) Honeycomb lattice composed of two triangular sub-lattices
A (black circles) and B (white circles) generated by a three-beam laser con-
ﬁguration. (b) Laser-assisted tunneling. Two internal states |gA⟩and |gB⟩are
trapped in state-dependent optical lattices with potentials VA and VB, respec-
tively. A resonant laser (not shown) couples the states and induces complex
eﬀective tunneling matrix elements teﬀ= −teiφ.
the lattice x = A, B. In general, the depths of the two optical lattices can be
diﬀerent, which amounts to introducing a staggered potential described by
HM = −M
X
iA
a†
iAaiA + M
X
iB
b†
iBbiB.
(9.34)
Note that HM breaks the inversion symmetry of the honeycomb lattice with
respect to the center of a hexagon.
Next, the two triangular lattices are coupled through laser-assisted tun-
neling, as illustrated schematically in Figure 9.7(b). The eﬀective hopping teﬀ
contains a Peierls phase determined by the wave vector q of the laser [232],
teﬀ= −teiφ(iA,jB),
φ(iA, jB) = 1
2q · (riA + rjB) = −φ(jb, iA).
(9.35)
The eﬀective Hamiltonian describing the laser-assisted coupling of the two
lattices has the form
HAB = −t
X
⟨iA,jB⟩

eiφ(iA,jB)a†
iAbjB + h.c.

,
(9.36)
where ⟨iA, jB⟩labels n.n. sites on the honeycomb lattice. The total Hamilto-
nian for the system is Htot = H0 + HM + HAB and the relevant parameters
are the hopping amplitudes tA, tB and t, the mismatch energy M, and the
wave vector q.
The eﬀective Hamiltonian Htot is explicitly position-dependent through
the Peierls phases φ(iA, jB). To eliminate this dependence, it is convenient to

Topological Phases in Cold Atom Systems
■267
perform the unitary transformation corresponding to aiA →aiA exp(iq·riA/2)
and bjB →bjB exp(−iq · rjB/2). The transformed Hamiltonian is character-
ized by real n.n. hopping and complex n.n.n. hopping, similar to the original
Haldane model. After performing a Fourier transform, the Hamiltonian can be
written in the standard form Htot = ϵ(k)I2×2+d(k)·σ, where σ = (σx, σy, σz)
are Pauli matrices and
ϵ(k) = −tAf(k −q/2) −tBf(k + q/2),
dx(k) = −t Re[g(k)],
dy(k) = t Im[g(k)],
(9.37)
dz(k) = −M −tAf(k −q/2) + tBf(k + q/2).
The functions f(k) = P
α cos(k·aα) and g(k) = P
α exp(−ik·δα) are deﬁned
in terms of the primitive lattice vectors aα = ±(δµ−δν) of the honeycomb lat-
tice shown in Figure 9.7(a). We note that the eﬀective Hamiltonian of the cold
atom system has the same structure as the original Haldane model given by
Eqs. (7.22) and (7.23), with the minor diﬀerence that the “magnetic ﬂux” con-
ﬁgurations associated with the Peierls phases have diﬀerent structures [183].
We note that the experimental realization of a Haldane-type model in a peri-
odically modulated optical honeycomb lattice was recently reported [237].
The Hamiltonian Htot of the two-dimensional cold atom system is in sym-
metry class A and its gapped ground states are classiﬁed by a Z topological
invariant given by the ﬁrst Chern number of the occupied band. In an analog
solid-state system (e.g., an integer quantum Hall ﬂuid), the non-trivial topol-
ogy is detected by measuring the Hall conductance. However, it is not clear
how a similar transport measurement can be done with cold atoms. Hence, the
question: how can one probe the presence of a topologically non-trivial phase
in a cold atom system? A type of measurement that can be easily done with
cold atoms is the so-called time of ﬂight (ToF) measurement: the trapping
potential is switched oﬀand the momentum distribution of the particles is
determined by imaging the expansion of the atomic cloud. For the Haldane-
type model described above, the normalized vector n(k) = d(k)/|d(k)| can
be reconstructed from the (pseudo) spin-resolved momentum densities ρA,B(k)
associated with the two internal states of the atoms [12, 183]. Knowing n(k),
provides us with direct access to the Berry curvature of the valence band,
F = 1
2n·(∂kxn×∂kyn), and to the corresponding Chern number (see Section
5.4.2 on page 142),
ν = 1
4π
Z
T2d2k n · (∂kxn × ∂kyn),
(9.38)
where T2 is the BZ torus.
This example illustrates three important potential contributions that cold
atom systems could bring to the table. i) Simplicity. The eﬀective low-energy
physics is free from eﬀects associated with phonons, disorder, sub-dominant
interactions, and other “unwanted” sources that make life complicated in solid-
state systems. Thus, cold atom systems are ideally suited for studying simple

268
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
models, which is key to advancing our understanding of the physical world (in-
cluding topological quantum matter). ii) Control and tunability. In solid state
systems one can easily control a few external parameters (e.g., temperature,
magnetic ﬁeld, etc.). With cold atoms, one can basically control all the param-
eters of the eﬀective Hamiltonian. Potentially, this is a signiﬁcant advantage,
as it oﬀers access to certain parameter regimes that may not be accessible in
a nature-given system, facilitates the study of phase transition (along various
paths in the parameter space), and provides convenient knobs for changing the
symmetry class of the Hamiltonian. iii) Accessibility. The cold atom environ-
ment provides certain tools for probing the topological properties of a system
that are not available in solid-state physics. For example, one has direct access
to the Berry curvature, as discussed above. Also, a direct measurement of the
Zak phase in topological Bloch bands was recently reported [28].
9.4.2
Majorana fermions in optical lattices
We close this chapter with a few brief remarks on proposed schemes for the
realization of zero-energy Majorana modes with cold atoms. To engineer a
topological superconducting state one can start with fermionic atoms trapped
in a 1D (or 2D) optical lattice. Synthetic spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman
ﬁelds can be generated using spatially modulated laser ﬁelds [382, 482], as
described in Section 9.3.3. Alternatively, one can use laser-assisted tunneling
methods or Raman coupling with non-zero photon recoil. For example, one
can show [235, 273] that using the Λ scheme [see Figure 9.6(a)] with two lasers
propagating along k1 and k2 and k1−k2 ̸= 0 oriented parallel to the quantum
wire one can induce both (eﬀective) spin-orbit interaction and magnetic ﬁeld.
To generate pairing, one can couple the system to a BEC reservoir of Feshbach
molecules via radio-frequency pulse [235]. This could be regarded as the analog
of the superconducting proximity eﬀect in solid-state heterostructures.
The detection of Majorana zero modes (MZMs) can be a non-trivial task.
As discussed in the previous chapter, there are several diﬀerent “detection lev-
els” determined by the type of property that is probed, starting with establish-
ing the presence of a zero-energy mode and culminating with the demonstra-
tion of non-Abelian statistics. In cold atom systems, one can use, for example,
spatially resolved radio-frequency spectroscopy [193] to obtain information
about the local density of states. This would be the AMO analog of scanning
tunneling spectroscopy. ToF imaging can also provide information about the
existence and number of MZMs in an optical lattice setup. More speciﬁcally,
the presence of MZMs is signaled by rapid oscillations of the atomic density
distribution at the detector, which are associated with the nonlocal nature
of the fermionic state corresponding to a pair of Majoranas localized at the
opposite ends of a 1D system [273]. In addition, for a 1D Majorana system in
the BDI symmetry class, the Z topological invariant could be measured using
a ToF scheme similar to the one proposed for Chern insulators [12].

IV
Topological Quantum
Computation
269


C H A P T E R 10
Elements of Quantum
Information Theory
CONTENTS
10.1
Basic concepts .............................................
272
10.1.1 Quantum bits ......................................
272
10.1.2 Quantum operations ...............................
274
10.1.3 No cloning ..........................................
277
10.2
Entropy and information ..................................
278
10.3
Data compression ..........................................
281
10.3.1 Schumacher’s noiseless quantum coding theorem ..
282
10.4
Accessible information .....................................
283
10.4.1 The Holevo bound .................................
284
10.5
Entanglement-assisted communication ....................
285
10.5.1 Superdense coding .................................
286
10.5.2 Quantum teleportation
............................
287
10.6
Quantum cryptography ....................................
289
10.6.1 Quantum key distribution .........................
290
Q
UANTUM PHYSICS AND INFORMATION SCIENCE HAVE
developed a fruitful relationship over the past few decades. On the one
hand, there is the excitement factor: our increasing ability to control the
quantum states of individual microsystems bears the promise of new tech-
nologies, such as computers that can handle classically intractable problems
or cryptographic protocols that are perfectly safe. On the other hand, this
relationship has shed new light on fundamental physics problems, including a
reconsideration of the foundations of quantum mechanics from an information
theoretical perspective. The study of topological quantum phases is another
area that has already beneﬁted from this relationship and, most likely, will
continue to proﬁt from it. It is this thought that motivates us to provide a
very brief introduction to basic concepts in quantum information (Chapter 10)
and quantum computation (Chapter 11), with a focus on topological quan-
271

272
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
tum computation (Chapter 12). The goal of this chapter is to familiarize the
reader with fundamental concepts and basic problems in quantum information
theory. The subsequent two chapters deal with general aspects pertaining to
quantum computation and with speciﬁc features associated with computation
using topological quantum states. The quantum mechanical formalism that is
relevant for this discussion is summarized in Chapter 1, in particular Section
1.2, which presents the operational formulation of quantum mechanics — the
“natural” language of quantum information theory. The classical analogs of
some of the concepts and ideas summarized here are introduced in Chapter 3
(Section 3.2). For a thorough treatment of concepts, problems, and techniques
in quantum information theory the reader is referred to the books by Nielsen
and Chuang [329] and Wilde [464]. An undergraduate level introduction to this
subject can be found, for example, in Schumacher and Westmoreland [394].
Some of the philosophical implications of the relationship between quantum
mechanics and information theory are discussed in Timpson [425].
10.1
BASIC CONCEPTS
Quantum information theory may be seen as an extension of its classical coun-
terpart that focuses on the challenges and opportunities that quantum behav-
ior provide for communication and computation. What are the new primitive
resources made available by quantum systems and what can one do with them
that one could not do using classical resources?
10.1.1
Quantum bits
In Chapter 3, we have deﬁned the bit as the basic unit of classical information.
We have also seen that information is always “encoded” in the states of various
physical systems. Consequently, the term bit is often used to refer to the
physical system that “carries” the information — in this case a system that
can have either one of two distinct classical states. Formally, the term may
designate an abstract pair of states (typically labeled as “0” and “1,” “+” and
“−,” “yes” and “no,” etc.), without reference to a speciﬁc physical system
(e.g., a coin, two distinct voltage levels in a circuit, two directions of the
magnetization in a ferromagnet, etc.).
The quantum bit or the qubit — the quantum analog of the classical bit
— is a mathematical object representing a two-state quantum system. If |0⟩
and |1⟩are two possible (orthogonal) states for the qubit (physically realized,
for example, as the “spin-up” and “spin-down” states of a spin- 1
2 quantum
system), a generic state is given by the superposition
|ψ⟩= α|0⟩+ β|1⟩,
(10.1)
where |α|2+|β|2 = 1 and the orthogonal states |0⟩and |1⟩, which represent the
so-called computational basis, are normalized. The complex coeﬃcients α and
β can be expressed (up to an irrelevant overall phase) in terms of two angles as

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■273
α = cos θ
2 and β = eiϕ sin θ
2. The mapping |ψ⟩→(θ, ϕ) gives a representation
of the two-dimensional Hilbert space of a qubit by a unit sphere (called the
Bloch sphere) with the North and South poles corresponding to |0⟩and |1⟩,
respectively. For convenience, we also introduce the vector representation:
|0⟩≡

1
0

,
|1⟩≡

0
1

,
|ψ⟩= α|0⟩+ β|1⟩≡

α
β

.
(10.2)
How much information is represented by a qubit? Naively, the existence
of an inﬁnite number of superpositions (i.e., points on the Bloch sphere) sug-
gests that qubits contain signiﬁcantly more information than classical bits.
However, we should be careful here and make a distinction between speciﬁ-
cation information — the amount of information (in bits) required to specify
a quantum state (or a sequence of states) — and accessible information —
how much classical information can be obtained by measuring the qubit (or
qubits). The ﬁrst can be arbitrarily large (one has to specify a point on the
Bloch sphere out of inﬁnitely many possible points); the second, however, is
limited because in general one cannot reliably identify the state |ψ⟩by mea-
suring it. In fact, one can show (see Section 10.4) that the maximum amount
of information that can be obtained by measuring a qubit is one bit, the same
as in the classical case. Finally, we note that the information-theoretic sense
of the term “qubit” as a measure of quantum information will be set on ﬁrm
ground in the context of the Schumacher compression (see Section 10.3), the
quantum correspondent of Shannon’s noiseless coding theorem.
Composite systems and entangled states
Consider now a quantum system containing n > 1 qubits. The corresponding
2n dimensional Hilbert space is the direct product of the Hilbert spaces asso-
ciated with the qubits, H = H1 ⊗H2 ⊗· · · ⊗Hn. A convenient basis, called
the computational basis, consists of all 2n strings of the form
|x1x2 . . . xn⟩= |x1⟩⊗|x2⟩⊗· · · ⊗|xn⟩,
(10.3)
where xi ∈{0, 1} and |xi⟩∈Hi. A generic state of the n-qubit system can
be written as a linear combination of basis states with 2n complex coeﬃcients
(also called amplitudes). Note that the corresponding speciﬁcation information
is enormous even for moderate values of n; for comparison, the estimated total
number of atoms in the universe is of the order 2270.
Let us now consider a generic two-qubit state of the form
|ψ⟩12 = α00|00⟩+ α01|01⟩+ α10|10⟩+ α11|11⟩,
(10.4)
with P
i,j∈{0,1} |αij|2 = 1. The bipartite state |ψ⟩12 is said to be a product
state if it can be written as |ψ⟩12 = |ψ1⟩⊗|ψ2⟩, where |ψ1⟩= a0|0⟩+a1|1⟩and
|ψ2⟩= b0|0⟩+ b1|1⟩. For a product state, the amplitudes in Eq. (10.4) satisfy
the condition αij = aibj. A bipartite state |ψ⟩12 that is not a product state

274
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
P
U
M
U
k
classical control
FIGURE 10.1: Schematic representation of typical (noiseless) quantum infor-
mation processing protocol: state preparation (P), unitary operation (U), and
measurement (M). The thin lines and thick arrows denote quantum informa-
tion and classical information, respectively.
is called entangled. Important examples of two-qubit entangled states are the
so-called Bell states (or EPR pairs),
|Ψ±⟩12 = |01⟩± |10⟩
√
2
,
|Φ±⟩12 = |00⟩± |11⟩
√
2
.
(10.5)
Bell has shown (see Chapter I) that the correlations between the outcomes of
(independent, spatially separated) measurements performed on two entangled
qubits are stronger than any correlation that is classically permitted. This is
a consequence of the fact that entangled states possess global properties that
are irreducible to local features. Consequently, shared entanglement (e.g., Alice
and Bob sharing a pair of qubits in an entangled state) represents a new type
of (static) information resource that allows information processing beyond
what is classically possible. Paradigmatic examples are superdense coding [45]
and teleportation [43] (see Section 10.5).
For multiple qubit systems with n > 2 the classiﬁcation with respect to
entanglement is richer. Again, we deﬁne |ψ⟩as being a product state (or fully
n-partite separable) if and only if |ψ⟩= |ψ1⟩⊗· · · ⊗|ψn⟩. In addition, we can
deﬁne separability with respect to various partitions, for example bipartite
partitions. A state |ψ⟩is said to be bipartite separable (with respect to the
partition {i1, . . . , im}, {j1, . . . , jn−m}) if it can be written as |ψ⟩= |ψi⟩⊗|ψj⟩,
where |ψi⟩∈Hi1 ⊗· · ·⊗Him and |ψj⟩∈Hj1 ⊗· · ·⊗Hjn−m. Finally, an n-qubit
state |ψ⟩is said to be genuinely n-partite entangled if and only if |ψ⟩is not
separable with respect to any bipartite partition.
10.1.2
Quantum operations
Qubits and shared entanglement are basic (static) resources in quantum in-
formation theory. The question now is how does one “encode” classical in-
formation by initializing the state of a quantum system? Furthermore, how
is quantum information processed and how does one extract the result (as
classical information)?
A typical quantum information processing protocol is illustrated schemat-
ically in Figure 10.1. A state |ψ⟩of the quantum system is initialized (i.e.,
prepared) based on classical information provided by a control device. The

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■275
state is then evolved by performing some quantum operations. These oper-
ations (also called quantum gates) are represented by unitary operators. Fi-
nally, a (projective) measurement is performed, which provides the classical
output. This measurement is represented by a set of projectors, i.e., a pro-
jection valued measure (PVM). The reader has probably recognized the three
basic steps of a quantum experiment — preparation (represented by the state
vector |ψ⟩, transformation (unitary operator U), and measurement (PVM Πk)
— as described in the language of (noiseless) operational quantum mechanics,
which is summarized in Chapter 1. One can also anticipate that the eﬀects
of noise can be incorporated by generalizing these steps, so that preparations
are represented by density operators, measurements by positive operator valued
measures (POVMs), and noisy evolutions (i.e., transformations) by completely
positive trace preserving maps (see Section 1.2.2).
Let us focus for a moment on the noiseless evolution of quantum states by
considering simple unitary operations performed on qubits (also called quan-
tum logic gates), the elementary dynamical processes used for manipulating
quantum information. Classically, there is only one (non-trivial) single bit
logic gate: the NOT gate. It is natural to deﬁne its quantum analog as the
unitary operator that evolves the state |0⟩into the state |1⟩, and vice versa.
Using the vector representation (10.2) for the states of the qubit, the unitary
operator X corresponding to the NOT gate is represented by the Pauli matrix
σx. We have
X ≡

0
1
1
0

,
X

α
β

=

β
α

.
(10.6)
Notice that the quantum NOT gate corresponds to a rotation in the Hilbert
space of the qubit, more speciﬁcally a π rotation about the x-axis on the Bloch
sphere. In fact, an arbitrary single qubit unitary operator can be written as
U = eiαRˆn(θ), where α ∈R and Rˆn(θ) represents a rotation by θ about the
ˆn axis. The rotation can be represented as
Rˆn(θ) = exp

−iθˆn · ⃗σ
2

= cos
θ
2

I −i sin
θ
2

(nxX + nyY + nzZ),
(10.7)
where I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix and ⃗σ = (X, Y, Z) are the Pauli matrices.
We have X = eiπ/2Rx(π) and similar relations hold for Y and Z.
In addition to the Pauli matrices, there are other important single qubit
unitary operations, such as, for example, the Hadamard gate
H ≡
1
√
2

1
1
1
−1

.
(10.8)
It is easy to check that H transforms the computational basis into the so-
called “+/−” or Hadamard basis: |0⟩→|+⟩≡(|0⟩+ |1⟩)/
√
2 and |1⟩→
|−⟩≡(|0⟩−|1⟩)/
√
2. Two other frequently used gates are the so-called phase

276
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
X
Z
H
FIGURE 10.2: Schematic representation of some frequently used quantum
logic gates and their action on generic single- and two-qubit states. Left: Pauli-
X (quantum NOT), Pauli-Z, and Hadamard gates. Right: CNOT gate.
(S) and π/8 (T) gates,
S ≡
 1
0
0
i

and
T ≡
 1
0
0
eiπ/4

.
(10.9)
Note that the Pauli-Z gate can be implemented by applying the phase gate
twice, Z = S2. In turn, we have S = T 2.
How can one generalize these unitary operations for multiple qubits? First,
let us note that a direct correspondence with standard classical gates, such as
AND, OR, exclusive OR (XOR), etc., is not possible because these gates are
irreversible (i.e., non-invertible), while quantum unitary evolution is always
reversible. Second, we point out an important result in classical computation
theory concerning the existence of a universal gate: any Boolean function (i.e.,
function on bits) can be implemented using a combination of NAND gates1
alone. Finally, we note that one of the most important types of controlled
operation in classical computation corresponds to the sequence: if x is true,
do the transformation y →y′. It turns out that this type of operation can
be implemented as a quantum gate with two input qubits, known as the
control qubit |ψC⟩and target qubit |ψT ⟩, and plays a key role in quantum
computation.
Assume that U is a single-qubit unitary operation. A controlled-U opera-
tion corresponds to applying U to the target qubit only if the control qubit is
set (otherwise |ψT ⟩is left unchanged). The prototypical quantum controlled
gate is the controlled-NOT (or CNOT) gate (see Figure 10.2). Using the com-
putational basis |xy⟩corresponding to Eq. (10.4), where |x⟩and |y⟩represent
the states of the control and target qubits, respectively, the matrix represen-
1The NAND gate (negative AND) generates the output 0 (false) if both inputs are true
and the output 1 otherwise.

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■277
tation of CNOT and its action on a generic two-qubit state are
UCN ≡


1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0

,
UCN


α00
α01
α10
α11

=


α00
α01
α11
α10

.
(10.10)
We note that another important example of two-qubit operation is the
controlled-Z gate, which corresponds to U = Z and, consequently, changes
the sign of the state |11⟩. Remarkably, unlike the CNOT gate, the action
of the controlled-Z gate does not change if we switch the control and target
qubits. This symmetry property makes the controlled-Z gate more natural
for physical implementation, since interactions between identical particles are
symmetric.
Similar to classical gates, quantum logic gates can be combined into quan-
tum circuits.2 In general, a quantum circuit can be viewed as a model for
quantum computation in which a certain information processing task is real-
ized as a sequence of quantum gates. To design and study quantum circuits,
it is convenient to use symbol notations for the gates, as illustrated in Figure
10.2. Finally, we note that the importance of the CNOT gate stems from a re-
markable universality result: any multiple qubit logic gate can be implemented
as a combination of CNOT and single qubit gates, i.e., CNOTs and unitary
single qubit operations form a universal set for quantum computation. In ad-
dition, one can show that single qubit operations can be approximated with
arbitrary precision using a ﬁnite set of gates. However, this approximation
cannot always be done eﬃciently.
10.1.3
No cloning
Classical information processing protocols take full advantage of the fact that
the value of a bit can be reproduced by generating an arbitrary number of
copies. By contrast, it is impossible to clone an unknown quantum state. This
statement, known as the no-cloning theorem [123, 471], implies that, given a
system in a quantum state |ψ⟩, it is impossible to end up with two or more
systems in state |ψ⟩, unless the state is already known. Note that the statement
does not exclude the possibility of swapping the state |ψ⟩from one system to
another.
Suppose that we have a “quantum copy machine” that takes the “data”
(an unknown quantum state |ψ⟩) and a blank “copy” (some standard pure
state |∅⟩) and generates a copy of |ψ⟩through the unitary evolution U,
|ψ⟩⊗|∅⟩−→U[|ψ⟩⊗|∅⟩] = |ψ⟩⊗|ψ⟩.
(10.11)
Consider now two arbitrary pure states |ψ⟩and |φ⟩that have been copied
using this procedure, i.e., U[|ψ⟩⊗|∅⟩] = |ψ⟩⊗|ψ⟩and U[|φ⟩⊗|∅⟩] = |φ⟩⊗|φ⟩.
2See Chapter 11 for more details.

278
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Taking the inner product of these two equations we have ⟨ψ|φ⟩= (⟨ψ|φ⟩)2.
However, this equality holds only for |ψ⟩= |φ⟩or when the two states are
orthogonal. Hence, a general purpose quantum copy machine is impossible.
It is interesting to note the connection between no-cloning and two deﬁning
features of quantum mechanics. First, there is a link with quantum measure-
ment: no-cloning is logically equivalent to the impossibility of determining the
(unknown) state of a single quantum system by performing a measurement on
that state. Indeed, if one could determine an unknown state, one could also
prepare an arbitrary number of copies of the (now known) state. On the other
hand, if cloning were possible, one could produce a large number of copies of
the unknown state, then measure them using various measurements, which
would allow determining the state with arbitrary precision.
The second connection involves the EPR thought experiment and the im-
possibility of superluminal signaling. Suppose that Alice and Bob, who are
separated by a large distance, share EPR pairs of the form
1
√
2(|00⟩+ |11⟩).
On each pair, Alice is performing a measurement in either the computational
basis {|0⟩, |1⟩} or the +/−basis {|+⟩, |−⟩}. If cloning were possible, Bob could
produce a certain number of copies of his state (after Alice has done the mea-
surement), then measure half of them in the computational basis and half in
the +/−basis. This would unambiguously tell Bob what was the basis for the
measurement done by Alice, hence Alice and Bob could communicate faster
than light. However, quite remarkably, the no-cloning theorem ensures the
consistency of non-relativistic quantum mechanics with relativity.
10.2
ENTROPY AND INFORMATION
In Chapter 3 we introduced the Shannon entropy as a measure of classical
information. In essence, if X = {x1, x2, . . . ; p1, p2, . . . } represents a random
variable (e.g., corresponding to letters generated with certain probabilities by
an information source), the Shannon entropy H(X) quantiﬁes how much infor-
mation is gained, on average, by learning the value of X. This corresponds to
the amount of uncertainty one has about X before one learns its value. Other
important classical information measures, e.g., the mutual information (not
mentioned in Chapter 3) quantify the correlations between random variables.
Here, we discuss several information measures that are used to quantify
the amount of information and correlation associated with quantum systems.
While most of the deﬁnitions are similar to their classical counterparts, the
properties of these measures may exhibit radical departures from the expected
classical behavior, such as, for example, the conditional quantum entropy being
negative for certain quantum states and the mutual information of entangled
qubits exceeding the classical limit. We emphasize that, despite the similar-
ity between the mathematical machinery used in quantum information theory
and the mathematics of Shannon’s theory, the conceptual contents are some-
times radically diﬀerent. These diﬀerences stem from fundamental quantum
properties that have no classical correspondent, in particular the following

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■279
features: i) non-orthogonal quantum states cannot be perfectly distinguished
and ii) quantum correlations can exceed the classical limit.
Von Neumann entropy. Assume that a source (Alice) prepares quantum
states |x⟩chosen from an ensemble, x ∈{x1, x2, . . . , xn}, each state occurring
with a priori probability px. From the point of view of an observer (Bob) with
no knowledge about which state was prepared, the source is completely charac-
terized by the density operator ρ = P
x px|x⟩⟨x|. We deﬁne the von Neumann
(or quantum) entropy — the quantum analog of the Shannon entropy — as
S(ρ) = −Tr(ρ log ρ),
(10.12)
where Tr represents the trace and the base of the logarithm is 2. If {|α⟩} are
the (normalized) eigenstates of ρ and λα = P
x px|⟨x|α⟩|2 the corresponding
eigenvalues, so that ρ = P
α λα|α⟩⟨α|, we can write the entropy as
S(ρ) = −
X
α
λαlog λα ≡H(A),
(10.13)
where H(A) is the Shannon entropy of the ensemble A = {α; λα}. Conse-
quently, if the source generates mutually orthogonal pure states, we have
X ≡{x; px} = A and S(ρ) = H(X), i.e., the quantum source reduces to
a classical one. In general, as we will show in Section 10.3, the von Neumann
entropy quantiﬁes the incompressible information content of the source, i.e.,
the minimum number of qubits per letter needed to reliably encode the in-
formation generated by a source. Thus, the von Neumann entropy provides
meaning to the information-theoretic notion of qubit as the fundamental unit
of quantum information (i.e., the quantum analog of the classical bit). Note
that this concept is diﬀerent from that of a physical qubit, which corresponds
to a two-state quantum system, and its mathematical representation (vectors
from a two-dimensional Hilbert space).
Several frequently used basic properties of the quantum entropy are listed
below without proof. Most of the proofs are straightforward; more details can
be found in, for example, Chapter 9 of Peres [343], Chapter 11 of Wilde [464],
or the review article by Wehrl [446].
1. Positivity. The entropy is non-negative, S(ρ) ≥0, for any ρ.
2. Minimum. The entropy of a pure state ρψ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ| is zero, S(ρψ) = 0.
3. Maximum. The entropy is maximum, S(ρ) = logd, for randomly chosen
quantum states, i.e., when ρ = 1
dI, where I is the identity operator on
the d-dimensional Hilbert space.
4. Concavity. Mixing states enhances the ignorance about preparation,
i.e., it increases the von Neumann entropy, S(ρ) ≥P
k pkS(ρk), where
ρ = P
k pkρk.
5. Entropy of preparation. If a pure state is drawn randomly from the
ensemble {|x⟩; px}, so that ρ = P
x px|x⟩⟨x|, then S(ρ) ≤H(X), with
equality if the states |x⟩are mutually orthogonal.

280
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
6. Entropy of measurement. Consider the measurement of observable
A = P
y αy|αy⟩⟨αy| in state ρ, so that the outcome αy occurs with
probability py = ⟨αy|ρ|αy⟩. Then, S(ρ) ≤H(Y ), where Y = {αy; py} is
the ensemble of measurements outcomes; equality obtains when A and
ρ commute.
7. Subadditivity. Consider a bipartite system AB in the state ρAB. Then,
S(ρAB) ≤S(ρA) + S(ρB), where ρA = TrB[ρAB] and ρB = TrA[ρAB],
with equality for uncorrelated systems, ρAB = ρA ⊗ρB.
8. Triangle inequality. For a bipartite system, we have S(ρAB) ≥
|S(ρA)−S(ρB)|. If ρAB is a pure state, S(ρAB) = 0 and S(ρA) = S(ρB).
Some of these properties have very similar classical analogs. The distinction
between quantum and classical information is nicely illustrated, for example,
by the contrast between the triangle inequality and its classical counterpart,
H(X, Y ) ≥H(X), H(Y ). Classically, there is more information to be found in
the whole system than in any of its parts (i.e., the whole is less predictable than
its parts). Quantum mechanically, the whole may be completely known, yet
the measurement outcomes for an entangled subsystem remain unpredictable.
Conditional quantum entropy. Consider the bipartite quantum system AB.
The conditional quantum entropy S(A|B) is deﬁned as the diﬀerence of the
joint quantum entropy S(A, B) ≡S(ρAB) and the marginal entropy S(B) ≡
S(ρB),
S(A|B) = S(A, B) −S(B).
(10.14)
This quantity is the quantum analog of the (classical ) conditional entropy,
H(X|Y ) = H(X, Y ) −H(Y ), which is a measure of how uncertain we are, on
average, about the value of X, given that we know the value of Y . Of course,
H(X|Y ) ≥0. By contrast, we can sometimes be more certain about the joint
state of a quantum system than we can be about any one of its parts. For
example, if AB is a system of two qubits in the entangled state (|00⟩+|11⟩)/
√
2,
we have S(A, B) = 0 (since ρAB is a pure state) and S(B) = 1 (since ρB = 1
2I).
This results in a negative value of S(A|B). The negative of the conditional
entropy, called coherent information, is a measure of quantum correlations,
i.e., a measure of the extent to which we know less about part of a system
than we do about its whole. Note that the quantum conditional entropy can
also be deﬁned operationally as a measure of the quantum communication
cost (if S(A|B) > 0) or surplus (if S(A|B) < 0) when performing quantum
state merging [224].
Quantum mutual information. The (classical) mutual information, deﬁned
as H(X :Y ) = H(X)+H(Y )−H(X, Y ), represents the standard informational
measure of correlations in the classical world. In essence, H(X :Y ) quantiﬁes
how much information X and Y have in common. The quantum analog of this
quantity — the quantum mutual information of a bipartite state ρAB — is
S(A:B) = S(A) + S(B) −S(A, B) = S(A) −S(A|B).
(10.15)

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■281
One can show [464] that the quantum mutual information of any bipartite
quantum state is positive, S(A:B) ≥0. We also note that discarding quantum
systems never increases mutual information, i.e., S(A : B) ≤S(A : B, C) for
any composite system ABC, and that quantum operations never increase
quantum information, i.e., S(A′ : B′) ≤S(A : B), where S(A′ : B′) is the
mutual information after a trace-preserving operation T (see Section 1.2.2)
was applied to subsystem B.
10.3
DATA COMPRESSION
Information is measured by the amount of communication needed to convey
it. Classically, the bit is shown to be a useful measure of information in the
context of Shannon’s noiseless coding theorem [399], which establishes how
much one can compress a long message without losing any information, i.e.,
what is the minimum number of binary symbols necessary for encoding it.
Schumacher compression [393], the quantum analog of Shannon’s noiseless
coding theorem, provides an operational interpretation of the von Neumann
entropy as the fundamental limit on the rate of quantum data compression
and establishes the qubit as a measure of the amount of quantum information
“contained” in a quantum information source.
Suppose a sender (Alice) and a receiver (Bob) have access to a quantum
information source and a noiseless quantum channel. Can they optimize the
use of these resources by transmitting compressed quantum information? The
answer is yes, but, before we go into more detail, let us deﬁne the four basic
steps of a generic quantum compression protocol: state preparation, encoding,
transmission, and decoding.
State preparation. The basic type of quantum information source is
one that outputs a sequence of systems in particular (pure) quantum states,
|ψxn⟩= |ψx1⟩⊗· · · ⊗|ψxn⟩, according to the ensemble {|ψx⟩; px}. From the
perspective of someone ignorant of the actual states, they are characterized
by the density operator ρ = P
x px|ψx⟩⟨ψx|. Hence, the quantum source can
formally be described by a Hilbert space H, and a density matrix ρ acting
on that Hilbert space. The compression operation will take the states |ψxn⟩∈
H⊗n, where xn = x1x2 . . . xn, to states in a lower dimensional compressed
space in such a way as to ensure the possibility of faithful recovery.
A diﬀerent type of quantum source always outputs systems in a particular
mixed state ρ as a result of these systems being only a part of a larger system
which is in a pure state. The mixed nature of the state is due to entanglement
between the “visible” subsystem A and the inaccessible reference system R.
The (pure) states of the composite system, which represent a puriﬁcation of
the density operator ρ, are
|Φα⟩RA =
X
x
√px |φxα⟩R |ψx⟩A.
(10.16)
In this case the source produces a sequence |Φαn⟩RA = |Φα1⟩RA⊗· · ·⊗|Φαn⟩RA

282
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
and the task is to optimally encode the quantum information of the source in
such a way as to faithfully transfer the entanglement of the output system with
the reference system. A successful compression-transmission-decompression
protocol will provide Bob with a sequence |Φαn⟩RB = |Φα1⟩RB ⊗· · ·⊗|Φαn⟩RB,
where |Φα⟩RB = P
x
√px |φxα⟩R |ψx⟩B, similar to that prepared by Alice.
Encoding. The output sequence generated by the source is encoded onto
a quantum system Σn
C according to some completely positive trace preserving
compression map3 C : H⊗n →Hn
C, where the compressed Hilbert space Hn
C
has dimension 2nR, R being the rate of compression.
Transmission. The quantum system Σn
C is transmitted to the receiver
(Bob) using n(R + δ) noiseless qubit channels, where δ is an arbitrarily small
positive number.
Decoding. Bob decodes the message by applying a decompression map
D : Hn
C →H⊗n. The protocol is successful if the decompressed state, e.g.,
|Φαn⟩RB, is close (in trace distance4) to the original state.
10.3.1
Schumacher’s noiseless quantum coding theorem
Consider a quantum information source described by the density operator
ρ acting on the Hilbert space H. A reliable compression scheme of rate R
exists if and only if R < S(ρ), where S(ρ) is the von Neumann entropy that
characterizes the source.
This theorem [393, 238], which represents the quantum analog of Shan-
non’s noiseless coding theorem [399], establishes the von Neumann entropy as
the fundamental limit on the rate of quantum data compression. The technical
details of the proof can be found in, for example, Refs. [329] and [464]. The key
idea is to promote the classical notion of a typical sequence5 to that of a typi-
cal subspace. More speciﬁcally, a quantum state |ψxn⟩= |ψx1⟩|ψx2⟩. . . |ψxn⟩is
said to be a typical state if xn = x1x2 . . . xn is a classical typical sequence. The
typical subspace HC is deﬁned as the subspace spanned by all typical states
|ψxn⟩. The crucial distinction between the classical case and the Schumacher
compression stems from the fact that the number of typical sequences (hence,
the number of typical states) is 2nH(p), where H(p) is the Shannon entropy
associated with the probability distribution {px}, while the dimension of the
typical subspace is, in general, lower, because the states |ψxn⟩are not neces-
sarily orthogonal. Speciﬁcally, we have dim(Hn
C) = Tr(Πn
C) = 2nS(ρ), where
Πn
C is the projector onto the typical subspace and S(ρ) is the von Neumann
entropy that characterizes the source.
3See Chapter 1, particularly Section 1.2.2 for deﬁnition and basic properties.
4Given any two operators M and N, the trace distance between them is ||M −N|| =
Tr
np
(M −N)†(M −N)
o
. If ρ and σ are density operators, 0 ≤||ρ −σ|| ≤2. The lower
bound applies when the two quantum states are equivalent (then, no measurement can
distinguish ρ from σ), while the upper bound corresponds to ρ from σ having support on
orthogonal subspaces (there exists a measurement that can perfectly distinguish between
the two states). For pure states, ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|, σ = |φ⟩⟨φ|, we have ||ρ −σ|| = 2 −2|⟨ψ|φ⟩|2.
5See Chapter 3 (Section 3.2) for details.

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■283
Since nearly all long messages have nearly unit overlap with the typical
subspace, it is enough if Alice, by applying the compression map C, encodes
the typical subspace components of these states (using nS(ρ) qubits) and
ignores the rest. Next, she sends the coded message to Bob, who reconstructs
the original message by applying the decompression map D. Note that Alice
could have done an eﬀectively classical compression by encoding the (typical)
sequences x1x2 . . . xn using 2nH(p) mutually orthogonal quantum states. Bob
would have no problem in reconstructing the original states with arbitrarily
high accuracy in the asymptotic limit n →∞. However, if the “letters” |ψx⟩
are drawn from an ensemble of non-orthogonal states, H(p) > S(ρ), hence this
classical-type compression is not optimal as there is an additional redundancy
associated with the indistinguishability of non-orthogonal states.
Finally, concerning the implementation of this protocol, we note that any
encoding circuit must be completely reversible. Also, the original state has to
be destroyed in the compression process, otherwise Bob would end up possess-
ing a copy of Alice’s state, which is not allowed by the no-cloning theorem.
Performing noiseless coherent operations over a large enough number of qubits
(to implement the compression protocol) is something extremely far from what
is currently accessible in experiment. Nonetheless, Schumacher’s theorem pro-
vides the ﬁrst important quantum information-theoretic result and the useful
insight that, when dealing with quantum protocols, it may be enough to only
consider a high-probability subspace, instead of the whole Hilbert space.
10.4
ACCESSIBLE INFORMATION
The ideas discussed in the previous section have close correspondents in the
classical world. Next, we focus on a feature of quantum information that illus-
trates a striking contrast with classical information. The question we address
is the following: given a message constructed from an alphabet of quantum
states, how much classical information can one extract from it?
Suppose that Alice produces (long) messages by preparing either pure
or mixed quantum states drawn from the ensembles Eψ = {|ψx⟩; px} and
Eρ = {ρx; px}, respectively. The amount of classical information (per let-
ter) encoded in these messages is given by the Shannon entropy H(X)
corresponding to the probability distribution px1, px2, . . . , pxn of the ran-
dom variable X = {x1, x2, . . . , xn}. To extract (some of) this information,
Bob is free to perform the measurement of his choice, generally a POVM6
{Ey} = {Ey1, . . . , Eym}. Note that Bob can choose to perform collective mea-
surements on all n letters. The measurement outcomes Y = {y1, . . . , ym} will
be characterized by a certain probability distribution {py1, . . . , pym}. For ex-
ample, given the preparation x, Bob will obtain the measurement outcome y
with conditional probability
p(y|x) = ⟨ψx|Ey|ψx⟩
or
p(y|x) = Tr(ρxEy).
(10.17)
6See Chapter 3 (Section 3.2.2).

284
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
The amount of information (per letter) that Bob has gained by doing the
measurement is given by how much information X and Y have in common,
i.e., by the mutual information,
H(X :Y ) =
X
x,y
pxy logp(y|x)
py
,
(10.18)
where pxy = p(y|x)px and py = P
x pxy. The POVM that maximizes the
information gain is called the optimal measurement. Again, for n-letter mes-
sages this may be a collective measurement. The maximal information gain
represents the accessible information of the ensemble Eψ (or Eρ).
Suppose now that Alice sends Bob eﬀectively classical messages using mu-
tually orthogonal states drawn from an ensemble {|ψx⟩; px}. Bob can per-
form the orthogonal measurement Πy = |ψy⟩⟨ψy|, which has conditional
probability p(y|x) = δx,y. This implies pxy = pxδx,y and py = px, so that
H(X : Y ) = H(X). In other words, Bob has complete access to the (classi-
cal) information sent by Alice. In fact classically the accessible information is
always the same as the entropy of the source H(X).
Next, consider the case when Alice prepares pure quantum states that are
non-orthogonal to each other. No measurement done by Bob can perfectly dis-
tinguish between two such states and, as a result, the maximum information
gain will be less than H(X). In fact, we would expect the accessible informa-
tion not to exceed the von Neumann entropy of the source, S(ρ) < H(X).
Interestingly, this reduced accessibility (as compared with the classical case)
can be viewed as a statement equivalent to the no-cloning theorem. Indeed,
assume that Alice prepares the non-orthogonal states |ψ⟩and |φ⟩with prob-
abilities p and 1 −p, respectively. Alice sends Bob one state. If the accessible
information were H(p), Bob could unambiguously identify the state by doing
some measurement, then he could prepare copies of that state (in violation of
the no-cloning theorem). On the other hand, if cloning non-orthogonal states
were possible, Bob could produce multiple copies of whatever state Alice sends
him and generate the state |ψ⟩⊗n or the state |φ⟩⊗n. These two states are
nearly orthogonal and can be distinguished with arbitrarily high accuracy by
a projective measurement, which would imply that the accessible information
is H(p) (in violation of the reduced accessibility statement).
The most general situation involves the preparation of mixed states drawn
from an ensemble Eρ = {ρx; px}. Equivalently, Alice may try to send pure
states through a noisy quantum channel, but, as a result of decoherence, Bob
receives some mixed states that he has to decode. In this case, the accessible
information is limited by the so-called Holevo information, χ(Eρ) = S(ρ) −
P
x pxS(ρx), where ρ = P
x pxρx.
10.4.1
The Holevo bound
Suppose Alice prepares a quantum state drawn from the ensemble E =
{ρx; px}, then Bob performs a measurement described by the POVM {Ey}

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■285
with possible outcomes Y = {y1, . . . , ym}. For any such measurement we have
H(X :Y ) ≤S(ρ) −
X
x
pxS(ρx) ≡χ(E),
(10.19)
where ρ = P
x pxρx. Equation (10.19) establishes an upper bound on the ac-
cessible information, called the Holevo bound [221]. The proof can be found
in, for example, Nielsen and Chuang [329]. Note that for pure quantum
states ρx = |ψx⟩⟨ψx|, we have S(ρx) = 0 and the Holevo bound becomes
χ(E) = S(ρ), as discussed above. Also, suppose that E is an ensemble of
mutually orthogonal mixed states, i.e., if x ̸= x′ ρx and ρy have support
on mutually orthogonal subspaces of the Hilbert space and Tr(ρxρy) = 0.
Then, one can easily show that S(ρ) = H(X) + P
x pxS(ρx), which implies
χ(E) = H(X). In other words, classical information encoded using mutually
orthogonal mixed states (or mutually orthogonal pure states), which can be
distinguished from one another with arbitrarily high accuracy, can be fully
recovered by performing an optimal (generalized) measurement. By contrast,
if classical information is encoded using non-orthogonal quantum states, it
cannot be fully recovered.
10.5
ENTANGLEMENT-ASSISTED COMMUNICATION
Shared entanglement is an information resource that has no classical corre-
spondent. Hence, the natural question: what can one do with it that is not
possible classically? We already know that the irreducible non-local nature
of a pair of quantum systems in an entangled state leads to the violation
of Bell’s inequalities. But what communication and computational tasks can
one accomplish using this global property? This task-oriented approach has
been extremely successful and has led to the development of quantitative mea-
sures of entanglement and detailed criteria for detecting and characterizing it
[73, 134]. The prototypical examples of entanglement-assisted communication
are superdense coding [45] and teleportation [43].
In Section 10.1 we have deﬁned an entangled state as a state that is not
separable. A pure state |Ψ⟩(or a mixed state ρ) is said to be separable if the
system can be partitioned into two subsystems A and B so that
|Ψ⟩= |φ⟩A ⊗|ψ⟩B
or
ρ =
X
i
αi ρi
A ⊗ρi
B,
(10.20)
where αi > 0 and P
i αi = 1. In the particular case of bipartite systems AB,
pure states can always be written using the Schmidt decomposition as
|Ψ⟩AB =
X
i
√pi |φi⟩A ⊗|ψi⟩B,
(10.21)
where {|φi⟩A} and {|ψi⟩B} are orthonormal bases for subsystems A and B,
respectively, and pi are the non-zero values of the reduced density matrix.

286
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
The state |Ψ⟩AB is separable if there is only one coeﬃcient in the Schmidt
decomposition (10.21); otherwise, |Ψ⟩AB is entangled. Operational criteria
for entanglement in a few other particular cases have been determined [225].
However, at the time of this writing there is no general theory of entanglement
for multi-partite systems.
10.5.1
Superdense coding
Classical information can be stored and transmitted using qubits. For example,
the classical bit string x1, x2, . . . , xn (where xi ∈{0, 1}) can be transmitted by
preparing n qubits in the (direct product) state |x1, x2, . . . , xn⟩, sending them
through a (noiseless) quantum channel, and measuring them in the computa-
tional basis. A rather surprising communication protocol is made possible by
the laws of quantum mechanics through the use of shared entanglement.
Suppose that Alice and Bob share a maximally entangled7 state of two
qubits, e.g. the state |Φ+⟩AB = (|00⟩+|11⟩)/
√
2, with Alice initially possessing
qubit A and Bob qubit B. The preparation can be done starting with the
state |00⟩by applying a Hadamard gate, followed by a CNOT, as illustrated
in Figure 10.3. Superdense coding [45] is a protocol that enables Alice to
transmit to Bob two classical bits by sending him one qubit (qubit A). The
protocol has the following three steps:
(1) Alice applies one of the unitary operators I, X, Z, or iY = ZX to
qubit A, conditional on the classical bits x1 and x2 that she wants to transmit
(see Figure 10.3). This local operation changes the (global) properties of the
joined system by evolving the entangled state |Φ+⟩AB into |Φ+⟩AB, |Ψ+⟩AB,
|Φ−⟩AB, or |Ψ−⟩AB, respectively. These Bell-EPR states are deﬁned in Eq.
(10.5).
(2) Alice sends qubit A to Bob using a noiseless qubit channel.
(3) Once in possession of both qubits, Bob performs a measurement in
the Bell basis and determines the Bell-EPR state produced by Alice, which
encodes two bits of classical information.
The details of the protocol are illustrated schematically in Figure 10.3. The
maximally entangled state is prepared starting with each of the two qubits
in the |0⟩state by applying a Hadamard gate to one of the qubits, |0⟩→
(|0⟩+ |1⟩)/
√
2, followed by a CNOT, (|00⟩+ |10⟩)/
√
2 →(|00⟩+ |11⟩)/
√
2.
The two entangled qubits are then distributed to Alice and Bob. Suppose now
that Alice wants to transmit to Bob two classical bits, x1 and x2. First, she
applies a unitary transformation U to her qubit, conditional on the bit string
“x1x2,” and thus changes the entangled state. There are four possibilities: i)
The bit string is “00”; Alice does nothing and the entangled state remains
|Φ+⟩AB. ii) The bit string is “10”; Alice applies the phase ﬂip Z and the
entangled state becomes |Φ−⟩AB. iii) The bit string is “01”; Alice applies the
7A pure state |ψ⟩AB ∈HA ⊗HB, with dim(HA) ≤dim(HB), is maximally entangled if
the reduced density matrix is proportional to the identity operator, ρA = TrB|ψ⟩AB AB⟨ψ| =
1
dim(HA)1A.

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■287
H
Preparation 
of Bell pairs
x2
x1
H
Decoding 
(Bob)
Z
x2
x1
Encoding 
(Alice)
FIGURE 10.3: Schematic representation of the superdense coding protocol.
NOT gate and produces the state |Ψ+⟩AB. iv) The bit string is “11”; Alice
applies the ZX transformation to her qubit and the entangled state becomes
|Ψ−⟩AB. Next, Alice sends her qubit to Bob.
To decode Alice’s message, Bob applies a CNOT operation to the entangled
pair, followed by a Hadamard gate on the control qubit, then measures the
two qubits (in the computational basis). The unitary operations performed by
Bob correspond to the following evolutions: i) |Φ+⟩AB
CNOT
−−−−→|+0⟩
H⊗I
−−−→|00⟩;
ii) |Φ−⟩AB
CNOT
−−−−→| −0⟩
H⊗I
−−−→|10⟩; iii) |Ψ+⟩AB
CNOT
−−−−→| + 1⟩
H⊗I
−−−→|01⟩; iv)
|Ψ−⟩AB
CNOT
−−−−→|−1⟩
H⊗I
−−−→|11⟩. Hence, the outputs of the ﬁnal measurements
are exactly the classical bits x1 and x2 sent by Alice.
Using superdense coding Alice is able to transmit two classical bits, while
sending Bob only one qubit. The key to understanding this apparent violation
of the Holevo bound is to recognize that the information is not “carried” by
Alice’s qubit, but rather by the entangled pair as a whole. The remarkable
quantum eﬀect revealed by this protocol is based on the nontrivial impact
of local operations (i.e., the unitary operations done by Alice) on the irre-
ducibly global properties of the entangled system — the original joint state is
transformed into an orthogonal state. Finally, we note that superdense coding
enables secure communication: no measurement of Alice’s qubit (intercepted
by a third party) could reveal the encoded information without possession of
the entangled partner (i.e., Bob’s qubit).
10.5.2
Quantum teleportation
Quantum teleportation [43] is a protocol in which a certain unknown quantum
state is destroyed at one location (Alice’s lab) and recreated at a distant
location (Bob’s lab). First, two important remarks: i) what is transported
from Alice to Bob is a quantum state |φ⟩, not matter (i.e., not a physical

288
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
H
Preparation 
of Bell pairs
Bob
Z
Alice
H
FIGURE 10.4: Schematic representation of the quantum teleportation proto-
col.
qubit); ii) the unknown state is not cloned, i.e., the quantum information that
is generated in Bob’s lab has disappeared from Alice’s lab.
Teleportation addresses the following problem. Suppose that Alice wants to
communicate to Bob the quantum state |φ⟩of a single qubit without actually
sending him the physical qubit. If Alice knows the state (e.g. |φ⟩= α|0⟩+β|1⟩),
she can simply send Bob the classical information corresponding to the co-
eﬃcients (α, β) and he would be able to prepare the state using his own
physical qubit. Note, however, that reconstructing the state with high accu-
racy requires a huge amount classical information, since the two coeﬃcients
are continuous variables. But what if the state is unknown? Measuring it is
not a solution because, in general, |ψ⟩is a linear combination of the com-
putational basis and cannot be determined with certainty by performing one
measurement. Cloning it and doing multiple measurements is also impossible.
Remarkably, there is a solution to this problem that, similarly to superdense
coding, involves the use of quantum entanglement as an information resource.
Speciﬁcally, assuming that Alice and Bob share an EPR pair, they can use
the following three-step protocol:
(1) Alice interacts the qubit |φ⟩with her half of the entangled pair, then
applies a CNOT followed by a Hadamard gate on the control qubit and, ﬁnally,
measures the two qubits in her possession. The possible results are “00,” “01,”
“10,” and “11.”
(2) Alice sends the results (i.e., two bits of classical information) to Bob.
(3) Bob performs one of four operations (I, X, Z, or iY = ZX) on his
half of the EPR pair, conditional on the information received from Alice, and
recovers the original state |φ⟩.
The details of the protocol are illustrated schematically in Figure 10.4.
At the beginning of the protocol, the three-qubit quantum state is |ψ1⟩=
|φ⟩⊗|Φ+⟩AB = (α|000⟩+ β|100⟩+ α|011⟩+ β|111⟩)/
√
2, where the ﬁrst two

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■289
qubits belong to Alice and the rightmost qubit to Bob. Applying the CNOT
gate on the ﬁrst two qubits evolves the state into |ψ2⟩= (α|000⟩+ β|110⟩+
α|011⟩+ β|101⟩)/
√
2. Finally, applying the Hadamard gate generates |ψ3⟩=
[|00⟩(α|0⟩+ β|1⟩) + |10⟩(α|0⟩−β|1⟩) + |01⟩(α|1⟩+ β|0⟩) + |11⟩(α|1⟩−β|0⟩)]/2.
Once Alice has measured her qubits, Bob’s qubit will be in one of the states
α|0⟩+β|1⟩(if the results of the measurements are “00”), α|0⟩−β|1⟩(for “10”),
α|1⟩+β|0⟩(for “01”), or α|1⟩−β|0⟩(for “11”). After receiving from Alice the
(classical) information concerning the measurement outcome, Bob applies the
appropriate unitary operation — i.e., I for “00,” Z for “10,” X for “01,” and
ZX for “11” — and recovers the state |ψ⟩.
It is worth noting that quantum teleportation does not enable faster than
light communication, because the protocol cannot be completed before Bob
receives the measurement results from Alice, which implies transmission over
a classical communication channel. Also, as in the case of superdense coding,
the “driving force” behind teleportation is the ability to induce global changes
in the properties of the entangled system by performing local operations.
Finally, we note that teleportation reveals the possibility of using quantum
information resources interchangeably: one shared EPR pair plus two classical
bits represent a communication resource at least the equal of one qubit.
10.6
QUANTUM CRYPTOGRAPHY
Quantum cryptography [178], more precisely quantum key distribution [458,
42], represents the most remarkable practical application of quantum infor-
mation that can be implemented using current technology. While quantum
cryptography is primarily concerned with quantum key distribution, it also
includes other ideas, such as those related to bit commitment protocols8 [67].
Below, we focus on the basic ideas behind quantum key distribution. We note
that this ﬁeld is not concerned with the actual transmission of secret messages,
but rather with the secure distribution of a private key, which is then used
for encoding and transmitting secret messages classically. In essence, quan-
tum cryptography builds upon the impossibility of perfectly distinguishing
nonorthogonal quantum states. In other words, quantum cryptography ex-
ploits the fundamental laws of physics — in particular the existence of incom-
patible physical quantities and the non-commutativity of the corresponding
observables — to create private key bits between two parties (Alice and Bob)
using protocols that are provably secure. Any attempt by Eve to gain access to
this key necessarily results in a detectable disturbance of the quantum state
that reveals the eavesdropper’s presence.
8In essence, bit commitment addresses the following problem: Alice casts a vote and Bob,
while being sure that the vote was cast, cannot learn Alice’s decision before a certain time
chosen by her. How can this be done in such a way that Bob cannot (yet) know Alice’s vote,
yet she cannot change her mind between the moment she casts the vote and the moment
she reveals it?

290
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
10.6.1
Quantum key distribution
As brieﬂy mentioned in the opening section of Chapter 3, there are two
main cryptographic techniques: private-key (or symmetric) cryptography and
public-key (or asymmetric) cryptography. The ﬁrst method is based on the
two parties (e.g., Alice and Bob) sharing a secret key that is used for both
encryption and decryption. For example, the so-called one-time pad technique
involves Alice and Bob sharing a secret random bit string (the key) of the
same length as the message to be transmitted. Alice encrypts the message by
adding (modulo 2) the key bits to the message bits, while Bob decrypts it by
subtracting the key (modulo 2). The encrypted message is a random string
that provides no information to Eve, if she intercepts it. However, the key has
to be discarded after one use, because Eve could start identifying the secret bit
string by comparing messages encoded using the same key. The main draw-
back of this method is that the two parties have to be able to secretly share
the key, a problem as diﬃcult as the original problem one wants to address,
i.e., realizing secure communication.
Public-key cryptography is based on the idea of generating a pair of keys
using one-way functions — functions that are easy to calculate (given the argu-
ments) but hard to invert. For example, multiplying two large prime numbers
is easy, but factoring the product appears to be hard (i.e., it is a compu-
tationally intractable problem on a classical computer, as far as we know).
Alice generates the pair of keys and broadcasts the public key (e.g. the large
product), which is then used by Bob to encrypt the message. To decrypt the
message, Alice uses her private secret key (i.e., the prime factors). Eve, on the
other hand, has no access to the information transmitted by Bob unless she
is able to perform the factorization. This method eliminates the problem of
secretly sharing the key, but relies on the computational intractability of in-
verting a one-way function. The existence of adequate one-way functions is an
unsolved problem. For example, Eve could break the most widely used public
key protocol (the RSA[370]), which is based on the apparent diﬃculty of fac-
toring large numbers, if she manages to ﬁnd an eﬃcient classical factorization
algorithm (assuming that it exists) or if she gets a quantum computer.
Quantum key distribution is a provably secure protocol that allows two
parties to generate a private key without the need to meet in secret or share
secret information beforehand. The basic idea behind this technique exploits
two fundamental properties of quantum systems: the no-cloning theorem —
Eve cannot clone any qubit that she may have intercepted (see 10.1.3) —
and the impossibility of distinguishing between two non-orthogonal quantum
states without disturbing them. Suppose that Eve is trying to obtain infor-
mation about the non-orthogonal states |ψ⟩and |φ⟩. She does not know the
bases in which these states were prepared, so measurement is not an option.
She may try to unitarily interact the states with ancilla qubits prepared in a
standard state |u⟩. Assuming that this process does not disturb the states, one
has |ψ⟩|u⟩→|ψ⟩|vψ⟩and |φ⟩|u⟩→|φ⟩|vφ⟩. However, unitary transformations

Elements of Quantum Information Theory
■291
preserve the inner product, which implies ⟨vψ|vφ⟩= 1, i.e., the ﬁnal states
of the ancilla are the same. Eve cannot acquire any information about the
identity of the original states without perturbing at least one of them.
These ideas, ﬁrst presented in 1984 by Bennett and Brassard [42], are
incorporated into the following protocol (dubbed “BB84”):
(1) Alice prepares a large number 4n of qubits in one of the states cor-
responding to the σz basis (i.e., |0⟩or |1⟩) or the σx basis (i.e., |+⟩or |−⟩),
randomly chosen, records each preparation, and sends the qubits to Bob via a
quantum channel. Associating the states |0⟩and |+⟩with 0; |1⟩and |−⟩with
1, Alice is in possession of a random string of 4n classical bits.
(2) Bob measures the qubits received from Alice choosing the measurement
basis randomly between σz and σx and records the measurement bases and
the outcomes. About half of the qubits will be measured in the same basis
Alice used to prepared them; Bob will ascribe to these outcomes the same bit
values as Alice, but the other half will generate uncorrelated bit values.
(3) Alice and Bob announce the basis they chose for each qubit using a
public classical channel. The bit values corresponding to diﬀerent preparation
and measurement bases are disregarded. The coincidences in their independent
random choices of basis provide Alice and Bob with classical bit strings of
length approximately 2n that, in the absence of noise or eavesdropping on the
transmitted qubits, are identical.
(4) Alice and Bob check for Eve’s presence. Assume that an eavesdropper
intercepts the qubits sent by Alice and tries to ﬁnd information about the
sequence being sent. This will create disturbances that can be easily identiﬁed.
For example, if Eve measures the qubits en route between Alice and Bob using
either the σz or the σx basis, half of the time she will project the state into the
other basis than the one chosen by Alice, which implies a 25% chance for Alice
and Bob to ascribe diﬀerent bit values when choosing the same basis. This
anomaly, which reveals Eve’s presence, can be detected by Alice announcing
the values of n randomly chosen bits from her key. If these values agree with
Bob’s corresponding bit values, there was no eavesdropping; the checked bits
are discarded and remaining n bits constitute a secret random key shared by
Alice and Bob. If the bit values made public by Alice do not coincide with
Bob’s values, the protocol is aborted.
Once the protocol is successfully completed, Alice and Bob share a private
key that can be used for one-time pad encryption. Alice can send the encrypted
message over a public channel with no risk of being decrypted by anybody, ex-
cept Bob. A few remarks on realistic implementations and possible variations
of this protocol are warranted. First, we note that in practice the protocol has
to allow for the presence of noise and for Eve adopting a more subtle strategy
(e.g., not intercepting all the qubits). The key may be retained if the error
rate in step (4) is well below 25%, but Alice and Bob will have to perform in-
formation reconciliation and privacy ampliﬁcation protocols on the remaining
n bits [329]. The information reconciliation protocols are designed to increase
the correlation between Alice’s and Bob’s strings, while (possibly) providing

292
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Eve with minimal information. For example Alice and Bob can check the par-
ity of randomly chosen pairs of bits; if the corresponding pairs have the same
parity, they keep the ﬁrst bit and disregard the second, otherwise both bits
are discarded [178]. After reconciliation, Alice and Bob will share the same
key, within some acceptable error rate. Finally, privacy ampliﬁcation[329] can
systematically reduce the correlation between the string shared by Alice and
Bob and the string that Eve may have acquired.
Second, we emphasize that the protocol described above involves the use
of both a quantum channel (for transmitting the qubits) and a public classical
channel (for broadcasting basis choices, bit values, parities, etc.). It is assumed
that Eve may have access to the quantum channel and possibly perturb the
qubits, but that she cannot inﬂuence the data sent over the public channel. The
key feature of this protocol is the fact that Eve cannot acquire any information
about the transmitted qubits without perturbing them, i.e., without revealing
her presence.
Finally, we note that another quantum key distribution approach [135, 44]
involves the use of shared EPR states. If Alice and Bob share a large number of
entangled pairs, they can measure each system using the σz or σx basis, chosen
randomly; this will provide each of them with a random sequence of 0 and
1 outcomes. The protocol proceeds as before, with a public announcement of
the random basis choices, followed by the selection of bit values corresponding
to measurements in the same basis, the check for Eve’s presence, and the
completion of information reconciliation and privacy ampliﬁcation protocols.

C H A P T E R 11
Introduction to
Quantum Computation
CONTENTS
11.1
Introduction: the universal quantum computer ...........
294
11.2
Quantum circuits ..........................................
297
11.3
Quantum algorithms .......................................
300
11.3.1 Deutsch’s algorithm ................................
300
11.3.2 Quantum search: Grover’s algorithm ..............
302
11.3.3 Quantum Fourier transform: Shor’s algorithm ....
306
11.3.4 Simulation of quantum systems ....................
310
11.4
Quantum error correction .................................
313
Q
UANTUM COMPUTATION IS NOT AN IMMINENT ACHIEVE-
ment. We will not wake up tomorrow (or sometime in the foreseeable
future) and ﬁnd quantum computers on our desks. At the time of this writing,
manipulating 50 qubits looks like a daunting task; predicting how long it will
take to achieve controlled manipulation of 103 qubits or more (i.e., a number
consistent with a “useful” quantum computer) is probably not a rational un-
dertaking. The most pessimistic experts regard the lively research activity in
quantum computation as a waste of time and resources. But the pervading
mood in this ﬁeld is one of cautious optimism. Expediency may be responsible
for some of this optimism; a good feeling about the prospects for quantum
computation certainly helps when it comes to publishing papers and getting
funded. Ultimately, however, the responsibility for the wise distribution of re-
sources rests with the funding agencies; scientists, on the other hand, are called
to explore every aspect of real and possible worlds that looks fascinating and
worthy of their curiosity. From this perspective, quantum computation (de-
ﬁned broadly) oﬀers plenty of opportunities for producing “good science.” The
problems brought to the fore by the development of this ﬁeld range from ba-
sic questions relating to the foundations of quantum mechanics and unsolved
problems in computational complexity, to the investigation of new phases of
matter (e.g., topological quantum phases), the quest for “complete” control
293

294
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
over quantum systems, and the critical need for signiﬁcant advances in materi-
als science and device fabrication (e.g., engineering nanoscale heterostructures
with atomic precision). Progress in these areas will naturally open new possi-
bilities for interesting applications. Precisely identifying these applications is
premature, but, most likely, building a quantum computer will not be among
the ﬁrst of them.
11.1
INTRODUCTION: THE UNIVERSAL QUANTUM
COMPUTER
Quantum computation is the process of accomplishing a (classical) computa-
tional task using the laws of quantum mechanics. In essence, this involves three
distinct steps: 1) Initialization — classical information (the input) is encoded
as quantum information into a quantum state |ψi⟩∈H, where H is a large
Hilbert space. 2) Controlled evolution — the quantum information is processed
by evolving the initial state |ψi⟩into a ﬁnal state |ψf⟩. The evolution can be
realized by applying a unitary operator, |ψf⟩= U|ψi⟩, or by performing cer-
tain measurements, or by combining unitary evolutions and measurements. 3)
Readout (measurement) — classical information (the output of the computa-
tion) is extracted from the ﬁnal quantum state by measuring |ψf⟩in a certain
basis. Note that sometimes quantum computation is narrowly understood as
the quantum information processing phase (i.e., step 2). The basic intuition
leading to the concept of quantum computation is the fact that every compu-
tation is (or should be) performed by a physical machine (i.e., a computer)
and, consequently, is essentially a physical process. From this perspective, an
isolated quantum object may be regarded as a dedicated quantum computer
that computes its own behavior in real time, i.e., evolves its quantum state
according to a unitary operator generated by its Hamiltonian.
There are several diﬀerent quantum computational models which have
been shown to be equivalent, in the sense that they can simulate each other
with only polynomial overhead. The models are distinguished by the way
classical information is encoded and, most importantly, by the elementary
processes in which the evolution from |ψi⟩to |ψf⟩is decomposed. Historically,
the ﬁrst quantum computational model — the quantum Turing machine —
was proposed by David Deutsch in 1985 [120], based on earlier work by Benioﬀ
[39], and represents the quantum generalization of the classical Turing machine
[430]. In practice, the model that provides a straightforward architecture for
building a quantum computer and an intuitive framework for designing quan-
tum algorithms is the quantum circuit model. The equivalence between the
quantum circuit model and the quantum Turing machine model was estab-
lished by Yao in 1993 [475]. Within the circuit model, the input is encoded
as a speciﬁc quantum state of n qubits and the evolution, which corresponds
to a certain unitary operator U acting on a 2n-dimensional Hilbert space, is
decomposed into a sequence of few-qubit gates. The step-by-step set of in-
structions specifying the sequence of quantum gates that realizes the desired

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■295
unitary evolution U (and, implicitly, the desired output, when measuring the
ﬁnal state |ψf⟩) is called the quantum algorithm. Hence, within this model,
a quantum computation on n qubits can be viewed as a rotation (i.e., uni-
tary transformation) in a 2n-dimensional space that is speciﬁed by a certain
quantum algorithm (i.e., sequence of quantum gates). A universal quantum
computer is a machine running algorithms that are written in terms of an
elementary set of quantum gates capable of generating all possible unitary
operations. More details are discussed in the next section.
Oftentimes in the literature when saying “quantum computer” people ac-
tually mean “quantum circuit.” Nonetheless, several other models of quantum
computation have been proposed. Although these models are mathematically
equivalent to the circuit model, it is useful to investigate them as they may
oﬀer better alternatives for practical implementation or intuition for construct-
ing new algorithms. One alternative model is the so-called one-way quantum
computation, which, basically, involves two steps. First, a particular highly
entangled initial state, known as a “cluster state,” is prepared. Then, the com-
putation involves just a long sequence of single-qubit measurements applied to
the cluster state. The exact sequence of bases in which the measurements are
performed depends upon the results of intermediate measurements. A key les-
son that this model teaches us is that quantum computation is not something
that necessarily involves only unitary operations.
Another model, in which the algorithm is generated by an adiabatic pro-
cess, is the so-called adiabatic quantum computation [111]. Basically, the input
state is the (non-degenerate) ground state of an initial Hamiltonian Hi, which
is adiabatically evolved into a ﬁnal Hamiltonian Hf by slowly varying a certain
parameter (or a set of parameters) λ. The desired solution of the computa-
tional problem is given by the (non-degenerate) ground state of Hf. Note that
encoding information into the ground state of the Hamiltonian is meaningful
provided the ground state is protected at all times (i.e., for all values of λ) by
a ﬁnite energy gap.
The last model we mention here is the topological quantum computation
[327]. Information is encoded in topologically non-trivial quantum states con-
taining multi-quasiparticle excitations (called anyons), which can be created
in pairs, moved apart, and annihilated when brought back together. Perform-
ing unitary operations involves braiding the anyons. Remarkably, the unitary
operation generated by a process involving the creation, movement, and an-
nihilation of anyons depends solely on the topology of the path traversed by
the quasiparticles and not on the details of the path. As a result, the system
is naturally insensitive to any local noise experienced by the quasiparticles.
The basic ideas behind topological quantum computation will be discussed in
more detail in the next chapter.
In some sense, quantum computation can be viewed as an attempt at
redeﬁning what it means to compute. Classically, a computation is a process
that we can perform on a Turing machine. However, quantum systems are very
hard to simulate on a classical computer. Could it be that exploiting the laws of

296
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
quantum mechanics one could perform eﬃciently certain computational tasks
that classically are hard to perform? This thought inspired David Deutsch
to formally deﬁne the notion of quantum computer — a machine that runs
computational processes based on the laws of physics, which are believed to
be the laws of quantum mechanics. The basic idea can be summarized as the
following generalization of the strong Church–Turing thesis:
Church–Turing–Deutsch principle: Any physical process can be ef-
ﬁciently simulated on a quantum computer.
A few remarks are warranted at this point. First, without the speciﬁcation “ef-
ﬁciently,” this principle would be the analog of the standard Church–Turing
thesis, with the notion of “physical process” replacing the rather vague “algo-
rithmic process” and the quantum computer taking the place of the universal
Turing machine. These modiﬁcations express Deutsch’s aspiration to be able
to formally derive this principle using the laws of physics. At the time of this
writing, this is one of the most important open problems in quantum informa-
tion science. Second, if classical computers cannot eﬃciently simulate quantum
systems, it is natural to assume that they cannot eﬃciently simulate machines
operating according to the laws of quantum mechanics, i.e., quantum comput-
ers. Should this be the case, quantum computers would not be polynomially
equivalent to a (probabilistic) Turing machine. This non-equivalence would
represent a violation of the strong Church–Turing thesis. Third, we should
emphasize the importance of the Church–Turing–Deutsch principle for both
computer science and physics. On the one hand, this principle could place
computational complexity on a stronger foundation by connecting some of its
basic concepts with the fundamental laws of physics. On the other hand, it
would lead to the remarkable conclusion that the whole diversity of physical
processes found in nature can be eﬃciently simulated by a universal computing
device, which a priori is not an obvious possibility.
In the remainder of this chapter we provide a basic description of the most
widely used model of quantum computation, the quantum circuit model, fol-
lowed by a brief discussion of some important quantum algorithms. We end
with a summary of the main ideas behind quantum error correction. Antic-
ipating the conclusions, we ﬁrst point out that, to build quantum comput-
ers, one faces considerable practical diﬃculties stemming, in essence, from
the requirement of imposing strict limits on quantum decoherence. Second,
there are further limitations for quantum computation that have nothing to
do with these practical diﬃculties. Although it was not rigorously proved, it
appears that quantum computers would solve certain speciﬁc problems (e.g.,
factoring integers) dramatically faster than classical computers, but for most
problems (e.g., playing chess and proving theorems) the improvement over
conventional computers would be modest. These “hard” problems include the
so-called NP-complete (NP-C) problems.1 Cook, Karp, and Levin have shown
[103, 247, 286] that, if an eﬃcient algorithm were found for any NP-C problem,
1Formal deﬁnitions of various complexity classes are given in Chapter 3.

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■297
it could be adapted to eﬃciently solve all the other NP problems (implying
that P = NP). However, it is strongly believed that P ̸= NP and that
quantum computers cannot solve NP-C problems in polynomial time.
Could then the quest for quantum computation be motivated by the goal
of breaking public key encryption using Shor’s algorithm? Probably not. If
quantum computers ever become a reality, their most likely use will involve
the (eﬃcient) simulation of quantum systems, an achievement that could dra-
matically advance research in certain areas of condensed matter physics, as
well as chemistry, nanotechnology, and several other ﬁelds. But what if they
cannot be realized? In the words of Scott Aaronson [1], “... the most excit-
ing possible outcome of quantum computing research would be to discover a
fundamental reason why quantum computers are not possible. Such a failure
would overturn our current picture of the physical world, whereas success would
merely conﬁrm it.”
11.2
QUANTUM CIRCUITS
Quantum computation can be viewed as a three-step process involving 1) the
preparation of the n-qubit input in the computational basis, 2) the applica-
tion of a sequence of single- and two-qubit quantum logic gates, and 3) the
measurement of the n-qubit ﬁnal state in the computational basis. Note that
in this “standard model” of quantum computation the input is restricted to
computational basis states. Also note that this model is developed in close
analogy to the classical circuit model of computation. There are, however,
a few important diﬀerences. The obvious one is that the basic unit — the
classical bit — is replaced by its quantum correspondent, the qubit. In addi-
tion, the classical logic gates are spread out in space and connected by wires,
which results in a two-dimensional network. By contrast, the quantum gates
correspond to interactions that are turned on and oﬀin time. Each gate acts
on a few qubits (typically one or two), which evolve in time but have ﬁxed
positions, resulting a “network” that has time as one of its dimensions (see
Figure 11.1). Finally, unlike classical machines, a quantum computer requires
external control by a classical computer running in parallel, which has to place
the quantum gates and decide when to do the measurement.
The importance of the circuit model is twofold. On the one hand, this
language provides a variety of tools that help simplify algorithm design and
provide conceptual insight. On the other hand, it enables us to quantify the
cost of algorithms in terms of necessary number of gates or circuit depth.
The tools provided by the circuit model can be viewed as a primitive form
of high-level programming language that facilitates the development of quan-
tum algorithms. We note that almost all known quantum algorithms were
developed in the quantum circuit model (a notable exception is the algorithm
for evaluating Jones polynomials, which was developed using the topological
quantum computation model [159]).
A speciﬁc quantum algorithm is a sequence of elementary operations

298
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
(quantum logic gates) applied to a system of n qubits, which generates a
particular unitary transformation U ∈U(2n), where 2n is the dimension of
the Hilbert space corresponding to n qubits. The operator U acts on the state
|ψi⟩that encodes the input information and generates the state |ψf⟩= U|ψi⟩
containing the desired solution of the computational problem. The output
is extracted by performing a projective measurement on |ψf⟩. Typically, we
take |00 . . . 0⟩as the initial state and consider the encoding of the input,
|ψi⟩= Uψi|00 . . . 0⟩, as an input-dependent part of the algorithm, which now
corresponds to the “total” unitary transformation UUψi.
The physical implementation of quantum gates is not an easy task. There-
fore, it is critical to be able to realize arbitrary unitary transformations using
a ﬁnite set of gates, each acting on just a few qubits at a time. A speciﬁc set of
quantum gates that is suﬃcient to generate all unitary operators U ∈U(2n)
with arbitrary precision is called universal. Note that a quantum gate acting
on m qubits corresponds to a unitary matrix that rotates the vectors from a
particular 2m-dimensional subspace and leaves unaﬀected the orthogonal com-
plement of this subspace (which corresponds to the remaining n −m qubits).
A sequence of gates is represented by an element of U(2n) that is the product
of the “elementary” unitary matrices corresponding to these gates. Conse-
quently, a physical system can operate as a universal quantum computer if it
supports a set of “elementary” unitary matrices that spans U(2n) densely.
There are several known universal sets of quantum gates. For example,
one can prove [329] that any unitary operation can be approximated with
arbitrary precision using Hadamard, π/8, and CNOT gates. We emphasize
that this universality should not be understood as implying the possibility of
generating an arbitrary unitary operation on n qubits using only polynomially
many quantum gates. One can prove that, in fact, there are unitary operations
requiring a number of steps that depends exponentially on n, i.e., there are
unitary operations that are hard to compute using single-qubit and CNOT
gates. Moreover, one can demonstrate that nearly all unitary operations are
hard to compute, although constructing explicitly a class of hard to compute
unitary operations on n qubits remains an open problem. Finding unitary
transformations that can be performed eﬃciently — i.e., identifying eﬃcient
quantum algorithms — is one of the main goals in quantum computation.
The construction of the universal set of quantum gates consisting of
Hadamard, π/8, and CNOT gates involves the three main steps brieﬂy de-
scribed below. Formal proofs can be found in Nielsen and Chuang [329].
1. An arbitrary unitary operator can be expressed exactly as a product
of two-level unitary operators [365], i.e., operators acting non-trivially only
on a subspace spanned by two computational basis states. More speciﬁcally,
consider an arbitrary unitary matrix U acting on a d-dimensional space. One
can prove [329] that the matrix U may always be written as a product of
two-level unitary matrices Vi,
U = V1V2 . . . Vk,
(11.1)

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■299
=
H
S
H
T†
T†
T†
T
T†
T
T
time
FIGURE 11.1: Quantum circuit showing the implementation of the (quantum)
Toﬀoli gate using Hadamard, phase (S), CNOT, and π/8 (T) gates.
where k ≤d(d −1)/2. For n-qubits, an arbitrary unitary transformation can
be expressed as a product of at most 2n−1(2n −1) ≃O(4n) two-level unitary
matrices. Note that this may require an exponential number of matrices.
2. An arbitrary unitary operation on n qubits can be implemented exactly
using single qubit and controlled gates (e.g., CNOT gates) [127]. This result
can be obtained by combining step 1 with the property that an arbitrary two-
level unitary operation on the state space of n qubits can be implemented using
O(n2) single qubit and CNOT gates [329]. Note that, although the CNOT plus
single qubit unitaries form a universal set for quantum computation, this set
has an inﬁnite number of elements (i.e., single qubit gates) and would be
diﬃcult (if not impossible) to implement.
3. An arbitrary unitary operation on n qubits can be approximated with
arbitrary precision using the Hadamard gate, phase gate, π/8 gate, and CNOT
gate, i.e., these gates form a discrete set of universal operations for quantum
computation [64]. We will call this set the standard set of universal quantum
gates. One can show [329] that these gates can be done in a fault-tolerant
manner (for a deﬁnition of fault-tolerance, see note on page 320). In fact,
the phase gate, which can be constructed using two π/8 gates, is typically
included in the standard set because of its natural role in the fault-tolerant
construction. Replacing the π/8 gates with Toﬀoli gates (see below) generates
another discrete set of universal quantum gates.
It is important to emphasize that approximating quantum circuits that
contain single qubit and controlled gates (step 2) using a discrete set of gates
(step 3) can be done eﬃciently. Speciﬁcally, the Solovay–Kitaev theorem [262,
329] states that approximating a circuit that contains m = n24n CNOT gates
and single qubit unitaries to an accuracy ϵ requires O(m logc(m/ϵ)) gates
from the discrete set, where c ≈2 is a constant; i.e., the overhead required to
perform the simulation is polynomial in log(m/ϵ). Nonetheless, there might be
an initial exponential cost for representing a given unitary operator U using
two-level unitary operations (step 1). The diﬃculty of identifying interesting
families of unitary operators that can be eﬃciently represented using two-level
unitaries translates into the diﬃculty of ﬁnding eﬃcient quantum algorithms
that outperform their classical counterparts.

300
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
As a ﬁnal note, we point out that any classical circuit can be replaced by
an equivalent circuit containing only reversible Toﬀoli gates. The Toﬀoli gate
acts on three input bits and has three output bits: two control bits (a and b)
are unaﬀected by the action of the gate and the third bit, the target bit (c), is
ﬂipped when both control bits are set to 1, c →c⊕a·b. Being a reversible gate,
the Toﬀoli gate has a quantum analog (also known as the controlled-controlled-
NOT gate) that acts on three qubits: two control qubits, |c1⟩and |c2⟩, and
one target qubit |t⟩. When both control qubits are in state |1⟩, the amplitudes
of the target qubit are ﬂipped, i.e., |110⟩→|111⟩and |111⟩→|110⟩. The
implementation of the (quantum) Toﬀoli gate using Hadamard, phase, CNOT,
and π/8 gates is illustrated in Figure 11.1. We conclude that any classical
circuit (i.e., classical algorithm) that solves a given computational problem
can be constructed using Toﬀoli gates and then “translated” eﬃciently into
a quantum circuit. Hence, quantum computers are capable of performing any
computation that can be done classically. Moreover, any eﬃcient classical
circuit can be translated into an eﬃcient quantum analog.
11.3
QUANTUM ALGORITHMS
A quantum algorithm is a step-by-step procedure for solving a computational
problem on a quantum computer. Classical algorithms can, of course, be per-
formed on a quantum machine, but the term “quantum” usually applies to
those algorithms that exploit some intrinsically quantum feature, such as su-
perposition and entanglement. To date, there are only a handful of known
quantum algorithms that have the potential to outperform their classical coun-
terparts, most notably the factoring algorithm by Peter Shor [405, 408] and
the searching algorithm by Lov Grover [196, 197]. Their key elements are
brieﬂy discussed below. In addition, we mention Deutsch’s algorithm [120],
the ﬁrst example of a true quantum algorithm, and discuss the simulation of
quantum systems, possibly the “killer app” for future quantum computers.
11.3.1
Deutsch’s algorithm
Deutsch’s algorithm solves a rather artiﬁcial problem formulated by David
Deutsch with the goal of showing that, in principle, there exist computa-
tional tasks that quantum computers could solve more easily than classical
computers. Some key ideas behind this ﬁrst quantum algorithm inspired the
development of subsequent algorithms, such as Shor’s factoring algorithm.
The problem proposed by Deutsch may be described as the following game.
Alice selects a number x ∈{0, 1, . . . , 2n −1} and sends it to Bob. Upon
receiving the number, Bob calculates a certain function f(x) = y with y ∈
{0, 1} that is either constant (i.e., y is the same for all values of x) or balanced
(i.e., y = 0 for half of the possible values of x and y = 1 for the other half) and
sends the result back to Alice. Calculating f(x) is assumed to be extremely
diﬃcult. Alice may select another number x′ ∈{0, 1, . . . , 2n −1} and repeat

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■301
the procedure. Her goal is to determine with certainty whether the function f
calculated by Bob is constant or balanced. How fast can she succeed?
Here, we are not concerned about the algorithm used for calculating f(x),
which can be regarded as a “black box function.” Alice’s problem is just to
minimize the number of times this black box needs to be used for evaluating
f(x) (since the evaluations are very expensive). We note that, given a clas-
sical algorithm for computing f, one can show that there exists a quantum
circuit of comparable eﬃciency for evaluating f on a quantum computer with
n + 1 qubits. The ﬁrst n qubits (representing the so-called “data” register)
encode the input number x in binary form, x = x1x2 . . . xn, with xi ∈{0, 1},
while the last qubit (the “target” register) will contain the result of the cal-
culation. The quantum circuit generates a unitary transformation Uf on the
corresponding 2n+1 dimensional Hilbert space. The transformation is deﬁned
by Uf|x1, x2, . . . , xn, z⟩= |x1, x2, . . . , xn, z⊕f(x)⟩, where ⊕indicates addition
modulo 2.
Returning to Alice’s problem, we note that classically she needs 2n−1 + 1
evaluations of f to establish with certainty that the function is constant. Also,
proving that f is balanced requires at least two evaluations (if she is lucky
and gets a 1 and a 0) and at most 2n−1 + 1 evaluations (since in the worst
case scenario Alice may get 1 2n−1 times, before getting a 0). However, using
a quantum algorithm it is possible to determine whether f is constant or
balanced using only one query to the black box. The algorithm — referred
to as the Deutsch–Jozsa algorithm — was proposed by David Deutsch and
Richard Jozsa in 1992 [121] and improved by Cleve et al. in 1998 [98]. Here,
we will not discuss the generic case but focus instead on the simple case
corresponding to n = 1: how many queries to the black box are required in
order to determine whether the function f : {0, 1} →{0, 1} is constant or
balanced? Classically, the answer is two. Deutsch’s quantum algorithm [120]
solves this problem using only one evaluation of f. An improved version of
the original algorithm is presented below.
The quantum circuit contains two qubits. A black box Uf performs the
unitary transformation |x⟩|z⟩−→|x⟩|z ⊕f(x)⟩, where f(x) is either constant
or balanced. The speciﬁc steps of the algorithm are illustrated in Figure 11.2.
1. The qubits are initialized in the state |ψi⟩= |0⟩|1⟩.
2. Using Hadamard gates, the qubits are prepared as the superposition
|ψ1⟩=
|0⟩+ |1⟩
√
2
 |0⟩−|1⟩
√
2

.
(11.2)
3. The unitary transformation Uf is applied to |ψ1⟩. Since Uf|x⟩(|0⟩−
|1⟩)/
√
2 = (−1)f(x)|x⟩(|0⟩−|1⟩)/
√
2, applying Uf generates the state
|ψ2⟩=







±
h
|0⟩+|1⟩
√
2
i h
|0⟩−|1⟩
√
2
i
if f(0) = f(1)
±
h
|0⟩−|1⟩
√
2
i h
|0⟩−|1⟩
√
2
i
if f(0) ̸= f(1)
(11.3)

302
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
H
H
Uf
H
FIGURE 11.2: Quantum circuit implementing Deutsch’s algorithm. The black
box Uf performs the unitary transformation |x⟩|z⟩−→|x⟩|z ⊕f(x)⟩.
4. A Hadamard gate applied to the ﬁrst qubit gives the ﬁnal state
|ψf⟩= ±|f(0) ⊕f(1)⟩
|0⟩−|1⟩
√
2

,
(11.4)
where f(0) ⊕f(1) = 0 if f(0) = f(1) and 1 otherwise.
5. By measuring the ﬁrst qubit we determine f(0) ⊕f(1), i.e., whether the
function f is constant or balanced.
Remarkably, this quantum algorithm allows us to determine a global property
of f(x) using only one query to the black box. What makes this possible? Most
commonly, the answer makes reference to the so-called quantum parallelism
understood as the ability of a quantum computer to perform multiple evalua-
tions of a function simultaneously. More speciﬁcally, the idea is to prepare the
data register into a superposition of both possible input states (step 2), then,
using the black box once, to encode information about both f(0) and f(1) in
the phase of the quantum state (step 3). Indeed, we could say that |ψ2⟩“con-
tains information about all possible values of f(x).” However, one has to keep
in mind that, in fact, the accessible information corresponding to the data reg-
ister is one bit, so it is impossible to recover all these values. The crucial idea
is to identify a global property of f that can be speciﬁed using one bit and, by
performing appropriate operations, to cause the quantum states to interfere
in such a way as to encode the value of this global property in the ﬁnal state.
This is, in essence, the key idea behind many quantum algorithms: a clever
choice of function and a sequence of transformations that allows the eﬃcient
evaluation of a certain useful global property of this function, a property that
cannot be easily determined using a classical computer.
11.3.2
Quantum search: Grover’s algorithm
At the time of this writing, there are only two types of problems for which
useful quantum algorithms are known: searching unstructured lists and per-
forming Fourier transforms. These algorithms provide a remarkable speedup
over the best-known classical algorithms, thus rendering feasible certain com-
putational problems that are practically impossible to solve on a classical

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■303
computer due to the exorbitant amount of required resources. The algorithm
presented by Lov Grover in 1996 [196, 197] addresses the following problem:
given the unstructured list of items {e0, e1, . . . , eN−1}, ﬁnd the element e∗that
satisﬁes a certain condition. For convenience we assume N = 2n. Note that, in
general, a search problem can have M solutions, with 1 ≤M ≤N. We will fo-
cus on the particular case M = 1. Classical algorithms cannot do better than
searching through the list, one element at a time, which requires on average
N/2 steps (i.e., scanning half of the entries). Grover’s algorithm, on the other
hand, requires only O(
√
N) operations, generating a “quantum speedup” of
order
√
N/2. Note that this speedup does not change the complexity class of
the computational task (i.e., the problem remains computationally hard), but
may become important when searching through extremely large sets.2 Fur-
thermore, Bennett et al. have demonstrated [41] that Grover’s algorithm is
optimal, i.e., no quantum search algorithm can run faster than O(
√
N).
Grover’s algorithm can be applied far beyond the search of unstructured
classical databases. In fact, its most promising potential application is to speed
up search-based classical algorithms for computationally hard problems. As
discussed in Chapter 3 (see Section 3.3), problems in complexity class NP
(outside class P) are hard to solve but, given a witness, the solution can be
easily veriﬁed. For example, factoring a large number m is hard, but checking
whether or not q < m is a factor of m is easy. Consequently, one possible
approach to solving problems in NP is to search through all possible witnesses.
Consider, for example, the Hamiltonian cycle problem: given a graph with
n vertices, determine whether or not it has a simple cycle that visits every
vertex of the graph (called a Hamiltonian cycle). The problem is NP-complete,
hence believed to be intractable on a classical computer. One can address it
by searching through all nn = 2n log n possible orderings of the vertices and
checking for the Hamiltonian cycle property. More generally, assuming that
an NP problem (of size n) has witnesses that can be speciﬁed using p(n) bits,
where p(n) is a polynomial in n, the solution of the problem (if one exists) can
be found by searching through all N = 2p(n) possible witnesses. Using Grover’s
quantum algorithm to perform the search provides a speedup of order
√
N/2.
The oracle
Suppose we have an unstructured list {e0, e1, . . . , eN−1} (with N = 2n)
and wish to ﬁnd the element e∗= ex∗that satisﬁes a certain condition.
It is convenient to represent the elements of the list using their index
x = 0, 1, . . . , 2n −1 and the condition satisﬁed by the solution e∗using a func-
tion f : {0, 1, . . . , N −1} →{0, 1} with the property f(x∗) = 1 and f(x) = 0
for x ̸= x∗. We should keep in mind that verifying the condition (e.g., verifying
whether or not a certain ordering of vertices represents a Hamiltonian cycle)
is computationally easy, i.e., there exists an eﬃcient classical algorithm for
calculating f(x). Of course, the algorithm depends on the particular problem
2For example, code-breaking problems may involve sets with N ≃1016 [66].

304
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
we address and we will not consider any speciﬁc example. What is important
here is that f(x) can be calculated using polynomial resources. Furthermore,
the (typically irreversible) classical circuit for calculating f can be modiﬁed
into a reversible classical circuit (possibly, with a small overhead). The re-
versible circuit has an n-bit input register (initially set to x) and a one-bit
output register (initially set to q) and takes (x, q) to (x, q⊕f(x)). In turn, this
reversible circuit can be translated into a quantum circuit that takes |x⟩|q⟩
to |x⟩|q ⊕f(x)⟩, where |x⟩represents the state on an n-qubit index register
(x being the index, written in base 2, of element ex) and |q⟩is the state of a
single-qubit register (the oracle qubit). In other words, for every search prob-
lem we can construct a quantum circuit that allows us to eﬃciently verify
whether or not x is the index of the desired solution.
The recipe described above leads to a quantum circuit that generates a
unitary operator O — the oracle — deﬁned by the following action on the
computational basis
|x⟩|q⟩
O
−−−−−−→|x⟩|q ⊕f(x)⟩,
(11.5)
where ⊕is addition modulo 2 and x is a string of 0s and 1s corresponding
to the numerical value of the index written in base 2. Since the details of
the circuit are problem-dependent, we will treat it as a black box. To verify
whether x is the solution of our search, we prepare the state |x⟩|0⟩and apply
the oracle; if the oracle qubit ﬂips to |1⟩(i.e., f(x) = 1), we found the solution
(i.e., x = x∗), otherwise x ̸= x∗.
Next, inspired by Deutsch’s algorithm, we put the information about f(x)
into the phase of the index register by initializing the oracle qubit in the state
(|0⟩−|1⟩)/
√
2. Speciﬁcally, the action of the oracle becomes
|x⟩
|0⟩−|1⟩
√
2

O
−−−−−−→(−1)f(x)|x⟩
|0⟩−|1⟩
√
2

.
(11.6)
Note that the state of the oracle qubit does not change (and it will remain the
same throughout the entire algorithm). We can view the action of the oracle
as “marking” the solution to the search problem by changing the phase of the
corresponding state |x∗⟩by π, the other states being unaﬀected.
The procedure
So far, nothing is gained by replacing the classical algorithm for calculating f
with a quantum oracle; we still need (on average) N/2 queries to the oracle to
solve the search problem. The idea is to make use of quantum superposition
by putting the index register into an equal superposition of all possible states,
which can be done by applying a Hadamard gate to every qubit in the register
(see Figure 11.3). Explicitly, we have
|ψ⟩= H⊗n|0⟩⊗n =
1
√
N
N−1
X
x=0
|x⟩.
(11.7)

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■305
H n
X
Oracle
H
H n
X
H n
X
Grover iteration
FIGURE 11.3: Schematic circuit for implementing Grover’s quantum search
algorithm. The Grover iteration is applied R ≃π
4
√
N times.
Having prepared the index register in state |ψ⟩and the oracle qubit in state
(|0⟩−|1⟩)/
√
2, the search algorithm consists in repeatedly applying a quantum
subroutine referred to as the Grover iteration (or Grover operator). After r
iterations, the quantum state of the ﬁrst n qubits becomes
|ψ⟩r = sin(θ0 + r∆θ)|x∗⟩+ cos(θ0 + r∆θ)
√
N −1
X
x̸=x∗
|x⟩,
(11.8)
where sin θ0 = 1/
√
N and sin ∆θ = 2
√
N −1/N. Applying the Grover itera-
tion R times, where R ≃π
4
√
N [63], results in a rotation |ψ⟩→|ψ⟩R ≃|x∗⟩
of the quantum state of the index register in the two-dimensional subspace
spanned by the starting vector |ψ⟩and the solution |x∗⟩to the search problem.
The ﬁnal step is to extract x∗(with error probability O(1/N)) by measuring
the ﬁrst n qubits. We note that performing the Grover iteration more than R
times increases the error probability, i.e., the state vector is over-rotated.
The quantum circuit for the Grover iteration, which is illustrated schemat-
ically in Figure 11.3, implements the following four steps:
1. Apply the oracle O. The sign of the |x∗⟩component of |ψ⟩r is reversed.
2. Apply the Hadamard transform H⊗n to the index register.
3. Perform a conditional phase shift that reverses the signs of all compo-
nents except |0⟩≡|0⟩⊗n. This is represented by the unitary operator
2|0⟩⟨0| −I, which can be implemented using O(n) quantum gates [329].
4. Apply the Hadamard transform H⊗n to the index register.
Steps 2-4, the so-called diﬀusion transform, are represented by the following
unitary operator
H⊗n(2|0⟩⟨0| −I)H⊗n = 2|ψ⟩⟨ψ| −I,
(11.9)
where |ψ⟩is the equal superposition given by (11.7) and I is the identity
operator. The diﬀusion transform (11.9) can be viewed as the inversion about

306
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
mean operation. Indeed, one can easily check that applying this operation to
a generic state P
k αk|k⟩produces P
k[−αk +2⟨α⟩]|k⟩, where ⟨α⟩= P
k αk/N
is the mean value of the coeﬃcients. The entire Grover iteration corresponds
to G = (2|ψ⟩⟨ψ| −I)O. Note that the diﬀusion transform requires O(n) gates
and that the oracle can be eﬃciently implemented on a quantum computer,
although its speciﬁc cost depends upon the particular application. Since the
full algorithm requires R ≃π
4
√
N Grover iterations, it provides a quadratic
improvement over the O(N) oracle calls required classically.
11.3.3
Quantum Fourier transform: Shor’s algorithm
The quantum algorithms for solving the factoring and discrete logarithm prob-
lems, which are based on Shor’s quantum Fourier transform [405, 408], provide
an impressive exponential speedup over the best-known classical algorithms
and, probably, the clearest evidence so far that quantum computers could ad-
dress certain problems that are classically intractable. This spectacular discov-
ery has been a signiﬁcant driving force behind the developments in quantum
computing over the past decade. Below, we brieﬂy sketch the main ideas that
underlie this class of quantum algorithms focusing on the factoring problem.
Shor’s algorithm for integer factorization involves two basic steps: i) reduce
the factoring problem to the so-called order-ﬁnding problem and ii) solve the
order-ﬁnding problem using a quantum algorithm. The ﬁrst part can be done
eﬃciently on a classical computer. The second component, which represents
a particular case of a more general procedure called phase estimation, has
the quantum Fourier transform (QFT) as key ingredient. It is this application
of the QFT that provides the exponential speedup over the (known) classical
algorithms. We note that, in addition to integer factorization, phase estimation
represents the central component of a few other quantum algorithms.
The original problem is the following: given an integer N, ﬁnd its prime
factors. Note that determining whether N is prime or not can be done eﬃ-
ciently using classical algorithms [107]. Therefore, the original problem reduces
to the following task: given an integer N that is not prime, ﬁnd a non-trivial
factor of N. In turn, this task can be reduced to the following order-ﬁnding3
problem: given the function fa(x) = ax (mod N), where x is integer and a is
an element4 of the multiplicative group of integers modulo N, ﬁnd its period,
i.e., ﬁnd the smallest integer r for which f(x + r) = f(x). The reduction of
factoring to order-ﬁnding can be done using the following algorithm:
1. Randomly choose an integer a < N; compute the greatest common
divisor gcd(a, N); if gcd(a, N) ̸= 1, return it and stop (a nontrivial
factor of N has been found); otherwise, continue.
3The order (or period) of the element a of a group is the smallest positive integer r such
that ar = e, where e is the identity element and ar denotes the product of r copies of a.
4As an element of the multiplicative group of integers modulo N, a is relatively prime to
N, i.e., gcd(a, N) = 1. Note that ﬁnding the greatest common divisor (gcd) of two integers
can be done eﬃciently using Euclid’s algorithm [415].

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■307
2. Apply the order-ﬁnding subroutine to ﬁnd the period r of the function
fa(x) = ax (mod N).
3. If r is odd or ar/2 = −1 (mod N), go back to step 1, otherwise continue.
4. At least one of the integers p = gcd(ar/2+1, N) and q = gcd(ar/2−1, N)
is a non-trivial factor of N; test which one and return it; stop.
The proof of the theorem behind step 4 can be found in, for example, Nielsen
and Chuang [329]. The key component of this factoring algorithm is the order-
ﬁnding subroutine (step 2). The corresponding quantum order-ﬁnding circuit
is shown schematically in Figure 11.4. For concreteness, we assume that the
number N we want to factorize is an L-bit number. The quantum order-
ﬁnding circuit has two registers [329]: one containing q qubits, with q ≃2L +
1+log(2+ 1
2ϵ), initialized to |0⟩= |00 . . . 0⟩and the other containing L qubits
initialized to |1⟩= |00 . . . 01⟩. The algorithm proceeds as follows:
1. Apply Hadamard gates to the ﬁrst register to create the superposition
of Q = 2q states
1
√Q
Q−1
X
j=0
|j⟩|1⟩.
(11.10)
2. Apply a sequence of controlled-U 2k
a
operations, with 0 ≤k < q, that
performs the transformation |j⟩|1⟩→|j⟩|aj (mod N)⟩. The controlled-
Ua black box performs the unitary transformation |u⟩→|ua (mod N)⟩,
if the control qubit is in the state |1⟩. The controlled-U 2k
a
operations can
be eﬃciently implemented using a procedure called modular exponenti-
ation and the entire sequence requires O(L3) gates. The resulting state
is
1
√Q
Q−1
X
j=0
|j⟩|aj (mod N)⟩≈
1
√rQ
r−1
X
s=0
Q−1
X
j=0
e2πisj/r|j⟩|us⟩,
(11.11)
where r is the order of a modulo N and
|us⟩≡
1
√r
r−1
X
k=0
exp
−2πisk
r

|ak (mod N)⟩
(11.12)
is an eigenstate of Ua corresponding to the eigenvalue exp
 2πis
r

. Note
that, more generally, the spectrum of a unitary operator U consists of
phases, U|ψ⟩= eiθ|ψ⟩. Given an eigenvector |ψ⟩, the corresponding θ can
be eﬃciently determined using the quantum phase estimation algorithm
[329]. Order-ﬁnding corresponds to the particular case U = Ua.
3. Apply the inverse quantum Fourier transform FT † to the ﬁrst register.
The resulting quantum state is [329]
1
√r
r−1
X
s=0
|g
s/r⟩
(11.13)

308
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
First register
(q qubits)
Second register
(L qubits)
H
H
H
H
Ua
20
Ua
21
Ua
22
Ua
2q-1
FT†
FIGURE 11.4: Schematic circuit for implementing the quantum order-ﬁnding
algorithm. Replacing Ua →U (unitary operator) and |1⟩→|ψ⟩(eigenstate
of U) corresponds to a generic phase-estimation algorithm that outputs θ
accurate to q −log(2 + 1
2ϵ) bits with probability of success at least 1 −ϵ.
where g
s/r is a good estimator for s/r.
4. Measure the ﬁrst register. A good estimate (accurate to 2L + 1 bits) of
the phase angle θ/2π = s/r is obtained with probability of success at
least 1 −ϵ.
5. Extract the period r using the continued fractions algorithm [329]. Start-
ing with g
s/r, the algorithm produces numbers s′ and r′ with no common
factor, such that s′/r′ = s/r. Check whether r′ is the order of a modulo
N. If yes, stop. Otherwise, repeat the algorithm.
The order-ﬁnding algorithm uses O(L3) gates, with the major cost coming
from the modular exponentiation. We note that the black box transformation
Ua can be implemented using O(L2) quantum gates, similar to the cost of the
classical algorithm for modular multiplication, and the entire U 2k
a
sequence
requires O(L3) gates. The core of the order-ﬁnding subroutine is the inverse
quantum Fourier transform (step 3), which requires O(L2) gates [329] and is
responsible for the exponential speedup of phase-estimation and other related
tasks, including the order-ﬁnding problem and the factoring problem.
Let x0, x1, . . . , xQ be the components of a complex vector of length Q = 2q.
The discrete Fourier transform of this vector is another complex vector with
components
yk =
1
√Q
Q−1
X
j=0
xje2πijk/Q.
(11.14)
The quantum Fourier transform, which is the quantum analog of the discrete
Fourier transform, is a unitary transformation on q qubits deﬁned by the

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■309
following action on the basis states |0⟩, |1⟩, . . . , |Q −1⟩:
|j⟩
FT
−−−−−→
1
√Q
Q−1
X
k=0
e2πijk/Q|k⟩.
(11.15)
For an arbitrary state, the action of this transformation takes the form
P
j xj|j⟩
FT
−−−−−→P
k yk|k⟩, where the amplitudes yk are given by Eq. (11.14).
Being unitary, the FT transformation can be implemented as a quantum cir-
cuit. Moreover, this implementation can be done eﬃciently [329] using O(q2)
quantum gates. By contrast, the best classical algorithms for computing the
discrete Fourier transform, e.g., the fast Fourier transform (FFT), use O(q 2q)
gates. Note, however, that there is no known procedure to use the quantum
Fourier transform to eﬃciently compute the Fourier transformed amplitudes
yk. This is because, on the one hand, the amplitudes yk cannot be directly ac-
cessed by measurement and, on the other hand, there is no recipe for eﬃciently
preparing a generic input state P
j xj|j⟩.
In Eq. (11.15), j is an integer (0 ≤j < Q) written in binary representation
j ⇒j1j2 . . . jq, with jk ∈{0, 1} and j = j12q−1 + j22q−2 + · · · + jq20. We
introduce the following notation for binary fractions: jl2−1 + jl+12−2 + · · · +
jm2l−m−1 = 0.jljl+1 . . . jm. Using this notation, the right-hand side of the
quantum Fourier transform (11.15) can be written [329] in the form
1
√Q
 |0⟩+ e2πi 0.jq|1⟩
  |0⟩+ e2πi 0.jq−1jq|1⟩

. . .
 |0⟩+ e2πi 0.j1j2...jq|1⟩

.
(11.16)
This product representation is the basis for the construction of an eﬃcient
circuit for the QFT. The key idea is to use O(q) gates to evolve each qubit
into the corresponding state of the product (11.16). Consider, as an exam-
ple, the ﬁrst qubit, |j1⟩. Applying a Hadamard gate will generate the state
|0⟩+ (−1)j1|1⟩, where, for simplicity, we omit the overall factor 1/
√
2. Since
e2πi 0.j1 = ej1πi = (−1)j1, we can write the state of the ﬁrst qubit after the ap-
plication of the Hadamard gate as |0⟩+e2πi 0.j1|1⟩. Next, we apply a sequence
of controlled-Rk gates, where Rk denotes the unitary transformation
Rk =
 1
0
0
e2πi/2k

.
(11.17)
The gate Rk (with 2 ≤k ≤q) is applied to the ﬁrst qubit if the qubit k is set,
i.e., if jk = 1. Applying the controlled-R2 gate adds an extra phase e2πij2/4 in
front of |1⟩and the state of the ﬁrst qubit becomes |0⟩+e2πi 0.j1j2|1⟩. After ap-
plying the whole sequence, the state of qubit one becomes |0⟩+e2πi 0.j1j2...jq|1⟩,
i.e., the last factor in Eq. (11.16).
How can we understand the role of the inverse QFT in step 3 of the quan-
tum order-ﬁnding algorithm? For simplicity, let us assume that θ = s/r can be
expressed exactly in q bits as θ = 0.θ1θ2 . . . θq, where θk ∈{0, 1}. In this case,
the product j(θ) ≡θQ = s/r2q is an integer with the binary representation

310
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
j(θ) ⇒θ1θ2 . . . θq. With these observations, the quantum state (11.11) of the
ﬁrst register, before applying the QFT, can be written as
1
√Q
Q−1
X
k=0
e2πi (0.θ1θ2...θq) k|k⟩=
1
√Q
Q−1
X
k=0
e2πij(θ)k/Q|k⟩.
(11.18)
A simple comparison between the right-hand side of this equation and Eq.
(11.15) shows that the output of the inverse Fourier transform is nothing
but |θ1θ2 . . . θq⟩= |j(s/r)⟩. Measuring this state in the computational basis
provides the values of the bits θ1, θ2, . . . , θq, hence it represents a direct mea-
surement of s/r. If s/r cannot be expressed exactly in q bits, one can show
[329] that, with high probability, the output of the inverse QFT is |j(g
s/r)⟩,
where g
s/r is a good estimator for s/r. Note that in Eq. (11.13) we have used
the (somehow ambiguous) notation |j(g
s/r)⟩≡|g
s/r⟩. Finally, we note that
these basic ideas are behind the use of the quantum Fourier transform in
other quantum algorithms based on phase-estimation [329].
11.3.4
Simulation of quantum systems
If there is an application of quantum computation that could be realized in
the foreseeable future, it is the simulation of quantum systems [146, 174]. The
key challenge in simulating quantum systems using classical computers stems
from i) the huge space required to store information about the state vector
(which is an element of an exponentially large Hilbert space) and the evolution
operator and ii) the ineﬃciency of calculating the evolution of the system. Let
N = dim(H) be the dimension of the Hilbert space; then, log N ≃n is propor-
tional to the number of degrees of freedom of the quantum system. Simulating
the evolution of the system on a classical computer requires the manipulation
of matrices containing 22n elements, which involves an exponentially large
number of elementary operations. Of course, there are situations when in-
sightful approximations can make the classical simulation feasible. However,
there are many important classes of quantum systems (e.g., strongly correlated
materials, including the notorious high-temperature cuprate superconductors)
for which classical simulation is an intractable problem. We need not go farther
that the innocuous looking Hubbard model,
H =
X
⟨i,j⟩,σ
tijc†
iσcjσ + V0
X
i
ni↑nj↓,
(11.19)
where ⟨i, j⟩are nearest-neighbor sites on a d-dimensional lattice. Being able to
simulate this type of model could lead to huge advances in understanding the
physics of strongly interacting many-body systems, including the properties
of correlated materials and interacting topological matter.
In essence, a quantum simulator can be understood as a controllable
quantum system capable of emulating other quantum systems [75]. More
speciﬁcally, consider a quantum system S that evolves from the initial state

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■311
|ψ(0)⟩≡|ψ0⟩to |ψ(t)⟩≡|ψt⟩via the unitary transformation U = exp(−iHt),
where H is the Hamiltonian of the system. We say that the system S can be
simulated if there exists another (controllable) quantum system S′ (the simu-
lator) that satisﬁes the following conditions: i) there is a mapping between the
system and the simulator so that |ψ0⟩↔|φ0⟩and |ψt⟩↔|φt⟩, where |φ0⟩and
|φt⟩are the initial and ﬁnal states of the simulator, respectively; ii) the initial
state |φ0⟩can be prepared; iii) the unitary transformation U ′ = exp(−iH′t)
describing the evolution from |φ0⟩to |φt⟩can be engineered (here H′ repre-
sents the controllable Hamiltonian of the simulator); iv) the ﬁnal state |φt⟩
(or a relevant property of this state) can be measured. A (universal) quantum
computer satisﬁes these conditions. However, the key question concerns the
eﬃciency of the simulation, more speciﬁcally whether or not one can prepare
the initial state, engineer the unitary transformation, and measure the ﬁnal
state using resources that depend polynomially on the size (i.e., number of
degrees of freedom) of the simulated system.
What is the advantage of using a quantum simulator? First, it solves the
information storage problem. Indeed, instead of dealing with 2n complex num-
bers, a quantum computer requires just n qubits to store the information about
the state vector. Note, however, that this information may not be accessible.
Second, to simulate evolution, the quantum computer has to implement uni-
tary operations acting on the 2n-dimensional Hilbert space. As discussed in
Section 11.2, there exist unitary operations that cannot be eﬃciently approx-
imated, so, in principle, there are Hamiltonian evolutions that cannot be eﬃ-
ciently simulated on a quantum computer. Whether or not such evolutions are
realized in nature is an interesting open question. If such processes existed,
they could be used to perform information processing beyond the quantum
circuit model.
An important class of quantum systems that can be eﬃciently simulated
on a quantum computer is characterized by Hamiltonians of the form
H =
p(n)
X
k=1
Hk,
(11.20)
where n is the number of particles in the system, p(n) is a polynomial func-
tion of n, and Hk are terms that include local interactions, each term act-
ing only on a few particles. The Hubbard model (11.19) is an example of
Hamiltonian in this class. The key point is that, unlike the evolution oper-
ator e−iHt, the unitary operators e−iHkt can be easily approximated using
quantum circuits because they act on small subspaces of the Hilbert space.
However, in general, the terms of the Hamiltonian (11.20) do not commute,
hence e−iHt ̸= Q
k e−iHkt. To deal with this complication, the key idea is to
divide the time evolution interval [0, t] into n small segments ∆t = t/n and
exploit the following asymptotic approximation theorem: given the hermitian
operators A and B, for any real t we have
lim
n→∞

eiAt/neiBt/nn
= ei(A+B)t.
(11.21)

312
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Eq. (11.21), also called the Trotter formula, holds even if A and B do not
commute. For quantum simulations one can use convenient approximations
obtained by modifying the Trotter formula. For example, one can divide the
evolution of the system in elementary steps described approximately by the
unitary operator U∆t = e−iH∆t + O(∆t3), with
U∆t =
h
e−iH1∆t/2 . . . e−iHp(n)∆t/2i h
e−iHp(n)∆t/2 . . . e−iH1∆t/2i
,
(11.22)
where Hk are the Hamiltonian terms from the right-hand side of Eq. (11.20).
Consider now the evolution of a quantum system described by the Hamilto-
nian (11.20), which acts on an N-dimensional Hilbert space, from some initial
state |ψ0⟩at t = 0 to a ﬁnal state |ψt⟩at t > 0. The evolution of the quantum
simulator will be described by a Hamiltonian H′ having the same structure
as the Hamiltonian in Eq. (11.20). The key steps of a quantum simulation
algorithm for this evolution can be summarized as follows [174, 329].
1. Initial-state preparation. The physical state |ψ0⟩is represented by the
state |φ0⟩of n qubits, where n is a polynomial function of log N. The
quantum simulation problem cannot be solved eﬃciently unless the
quantum register can be initialized to the state |φ0⟩using only poly-
nomial resources. Examples of eﬃcient state-preparation algorithms in-
clude the proposals by Ward et al. [445] (realistic many-particle quantum
states on a lattice), Kassal et al. [249] (commonly used chemical wave
functions), and Wang et al. [443] (arbitrary energy eigenstates).
2. Unitary evolution. The time evolution of the system is represented by
the unitary evolution of the simulator, U ↔U ′. This evolution is bro-
ken into a large number of small time steps ∆t and the correspondent
“elementary” evolution operator U ′
∆t, which is approximated using Eq.
(11.22) or similar approximations, is applied t/∆t times.
3. Measurement. The relevant information is extracted from the simulator
by measuring the ﬁnal state |ψt⟩. The state could be uniquely identi-
ﬁed using quantum state tomography [110], which involves performing
diﬀerent measurements repeatedly and requires resources that grow ex-
ponentially with the size of the system. It is more convenient to identify
certain relevant physical quantities, such as correlation functions or spec-
tra of operators, that can be extracted directly [335, 411]. This requires
repeating the algorithm only at most a polynomial number of times.
As a ﬁnal note, we emphasize that even a small-scale quantum simulator (a
few hundreds of qubits) can provide access to interesting physics that can-
not be simulated using classical computers. This is in sharp contrast with
other quantum algorithms (e.g. Shor’s), which would require thousands of
ideal qubits (many more with quantum error correction) to outperform their
classical counterparts. One can reasonably hope that in the foreseeable future
quantum simulation will have a profound impact on physics research.

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■313
11.4
QUANTUM ERROR CORRECTION
There is no such thing as an isolated quantum system, nor are there per-
fect quantum gates. Hence, the natural question: can one stabilize a quantum
computer against the eﬀects of random noise? The answer is far from obvi-
ous. One can start from our experience with classical computers, which are
insensitive to noise. Their stability is based on a combination of ampliﬁcation
(if the signal is too weak, one ampliﬁes it) and dissipation (if a physical bit
ends up slightly away from its “0” (or “1”) state, a damped restoring force
will bring it back to the desired state). Dissipation transforms an intrinsically
analog system (the physical computer, which is characterized by a continuum
of possible states) into a digital device. The price is energy consumption, but
the computational task gets done. However, for quantum computation this
is not an option. Ampliﬁcation of unknown quantum states is ruled out by
the no-cloning theorem, while dissipation (i.e., irreversibility) is inconsistent
with unitary transformations. This may suggest that the intrinsic fragility of
coherent quantum states may represent a catastrophic obstacle to building
a quantum computer. We note that the root of the problem is not neces-
sarily the size of the system (i.e., number of particles), but the size of the
(relevant) Hilbert space. One can easily maintain quantum coherence in a
superconductor (which contains many electrons, but has a unique, gapped
ground state, with no information content), but it is a totally diﬀerent task
to do it in a quantum computer with, say, a 2104-dimensional Hilbert space;
this would practically correspond to stabilizing Schr¨odinger’s cat (well, maybe
“Schr¨odinger’s virus”) into a superposition of dead and alive states (whatever
that means for a virus).
Going back to the lessons of classical information processing, we know
that error correction is possible and that the key idea is redundant infor-
mation encoding (see Section 3.2). With quantum information, one faces a
few diﬃculties that have no classical correspondent: (1) Replicating unknown
states to generate repetition codes is prohibited by the no-cloning theorem.
The quantum correspondent of the classical encoding 0 7→000, 1 7→111 can-
not be |ψ⟩7→|ψψψ⟩≡|ψ⟩⊗|ψ⟩⊗|ψ⟩. (2) Possible errors form a continuum.
For example, a generic phase error corresponds to the transformation
R θ
2 =
 1
0
0
eiθ

= e
iθ
2

cos θ
2 I −i sin θ
2 Z

,
(11.23)
with θ arbitrary. Exact determination of an error would require inﬁnite re-
sources. (3) Measurements destroy quantum information. One cannot simply
measure an unknown quantum state to check for possible errors.
Despite these diﬃculties, quantum error correction is possible [78, 416,
122]. To illustrate the main idea, we consider the simple example of a 3-qubit
code. Note that this is not a full quantum code, since it cannot simultaneously
correct for both bit (i.e., |0⟩↔|1⟩) and phase (i.e., +|x⟩↔−|x⟩) ﬂips, but it
contains all the key ingredients.

314
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Correction
Error
|ψ⟩
|0⟩
|0⟩
|ψ⟩
|0⟩
|0⟩
M
M
Encoding
Syndrome
Ancilla
FIGURE 11.5: Circuit that realizes the encoding from Eq. (11.24) and cor-
rects for one single bit-ﬂip error. Ancilla qubits coupled to the data block are
measured to check the parity between data qubits. A bit-ﬂip error is corrected
using the syndrome information by applying classically-controlled X gates.
Encoding. Consider the quantum state |ψ⟩= α|0⟩+ β|1⟩. We encode the
state using three physical qubits as |ψ⟩7→|ψ⟩, with
|ψ⟩= α|000⟩+ β|111⟩≡α|0⟩+ β|1⟩.
(11.24)
Note that |ψ⟩̸= |ψψψ⟩, so this encoding is not prohibited by the no-cloning
theorem. A quantum circuit containing two CNOT gates that realizes the
encoding is shown in Figure 11.5.
Error detection. Assume that a bit-ﬂip error has corrupted the state |ψ⟩.
To correct it, one ﬁrst needs to detect the error by performing a so-called syn-
drome. In essence, the syndrome involves acquiring information about possible
bit-ﬂips on the three qubits. More speciﬁcally, there are four error syndromes
corresponding to the projectors
Π0
=
|000⟩⟨000| + |111⟩⟨111|
(no error),
Π1
=
|100⟩⟨100| + |011⟩⟨011|
(ﬂip on ﬁrst qubit),
(11.25)
Π2
=
|010⟩⟨010| + |101⟩⟨101|
(ﬂip on second qubit),
Π3
=
|001⟩⟨001| + |110⟩⟨110|
(ﬂip on third qubit).
Let us assume that the bit ﬂip error occurred on the ﬁrst qubit, so that the
corrupted state is |ψE⟩= α|100⟩+ β|011⟩. Measurements corresponding to
the projectors (11.25) give ⟨ψE|Πk|ψE⟩= 1 for k = 1 and ⟨ψE|Πk|ψE⟩= 0
if k ̸= 1, indicating where the error occurred. Most importantly, these mea-
surements do not destroy the qubit superposition. On the other hand, they
provide minimal information about the state |ψE⟩and no information about
the encoded state |ψ⟩(i.e., about the coeﬃcients α and β).
In practice, the encoding qubits are not measured directly, but, instead, we
introduce two additional ancilla qubits to extract the syndrome information,
as illustrated in Figure 11.5. If no error occurs, the ancilla qubits will remain

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■315
in the state in which they are prepared, i.e., |00⟩. Assuming that a bit ﬂip
error occurred on the ﬁrst qubit, the quantum state of the ﬁve qubit system
prior to the syndrome measurement is α|100⟩⊗|11⟩+β|011⟩⊗|11⟩. Similarly, if
an error occurs on the second or third encoding qubit, the state of the ancilla
qubits changes to |10⟩or |01⟩, respectively. Hence, the syndrome information
can be extracted by measuring the state of the ancilla qubits.
Error correction. Once a bit ﬂip error is identiﬁed, one can correct it using
X gates with classical controls (see Figure 11.5). For example, if the measure-
ment corresponds to the ancilla qubits being in the state |11⟩, we know that
the “collapsed” three-qubit state is |ψE⟩= α|100⟩+ β|011⟩, i.e., the desired
code state with one bit ﬂip error on the ﬁrst qubit. The correct code state
|ψ⟩can be recovered by applying an X gate to the ﬁrst qubit. Similarly, to
correct a bit ﬂip error detected on the second or third qubit one applies the
X gate to the corresponding qubit.
The simple code described above only works if a maximum of one bit ﬂip
error occurs. If, for example, there are two errors on qubits two and three, the
syndrome will incorrectly indicate a single error on qubit one. We note that one
can imagine a similar scheme that performs phase ﬂip error correction. The key
observation is that a phase ﬂip in the computational basis, i.e., α|0⟩+ β|1⟩→
α|0⟩−β|1⟩, acts as a bit ﬂip in the Hadamard basis |±⟩= (|0⟩± |1⟩)/
√
2.
Consequently, we can encode a generic quantum state as |ψ⟩7→|ψ⟩= α| +
+ +⟩+ β| −−−⟩and adapt the above procedure to correct for a phase ﬂip
error occurring on one of the three qubits. Moreover, one can combine the two
codes into a 9-qubit code that corrects for both (single qubit) bit ﬂip errors
and (single qubit) phase ﬂip errors. The 9-qubit error correcting code, which
was ﬁrst developed by Shor in 1995 [406], has the following basis states
|0⟩=
1
√
23 (|000⟩+ |111⟩) ⊗(|000⟩+ |111⟩) ⊗(|000⟩+ |111⟩),
(11.26a)
|1⟩=
1
√
23 (|000⟩−|111⟩) ⊗(|000⟩−|111⟩) ⊗(|000⟩−|111⟩).
(11.26b)
A generic quantum state is encoded as |ψ⟩= α|0⟩+ β|1⟩. The inner layer
of the code corrects for bit ﬂip errors by implementing the majority rule as
discussed above, while the outer layer corrects for phase ﬂip errors through a
similar implementation of the majority sign rule.
Further insight into the basic principles of quantum error correction can
be gained by considering the syndrome measurement from a slightly diﬀerent
perspective. Instead of measuring projectors, like those in Eq. (11.25), let us
consider the observables ZiZi+1 = 1 ⊗· · · ⊗Zi ⊗Zi+1 ⊗· · · ⊗1 corresponding
to the bit string parity of a neighboring pair of qubits (from a three-qubit
block). For the 9-qubit code, we consider the following six observables
Z1Z2,
Z2Z3,
Z4Z5,
Z5Z6,
Z7Z8,
Z8Z9.
(11.27)
Measuring these observables provides the necessary information about possible

316
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
bit ﬂip errors without collapsing the quantum state. Assume, for example, a
bit ﬂip error on the ﬁfth qubit. In this case, the output of the measurement will
be (+1, +1, −1, −1, +1, +1), clearly indicating that the error happened on the
ﬁfth qubit. The original state can be recovered by applying the Pauli operator
X5 (i.e., an X gate on the ﬁfth qubit). Similarly, the phase ﬂip syndromes can
be obtained by measuring the observables
X1X2X3X4X5X6,
X4X5X6X7X8X9.
(11.28)
If a phase ﬂip error occurs on, say, the second qubit, the output of these
measurements will be (−1, +1). This indicates that the phase ﬂip happened
on one of the ﬁrst three qubits. The original state can be recovered by applying
a phase ﬂip gate to each qubit of the ﬁrst block, i.e., Z1Z2Z3. Note that the
code works even in the presence of one bit-ﬂip error and one phase ﬂip error
(on any two of the nine qubits).
In the actual code the syndromes are implemented using additional ancilla
qubits that are initialized to |0⟩and record what type of error occurred and
where, similar to the simple scheme illustrated in Figure 11.5. We emphasize
that this scheme corrects generic phase errors R θ
2 given by Eq. (11.23). Indeed,
assume that such an error occurs on qubit k. The state of the 9-qubit block
plus the relevant ancilla qubits takes the form cos θ
2(α|0⟩+ β|1⟩) ⊗|0 . . . 0⟩−
i sin θ
2 Zk(α|0⟩+ β|1⟩) ⊗|Zk⟩, where |Zk⟩is the ancilla state that signals
the corresponding error. After measuring the ancilla, we get |0 . . . 0⟩(i.e., no
error) with probability cos2 θ
2, in which case the 9-qubit state collapses to the
original state |ψ⟩, or |Zk⟩(i.e., phase ﬂip in a certain block) with probability
sin2 θ
2, in which case the state collapses to Zk|ψ⟩and can be restored to |ψ⟩
by inverting the error indicated by the ancilla.
The operators in Eqs. (11.27) and (11.28) generate an Abelian qroup called
the stabilizer of the 9-qubit code. The stabilizer formalism [189] describes
error correction in terms of operators that stabilize certain states. We do not
address this important and rather complex topic; instead, we only provide
some basic deﬁnitions. Consider the so-called Pauli group Pn generated under
multiplication by the Pauli matrices X, Y , Z and the identity I (multiplied by
±1 or ±i) acting on n qubits. The operators (11.27) and (11.28) are examples
of elements of P9. Now let S (the stabilizer) be a subgroup of Pn with the
property that i) all its elements commute and ii) −I is not an element of
S. Then, the encoding states |ψ⟩∈C(S) of the stabilizer code consist of all
the states with the property Ki|ψ⟩= |ψ⟩for all Ki ∈S. For example, the 3-
qubit subspace spanned by {|000⟩, |111⟩} is stabilized by the Abelian subgroup
S = {I, Z1Z2, Z2Z3, Z1Z3}, which can be obtained from k = 2 independent
generators (e.g. Z1Z2 and Z2Z3). In general, if S has k independent generators,
the code space C(S) has dimension 2n−k, i.e., it can encode n−k qubits. Every
error E ∈Pn that anticommutes with the elements of S takes |ψ⟩∈C(S) to
an orthogonal subspace; however, such errors can be detected (via syndrome
measurements) and corrected. If, on the other hand, E commutes with all

Introduction to Quantum Computation
■317
Ki ∈S, then either E ∈S, in which case it does not aﬀect the state at all, or
E /∈S, in which case it corrupts the state.


C H A P T E R 12
Anyons and Topological
Quantum Computation
CONTENTS
12.1
Quantum computation with anyons .......................
320
12.1.1 Abelian and non-Abelian anyons ..................
320
12.1.2 Braiding ............................................
322
12.1.3 Particle types, fusion rules, and exchange
properties ..........................................
324
12.1.4 Fault-tolerance from non-Abelian anyons ..........
327
12.1.5 Ising anyons ........................................
329
12.1.6 Fibonacci anyons ...................................
331
12.2
Anyons and topological quantum phases ..................
333
12.2.1 Abelian Chern–Simons ﬁeld theories ..............
335
12.2.2 Non-Abelian Chern–Simons ﬁeld theories .........
337
12.3
Topological quantum computation with Majorana zero
modes ......................................................
339
12.3.1 Non-Abelian statistics .............................
339
12.3.2 Fusion of Majorana zero modes ....................
341
12.3.3 Quantum information processing ..................
343
12.4
Outlook: Quantum computation and topological quantum
matter ......................................................
344
T
OPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTATION HAS EMERGED
as a rapidly growing research ﬁeld at the conﬂuence of physics, mathe-
matics, and computer science, bringing together several major themes that
fruitfully inform each other. Physics problems, ranging from fundamental
questions concerning the foundations of quantum mechanics to problems re-
garding the classiﬁcation, realization, and manipulation of topological phases
of matter, and mathematical challenges, ranging from identifying the formal
tools for the complete classiﬁcation of topological phases to open problems
319

320
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
in computational complexity, converge at this intellectual junction in a com-
bined eﬀort to realize fault-tolerant quantum computation. The convergence
of these themes has a signiﬁcance that goes beyond the simple realization of
a certain application — even one as remarkable as a quantum computer —
and generates a new paradigm in which the cross fertilization of ideas takes
center stage. Thinking about topological quantum matter from the perspec-
tive of quantum computation is more creative and fruitful than simply asking
the standard questions of many-body condensed matter physics. This is one
of the main messages of this book, while the themes involved in this synergy
represent its main subject. Therefore, it is ﬁtting to conclude our journey with
a chapter on the most explicit manifestation of this new paradigm: topological
quantum computation.
12.1
QUANTUM COMPUTATION WITH ANYONS
Topological quantum computation relies on employing anyons for encoding
and manipulating information in a manner that is resilient against environ-
mental perturbations. Anyons are quasiparticle excitations of two-dimensional
topological states of matter having exchange properties that are diﬀerent from
those of both fermions and bosons. Particularly relevant for quantum compu-
tation are the so-called non-Abelian anyons, which are quasiparticles that obey
non-Abelian braiding statistics. In a topological quantum computer informa-
tion is encoded non-locally using multi-quasiparticle states, which makes it
immune to errors caused by local perturbations and generates fault-tolerance.1
In this section we brieﬂy review the main properties of anyons, highlight their
role in quantum computation, and discuss a few examples. For a more detailed
discussion of the basic concepts and ideas in topological quantum computa-
tion, including the properties of anyons, the reader is referred to the review
article by Nayak et al. [327] and the book by Jiannis Pachos [337].
12.1.1
Abelian and non-Abelian anyons
Exchange statistics, a central element of the quantum mechanical description
of the world, arises from the indistinguishability of identical quantum parti-
cles. The exchange of two identical particles in a many-body quantum system
represents a symmetry operation and, consequently, cannot aﬀect the physical
properties of the quantum state. However, it may result in a transformation
1Fault-tolerant quantum computation involves quantum circuit designs and error cor-
rection procedures that do not cause errors to cascade. A circuit element is said to be
fault-tolerant if a single error (generated by some component) causes at most one error in
the output for each logical qubit block. This deﬁnition can be relaxed if the quantum code
is able to correct multiple errors (i.e., if r errors can be corrected, then ne ≤r errors during
an operation should not result in more than r errors in the output for each logical qubit).
A remarkable consequence of fault-tolerant circuit design is the so-called threshold theorem
[189], which, basically, states that an arbitrarily large quantum circuit can be successfully
implemented to arbitrary accuracy if the physical error rate is below a certain threshold.
Gate operation based on braiding of anyons are “naturally” endowed with fault tolerance.

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■321
of the wave function that is consistent with this symmetry. In three spatial
dimensions (3D), there are only two types of particles: bosons, which are
characterized by wave functions that are completely symmetric under parti-
cle exchange, and fermions, which are described by completely antisymmetric
wave functions. To understand this limitation to only two possibilities, we
ﬁrst notice that the process of adiabatically interchanging a pair of particles
twice is equivalent to adiabatically taking one particle around the other along
a certain closed path C that does not intersect the position r2 of the second
particle. Continuously deforming the path cannot aﬀect the wave function. In
3D any path C ∈R3 −{r2} can be continuously deformed to the trivial path
C0(r1) that corresponds to keeping the ﬁrst particle at its original position.
Since, the double exchange process does not modify the wave function, a single
interchange can either leave the wave function unchanged (which corresponds
to a system of identical bosons) or change its overall sign (for fermions).
The exchange properties of one- and two-dimensional quantum systems are
fundamentally diﬀerent from those of 3D systems. In 1D exchange statistics is
not well deﬁned because particle interchange is not possible without the two
particles passing through one another. Two dimensions, on the other hand, are
a true heaven for quantum statistics. A rich diversity of behaviors is possible in
2D [418], essentially because a particle loop C that encircles another particle
(at position r2) cannot be continuously deformed to a trivial path C0(r1)
without going through the second particle. Hence, in 2D it is possible to have
a non-trivial winding of one particle around another, which implies that the
initial and ﬁnal states of the system are not necessarily identical. This sharp
diﬀerence between 3D and 2D, ﬁrst realized by Leinaas and Myrheim [284] and
by Wilczek [459], is topological in nature and can be expressed mathematically
as the diﬀerence between the fundamental groups π1(R3−{0}) = 1 (in 3D all
loops can be deformed to a point without passing through the origin) and
π1(R2−{0}) = Z (in 2D there are non-trivial windings around the origin).
Consider now the (counterclockwise) exchange of two identical particles
in 2D. As a result of this process, the wave function can change by a phase
factor,
ψ(r1, r2) −→eiθψ(r1, r2).
(12.1)
Performing a second counterclockwise exchange does not necessarily lead back
to the initial state, i.e., the phase e2iθ can be arbitrary, which implies that,
in general, the phase angle θ can be diﬀerent from 0 (which corresponds to
bosons) and π (for fermions). Particles with θ ̸= 0, π are called anyons [461]
with statistics θ.
For a 2D system of N identical particles, the paths associated with particle
exchange belong to topological classes that are in one-to-one correspondence
with the elements of the so-called braid group (see below, Section 12.1.2).
The evolution of the system is given by the action of the braid group on the
multi-particle quantum states. The simplest case corresponds to a straight-
forward generalization of Eq. (12.1) in which an element of the braid group
is represented by a phase factor eimθ, where m is the number of two-particle

322
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
counterclockwise exchanges minus the number of clockwise processes. Note
that eimθ is a one-dimensional representation2 of the braid group and that
m does not depend on the speciﬁc order of the braiding operations, i.e., the
representation is Abelian. The quasiparticles described by a wave function
that evolves under particle exchange according to a one-dimensional repre-
sentation of the braid group, ψ(r1, . . . , rN) →eimθψ(r1, . . . , rN), are called
Abelian anyons.
In addition to Abelian anyons, in 2D there are other types of quasiparticles
that give rise to exchange evolutions that correspond to higher-dimensional
representations of the braid group. Assume that a quantum system having
N quasiparticles at certain ﬁxed positions is g times degenerate and let ψα,
with α = 1, 2, . . . , g, be an orthonormal basis for the subspace of degenerate
quantum states. An element σ of the braid group will be represented by a
g × g unitary matrix ρ(σ) acting on the subspace of degenerate states,
ψα −→[ρ(σ)]αβψβ.
(12.2)
Consequently, exchanging two particles corresponds to a rotation within the
degenerate N-quasiparticle Hilbert space. Since, in general, two unitary ma-
trices ρ(σ) and ρ(σ′) corresponding to two diﬀerent braiding operations do
not commute, the evolution of the system depends on the speciﬁc order of
these operations. The quasiparticles characterized by this type of statistical
evolution are called non-Abelian anyons. Remarkably, within the degenerate
subspace of N non-Abelian anyons all local perturbations have vanishing ma-
trix elements. Consequently, the only way to perform unitary transformations
within this subspace is by braiding quasiparticles. This property, together with
the richness of the braid group, are the key features that enable fault-tolerant
quantum computation with non-Abelian anyons.
12.1.2
Braiding
Consider a system of N particles with initial positions R1, R2, . . . , RN at
time ti and ﬁnal positions R1, R2, . . . , RN at time tf. The trajectories of the
particles correspond to N world lines (strands) in (d + 1)-dimensional space-
time originating at points (Rn, ti) and terminating at (Rm, tf). Let us consider
ﬁrst the 3D case (i.e., d = 3). If the particles are distinguishable, all strands
(Rn, ti) →(Rn, tf) can be continuously deformed into straight lines parallel
to the time direction corresponding to particles sitting at ﬁxed positions. If
the particles are indistinguishable, their trajectories may have diﬀerent initial
and ﬁnal points, Rn ̸= Rm, and the corresponding sets of N world lines
fall into diﬀerent topological classes corresponding to the elements P of the
permutation group SN. Note that SN has two one-dimensional irreducible
representations, the trivial representation, P →1, and the sign representation,
2A representation assigns a matrix ρ(g) to every element g of a group so that the group
operation can be represented by matrix multiplication: g = g1 ⋆g2 −→ρ(g) = ρ(g1)ρ(g2).

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■323
1
2
3
3D
2D
2D
1
2
3
1
2
3
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
time
position
FIGURE 12.1: Graphical representation of real-space trajectories (a-c) and
quasiparticle world lines (d-g) for a system of N = 3 identical particles. The
trajectories in panels (a-c) correspond to the same element of the permutation
group S3, (1, 2, 3) →(3, 1, 2), which uniquely determines the evolution of the
system in 3D (a), but not in 2D (b-c). The evolution in (b) corresponds to
the element of the braid group shown in panel (f), while the evolution in (c)
is represented by the element in panel (g). These elements can be expressed
in terms of the elementary operations shown in panels (d) and (e).
P →sign(P), which describe the evolution of a system of N identical bosons
or fermions, respectively.
In 2D, the strands associated with N indistinguishable particles are in
one-to-one correspondence with the elements of the braid group BN. An ele-
ment of the braid group can be represented graphically as a set of world lines
originating at initial positions and terminating at ﬁnal positions, which corre-
spond to N distinct points on the horizontal axis, time being represented by
the vertical axis (see Fig 12.1). It is critical to distinguish between clockwise
and counterclockwise exchanges by specifying whether a given strand passes
over or under another strand. As shown in Figure 12.1, panels (c) and (g),
this key information does not only involve the real space trajectories of the
particles, but also their time evolution along these trajectories.
An elementary braid operation corresponds to the counterclockwise ex-
change of particles i and i + 1, as shown in Figure 12.1 (d) and (e). Alge-
braically, these elementary operations can be represented in terms of gener-
ators σi, with 1 ≤i ≤N −1. A clockwise exchange of particles i and i + 1
corresponds to the inverse σ−1
i
. Note that σ−1
i
̸= σi, i.e., σ2
i ̸= 1. An arbi-
trary element of the braid group can be written as a product of generators,
which corresponds graphically (up to continuous deformations) to the vertical
stacking of drawings representing elementary operations (see Fig 12.1). The

324
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
generators of the braid group satisfy the following basic relations
σiσj ̸= σjσi
for |i −j| = 1,
σiσj = σjσi
for |i −j| ≥2,
σiσi+1σi = σi+1σiσi+1.
(12.3)
Note that the elements Pi of the permutation group SN representing ele-
mentary permutations, i ⇌i + 1 satisfy similar relations, with the notable
diﬀerence that P 2
i = 1, while σ2
i ̸= 1. As a consequence, the permutation
group is ﬁnite (speciﬁcally, SN has N! elements), while the braid group is
inﬁnite. As we will see later in this chapter, the richness of the braid group
plays a key role in enabling topological quantum computation.
12.1.3
Particle types, fusion rules, and exchange properties
In a system of N identical fermions, bringing together two particles results in
a composite object that behaves like a boson. Moreover, two spin-1/2 fermions
can be combined into either a spin-0 or a spin-1 boson. These types of prop-
erties are also present in anyonic systems, but generally the situation is more
complicated. The main consequence of this observation is that anyonic systems
contain, in general, multiple types of anyons; hence, one has to address the
following basic questions: what are the rules for combining diﬀerent species of
quasiparticles and what are the exchange properties of these particles?
The simplest case is that involving Abelian anyons. For concreteness, con-
sider a system that contains anyons with statistics θ = π/m and composites
made of k such quasiparticles. The exchange of two k = 2 particles is equiv-
alent to four exchanges of k = 1 anyons, therefore the k = 2 composites have
statistics θ = 4π/m. A complete description of the system includes all particle
species, i.e., anyons with statistics θ = π/m, 4π/m, 9π/m, . . . . Note that the
statistics parameter θ is deﬁned modulo 2π, which implies that the number of
distinct particle species is ﬁnite. Also note that the boson with θ = 0, which
is often denoted by 1, (e.g., the composite of m π/m-type anyons, for m even)
behaves trivially, as if no particle were present. We will call this boson, which
can be viewed as the particle type k = 0, the trivial particle or the vacuum.
Finally, since θ is only deﬁned up to 2π, we can ascribe the topological num-
ber −k to the particle species m −k (for m even) or 2m −k (for m odd),
since these particles have statistics k2π/m. The anyon −k is the antiparticle
of the k anyon, as combining them generates the vacuum. Note that certain
situations (e.g., if 2k = m) the antiparticle can coincide with the particle.
The rules for combining two anyons into a larger composite are called
fusion rules. For Abelian anyons, the fusion rule is simple: φn × φk = φn+k,
where φk denotes the k-type particle and φn ×φk means that φn is fused with
φk. The situation becomes more complicated for non-Abelian anyons because
diﬀerent fusion channels are possible, similarly to combining two spin-1/2
particles into either a spin-0 boson or a spin-1 boson. In general, the fusion

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■325
a
b
c
d
a
b
c
d
i
j
(Fabc)ij
d
FIGURE 12.2: Correspondence between three-anyon fusion processes with
ﬁxed total fusion channel (d) but diﬀerent fusion orderings. The F matrix
can be viewed as a rotation in the intermediate fusion space.
rules for a set of particles φ0 ≡1, φa, φb, . . . can be written as
φa × φb =
X
c
N c
ab φc,
(12.4)
which expresses the fact that fusing particles φa and φb can result in any of
the particles φc for which N c
ab ̸= 0. For Abelian anyons we have N q
nk = δn+k,q,
i.e., one always gets a single type of composite particle. By contrast, in the
case of non-Abelian anyons there is at least one pair (φa, φb) that has multiple
fusion channels, P
c N c
ab > 1. Note that there are theories in which φa and φb
can fuse to form φc in diﬀerent distinct ways, i.e., N c
ab > 1. Here, we will only
consider examples when N c
ab is either 0 or 1.
Next, let us assume that we want to fuse more than two anyons. There
is a freedom to choose the ordering in which pairwise fusion processes take
place. Consider, for example, the fusion of three anyons φa, φb, and φc into a
particle φd. One can either fuse φa and φb into an intermediate quasiparticle
φi, followed by the fusion of φi with φc, or fuse φb and φc into φj, followed
by the fusion with φa. Since the total fusion channel φd is ﬁxed, the ﬁnal
outcome is the same, but the intermediate two-anyon states may be diﬀerent.
Nonetheless, these intermediate states span the same anyonic Hilbert space,
so that the two choices described above correspond to diﬀerent choices of
basis for this space. The relation between these bases is given by the so-called
fusion or F matrix, which can be viewed as a rotation in the intermediate
fusion space. Using the F matrix, any two fusion orderings can be mapped
into each other, as illustrated in Figure 12.2.
Consider now two particles a and b that fuse in a particular channel c.
Braiding the two particles cannot change the fusion channel, since the total
topological charge of the pair is not a local property — it could be measured,
for example, along a large loop enclosing the particles well before they become
a “local composite” — and does not depend on the evolution of the pair,

326
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
=Rab
c
c
c
a
a
b
b
a
a
b
b
c
c
(A)
(B)
(C)
FIGURE 12.3: (A) Symbolic representation of a counterclockwise exchange
of anyons a and b which fuse into a particle of type c. The exchange process
generates a phase Rc
ab. (B) Representation of the exchange process in (A)
using worldribbons. (C) The continuous deformation of the ribbon produces
a topologically equivalent process containing half-twists that correspond to
rotations of the particles around themselves.
as long as braiding with a third particle is not considered. Consequently, a
counterclockwise exchange of particles a and b could also be viewed as a half
twist of the c particle and corresponds to multiplying the wave function of the
system by a phase factor Rc
ab. This behavior is illustrated in Figure 12.3. The
conclusion of this brief analysis is that in order to fully specify the braiding
statistics of a system of anyons it is required to specify i) the particle species,
ii) the fusion rules N c
ab, iii) the F matrix, and iv) the R matrix.
We close this section with a remark on the relation between spin and statis-
tics. In the familiar cases involving bosons and fermions, rotating a particle
around itself generates a phase factor ei2πs, where the spin s is an integer for
bosons and a half-integer for fermions. For anyons, the situation is similar, ex-
cept that in this case spin can take any value. To get a better intuition about
the spin-statistics relation, we use “worldribbons” (instead of worldlines) to
describe the evolution of the system. Let us now consider k exchanges of the
particles a and b with given fusion channel c. The spins ascribed to these
particles are sa, sb, and sc, respectively, and the phase generated by a coun-
terclockwise rotation of a spin s particle by and angle φ is eiφs. Assuming
that the evolution of the system remains invariant under continuous defor-
mations of the worldribbons, the total exchange process has to be equivalent
to performing k π-twists of the ribbons (counterclockwise for particles a and
b and clockwise for c), as illustrated in Figure 12.3. This equivalence can be
expressed as the following spin-statistics theorem [31]
(Rc
ab)k = eiπksaeiπksbe−iπksc.
(12.5)
Note that exchanging particle a and its antiparticle ¯a, both having spin s and

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■327
the fusion channel being the vacuum (c = 1, s1 = 0), results in the familiar
spin-statistics relation R1
a¯a = ei2πs, where s can take arbitrary values.
12.1.4
Fault-tolerance from non-Abelian anyons
The standard model of quantum computation involves three basic steps: ini-
tialization, unitary evolution, and measurement. The ﬁrst step has the role
to encode the classical information representing the input of the computa-
tion as a state vector in a large Hilbert space H. This initial state |ψi⟩is
then evolved unitarily (e.g., by applying a set of quantum gates) into a ﬁnal
state |ψf⟩= U|ψi⟩, from which the (classical) output of the computation is
extracted by performing a measurement.
In the topological quantum computation scheme, the Hilbert space H is a
subspace of the total Hilbert space of the system that consists of the degener-
ate ground states with a ﬁxed number of non-Abelian anyons at ﬁxed positions.
A possible way to initialize the system is by creating particle-antiparticle pairs
from the vacuum. The dimension of the Hilbert space H, which corresponds to
the number of all possible in-between fusion outcomes (the total fusion chan-
nel being in this case the vacuum), increases exponentially with the number of
anyonic pairs. Note that the pairs have conjugate quantum numbers, since the
total quantum number of a pair (before braiding with other particles) is the
same as that of the vacuum, and provide a known state to start the computa-
tion process. The initialization is then completed by performing a controlled
unitary operation Uψi to put the quasiparticles in the desired initial state |ψi⟩.
The controlled unitary operations Uψi and U are performed by braiding
the anyons, i.e., dragging the quasiparticles around one another in some spec-
iﬁed way. Assume that we start with n anyonic pairs, each having a speciﬁed
fusion channel (e.g., the vacuum). When particles belonging to diﬀerent pairs
braid, the fusion channels of the pairs change, which corresponds to a rotation
in the Hilbert space H. After completing the unitary evolution, the output of
the computation is retrieved by fusing the anyons in some speciﬁed way and
measuring the anyonic charge of the outcomes, φ1, φ2, . . . , which encode the
result of the computation. Note that the braiding algorithm depends on the
computation that is performed, but also on the initial state and the fusion
procedure. Also note that a non-Abelian anyonic system is suitable for quan-
tum computation if the set of transformations generated by the braiding of
quasiparticles contains all operations needed for computation.
In general, errors represent a huge obstacle to building a functional quan-
tum computer. Errors may occur when quantum information is either stored
or processed. The main source of errors aﬀecting a qubit that stores quantum
information is interaction with the environment, which causes decoherence.
As a result of this interaction, the quantum information is not “contained”
by the qubit alone, but by the total system qubit + environment, hence, it is
practically lost. Even if we eliminate the coupling to the environment, there
could still be systematic errors stemming from the imperfection of the applied

328
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
quantum gates. For example, a (desired) rotation of the qubit state by an angle
θ may actually be a rotation by θ + δθ. Even when δθ ≪θ, applying the gate
many times may signiﬁcantly aﬀect the total unitary transformation U and,
consequently, the result of the computation. The possibility of error correction
[406, 78, 416, 190, 354] is a cornerstone of quantum computation. However,
error correction is only possible below a certain threshold error rate of about
one error in 104 – 106 operations. This is an extremely stringent constraint
that demands quantum computation schemes with intrinsic low error rates.
Topological quantum computation is the most promising known candidate.
How robust is the topological quantum computation scheme? First, we
note that topological quantum memories are protected against errors due to
local interactions with the environment. For example, the fusion channel of two
anyons can only be changed by braiding them with other anyons and is immune
to any local perturbation applied to the system. This is in sharp contrast with
quantum information being stored using local qubits (e.g., the spin degree of
freedom in a quantum dot); coupling to the environment (e.g., nuclear spins)
results in the rapid loss of this information. Topological quantum computers
are also protected against systematic errors due to imprecise gate operations.
In this scheme, the unitary operations depend only on the topology of the
braid and not on the details of the quasiparticle paths. Note that the exact
positions of the particles after performing the braid is not a real concern; one
can always imagine an initialization scheme based on the creation of particle-
antiparticle pairs and a measurement involving the fusion of anyons, so that
the computation corresponds to a set of links, rather than open braids, and
represents a completely topological process.
Finally, we note that probabilistic errors due to, for example, ﬁnite tem-
perature do aﬀect topological quantum computation. These errors are gener-
ated by the presence of additional, “unwanted” quasiparticles that braid with
the “working” anyons and change their fusion channel. The main sources for
these additional quasiparticles are disorder (e.g., impurities and defects) and
thermal ﬂuctuations. Note, however, that even in the presence of “unwanted”
quasiparticles, certain types of processes do not cause an error, e.g., when a
thermally created pair encircles a “working” anyon and then reannihilates, or
when one of the particles from the pair annihilates an existing anyon. Gener-
ally, the system is protected against the generation of “unwanted” quasiparti-
cles by a ﬁnite energy gap. Working at temperatures much lower than this gap
suppresses exponentially the errors generated by thermally excited quasipar-
ticle pairs. Also, disorder becomes an issue when its strength is comparable
with (or larger than) the energy gap. In this case, one can view disorder as a
strong (local) perturbation that (locally) closes the energy gap.
We conclude that the fault-tolerant nature of the anyonic system stems
from i) the non-local encoding of quantum information in the fusion states
of the anyons and ii) the presence of a ﬁnite energy gap. Local perturbations
to the Hamiltonian due to interaction with the environment cannot alter the
fusion states [70], as long as they are weak compared to the energy gap. In

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■329
addition, the unitary operations depend only on the topology of the braid
providing topological quantum computation with immunity to unitary errors
due to imperfect gate operations.
12.1.5
Ising anyons
The most commonly discussed type of non-Abelian anyon is the so-called
Ising anyon. The importance of this model stems from its relevance in the
context of several promising routes for the physical realization of topological
quantum states that support non-Abelian anyons. For many years, the main
focus of research was on the fractional quantum Hall state with ﬁlling factor
ν = 5/2 [465]. Moore and Read suggested that the quasiparticle excitations
of this state are non-Abelian anyons [317]. The statistical properties of these
quasiparticles were shown [328] to be essentially the same as those of Ising
anyons, up to an additional Abelian component to their statistics. Currently,
intense research eﬀorts are dedicated to the realization of zero-energy bound
states in p-wave superconductors (see Chapter 8). The statistical properties of
these quasiparticles are also described by the Ising anyon model, as we discuss
below (Section 12.3).
The Ising anyon model contains three types of particles: the vacuum, 1,
the non-Abelian anyon, σ, and the fermion, ψ. The vacuum fuses trivially with
the other particles, σ × 1 = σ and ψ × 1 = ψ; the non-trivial fusion rules are
σ × σ = 1 + ψ,
σ × ψ = σ,
ψ × ψ = 1.
(12.6)
Note the existence of two fusion channels for a pair of σ anyons, the vacuum
and the fermion ψ. Also note that two fermions condense to the vacuum,
hence the total fermion number is not well deﬁned, but its parity is and,
consequently, represents a measurable quantity.
Consider the fusion of three anyons with ﬁxed total fusion channel. The
only case involving more than one intermediate quasiparticle corresponds to
the fusion of three σ anyons, which can only have σ as their total fusion
channel. Since σ×σ = 1+ψ, the intermediate fusion space is two-dimensional
and we can choose the fusion states |σ, σ →1⟩and |σ, σ →ψ⟩as a basis.
Note that a generic fusion state |φa, φb →φc⟩represents a state containing
two anyons, φa and φb that, if fused, generate the anyon φc. Using the basis
speciﬁed above, the F matrix is given by
F σ
σσσ =
1
√
2
 1
1
1
−1

.
(12.7)
The meaning of this matrix can be easily understood from the diagram in
Figure 12.2, with a, b, c, d = σ and the intermediate quasiparticles (i and j)
being either the vacuum 1 or the fermion ψ. For a derivation of this equation
using the so-called pentagon identity, a simple consistency equation satisﬁed
by the F matrix [429], see, for example, the book by Jiannis Pachos [337].

330
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
1
1
(a)
1
1
(b)
1
1
FIGURE 12.4: Worldlines representing two pairs of Ising anyons, σ, generated
from the vacuum. (a) The anyons are fused back to the vacuum. (b) Non-trivial
braiding-induced evolution of the fusion states. After one anyon from the ﬁrst
pair is circulated around an anyon from the second pair, the fusion of σ anyons
generates two ψ fermions.
Eq. (12.7) implies that the intermediate fusion outcomes can be non-trivially
transformed by changing the fusion ordering.
The R matrix that gives the phase corresponding to taking one anyon
around another (when the their fusion channel is ﬁxed) can be obtained [337]
using the so-called hexagon identity [429]. Explicitly, we have
R1
σσ = e−πi/8,
Rψ
σσ = e3πi/8,
R1
ψψ = −1,
Rσ
σψ = i.
(12.8)
Note that exchanging two ψ fermions changes the sign of the state, as ex-
pected. On the other hand, exchanging to σ anyons generates a phase that
depends on the fusion channel of the pair.
How can one exploit Ising anyons for topological quantum computation?
In essence, since a pair of σ quasiparticles has two fusion channels, we can view
it as a qubit with states |0⟩and |1⟩corresponding to the fusion outcome being
1 and ψ, respectively. However, having a pair prepared in a given channel
(say 1), one can only change the fusion channel by braiding it with other
anyons. Therefore, for a single qubit we need, in fact, two pairs of σ anyons.
Indeed, assume that the pairs are generated from vacuum (see Figure 12.4),
so that initially the fusion state of each pair is 1. Next, we braid two anyons
that belong to diﬀerent pairs, as shown in Figure 12.4. Note that the two
anyons (say, anyons 2 and 3) do not have a direct fusion channel (i.e., if fused,
they will generate a superposition of 1 and ψ). To determine the eﬀect of the
braiding operation, we ﬁrst change the fusion order using the F matrix so that
anyons 2 and 3 fuse to particle α, where α is either 1 or ψ; then we account
for the 2π rotation by applying Rα
σσ twice, and, ﬁnally, we restore the original
fusion order using F −1. Explicitly, the fusion state of the ﬁrst pair changes
after braiding with the third particle according to
|σ, σ →1⟩=⇒
X
β
|σ, σ →β⟩Bβ1 = e−iπ/4|σ, σ →ψ⟩,
(12.9)

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■331
with a B matrix (or braid matrix) given by
Bβγ =
X
α

(F −1)σ
σσσ

βα (Rα
σσ)2 [F σ
σσσ]αγ = e−iπ/4
 0
1
1
0

βγ
,
(12.10)
where we have used the explicit form of the F and R matrices given by equa-
tions (12.7) and (12.8). We conclude that braiding with the third particle
changes the fusion channel of the ﬁrst pair from 1 to ψ (up to an overall
phase factor). A similar conclusion holds for the second pair. Hence, the
four σ anyons with the total fusion channel 1, have a two-dimensional in-
termediate fusion space H spanned by the states ||11⟩⟩and ||ψψ⟩⟩, where
||ab⟩⟩= |σ, σ →a⟩⊗|σ, σ →b⟩is a shorthand notation for the fusion states of
the two pairs. The two-dimensional space H, which corresponds to one qubit,
can be used to store quantum information non-locally.
We note that similar considerations apply if one pair of anyons is created
from the vacuum and the other one from a ψ fermion, i.e., when the total
fusion channel is ψ. The corresponding basis states of the intermediate fusion
space are ||1ψ⟩⟩and ||ψ1⟩⟩and, as before, braiding two anyons from diﬀerent
pairs will transform one state into the other. For three pairs of σ particles with
total fusion channel 1, the intermediate fusion states ||111⟩⟩, ||1ψψ⟩⟩, ||ψ1ψ⟩⟩,
and ||ψψ1⟩⟩span a four-dimensional space H that corresponds to two qubits.
Braiding the anyons induces rotations within this fusion space. A similar space
can be obtained using three pairs of anyons with total fusion channel ψ. In
general, n pairs of σ anyons with ﬁxed total fusion channel (i.e., either 1
or ψ) will generate a 2n−1-dimensional Hilbert space, which can be viewed
as the Hilbert space of n −1 qubits. Logical operations can be performed by
braiding the quasiparticles. However, for Ising anyons the operations generated
by braiding are not suﬃcient to implement all possible unitary transformations
[156, 157]. In other words, Ising anyons are not capable of universal topological
quantum computation. Nonetheless, in order to construct arbitrary unitary
operations, it is only necessary to supplement braiding with a single-qubit
π/8 phase gate and a two-qubit measurement, which can be done using non-
topological operations [69]. Of course, these operations are not topologically
protected. However, it was shown [69] that error correction protocols can be
implemented, provided the π/8 phase gate and the two-qubit measurement are
accurate to within 14% and 38%, respectively, which is not a serious constraint.
12.1.6
Fibonacci anyons
The Fibonacci anyon model or the golden theory, combines simplicity and
richness to provide one of the simplest models of non-Abelian statistics that
supports universal quantum computation. The model contains two types of
particles: the vacuum, 1, and the non-Abelian quasiparticle, τ. The only non-
trivial fusion rule is
τ × τ = 1 + τ.
(12.11)

332
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
1
i1
in-2
1
i
1
1
1
FIGURE 12.5: Fusion processes for n Fibonacci anyons with total fusion chan-
nel 1. The symbols i and ik designates intermediate fusion outcomes (i.e., par-
ticles 1 or τ). For n = 1, the “disappearance” of a τ anyon is an impossible
process. Note that in−2 = τ (for n ≥3), which implies that the dimension
of the Hilbert space for n particles fusing to 1 is the same as that of n −1
anyons fusing to τ.
When fusing three anyons that have a ﬁxed total fusion channel, the only
process involving more than one intermediate particle consists of fusing three
τ anyons into a τ particle. The correspondence between the intermediate fusion
states associated with diﬀerent orderings is given by the following F matrix
F τ
τττ =
 φ−1
φ−1
2
φ−1
2
−φ−1

,
(12.12)
where φ = (1 +
√
5)/2 is the golden ratio. Finally, the phase acquired during
the (counterclockwise) exchange of two Fibonacci anyons is described by the
R matrix
R1
ττ = e4πi/5,
Rτ
ττ = −e2πi/5
(12.13)
Using the F and R matrices, one can determine the unitary operation resulting
from any braid performed on any number of particles n ≥2.
To understand the structure of the fusion space of a system of Fibonacci
anyons, let us consider the fusion of n non-Abelian particles with total fusion
channel 1, as shown in Figure 12.5. The particle generated by the fusion of
the ﬁrst k + 1 anyons is ik, which can be either 1 or τ. Note that fusing a τ
anyon with the vacuum generates a τ particle, τ × 1 = τ. Hence, if ik = 1
we necessarily have ik+1 = τ. Also, to obtain the vacuum one has to fuse
two τ particles, which implies in−2 = τ. Consequently, the dimension of the
fusion space H for n anyons, which represents the number of independent
ways in which the particles could fuse to give total charge 1, will be given by
the number Nn of independent sequences (i1, i2, . . . , in−2) that are consistent
with the constraints. As shown in Figure 12.5, for n = 1 we have the forbidden
process τ →1 (i.e., N1 = 0), while for n = 2, 3 the fusion tree is unique (i.e.,
N2 = N3 = 1). On the other hand, for n = 4 we have a two-dimensional
fusion space corresponding to two possible intermediate outcomes: i = 1 and
i = τ. In general, the dimension of the fusion space can be obtained using a

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■333
simple recursion relation. Let i1 be the outcome of fusing the ﬁrst two anyons.
If i1 = 1, the remaining n −2 anyons can fuse in Nn−2 distinct ways, while if
i1 = τ, there are Nn−1 ways to fuse this anyon with the other n−2 τ particles.
Consequently,
Nn = Nn−2 + Nn−1,
with N1 = 0 and N2 = 1.
(12.14)
The solution to this recursion relation is the famous Fibonacci sequence:
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, . . . . Note that the ratio of two successive numbers in this se-
ries is a (rapidly converging) approximation of the golden ratio, Nn/Nn−1 ≈φ.
Hence, the dimension of the fusion space H grows exponentially with the num-
ber of anyons at a rate Nn ∝φn.
To construct a qubit, we can start with two pairs of non-Abelian anyons
(τ1, τ2) and (τ3, τ4) created from the vacuum. The dimension of the corre-
sponding Hilbert space H is N4 = 2. We note that a two-dimensional space
can also be obtained using three anyons with total fusion channel τ, as evident
from the rightmost diagram in Figure 12.5. In fact, alternative schemes for
encoding qubits based on three anyons have been proposed [156]. Returning to
the four-anyon scheme, we note that a convenient basis, given, for example, by
the intermediate fusion states ||ab⟩⟩= |τ1, τ2 →a⟩⊗|τ3, τ4 →b⟩, provides the
qubit states for encoding quantum information, |0⟩= ||11⟩⟩and |1⟩= ||ττ⟩⟩.
To perform unitary operations on the logical states of the qubit we braid
the quasiparticles. Consider, for example, exchanging the ﬁrst two particles.
This elementary braid operation corresponds to the generator σ1 of the braid
group (see Figure 12.1) and is represented by the matrix
ρ(σ1) ≡Rττ =

R1
ττ
0
0
Rτ
ττ

,
(12.15)
where the R matrix is given by Eq. (12.13). A representation of the generator
σ2 (which corresponds to exchanging the second and third anyons) in terms
of R and F matrices can be obtained following the main arguments leading to
Eq. (12.10),
ρ(σ2) = (F τ
τττ)−1RττF τ
τττ.
(12.16)
Remarkably, one can show [354] that the unitary operations ρ(σ1) and ρ(σ2)
are dense in SU(2), i.e., one can generate an arbitrary element of SU(2)
with accuracy ϵ using a number of operations that scales polynomially with
log(1/ϵ). This means that any single gate operation can be realized by braid-
ing alone. Furthermore, one can show that two-qubit controlled gates can also
be implemented with arbitrary accuracy using braiding alone [60, 156, 223].
We conclude that the Fibonacci anyon model allows for universal topological
quantum computation solely through braiding.
12.2
ANYONS AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM PHASES
The realization of a topological quantum computer rests, ultimately, on the
existence of topological phases of matter that support non-Abelian anyons

334
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
and on our ability to identify and manipulate such states. The task at hand
is twofold and involves both the theoretical understanding of the physics gov-
erning the topological phases of matter, as well as the actual experimental
realization and study of these phases. At the time of this writing, the most
promising real systems that could support non-Abelian anyons are quantum
Hall systems in two-dimensional electron gases and p-wave superconductors in
solid state hybrid structures. Their perceived potential is based on theoretical
predictions and partial indirect experimental evidence.
The quantum Hall ﬂuids3 are phases of a two-dimensional electron gas
in the presence of a strong magnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁlling factor ν = 5/2 [465],
which is believed to realize the so-called Pfaﬃan state proposed by Moore and
Green [317], has been the focus of research for many years. The excitations of
the Pfaﬃan state are non-Abelian anyons that are similar to the Ising anyons
(but have an additional Abelian component to their statistics [327]). Several
schemes to realize universal quantum computation in the ν = 5/2 fractional
quantum Hall state have been proposed [71, 69, 114, 158]. If the ﬁlling fraction
ν = 12/5 [472] is in the universality class of the so-called Z3 Read–Rezayi state
[363], it is expected to support non-Abelian quasiparticles that are similar
to the Fibonacci anyons, i.e., are capable of universal topological quantum
computation through braiding. Presently, however, it is not entirely clear how
to actually transport the quasiparticles in a quantum Hall ﬂuid, i.e., how
to perform braiding operation. A comprehensive discussion of various aspects
concerning the realization of topological quantum computation using quantum
Hall states can be found in the review article by Nayak et al. [327].
The most transparent route towards the realization of non-Abelian anyons
is based on p-wave superconductors, which were shown to support vortices
with anyonic statistics [230, 362]. The chiral p-wave superconductor (see Sec-
tion 7.2.3) is equivalent to Kitaev’s honeycomb model [256], a lattice model of
anisotropically interacting spins that can be mapped onto a system of Majo-
rana fermions, and, essentially, represents another embodiment of the Pfaﬃan
state. In Chapters 8 and 9, we have discussed various aspects regarding the
realization of p-wave superconducting states in solid state heterostructures
and cold atom systems. Below, in Section 12.3, we will address a few speciﬁc
points related to the use of Majorana bound states as a platform for topologi-
cal quantum computation. But before we address these issues, it is instructive
to brieﬂy comment on some generic features of topological models that are
directly relevant to quantum computation. We focus on Chern–Simons ﬁeld
theories and particularly on how the properties of Abelian and non-Abelian
anyons can be captured within these theories.
It is worth noting, however, that lattice theories also play a key role in
understanding the connection between topological quantum computation and
the physics of many-body systems capable of supporting topological phases.
The very birth of topological quantum computation was triggered by Alexei
3For a review of the quantum Hall eﬀect, see, for example, [352] and [113].

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■335
Kitaev’s idea to convert a quantum error-correcting code — so-called toric
code — into a Hamiltonian describing an interacting many-body system [261,
257]. Hence, the toric code, which is an example of a stabilizer code, can also be
viewed as the Hamiltonian of a two-dimensional interacting spin system. The
model is the simplest example of a so-called quantum double model, D(G). Here
G is a ﬁnite group that labels a spin-like Hilbert space with basis {|g⟩: g ∈G}
deﬁned on each link of a two-dimensional lattice. The toric code corresponds
to G = Z2. In these models, the ground state of the Hamiltonian represents the
stabilizer space of the code, while the quasiparticle excitations are anyons. The
properties of the quasiparticles can be determined by studying the irreducible
representations of D(G). For an elementary introduction to quantum double
models see, for example, Ref. [337].
12.2.1
Abelian Chern–Simons field theories
Quantum ﬁeld theory is the basic theoretical tool for describing the low-
energy physics of condensed matter systems. A topological quantum ﬁeld
theory (TQFT) is characterized by observables (e.g., correlation functions)
that are invariant under smooth coordinate transformations (i.e., diﬀeomor-
phisms). In other words, the theory is insensitive to the metric of space-time
(e.g., to changes in the shape of the space-time manifold on which the system
is deﬁned) and the correlation functions are topological invariants. Note that
these are precisely the deﬁning features of a topological phase of matter: a sys-
tem is in a topological phase if all its low-energy, long-wavelength observable
properties are invariant under smooth deformations of space-time. In other
words, a system is in a topological phase if its low-energy eﬀective theory is
a TQFT. Some basic features of TQFTs and a few examples were discussed
in Chapters 6 and 7. Here, we are interested in the relation between TQFTs
and the properties of Abelian and non-Abelian anyons.
The simplest example of a TQFT is the Abelian Chern–Simons theory,
which is deﬁned by the action4
SCS[a] = k
4π
Z
dr2dt ϵµνρaµ∂νaρ,
(12.17)
where ϵ is the antisymmetric tensor, a is a U(1) gauge ﬁeld, and the indices
µ, ν, and ρ take the values 0 (for the time direction), 1, and 2. Note that
the action (12.17) is independent of any metric and is invariant under gauge
transformations aµ →aµ + ∂µω. When k is an odd integer, Eq. (12.17) corre-
sponds to the low-energy eﬀective theory of the Laughlin quantum Hall state
at ﬁlling fraction ν = 1/k.
The topological phase is protected by a ﬁnite energy gap, which is not
captured by the Chern–Simons theory. Hence, the natural question: does the
low-energy eﬀective theory have anything to say about the properties of the
4See Chapter 7 for a discussion of the basic properties of Chern–Simons theories.

336
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
quasiparticles, which are excitations of the system above the energy gap? It
turns out that the quasiparticle properties are in fact part of the universal low-
energy physics of the system and emerge naturally in a Chern–Simons theory.
Indeed, consider a conserved current jµ ≡(ρ, j) that couples to the gauge
ﬁeld. For now, the quasiparticles are not dynamical, but move along classical
trajectories consistent with the current j. The Lagrangian density becomes
L =
k
4πϵµνρaµ∂νaρ −aµjµ and we have the following classical Euler-Lagrange
equations
jµ = k
2π ϵµνρ∂νaρ.
(12.18)
Note that Eq. (12.18) makes current conservation explicit, ∂µjµ = 0. Consider
now the equation corresponding to µ = 0, i.e., ρ =
k
2π∇× a, which tells us
that the quasiparticle charge density is locally proportional to the “magnetic
ﬁeld” associated with the gauge ﬁeld aµ. Hence, we can view the Chern–
Simons coupling as a pure constraint that rigidly attaches a ﬂux q02π/k to
each particle that carries charge q0 =
R
dr2j0. Upon moving one particle with
q0 = 1 around another (i.e., performing two quasiparticle exchanges), the
Chern–Simons ﬂux gives rise to an Aharonov–Bohm phase [453] 2θ = 2π/k.
Consequently, the quasiparticles of the Chern–Simons theory (12.17) have
Abelian braiding statistics with θ = π/k, i.e., they are Abelian anyons.
Further progress can be made by addressing the following question: what
are the fundamental observables of a topological ﬁeld theory? Clearly, these
observables cannot be local, since the topological phase is insensitive to any
local perturbation. On the other hand, we know that ﬁnding the topological
charge of a quasiparticle requires taking another (test) particle around it. The
test charge could be obtained by creating a pair of anyons from the vacuum,
evolving them along some worldlines, then fusing them back to the vacuum.
The corresponding operator is the so-called Wilson loop
Wγ = exp

iq
I
γ
dxµaµ(x)

,
(12.19)
where q is the (topological) charge of the particle and γ a given looping tra-
jectory. Note that the operator Wγ is gauge-invariant and independent of any
metric. Consider now the ground state expectation value of a product of r Wil-
son loops, ⟨W(Γ)⟩= ⟨ψ0| Q
i Wγi|ψ0⟩, where 1 ≤i ≤r indexes the (closed)
trajectory γi of a particle with charge qi, Γ denotes the entire set of loops, and
|ψ0⟩is the vacuum state. The expectation value can be evaluated in the path
integral formalism, ⟨W(Γ)⟩=
R
Da W(Γ)eiSCS[a], and we obtain [337, 350]
⟨W(Γ)⟩= exp

iπ
k
X
i,j
qiqjΦ(γi, γj)

,
(12.20)
where i and j take all possible values and Φ(γi, γj) is the Gauss integral
Φ(γi, γj) = 1
4π
I
γi
dxµ
I
γj
dyνϵµνρ
(x −y)ρ
|x −y|3 .
(12.21)

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■337
When the loops γi and γj do not intersect5, Φ(γi, γj) is an integer [350] repre-
senting the linking between the two loops, i.e., the number of times γi winds
around γj. Since the Chern–Simons action and the Wilson loops are indepen-
dent of the metric, Φ(γi, γj) and ⟨W(Γ)⟩depend only on the topology of the
loops, i.e., on how the particles that evolve along the corresponding worldlines
are braided. For example, consider four quasiparticles created pairwise from
the vacuum which are fused back to the vacuum after braiding one particle
from the ﬁrst pair with a particle from the second pair. Assuming, for simplic-
ity, qi = 1, the expectation value of the Wilson loops gives the phase factor
exp(2πi/k), which corresponds to the double exchange of two Abelian anyons
with θ = π/k. We conclude that the phase change due to braiding of Abelian
quasiparticles is eﬃciently captured by the expectation value of the Wilson
loop operators.
12.2.2
Non-Abelian Chern–Simons field theories
The above considerations can be generalized to non-Abelian Chern–Simons
theories (see also Chapter 7). In essence, similar to the Abelian case, the any-
onic properties of the quasiparticles, including their fusion rules and braiding
statistics [201, 470], are part of the universal low-energy physics of the sys-
tem and can be determined within the low-energy eﬀective ﬁeld theory that
describes the topological phase. Below, without delving too much into tech-
nical aspects, we brieﬂy comment on how the existence of diﬀerent types of
quasiparticles and their fusion properties emerge naturally in Chern–Simons
theories. Of course, the braiding properties of these quasiparticles can be ob-
tained by calculating expectation values of Wilson loops, following a procedure
that generalizes the Abelian scheme sketched above.
Consider the non-Abelian Chern–Simons ﬁeld theory deﬁned by the action
SCS[a] = k
4π
Z
d3x ϵµνρTr

aµ∂νaρ + i2
3aµaνaρ

.
(12.22)
Under a generic gauge transformation U(x) ∈G, the action (12.22) transforms
as SCS[a] →SCS[a] + 2πkm, where the integer m is the winding number of
the gauge transformation, i.e., the number of times U spans the whole group
(see Chapter 7 for more details). Since we require the expectation values of all
observables to be gauge-invariant, the quantity exp(iSCS[a]) has to be gauge-
invariant, which means that the coupling k (called the level of the theory)
is necessarily an integer. For example, when G = SU(2) and k = 2, we talk
about an SU(2) level 2 Chern–Simons theory and we use the notation SU(2)2
to designate it.
5To eliminate ambiguities in the case i = j, we follow the so-called framing prescription
[470]: the loop γi is slightly displaced (rigidly) in a given direction so that it generates a
distinguishable loop γ′
i. The two loops deﬁne the edges of a ribbon. The integral Φ(γi, γi)
is then substituted by the well-deﬁned quantity Φ(γi, γ′
i).

338
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Focusing on the group SU(2), we deﬁne the non-Abelian Wilson loop as-
sociated with a curve γ as
Wγ = Tr

P exp

iqj
I
γ
T aaa
µ dxµ

,
(12.23)
where P is the path-ordering operator, qj = 2j is an integer, T a = ρj(Ja) is
a (2j + 1)-dimensional representation6 of the SU(2) algebra, and aµ = T aaa
µ.
One can show that considering j > k/2, where k is the level of the Chern–
Simons theory, will generate the same expectation value of the Wilson loop
as a certain representation with 0 ≤j ≤k/2 [136]. In other words, there are
only k + 1 distinct representations: 0, 1/2, . . . , k/2. With this observation, we
are ready for the key point: each of the non-equivalent representations of the
SU(2) algebra corresponds to a distinct quasiparticle type. We conclude that
the SU(2)k theory has k+1 types of anyons, each corresponding to a diﬀerent
representation ρj of the SU(2) group.
What about the fusion properties of these quasiparticles? Consider two
particles corresponding to the j1 and j2 representations of SU(2). Each of
the particles/representations has an associated Hilbert space spanned by the
states |j1, mj1⟩and |j2, mj2⟩, respectively. The tensor product |j1, mj1⟩⊗
|j2, mj2⟩provides a basis for the composite Hilbert space associated with the
pair of particles. Another possible basis is given by the states |j, mj⟩, where
|j1 −j2| ≤j ≤j1 + j2, as dictated by the composition rules for angular mo-
mentum. The corresponding representations ρj1 and ρj2 can be combined in a
similar manner into a (2j1 + 1) × (2j2 + 1)-dimensional representation, which,
in turn, can be written as a direct sum of ρj representations. Note, however,
that not all representations are distinct. As a result, one can show [337] that
the upper value for j is jmax(j1, j2) = min[j1 + j2, k −(j1 + j2)]. The com-
position of (non-equivalent) representation can be expressed symbolically as
ρj1 × ρj2 =
jmax(j1,j2)
X
j≤|j1−j2|
ρj,
(12.24)
where the sum should be understood as a direct sum. Equation (12.24)
gives the fusion rules for the SU(2) level-k theory. Considering, for exam-
ple, the SU(2)2 theory, we have three types of particles corresponding to
the representations ρ0, ρ 1
2 , and ρ1 and satisfying the non-trivial fusion rules
ρ 1
2 ×ρ 1
2 = ρ0 +ρ1, ρ 1
2 ×ρ1 = ρ 1
2 , and ρ1 ×ρ1 = ρ0. Note that these are exactly
the fusion rules satisﬁed by Ising anyons, with ρ0, ρ 1
2 , and ρ1 corresponding
to 1, σ, and ψ, respectively.
We conclude that the SU(2) level-k Chern–Simons theory has k + 1 dis-
tinct particles that correspond to the non-equivalent representations ρj of the
SU(2) group, where j = 0, 1/2, 1, . . . , k/2. The fusion properties of these quasi-
particles correspond to the decomposition rules (12.24) for tensor products of
6See footnote on page 214.

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■339
γ1
γ2
γ3
γ4
FIGURE 12.6: Four Majorana-carrying vortices in a 2D topological supercon-
ductor. The branch cuts correspond to a 2π phase shift of the superconducting
order parameter. Upon exchanging the central vortices, γ2 crosses a branch
cut and acquires an extra minus sign. As a result, γ2 →−γ3 and γ3 →γ2.
irreducible SU(2) representations. The braiding properties of the anyonic sys-
tem can be determined by calculating expectation values of Wilson loops. In
general, the Wilson loop operators can be viewed as creation or annihilation
operators for the degrees of freedom in a topological phase, which are gauge-
and metric-independent. A many-body interacting system will support a topo-
logical phase if its eﬀective low-energy theory is a topological quantum ﬁeld
theory, i.e., if its low-energy degrees of freedom can be mapped into loops or,
alternatively, into string nets [289].
12.3
TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTATION WITH
MAJORANA ZERO MODES
The possibility of topologically protected storage and processing of quantum
information using Majorana zero modes (MZMs) localized at vortices or do-
main walls is based on the non-Abelian nature of these objects. We will ﬁrst
illustrate the non-Abelian properties of the MZMs, then we will show how
these properties can be exploited to implement quantum computation.
12.3.1
Non-Abelian statistics
In a two-dimensional (2D) spinless chiral superconductor MZMs are carried by
vortices (see Figure 7.7 on page 211). The non-Abelian statistics is associated
with the exchange of these vortices. On the other hand, in 1D systems (e.g.,
Majorana wires) exchange statistics is not well deﬁned. However, one can
meaningfully discuss exchange properties in a network of 1D wires [15], where
Majorana-carrying domain walls can be manipulated without overlapping the
MZMs (hence, without splitting the ground state degeneracy). Here, we focus
on the 2D case [230]. We emphasize that the objects whose exchange statistics
we are studying are Majorana-carrying vortices, although we may simply call
them vortices or MZMs.

340
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
Consider a 2D spinless chiral superconductor (SC) containing a collection
of 2n MZMs localized at vortices that are well separated from each other. The
positions of the vortices are given by the position vectors ri (1 ≤i ≤2n) and
magnetic ﬂux through each vortex is h/2e. The presence of a vortex changes
the phase of the superconducting order parameter, so that cycling the vortex
once corresponds to a 2π phase change [230]. In general, a phase shift by φ of
the SC order parameter is equivalent to rotating the phase of the electronic
annihilation operator by φ/2, ˆψ(r) →eiφ/2 ˆψ(r). Consequently, the Majorana
operator corresponding to the ith MZM has the form
γi =
Z
d2r
h
ui(r)ei φi
2 ˆψ(r) + u∗
i (r)e−i φi
2 ˆψ†(r)
i
,
(12.25)
where ui(r) is the MZM wave function and the phase angle φi depends on
the relative angles between ri and the position vectors of the other vortices.
Taking (adiabatically) the vortex i (and the corresponding MZM) around
vortex j results in a 2π phase shift, φi →φi +2π, which corresponds to a sign
change of the Majorana operator, γi →−γi. To account for the 2π phase shifts
associated with going around a vortex we introduce branch cuts, as shown in
Figure 12.6. Upon exchange processes, whenever the MZM bounded by vortex
i passes through the branch cut, it picks up an additional minus sign.
Consider now the counterclockwise exchange of vortices i and j. As a
result of this process, γi and γj swap positions and γi acquires an additional
minus sign, as it crosses a branch cut (see Figure 12.6). Speciﬁcally, we have
γi →−γj and γj →γi. This transformation is implemented by the unitary
operator
Ui,j =
1
√
2(1 + γiγj) = exp
π
4 γiγj

.
(12.26)
Indeed, one can easily check that the transformed γi operator is Ui,jγiU †
i,j =
−γj, while Ui,jγjU †
i,j = γi. We note that Ui,i+1 is a representation of the braid
group generators σi introduced in Section 12.1.2.
To show that this is a non-Abelian representation, consider the particular
case involving four vortices (i.e., n = 2). The MZMs can be paired into two
complex fermions,
f1 = 1
2(γ1 + iγ2),
f2 = 1
2(γ3 + iγ4).
(12.27)
The system has four degenerate ground states and a natural basis for the
ground state subspace is given by the eigenvectors |n1n2⟩= |n1⟩⊗|n2⟩, where
|ni⟩is an eigenstate of the fermion occupation operator ˆni = f †
i fi. Assume
that we start in a particular basis state |Ψi⟩= |n1n2⟩and perform a counter-
clockwise exchange of γ2 and γ3. The ﬁnal state can be found by expressing
U2,3 in terms of fermion operators. Explicitly, we have
|Ψf⟩= U2,3 |n1n2⟩=
1
√
2 [|n1n2⟩+ i(−1)n1|1−n1, 1−n2⟩] .
(12.28)

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■341
Note that |Ψi⟩and |Ψf⟩have the same total fermion parity and that the ex-
change of γ2 and γ3 corresponds to a rotation of state vector within the ground
state manifold. This nontrivial transformation reveals the non-Abelian statis-
tics of the Majorana-carrying vortices (since exchanging Abelian anyons can
only generate a phase factor, i.e., |Ψf⟩= eiθ|Ψi⟩). Furthermore, performing
m sequential exchanges, Uim,jm . . . Ui1,j1, results in a ﬁnal state that depends
not only on what exchanges are performed, but also on the order in which
they are carried out (i.e., on the element of the braid group represented by
Uim,jm . . . Ui1,j1). The non-trivial quantum evolutions generated by braiding
operations are key elements of topological quantum computation with MZMs.
12.3.2
Fusion of Majorana zero modes
Fusion rules provide another unique signature of non-Abelian anyonic be-
havior. As discussed in Section 12.1.3, non-Abelian anyons (unlike Abelian
particles) have multiple fusion channels. For the purpose of demonstrating ex-
perimentally the non-Abelian nature of MZMs, determining their fusion rules
may be technically less challenging than determining their exchange statistics.
A charge-sensing fusion-rule experiment for Majorana wires has been proposed
in Ref. [2]. The basic idea is illustrated in Figure 12.7(a). A semiconductor
(SM) wire partially coated with a mesoscopic superconducting island with
charging energy Ec is coupled to a bulk superconductor (SC). The island
charge and the Josephson energy that characterizes the coupling to the bulk
SC are controlled by gate potentials. When EJ ≫Ec, the wire hosts two
Majorana modes at its ends and is characterized by degenerate ground states
|Ψe⟩and |Ψo⟩with even and odd fermion parity, respectively. Increasing the
barrier potential (EJ ≪Ec) restores charging energy and converts the de-
generate parity states into non-degenerate eigenstates with charges Qo and
Qe.
The protocol for detecting the fusion rules for MZMs [2] involves two SC
islands and three basic steps, as illustrated in Figure 12.7(b). (I) Starting
from a unique ground state with total charge Qtot create two MZMs (out
of the vacuum) by lowering the outer barriers. We assume that lowering the
barriers is an adiabatic process. Let f14 = (γ1+iγ4)/2 be the fermion operator
associated with the two Majoranas. As a result of lowering the gates, the
system evolves into the state |014⟩, which is the eigenstate with eigenvalue
0 of the fermion number operator ˆn14 = f †
14f14. (II) Create two additional
MZMs, γ2 and γ3, out of the vacuum by raising the central barrier. The
system evolves into the quantum state |014023⟩, which is an eigenstate of ˆn14
and ˆn23. One can redeﬁne the fermion basis in terms of occupation numbers
for the left and right Majorana pairs ˆn12 and ˆn34. In the new basis we have
|014023⟩=
1
√
2 (|012034⟩+ |112134⟩) .
(12.29)
(III) Restore charging energy by raising the outer barriers. This fuses the

342
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
SC
SC
SC
SC
(a)
Vb (high)
Vg
Vb (low)
Vg
EJ ≪Ec
EJ ≫Ec
|Qe⟩
|Qo⟩
|Ψe⟩
|Ψo⟩
γ1
γ2
(I)
(II)
(III)
γ1
γ4
γ1
γ4
γ2
γ3
|Qtot⟩
|014⟩
|014023⟩
1
√
2
 |QL, QR⟩+ eiα|QL−1, QR+1⟩

(b)
FIGURE 12.7: (a) Gate-controlled “parity-to-charge” converter. A SM wire is
covered by a SC island (with charging energy Ec) and coupled to a bulk SC.
The back gate voltage Vg tunes the charge on the island. The Josephson energy
EJ is controlled via the barrier potential Vb. Low (high) barrier potential is
symbolized by an open (closed) “valve.” When EJ ≫Ec, the wire supports
MZMs (symbolized by stars) localized at its ends and has degenerate ground
states with even and odd fermion parity. (b) Protocol for detecting the fusion
rules for MZMs using charge sensing (see main text).
anyons corresponding to γ1 and γ2, as well as the pair γ3, γ4. Let |QL, QR⟩
be the unique ground state of the double-island system, where QL and QR
(with QL + QR = Qtot) designate the charges on the left and right islands,
respectively. Also, assume that the lowest excited state with opposite (relative
to the ground state) fermion parities on each island is |QL −1, QR + 1⟩. Upon
restoring charging energy, the state |012034⟩evolves into the ground state
|QL, QR⟩, while |112134⟩evolves into the excited state |QL −1, QR + 1⟩.
The (idealized) protocol described above corresponds to the evolution
|Qtot⟩→
1
√
2
 |QL, QR⟩+ eiα|QL −1, QR + 1⟩

(12.30)
generated by creating two MZM pairs, γ1, γ4 and γ2, γ3, out of the vacuum
and fusing the anyons in a diﬀerent order. The superposition in Eq. (12.30) is
a consequence of the anyons having two fusion channels, the vacuum and the
fermion, i.e., being non-Abelian. The experimental signature is a probabilistic
charge measurement of a given island characterized by even and odd electron
numbers occurring with equal probability.

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■343
12.3.3
Quantum information processing
Storing quantum information in a system of MZMs can be done following
the basic ideas discussed earlier in the context of Ising anyons. Using the so-
called “dense” encoding approach, one can store n −1 qubits in 2n MZMs
with ﬁxed total fermion parity. The basis states of the encoding space are
labeled by the eigenvalues ±1 of the parity operators iγ2j−1γ2j, where 1 ≤
j ≤n −1. Note that, given the eigenvalues of the ﬁrst n −1 operators,
the eigenvalue of iγ2n−1γ2n is ﬁxed by the total fermion parity. Hence, the
dimension of the encoding space is 2n−1, which allows the storage of n −1
qubits. In this scheme, one can easily entangle qubits by braiding the MZMs.
However, in a highly entangled state an error that occurs in one qubit can
propagate to many other qubits corrupting the quantum information stored in
the system. An alternative approach — the so-called “sparse” encoding — uses
4n MZMs to store n qubits by imposing the condition γ4j−3γ4j−2γ4j−1γ4j =
−1. This means that the fermion parity for each set (4j −3, 4j −3, 4j −
1, 4j) of four MZMs is even. Since there are 2n parity operators, iγ2j−1γ2j
with 1 ≤j ≤2n, and n parity conditions, the dimension of the encoding
space is 2n. The basis states for qubit j correspond to the eigenvalues of the
parity operator iγ4j−3γ4j−2 = iγ4j−1γ4j = ±1. In this scheme it is easier
to limit the propagation of errors, but entangling qubits requires performing
measurements.
Quantum computation requires the implementation of a universal set of
quantum gates. One possible universal set consists of the Hadamard gate (H),
the π/8 gate (T), and the controlled-Z gate. Unfortunately, MZMs are Ising-
type anyons, hence, they are not capable of implementing universal quantum
computation by braiding alone. More speciﬁcally, the T gate cannot be realized
through braiding and has to be implemented in a “conventional,” topologically
unprotected way. For example, one can bring two MZMs close together for a
short time τ, then separate them again. When the distance between the MZMs
is short (so that they overlap), the corresponding states are split in energy by
a quantity ∆E, which generates a dynamical phase factor. The evolution of
the quantum state described by the unitary operator
U =
 1
0
0
ei∆Eτ

.
(12.31)
Of course, getting exactly ∆Eτ = π/4 would require perfect control over
this process, which is practically impossible. Error correction is, therefore,
necessary. In this case, it is the error correction process (rather than the
gate itself) that takes advantage of the topologically protected operations. For
example, one can use so-called magic state distillation [71, 69] to enhance the
ﬁdelity of the T gate. Relying on topologically protected operations to achieve
the required ﬁdelity means fewer qubits and gate operations, as compared to
conventional quantum computation.
The other gates from the universal set can be implemented via MZM braid-
ing and (for sparse encoding) additional measurements. For example, in the

344
■Topological Quantum Matter & Quantum Computation
sparse encoding scheme, applying a Hadamard gate on the jth qubit can be
done by performing an exchange of the MZMs γ4j−2 and γ4j−1. However, en-
tangling two qubits cannot be done directly. To apply a controlled-Z gate on
two qubits, which are encoded in 8 MZMs, one has to ﬁrst perform a parity
measurement (on two MZMs) in order to switch to dense encoding with 6
MZMs. Then, the controlled-Z operation is done by performing a braid and,
ﬁnally, one returns to the sparse encoding by introducing an ancillary MZM
pair and performing another measurement [115]. As a ﬁnal remark, we men-
tion that recent algebraic number theory studies [397, 266] have shown that
the number of (topologically unprotected) T gates required to implement a
given quantum algorithm can be signiﬁcantly reduced. This number can be
further reduced by taking advantage of certain techniques based on using
ancilla qubits and measurements [56, 338]. These results demonstrate that
quantum algorithms could be implemented quite eﬃciently using Majorana
zero modes, should these anyons be physically available.
12.4
OUTLOOK: QUANTUM COMPUTATION
AND TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM MATTER
Are we on the verge of a technological revolution driven by new ways of
processing information based on the ability to control and manipulate non-
Abelian topological quantum systems? Possibly. However, foreseeing when this
will happen and to what result is not for the scientists, but for the planners
and the soothsayers. Science, on the other hand, is about understanding. For a
physicist, this means to be able to a) make predictions about certain behaviors
of physical systems and b) verify those predictions by performing experiments.
From this perspective, the topological quantum world awaits us full of marvels
and possible surprises.
Taking the search for Majorana bound states as a paradigmatic example,
we have learned that when a system expected to host a certain quantum state
cannot be obtained by just picking it out of the ground, the way to go is to
built it “from scratch.” Materials, heterostructure, and device engineering are
major themes that are here to stay. Their relevance and implications go way
beyond topological quantum systems, but the lesson emerging in this ﬁeld is
that raising this type of engineering to a level that provides access to new
physics is within reach.
This “new physics” has intrinsic ties with quantum information and quan-
tum computation. Essentially, being able to control and manipulate individual
quantum states, particularly if they are many-body quantum states “living”
in a large Hilbert space, could provide access to “nature’s way” of doing com-
putations. Is this diﬀerent from our well-known classical ways? Answering this
question will ultimately involve ﬁnding solutions to a multitude of problems
ranging from identifying working methods to perform quantum measurements
quickly and accurately, to designing and optimizing quantum algorithms, or
solving outstanding problems in computational complexity.

Anyons and Topological Quantum Computation
■345
As always, the best solution (or even a solution) might not be in sight.
Perhaps, zero-energy Majorana bound states are not the way to practically
perform topological quantum computation. Nonetheless, what is done in the
search for Majorana and its possible implementation as a platform for quan-
tum computation (i.e., looking for new materials, optimizing heterostructure
and device engineering, identifying techniques for eﬃciently modeling com-
plex quantum devices, ﬁnding better quantum algorithms and error correction
methods, etc.) is exactly what needs to be done. Maybe some Fibonacci-type
anyon will be the answer. Still, to get there we need mastery over materials,
nanostructures, and measurement techniques. Aiming for a speciﬁc goal (e.g.,
the Majorana) serves this need very well, even if the outcome will not be the
expected one.
What about an “epic failure”? What if quantum computation is not pos-
sible in principle? This would perhaps be a prize even bigger than quantum
computation itself, since we would have discovered a Principle that makes
quantum computation impossible. This brings us to the most fundamental
level of this interrogation of the topological quantum world, an inquiry that
touches upon the foundations of quantum mechanics and the principles of el-
ementary particle physics. Is there a fundamental information-theoretic prin-
ciple that constrains all possible physical theories? Can we learn something
about the nature of elementary particles by studying emergent physics in our
“universe-in-a-box” — the condensed matter systems in our labs? Can topo-
logical order survive non-zero temperature? Does this have anything to do
with the classical and the quantum worlds being diﬀerent? Is P ̸= NP?
There might be a long way to go before these questions will be answered
and before humankind will beneﬁt from the new ﬁndings. For some, this may
be disappointing, because the way is long. For a researcher, I believe, it is
good news: we are not at a dead end; there is a way.


References
[1] S. Aaronson. The limits of quantum computers. Scientiﬁc American,
(298):62, 2008.
[2] D. Aasen, M. Hell, R. V. Mishmash, A. Higginbotham, J. Danon, M. Lei-
jnse, T. S. Jespersen, J. A. Folk, C. M. Marcus, K. Flensberg, and J. Al-
icea. Milestones toward Majorana-based quantum computing. e-print
arXiv:1511.05153, 2015.
[3] A. A. Abrikosov, L. P. Gor’kov, and I. E. Dzyaloshinski. Methods of
Quantum Field Theory in Statistical Physics. Dover Publications, Inc.,
New York, 1963.
[4] I. Aﬄeck. Quantum spin chains and the Haldane gap. J. Phys.: Cond.
Matt., (1):3047, 1989.
[5] I. Aﬄeck, T. Kennedy, E. H. Lieb, and H. Tasaki.
Rigorous results
on valence-bond ground states in antiferromagnets. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(59):799, 1987.
[6] Y. Aharonov, D. Z. Albert, and L. Vaidman. How the result of a mea-
surement of a component of the spin of a spin-1/2 particle can turn out
to be 100. Phys. Rev. Lett., (60):1351, 1988.
[7] Y. Aharonov and J. Anandan. Phase change during a cyclic quantum
evolution. Phys. Rev. Lett., (58):1593–1596, 1987.
[8] Y. Aharonov, P. G. Bergmann, and J. L. Lebowitz. Time symmetry in
the quantum process of measurement. Phys. Rev., (134):B1410, 1964.
[9] Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm. Signiﬁcance of electromagnetic potentials
in the quantum theory. Phys. Rev., (115):485–491, 1959.
[10] Y. Aharonov, S. Popescu, D. Rohrlich, and P. Skrzypczyk. Quantum
cheshire cats. New J. Phys., (15):113015, 2013.
[11] A. R. Akhmerov, J. Nilsson, and C. W. J. Beenakker. Electrically de-
tected interferometry of majorana fermions in a topological insulator.
Phys. Rev. Lett., (102):216404, 2009.
[12] E. Alba, X. Fernandez-Gonzalvo, J. Mur-Petit, J. K. Pachos, and J. J.
Garcia-Ripoll. Seeing topological order in time-of-ﬂight measurements.
Phys. Rev. Lett., (107):235301, 2011.
[13] J. Alicea. Majorana fermions in a tunable semiconductor device. Phys.
Rev. B, (81):125318, 2010.
[14] J. Alicea. New directions in the pursuit of Majorana fermions in solid
state systems. Reports on Progress in Physics, (75):076501, 2012.
347

348
■References
[15] J. Alicea, Y. Oreg, G. Refael, F. von Oppen, and M. P. A. Fisher. Non-
Abelian statistics and topological quantum information processing in
1D wire networks. Nature Physics, (7):412, 2011.
[16] A. Altland and B. D. Simons. Condensed Matter Field Theory. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2010.
[17] A. Altland and M. R. Zirnbauer.
Nonstandard symmetry classes in
mesoscopic normal-superconducting hybrid structures. Phys. Rev. B,
(55):1142, 1997.
[18] L. Alvarez-Gaum´e and E. Witten. Gravitational anomalies. Nuclear
Physics B, (234):269, 1984.
[19] M. H. Anderson, J. R. Ensher, M. R. Matthews, C. E. Wieman, and
E. A. Cornell. Observation of Bose–Einstein condensation in a dilute
atomic vapor. Science, (269):198, 1995.
[20] P. W. Anderson. Absence of diﬀusion in certain random lattices. Phys.
Rev., (109):1492, 1958.
[21] P. W. Anderson. Resonating valence bonds: A new kind of insulator?
Materials Research Bulletin, (8):153, 1973.
[22] Y. Ando. Topological insulator materials. Journal of the Physical Society
of Japan, (82):102001, 2013.
[23] M. Ansmann, H. Wang, R. C. Bialczak, M. Hofheinz, E. Lucero, M. Nee-
ley, A. D. O’Connell, D. Sank, M. Weides, J. Wenner, A. N. Cleland,
and J. M. Martinis. Violation of Bell’s inequality in Josephson phase
qubits. Nature, (461):504, 2009.
[24] S. Arora and B. Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach.
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[25] D. Arovas, J. R. Schrieﬀer, and F. Wilczek. Fractional statistics and the
quantum hall eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett., (53):722–723, 1984.
[26] A. Aspect, E. Arimondo, R. Kaiser, N. Vansteenkiste, and C. Cohen-
Tannoudji. Laser cooling below the one-photon recoil energy by velocity-
selective coherent population trapping. Phys. Rev. Lett., (61):826, 1988.
[27] A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, and G. Roger. Experimental test of bell’s in-
equalities using time-varying analyzers.
Phys. Rev. Lett., (49):1804,
1982.
[28] M. Atala, M. Aidelsburger, J. T. Barreiro, D. Abanin, T. Kitagawa,
E. Demler, and I. Bloch. Direct measurement of the Zak phase in topo-
logical Bloch bands. Nature Physics, (9):795, 2013.
[29] F. T. Avignone, S. R. Elliott, and J. Engel. Double beta decay, Majorana
neutrinos, and neutrino mass. Rev. Mod. Phys., (80):481, 2008.
[30] A. B´erut, A. Arakelyan, A. Petrosyan, S. Ciliberto, R. Dillenschneider,
and E. Lutz. Experimental veriﬁcation of Landauer’s principle linking
information and thermodynamics. Nature, (483):187, 2012.
[31] F.A. Bais, P. van Driel, and M. de Wild Propitius. Quantum symmetries
in discrete gauge theories. Phys. Lett. B, (280):63, 1992.
[32] J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieﬀer. Microscopic theory of
superconductivity. Phys. Rev., (106):162, 1957.

References
■349
[33] J. T. Barreiro, N. K. Langford, N. A. Peters, and P. G. Kwiat. Gen-
eration of hyperentangled photon pairs. Phys. Rev. Lett., (95):260501,
2005.
[34] J. G. Bednorz and K. A. M¨uller. Possible high Tc superconductivity in
the Ba-La-Cu-O system. Zeit. Phys. B, (64):189, 1986.
[35] C. W. J. Beenakker. Annihilation of colliding bogoliubov quasiparticles
reveals their majorana nature. Phys. Rev. Lett., (112):070604, 2014.
[36] C.W.J. Beenakker. Search for Majorana fermions in superconductors.
Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics, (4):113, 2013.
[37] J. S. Bell. On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox. Physics, (1):195,
1964.
[38] J. S. Bell. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics: Collected
Papers on Quantum Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 1987.
[39] P. Benioﬀ. The computer as a physical system: A microscopic quantum
mechanical Hamiltonian model of computers as represented by Turing
machines. J. Stat. Phys., (22):563, 1980.
[40] C. H. Bennett. The thermodynamics of computation—a review. Int. J.
Theor. Phys., (21):905, 1982.
[41] C. H. Bennett, E. Bernstein, G. Brassard, and U. Vazirani. Strengths
and weaknesses of quantum computing. SIAM Journal on Computing,
(26):1510, 1997.
[42] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard. Quantum cryptography: Public key
distribution and coin tossing. Proc. of IEEE International Conference
on Computers, Systems and Signal Processing, IEEE, New York, page
175, 1984.
[43] C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Cr´epeau, R. Jozsa, A. Peres, and W. K.
Wootters. Teleporting an unknown quantum state via dual classical and
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen channels. Phys. Rev. Lett., (70):1895, 1993.
[44] C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, and N. D. Mermin. Quantum cryptography
without Bell’s theorem. Phys. Rev. Lett., (68):557, 1992.
[45] C. H. Bennett and S. J. Wiesner. Communication via one- and two-
particle operators on Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen states. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(69):2881, 1992.
[46] V. L. Berezinskii. Destruction of long-range order in one-dimensional
and two-dimensional systems having a continuous symmetry group I.
Classical systems. Sov. Phys. JETP, (32):493, 1971.
[47] B. B´eri and N. R. Cooper. Z2 Topological insulators in ultracold atomic
gases. Phys. Rev. Lett., (107):145301, 2011.
[48] B. A. Bernevig. Topological Insulators and Topological Superconductors.
Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 2013.
[49] B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang. Quantum spin hall
eﬀect and topological phase transition in HgTe quantum wells. Science,
(314):1757, 2006.
[50] M. V. Berry. Quantal phase factors accompanying adiabatic changes.
Proc. Roy. Soc. London, (A392):45–57, 1984.

350
■References
[51] G. Bihlmayer, O. Rader, and R. Winkler. Focus on the Rashba eﬀect.
New Journal of Physics, (17):050202, 2015.
[52] I. Bloch. Ultracold quantum gases in optical lattices. Nature Physics,
(1):23, 2005.
[53] I. Bloch, J. Dalibard, and W. Zwerger. Many-body physics with ultra-
cold gases. Rev. Mod. Phys., (80):885, 2008.
[54] B. Blok and X.-G. Wen. Eﬀective theories of the fractional quantum
hall eﬀect: Hierarchy construction. Phys. Rev. B, (42):8145, 1990.
[55] G. E. Blonder, M. Tinkham, and T. M. Klapwijk. Transition from metal-
lic to tunneling regimes in superconducting microconstrictions: Excess
current, charge imbalance, and supercurrent conversion. Phys. Rev. B,
(25):4515, 1982.
[56] A. Bocharov, M. Roetteler, and K. M. Svore.
Eﬃcient synthesis
of universal repeat-until-success quantum circuits.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(114):080502, 2015.
[57] A. Bohm, A. Mostafazadeh, H. Koizumi, Q. Niu, and J. Zwanziger.
The Geometric Phase in Quantum Systems: Foundations, Mathematical
concepts, and Applications in Molecular and Condensed Matter Physics.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003.
[58] D. Bohm. A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms
of “hidden” variables. I. Phys. Rev., (85):166, 1952.
[59] C. J. Bolech and E. Demler. Observing Majorana bound states in p-wave
superconductors using noise measurements in tunneling experiments.
Phys. Rev. Lett., (98):237002, 2007.
[60] N. E. Bonesteel, L. Hormozi, G. Zikos, and S. H. Simon. Braid topologies
for quantum computation. Phys. Rev. Lett., (95):140503, 2005.
[61] M. Born and V. Fock. Beweis des Adiabatensatzes. Z. Phys., (51):165,
1928.
[62] R. Bott. The periodicity theorem for the classical groups and some of
its applications. Advances in Mathematics, (4):353, 1970.
[63] M. Boyer, G. Brassard, P. Hoyer, and A. Tapp. Tight bounds on quan-
tum searching. Fortschritte der Physik, (46):493, 1998.
[64] P. O. Boykin, T. Mor, M. Pulver, V. Roychowdhury, and F. Vatan. On
universal and fault-tolerant quantum computing. Information Process-
ing Letters, (75):101, 2000.
[65] C. C. Bradley, C. A. Sackett, J. J. Tollett, and R. G. Hulet. Evidence
of Bose–Einstein condensation in an atomic gas with attractive interac-
tions. Phys. Rev. Lett., (75):1687, 1995.
[66] G. Brassard.
Searching a quantum phone book.
Science, (275):627,
1997.
[67] G. Brassard, C. Crepeau, D. Mayers, and L. Salvail.
A brief review
on the impossibility of quantum bit commitment. arXiv e-print quant-
ph/9712023, 1997.

References
■351
[68] B. Braunecker and P. Simon. Interplay between classical magnetic mo-
ments and superconductivity in quantum one-dimensional conductors:
Toward a self-sustained topological majorana phase. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(111):147202, 2013.
[69] S. Bravyi. Universal quantum computation with the ν = 5/2 fractional
quantum Hall state. Phys. Rev. A, (73):042313, 2006.
[70] S. Bravyi, M. B. Hastings, and S. Michalakis.
Topological quantum
order: Stability under local perturbations. J. Math. Phys., (51), 2010.
[71] S. Bravyi and A. Kitaev. Universal quantum computation with ideal
Cliﬀord gates and noisy ancillas. Phys. Rev. A, (71):022316, 2005.
[72] S. B. Bravyi and A. Y. Kitaev. Quantum codes on a lattice with bound-
ary. arXiv e-print quant-ph/9811052, 1998.
[73] D. Bruss. Characterizing entanglement. J. Math. Phys., (43):4237, 2002.
[74] P. M. R. Brydon, S. Das Sarma, Hoi-Yin Hui, and Jay D. Sau. Topo-
logical Yu–Shiba–Rusinov chain from spin-orbit coupling. Phys. Rev. B,
91:064505, 2015.
[75] I. Buluta and F. Nori. Quantum simulators. Science, (326):108, 2009.
[76] P. Busch, M. Grabowski, and P. J. Lahti. Operational Quantum Physics.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1995.
[77] A. R. Calderbank, E. M. Rains, P. W. Shor, and N. J. A. Sloane. Quan-
tum error correction via codes over GF(4). IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
(44):1369, 1998.
[78] A. R. Calderbank and Peter W. Shor. Good quantum error-correcting
codes exist. Phys. Rev. A, (54):1098, 1996.
[79] A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, and
A. K. Geim. The electronic properties of graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
(81):109, 2009.
[80] C. Chamon, R. Jackiw, Y. Nishida, S.-Y. Pi, and L. Santos. Quantizing
Majorana fermions in a superconductor.
Phys. Rev. B, (81):224515,
2010.
[81] M.-C. Chang and Q. Niu. Berry curvature, orbital moment, and eﬀective
quantum theory of electrons in electromagnetic ﬁelds. J. Phys.: Cond.
Matt., (20):193202, 2008.
[82] X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, Z.-X. Liu, and X.-G. Wen. Symmetry protected
topological orders and the group cohomology of their symmetry group.
Phys. Rev. B, (87):155114, 2013.
[83] X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen. Local unitary transformation, long-
range quantum entanglement, wave function renormalization, and topo-
logical order. Phys. Rev. B, (82):155138, 2010.
[84] X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen. Classiﬁcation of gapped symmetric
phases in one-dimensional spin systems.
Phys. Rev. B, (83):035107,
2011.
[85] S.-S. Chern and J. Simons. Characteristic forms and geometric invari-
ants. Ann. Math., (1):48, 1974.

352
■References
[86] C. Chin, R. Grimm, P. Julienne, and E. Tiesinga. Feshbach resonances
in ultracold gases. Rev. Mod. Phys., (82):1225, 2010.
[87] K.-C. Chiu, J. C. Y. Teo, A. P. Schnyder, and S. Ryu.
Classiﬁca-
tion of topological quantum matter with symmetries. Rev. Mod. Phys.,
(88):035005, 2016.
[88] G. Y. Cho and J.l E. Moore. Topological bf ﬁeld theory description of
topological insulators. Annals of Physics, (326):1515, 2011.
[89] T.-P. Choy, J. M. Edge, A. R. Akhmerov, and C. W. J. Beenakker.
Majorana fermions emerging from magnetic nanoparticles on a super-
conductor without spin-orbit coupling. Phys. Rev. B, (84):195442, 2011.
[90] S. Chu. Nobel lecture: The manipulation of neutral particles. Rev. Mod.
Phys., (70):685, 1998.
[91] S. Chu, L. Hollberg, J. E. Bjorkholm, A. Cable, and A. Ashkin. Three-
dimensional viscous conﬁnement and cooling of atoms by resonance ra-
diation pressure. Phys. Rev. Lett., (55):48, 1985.
[92] S. B. Chung, H.-J. Zhang, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang. Topological super-
conducting phase and Majorana fermions in half-metal/superconductor
heterostructures. Phys. Rev. B, (84):060510, 2011.
[93] A. Church. An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory. Am.
J. Math., (58):345, 1936.
[94] H. O. H. Churchill, V. Fatemi, K. Grove-Rasmussen, M. T. Deng,
P. Caroﬀ, H. Q. Xu, and C. M. Marcus. Superconductor-nanowire de-
vices from tunneling to the multichannel regime: Zero-bias oscillations
and magnetoconductance crossover. Phys. Rev. B, (87):241401, 2013.
[95] J. I. Cirac and P. Zoller. Quantum computations with cold trapped ions.
Phys. Rev. Lett., (74):4091, 1995.
[96] B. S. Cirel’son. Quantum generalizations of Bell’s inequality. Lett. Math.
Phys., (4):93, 1980.
[97] J. F. Clauser, M. A. Horne, A. Shimony, and R. A. Holt. Proposed
Experiment to test local hidden-variable theories.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(23):880, 1969.
[98] R. Cleve, A. Ekert, C. Macchiavello, and M. Mosca. Quantum algo-
rithms revisited. Proc. R. Soc. London A, (454):339, 1998.
[99] W. K. Cliﬀord. Mathematical Papers. (ed. R. Tucker), London: Macmil-
lan, 1882.
[100] C. Cohen-Tannoudji. Nobel lecture: Manipulating atoms with photons.
Rev. Mod. Phys., (70):707, 1998.
[101] C. Cohen-Tannoudji. Atoms in Electromagnetic Fields. World Scientiﬁc,
2004.
[102] C. Cohen-Tannoudji and D. Guery-Odelin. Advances in Atomic Physics:
An Overview. World Scientiﬁc, 2011.
[103] S. A. Cook. The complexity of theorem-proving procedures. In Proceed-
ings of the Third Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
STOC ’71, page 151. ACM Press, New York, 1971.

References
■353
[104] N. R. Cooper. Optical ﬂux lattices for ultracold atomic gases. Phys.
Rev. Lett., (106):175301, 2011.
[105] Ph. Courteille, R. S. Freeland, D. J. Heinzen, F. A. van Abeelen, and
B. J. Verhaar. Observation of a Feshbach resonance in cold atom scat-
tering. Phys. Rev. Lett., (81):69, 1998.
[106] J. G. Cramer. The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Rev. Mod. Phys., (58):647, 1986.
[107] R. Crandall and C. Pomerance. Prime Numbers: A Computational Per-
spective. Springer, New York, 2005.
[108] M. O. T. Cunha, J. A. Dunningham, and V. Vedral. Entanglement in
single-particle systems. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, (463):2277, 2007.
[109] J. Dalibard, F. Gerbier, G. Juzeli¯unas, and P. ¨Ohberg.
Colloquium:
Artiﬁcial gauge potentials for neutral atoms. Rev. Mod. Phys., (83):1523,
2011.
[110] G. M. D’Ariano, M. G. A. Paris, and M. F. Sacchi. Quantum tomogra-
phy. Adv. Imaging Electron Phys., (128):205, 2003.
[111] A. Das and B. K. Chakrabarti. Colloquium: Quantum annealing and
analog quantum computation. Rev. Mod. Phys., (80):1061, 2008.
[112] A. Das, Y. Ronen, Y. Most, Y. Oreg, M. Heiblum, and H. Shtrikman.
Zero-bias peaks and splitting in an Al-InAs nanowire topological super-
conductor as a signature of Majorana fermions. Nature Physics, (8):887,
2012.
[113] S. DasSarma and A. Pinczuk (editors). Perspectives in Quantum Hall
Eﬀects: Novel Quantum Liquids in Low-Dimensional Semiconductor
Structures. Wiley, New York, 1997.
[114] S. Das Sarma, M. Freedman, and C. Nayak. Topologically protected
qubits from a possible non-abelian fractional quantum Hall state. Phys.
Rev. Lett., (94):166802, 2005.
[115] S. Das Sarma, M. Freedman, and C. Nayak.
Majorana zero modes
and topological quantum computation.
Npj Quantum Information,
(1):15001, 2015.
[116] S. Das Sarma, C. Nayak, and S. Tewari. Proposal to stabilize and detect
half-quantum vortices in strontium ruthenate thin ﬁlms: Non-Abelian
braiding statistics of vortices in a px + ipy superconductor. Phys. Rev.
B, (73):220502, 2006.
[117] S. Das Sarma, J. D. Sau, and T. D. Stanescu. Splitting of the zero-
bias conductance peak as smoking gun evidence for the existence of the
Majorana mode in a superconductor-semiconductor nanowire.
Phys.
Rev. B, (86):220506, Dec.
[118] K. B. Davis, M. O. Mewes, M. R. Andrews, N. J. van Druten, D. S.
Durfee, D. M. Kurn, and W. Ketterle. Bose–Einstein condensation in a
gas of sodium atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett., (75):3969, 1995.

354
■References
[119] M. T. Deng, C. L. Yu, G. Y. Huang, M. Larsson, P. Caroﬀ, and H. Q.
Xu. Anomalous zero-bias conductance peak in a Nb–InSb nanowire–Nb
hybrid device. Nano Letters, (12):6414, 2012.
[120] D. Deutsch.
Quantum theory, the Church–Turing principle and the
universal quantum computer. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, (400):97, 1985.
[121] D. Deutsch and R. Jozsa. Rapid solution of problems by quantum com-
putation. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, (439):553, 1992.
[122] S. J. Devitt, K. Nemoto, and W. J. Munro. Quantum error correction
for beginners. Rep. Prog. Phys., (76):076001, 2013.
[123] D. Dieks. Communication by EPR devices. Phys. Lett. A, (92):271,
1982.
[124] W. Diﬃe and M. Hellman. New directions in cryptography. IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, (IT-22):644, 1976.
[125] P. A. M. Dirac. The quantum theory of the electron. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 117(778):610, 1928.
[126] P. A. M. Dirac. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford Univer-
sity Press Inc., New York, 1958.
[127] D. P. DiVincenzo. Two-bit gates are universal for quantum computation.
Phys. Rev. A, (51):1015, 1995.
[128] P. B. Dixon, D. J. Starling, A. N. Jordan, and J. C. Howell. Ultra-
sensitive beam deﬂection measurement via interferometric weak value
ampliﬁcation. Phys. Rev. Lett., (102):173601, 2009.
[129] J. Dressel, M. Malik, F. M. Miatto, A. N. Jordan, and R. W. Boyd. Col-
loquium: Understanding quantum weak values: Basics and applications.
Rev. Mod. Phys., (86):307, 2014.
[130] L.-M. Duan, E. Demler, and M. D. Lukin. Controlling spin exchange
interactions of ultracold atoms in optical lattices.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(91):090402, 2003.
[131] F. J. Dyson. The threefold way. Algebraic structure of symmetry groups
and ensembles in quantum mechanics. J. Math. Phys., (3):1199, 1962.
[132] K. Efetov. Supersymmetry in Disorder and Chaos. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1997.
[133] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen.
Can quantum-mechanical
description of physical reality be considered complete?
Phys. Rev.,
(47):777, 1935.
[134] J. Eisert and D. Gross. Multi-partite entanglement. In D. Bruss and
G. Leuchs, editors, Lectures on Quantum Information, 2006.
[135] A. K. Ekert. Quantum cryptography based on Bell’s theorem. Phys.
Rev. Lett., (67):661, 1991.
[136] S. Elitzur, G. Moore, A. Schwimmer, and N. Seiberg. Remarks on the
canonical quantization of the Chern–Simons–Witten theory. Nucl. Phys.
B, (326):108, 1989.

References
■355
[137] S. R. Elliott and M. Franz. Colloquium: Majorana fermions in nuclear,
particle, and solid-state physics. Rev. Mod. Phys., (87):137, 2015.
[138] A. M. Essin and M. Hermele. Classifying fractionalization: Symmetry
classiﬁcation of gapped Z2 spin liquids in two dimensions. Phys. Rev.
B, (87):104406, 2013.
[139] A. M. Essin, J. E. Moore, and D. Vanderbilt. Magnetoelectric polariz-
ability and axion electrodynamics in crystalline insulators. Phys. Rev.
Lett., (102):146805, 2009.
[140] H. Everett. Relative state formulation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod.
Phys., (29):454, 1957.
[141] Z. F. Ezawa. Quantum Hall Eﬀects: Recent Theoretical and Experimen-
tal Developments (3rd Edition). World Scientiﬁc, 2013.
[142] M. Fannes, B. Nachtergaele, and R. F. Werner. Exact antiferromagnetic
ground states of quantum spin chains. EPL, (10):633, 1989.
[143] U. Fano. Eﬀects of conﬁguration interaction on intensities and phase
shifts. Phys. Rev., (124):1866, 1961.
[144] P. Fendley. Critical points in two-dimensional replica sigma models. In
A. M. Tsvelik, editor, New Theoretical Approaches to Strongly Corre-
lated Systems, 2006.
[145] H. Feshbach. Uniﬁed theory of nuclear reactions. Annals of Physics,
(5):357, 1958.
[146] R. P. Feynman.
Simulating physics with computers.
Int. J. Theor.
Phys., (21):467, 1982.
[147] L. Fidkowski, X. Chen, and A. Vishwanath. Non-Abelian topological
order on the surface of a 3D topological superconductor from an exactly
solved model. Phys. Rev. X, (3):041016, 2013.
[148] L. Fidkowski and A. Kitaev. Eﬀects of interactions on the topological
classiﬁcation of free fermion systems. Phys. Rev. B, (81):134509, 2010.
[149] L. Fidkowski and A. Kitaev.
Topological phases of fermions in one
dimension. Phys. Rev. B, (83):075103, 2011.
[150] A. D. K. Finck, D. J. Van Harlingen, P. K. Mohseni, K. Jung, and
X. Li. Anomalous modulation of a zero-bias peak in a hybrid nanowire-
superconductor device. Phys. Rev. Lett., (110):126406, 2013.
[151] V. Fock.
¨Uber die Beziehung zwischen den Integralen der quanten-
mechanischen Bewegungsgleichungen und der Schr¨odingerschen Wellen-
gleichung. Z. Phys., (49):323, 1928.
[152] E. Fradkin. Field Theories of Condensed Matter Physics. Cambridge
University Press, 2013.
[153] M. Franz and L. Molenkamp (Editors). Topological Insulators. Elsevier,
2013.
[154] E. Fredkin and T. Toﬀoli.
Conservative logic.
Int. J. Theor. Phys.,
(21):219, 1982.
[155] D. S. Freed and G. W. Moore. Twisted equivariant matter. Annales
Henri Poincar´e, (14):1927, 2013.

356
■References
[156] H. M. Freedman, M. Larsen, and Z. Wang. A modular functor which is
universal for quantum computation. Commun. Math. Phys., (227):605,
2002.
[157] H. M. Freedman, M. Larsen, and Z. Wang. The two-eigenvalue problem
and density of Jones representation of braid groups. Commun. Math.
Phys., (228):177, 2002.
[158] M. Freedman, C. Nayak, and K. Walker. Towards universal topological
quantum computation in the ν = 5
2 fractional quantum Hall state. Phys.
Rev. B, (73):245307, 2006.
[159] M. H. Freedman, A. Kitaev, M. J. Larsen, and Z. Wang. Topological
quantum computation. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., (40):31, 2003.
[160] S. J. Freedman and J. F. Clauser. Experimental test of local hidden-
variable theories. Phys. Rev. Lett., (28):938, 1972.
[161] L. Fu. Electron Teleportation via Majorana bound states in a mesoscopic
superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett., (104):056402, 2010.
[162] L. Fu and C. L. Kane. Time reversal polarization and a Z2 adiabatic
spin pump. Phys. Rev. B, (74):195312, 2006.
[163] L. Fu and C. L. Kane. Topological insulators with inversion symmetry.
Phys. Rev. B, (76):045302, 2007.
[164] L. Fu and C. L. Kane. Superconducting proximity eﬀect and Majorana
fermions at the surface of a topological insulator.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(100):096407, 2008.
[165] L.
Fu
and
C.
L.
Kane.
Josephson
current
and
noise
at
a
superconductor/quantum-spin-Hall-insulator/superconductor junction.
Phys. Rev. B, (79):161408, 2009.
[166] L. Fu, C. L. Kane, and E. J. Mele.
Topological insulators in three
dimensions. Phys. Rev. Lett., (98):106803, 2007.
[167] V. Galitski and I. B. Spielman. Spin–orbit coupling in quantum gases.
Nature, (494):49, 2013.
[168] J. J. Garc´ıa-Ripoll, M. A. Martin-Delgado, and J. I. Cirac.
Imple-
mentation of spin Hamiltonians in optical lattices.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(93):250405, 2004.
[169] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathemat-
ica und verwandter Systeme I. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik,
(38):173.
[170] A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov. The rise of graphene. Nature Materials,
(6):183, 2007.
[171] I. M. Gelfand and M. A. Neumark. On the embedding of normed rings
into the ring of operators in Hilbert space. Rec. Math. [Mat. Sbornik]
N.S., (12):197, 1943.
[172] M. Gell-Mann and J. B. Hartle. Complexity, Entropy and the Physics
of Information, SFI Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Vol. VIII.
ed. by W. Zurek, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1990.
[173] M. Gell-Mann and M. L´evy. The axial vector current in beta decay. Il
Nuovo Cimento (1955-1965), (16):705, 1960.

References
■357
[174] I. M. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori. Quantum simulation. Rev.
Mod. Phys., (86):153, 2014.
[175] W. Gerlach and O. Stern. Das magnetische Moment des Silberatoms.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, (9):353, 1922.
[176] G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, and T. Weber. Uniﬁed dynamics for micro-
scopic and macroscopic systems. Phys. Rev. D, (34):470, 1986.
[177] V. L. Ginzburg and L. D. Landau. On the theory of superconductivity.
Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., (20):1064, 1950.
[178] N. Gisin, G. Ribordy, W. Tittel, and H. Zbinden. Quantum cryptogra-
phy. Rev. Mod. Phys., (74):145, 2002.
[179] M. Giustina, A. Mech, S. Ramelow, B. Wittmann, J. Koﬂer, J. Beyer,
A. Lita, B. Calkins, T. Gerrits, S. W. Nam, R. Ursin, and A. Zeilinger.
Bell violation using entangled photons without the fair-sampling as-
sumption. Nature, (497):227, 2013.
[180] A. Gleason. Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. Indiana
Univ. Math. J., (6):885, 1957.
[181] N. Goldenfeld. Lectures on Phase Transitions and the Renormalization
Group. Perseus Publishing, 1992.
[182] D. Goldin and P. Wegner. The interactive nature of computing: Refuting
the strong church–turing thesis. Minds and Machines, (18):17, 2008.
[183] N. Goldman, E. Anisimovas, F. Gerbier, P. ¨Ohberg, I. B. Spielman,
and G. Juzeli¯unas. Measuring topology in a laser-coupled honeycomb
lattice: from Chern insulators to topological semi-metals. New Journal
of Physics, (15):013025, 2013.
[184] N. Goldman, G. Juzeliunas, P. Ohberg, and I. B. Spielman.
Light-
induced gauge ﬁelds for ultracold atoms. Rep. Prog. Phys., (77):126401,
2014.
[185] N. Goldman, I. Satija, P. Nikolic, A. Bermudez, M. A. Martin-Delgado,
M. Lewenstein, and I. B. Spielman.
Realistic time-reversal invari-
ant topological insulators with neutral atoms.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(105):255302, 2010.
[186] J. Goldstone, A. Salam, and S. Weinberg. Broken symmetries. Phys.
Rev., (127):965, 1962.
[187] J. P. Gordon and A. Ashkin. Motion of atoms in a radiation trap. Phys.
Rev. A, (21):1606, 1980.
[188] D. Gottesman. Class of quantum error-correcting codes saturating the
quantum Hamming bound. Phys. Rev. A, (54):1862, 1996.
[189] D. Gottesman.
Quantum Error Correction. Ph.D. thesis.
California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 1997.
[190] D. Gottesman. Theory of fault-tolerant quantum computation. Phys.
Rev. A, (57):127, 1998.
[191] M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T. W. Hansch, and I. Bloch. Quan-
tum phase transition from a superﬂuid to a Mott insulator in a gas of
ultracold atoms. Nature, (415):39, 2002.

358
■References
[192] R. B. Griﬃths.
Consistent Quantum Theory.
Cambridge University
Press, 2003.
[193] E. Grosfeld, N. R. Cooper, A. Stern, and R. Ilan. Predicted signatures of
p-wave superﬂuid phases and Majorana zero modes of fermionic atoms
in rf absorption. Phys. Rev. B, (76):104516, 2007.
[194] E. Grosfeld and A. Stern. Observing Majorana bound states of Joseph-
son vortices in topological superconductors. Proc. Natl. Acad. of Sci.,
(108):11810, 2011.
[195] E. P. Gross. Structure of a quantized vortex in boson systems. Il Nuovo
Cimento (1955-1965), (20):454, 1961.
[196] L. K. Grover. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
of Computing, STOC ’96, page 212. ACM Press, New York, 1996.
[197] L. K. Grover. Quantum mechanics helps in searching for a needle in a
haystack. Phys. Rev. Lett., (79):325, Jul 1997.
[198] G. Grynberg and C. Robilliard. Cold atoms in dissipative optical lat-
tices. Physics Reports, (355):335, 2001.
[199] Z.-C. Gu and X.-G. Wen. Tensor-entanglement-ﬁltering renormaliza-
tion approach and symmetry-protected topological order. Phys. Rev. B,
(80):155131, 2009.
[200] Z.-C. Gu and X.-G. Wen. Symmetry-protected topological orders for
interacting fermions: Fermionic topological nonlinear σ models and a
special group supercohomology theory. Phys. Rev. B, (90):115141, 2014.
[201] E. Guadagnini, M. Martellini, and M. Mintchev. Wilson lines in chern-
Simons theory and link invariants. Nucl. Phys. B, (330):575, 1990.
[202] F. D. M. Haldane. Spontaneous dimerization in the s=1/2 Heisenberg
antiferromagnetic chain with competing interactions.
Phys. Rev. B,
(25):4925, 1982.
[203] F. D. M. Haldane. Fractional quantization of the hall eﬀect: A hierarchy
of incompressible quantum ﬂuid states. Phys. Rev. Lett., (51):605, 1983.
[204] F. D. M. Haldane. Nonlinear ﬁeld theory of large-spin Heisenberg anti-
ferromagnets: semiclassically quantized solitons of the one-dimensional
easy-axis n´eel state. Phys. Rev. Lett., (50):1153, 1983.
[205] F. D. M. Haldane. Model for a quantum hall eﬀect without Landau
Levels: Condensed-matter realization of the “parity anomaly”. Phys.
Rev. Lett., (61):2015, 1988.
[206] B. I. Halperin. Statistics of quasiparticles and the hierarchy of fractional
quantized hall states. Phys. Rev. Lett., (52):1583, 1984.
[207] J. H. Hannay. Angle variable holonomy in adiabatic excursion of an
integrable Hamiltonian. J. Phys. A Math. Gen., (18):221–230, 1985.
[208] T. H. Hansson, V. Oganesyan, and S. L. Sondhi. Superconductors are
topologically ordered. Ann. Phys., (313):497, 2004.
[209] M. Haque, O. S. Zozulya, and K. Schoutens. Entanglement between
particle partitions in itinerant many-particle states. Journal of Physics
A: Mathematical and Theoretical, (42):504012, 2009.

References
■359
[210] S. Haroche, J. C. Gay, and G. Grynberg (Editors).
Atomic Physics
11: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Atomic
Physics. World Scientiﬁc, 1989.
[211] M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane. Colloquium: Topological insulators. Rev.
Mod. Phys., (82):3045, 2010.
[212] M. Z. Hasan and J. E. Moore. Three-dimensional topological insulators.
Ann. Review.Condensed Matter Physics, (2):55, 2011.
[213] T. W. H¨ansch and A. L. Schawlow. Cooling of gases by laser radiation.
Optics Communications, (13):68, 1975.
[214] J. J. He, T. K. Ng, P. A. Lee, and K. T. Law.
Selective equal-spin
andreev reﬂections induced by majorana fermions.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(112):037001, 2014.
[215] O. Heinonen (Editor).
Composite Fermions: A Uniﬁed View of the
Quantum Hall Regime. World Scientiﬁc, 1998.
[216] W. Heisenberg.
Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern
Science. Penguin Books, 1958.
[217] S. Helgason. Diﬀerential Geometry, Lie Groups, and Symmetric Spaces.
Academic Press, 1978.
[218] B. Hensen, H. Bernien, A. E. Dr´eau, A. Reiserer, N. Kalb, M. S. Blok,
J. Ruitenberg, R. F. L. Vermeulen, R. N. Schouten, C. Abell´an, W.
Amaya, V. Pruneri, M. W. Mitchell, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, D.
Elkouss, S. Wehner, T. H. Taminiau, and R. Hanson, Loophole-free Bell
inequality violation using electron spins separated by 1.3 kilometers,
Nature (526):68, 2015.
[219] G. Herzberg and H. C. Longuet-Higgins. Intersection of potential energy
surfaces in polyatomic molecules. Discuss. Farady Soc., (35):77, 1963.
[220] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann.
Principles of Mathematical Logic.
Springer-Verlag, 1928.
[221] A. S. Holevo. Bounds for the quantity of information transmitted by a
quantum communication channel. Problems of Information Transmis-
sion, (9):177, 1973.
[222] J. P. Home, D. Hanneke, J. D. Jost, J. M. Amini, D. Leibfried, and
D. J. Wineland. Complete methods set for scalable ion trap quantum
information processing. Science, (325):1227, 2009.
[223] L. Hormozi, G. Zikos, N. E. Bonesteel, and S. H. Simon. Topological
quantum compiling. Phys. Rev. B, (75):165310, 2007.
[224] M. Horodecki, J. Oppenheim, and A. Winter. Partial quantum infor-
mation. Nature, (436):673, 2005.
[225] R. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, and K. Horodecki. Quantum
entanglement. Rev. Mod. Phys., (81):865, 2009.
[226] O. Hosten and P. Kwiat. Observation of the spin hall eﬀect of light via
weak measurements. Science, (8):787, 2008.
[227] D. Hsieh, D. Qian, L. Wray, Y. Xia, Y. S. Hor, R. J. Cava, and M. Z.
Hasan. A topological Dirac insulator in a quantum spin Hall phase.
Nature, (452):970, 2008.

360
■References
[228] S. Inouye, M. R. Andrews, J. Stenger, H.-J. Miesner, D. M. Stamper-
Kurn, and W. Ketterle. Observation of Feshbach resonances in a Bose–
Einstein condensate. Nature, (392):151, 1998.
[229] C. Isham. Modern Diﬀerential Geometry for Physicists. World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 1989.
[230] D. A. Ivanov. Non-Abelian statistics of half-quantum vortices in p-wave
superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett., (86):268, 2001.
[231] J. K. Jain. Composite-fermion approach for the fractional quantum Hall
eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett., (63):199, 1989.
[232] D. Jaksch and P. Zoller. Creation of eﬀective magnetic ﬁelds in optical
lattices: the Hofstadter butterﬂy for cold neutral atoms. New Journal
of Physics, (5):56, 2003.
[233] D. Jaksch and P. Zoller. The cold atom Hubbard toolbox. Annals of
Physics, (315):52, 2005. Special Issue.
[234] P. S. Jessen and I. H. Deutsch. Optical lattices. Adv. Atm. Mol. Opt.
Phys., (37):95, 1996.
[235] L. Jiang, T. Kitagawa, J. Alicea, A. R. Akhmerov, D. Pekker, G. Refael,
J. I. Cirac, E. Demler, M. D. Lukin, and P. Zoller. Majorana fermions in
equilibrium and in driven cold-atom quantum wires. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(106):220402, 2011.
[236] E. Joos and H. D. Zeh. The emergence of classical properties through in-
teraction with the environment. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik B - Cond. Matt.,
(59):223, 1984.
[237] G. Jotzu, M. Messer, R. Desbuquois, M. Lebrat, T. Uehlinger, D. Greif,
and T. Esslinger. Experimental realization of the topological Haldane
model with ultracold fermions. Nature, (515):237, 2014.
[238] Jozsa and B. Schumacher. A new proof of the quantum noiseless coding
theorem. J. Mod. Opt., (41):2343, 1994.
[239] T. Jungwirth, Q. Niu, and A. H. MacDonald. Anomalous Hall eﬀect in
ferromagnetic semiconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett., (88):207208, 2002.
[240] G. Juzeli¯unas, J. Ruseckas, and J. Dalibard.
Generalized Rashba-
Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling for cold atoms.
Phys. Rev. A,
(81):053403, 2010.
[241] G. Juzeli¯unas, J. Ruseckas, P. ¨Ohberg, and M. Fleischhauer.
Light-
induced eﬀective magnetic ﬁelds for ultracold atoms in planar geome-
tries. Phys. Rev. A, (73):025602, 2006.
[242] L. P. Kadanoﬀ. Scaling laws for Ising models near Tc, Physics (2):263,
1966.
[243] V. Kalmeyer and R. B. Laughlin. Equivalence of the resonating-valence-
bond and fractional quantum Hall states. Phys. Rev. Lett., (59):2095,
1987.
[244] C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele. Quantum spin Hall eﬀect in graphene. Phys.
Rev. Lett., (95):226801, 2005.
[245] C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele. Z2 Topological order and the quantum spin
Hall eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett., (95):146802, 2005.

References
■361
[246] A. Kapustin. Symmetry protected topological phases, anomalies, and
cobordisms: Beyond group cohomology. e-print arXiv:1403.1467, 2014.
[247] R. M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In R. E. Miller
and J. W. Thatcher, editors, Complexity of Computer Computations,
page 85. New York: Plenum, 1972.
[248] M. Kasevich and S. Chu.
Laser cooling below a photon recoil with
three-level atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett., 69:1741, 1992.
[249] I. Kassal, S. P. Jordan, P. J. Love, M. Mohseni, and A. Aspuru-Guzik.
Polynomial-time quantum algorithm for the simulation of chemical dy-
namics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., (105):18681, 2008.
[250] T. Kato. On the adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics. J. Phys.
Soc. Jap., (5):435–439, 1950.
[251] M. K¨onig, S. Wiedmann, C. Br¨une, A. Roth, H. Buhmann, L. W.
Molenkamp, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang. Quantum spin Hall insulator
state in HgTe quantum wells. Science, (318):766, 2007.
[252] B. Keimer, S. A. Kivelson, M. R. Norman, S. Uchida, and J. Zaanen.
From quantum matter to high-temperature superconductivity in copper
oxides. Nature, (518):179, 2015.
[253] G. Kells, D. Meidan, and P. W. Brouwer. Near-zero-energy end states in
topologically trivial spin-orbit coupled superconducting nanowires with
a smooth conﬁnement. Phys. Rev. B, (86):100503, 2012.
[254] W. Ketterle and N.J. Van Druten.
Evaporative Cooling of Trapped
Atoms.
volume 37 of Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical
Physics, pages 181–236. Academic Press, 1996.
[255] R. D. King-Smith and David Vanderbilt.
Theory of polarization of
crystalline solids. Phys. Rev. B, (47):1651, 1993.
[256] A. Kitaev.
Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons.
Annals
Phys., (303):2, 2003.
[257] A. Kitaev. Anyons in an exactly solved model and beyond. Annals of
Physics, (321):2, 2006.
[258] A. Kitaev. Periodic table for topological insulators and superconductors.
AIP Conference Proceedings, (1134):22–30, 2009.
[259] A. Kitaev and C. Laumann. Topological phases and quantum compu-
tation. e-print arXiv:0904.2771, 2009.
[260] A. Kitaev and J. Preskill. Topological entanglement entropy. Phys. Rev.
Lett., (96):110404, 2006.
[261] A. Y. Kitaev. Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference of Quan-
tum Communication and Measurement. Editors O. Hirota, A. S. Holevo,
and C. M. Caves, New York, Plenum, 1997.
[262] A. Y. Kitaev. Quantum computations: Algorithms and error correction.
Russ. Math. Surv., (52):1191, 1997.
[263] A. Y. Kitaev. Unpaired Majorana fermions in quantum wires. Physics-
Uspekhi, (44):131, 2001.

362
■References
[264] M. Kjaergaard, K. W¨olms, and K. Flensberg.
Majorana fermions in
superconducting nanowires without spin-orbit coupling. Phys. Rev. B,
(85):020503, 2012.
[265] K. v. Klitzing, G. Dorda, and M. Pepper. New method for high-accuracy
determination of the ﬁne-structure constant based on quantized hall
resistance. Phys. Rev. Lett., (45):494, 1980.
[266] V. Kliuchnikov, D. Maslov, and M. Mosca. Fast and eﬃcient exact syn-
thesis of single qubit unitaries generated by cliﬀord and t gates. Quan-
tum Inf. Comput., (13):607, 2013.
[267] D. E. Knuth.
The Art of Computer Programming, Volumes 1-4A.
Addison-Wesley, 2011.
[268] S. Kobayashi and K. Nomizu. Foundations of Diﬀerential Geometry.
Wiley Classics Library, 2009.
[269] S. Kochen and E. Specker. The problem of hidden variables in quantum
mechanics. Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, (17):59, 1967.
[270] M. Kohmoto, B. I. Halperin, and Y.-S. Wu. Diophantine equation for
the three-dimensional quantum Hall eﬀect. Phys. Rev. B, (45):13488,
1992.
[271] S. S. Kondov, W. R. McGehee, W. Xu, and B. DeMarco.
Disorder-
induced localization in a strongly correlated atomic Hubbard gas. Phys.
Rev. Lett., (114):083002, 2015.
[272] D. J. Kosterlitz, J. M.; Thouless. Ordering, metastability and phase
transitions in two-dimensional systems.
Journal of Physics C: Solid
State Physics, (6):1181, 1973.
[273] C. V. Kraus, S. Diehl, P. Zoller, and M. A. Baranov. Preparing and
probing atomic Majorana fermions and topological order in optical lat-
tices. New Journal of Physics, (14):113036, 2012.
[274] K. Kraus. States, Eﬀects, and Operations: Lecture Notes in Physics,
190. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1983.
[275] L. D. Landau. Oscillations in a Fermi-liquid. Sov. Phys. JETP, (5):101,
1957.
[276] L. D. Landau. Theory of Fermi-liquids. Sov. Phys. JETP, (3):920, 1957.
[277] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz. Statistical Physics Part 1, 3rd Ed.
(Course of Theoretical Physics Vol. 5). Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1994.
[278] R. Landauer. Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing pro-
cess. IBM J. Res. Dev., (5):183, 1961.
[279] R. B. Laughlin.
Anomalous quantum Hall eﬀect: An incompressible
quantum ﬂuid with fractionally charged excitations. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(50):1395, 1983.
[280] K. T. Law, Patrick A. Lee, and T. K. Ng. Majorana fermion induced
resonant Andreev reﬂection. Phys. Rev. Lett., (103):237001, 2009.
[281] P. A. Lee and T. V. Ramakrishnan. Disordered electronic systems. Rev.
Mod. Phys., (57):287, 1985.
[282] A. J. Leggett. A theoretical description of the new phases of liquid 3He.
Rev. Mod. Phys., (47):331, 1975.

References
■363
[283] M. Leijnse and K. Flensberg. Introduction to topological superconduc-
tivity and Majorana fermions. Semiconductor Science and Technology,
(27):124003, 2012.
[284] J. M. Leinaas and J. Myrheim. On the theory of identical particles.
Nuovo Cimento, (37B):1, 1977.
[285] P. D. Lett, R. N. Watts, Ch. I. Westbrook, W. D. Phillips, P. L. Gould,
and H. J. Metcalf. Observation of atoms laser cooled below the Doppler
limit. Phys. Rev. Lett., (61):169, 1988.
[286] L. Levin. Universal search problems (Russian, 1973); translated by B. A.
Trakhtenbrot. A survey of Russian approaches to perebor (brute-force
searches) algorithms. Annals of the History of Computing, (6):384, 1984.
[287] M. Levin and A. Stern. Classiﬁcation and analysis of two-dimensional
Abelian fractional topological insulators.
Phys. Rev. B, (86):115131,
2012.
[288] M. Levin and X.-G. Wen. Detecting topological order in a ground state
wave function. Phys. Rev. Lett., (96):110405, 2006.
[289] M. A. Levin and X.-G. Wen. String-net condensation: A physical mech-
anism for topological phases. Phys. Rev. B, (71):045110, 2005.
[290] M. Lewenstein, A. Sanpera, and V. Ahuﬁnger. Ultracold Atoms in Op-
tical Lattices: Simulating Quantum Many-Body Systems. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2012.
[291] M. Lewenstein, A. Sanpera, V. Ahuﬁnger, B. Damski, A. Sen(De), and
U. Sen. Ultracold atomic gases in optical lattices: Mimicking condensed
matter physics and beyond. Advances in Physics, (56):243, 2007.
[292] J. Li, H. Chen, I. K. Drozdov, A. Yazdani, B. A. Bernevig, and A. H.
MacDonald. Topological superconductivity induced by ferromagnetic
metal chains. Phys. Rev. B, (90):235433, 2014.
[293] D. A. Lidar (editor) and T. A. Brun (editor). Quantum Error Correc-
tion. Cambridge University Press, 2013.
[294] E. M. Lifshitz. Sov. Phys. JETP, (11):1130, 1960.
[295] E. M. Lifshitz and L. P. Pitaevskii. Statistical Physics: Theory of the
Condensed State (Course of Theoretical Physics Vol. 9).
Pergamon
Press, Oxford, 1980.
[296] J. Liu, A. C. Potter, K. T. Law, and P. A. Lee. Zero-bias peaks in the
tunneling conductance of spin-orbit-coupled superconducting wires with
and without Majorana end-states. Phys. Rev. Lett., (109):267002, 2012.
[297] H. C. Longuet-Higgens, U. ¨Opik, M. H. L. Pryce, and R. A. Sack. Studies
of the John-Teller eﬀect. Proc. Roy. Soc. London, (A244):1–16, 1958.
[298] Y.-M. Lu and A. Vishwanath. Theory and classiﬁcation of interacting
integer topological phases in two dimensions: A Chern–Simons approach.
Phys. Rev. B, (86):125119, 2012.
[299] A. W. W. Ludwig. Topological phases: Classiﬁcation of topological in-
sulators and superconductors of non-interacting fermions, and beyond.
Physica Scripta, (2016):014001, 2016.

364
■References
[300] J. S. Lundeen and C. Bamber. Procedure for direct measurement of
general quantum states using weak measurement.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(108):070402, 2012.
[301] R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma.
Majorana fermions
and a topological phase transition in semiconductor-superconductor het-
erostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett., (105):077001, 2010.
[302] J. Maciejko, T. L. Hughes, and S. C. Zhang. The quantum spin Hall
eﬀect. Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics, (2):31, 2011.
[303] A. P. Mackenzie and Y. Maeno. The superconductivity of Sr2RuO4 and
the physics of spin-triplet pairing. Rev. Mod. Phys., (75):657, 2003.
[304] Y. Maeno, S. Kittaka, T. Nomura, S. Yonezawa, and K.i Ishida. Evalu-
ation of spin-triplet superconductivity in Sr2RuO4. J. Phys. Soc. Jap.,
(81):011009, 2012.
[305] E. Majorana. Teoria simmetrica dell’elettrone e del positrone. Nuovo
Cimento, (5):171, 1937.
[306] I. Martin and A. F. Morpurgo. Majorana fermions in superconducting
helical magnets. Phys. Rev. B, (85):144505, 2012.
[307] V. Mastropietro and D. C. Mattis. Luttinger Model: The First 50 Years
and Some New Directions. World Scientiﬁc, 2013.
[308] C.A. Mead and D. G. Truhlar.
On the determination of Born–
Oppenheimer nuclear motion wave functions including complications
due to conical intersections and identical nuclei.
J. Chem. Phys.,
(70):2284, 1979.
[309] R. Merkle. Secure communications over insecure channels. Comm. of
the ACM, (21):294, 1978.
[310] A. Messiah. Quantum Mechanics. Dover, 2014.
[311] M. A. Metlitski, C. L. Kane, and M. P. A. Fisher. Bosonic topological
insulator in three dimensions and the statistical Witten eﬀect. Phys.
Rev. B, (88):035131, 2013.
[312] H.-J. Mikeska and A. K. Kolezhuk.
One-dimensional magnetism, in
Quantum Magnetism, pages 1–83. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2004.
[313] G. P. Mikitik and Yu. V. Sharlai. Manifestation of Berry’s phase in
metal physics. Phys. Rev. Lett., (82):2147–2150, 1999.
[314] G. P. Mikitik and Yu. V. Sharlai. Berry phase and de Haas–van Alphen
Eﬀect in LaRhIn5. Phys. Rev. Lett., (93):106403, 2004.
[315] T. Mizushima, Y. Tsutsumi, T. Kawakami, M. Sato, M. Ichioka, and
K. Machida. Symmetry-protected topological superﬂuids and supercon-
ductors: From the basics to 3He. J. Phys. Soc. Jap., (85):022001, 2016.
[316] A. J. Moerdijk, B. J. Verhaar, and A. Axelsson. Resonances in ultracold
collisions of 6Li, 7Li, and 23Na. Phys. Rev. A, (51):4852, 1995.
[317] G. Moore and N. Read. Nonabelions in the fractional quantum Hall
eﬀect. Nuclear Physics B, (360):362, 1991.
[318] J. E. Moore and L. Balents.
Topological invariants of time-reversal-
invariant band structures. Phys. Rev. B, (75):121306, 2007.

References
■365
[319] N. F. Mott and R. Peierls. Discussion of the paper by de Boer and
Verwey. Proceedings of the Physical Society, (49):72, 1937.
[320] V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P. A. M. Bakkers,
and L. P. Kouwenhoven.
Signatures of Majorana fermions in hybrid
superconductor-semiconductor nanowire devices. Science, (336):1003,
2012.
[321] S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, B. A. Bernevig, and Ali Yazdani. Pro-
posal for realizing Majorana fermions in chains of magnetic atoms on a
superconductor. Phys. Rev. B, (88):020407, 2013.
[322] S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon, J. Seo, A. H.
MacDonald, B. A. Bernevig, and A. Yazdani. Observation of Majorana
fermions in ferromagnetic atomic chains on a superconductor. Science,
(346):602, 2014.
[323] N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, A. H. MacDonald, and N. P. Ong.
Anomalous Hall eﬀect. Rev. Mod. Phys., (82):1539–1592, 2010.
[324] M. Nakahara. Geometry, Topology and Physics. Adam Hilger, Bristol,
1990.
[325] Y. Nambu. Quasi-particles and gauge invariance in the theory of super-
conductivity. Phys. Rev., (117):648, 1960.
[326] C. Nash and S. Sen. Topology and Geometry for Physicists. Academic
Press, London, 1983.
[327] C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman, and S. Das Sarma.
Non-Abelian anyons and topological quantum computation. Rev. Mod.
Phys., (80):1083, 2008.
[328] C. Nayak and F. Wilczek. 2n-quasihole states realize 2n−1-dimensional
spinor braiding statistics in paired quantum Hall states. Nuclear Physics
B, (479):529, 1996.
[329] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information, 10th Anniversary Edition. Cambridge University Press,
2010.
[330] J. Nilsson, A. R. Akhmerov, and C. W. J. Beenakker. Splitting of a
Cooper pair by a pair of Majorana bound states.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(101):120403, 2008.
[331] Q. Niu, X. Wang, L. Kleinman, W.-M. Liu, D. M. C. Nicholson, and
G. M. Stocks. Adiabatic dynamics of local spin moments in itinerant
magnets. Phys. Rev. Lett., (83):207–210, 1999.
[332] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson,
I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos, and A. A. Firsov. Two-dimensional gas
of massless Dirac fermions in graphene. Nature, (438):197, 2005.
[333] R. Omn`es. Consistent interpretations of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod.
Phys., (64):339, 1992.
[334] Y. Oreg, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen. Helical liquids and Majorana
bound states in quantum wires. Phys. Rev. Lett., (105):177002, 2010.
[335] G. Ortiz, J. E. Gubernatis, E. Knill, and R. Laﬂamme. Quantum algo-
rithms for fermionic simulations. Phys. Rev. A, (64):022319, 2001.

366
■References
[336] G. Ortiz and R. M. Martin. Macroscopic polarization as a geometric
quantum phase: Many-body formulation.
Phys. Rev. B, (49):14202–
14210, 1994.
[337] J. K. Pachos. Introduction to Topological Quantum Computation. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2012.
[338] A. Paetznick and K. Svore. Repeat-until-success: Non-deterministic de-
composition of single-qubit unitaries. Quantum Inf. Comput., (14):1277,
2014.
[339] S. Pancharatnam. Generalized theory of interference, and its applica-
tions. Proc. Indian Acad. Sci., (A44):247, 1956.
[340] C. M. Papadimitriou.
Computational Complexity.
Addison-Wesley,
1994.
[341] Y. Peng, F. Pientka, L. I. Glazman, and F. von Oppen. Strong localiza-
tion of Majorana end states in chains of magnetic adatoms. Phys. Rev.
Lett., (114):106801, 2015.
[342] R. Penrose. The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford University Press, 1989.
[343] A. Peres. Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1995.
[344] D. S. Petrov, C. Salomon, and G. V. Shlyapnikov. Scattering properties
of weakly bound dimers of fermionic atoms. Phys. Rev. A, (71):012708,
2005.
[345] W. D. Phillips. Nobel lecture: Laser cooling and trapping of neutral
atoms. Rev. Mod. Phys., (70):721, 1998.
[346] F. Pientka, L. I. Glazman, and F. von Oppen. Topological supercon-
ducting phase in helical Shiba chains. Phys. Rev. B, (88):155420, 2013.
[347] L. P. Pitaevskii. Vortex lines in an imperfect Bose gas. Soviet Physics
JETP, (13):451, 1961.
[348] M. B. Plbnio and S. Virmani. An introduction to entanglement mea-
sures. Quantum Info. Comput., (7):1, 2007.
[349] F. Pollmann, A. M. Turner, E. Berg, and M. Oshikawa.
Entangle-
ment spectrum of a topological phase in one dimension.
Phys. Rev.
B, (81):064439, 2010.
[350] A.M. Polyakov.
Fermi–Bose transmutations induced by gauge ﬁelds.
Mod. Phys. Lett. A, (3):325, 1988.
[351] A. C. Potter and Patrick A. Lee. Engineering a p + ip superconduc-
tor: Comparison of topological insulator and Rashba spin-orbit-coupled
materials. Phys. Rev. B, (83):184520, 2011.
[352] R. Prange and S. M. Girvin (editors).
The Quantum Hall Eﬀect.
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990.
[353] J. Preskill. Fault tolerant quantum computation. In Introduction to
Quantum Computation, ed. H.K. Lo, S. Popescu and T.P. Spiller, World
Scientiﬁc, 1998.
[354] J. Preskill.
Lecture Notes for Physics 219: Quantum Computation.
available
at
http://www.theory.caltech.edu/people/preskill/ph229/
#lecture, 2004.

References
■367
[355] Q. Niu and D. J. Thouless. Quantised adiabatic charge transport in the
presence of substrate disorder and many-body interaction. J. Phys. A:
Math. Gen., (17):2453, 1984.
[356] X.-L. Qi, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang. Topological ﬁeld theory of
time-reversal invariant insulators. Phys. Rev. B, (78):195424, 2008.
[357] X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang. Topological insulators and superconductors.
Rev. Mod. Phys., (83):1057, 2011.
[358] K. De Raedt, K. Michielsen, H. De Raedt, B. Trieu, G. Arnold,
M. Richter, Th. Lippert, H. Watanabe, and N. Ito. Massively paral-
lel quantum computer simulator. Comput. Phys. Commun., (176):121,
2007.
[359] Y. Ran, Y. Zhang, and A. Vishwanath. One-dimensional topologically
protected modes in topological insulators with lattice dislocations. Na-
ture Physics, (5):298, 2009.
[360] E. I. Rashba and Sheka. V. I. Symmetry of energy bands in crystals of
wurtzite type: II. Symmetry of bands including spin-orbit interaction.
Fiz. Tverd. Tela: Collected Papers, (2):162, 1959.
[361] N. Read. Excitation structure of the hierarchy scheme in the fractional
quantum Hall eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett., (65):1502, 1990.
[362] N. Read and D. Green. Paired states of fermions in two dimensions
with breaking of parity and time-reversal symmetries and the fractional
quantum Hall eﬀect. Phys. Rev. B, (61):10267, 2000.
[363] N. Read and E. Rezayi.
Beyond paired quantum Hall states:
Parafermions and incompressible states in the ﬁrst excited Landau level.
Phys. Rev. B, (59):8084, 1999.
[364] N. Read and S. Sachdev. Large-N expansion for frustrated quantum
antiferromagnets. Phys. Rev. Lett., (66):1773, 1991.
[365] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H. J. Bernstein, and P. Bertani. Experimental
realization of any discrete unitary operator. Phys. Rev. Lett., (73):58,
1994.
[366] M. Reed and B. Simon. Functional Analysis. Academic Press, 1980.
[367] R. Resta. Macroscopic polarization in crystalline dielectrics: the geo-
metric phase approach. Rev. Mod. Phys., (66):899–915, 1994.
[368] R. Resta and D. Vanderbilt. Theory of polarization: A modern approach.
In Physics of Ferroelectrics: a Modern Perspective. ed. K.M. Rabe, C.
H. Ahns, and J. M. Triscone. Springer Verlag, 2007.
[369] F. Riesz and B. Sz.-Nagy.
Functional Analysis.
Dover Publications,
1990.
[370] R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. M. Adleman. A method of obtaining
digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems. Comm. ACM, (21):120,
1978.
[371] L. P. Rokhinson, X. Liu, and J. K. Furdyna. The fractional a.c. Joseph-
son eﬀect in a semiconductor–superconductor nanowire as a signature
of Majorana particles. Nature Physics, (8):795, 2012.

368
■References
[372] M. A. Rowe, D. Kielpinski, V. Meyer, C. A. Sackett, W. M. Itano,
C. Monroe, and D. J. Wineland.
Experimental violation of a Bell’s
inequality with eﬃcient detection. Nature, (409):791, 2001.
[373] R. Roy. Topological phases and the quantum spin Hall eﬀect in three
dimensions. Phys. Rev. B, (79):195322, 2009.
[374] W. Rudin. Principles of Mathematical Analysis. McGraw-Hill, 1976.
[375] J. Ruseckas, G. Juzeli¯unas, P. ¨Ohberg, and M. Fleischhauer.
Non-
Abelian gauge potentials for ultracold atoms with degenerate dark
states. Phys. Rev. Lett., (95):010404, 2005.
[376] A. I. Rusinov. Superconductivity near a paramagnetic impurity. JETP
Lett., (9):85, 1969.
[377] S. Ryu. Interacting topological phases and quantum anomalies. Physica
Scripta, (2015):014009, 2015.
[378] S. Ryu, J. E. Moore, and A. W. W. Ludwig.
Electromagnetic and
gravitational responses and anomalies in topological insulators and su-
perconductors. Phys. Rev. B, (85):045104, 2012.
[379] S. Ryu, A. P. Schnyder, A. Furusaki, and A. W. W. Ludwig. Topological
insulators and superconductors: Tenfold way and dimensional hierarchy.
New Journal of Physics, (12):065010, 2010.
[380] J. J. Sakurai and J. J. Napolitano. Modern Quantum Mechanics. Pear-
son, 2014.
[381] J. Samuel and R. Bhandari. General setting for Berry’s phase. Phys.
Rev. Lett., (60):2339–2342, 1988.
[382] M. Sato, Y. Takahashi, and S. Fujimoto. Non-Abelian topological order
in s-wave superﬂuids of ultracold fermionic atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(103):020401, 2009.
[383] J. D. Sau, R. M. Lutchyn, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma. Generic new
platform for topological quantum computation using semiconductor het-
erostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett., (104):040502, 2010.
[384] J. D. Sau, B. Swingle, and S. Tewari. Proposal to probe quantum non-
locality of Majorana fermions in tunneling experiments. Phys. Rev. B,
(92):020511, 2015.
[385] L.
Savary
and
L.
Balents.
Quantum
spin
liquids.
e-print
arXiv:1601.03742, 2016.
[386] M. Schlosshauer. Decoherence, the measurement problem, and interpre-
tations of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys., (76):1267, 2005.
[387] F. Schmidt-Kaler, H. H¨aﬀner, M. Riebe, S. Gulde, G. P. T. Lancaster,
T. Deuschle, C. Becher, C. F. Roos, J. Eschner, and R. Blatt. Realization
of the Cirac–Zoller controlled-NOT quantum gate. Nature, (422):408,
2003.
[388] Ch. Schneider, D. Porras, and T. Schaetz. Experimental quantum sim-
ulations of many-body physics with trapped ions.
Rep. Prog. Phys.,
(75):024401, 2012.

References
■369
[389] A. P. Schnyder, S. Ryu, A. Furusaki, and A. W. W. Ludwig. Classi-
ﬁcation of topological insulators and superconductors in three spatial
dimensions. Phys. Rev. B, (78):195125, 2008.
[390] E. Schr¨odinger. The present situation in quantum mechanics. Natur-
wissenschaften, (23):823807, 1935.
[391] M. Schreiber, S. S. Hodgman, P. Bordia, H. P. L¨uschen, M. H. Fis-
cher, R. Vosk, E. Altman, U. Schneider, and I. Bloch. Observation of
many-body localization of interacting fermions in a quasirandom optical
lattice. Science, (349):842, 2015.
[392] N. Schuch, D. Perez-Garcia, and I. Cirac. Classifying quantum phases
using matrix product states and projected entangled pair states. Phys.
Rev. B, (84):165139, 2011.
[393] B. Schumacher. Quantum coding. Phys. Rev. A, (51):2738, 1995.
[394] B. Schumacher and M. Westmoreland. Quantum Processes Systems, and
Information. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2010.
[395] B. Schutz. Geometrical Methods of Mathematical Physics. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1980.
[396] A. Schwarz.
Topological quantum ﬁeld theories.
arXiv e-print hep-
th/0011260, 2000.
[397] P. Selinger. Eﬃcient Cliﬀord+T approximation of single-qubit opera-
tors. e-print arXiv:1212.6253, 2012.
[398] T. Senthil. Symmetry-protected topological phases of quantum matter.
Ann. Rev. Cond. Mat. Phys., (6):299, 2015.
[399] C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System
Tech. J., (27):379–423, 623–656, 1948.
[400] L. B. Shao, S.-L. Zhu, L. Sheng, D. Y. Xing, and Z. D. Wang. Realizing
and detecting the quantum Hall eﬀect without Landau levels by using
ultracold atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett., (101):246810, 2008.
[401] A. Shapere and F. Wilczek. Geometric Phases in Physics. World Sci-
entiﬁc, Singapore, 1989.
[402] S.-Q. Shen. Topological Insulators: Dirac Equation in Condensed Mat-
ters. Springer Series in Solid-State Sciences, Springer, 2013.
[403] Y. Shevy, D. S. Weiss, P. J. Ungar, and S. Chu. Bimodal speed distri-
butions in laser-cooled atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett., (62):1118, 1989.
[404] H. Shiba.
Classical spins in superconductors.
Prog. Theor. Phys.,
(40):435, 1968.
[405] P. W. Shor. Algorithms for quantum computation: Discrete logarithms
and factoring. Proc. 35nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Com-
puter Science, IEEE Computer Society Press, page 124, 1994.
[406] P. W. Shor. Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer
memory. Phys. Rev. A, (52):R2493, 1995.
[407] P. W. Shor. Fault-tolerant quantum computation. Proc. 37nd Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, IEEE Computer So-
ciety Press, page 56, 1996.

370
■References
[408] P. W. Shor.
Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and
discrete logarithms on a quantum computer.
SIAM J. Computing,
(26):1484, 1997.
[409] B. Simon.
Holonomy, the quantum adiabatic theorem, and Berry’s
phase. Phys. Rev. Lett., (51):2167–2170, 1983.
[410] E. Sj¨oqvist. Geometric phase in weak measurements. Physics Letters
A, (359):187, 2006.
[411] R. Somma, G. Ortiz, J. E. Gubernatis, E. Knill, and R. Laﬂamme.
Simulating physical phenomena by quantum networks. Phys. Rev. A,
(65):042323, 2002.
[412] T. D. Stanescu, B. Anderson, and V. Galitski. Spin-orbit coupled Bose–
Einstein condensates. Phys. Rev. A, (78):023616, 2008.
[413] T. D. Stanescu, V. Galitski, and S. Das Sarma. Topological states in
two-dimensional optical lattices. Phys. Rev. A, (82):013608, 2010.
[414] T. D. Stanescu and S. Tewari.
Majorana fermions in semiconductor
nanowires: fundamentals, modeling, and experiment. J. Phys.: Cond.
Matt., (25):233201, 2013.
[415] H. M. Stark. An Introduction to Number Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge,
1978.
[416] A. M. Steane. Error correcting codes in quantum theory. Phys. Rev.
Lett., (77):793, 1996.
[417] J. Stenger, S. Inouye, M. R. Andrews, H.-J. Miesner, D. M. Stamper-
Kurn, and W. Ketterle.
Strongly enhanced inelastic collisions in a
Bose–Einstein condensate near feshbach resonances. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(82):2422, 1999.
[418] A. Stern. Anyons and the quantum Hall eﬀect: A pedagogical review.
Annals of Physics, (323):204, 2008.
[419] L. Szilard. Uber die entropieverminderung in einen thermodynamischen
system bei eingriﬀen intelligenter wesen. Z. Phys., (53):840, 1929.
[420] S. Tewari, S. Das Sarma, C. Nayak, C. Zhang, and P. Zoller. Quan-
tum computation using vortices and majorana zero modes of a px + ipy
superﬂuid of fermionic cold atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett., (98):010506, 2007.
[421] S. Tewari, C. Zhang, S. Das Sarma, C. Nayak, and D.-H. Lee. Testable
signatures of quantum nonlocality in a two-dimensional chiral p-wave
superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett., (100):027001, 2008.
[422] D. J. Thouless.
Quantization of particle transport.
Phys. Rev. B,
(27):6083–6087, 1983.
[423] D. J. Thouless, M. Kohmoto, M. P. Nightingale, and M. den Nijs. Quan-
tized Hall conductance in a two-dimensional periodic potential. Phys.
Rev. Lett., (49):405, 1982.
[424] E. Tiesinga, B. J. Verhaar, and H. T. C. Stoof. Threshold and resonance
phenomena in ultracold ground-state collisions. Phys. Rev. A, (47):4114,
1993.
[425] C. G. Timpson. Quantum Information Theory and the Foundations of
Quantum Mechanics. Oxford University Press, 2013.

References
■371
[426] M. Tinkham. Introduction to Superconductivity. Dover, New York, 2004.
[427] W. Tittel, J. Brendel, H. Zbinden, and N. Gisin.
Violation of Bell
inequalities by photons more than 10 km apart.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(81):3563, 1998.
[428] D. C. Tsui, H. L. Stormer, and A. C. Gossard. Two-dimensional magne-
totransport in the extreme quantum limit. Phys. Rev. Lett., (48):1559,
1982.
[429] V. G. Turaev. Quantum Invariants of Knots and 3-Manifolds. Walter
de Gruyter, Berlin, New York, 1994.
[430] A. M. Turing.
On computable numbers, with an application to the
Entscheidungsproblem. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 2, (42):230, 1936.
[431] A. M. Turner and A. Vishwanath. Beyond band insulators: Topology of
semi-metals and interacting phases. e-print arXiv:1301.0330, 2013.
[432] A. Uhlmann. Parallel transport and “quantum holonomy” along density
operators. Rep. Math. Phys., (24):229, 1986.
[433] M. M. Vazifeh and M. Franz. Self-organized topological state with Ma-
jorana fermions. Phys. Rev. Lett., (111):206802, 2013.
[434] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac. Matrix product states represent ground
states faithfully. Phys. Rev. B, (73):094423, 2006.
[435] F. Verstraete, J. I. Cirac, J. I. Latorre, E. Rico, and M. M. Wolf.
Renormalization-group transformations on quantum states. Phys. Rev.
Lett., (94):140601, 2005.
[436] A. Vishwanath and T. Senthil. Physics of three-dimensional bosonic
topological insulators: Surface-deconﬁned criticality and quantized mag-
netoelectric eﬀect. Phys. Rev. X, (3):011016, 2013.
[437] D. Vollhardt and P. W¨olﬂe. The Superﬂuid Phases of Helium 3. Taylor
& Francis, London, 1990.
[438] G. E. Volovik. Fermion zero modes on vortices in chiral superconductors.
JETP Letters, (70):609, 1999.
[439] G. E. Volovik. The Universe in a Helium Droplet. Clarendon, Oxford,
2003.
[440] J. von Neuman.
Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.
Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 1996.
[441] C. Wang and T. Senthil.
Interacting fermionic topological insula-
tors/superconductors in three dimensions. Phys. Rev. B, (89):195124,
2014.
[442] F. Wang and A. Vishwanath. Spin-liquid states on the triangular and
Kagome lattices: A projective-symmetry-group analysis of Schwinger
boson states. Phys. Rev. B, (74):174423, 2006.
[443] H. Wang, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori. Quantum algorithm for simulating
the dynamics of an open quantum system. Phys. Rev. A, (83):062317,
Jun 2011.
[444] Z. Wang, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang. Topological order parameters for
interacting topological insulators. Phys. Rev. Lett., (105):256803, 2010.

372
■References
[445] N. J. Ward, I. Kassal, and A. Aspuru-Guzik. Preparation of many-body
states for quantum simulation. J. Chem. Phys., (130):194105, 2009.
[446] A. Wehrl. General properties of entropy. Rev. Mod. Phys., (50):221,
1978.
[447] G. Weihs, T. Jennewein, C. Simon, H. Weinfurter, and A. Zeilinger.
Violation of Bell’s inequality under strict einstein locality conditions.
Phys. Rev. Lett., (81):5039, 1998.
[448] X.-G. Wen.
Topological orders in rigid states.
Int. J. Mod. Phys.,
(B4):239, 1990.
[449] X.-G. Wen. Quantum orders and symmetric spin liquids. Phys. Rev. B,
(65):165113, 2002.
[450] X.-G. Wen.
Quantum Field Theory of Many-body Systems.
Oxford
University Press, 2004.
[451] X.-G. Wen and Q. Niu. Ground-state degeneracy of the fractional quan-
tum Hall states in the presence of a random potential and on high-genus
Riemann surfaces. Phys. Rev. B, (41):9377, 1990.
[452] X.-G. Wen, F. Wilczek, and A. Zee. Chiral spin states and supercon-
ductivity. Phys. Rev. B, (39):11413, Jun 1989.
[453] X.-G. Wen and A. Zee. On the possibility of a statistics-changing phase
transition. Journal de Physique, (50):1623, 1989.
[454] X.-G. Wen and A. Zee. Classiﬁcation of Abelian quantum Hall states
and matrix formulation of topological ﬂuids. Phys. Rev. B, (46):2290,
1992.
[455] A. Whitaker. Einstein, Bohr and the Quantum Dilemma. Cambridge
University Press, New York, 2006.
[456] Keola Wierschem and P. Sengupta. Characterizing the Haldane phase in
quasi-one-dimensional spin-1 Heisenberg antiferromagnets. Mod. Phys.
Lett. B, (28):1430017, 2014.
[457] U.-J. Wiese. Ultracold quantum gases and lattice systems: Quantum
simulation of lattice gauge theories.
Annalen der Physik, (525):777,
2013.
[458] S. Wiesner. Conjugate coding. SIGACT News, (15):78, 1983.
[459] F. Wilczek. Quantum mechanics of fractional-spin particles. Phys. Rev.
Lett., (49):957, 1982.
[460] F. Wilczek.
Two applications of axion electrodynamics.
Phys. Rev.
Lett., (58):1799, 1987.
[461] F. Wilczek. Fractional Statistics and Anyon Superconductivity. World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1990.
[462] F. Wilczek. Majorana returns. Nature Physics, (5):614, 2009.
[463] F. Wilczek and A. Zee. Appearance of gauge structure in simple dy-
namical systems. Phys. Rev. Lett., (52):2111–2114, 1984.
[464] M. M. Wilde.
Quantum Information Theory.
Cambridge University
Press, New York, 2013.

References
■373
[465] R. Willett, J. P. Eisenstein, H. L. St¨ormer, D. C. Tsui, A. C. Gossard,
and J. H. English. Observation of an even-denominator quantum number
in the fractional quantum Hall eﬀect. Phys. Rev. Lett., (59):1776, 1987.
[466] K. G. Wilson. The renormalization group: Critical phenomena and the
Kondo problem, Rev. Mod. Phys. (47):773, 1975.
[467] D. Wineland and H. Dehmelt. Proposed 1014δν < ν laser ﬂuorescence
spectroscopy on Tl+ mono-ion oscillator III (side band cooling). Bull.
Am. Phys. Soc., (20):637, 1975.
[468] D. J. Wineland and W. M. Itano. Laser cooling of atoms. Phys. Rev.
A, (20):1521, 1979.
[469] E. Witten. Topological quantum ﬁeld theory. Commun. Math. Phys.,
(117):353, 1988.
[470] E. Witten. Quantum ﬁeld theory and the Jones polynomial. Commun.
Math. Phys., (121):351, 1989.
[471] W. K. Wootters and W. H. Zurek. A single quantum cannot be cloned.
Nature, (229):802, 1982.
[472] J. S. Xia, W. Pan, C. L. Vicente, E. D. Adams, N. S. Sullivan, H. L.
Stormer, D. C. Tsui, L. N. Pfeiﬀer, K. W. Baldwin, and K. W. West.
Electron correlation in the second landau level: A competition between
many nearly degenerate quantum phases. Phys. Rev. Lett., (93):176809,
2004.
[473] Y. Xia, D. Qian, D. Hsieh, L. Wray, A. Pal, H. Lin, A. Bansil, D. Grauer,
Y. S. Hor, R. J. Cava, and M. Z. Hasan. Observation of a large-gap
topological-insulator class with a single Dirac cone on the surface. Na-
ture Physics, (5):398, 2009.
[474] D. Xiao, M.-C. Chang, and Q. Niu. Berry phase eﬀects on electronic
properties. Rev. Mod. Phys., (82):1959–2007, 2010.
[475] A. C. Yao. Quantum circuit complexity. Proc. of the 34th Ann. IEEE
Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science, page 352, 1993.
[476] D Yoshioka. The Quantum Hall Eﬀect. Springer, 2002.
[477] L. Yu. Bound state in superconductors with paramagnetic impurities.
Acta Phys. Sin., (21):75, 1965.
[478] J. Zak.
Berry’s phase for energy bands in solids.
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
(62):2747, 1989.
[479] H. D. Zeh. On the interpretation of measurement in quantum theory.
Found. Phys., (1):69, 1970.
[480] B. Zeng, X. Chen, D.-L. Zhou, and X.-G. Wen. Quantum information
meets quantum matter – From quantum entanglement to topological
phase in many-body systems. e-print arXiv:1508.02595, 2015.
[481] H. Zhai. Degenerate quantum gases with spin–orbit coupling: A review.
Rep. Prog. Phys., (78):026001, 2015.
[482] C. Zhang, S. Tewari, R. M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma. px + ipy Su-
perﬂuid from s-wave interactions of fermionic cold atoms. Phys. Rev.
Lett., (101):160401, 2008.

374
■References
[483] Y. Zhang, Y.-W. Tan, H. L. Stormer, and P. Kim. Experimental obser-
vation of the quantum Hall eﬀect and Berry’s phase in graphene. Nature,
(438):201, 2005.
[484] S.-L. Zhu, H. Fu, C.-J. Wu, S.-C. Zhang, and L.-M. Duan. Spin Hall
eﬀects for cold atoms in a light-induced gauge potential. Phys. Rev.
Lett., (97):240401, 2006.
[485] M. R. Zirnbauer. Riemannian symmetric superspaces and their origin
in random-matrix theory. J. Math. Phys., (37):4986, 1996.
[486] E. Zohar, J. I. Cirac, and B. Reznik. Quantum simulations of lattice
gauge theories using ultracold atoms in optical lattices. Rep. Prog. Phys.,
(79):014401, 2016.
[487] W. H. Zurek. Pointer basis of quantum apparatus: Into what mixture
does the wave packet collapse? Phys. Rev. D, (24):1516, 1981.
[488] W. H. Zurek. Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the
classical. Rev. Mod. Phys., (75):715, 2003.

Index
F matrix, 325, 329, 332
R matrix, 326, 330, 332
Λ scheme, 262
ac-Stark eﬀect, 253, 255
adiabatic evolution, 46, 151, 152
Aharonov–Bohm eﬀect, 42, 49, 336
AKLT model, 177
algorithm, 69–71, 79–82
quantum algorithm, 295, 300
Deutsch, 300–302
eﬃcient/ineﬃcient, 70
Grover (quantum search), 302–306
quantum Fourier transform, 308
quantum order-ﬁnding, 307
quantum simulation, 310–312
Shor (quantum factoring), 306–310
alphabet, 75
analytical engine, 69
Andreev reﬂection, 239
crossed Andreev reﬂection, 244
anomalous velocity, 51
anyon, 220, 320, 321
Abelian, 322, 324, 336
Fibonacci anyon, 331
Ising anyon, 221, 329, 338
non-Abelian, 220, 322, 324
auxiliary (ancilla) system, 12, 13, 15
axion electrodynamics, 216
behavior, 27
Bell inequalities, 29
Bell states (see EPR pairs), 274
Bell test experiment, 31
loopholes, 32
Bell’s theorem, 25
Bernevig–Hughes–Zhang model, 201,
202
Berry curvature, 47, 51, 142, 143, 145,
151, 200, 201, 263
BF topological ﬁeld theory, 213
bit, 74, 272
Bloch sphere, 41, 273, 275
Bogoliubov quasiparticle, 219
Bogoliubov–de Gennes (BdG)
formalism, 203–206
Born rule, 9
Bott periodicity, 134, 135, 138
braid group, 321, 323, 324, 333
braid matrix, 331
bright state, 264
bulk-boundary correspondence, 170
channel capacity, 78
charge vector, 168
chart, 56, 60, 145
Chern character, 146, 147
Chern number, 49, 141–146, 151, 191,
194, 200, 201, 210
Chern–Simons ﬁeld theory, 213
Abelian, 335
level, 215, 337
non-Abelian, 337
Chern–Simons theory, 166
CHSH (Clauser–Horne–Shimony–Holt),
30, 31, 33
Church–Turing thesis, 82, 84
Church–Turing–Deutsch principle, 296
circuit
quantum circuit, 277, 297–300
circuit model, 82
classifying space, 134–136
coarse graining, 21, 102, 108
coherent information, 280
communication channel, 77
compact symmetric space, 129, 134
compactness, 110
complementarity, 18
completely positive trace preserving
map, 275, 282
complexity class, 83–85, 297
compression rate, 75
computation
quantum computation, 293
reversible computation, 86
375

376
■Index
topological quantum computation,
319
computational basis, 272, 273
computational complexity, 70, 83–86
computational model, 294
adiabatic quantum computation,
295
one-way quantum computation,
295
quantum Turing machine, 294
topological quantum computation,
295
Turing machine, 79
connectedness, 110
connection, 62
Aharonov–Anandan connection, 66
connection one-form, 62, 65
local connection one-form, 63
Mead–Berry connection, 46, 51, 65,
142, 144, 147, 150, 151, 263
non-Abelian connection, 53
contextuality, 36
cooling
Doppler cooling, 250
Sisyphus cooling, 253
sub-Doppler cooling, 253
correlations
correlators, 27, 30
no-signaling, 27
cotangent space, 57
cryptography, 72
private-key, 290
public-key, 290
quantum cryptography, 289
dark state, 262, 264
data compression, 281, 282
decision problem, 83
decoherence, 18, 19
density operator, 11
Deutsch’s problem, 300
diﬀeomorphism, 56
diﬀerential form, 58
curvature two-form, 63, 143, 146
diﬀerential one-form, 58
Chern–Simons 3-form, 216
Dirac Hamiltonian, 188, 190, 196–198,
200
dressed states, 260
emergent properties, 97, 117
entanglement, 274, 280, 281, 285
entangled state, 5, 13, 25
many-body, 157
maximally entangled state, 286
short- and long-range, 158
entropy
conditional entropy, 280
von Neumann entropy, 279
Shannon entropy, 74, 278
topological entanglement entropy,
158
Entscheidungsproblem, 79
EPR (Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen), 25,
278
EPR pairs, 274, 278, 288, 292
error, 327, 328
error correction
classical, 78
exterior derivative, 59
fault tolerant quantum computation,
320
Feshbach resonance, 256, 259
ﬁber bundle, 59, 140, 144, 145
Bloch bundle, 145, 147, 148
principal ﬁber bundle, 61, 62, 64,
66
vector bundle, 61, 145
Fibonacci sequence, 333
fractional Josephson eﬀect, 243
fractional topological phases, 164
framing, 337
fusion matrix, 325
fusion rules, 324, 329, 331, 338
fusion states, 331, 333
gap-preserving deformation, 157
gapless boundary states, 162
gauge transformation, 45, 52, 144, 147
Gauss (linking) integral, 336
geometric phase, 43
Aharonov–Anandan phase, 42, 54,
66
Berry phase, 42, 45, 46, 65, 142
non-Abelian geometric phase, 53
topological phase, 42
Zak phase, 51
geometric potential
gauge potential, 260

Index
■377
scalar potential, 261
vector potential, 261
golden ratio, 332
Goldstone theorem, 101
Goldstone boson, 101, 106
graphene, 189, 192
Grassmannian, 132, 134, 139
Gross–Pitaevskii equation, 248
group, 129
coset, 129
general linear group, 61
holonomy group, 63
homotopy group, 132–136, 138,
139, 146
structure group, 60, 145
braid, 322
deﬁnition, 100
fundamental group, 111, 114
representation, 214, 322, 333, 338
symmetry group, 100
Grover iteration, 305
H-class, 157
Haldane model, 191, 199–201
Haldane phase, 176
Hamiltonian cycle problem, 303
Heisenberg picture, 10
hidden variables, 18, 20
Higgs mechanism, 107
Hilbert space, 4
Holevo bound, 284
holonomy, 38, 63, 65
non-Abelian holonomy, 52
topological holonomy, 39, 42
homeomorphism, 55, 110
homotopy, 111, 114
horizontal subspace, 62, 63
information, 73
accessible information, 273, 283
Holevo information, 284
speciﬁcation information, 273
classical information theory, 73–78
information content, 74
information source, 74
quantum information, 89
quantum information theory, 272
self-information, 74
initialization, also see preparation, 327
inner product, 4
interpretations of quantum theory
consistent histories interpretation,
19
Copenhagen interpretation, 17
de Broglie–Bohm pilot wave
theory, 18, 22
hidden variable theories, 18
many worlds interpretation, 18
objective collapse theories, 18
two-state vector formalism, 19, 22
Ising model, 101
isomorphism, 100
K-matrix, 164, 168
Kane–Mele model, 191–193
Kitaev chain model, 179, 206
Kochen–Specker theorem, 36
Kramers
Kramers pair, 149–151, 202
Kramers theorem, 124, 147
Landau
Fermi liquid theory, 96
Landau free energy, 100, 103
symmetry breaking theory, 98
Landauer’s principle, 87
Laughlin state, 165
Lie group
generators, 214
lift
dynamical lift, 54
horizontal lift, 62, 63
Aharonov–Anandan lift, 66
closed lift, 54, 66
dynamical lift, 66
local unitary evolution, 158
locality, 26
Einstein locality, 26
local causality, 25, 28
non-locality, 30
logic gate, 275
π/8 (T), 276
universal, 276, 277
CNOT, 276
Hadamard, 275
Pauli, 276
phase (S), 276
quantum, 275
Toﬀoli, 299, 300
universal, 298, 299

378
■Index
M¨obius strip, 38, 60
Mach–Zehnder interferometer, 35
Majorana
bound states, 207–209
fermion representation, 208
Majorana fermion, 218, 219
Majorana zero mode, 220
Majorana–Weyl fermions, 210, 211
number, 208
Majorana device
semiconductor wire -
superconductor, 225, 226
manifold, 56, 133, 145, 146
smooth manifold, 56
map, 131–133, 136, 142, 146, 198
pullback map, 59
push-forward map, 59
transition map, 56, 60, 64
matrix product state (MPS), 178
Maxwell’s demon, 87
measurement, 5, 7, 20, 24, 312
quantum measurement problem, 6
weak measurement, 19, 22, 34
Mermin–Wagner theorem, 113
mixed state, 11
model
ψ-epistemic models, 22
ψ-ontic models, 21
Bell–Mermin model, 21
Kochen–Specker model, 22
monopole, 49, 143
mutual information, 280, 284
mutual statistics, 167
Nambu spinor, 205
Neumark’s theorem, 15
no-cloning theorem, 277
noise
noiseless quantum theory, 9
noisy quantum theory, 10
non-local excitations, 174
nonlinear sigma model, 137
operational formulation, 7
operator
anti-unitary operator, 123, 125, 126
completely positive trace
preserving, 16
hermitian operator, 5, 9, 23
idempotent operator, 14
Kraus operator, 16
projection operator, 9
representation, 123
superoperator, 15
optical lattice, 253
optical molasses, 250, 251
order parameter, 98, 100, 102
p-wave superconductor
1D wire, 206–209
2D chiral, 209–211
parallel transport, 38, 62
partition
particle, 157
spatial, 157
Pauli group, 316
Pfaﬃan, 149, 150, 152, 208
phase transition, 97, 99, 104
Kostelitz–Thouless transition, 113
ﬁrst-order phase transition, 105
Lifshitz phase transition, 112
second-order phase transition, 108
pointer state, 19, 23
polarization
charge polarization, 151
time-reversal polarization, 152
polynomial time, 70
polytope, 27, 29
postulates of quantum mechanics, 4
POVM (positive operator valued
measure), 13, 14, 28, 275,
283–285
PR box, 29
preparation, 8–10, 20, 281, 312
probability, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 20–22,
34
joint probability, 27
local probabilities, 28
no-signaling probabilities, 27
projective Hilbert space, 53, 65
proximity eﬀect
superconducting, 227, 228
pseudopotential, 257
puriﬁcation, 13, 281
PVM (projection valued measure), 9,
275
quantum Cheshire cat, 35
quantum computation, 90, 293
topological, 221

Index
■379
quantum dimension, 159
quantum double model, 171, 335
quantum error correction, 313
quantum Hall eﬀect, 334
fractional, 164
quantum key distribution, 289, 290
quantum parallelism, 302
quantum simulator, 70, 248
quantum spin Hall insulator, 147, 153,
191, 194, 195
quantum teleportation, 287
quaternion, 148
qubit, 272, 279
Rabi frequency, 255
realist formulation, 7, 17, 20, 26
renormalization group, 108
S-matrix, 257
scattering
collision channels, 258
diﬀerential cross section, 256
partial scattering amplitude, 256
scattering amplitude, 256
scattering length, 257
scattering phase shift, 257
Schr¨odinger
Schr¨odinger picture, 10
Schr¨odinger’s cat, 6, 18
Schumacher compression, 281, 282
selection
pre- and post-selection, 19, 24, 36
sewing matrix, 150–152
Shannon, 71, 73
source coding theorem, 76
noisy-channel coding theorem, 78
Shapiro steps, 243
Shiba state, 235
Solovay–Kitaev theorem, 299
spinless fermion, 223
stabilizer formalism, 316
statistical angle, 167
statistics, 321, 324
spin-statistics theorem, 326
stereographic projection, 56
Stern–Gerlach experiment, 8
superdense coding, 286
symmetry
Z2 symmetry, 102
chiral, 127, 135, 137, 146
continuous symmetry, 105
gauge symmetry, 106
particle-hole, 125–127, 135, 137
symmetry class, 127–129, 132,
134–139, 146
time-reversal, 122, 126, 127, 135,
137, 147, 148
translation, 124
broken symmetry, 97, 100, 106
chiral, 196, 197, 207
inversion, 189–191, 199, 202
particle-hole, 196, 206, 207, 210
symmetry class, 191, 196, 197, 207,
210, 212
time-reversal, 189–192, 195, 196,
199, 202, 207
translation, 199
symmetry enriched topological (SET)
phases, 162
symmetry protected topological (SPT)
phases, 175
symmetry-protected topological (SPT)
phases, 162
syndrome, 314
tangent space, 57, 62
threshold theorem, 320
time of ﬂight, 267
topological
topological defects, 113, 221
topological space, 109
topological band insulators, 175
topological invariant, 140, 159, 215
Z2 invariant, 147
Chern number, 143
TKNN invariant, 140
winding number, 146
topological order, 159, 163
topological quantum ﬁeld theory, 212,
335
topological space, 55
basis of, 55
open covering, 55
topological superconductor, 222, 223
toric code, 171
trace distance, 282
transformation, 8, 9, 15, 20
trapping
low-ﬁeld-seekers, 252
magnetic trap, 252

380
■Index
magneto-optical trap, 252
weak/strong ﬁeld seekers, 255
traveling salesman, 85
tripod scheme, 263
Trotter formula, 312
Tsirelson’s bound, 29, 30
Turing machine, 69, 70, 79–82
non-deterministic, 84
probabilistic, 84
universal TM, 82
typical sequence, 76
typical subspace, 282
uncomputable function, 70
undecidable problem, 69
valence bond solid (VBS) state, 178
vertical subspace, 62
vortices, 113
weak value, 22, 24, 36
wedge product, 47, 58
Wilson loop, 53, 214, 336, 338
winding number, 145, 146, 149, 198, 207
witness, 85, 303
xy-model, 105, 113

