INTRODUCTORY
The Greeks and mathematics.
IT is an encouraging sign of the times that more and more
effort is being directed to promoting a due appreciation and
a clear understanding of the gifts of the Greeks to mankind.
What we owe to Greece, what the Greeks have done for
civilization, aspects of the Greek genius : such are the themes
of many careful studies which have made a wide appeal and
will surely produce their effect. 
In truth all nations, in the
West at all events, have been to school to the Greeks, in art,
literature, philosophy, and science, the things which are essen-
tial to the rational use and enjoyment of human powers and
activities, the things which make life worth living to a rational
human being. ' Of all peoples the Greeks have dreamed the-
dream of life the best.' And the Greeks were not merely.the
pioneers in the branches of knowledge which they invented
and to which they gave names. What they began they carried
to a height of perfection which has not since been surpassed ;*
if there are exceptions, it is only where a few crowded centuries
were not enough to provide the accumulation of experience
required, whether for the purpose of correcting hypotheses
which at first could only be of the nature of guesswork, or of
suggesting new methods and machinery.
Of all the manifestations of the Greek genius none is more
impressive and even awe-inspiring than that which is revealed
by the history of Greek mathematics. Not only are the range
and the sum of what the Greek mathematicians actually
accomplished wonderful in themselves; it is necessary to bear
in mind that this mass of original work was done in an almost
incredibly short space of time, and in spite of the comparative
inadequacy (as it would seem to us) of the only methods at
their disposal, namely those of pure geometry, supplemented,
where necessary, by the ordinary arithmetical operations,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2 
INTRODUCTORY
Let us, confining ourselves to the main subject of pure
geometry by way of example, anticipate so far as to mark
certain definite stages in its development, with the intervals
separating them. In Thales's time (about 600 B. C.) we find
the first glimmerings of a theory of geometry, in the theorems
that a circle is bisected by any diameter, that an isosceles
triangle has the angles opposite to the equal sides equal, and
(if Thales really discovered this) that the angle in a semicircle
is a right angle. 
Rather more than half a century later
Pythagoras was taking the first steps towards the theory of
numbers and continuing the work of making geometry a
theoretical science; he it was who first made geometry one of
the subjects of a liberal education. The Pythagoreans, before
the next century was out (i. e. before, say, 450 B. a), had practi-
cally completed the subject-matter of Books I-II, IV, VI (and
perhaps III) of Euclid's Elements, including all the essentials
of the i geometrical algebra' which remained fundamental in
Greek geometry; the only drawback was that their theory of
proportion was not applicable to incommensurable but only
to commensurable magnitudes, so that it proved inadequate
as soon as the incommensurable came to be discovered.
In the same fifth century the difficult problems of doubling
the cube and trisecting any angle, which are beyond the
geometry of the straight line and circle, were not only mooted
but solved theoretically, the former problem having been first
reduced to that of finding two mean proportionals in continued
proportion (Hippocrates of Chios) and then solved by a
remarkable construction in three dimensions (Archytas), while
the latter was solved by means of the curve of Hippias of
Elis known as the quadratrix; the problem of squaring the
circle was also attempted, and Hippocrates, as a contribution
to it, discovered and squared three out of the five lunes which
can be squared by means of the straight line and circle. In
the fourth century Eudoxus discovered the great theory of
proportion expounded in Euclid, Book V, and laid down the
principles of the method of exhaustion for measuring areas and
volumes ; the conic sections and their fundamental properties
were discovered by Menaechmus; the theory of irrationals
(probably discovered, so far as «/2 is concerned, by the
early Pythagoreans) was generalized by Theaetetus; and the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE GREEKS AND MATHEMATICS 
3
geometry of the sphere was worked out in systematic trea-
tises. 
About the end of the century Euclid wrote his
Elements in thirteen Books. The next century, the third,
is that of Archimedes, who may be said to have anticipated
the integral calculus, since, by performing what are practi-
cally integrations, he found the area of a parabolic segment
and of a spiral, the surface and volume of a sphere and a
segment of a sphere, the volume of any segment of the solids
of revolution of the second degree, the centres of gravity of
a semicircle, a parabolic segment, any segment of a paraboloid
of revolution, and any segment of a sphere or spheroid.
Apollonius of Perga, the 'great geometer', about 200 B.C.,
completed the theory of geometrical conies, with specialized
investigations of normals as maxima and minima leading
quite easily to the determination of the circle of curvature
at any point of a conic and of the equation of the evolute of
the conic, which with us is part of analytical conies. With
Apollonius the main body of Greek geometry is complete, and
we may therefore fairly say that four centuries sufficed to
complete it.
But some one will say, how did all this come about? What
special aptitude had the Greeks for mathematics 1 The answer
to this question is that their genius for mathematics was
simply one aspect of their genius for philosophy. 
Their
mathematics indeed constituted a large part of their philo-
sophy down to Plato. Both had the same origin.
Conditions favouring the development of philosophy
among the Greeks.
All men by nature desire to know, says Aristotle.1 The
Greeks, beyond any other people of antiquity, possessed the
love of knowledge for its own sake; with them it amounted
to an instinct and a passion.2 We see this first of all in their
love of adventure. It is characteristic that in the Odyssey
Odysseus is extolled as the hero who had' seen the cities of
many men and learned their mind'/ often even taking his life
in his hand, out of a pure passion for extending his horizon^
1 Arist. Metaph. A. 1, 980 a 21.
2 Cf. Butcher, Some Aspects of the Greek Genius, 1892, p. 1.
3 Od. i. 3.
B 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

4 
INTRODUCTORY
as when he went to see the Cyclopes in order to ascertain f what
sort of people they were, whether violent and savage, with no
sense of justice, or hospitable and godfearing'.1 
Coming
nearer to historical times, we find philosophers and statesmen
travelling in order to benefit by all the wisdom that other
nations with a longer history had gathered during the cen-
turies. Thales travelled in Egypt and spent his time with
the priests. Solon, according to Herodotus,2 travelled ' to see
the world' (Oecopirj? tiveKtv), going to Egypt to the court of
Amasis, and visiting Croesus at Sardis. At Sardis it was not
till' after he had seen and examined everything' that he had
the famous conversation with Croesus ; and Croesus addressed
him as the Athenian of whose wisdom and peregrinations he
had heard great accounts, proving that he had covered much
ground in seeing the world and pursuing philosophy.
(Herodotus, also a great traveller, is himself an instance of
the capacity of the Greeks for assimilating anything that
could be learnt from any other nations whatever; and,
although in Herodotus's case the object in view was less the
pursuit of philosophy than the collection of interesting infor-
mation, yet he exhibits in no less degree the Greek passion
for seeing things as they are and discerning their meaning
and mutual relations; ' he compares his reports, he weighs the
evidence, he is conscious of his own office as an inquirer after
truth'.) 
But the same avidity for learning is best of all
illustrated by the similar tradition with regard to Pythagoras's
travels. Iamblichus, in his account of the life of Pythagoras,3
says that Thales, admiring his remarkable ability, communi-
cated to him all that he knew, but, pleading his own age and
failing strength, advised him for his better instruction to go
and study with the Egyptian priests. Pythagoras, visiting
Sidon on the way, both because it was his birthplace and
because he properly thought that the passage to Egypt would
be easier by that route, consorted there with the descendants
of Mochus, the natural philosopher and prophet, and with the
other Phoenician hierophants, and was initiated into all
the rites practised in Biblus, Tyre, and in many parts of
Syria, a regimen to which he submitted, not out of religious
1 Od. ix. 174-6. 
2 Herodotus, i. 30.
3 Iamblichus, De vita Pythagorica, cc. 2-4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 
5
enthusiasm, 'as you might think3 (&$ av TJ? airXcb?
but much more through love and desire for philosophic
inquiry, and in order to secure that he should not overlook
any fragment of knowledge worth acquiring that might lie
hidden in the mysteries or ceremonies of divine worship;
then, understanding that what he found in Phoenicia was in
some sort an offshoot or descendant of the wisdom of the
priests of Egypt, he concluded that he should acquire learning
more pure and more sublime by going to the fountain-head in
Egypt itself.
' There', continues the story, * he studied with the priests
and prophets and instructed himself on every possible topic,
neglecting no item of the instruction favoured by the best
judges, no individual man among those who were famous for
their knowledge, no rite practised in the country wherever it
was, and leaving no place unexplored where he thought he
could discover something more. . . . And so he spent 22
years in the shrines throughout Egypt, pursuing astronomy
and geometry and, of set purpose and not by fits and starts or
casually, entering into all the rites of divine worship, until he
was taken captive by Cambyses's force and carried off to
Babylon, where again he consorted with the Magi, a willing
pupil of willing masters. By them he was fully instructed in
their solemn rites aud religious worship, and in their midst he
attained to the highest eminence in arithmetic, music, and the
other branches of learning. 
After twelve years more thus
spent he returned to Samos, being then about 56 years old/
Whether these stories are true in their details or not is
a matter of no consequence. They represent the traditional
and universal view of the Greeks themselves regarding the
beginnings of their philosophy, and they reflect throughout
the Greek spirit and outlook.
From a scientific point of view a very important advantage
possessed by the Greeks was their remarkable capacity for
accurate observation. This is attested throughout all periods,
by the similes in Homer, by vase-paintings, by the ethno-
graphic data in Herodotus, by the ' Hippocratean' medical
books, by the biological treatises of Aristotle, and by the
history of Greek astronomy in all its stages. To take two
commonplace examples. 
Any person who examines the
under-side of a horse's hoof, which we call a ' frog' and the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6 
INTRODUCTORY
Greeks called a 'swallow', will agree that the latter is
the more accurate description. 
Or again, what exactness
of perception must have been possessed by the architects and
workmen to whom we owe the pillars which, seen from below,
appear perfectly straight, but, when measured, are found to
bulge out (evTao-is).
A still more essential fact is that the Greeks were a race of
thinkers. It was not enough for them to know the fact (the
on)', they wanted to know the why and wherefore (the 8ia TL),
and they never rested until they were able to give a rational
explanation, or what appeared to them to be such, of every
fact or phenomenon. The history of Greek astronomy fur-
nishes a good example of this, as well as of the fact that no
visible phenomenon escaped their observation. We read in
Cleomedes1 that there were stories of extraordinary lunar
eclipses having been observed which 6 the more ancient of the
mathematicians' had vainly tried to explain; the supposed
(paradoxical' case was that in which, while the sun appears
to be still above the western horizon, the eclipsed moon is
seen to rise in the east. The phenomenon was seemingly
inconsistent with the recognized explanation of lunar eclipses
as caused by the entrance of the moon into the earth's
shadow; how could this be if both bodies were above the
horizon at the same time? The 'more ancient' mathemati-
cians tried to argue that it was possible that a spectator
standing on an eminence of the spherical earth might see
along the generators of a cone, i.e. a little downwards on all
sides instead of merely in the plane of the horizon, and so
might see both the sun and the moon although the latter was
in the earth's shadow. Cleomedes denies this, and prefers to
regard the whole story of such cases as a fiction designed
merely for the purpose of plaguing astronomers and philoso-
phers ; but it is evident that the cases had actually been
observed, and that astronomers did not cease to work at the
problem until they had found the real explanation, namely
that the phenomenon is due to atmospheric refraction, which
makes the sun visible to us though it is actually beneath the
horizon. Cleomedes himself gives this explanation, observing
that such cases of atmospheric refraction were especially
1 Cleomedes, De motu circulars ii. 6, pp. 218 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 
7
noticeable in the neighbourhood of the Black Sea, and com-
paring the well-known experiment of the ring at the bottom
of a jug, where the ring, just out of sight when the jug is
empty, is brought into view when water is poured in. We do
not know who the ' more ancient' mathematicians were who
were first exercised by the ' paradoxical' case; but it seems
not impossible that it was the observation of this phenomenon,
and the difficulty of explaining it otherwise, which made
Anaxagoras and others adhere to the theory that there are
other bodies besides the earth which sometimes, -by their
interposition, cause lunar eclipses. The story is also a good
illustration of the fact that, with the Greeks, pure theory
went hand in .hand with observation. Observation gave data
upon which it was possible^to found a theory ; but the theory
had to be modified from time to time to suit observed new
facts; they had continually in mind the necessity of ' saving
the phenomena' (to use the stereotyped phrase of Greek
astronomy). Experiment played the same part in Greek
medicine and biology.
Among the different Greek stocks the Ionians who settled
on the coast of Asia Minor were the most favourably situated
in respect both of natural gifts and of environment for initiat-
ing philosophy and theoretical science. When the colonizing
spirit first arises in a nation and fresh fields for activity and
development are sought, it is naturally the younger, more
enterprising and more courageous spirits who volunteer to
leave their homes and try their fortune in new countries;
similarly, on the intellectual side, the colonists will be at
least the equals of those who stay at home, and, being the
least wedded to traditional and antiquated ideas, they will be
the most capable of striking out new lines. So it was with
the Greeks who founded settlements in Asia Minor. The
geographical position of these settlements, connected with the
mother country by intervening islands, forming stepping-
stones as it were from the one to the other, kept them in
continual touch with the mother country; and at the same
time their geographical horizon was enormously extended by
the development of commerce over the whole of the Mediter-
ranean. The most adventurous seafarers among the Greeks
of Asia Minor, the Phocaeans, plied their trade successfully
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

8 
INTRODUCTORY
as far as the Pillars of Hercules, after they had explored the
Adriatic sea, the west coast of Italy, and the coasts of the
Ligurians and Iberians. They are said to have founded
Massalia, the most important Greek colony in the western
countries, as early as 600 B.C. Cyrene, on the Libyan coast,
was founded in the last third of the seventh century. The
Milesians had, soon after 800 B.C., made settlements on the
east coast of the Black Sea (Sinope was founded in 785); the
first Greek settlements in Sicily were made from Euboea and
Corinth soon after the middle of the eighth century (Syracuse
734). The ancient acquaintance of the Greeks with the south
coast of Asia Minor and with Cyprus, and the establishment
of close relations with Egypt, in which the Milesians had a
large share, belongs to the time of the reign of Psammetichus I
(664-610 B.C.),and many Greeks had settled in that country.
The free communications thus existing with the whole of
the known world enabled complete information to be collected
with regard to the different conditions, customs and beliefs
prevailing in the various countries and races; and, in parti-
cular, the Ionian Greeks had the inestimable advantage of
being in contact, directly and indirectly, with, two ancient
civilizations, the Babylonian and the Egyptian.
Dealing, at the beginning of the Metaphysics, with the
evolution of science, Aristotle observes that science was
preceded by the arts. The arts were invented as the result
of general notions gathered from experience (which again was
derived from the exercise of memory); those arts naturally
came first which are directed to supplying the necessities of
life, and nqxt came those which look to its amenities. It was
only when all such arts had been established that the sciences,
which do not aim at supplying the necessities or amenities
of life, were in turn discovered, and this happened first in
the places where men began to have leisure. This is why
the mathematical arts were founded in Egypt; for there the
priestly caste was allowed to be at leisure. Aristotle does not
here mention Babylon; but, such as it was, Babylonian
science also was the monopoly of the priesthood.
It is in fact true, as Gomperz says,1 that the first steps on
the road of scientific inquiry were, so far as we know from
1 Griechische Denker, i, pp. 36, 37.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 
9
history, never accomplished except where the existence of an
organized caste of priests and scholars secured the necessary
industry, with the equally indispensable continuity of tradi-
tion. But in those very places the first steps were generally
the last also, because the scientific doctrines so attained tend,
through their identification with religious prescriptions, to
become only too easily, like the latter, mere lifeless dogmas.
It was a fortunate chance for the unhindered spiritual de-
velopment of the Greek people that, while their predecessors
in civilization had an organized priesthood, the Greeks nevgr
had. To begin with, they could exercise with perfect freedom
their power of unerring eclecticism in the assimilation of every
kind of lore. 'It remains their everlasting glory that they
discovered and made use of the serious scientific elements in
the confused and complex mass of exact observations and
superstitious ideas which constitutes the priestly wisdom of
the East, and threw all the fantastic rubbish on one side/ *
For the same reason, while using the earlier work of
Egyptians and Babylonians as a basis, the Greek genius
could take an independent upward course free from every
kind of restraint and venture on a flight which was destined
to carry it to the highest achievements.
The Greeks then, with their * unclouded clearness of mind '
and their freedom of thought, untrammelled by any ' Bible ' or
its equivalent, were alone capable of creating the sciences as
they did create them, i.e. as living things based on sound first
principles and capable of indefinite development. It was a
great boast, but a true one, which the author of the Epinomis
made when he said,' Let us take it as an axiom that, whatever
the Greeks take from the barbarians, they bring it to fuller
perfection \2 
He has been speaking of the extent to which
the Greeks had been able to explain the relative motions and
speeds of the sun, moon and planets, while admitting that
there was still much progress to be made before absolute
certainty could be achieved. He adds a characteristic sen-
tence, which is very relevant to the above remarks about the
Greek's free outlook:
* Let no Greek ever be afraid that we ought not at any time
to study things divine because we are mortal. We ought to
1 Cumont, Neue Jahrbiicher, xxiv, 1911, p. 4. 
2 Epinomis, 987 D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

10 
INTRODUCTORY
maintain the very contrary view, namely, that God cannot
possibly be without intelligence or be ignorant of human
nature : rather he knows that, when he teaches them, men
will follow him and learn what they are taught. And he is
of course perfectly aware that he does teach us, and that we
learn, the very subject we are now discussing, number and
counting; if he failed to know this, he would show the
greatest want of intelligence; the God we speak of would in
fact not know himself, if he took it amiss that a man capable
of learning should learn, and if he did not rejoice unreservedly
with one who became good by divine influence.'*
Nothing could well show more clearly the Greek conviction
that there could be no opposition between religion and scien-
tific truth, and therefore that there could be no impiety in the
pursuit of truth. The passage is a good parallel to the state-
ment attributed to Plato that 0eo? del
Meaning and classification of mathematics.
The words fiadrj/iara and jiaOrjixaTLKos do not appear to
have been definitely appropriated to the special meaning of
mathematics and mathematicians or things mathematical until
Aristotle's time. With Plato fidOrj/jia is quite general, mean-
ing any subject of instruction or study; he speaks of KaXa
fiaOrjfjiaTa, good subjects of instruction, as of KaXa kTnTr\8sv-
jiara, good pursuits, of women's subjects as opposed to men's,
of the Sophists hawking sound fiaOrjfictTa; what, he asks in
the Republic, are the greatest fxaOrj^aTa ? and he answers that
the greatest fidOrjixa is the Idea of the Good.2 But in the
Laws he speaks of rpia fiaOrj/xaTa, three subjects, as fit for
freeborn men, the subjects being arithmetic, the science of
measurement (geometry), and astronomy 3; and no doubt the
pre-eminent place given to mathematical subjects in his scheme
of education would have its effect in encouraging the habit of
speaking of these subjects exclusively as jiaOrjfiaTa. The
Peripatetics, we are told, explained the special use of the
word in this way ; they poirtted out that, whereas such things
as rhetoric and poetry and the whole of popular /JLOVO-LKT] can
be understood even by one who has not learnt them, the sub-
jects called by the special name of [ladruxara cannot be known
Epinomis, 988 A. 
% Republic, vi. 505 A. 
8 Laws, vii. 817 E.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CLASSIFICATION OF MATHEMATICS 
11
by any one who has not first gone through a course of instruc-
tion in them; they concluded that it was for this reason that
these studies were called fiaOrifxaTiKf]} The special use of the
word fibtdrj/jLaTLKrj seems actually to have originated in the
school of Pythagoras. It is said that the esoteric members
of the school, those who had learnt the theory of know-
ledge in its most complete form and with all its elaboration
of detail, were known as /xaOrj/iaTLKOL, mathematicians (as
opposed to the aKovcr/iaTtKo^ the exoteric learners who were
entrusted, not with the inner theory, but only with the prac-
tical rules of conduct); and, seeing that the Pythagorean
philosophy was mostly mathematics, the term might easily
come to be identified with the mathematical subjects as
distinct from others. According to Anatolius, the followers
of Pythagoras are said to have applied the term fxaOrj/jLaTitcrj
more particularly to the two subjects of geometry and
arithmetic, which had previously been known by their own
separate names only and not by any common designation
covering both.2 There is also an apparently genuine frag-
ment of Archytas, a Pythagorean and a contemporary and
friend of Plato, in which the word fiaQr\fiara appears as
definitely appropriated to mathematical subjects:
i The mathematicians (rol irepl ra fiaOrj/xara) seem to me to
have arrived at correct conclusions, and it is not therefore
surprising that they have a true conception of the nature of
each individual thing: for, having reached such correct con-
clusions regarding the nature of the universe, they were
bound to see in its true light the nature of particular things
as well. Thus they have handed down to us clear knowledge
about the speed of the stars, their risings and settings, and
about geometry, arithmetic, and sphaeric, and last, not least,
about music; for these fia.6rjfj.aTa seem to be sisters.'3
This brings us to the Greek classification of the different
branches of mathematics. Archytas, in the passage quoted,
specifies the four subjects of the Pythagorean 
quadrivium,
geometry, arithmetic, astronomy, and music (for 'sphaeric'
means astronomy, being the geometry of the sphere con-
Anatolius in Hultsch's Heron, pp. 276-7 (Heron, vol. iv, Heiberg,
60 1824)
p. 160. 18-24).
2 Heron, ed. Hultsch, p. 277; vol. iv, p. 160. 24-162. 2, Heiberg.
3 Diels, Vorsokrutiker, i3, pp. 330-1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

12 
INTRODUCTORY
sidered solely with reference to the problem of accounting for
the motions of the heavenly bodies); the same list of subjects
is attributed to the Pythagoreans by Nicomachus, Theon of
Smyrna, and Proclus, only in a different order, arithmetic,
music, geometry, and sphaeric; the idea in this order was
that arithmetic and music were both concerned with number
(TTOCTOV), arithmetic with number in itself, music with number
in relation to something else, while geometry and sphaeric were
both concerned with magnitude (W^XIKOV), geometry with mag-
nitude at rest, sphaeric with magnitude in motion. In Plato's
curriculum for the education of statesmen the same subjects,
with the addition of stereometry or solid geometry, appear,
arithmetic first, then geometry, followed by solid geometry,
astronomy, and lastly harmonics. The mention of stereometry
as an independent subject is Plato's own idea ; it was, however,
merely a formal addition to the curriculum, for of course
solid problems had been investigated earlier, as a part of
geometry, by the Pythagoreans, Democritus and others.
Plato's reason for the interpolation was partly logical. Astro-
nomy treats of the motion of solid bodies. There is therefore
a gap between plane geometry and astronomy, for, after con-
sidering plane figures, we ought next to add the third dimen-
sion and consider solid figures in themselves, before passing
to the science which deals with such figures in motion. 
But
Plato emphasized stereometry for another reason, namely that
in his opinion it had not been sufficiently studied. 
'The
properties of solids do not yet seem to have been discovered.'
He adds:
' The reasons for this are two. First, it is because no State
holds them in honour that these problems, which are difficult,
are feebly investigated ; and, secondly, those who do investi-
gate them are in need of a superintendent, without whose
guidance they are not likely to make discoveries. 
But, to
begin with, it is difficult to find such a superintendent, and
then, even supposing him found, as matters now stand, those
who are inclined to these researches would be prevented by
their self-conceit from paying any heed to him.'1
I have translated coy vvv €\ei (' as matters now stand') in
this passage as meaning 'in present circumstances', i.e. so
1 Plato, Republic, vii. 528 A-c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CLASSIFICATION OF MATHEMATICS 
13
long as the director has not the authority of the State behind
him: this seems to be the best interpretation in view of the
whole context; but it is possible, as a matter of construction,
to connect the phrase with the preceding words, in which case
the meaning would be ' and, even when such a superintendent
has been found, as is the case at present', and Plato would
be pointing to some distinguished geometer among his con-
temporaries as being actually available for the post. If Plato
intended this, it would presumably be either Archytas or
Eudoxus whom he had in mind.
It is again on a logical ground that Plato made harmonics
or music follow astronomy in his classification. As astronomy
is the motion of bodies (<popa fidOovsi) and appeals to the eye,
so there is a harmonious motion (kvapiiovios <f>opd), a motion
according to the laws of harmony, which appeals to the ear.
In maintaining the sisterhood of music and astronomy Plato
followed the Pythagorean view (cf. the passage of Archytas
above quoted and the doctrine of the ' harmony of the
spheresJ).
(a) Arithmetic and logistic.
By arithmetic Plato meant, not arithmetic in our sense, but
the science which considers numbers in themselves, in other
words, what we mean by the Theory of Numbers. He does
not, however, ignore the art of calculation (arithmetic in our
sense); he speaks of number and calculation {apiQjibv KOU
Xoyta-fiov) and observes thatc the art of calculation (Xoyio-TiKfj)
and arithmetic {apiQ[ir]TiKr\) are both -concerned with number';
those who have a natural gift for calculation (0/ (/>V<T€L Xoyc-
(TTIKOI) have, generally speaking, a talent for learning of all
kinds, and even those who are slow are, by practice in it,
made smarter.1 But the art of calculation (Xoyio-TiKrj) is only
preparatory to the true science; those who are to govern the
city are to get a grasp of Xoyio-TLicrj, not in the popular
sense with a view to use in trade, but only for the purpose of
knowledge, until they are able to contemplate the nature of
number in itself by thought alone.2 This distinction between
dpt.O/j.r}TLKrj (the theory of numbers) and Xoyta-riKri (the art of
1 Republic, vii. 522 c, 525 A, 526 B.
2 1b. vii. 525 B, c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14 
INTRODUCTORY
calculation) was a fundamental one in Greek mathematics.
It is found elsewhere in Plato,1 and it is clear that it was well
established in Plato's time. Archytas too has Xoyco-TLfcr} in
the same sense; the art of calculation, he says, seems to be far
ahead of other arts in relation to wisdom or philosophy, nay
it seems to make the things of which it chooses to treat even
clearer than geometry does; moreover, it often succeeds even
where geometry fails.2 But it is later writers on the classification
of mathematics who alone go into any detail of what Xoyio-Tiid]
included. Geminus in Proclus, Anatolius in the Variae Collec-
tiones included in Hultsch's Heron, and the scholiast to Plato's
Charmides are our authorities. Arithmetic, says Geminus,3 is
divided into the theory of linear numbers, the theory of plane
numbers, and the theory of solid numbers. It investigates,
in and by themselves, the species of number as they are succes-
sively evolved from the unit, the formation of plane numbers,
similar and dissimilar, and the further progression to the third
dimension. As for the Aoyjcm/eoy, it is not in and by themselves
that he considers the properties of numbers but with refer-
ence to sensible objects; and for this reason he applies to
them names adapted from the objects measured, calling some
(numbers) /z^Xm;? ^from firjXov, a sheep, or fxfjXov, an apple,
more probably the latter) and others <f)iaXiTr]$ (from cfridXr],
a bowl).4 The scholiast to the Charmides is fuller still:5
' Logistic is the science which deals with numbered things,
not numbers; it does not take number in its essence,
but it presupposes 1 as unit, and the numbered object as
number, e.g. it regards 3 as a triad, 10 as a decad, and
applies the theorems of arithmetic to such (particular) cases.
Thus it is logistic which investigates on the one hand what
Archimedes called the cattle-problem, and on the other hand
melites and phialites numbers, the latter relating to bowls,
the former to flocks (he should probably have said " apples ");
in other kinds too it investigates the numbers of sensible
bodies, treating them as absolute (a>y nepl reXeicov). Its sub-
ject-matter is everything that is numbered. 
Its branches
include the so-called Greek and Egyptian methods in multi-
plications and divisions,6 the additions and decompositions
1 Cf. Gorgias, 451 B, C ; Theaetetus, 145 A with 198 A, &c,
2 Diels, Vorsokratiker, is, p. 337. 7-11.
8 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 39. 14-20. 
4 Ib., p. 40. 2-5.
5 On Charmides, 165 E. 
6 See Chapter II, pp. 52-60.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARITHMETIC AND LOGISTIC 
15
of fractions; which methods it uses to explore the secrets of
the theory of triangular and polygonal numbers with reference
to the subject-matter of particular problems/
The content of logistic is for the most part made fairly
clear by the scholia just quoted. 
First, it comprised the
ordinary arithmetical operations, addition, subtraction, multi-
plication, division, and the handling of fractions; that is, it
included the elementary parts of what we now call arithmetic.
Next, it dealt with problems about such things as sheep
(or apples), bowls, &c.; and here we have no difficulty in
recognizing such problems as we find in the arithmetical
epigrams included in the Greek anthology. Several of them
are problems of dividing a number of apples or nuts among
a certain number of persons; others deal with the weights of
bowls, or of statues and their pedestals, and the like; as a
rule, they involve the solution of simple equations with one
unknown, or easy simultaneous equations with two unknowns;
two are indeterminate equations of the first degree to be solved
in positive integers. From Plato's allusions to such problems
it is clear that their origin dates back; at least, to the fifth
century B.C. The cattle-problem attributed to Archimedes
is of course a much more difficult problem, involving the
solution of a 'Pellian* equation in numbers of altogether
impracticable size. In this problem the sums of two pairs
of unknowns have to be respectively a square and a tri-
angular number; the problem would therefore seem to
correspond to the description of those involving {the theory
of triangular and polygonal numbers'. 
Tannery takes the
allusion in the last words to be to problems in indeter-
minate analysis like those of Diophantus's Arithmetica. 
The
difficulty is that most of Diophantus's problems refer to num-
bers such that their sums, differences, &c, are squares, whereas
the scholiast mentions only triangular and polygonal numbers.
Tannery takes squares to be included among polygons, or to
have been accidentally omitted by a copyist. 
But there is
only one use in Diophantus's Arithmetica of a triangular
number (in IV. 38), and none of a polygonal number; nor can
the Tpiydovov? of the scholiast refer, as Tannery supposes, to
right-angled triangles with sides in rational numbers (the
main subject of Diophantus's Book VI), the use of the mascu-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

16 
INTRODUCTORY
line showing that only rpiycbvovs dpiO/iovs, triangular num-
bers, can be meant. Nevertheless there can, I think, be no
doubt that Diophantus's Arithmetica belongs to Logistic.
Why then did Diophantus call his thirteen books Arithmetica ?
The explanation is probably this. Problems of the Diophan-
tine type, like those of the arithmetical epigrams, had pre-
viously been enunciated of concrete numbers (numbers of
apples, bowls, &c), and one of Diophantus's problems (V. 30)
is actually in epigram form, and is about measures of wine
with prices in drachmas. Diophantus then probably saw that
there was no reason why such problems should refer to
numbers of any one particular thing rather than another, but
that they might more conveniently take the form of finding
numbers in the abstract with certain properties, alone or in
combination, and therefore that they might claim to be part
of arithmetic, the abstract science or theory of numbers.
It should be added that to the distinction between arith~
metic and logistic there corresponded (up to the time of
Nicomachus) different methods of treatment. 
With rare
exceptions, such as Eratosthenes's KOCTKLVOV, or sieve, a device
for separating out the successive prime numbers, the theory
of numbers was only treated in connexion with geometry, and
for that reason only the geometrical form of proof was used,
whether the figures took the form of dots marking out squares,
triangles, gnomons, &c. (as with the early Pythagoreans), or of
straight lines (as in Euclid VII-IX); even Nicomachus did
not entirely banish geometrical considerations from his work,
and in Diophantus's treatise on Polygonal Numbers, of which
a fragment survives, the geometrical form of proof is used.
(fi) Geometry and geodaesia.
By the time of Aristotle there was separated out from
geometry a distinct subject, yecoSata-ta, geodesy, or, as we
should say, mensuration, not confined to land-measuring, but
covering generally the practical measurement of surfaces and
volumes, as we learn from Aristotle himself,1 as well as from
a passage of Geminus quoted by Proclus.2
1 Arist. Metaph. B. 2, 997 b 26, 31.
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 89. 20-40. 2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PHYSICAL SUBJECTS AND THEIR BRANCHES 17
(y) Physical subjects, mechanics, optics, harmonics,
astronomy, and their branches.
In applied mathematics Aristotle recognizes optics and
mechanics in addition to astronomy and harmonics. He calls
optics, harmonics, and astronomy the more physical (branches)
of mathematics,1 and observes that these subjects and mechanics
depend for the proofs of their propositions upon the pure
mathematical subjects, optics on geometry, mechanics on
geometry or stereometry, and harmonics on arithmetic; simi-
larly, he says, Phaenomena (that is, observational astronomy)
depend on (theoretical) astronomy.2
The most elaborate classification of mathematics is that given
by Geminus.3 After arithmetic and geometry, which treat of
non-sensibles, or objects of pure thought, come the branches
which are concerned with sensible objects, and these are six
in number, namely mechanics, astronomy, optics, geodesy,
canonic {KavovLK-q), logistic. Anatolius distinguishes the same
subjects but gives them in the order logistic^ geodesy, optics,
canonic, mechanics, astronomy.4 
Logistic has already been
discussed. Geodesy too has been described as mensuration,
.the practical measurement of surfaces and volumes; as
Geminus says, it is the function of geodesy to measure, not
a cylinder or a cone (as such), but heaps as cones, and tanks
or pits as cylinders.5 Canonic is the theory of the musical
intervals as expounded in works like Euclid's /cararcy*?)
KOLVOVOS. Division of the canon.
Optics is divided by Geminus into three branches.6 (1) The
first is Optics proper, the business of which is to explain why
things appear to be of different sizes or different shapes
according to the way in which they are placed and the
distances at which they are seen. 
Euclid's Optics consists
mainly of propositions of this kind; a circle seen edge-
wise looks like a straight line (Prop. 22), a cylinder seen by
one eye appears less than half a cylinder (Prop. 28); if the
line joining the eye to the centre of a circle is perpendicular
1 Arist. Phys. ii. 2, 194 a 8.
2 Arist. Anal. Post. i. 9, 76 a 22-5 ; i. 13, 78 b 35-9.
3 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 38. 8-12.
4 See Heron, ed. Hultsch, p. 278; ed. Heiberg, iv, p. 164.
5 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 39. 23-5. 
6 lb., p. 40. 13-22.
1523 
0
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18 
INTRODUCTORY
to the plane of the circle, all its diameters will look equal
(Prop. 34), but if the joining line is neither perpendicular to
the plane of the circle nor equal to its radius, diameters with
which it makes unequal angles will appear unequal (Prop. 35);
if a visible object remains stationary, there exists a locus such
that, if the eye is placed at any point on it, the object appears
to be of the same size for every position of the eye (Prop. 38).
(2) The second branch is Catoptric, or the theory of mirrors,
exemplified by the Catoptrica of Heron, which contains,
e. g., the theorem that the angles of incidence and reflexion
are equal, based on the assumption that the broken line
connecting the eye and the object reflected is a minimum.
(3) The third branch is o-Krjvoypa(/)iKrj or, as we might say,
scene-painting, i.e. applied perspective.
Under the general term of mechanics Geminus1 dis-
tinguishes (1) bpy avoir oiiK-q, the art of making engines of war
(cf. Archimedes's reputed feats at the siege of Syracuse and
Heron's fieXoirouKa), (2) dav/xaToirouKri, the art of making
wonderful machines, such as those described in Heron's
Pneumatica and Automatic Theatre, (3) Mechanics proper,
the theory of centres of gravity, equilibrium, the mechanical
powers, &c, (4) Sphere-making, the imitation of the move-
ments of the heavenly bodies; Archimedes is said to have
made such a sphere or orrery. 
Last of all,2 astronomy
is divided into (1) yv&jioviKri, the art of the gnomon, or the
measurement of time by means of the various forms of
sun-dials, such as those enumerated by Vitruvius,3 (2) fierecopo-
vKoinKri, which seems to have included, among other things,
the measurement of the heights at which different stars cross
the meridian, (3) SioTTTpiKrj, the use of the dioptra for the
purpose of determining the relative positions of the sun,
moon, and stars.
Mathematics in Greek education.4
The elementary or primary stage in Greek education lasted
till the age of fourteen. 
The main subjects were letters
(reading and writing followed by dictation and the study of
1 Proclus on Eucl. 1, p. 41. 3-18. 
2 IK, pp. 41. 19-42. 6.
3 Vitruvius, De architectural ix. 8.
4 Cf. Freeman, Schools of Hellas, especially pp. 100-7, 159.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MATHEMATICS IN GREEK EDUCATION 
19
literature), music and gymnastics; but there is no reasonable
doubt that practical arithmetic (in our sense), including
weights and measures, was taught along with these subjects.
Thus, at the stage of spelling, a common question asked of
the pupils was, How many letters are there in such and such
a word, e.g. Socrates, and in what order do they come I1 This
would teach the cardinal and ordinal numbers. In the same
connexion Xenophon adds, ' Or take the case of numbers.
Some one asks, What is twice five?'2 This indicates that
counting was a part of learning letters, and that the multipli-
cation table was a closely connected subject. Then, again,
there were certain games, played with cubic dice or knuckle-
bones, to which boys were addicted and which involved some
degree of arithmetical skill. In the game of knucklebones in
the Lysis of Plato each boy has a large basket of them, and
the loser in each game pays so many over to the winner.3
Plato connects the art of playing this game with mathe-
matics 4; so too he associates rreTTeta (games with 7reo-<roi,
somewhat resembling draughts or chess) with arithmetic in
general.6 
When in the Laws Plato speaks of three subjects
fit for freeborn citizens to learn, (1) calculation and the science
of numbers, (2) mensuration in one, two and three dimen-
sions, and (3) astronomy in the sense of the knowledge of
the revolutions of the heavenly bodies and their respective
Jperiods, he admits that profound and accurate knowledge of
these subjects is not for people in general but only for a few.6
But it is evident that practical arithmetic was, after letters
and the lyre, to be a subject for all, so much of arithmetic,
that is, as is necessary for purposes of war, household
management, and the work of government. Similarly, enough
astronomy should be learnt to enable the pupil to understand
the calendar.7 Amusement should be combined with instruc-
tion so as to make the subjects attractive to boys. Plato was
much attracted by the Egyptian practice in this matter:8
'Freeborn boys should learn so much of these things as
vast multitudes of boys in Egypt learn along with their
1 Xenophon, Econ. viii. 14. 
2 Xenophon, Mem. iv. 4. 7.
3 Plato, Lysis, 206 E ; cf. Apollonius Rhodius, iii. 117.
4 Phaedrus, 274 c-D. 
Q Politicus, 299 E ; Laws, 820 c.
6 Laws, 817 E - 8 1 8 A. 
7 Ib. 809 c, D,
8 Ib. 819 A-c.
c 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

20 
INTRODUCTORY
letters. First there should be calculations specially devised
as suitable for boys, which they should learn with amusement
and pleasure, for example, distributions of apples or garlands
where the same number is divided among more or fewer boys,
or (distributions) of the competitors in boxing or wrestling
matches on the plan of drawing pairs with byes, or by taking
them in consecutive order, or in any of the usual ways1; and
again there should be games with bowls containing gold,
bronze, and silver (coins?) and the like mixed together,2 or the
bowls may be distributed as undivided units; for, as I said,
by connecting with games the essential operations of practical
arithmetic, you supply the boy with what will be useful to
him later in the ordering of armies, marches and campaigns,
as well as in household management; and in any case you
make him more useful to himself and more wide awake.
Then again, by calculating measurements of things which
have length, breadth, and depth, questions on all of which
the natural condition of all men is one of ridiculous and dis-
graceful ignorance, they are enabled to emerge from this
state/
It is true that these are Plato's ideas of what elementary
education should include; but it can hardly be doubted that
such methods were actually in use in Attica.
Geometry and astronomy belonged to secondary Education,
which occupied the years between the ages of fourteen and
eighteen. The pseudo-Platonic AxiocKus attributes to Prodi-
cus a statement that, when a boy gets older, i. e. after he has
1 The Greek of this clause is (diavofial) TTVKTWV Kai 7ra\a«rra>i/ 
fap
re Kai avWrjf-eas iv /xcp« Kai irf)ei;rjs Kai as 7re<£uKatri ylyvcaSai, 
So far as
I can ascertain, iv fiepet (by itself) and ifagfjs have always been taken
as indicating alternative methods, * in turn and in consecutive order \
But it is impossible to get any satisfactory contrast of meaning between
* in turn' and * in consecutive order \ It is clear to me that we have
here merely an instance of Plato's habit of changing the order of words
for effect, and that iv nepei must'be taken with the genitives ifaBpeias Kai
avWrj&cas ; i.e. we must translate as if we had iv ifaBpelas re Kai o-vWr)-
ijeas fiepei, ' by way of"byes and drawings}. This gives a proper distinction
between (1) drawings with byes and (2) taking competitors in consecutive
order.
2 It is difficult to decide between the two possible interpretations
of the phrase fyiakas a\ia xpvo-ov Kai xaXfcou Kai apyvpov Kai TOLOVTOHV TIVCOV
aWwv KepavvvvTts. It may mean * taking bowls made of gold, bronze,
silver and other metals mixed together (in certain proportions)' or
'filling bowls with gold, bronze, silver, &c. (sc. objects such as coins)
mixed together \ 
The latter version seems to agree best with nalCovTes
(making a game out of the process) and to give the better contrast to
* distributing the bowls as wholes' (o\as TT<OS 
8b86)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MATHEMATICS IN GREEK EDUCATION 
21
passed the primary stage under the paidagogos, grammatistes,
and paidotribes, he comes under the tyranny of the * critics',
the geometers, the tacticians, and a host of other masters.1
Teles, the philosopher, similarly, mentions arithmetic and
geometry among the plagues of the lad.2 It would appear
that geometry and astronomy were newly introduced into the
curriculum in the time of Isocrates. ' I am so far', he says,3
' from despising the instruction which our ancestors got, that
I am a supporter of that which has been established in our
time, I mean geometry, astronomy, and the so-called eristic
dialogues.' 
Such studies, even if they do no other good,
keep the young out of mischief, and in Isocrates's opinion no
other subjects could have been invented more useful and
more fitting; but they should be abandoned by the time that
the pupils have reached man's estate. Most people, he says,
think them idle, since (say they) they are of no use in private
or public affairs; moreover they are forgotten directly because
they do not go with us in our daily life and action, nay, they
are altogether outside everyday needs. He himself, however,
is far from sharing these views. True, those who specialize in
such subjects as astronomy and geometry get no good from
them unless they choose to teach them for a livelihood; and if
they get too deeply absorbed, they become unpractical and
incapable of doing ordinary business; but the study of these
subjects up to the proper point trains a boy to keep his atten-
tion fixed and not to allow his mind to wander; so, being
practised in this way and having his wits sharpened, he will be
capable of learning more important matters with greater ease
and speed. Isocrates will not, give the name of * philosophy' to
studies like geometry and astronomy, which are of no imme-
diate use for producing an orator or man of business; they
are rather means of training the mind and a preparation for
philosophy. They are a more manly discipline than the sub-
jects taught to boys, such as literary study and music, but in
other respects have the same function in making them quicker
to learn greater and more important subjects.
1 Axiochus, 366 E.
2 Stobaeus, Ed. iv. 34, 72 (vol. v, p. 848, 19 sq., Wachsmuth and
Hense).
3 See Tsocrates, Panathenaicus, §§ 26-8 ^238 b-d); Ilepi avri86<n&sf
§§ 261-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

22 
INTRODUCTORY
It would appear therefore that, notwithstanding the in-
fluence of Plato, the attitude of cultivated people in general
towards mathematics was not different in Plato's time from
what it is to-day.
We are told that it was one of the early Pythagoreans,
unnamed, who first taught geometry for money: ' One of the
Pythagoreans lost his property, and when this misfortune
befell him he was allowed to make money by teaching
geometry.'x 
We may fairly conclude that Hippocrates of
Chios, the first writer of Elements, who also made himself
famous by his quadrature of lunes, his reduction of the
duplication of the cube to the problem of finding two mean
proportionals, and his proof that the areas of circles are in
the ratio of the squares on their diameters, also taught for
money and for a like reason. One version of the story is that
he was a merchant, but lost all his property through being
captured by a pirate vessel. 
He then came to Athens to
prosecute the offenders and, during a long stay, attended
lectures, finally attaining such proficiency in geometry that
he tried to square the circle.2 Aristotle has the different
version that he allowed himself to be defrauded of a large
sum by custom-house officers at Byzantium, thereby proving,
in Aristotle's opinion, that, though a good geometer, he was
stupid and incompetent in the business of ordinary life.3
We find in the Platonic dialogues one or two glimpses of
mathematics being taught or discussed in school- or class-
rooms. In the Erasbae 4 Socrates is represented as going into
the school of Dionysius (Plato's own schoolmaster5) and find-
ing two lads earnestly arguing some point of astronomy;
whether it was Anaxagoras or Oenopides whose theories they
were discussing he could not catch, but they were drawing
circles and imitating some inclination or other with their
hands. In Plato's Theaetetus6 we have the story of Theodoras
lecturing on surds and proving separately, for the square root
of every non-square number from 3 to 17, that it is incom-
mensurable with 1, a procedure which set Theaetetus and the
1 Iamblichus, Vit. Pyth. 89.
2 Philoponus on Arist. Phys., p. 327 b 44-8, Brandis.
3 Eudemian Ethics, H. 14, 1247 a 17.
4 Erastae, 32 A, B. 
5 Diog. L. iii. 5.
6 Theaetetus, 147 D-148 B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MATHEMATICS IN GREEK EDUCATION 
23
younger Socrates thinking whether it was not possible to
comprehend all such surds under one definition. In these two
cases we have advanced or selected pupils discussing among
themselves the subject of lectures they had heard and, in the
second case, trying to develop a theory of a more general
character.
But mathematics was not only taught by regular masters
in schools; the Sophists, who travelled from place to place
giving lectures, included mathematics (arithmetic, geometry,
and astronomy) in their very wide list of subjects. Theo-
dorus, who was Plato's teacher in mathematics and is
described by Plato as a master of geometry, astronomy,
logistic and music (among other subjects), was a pupil of
Protagoras, the Sophist, of Abdera.1 Protagoras himself, if we
may trust Plato, did not approve of mathematics as part of
secondary education ; for he is made to say that
{the other Sophists maltreat the young, for, at an age when
the young have escaped the arts, they take them against their
will and plunge them once more into the arts, teaching them
the art of calculation, astronomy, geometry, and music—and
here he cast a glance at Hippias—whereas, if any one comes
to me, he will not be obliged to learn anything except what
he comes for/2
The Hippias referred to is of course Hippias of Elis, a really
distinguished mathematician, the inventor of a curve known
as the quadratrix which, originally intended for the solution
of the problem of trisecting any angle, also served (as the
name implies) for squaring the circle. In the Hippias Minor3
there is a description of Hippias's varied accomplishments.
He claimed, according to this passage, to have gone once to
the Olympian festival with everything that he wore made by
himself, ring and seal (engraved), oil-bottle, scraper, shoes,
clothes, and a Persian girdle of expensive type; he also took
poems, epics, tragedies, dithyrambs, and all sorts of prose
works. 
He was a master of the science of calculation
(logistic), geometry, astronomy, ' rhythms and harmonies
and correct writing'. He also had a wonderful system of
mnemonics enabling him, if he once heard a string of fifty
1 Theaetetus, 164 E, 168 E. 
2 Protagoras, 318 D, E.
3 Hippias Minor, pp. 366 C-368 E.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

24 
INTRODUCTORY
names, to remember them all. As a detail, we are told that
he got no fees for his lectures in Sparta, and that the Spartans
could not endure lectures on astronomy or geometry or
logistic; it was only a small minority of them who could
even count; what they liked was history and archaeology.
The above is almost all that we know of the part played
by mathematics in the Greek system of edtication. Plato's
attitude towards mathematics was, as we have seen, quite
exceptional; and it was no doubt largely owing to his influence
and his inspiration that mathematics and astronomy were so
enormously advanced in his school, and especially by Eudoxus
of Cnidos and Heraclides of Pontus. But the popular atti-
tude towards Plato's style of lecturing was not encouraging.
There is a story of a lecture of his on ' The Good' which
Aristotle was fond of telling.1 The lecture was attended by
a great crowd, and ' every one went there with the idea that
he would be put in the way of getting one or other of the
things* in human life which are usually accounted good, such
as Riches, Health, Strength, or, generally, any extraordinary
gift of fortune. But when they found that Plato discoursed
about mathematics, arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy, and
finally declared the One to be the Good, no wonder they were
altogether taken by surprise; insomuch that in the end some
of the audience were inclined to scoff at the whole thing, while
others objected to it altogether/ 
Plato, however, was able to
pick and choose his pupils, and he could therefore insist on
compliance with the notice which he is said to have put over
his porch,' Let no one unversed in geometry enter my doors';2
and similarly Xenoerates, who, after Speusippus, succeeded to
the headship of the sqhool, could turn away an applicant for
admission who knew no geometry with the words, f Go thy
way, for thou hast not the means of getting a grip of
philosophy \3
The usual attitude towards mathematics is illustrated by
two stories of Pythagoras and Euclid respectively. 
Pytha-
goras, we are told,4 anxious as he was to transplant to his own
country the system of education which he had seen in opera-
1 Aristoxenus, Harmonica, ii ad mit.
2 Tzetzes, Chiliad, viii. 972. 
s Diog. L. iv. 10.
* Iamblichqs, Tit. Pyth. c. 5,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MATHEMATICS IN GREEK EDUCATION 
25
tion in Egypt, and the study of mathematics in particular,
could get none of the Samians to listen to him. He adopted
therefore this plan of communicating his arithmetic and
geometry, so that it might not perish with him. Selecting
a young man who from his behaviour in gymnastic exercises
seemed adaptable and was withal poor, he promised him that,
if he would learn arithmetic and geometry systematically, he
would give him sixpence for each ' figure' (proposition) that he
mastered. This went on until the youth got interested in
the subject, when Pythagoras rightly judged that he would
gladly go on without the sixpence. 
He therefore hinted
that he himself was poor and must try to earn his daily bread
instead of doing mathematics; whereupon the youth, rather
than give up the study, volunteered to pay sixpence himself
to Pythagoras for each proposition. We must presumably
connect with this story the Pythagorean motto, f a figure and
a platform (from which to ascend to the next higher step), not
a figure and sixpence '-1
The other story is that of a pupil who began to learn
geometry with Euclid and asked, when he had learnt one
proposition, 'What advantage shall I get by learning these
things ?' 
And Euclid called the slave and said, ' Give him
sixpence, since he must needs gain by what he learns.'
We gather that the education of kings in the Macedonian
period did not include much geometry, whether it was Alex-
ander who asked Menaechmus, or Ptolemy who asked Euclid,
for a short-cut to geometry, and got the reply that' for travel-
ling over the country there are royal roads and roads for com-
mon citizens: but in geometry there is one road for all \2
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 84. 16.
2 Stobaeus, Ed. ii. 31, 115 (vol. ii, p. 228, 30, Wachsmuth).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

