
Introducing Philosophy
Written for any readers interested in better harnessing philosophy’s real value,
this book covers a broad range of fundamental philosophical problems and
certain intellectual techniques for addressing those problems. In Introducing
Philosophy: God, Mind, World, and Logic, Neil Tennant helps any student in
pursuit of a ‘big picture’ to think independently, question received dogma, and
analyze problems incisively. It also connects philosophy to other areas of study
at the university, enabling all students to employ the concepts and techniques of
this millennia-old discipline throughout their college careers – and beyond.
Key features and beneﬁts:
•
Investigates the philosophy of various subjects (psychology, language,
biology, math), helping students contextualize philosophy and view it as
an interdisciplinary pursuit.
•
Introduces students to various important philosophical distinctions (e.g. fact
vs. value, descriptive vs. prescriptive, norms vs. laws of nature, analytic vs.
synthetic, inductive vs. deductive, a priori vs. a posteriori) providing skills
that are important for undergraduates to develop in order to inform their
study at higher levels.
•
Is much more methodologically comprehensive than competing introductions,
giving the student the ability to address a wide range of philosophical
problems – and not just the ones reviewed in the book.
•
Offers a companion website with links to apt primary sources, organized
chapter-by-chapter, making unnecessary a separate reader/anthology of
primary sources – thus providing students with all reading material necessary
for the course.
•
Provides ﬁve to ten discussion questions for each chapter.
Neil Tennant is Humanities Distinguished Professor in Philosophy and Distin-
guished University Scholar at The Ohio State University. He has published
widely in the philosophy of logic and language, metaphysics, philosophy of
mathematics, philosophy of mind, and the history of analytical philosophy.
He teaches classes regularly at Ohio State, from 100-level Introduction to
Philosophy courses to Advanced Graduate-level Seminars.

Thispageintentionallyleftblank

Introducing Philosophy
God, Mind, World, and Logic
Neil Tennant
Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group
NEW YORK AND LONDON

First published 2015
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
c⃝2015 Taylor & Francis
The right of Neil Tennant to be identiﬁed as author of this work has been asserted by
him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without intent
to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication data
Tennant, Neil, 1950–
Introducing philosophy : God, mind, world, and logic / Neil Tennant.
pages
cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-415-53711-7 (hardback) – ISBN 978-0-415-53714-8 (pbk) –
ISBN 978-1-315-73440-8 (ebk)
1. Philosophy–Introductions.
I. Title.
BD21.T39
2014
100–dc23
2014027493
ISBN: 978-0-415-53711-7 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-53714-8 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-73440-8 (ebk)
Typeset in Goudy
by Out of House Publishing

Contents
Preface
xiv
Acknowledgements
xix
The Plan of this Book
xxi
PART I
The Nature of Philosophy
1
1
The Main Features of Philosophy
3
1.1
Philosophy as a conceptual and reﬂective discipline 3
1.2
The main areas of Philosophy 4
1.2.1
Metaphysics 5
1.2.2
Epistemology 7
1.2.3
Logic 8
1.2.4
Ethics 11
1.2.5
Aesthetics 13
1.3
Philosophical questions as concerned with fundamentals 14
2
Philosophy’s History and Legacy
17
2.1
The historical sweep of Philosophy 17
2.2
The current legacy 21
3
The Philosophical Temperament
25
3.1
Keeping an open mind 25
3.2
Philosophy contrasted with Mathematics and Science 25
3.3
Scientiﬁc questions 26
3.4
Mathematical questions 27
3.5
Philosophical questions (by contrast) 27
3.6
Realism v. Anti-realism 28
3.7
Example of a philosophical question: does God exist? 29
3.8
Adopting a philosophical position 30

vi
Contents
3.9
Undergoing a philosophical education 30
3.10 The need to avoid dogmatism 31
3.11 The need to avoid fallacious thinking 32
3.12 The need for dispassionate contemplation 36
3.13 Abilities demanded by Philosophy 38
4
Important Concepts and Distinctions
40
4.1
The appearance/reality distinction 41
4.2
The mind/body distinction 43
4.3
The objective/subjective distinction 44
4.4
The abstract/concrete distinction 46
4.5
The descriptive/normative distinction 48
4.6
The empirical/rational distinction 49
4.7
The distinctions between the necessary and the true, and between the
false and the impossible 52
4.8
The theory/evidence distinction 55
4.8.1
The empirical case 55
4.8.2
The mathematical case 56
5
Kant’s Two Distinctions
63
5.1
The distinction between a priori and a posteriori knowledge 63
5.2
The analytic/synthetic distinction 65
6
Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
73
6.1
Realism v. [Anti-realism, Idealism, Irrealism, Instrumentalism,
Eliminativism, Solipsism] 74
6.2
Substantialism v. Deﬂationism about Truth 75
6.3
Descriptivism v. Projectivism 76
6.4
Transcendentalism v. Positivism 76
6.5
Absolutism v. Relativism 77
6.6
Objectivism v. [Subjectivism/Psychologism] 78
6.7
Cognitivism (in ethics) v. Emotivism 79
6.8
Theism v. [Atheism/Naturalism] 79
6.9
Determinism v. Libertarianism 80
6.10 Rationalism v. Empiricism 81
6.11 Foundationalism v. [Anti-foundationalism/ Coherentism] 81
6.12 Dualism v. [Monism/Materialism] 82
6.13 Reductionism v. Anti-reductionism 83
6.14 Innatism v. [Behaviorism/Environmentalism] 85
6.15 Essentialism and Necessitarianism v. Anti-essentialism and
Accidentalism 86
6.16 Philosophy as a priori (‘ﬁrst philosophy’) v. Philosophy as continuous
with science and common sense 87
6.17 Individualism v. Communitarianism 87
6.18 Skepticism and Revisionism v. Quietism 88

Contents
vii
6.19 Evolutionism v. Saltationism 88
6.20 Mentalism v. Linguisticism (concerning relative priority of thought and
language) 90
PART II
Philosophy and Method
91
7
What is Logic?
93
7.1
The basics of symbolizing sentences in logical notation 93
7.2
Arguments 94
7.3
Philosophical notions employed in the study of logic and language 100
7.3.1
Token-reﬂexiveness 100
7.3.2
Semantic closure 101
7.3.3
Vacuous terms 101
7.3.4
Vagueness and ambiguity 101
7.3.5
Referential opacity 102
7.3.6
Paradoxes of relevance 106
8
Inductive Reasoning
109
8.1
The structure of arguments 109
8.2
Inductive arguments 109
8.3
A Leitmotif 110
8.4
Inductive arguments (resumed): Hume’s ‘old riddle’ of induction 112
8.5
How probability ﬁgures in scientiﬁc reasoning: Reichenbach’s straight
rule 118
8.6
How probability ﬁgures in scientiﬁc reasoning: making hypotheses more
probable 120
8.6.1
The various interpretations of the notion of probability 120
8.6.2
The axioms of the theory of probability 121
8.6.3
A theorem about probability that is philosophically
signiﬁcant 122
9
The Method of Conceptual Analysis
125
9.1
Conceptual analysis as provision of necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions 125
9.2
X knows that p 127
9.2.1
Plato’s analysis 127
9.2.2
Gettier counterexamples to Plato’s analysis 128
9.3
The Paradox of Analysis 129
9.4
The analysis of the notion of valid argument 130
9.5
Russell’s analysis of the truth-conditions of sentences of the form ‘The
F is G’ 130
9.6
Grice’s analysis of meaning in terms of belief and intention 132
9.7
Mackie’s analysis of ‘event A caused event B’ 132
9.8
Frege’s analysis of the notion of number 133

viii
Contents
9.9
Lewis’s analysis of conventions 134
9.9.1
An afterword on the form of Lewis’s analysis of
conventions 137
10 The Method of Conceptual Explication
139
10.1 Conceptual explication provides a precise theoretical substitute for an
informal concept 139
10.2 The intuitive notion of a computable function 139
10.2.1
The diagonal argument: preliminaries 140
10.2.2
The diagonal argument, ﬁrst version 141
10.2.3
The diagonal argument, second version 142
10.3 Explicating the notion of computable function 144
10.3.1
Gödel’s general recursive functions 144
10.3.2
Turing machines 146
10.3.3
Other explications of computable functions 148
10.3.4
The Turing–Church Thesis 148
10.4 Explication of the notion of cognitive signiﬁcance 150
11 The Method of Thought-Experiment
152
11.1 The role of thought-experiments in philosophical critique 152
11.2 Some famous thought-experiments in analytical philosophy 156
11.2.1
The ship of Theseus 156
11.2.2
Descartes’s evil demon 156
11.2.3
Putnam’s brain-in-a-vat 157
11.2.4
Putnam’s Twin-Earth 157
11.2.5
Gettier-type examples 157
11.2.6
Williams’s example of ‘character and memory switch’ 157
11.2.7
The problem of the inverted spectrum 157
11.2.8
Jackson’s scientist Mary 158
11.2.9
Kripke’s standard meter-rod 158
11.2.10 Ayer’s universe of sounds 158
11.2.11 Searle’s ‘Chinese room’ argument 158
11.2.12 Block’s ‘China brain’ 159
11.2.13 Zombies as a possible refutation of physicalism 159
12 Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
161
12.1 Creativity and rigor in intellectual pursuits 161
12.2 General principles, rules and methods 163
12.3 Philosophy’s perennial fascination with Mathematics 163
12.3.1
Mathematical truths are necessarily true 164
12.3.2
Mathematical truth seems to rest on a few primitive, self-evident
truths (so-called ‘axioms’) 164
12.3.3
Mathematical truth is knowable without sensory
experience 164

Contents
ix
12.3.4
Mathematical objects are in an eternal realm other than that of
space-time 164
12.3.5
Mathematics begins with very simple concepts, and builds up
much more complicated ones by means of deﬁnitions 165
12.3.6
Mathematical concepts are the most ‘ideal’ types in science 166
12.3.7
Mathematics is full of vivid metaphor at the informal level;
but can be treated in a rigorous, symbolic, fully formalized
way as well 166
12.3.8
Really powerful mathematical intuition or insight appears to be
a gift of genius granted to but a few 167
12.3.9
Mathematical knowledge is one of the best available examples of
objective knowledge 167
12.3.10 Mathematical knowledge is one of the best examples of
knowledge that can be accommodated in an increasingly
generalized conceptual framework 168
12.3.11 Mathematics is curiously applicable to reality 168
12.3.12 Mathematics, at times of conceptual convulsion, can produce
paradoxes 168
12.4 How Mathematics needs Logic 169
12.5 Logical reasoning v. creative or inventive insight 171
12.6 Rigor 171
12.7 The nature of dialectic 174
13 Deduction in Mathematics and Science
177
13.1 Proof, truth and falsity 177
13.2 The foundational method in Mathematics 180
13.3 Logic and the axiomatic method in Mathematics 182
13.4 Logic and scientiﬁc method 187
13.5 Theory revision 192
13.5.1
The Quine–Duhem problem 193
13.6 Desiderata of a scientiﬁc theory 193
13.7 A look ahead to the Argument from Design 194
14 The Methodological Issue of Reductionism
196
14.1 Levels of reality 196
14.2 Reductionism 198
14.2.1
Does supervenience imply reductionism? An investigation of the
philosophical implications of Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem 199
14.3 Emergentism and epiphenomenalism 204
14.4 Towards a tolerant synthesis 207
14.5 An alternative to the ‘web of belief’ 207
14.6 Adequacy conditions on any methodological view 208

x
Contents
PART III
The Existence of God
211
15 A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
213
15.1 The Ontological Argument 214
15.1.1
The original Latin version of Chapter 2 of Anselm’s
Proslogion 214
15.1.2
A canonical English translation of Chapter 2 of Anselm’s
Proslogion 215
15.1.3
Our own, slightly more rigorous, English version of Anselm’s
argument 215
15.1.4
Exegesis 216
15.1.5
First objection: Anselm tacitly uses a mistaken principle about
linguistic understanding 217
15.1.6
Second objection: Anselm mistakenly treats existence as a
property of things 219
15.1.7
Third objection: The Ontological Argument keeps bad company.
There are other arguments, of the same form, for patently
unacceptable conclusions 219
15.1.8
Fourth objection (raised by the anti-realist): The Ontological
Argument uses a strictly classical form of reductio ad absurdum to
which the anti-realist would object 220
15.1.9
A completely rigorous regimentation of the argument 221
15.1.10 A translation manual for Anselm’s primitives, into suitable
logical notation 222
15.1.11 Translating Anselmian chunks into logical notation 225
15.1.12 Further reading on the Ontological Argument 227
15.2 The Cosmological Argument 227
15.2.1
Exegesis 227
15.2.2
First objection: there can be causal over-determination 227
15.2.3
Second objection: Aquinas commits the quantiﬁer-switch
fallacy 228
15.2.4
Third objection: even in the Big Bang model, there is, strictly
speaking, no ﬁrst cause 229
15.2.5
Fourth objection: why should a ﬁrst efﬁcient cause, if there
is one, be God? 229
16 The Argument from Design
231
16.1 Main presentations of the Argument from Design 231
16.2 The Anthropic Principle 233
16.3 The explanatory role of the theistic hypothesis 233
16.4 Theory choice 234
16.4.1
Simplicity 235
16.4.2
Ontological parsimony 235
16.4.3
Wide explanatory scope 236

Contents
xi
16.5 Revolutionary theory-change: a biological analogy 236
16.6 Evolution of ideas, concepts, theories and methods 238
16.7 The relation between theory and evidence 238
16.8 The Darwinian theory 239
16.9 The New Synthesis 241
16.10 On choosing between the theistic and naturalistic theories 242
17 The Argument from Contemporary Creationism
245
17.1 Naturalism v. Creationism 245
18 Pascal’s Wager
253
18.1 Background: the theory of rational decision-making 253
18.1.1
Rational decision-making without uncertainty 253
18.1.2
Rational decision-making under conditions of
uncertainty 255
18.2 Exposition of Pascal’s Wager 258
18.3 The ﬁrst criticism of Pascal’s Wager 259
18.4 The second criticism of Pascal’s Wager 260
19 The Problem of Evil
263
19.1 Exposition of the Problem of Evil 263
19.2 Responses to the Argument from the Problem of Evil 264
19.2.1
The ‘Polarity’ response 264
19.2.2
The Leibnizian response 265
19.2.3
The ‘Cosmic Justice’ response 265
19.2.4
The Libertarian response 266
19.2.5
The ‘Reconceptualization’ response 266
19.2.6
The ‘Incommensurability’ response 267
19.2.7
The ‘Deep Constraint’ response 267
PART IV
Mind, Body and External World
269
20 The Pivotal Figure of Descartes: Dualism and Skepticism
271
20.1 Cartesian coordinates 271
20.2 Cartesian dualism 272
20.3 Cartesian skepticism 273
20.4 The structure of the reasoning in the ﬁrst two Meditations 276
20.4.1
Meditation I: On what can be called into doubt 276
20.4.2
Meditation II: On the nature of the human mind, which is better
known than the body 277
20.5 Descartes’s resort to the existence of God 279
21 Problems about Mind
285
22 Cartesian Dualism v. Logical Behaviorism
294

xii
Contents
22.1 Cartesian dualism 294
22.2 Ryle’s critique of Cartesian dualism 297
22.2.1
Category mistakes 297
22.2.2
Invoking supervenience 299
22.3 Ryle’s Logical Behaviorism 299
22.3.1
Dispositional properties 299
22.3.2
Dispositional analyses of mental states 300
22.4 Criticisms of Logical Behaviorism 301
23 Materialism and Supervenience
304
23.1 The gradual emergence of Materialism about mind 304
23.2 Supervenience as central to Materialism 305
23.3 The main Materialist accounts of mind 307
23.3.1
Logical Behaviorism 307
23.3.2
Biological Essentialism 308
23.3.3
Functionalism 308
23.4 Identity theories 309
23.4.1
Anomalous Monism 310
23.4.2
Eliminative Materialism 310
24 Functionalism
312
24.1 Machine Functionalism 312
24.2 Causal Functionalism 315
24.3 Criticisms of Functionalism 318
24.3.1
The Disentanglement Problem 318
24.3.2
The Problem of Sensory Qualia 319
24.3.3
The Knowledge Argument 320
24.3.4
The Problem of Semantic Qualia 321
24.3.5
The Chinese-Room Argument 322
24.3.6
The Out-Gödelizing Argument 323
25 Free Will v. Determinism
326
25.1 A form of compatibilism that is more deterministic than libertarian 329
PART V
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
335
26 Representation and Evaluation
337
26.1 Verifying a sentence in a situation 342
26.2 Falsifying a sentence in a situation 344
26.3 An example to motivate rules for the conditional connective 345
26.4 What is the role of inference in understanding the representational
content of a sentence? 347

Contents
xiii
26.4.1
Isomorphisms among models 348
26.5 The rules of veriﬁcation and falsiﬁcation 350
26.5.1
Rules of veriﬁcation 351
26.5.2
Rules of falsiﬁcation 352
26.5.3
The semantic upshot of the rules of veriﬁcation and
falsiﬁcation 354
27 From Evaluation to Deduction
356
27.1 From evaluation to deduction 356
27.2 An evolutionary perspective: how could language have acquired its
logic? 362
27.3 Communication 363
27.4 Harmony and truth-telling 364
27.5 Inference and truth-preservation 366
28 Paradoxes
369
28.1 Inductive paradoxes 369
28.1.1
Hempel’s Paradox 369
28.1.2
Goodman’s Paradox; or, the ‘New Riddle’ of Induction 370
28.2 The Sorites Paradox 375
28.3 Logical or semantical paradoxes 375
28.3.1
The Liar Paradox 376
28.3.2
The Postcard Paradox 377
28.3.3
Grelling’s Paradox 377
28.4 Mathematical Paradoxes 377
28.4.1
Zeno’s Paradox 377
28.4.2
Richard’s Paradox 378
28.4.3
Russell’s Paradox 378
28.4.4
The Burali–Forti Paradox 380
28.4.5
Skolem’s Paradox 384
29 Description v. Deduction: The Clash of Ideals
389
29.1 The Noncompossibility Theorem 389
29.2 The foundational consequences of noncompossibility 395
30 The Incompleteness of Arithmetic
397
Appendix A
The History of Western Philosophy
405
Appendix B
Formal Results in the Theory of Probability
410
Bibliography
416
Index
426

Preface
This Preface is important for the reader who wishes to have, at the very outset,
well-informed expectations.
Philosophy values highly the ability to analyze theories or points of view
carefully, to assess arguments critically, to make useful and enlightening
connections, and to bring some systematic order to our reﬂections on deep and
important issues. Those who teach Philosophy wish, above all, to impart these
abilities to their students.
This book is written in the hope that it may help to make such a wish
come true. It aims to introduce the beginner, in a reasonably balanced and
comprehensive way, to a certain broad range of problems with which Philosophy
deals, along with certain intellectual techniques, or methods, for addressing those
problems. The beginner will acquire a considerable battery of philosophical
concepts, and an understanding of crucial distinctions that can be expressed
by means of them. These help to deﬁne the main ingredients of important
philosophical positions, or theories, or world-views, here labeled ‘-isms’.
As its subtitle indicates, the book introduces the beginner to some of the most
important philosophical problems, and explains a variety of philosophical views
and methods in response to them. The author hopes that it will attract students
to the discipline, and then provide a continuing way into it, even after their ﬁrst
introductory course. The book is intended to be a resource for re-initiation and
replenishment, as it were, in addition to being some kind of ‘hook’. Instructors
are therefore invited to pick and choose from the topics covered here, in a way
that best suits their instructional needs.
For the beginner, a word is in order about how to cope with certain bits
of material in this text. Different readers may have to pore over the material
at different rates in different places. This is one of the ineliminable problems
in teaching both Logic and Philosophy: it is impossible to make all material
uniformly accessible without great variations in texture. Students will ﬁnd large
sections of this book easy to follow, even as the ideas they encounter are new
and engaging. But they should also be prepared to read and re-read other sections
very carefully in order to master the material. A good book on Philosophy is
not at all like a novel. Philosophy texts are not page-turners. If anything, they
are page-turner-backers! One needs to learn to savor the detailed moves, the

Preface
xv
distinctions, and the directions of argument more slowly than one does when
simply following a story.
There are some important differences between this work and others that have
aimed, in their various ways, to ﬁll similar needs. The experienced Introduction
to Philosophy instructor will know of various introductory texts that are all
excellent in their own special ways. Especially noteworthy are the Michael
Bratman, John Perry, and John Fischer anthology Introduction to Philosophy:
Classical and Contemporary Readings; Thomas Nagel’s What Does It All Mean?:
A Very Short Introduction to Philosophy; and Kwame Anthony Appiah’s Thinking
It Through: An Introduction to Contemporary Philosophy.
This book is not an anthology of source papers, in which the author’s or editor’s
contribution, apart from judicious selection, is to furnish introductory remarks
that provide some context for the readings on different topics. It is, rather, what
publishers call a ‘singly authored textbook’ – a description which, because of the
morpheme ‘text’, implies a humbled sense of what it owes to all those singly
authored, original, and pioneering works by the truly great philosophers who have
gone before. This book cannot, therefore, conﬁne itself to setting out the author’s
own ‘reﬂective equilibrium’ (see §1.1) on all the issues addressed. Rather, it must
convey a sense of the great variety of opposing views, and their various merits
and demerits, on matters of great importance. Like any singly authored work,
however – and, in this regard, like the works just mentioned, by Nagel and by
Appiah – it will take the liberty of presenting certain matters from its author’s
point of view. That, after all, is what makes any textbook interestingly different
from any other.
The way the present work differs from the two just mentioned is that it
provides a more methodical survey of the basic tools for thinking that the beginning
philosopher must acquire. It tries to be methodologically comprehensive, but
expositorily clear. It aims to provide the beginning student with the wherewithal
to address even those philosophical problems that the text does not itself discuss
(of which there are perforce many). A further distinguishing mark (see below) is
its insistence on getting clear about the overall logical structure of the arguments
involved.
With any work that furnishes an authorial point of view, one must immediately
point out some obvious accompanying drawbacks. No philosophical author
nowadays can claim expertise in every one of the sub-disciplines into which
Philosophy has become divided. This is a mirror of the problem, to be mentioned
again in §2.1, that no thinker nowadays can possibly master all the different
disciplines in science; there are no ‘Renaissance’ men or women any longer. So,
the author begs the reader’s indulgence for what will inevitably be a slightly
biased or personal selection of topics and methods. The book is largely silent
also on the areas of Ethics (or Moral Philosophy), and Aesthetics. It could
not have cast its net that wide without coarsening the mesh. Moreover, Ethics
and Aesthetics tend, in American colleges and universities, to have their own
introductory courses devoted to them, using appropriately specialized textbooks.
So, while mention and broad description of those two areas of Philosophy are

xvi
Preface
indeed included here in the interests of comprehensive coverage, the reader
should be aware, at the outset, that the philosophizing undertaken here is
more concerned with the topics of a ‘core’ introductory course in Analytical
Philosophy: Metaphysics, Epistemology, Philosophy of Mind and Language, and
Logic.
‘Bias’, of course, usually carries a pejorative connotation. But there is one
feature of ‘bias’ in this work for which the author is unapologetic, and which
was foreshadowed above. This is the pride of place given, and detailed attention
paid, to Logic as the centerpiece of philosophical method. The author aims to
show just how crucial Logic is to a proper grasp of the ongoing debates about
major philosophical problems. And this is so in two regards.
First, there is the matter of judging the internal logical correctness of passages
of philosophical argumentation, when their validity is at issue (ordinary logic
being brought to bear within the philosopher’s ‘object language’, as it were).
We do not shrink from the hard but enlightening work of actually regimenting
certain arguments, revealing in minute detail every step taken, so that each step is
either obviously correct even to the skeptic’s eye, or revealed as formally wanting,
and even fallacious.
Secondly – and extremely important also, in the author’s estimation – we
seek to impart a working knowledge of how certain major results in metalogic
and in foundations can be brought to bear on central philosophical problems.
(Metalogical results are rigorously proven results about logical systems and formal
languages.)
In this latter regard – the explanation and applications of metalogical results –
the author has sought to impart a personal stamp to the material, by seeking to
explain these results in the most accessible possible way, but without doing so at
excessive length. The aim is to equip the motivated reader, who is willing to put
in some extra intellectual effort, with the most succinct and lucid exposition
possible of the major results that are so often merely mentioned and not fully
explained. The author hopes that this text will be judged at least in part by the
extent to which this aim has been achieved.
Various logical themes recur within the text. The extent of their reprise, with
variations, is an intentional part of this composition. For the book has been
written in the realization that many students might be called upon to use it
only in part, because their instructor teaches from several different texts. For
that reason, the author has taken the liberty of repeating the basic lessons
of Logic that are relevant to major themes. The dedicated reader who starts
at the beginning and works all the way through the text to the end will
notice the recurring Leitmotif of the contrast between proof in mathematics, and
hypothetico-deductivism in science. The contrast is so vital that it cannot suffer
from repetition.
Another recurring Leitmotif is the method of diagonal argument. This is a
beautiful and pervasive technique that ﬁnds application in many areas of logical,
mathematical, and metamathematical reasoning that are of signiﬁcance for the
philosopher and foundationalist.

Preface
xvii
The method of diagonal argument is one formal reﬁnement of that peculiar
cast of mind whose native deployment is so often a sign of philosophical talent
on the part of a beginning student: that tendency to question a position by ﬁrst
checking to see whether it applies to itself. It is often known as the ‘reﬂexive
trick’, and it is a hallmark of philosophical thinking. Confronted, say, with a
proposed Principle of Veriﬁability, one can ask: Is that Principle veriﬁable by its
own lights? Or, of a proposed criterion of cognitive signiﬁcance, one can ask:
Is that criterion cognitively signiﬁcant by its own lights? It is no accident that the
method of diagonal argument in logic and mathematics should have been forged
by thinkers who were profoundly philosophical in their approaches to their subject
matters: Georg Cantor (1845–1918) in set theory and analysis; Bertrand Russell
(1872–1970) in the foundations of mathematics; Alan Turing (1912–54) in the
foundations of computer science; Alfred Tarski (1901–83) in the foundations of
formal semantics; Kurt Gödel (1906–78) in metamathematics. Throughout this
text we shall have occasion to draw the reader’s attention to the beautiful power,
elegance, and simplicity of diagonal argumentation.
The author approaches Philosophy with a past grounding in Mathematics,
which inspired his ﬁrst interest in philosophical, logical, and foundational
matters. He was trained in the analytical method, with an emphasis on problems
as currently conceived and handled. This differs from the hermeneutical tradition
of trying to interpret past texts in order to make sense of how thinkers in other
historical periods conceived of the problems they were bequeathing us. This is
not to imply, however, any measure of disregard for the importance and value of
our continuing study of the History of Philosophy. It is only to say that that is
not how this particular author cut his teeth in the subject.
Of course, historical ﬁgures and certain central features of their thought are
important in setting out the philosophical problems treated here. That having
been said, however, it should be noted that historical coverage here is limited,
in the main, to providing a suitable context for our appreciation of the depth of a
central problem. This is not a work in, nor even an introduction to, the History
of Philosophy as such. It is, rather, a more personal tribute to the tradition. It
takes the form of an explanation – which, it is to be hoped, is accessible – of
certain main philosophical problems. They are the ones that the author ﬁnds
both engaging and tractable by the intellectual methods that he has available, as
someone coming from a background of logic and foundations within Analytical
Philosophy. They are also ones which, the author has found, resonate with
many beginning students. Space permits a reasonably thorough introductory
examination only of the main topics mentioned in the subtitle: the existence
of God; knowledge of the external world (including the problem of induction);
the mind–body problem (including the problem of free will); and logic (as both
tool and topic throughout).
There is one aspect of this work that bears emphasis, and which perhaps sets it
apart from other introductory texts. This is that the author makes uninhibited
use of logical analysis, schematization, and regimentation in order to clarify
important views or methods as they are laid out. (This is the ﬁrst of the two

xviii
Preface
regards mentioned earlier, in which Logic is relevant to Philosophy.) It is the
author’s sincere conviction that professional philosophers often err by being
too reluctant to actually deploy the logical methods to which they pay a great
deal of pedagogical lip-service. It is one thing for philosophers in colleges and
universities to teach ‘baby logic’ to their ﬁrst-year students, and then to move
on to the fundamentals of ﬁrst-order logic for the more advanced student. It
is quite another to employ these logical methods, as a matter of ﬁrst instinct
and intellectual habit, when addressing thorny philosophical issues involving
intricate reasoning. A philosopher who shies away from formal analysis is like a
surgeon who ignores the need for basic hygiene.
This work aims to enliven Logic a little, by applying it closer to home.
Invoking logical analysis helps one to understand important techniques in
Philosophy, such as the provision of analyses (and criticisms thereof) of
individually necessary and jointly sufﬁcient conditions for the application of a
given concept. The same holds true for more general intellectual methods
or techniques whose logical structure needs to be properly appreciated before
they can be deployed successfully. This is particularly the case with the
hypothetico-deductive method in science, and the method of inference to the best
explanation.
The beginning student will not, of course, be able to understand right
away what all the italicized phrases in the previous paragraph mean, let alone
appreciate the importance of the methods they denote. In this regard, they might
be relieved to learn, they keep company with virtually all thinkers before the
latter part of the nineteenth century. For we owe mainly to the philosophers of
science Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970), Karl
Popper (1902–94) and Carl Hempel (1905–97) our contemporary understanding
of what may be called the ‘logic of scientiﬁc explanation’.
This book is both the author’s attempt at overview and a disclosure of the
author’s own views at times. It is an invitation to the beginner to get more deeply
involved in the discipline. The author believes that many of his own intellectual
biases and preferences are shared by many other contemporary philosophers, even
if not every one of them is shared by a majority – let alone that a majority shares
all of them. This book will have succeeded even if the reader goes on to take issue
with many, even all, of the author’s more idiosyncratic views whenever they are
disclosed within the text. This is a familiar fate for, and a fate familiar to, all
philosophers of a certain age. For Philosophy is that ﬁeld in the humanities that
prizes, above all, independent, creative, and original thought; and does the most
to encourage any intellectual rebel with a cause.

Acknowledgements
This book owes its existence to the initiative, encouragement, and patient
guidance of Routledge’s Philosophy Editor, Andrew Beck. I am grateful to the
several anonymous readers involved at various stages, from original proposal,
through draft chapters to penultimate draft, for their carefully considered and
very helpful comments. Any remaining defects are entirely my responsibility.
I want to thank my many past students. Among them there have always been
an inspiring few, year after year, who have been committed to entering the life
of the mind. My interactions with them began back in my Edinburgh days, when
I conducted tutorials (or what in the USA are called recitations) for ﬁrst-year
students taking the introductory Philosophy course taught by the distinguished
Kant scholar W. H. Walsh. Further cohorts of skeptical and commonsensical
young Scots helped to reﬁne my philosophical sensibilities whenever I taught the
large introductory course at Stirling on Theories of Human Nature. Thereafter, at
the Australian National University, I had the beneﬁt of yet more down-to-earth
feedback from students in a ﬁrst-year course that I inherited, with the engaging
Platonic title Dialectic. Some of them may recognize here traces of my notes
that were circulated for that course. My largest accumulated debt to student
reaction has accrued during my time at The Ohio State University, the USA’s
largest campus. Here I have had the rewarding privilege of teaching Introduction
to Philosophy on many an occasion, and amassing incontrovertible evidence,
through Student Evaluations of Intructors, that while one can satisfy some of the
people some of the time, one cannot possibly satisfy all of the people all of the
time.
Much of the current text was written on the psychic energy released by the
Ethiopian and Costa Rican brews provided by Boston Stoker at Neil and 11th,
just south of the Oval on the main campus of The Ohio State University. My
thanks go to baristas Erik Fenstermacher, Kasey Kimble and Alicia Nunez.
I also thank my long-deceased maternal grandmother. (If some of her
metaphysical views were correct, she will be in a position to appreciate this.)
Her contribution to my interest in the Philosophy of Mathematics was as follows.
Around the age of four, I was sitting in her kitchen, next to her huge iron log-
and coal-burning stove, looking at a tin (or, for my American readers, a can) of
baking soda whose trademark picture on its side was of – itself. This meant that

xx
Acknowledgements
the picture of it that it had on its side contained a part that pictured its side,
which of course contained a picture of it that ... . The visibly shrinking, but
pairwise discernible pictures of ‘the’ tin immediately prompted the conception of
an ω-series. It was a series with a double interest. First, it afforded the intuition of
unboundedly many distinct things. Secondly, it did so by exploiting the ancillary
intuition that space is inﬁnitely divisible. That gorgeous tin gave the little boy
his ﬁrst grasp of both inﬁnity and inﬁnite divisibility. When he excitedly asked
his grandmother if she could see that the tins-within-tins would just go on and
on, forever, she impatiently exclaimed ‘Why, don’t be silly, little boy, you can
see it just ends with that blob there!’, as she pointed to the fourth (or was it
the ﬁfth?) place in the series, at which ordinary vision gave out and a certain
intellectual microscope would have to be turned on. Rebuffed, I went back
morosely to my toast with dripping. If she had prevailed, I would have become,
not an intuitionist – which is deviant enough, by today’s insufﬁciently criticized,
orthodox standards – but a wretched ﬁnitist.
I dedicate this book with a deep sense of gratitude to my own teachers at
Cambridge, for whom the world of ideas was their oyster, and whose lectures
or tutorials shaped my way of thinking: Jimmy Altham, Elizabeth Anscombe,
Thomas Baldwin, Renford Bambrough, John Conway, Edward Craig, Ian
Hacking, Casimir Lewy, Adrian Mathias, Hugh Mellor, Timothy Smiley, and
Bernard Williams. Even those who have passed on remain part of the Great
Conversation.

The Plan of this Book
Parts I and II provide groundwork, orientation, and wherewithal: concepts; dis-
tinctions; characterization of important ‘-isms’; and philosophical methodologies
such as analysis, explication and thought-experiment.
Parts III–V provide applications of these methods to famous philosophical
problems, concentrating in the main on the existence of God; the mind–body
problem; and the limits of thought and language. Both Part III and Part IV
provide standard coverage, aiming to be both comprehensive and balanced. Part
V is where the author offers some of his own original ideas, and presents some
standard material in his own preferred way.
The book can therefore be used as a ‘dual-aspect’ resource, either for the basic
explanation of the terrain in Parts I and II, or for the discussion of particular
philosophical problems in Parts III, IV and V (or for both). It can therefore
supplement other texts of the instructor’s choice; or serve as a sole text for an
introductory course.
The chapters number thirty in all. They also vary in length. Some care has
been exercised, however, to constrain variation in this regard, and the remaining
variation reﬂects, in the author’s estimation, the ‘difﬁculty density’ of the topics
involved. Shorter chapters, by and large, will take more time per page to digest.
Each chapter, therefore, can be commended as background reading for a single
meeting of an introductory course. The book should thereby be able to cater
both for a ten-week, term-long course with three meetings each week, and for a
fourteen-week, semester-long course with two meetings each week.
Judicious selection of chapters (or more demanding imposition of longer
readings) will be required for a ten-week course meeting twice a week. And for a
fourteen-week course meeting three times a week, the text can be supplemented
with primary sources.
Each chapter (except for the ﬁnal two) is furnished with a set of problems.
The problems can serve different purposes. Readers can use them to test their
comprehension and recall once they have read the material in that chapter. The
problems can be used as the basis for group discussion of the material in class;
they can be used for take-home assignments, or for examination questions; and
they can also serve to provoke further interest in the topic, perhaps leading to
some independent and original research. A few of the problems are not for the

xxii
The Plan of this Book
faint-hearted. They have been included in order to help instructors identify those
students who ‘have what it takes’.
The ﬁnal two chapters are free of problem-sets because the author would not
want the student who has read either of these chapters to do anything but
meditate on the enormity of the a priori lesson that they have just learned ...
and then re-read it.

Part I
The Nature of Philosophy

Thispageintentionallyleftblank

1
The Main Features of Philosophy
1.1 Philosophy as a conceptual and reﬂective discipline
Philosophy is a conceptual discipline. Its method is introspective and reﬂective.
It is based on our intuitions and on our grasp of the meanings of our words.
Yet it aspires now, after two and a half millennia of reﬁnement, refutation and
re-thinking, not to be provincial to any particular language. Nor is it conﬁned to
any particular historical period, cultural milieu, socio-political system or religious
afﬁliation. Philosophy strives to be of universal appeal, to any rational intellect,
human or otherwise. In that regard, it is a lot like Mathematics. Philosophy tries
not to depend on empirical considerations, even though one of its main con-
temporary aims is to come to mutually enlightening terms with natural science.
There has been increased interest of late in so-called ‘experimental philosophy’.
This purports to be a form of Philosophy while being a branch of empirical
inquiry. ‘X-phi’ strikes this author, however, as a straightforward branch of social
psychology or sociology or anthropology. For it involves the use of surveys and
questionnaires to ﬁnd out what ordinary people think about certain philosophical
issues. (And when the survey-respondentsare chosen from within the philosoph-
ical community, X-phi is a poor substitute for simply reading the journals.)
The archetypical philosopher (and henceforth we drop the adjective) does not
perform real-world experiments, or make observations in the ﬁeld, or conduct
opinion polls. The philosopher’s tool-kit contains no measuring rules, no scales,
no clocks. The most one will ﬁnd, in the literal sense of ‘tool-kit’, is paper and
pencil – or, nowadays, a laptop computer. In the more ﬁgurative sense, what one
would hope to ﬁnd in the philosopher’s tool-kit is a mind wide open, ready to
turn on the searchlights within. The philosopher must be prepared to mull over
words, stretch concepts to their limits, imagine far-fetched, bizarre situations,
and consider principles of the highest level of abstraction and the widest domain
of application.
Philosophical method in its purest form is, in one simple phrase, a priori, not
a posteriori. The cliché for this is ‘the armchair method’. Another hackneyed
expression is ‘putting one’s thinking-cap on’. Methods of investigation, and the
knowledge they enable us to obtain, are called a priori when they do not depend
in any way on our sensory experience. Also, truths are called a priori when they

4
The Nature of Philosophy
can be known in that way. By contrast, a posteriori truths are those that can be
known only by appeal to sensory experience.
A closely related distinction is that between analytic and synthetic truths. A
sentence is said to be analytically true just in case it is true solely in virtue of
its meaning, quite independently of any appeal to ‘facts about the world’. Mere
a priori reﬂection on one’s grasp of the meaning of such a sentence should be
enough to enable one to recognize that it is indeed true. Thus analytic truth
is a priori. Put another way, it is truth that is accessible ‘merely by reﬂecting
on the meanings of the words involved’. Simple examples are ‘All red things
are colored’ and ‘Every bachelor is unmarried’. Once one has grasped the concepts
and/or the meanings of the words involved, one can tell that these sentences are true
without any further recourse to sensory experience. And that last observation is
true regardless of the fact that one needed sensory experience in order to acquire
mastery of the concepts involved (or knowledge of the meanings of the words
involved).
Truths that are not analytic are called synthetic. Given the foregoing
characterization of analytic truths, it is clear that a synthetically true sentence
must owe its truth not only to its meaning, but also to ‘facts about the world’.
Thus synthetic truths tell us something informative about the world. A ﬁrm grasp of
both these distinctions is vital for a proper appreciation of philosophical debates
that took place in the twentieth century – including debates over the question
whether the two distinctions are of any value at all. For more detailed discussion
of this issue, see §5.2.
We have stressed that Philosophy is done a priori. Philosophy is also
fundamentally argumentative. It seeks to establish conclusions ﬁrmly, with the
help of logic, from clearly stated premises. A critic can disagree with such
argumentation in two important ways. (This holds good for any intellectual
discipline, not just for Philosophy.) One can reject a premise – or, at least,
refuse to accept it. Alternatively, one can demur at a particular step within the
argument, complaining – very often with justiﬁcation – that it is fallacious. A
fallacious step of reasoning is one that cannot be guaranteed always to transmit
truth from its immediate premises to its conclusion.
The intellectual aim of philosophizing is to achieve reﬂective equilibrium.
This the philosopher does by synthesizing, integrating, and reconciling all
our immediate intuitions, important insights, arduously deduced results, and
inspired hypotheses. The philosopher seeks to resolve paradoxes and eliminate
inconsistencies, and to provide proper foundations where appropriate. The aim
is to attain some overarching understanding both of the human condition within
the natural cosmos, and of the connections among thought, language, and the
world; emotion and reason; fact and value; being and truth.
1.2 The main areas of Philosophy
The ﬁve main areas of Philosophy have traditionally been Metaphysics,
Epistemology, Logic, Ethics (also known as Moral Philosophy) and Aesthetics.

The Main Features of Philosophy
5
(A recent, and disappointing, departure from this tradition has been the
comparative neglect, of late, of Aesthetics among the ranks of professional
philosophers. This may be because theorizing in Aesthetics has migrated to other
university departments catering to students with appropriate interests, such as
Literature, Music, and Art History. If so, this is a pity, for it incurs the risk of
aesthetic theorizing becoming less general and systematic. One hopes that the
trend might be reversed.)
Here are some general comments about, and sample questions from, each of
these respective areas.
1.2.1 Metaphysics
The area of Philosophy known as Metaphysics is concerned with the necessities
and possibilities governing existence. The name of this area derives from the
Greek word ‘meta’, meaning ‘after’: the relevant book by Aristotle (384–322
bc), which attended to these deeper concerns about existence, tended to be
anthologized immediately after his book on physics.
Today, however, we understand the preﬁx ‘meta’ as indicating a sort of
conceptual or theoretical ascent, ‘going one step higher’, in our contemplation
of the world through particular ‘lower-level’ scientiﬁc or philosophical disciplines.
In Metaethics, for example, one inquires into what sort of facts moral facts might
be – indeed, whether there could be any such facts at all. There is even a branch
of contemporary Philosophy called Metaphilosophy, concerned with the nature,
purpose and direction of Philosophy itself.
Metaphysical questions typically arise ‘at the edge’ or ‘at the limits’ of scientiﬁc
or mathematical inquiry. They concern ‘ultimate’ matters, to which some default
answer is usually presupposed by the intellectual disciplines in question. So, for
example, Physics can investigate what kinds of fundamental particles there are,
and what laws govern their interactions. Most philosophers believe, however,
that it lies beyond the reach of Physics, and of science in general, to explain
why there should be something rather than nothing; or why there should be any
regularities in nature at all.
Some sample metaphysical questions follow. Note that some of them are
not entirely independent of scientiﬁc theorizing. For example, the question
whether every event has a cause receives a negative answer from quantum
physics. This is because of the random and completely unpredictable nature of
the radioactive decay of individual fundamental particles. These uncaused events
were discovered, however – by Marie Curie (1867–1934) – only about a century
ago; so it has been only since then that the question whether every event has a
cause has begun to strike some cognoscenti as a little dated.
By contrast, however, consider the question concerning how consciousness
relates to the workings of mere matter. This question was stoutly maintained,
by prominent European scientists and philosophers in the mid-to-late nine-
teenth century, and has been maintained by many Anglo-American analytical
philosophers since then, to be, in principle, beyond the reach of any scientiﬁc

6
The Nature of Philosophy
determination. The phrase ‘in principle’ here, which is often used in such
discussions, stresses that it is impossible for science to give an answer, regardless of
how our scientiﬁc theories could or might progress in the future. (For more on this, and
especially on the provenance of the epistemic pessimism involved, see Tennant
(2007).)
The reader should be asking, of each of the other metaphysical questions
below, whether its answer, too, might lie, in principle, beyond the reach
of any possible future scientiﬁc theory. (Note that these are metaquestions.)
Any such scientiﬁc theory would, of course, have to be beholden to sensory
experience – that is, empirical evidence – in the sense that it could be refuted
by recalcitrant experience. We shall have more to say, in due course, about
exactly what counts as a scientiﬁc theory, and what qualiﬁes as properly
scientiﬁc method. Such issues lie under the heading ‘Epistemology’, rather than
‘Metaphysics’.
Here, then are the promised sample questions in Metaphysics:
1
Do individuals have essences – that is, clusters of properties that they must
possess in order to exist ‘as themselves’ at all?
2
Is there more to a law of nature than its universal truth?
3
Does the world itself possess a causal structure, or is that structure something
that the mind imposes in order to make sense of the world?
4
Does every event have a cause?
5
Does the universe exist for a purpose?
6
Must space have three dimensions?
7
Must time be linear?
8
Could there be time travel?
9
What is the relationship between mind and body?
10
How does consciousness relate to the workings of ‘mere’ matter? Are the facts
of consciousness beyond the reach of science?
11
Are persons to be identiﬁed with their physical bodies, or with their streams
of consciousness?
12
Is the Self a thing, or individual substance? If so, what kind of thing?
13
Is there an objective fact of the matter as to what it is like to be a bat, or any
other kind of sentient creature, even if it is in principle inaccessible to us?
14
Could there be re-incarnation, or at least some kind of survival – of soul, or
individual consciousness – after bodily death?
15
Is the future determined by the past?
16
Whether or not all events are pre-determined, can we exercise free will?
17
Does God exist? If so, does He/She/It exist necessarily?
18
Could there be thought without talk?
19
Are there abstract objects such as numbers? Or are all existents concrete – that
is, physical – things?
One tradition in Metaphysics, due to Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), is that of
so-called transcendental philosophy, which inquires after the necessary pre-conditions

The Main Features of Philosophy
7
for the very possibility of thought about, and knowledge of, an external world.
According to this tradition, mind has to be regarded as constituted by various
rules, norms, conceptual capacities, etc. These could be thought of as ‘innate’.
Our possession of these capacities is what enables us to acquire certain kinds
of knowledge a priori. But – very importantly, for Kant – our knowledge of
both mathematics and metaphysics is synthetic a priori. Here, of course, one has
metaphysics blending into epistemology, the next area on our list.
1.2.2 Epistemology
Questions about different kinds of knowledge, its scope and limits, its proper
objects, its sources and its justiﬁcation, are pursued in that branch of philosophy
known as Epistemology or the theory of knowledge.
The epistemologist is concerned, ﬁrst, to establish the possibility of knowledge
of the external world (that is, to refute skepticism) and is then concerned to
elucidate the different kinds of knowledge to be had; how we acquire such
knowledge; and how we justify it.
The results of such inquiries are likely to depend on what kinds of objects or
states of affairs the knowledge in question is about. These include mathematical
entities; observable matters of fact; theoretical entities such as protons and
electrons; individual organisms; species; one’s own states of mind; other people’s
states of mind; and meanings of expressions of a language.
We might come to acquire such knowledge in different ways. Among these
might be introspection; direct observation; deductive inference; indirect or
inductive inference; and testimony of others. But what of ingrained habit? innate
endowment? subliminal exposure? ﬂash of integrating insight? telepathy? Or even
divine revelation? religious prophecy? reading the Bible?
The knowledge in question might be justiﬁed as knowledge in different ways.
Among these are mathematical proof; the withstanding of severe experimental
tests; and causal links to the phenomena at the source. But might we include also
(say) appeals to papal authority?
The main questions faced by epistemologists in a long and venerable tradition
have been these:
1
Could there be truths we could not know?
2
Could we be systematically deceived, or hallucinating, in all our ‘experi-
ences’?
3
Are there any beliefs that are immune to revision in the light of experience?
4
Are any statements true solely by virtue of what they mean?
5
What is special about knowledge?
6
What distinguishes knowledge from true belief?
7
What sorts of propositions are our knowledge-claims ultimately based upon?
8
Which of our knowledge-claims, if any, are – or could be – absolutely certain,
or incorrigible?
9
Can contingent ones be among these?

8
The Nature of Philosophy
10 Are there limits to what we can know?
11 How is knowledge of abstract objects possible?
12 Is our knowledge of the external world based wholly on sensory perception?
13 Are there limits to self-knowledge?
14 Is it possible to organize our knowledge in a logical way, with the
propositions that are most certain making up a ﬁrm foundation, and with the
rest of our knowledge built on top of that foundation, by following strictly
logical, or other inferential, methods?
15 Are the facts of subjectivity and consciousness inaccessible to the methods
of objective science?
16 Can reason be naturalized?
17 Is there a single correct scientiﬁc method?
1.2.3 Logic
Logic is the study of valid reasoning, that is, transitions in thought (typically
heralded by words like ‘therefore’) that aim to preserve truth from their premises,
or starting points, to their conclusion, or end point. The premises, and
the conclusion, are truth-bearers – declarative sentences, or statements, or
propositions. (And much ink has been spilled debating which of these choices is
optimal.)
Aristotle pioneered the discipline of formal logic, in his famous work Prior
Analytics. In that book he crafted his theory of syllogisms. (For a detailed
description of Aristotle’s syllogistic, and a modernized version of it, see Tennant
(2014a).) These are valid arguments of very speciﬁc forms, involving two
premises and a conclusion. Perhaps the most famous of these can be represented
as follows:
Every M is P
Every S is M
Every S is P
.
Here, the horizontal line marks the deductive transition, from the sentences
above it (the premises) to the sentence below it (the conclusion).
A quick aside about ways to display arguments. Because the sentences are quite
long, we have just used the vertical-stack display option for the premises. This
option also makes it easier to read the sentences separately from each other. An
alternative would have been the horizontal-stack display:
Every M is P
Every S is M
Every S is P
.
This, however, presents problems of ‘sideways stretch’ very quickly when we have
more than two sentences above the line, adequately spaced so as to be easily

The Main Features of Philosophy
9
read. Displaying premises horizontally is the better choice only when they are
abbreviated symbolically, as with:
P1
P2
...
Pn
Q
.
In a case like this, the vertical-stack option would just be too space-consuming:
P1
P2
...
Pn
Q
The reader is forewarned, though, that the horizontal-stack display option is the
one that we prefer for stating rules of inference symbolically. Two self-explanatory
examples would be:
A
B
A and B
A
if A then B
B
.
End of aside
Another well-known syllogistic form is:
No M is P
Every S is M
No S is P
.
These two syllogisms, to repeat, are valid. Put another way: their premises
logically imply their conclusions. This relation of logical implication between a
set of premises, on the one hand, and a conclusion, on the other, is the main
relation studied in logic. Logical systems for a given language seek to furnish
proofs, or deductions, for valid arguments in that language. Logical systems,
which specify norms for deductive reasoning, are themselves beholden to two
standards:
•
Soundness: No invalid argument has a proof.
•
Completeness: Every valid argument has a proof.
In order to understand these two standards, one needs to understand what sort of
object a proof is.
A proof is a ﬁnite arrangement of individually obvious and compelling steps of
inference that take one from the premises of the proof to its conclusion. A proof

10
The Nature of Philosophy
has to be ﬁnite in order to be surveyable and checkable. A proof makes clear
and indisputable that its conclusion really does follow logically from its premises.
And one can ‘read off’ those premises (say P1,...,Pn) and that conclusion (say
Q) from the proof itself (otherwise, one would not know what the proof was a
proof of). When there exists a proof of conclusion Q from premises P1,...,Pn we say
that Q is deducible from P1,...,Pn; and we write
P1,...,Pn ⊢Q
to register this. The symbol ‘⊢’ is called the single turnstile, and it is perhaps the
most important symbol in (Meta)logic.
The requirements of Soundness and Completeness, then, are to the effect
that for any set of premises, all conclusions deducible from it should be logically
implied by it, and vice versa. The requirements can be re-stated as follows, using
our new symbol ⊢:
Soundness:
If P1,...,Pn ⊢Q, then the argument P1,...,Pn/Q is valid.
Completeness:
If the argument P1,...,Pn/Q is valid, then P1,...,Pn ⊢Q.
We owe to Aristotle the central and original ideas that:
(i)
Logic treats forms of deductive reasoning that arise in all disciplines, and
in all areas of thought. So logic is universally applicable.
(ii)
Arguments in natural language can be symbolized by using letters for
longer expressions, and studying the patterns of their occurrences. These
abbreviating symbols are of two distinct kinds: so-called logical expressions,
which are always interpreted the same way; and so-called extralogical
expressions, whose interpretations can vary.
(iii)
The central idea in Logic is that of valid inference, as revealed by perfected
proofs.
For Aristotle, the logical expressions were
‘All ...are
’;
‘Some ...is
’;
‘No ...is
’; and
‘Some ...is not
’.
His extralogical expressions were predicates, like ‘...is a man’ and ‘...is mortal’.
Aristotle’s guiding ideas informed all subsequent work in Logic. Interesting
developments were accomplished by various medieval ﬁgures, but still, by the

The Main Features of Philosophy
11
middle of the 1800s, the intellectual communities of the civilized world had no
canon of deductive reasoning adequate to the intricacies of inference already in evidence
in ancient Greek mathematics.
All that was changed in 1879, by a revolutionary breakthrough: the short
monograph by Gottlob Frege (1848–1925), a philosopher, logician and math-
ematician in Jena, titled Begriffsschrift (trans: Conceptual Notation). The subtitle
is worth mentioning too: Eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des
reinen Denkens (trans: A formula language for pure thought, modeled after that
for arithmetic). We owe to Frege our modern ability to frame mathematical
statements as sentences in formalized languages, and to manipulate them
logically in all the ways justiﬁed by their internal structure.
Frege’s technical achievement did not, however, dispose of all the philosoph-
ical questions and issues that surround the use of Logic, and its applications in
mathematics and other areas of inquiry. Philosophers still ponder questions like
the following.
1
What makes an argument from premises to a conclusion valid?
2
Can every valid argument be (compellingly) proved?
3
Is there a single correct system of logic?
4
How do scientiﬁc hypotheses relate to observational evidence?
5
Can we both say everything we want to say about certain inﬁnite mathemati-
cal structures and also deduce every statement that follows logically from what
we say?
6
Can all mathematical truths be proved from suitably chosen ﬁrst principles?
7
Is it possible to prove, mathematically, that mathematics is consistent, i.e.,
free from internal contradiction?
8
Is all of natural language suitable for logical formalization, as far as its
declarative sentences are concerned? Or does the recent success of modern
Logic have to stop short at, and be limited to, the analysis of mathematical
statements and their logical relations?
9
Are there formal ‘logics’ to be had of philosophically important concepts such
as necessity and possibility? belief and knowledge? part and whole? causal
relations and counterfactual dependencies? obligation and permission? time
and tense?
1.2.4 Ethics
Virtually all the questions we have considered above from Metaphysics and
Epistemology could be raised by two kinds of very non-human characters: Star
Trek’s Vulcan Mr. Spock, who is devoid of all emotions and moods; and your
favorite kind of alien, heartless brute (think: those glistening tentacled beings
in Independence Day), who is devoid of any moral scruples in annihilating
humankind. But we human beings, having evolved as social creatures in our

12
The Nature of Philosophy
little corner of the Milky Way, are very concerned about values – both moral and
aesthetic. In addition to wanting to know what the world is ultimately like, we want
to know how we should conduct ourselves within it, and towards one another. We
raise questions about both the Good and the Beautiful. Ethics is concerned with
the Good. Here are some of the questions that it raises:
1
Are there moral facts in the world? Or is morality just an expression of
subjective opinions?
2
Is the goodness or badness of an action something that is based on,
or determined by, only what turn out to be the consequences of the action,
regardless of whether the agent intended them? Or does the action’s moral
status depend on the agent’s intentions (even if the action fails to accomplish
them)?
3
Do we ‘create our values’ through our actions? Or are our values things that
we can excogitate, and that will (or ought, then, to) guide and constrain our
actions?
4
Are there any basic principles about good and bad, from which one could
work out which actions would be good and which would be bad?
5
Can science throw any light on questions about what is good and what
is bad? Or will the application of scientiﬁc theory to questions of morals
always be guilty of the ‘is–ought’ fallacy? (The fallacy in question is that of
trying to derive prescriptive statements about what one ought to do from merely
descriptive statements about how things are.)
6
Are our moral codes based on emotions, or on reason, or perhaps on a
combination of both?
7
How do moral judgments motivate one to act? Can they?
8
Are morals absolute? Or might they be culturally relative? Might they be
attuned to, or appropriate for, only a particular era, or place, or Zeitgeist, or
phase of one’s life, or stage of technological development?
9
Is there such a thing as moral progress? If so, how is it possible?
10 Is it necessary to base one’s morality on some set of religious beliefs? Or
can morality be utterly segregated from religious views, so that non-religious
agents can be moral saints and paragons?
11 What creatures merit our moral concern? Only human beings? Only those
human beings who are into their second trimester? Only those human beings
who have been born? Only those among the latter who already talk, and can
still talk? Or should the circle of concern be widened, to include not only
human beings, but also all primates? or all mammals? or all vertebrates? or
all creatures with rudimentary nervous systems?
With this last question, we see how Metaphysics, Epistemology and Moral
Philosophy can intersect. Is there something it is like to be a creature of type X?
Can it suffer? If so, oughtn’t we to care about its well-being, for its own sake, and
not just for ours?

The Main Features of Philosophy
13
1.2.5 Aesthetics
The other main area of so-called ‘value theory’ is Aesthetics, the study of artistic
beauty and our judgments about it. The subject matter of Aesthetics is prima facie
more variegated and chaotic than the subject matters of the other main areas
of Philosophy already discussed above. Think for a moment about the bafﬂing
variety of artistic endeavor: literature (novels, short stories, poems, plays, ...);
music (covering both works embodied in scores, and performances that can be
highly extemporized); theater (from tragedy to comedy ... even unto stand-up
comedy); painting and other graphic art-forms, such as engraving, etching, and
printing; sculpture; textiles; architecture; dance; photography; ﬁlm; ... . Within
each of these areas, art works vary from the more directly representional to the
highly abstract; from celebration to harsh criticism; from the soothing or amusing
to the terrifying; from the satiating or satisfying to the disgusting or revolting.
Why and how is it, then, that the creative activities in these areas, and the
various enduring products or ﬂeeting performances that they result in, are almost
universally recognizable, and valued, as art?
Art seems to be an extreme form of successful classiﬁcation without any
immediately recognizable ‘necessary and sufﬁcient conditions’. Art works are
analogous in this regard to games, which were the favorite example used by
Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) when he put forward his theory of ‘family
resemblances’ as providing the threads that unite disparate items into a category
that can then be conveniently labeled.
Art has played an essential role in a fulﬁlled and enriched life, not only in the
civilized world, but also in the prehistoric world of our cave-dwelling ancestors.
At this juncture of human development, however, we almost take for granted its
pervasive presence in the environments that we create for ourselves, or in which
we choose to live. But Philosophy is in part a project of questioning things that we
take for granted, so as to attain a deeper understanding and appreciation of what
they involve: their ultimate make-up or constitution; their relations to us; our
perceptions of them; the concepts by means of which we organize our experience
of them; and the value we derive from our interactions with them. Here are some
of the questions that a philosopher might raise about art, art objects, the art
world, and aesthetic value:
1
What is an ‘art form’? Do all art forms have something speciﬁc in common?
2
What is good taste? Must we defer to ‘experts’ in matters of taste?
3
Does aesthetic judgment involve any kind of logic, any notion of evidence,
or any conception of ‘best’ or ‘simplest’ explanation of the ‘artistic
phenomena’? Is the aesthete in intellectual pursuit of important generalities
or regularities in the ‘art world’, when accumulating experiences within it,
and arriving at aesthetic judgments about it? Or is the whole point about
works of art that each of them is utterly singular, despite belonging to a
genre?
4
Is one of the main aims of artists working at the frontiers of creative
foment to continually undermine or subvert any systematic conceptions or

14
The Nature of Philosophy
categorizations that critics or theorists have thus far arrived at, and to render
false or irrelevant any generalizations based thereon, concerning what may
count as art?
5
Are there unsuspected biases at work in our judgments of what counts as
art? – in particular, gender biases, biases of historical remove, or biases
of Western culture? (This question is explored by some of the essays in
Korsmeyer (1998).)
6
What makes something a work of art? Are works of art at least partially
constituted by their creators’ intentions? or by social conventions?
7
Are there objective standards of beauty?
8
Can two observers be in extreme disagreement as to whether a creation is
beautiful or ugly, yet unanimous in their judgment that it is art – even,
indeed, great art?
9
What is the nature of ‘artistic experience’, both on the part of the artist and
on the part of the beholder?
10 Are certain art forms ‘higher’ than others?
11 How can we be moved by works of art? Do art objects communicate
emotion(s)?
12 Do works of art make moral statements? If so, does their aesthetic value
depend on ‘getting it right’ (as to what is right)?
13 Is there any difference between erotic art and pornography?
14 How do judgments about what is beautiful relate to judgments about what is
morally right, and to judgments about what is factually correct?
15 What is the aesthetic difference between an authentic work of art and a
perfect fake?
16 What is the value of art (its creation and its consumption) in a world plagued
by poverty, famine, disease, apocalyptic disasters, and wars?
17 Do aesthetic sensibilities and preferences have a role to play in the way
we understand reality? Why do we prefer ‘elegant’ equations in Physics?
Why is it that the world admits of such elegant descriptions? Why do
scientiﬁc hypotheses, when mathematically encapsulated in an elegant
fashion, enable us not only to know about the world at a deep level, but
also to marvel at the beauty of its inner workings?
18 Can a work of art possess an intrinsic value or beauty that might forever
elude, or go undetected and unappreciated by, anyone who experiences the
work?
1.3 Philosophical questions as concerned with fundamentals
All the questions given above as examples from the ﬁve main areas of Philosophy
involve very fundamental concepts or distinctions. Among these are mind; body;
causation; free will, knowledge; consciousness; concrete v. abstract; fact v. value;
objective v. subjective; moral goodness; validity of argument; and beauty. They
seem to be the sorts of questions that one would like to have answered before
undertaking any particular scientiﬁc investigations.

The Main Features of Philosophy
15
At this point we can raise an important Metaphilosophical Question:
Can one – should one – try to answer these questions without the beneﬁt of
any light that scientiﬁc theories might be able to shed on them?
Philosophy, as a reﬂective discipline, contrasts with disciplines that rely more on
the empirical method. Philosophy engages with very fundamental concepts and
questions. The following question, for example, concerns all possible areas of
human inquiry, or of thought about things-in-the-world:
Are there properties in the world, over and above the things or individuals
that ‘have’ them? Does the truth-condition for a statement like ‘Socrates is
wise’ involve just the individual Socrates, or does it involve also the property,
or universal, of wisdom?
This is known as the Problem of Universals. The question at issue is whether
universals exist at all. If they do not, then the world contains (as the nominalist
asserts) only individuals, like Socrates, whom we group or classify using different
labels, such as the predicate ‘...is wise’. But if, in addition to individuals such as
Socrates, universals (such as wisdom) exist (as the Platonist claims they do), then
the world consists – to put it crudely – not just of things that we can grasp with
our hands, but also things for whose grasp we have to use our minds. There is then
an added depth to reality, to which only minds are granted access of any kind. If
the Platonist prevails, then – who knows? – perhaps those erstwhile individuals
such as Socrates may come to be ‘seen’ or ‘understood’ not as the ﬂesh-and-blood
individuals we unreﬂectively take them to be, but also rather as clusters of the
universals that they instantiate. With the emphasis and focus on universals, perhaps
one would wish to say, not that Socrates is wise, but rather that wisdom Socratizes.
Might Jorge Luis Borges have been right in having his speakers of Tlön say, not
The moon rose above the river but (whatever in their language was best translated
as) Upward behind the onstreaming it mooned?
Problems
1
What are the ﬁve main areas of Philosophy? Can you think of any problems
that can be solved only by combining certain concepts and methods from
more than one of these areas?
2
What dependencies or logical relationships can you detect among possible
answers to any of the questions listed under the ﬁve main areas? What
questions not listed above would you wish to add, and to which list(s)?
3
Which of the questions listed under the ﬁve main areas strike you as the most
intriguing? the most unusual? the most perplexing? the most important for
your quality of life? the most pressing or urgent for the human condition? the
most inconsequential? Give reasons for your offerings.

16
The Nature of Philosophy
4
Do you think that any of the questions listed under the ﬁve main areas
will ever receive a deﬁnitive answer? If so, will the answer(s) come from
Philosophy, or from the sciences?
5
Are any of the questions listed under the ﬁve main areas absolutely
unanswerable by human thinkers? If so, might they be answerable by other
rational beings?
6
Should any of the questions listed under the ﬁve main areas be relegated to
Religion or Theology, as matters for resolution by faith alone, without regard
for observational evidence of any kind, and without relying on scientiﬁc
method?

2
Philosophy’s History and Legacy
This is an introductory text on the problems of Philosophy, not on the history
of Philosophy. These problems, however, do have a history, and we should
be mindful of that. Philosophy is the oldest and most venerable branch of
human inquiry. Even though its problems, and the answers it tries to provide,
have evolved over more than two millennia, they nevertheless remain profound
mysteries that will always be there to fascinate us and our descendants.
2.1 The historical sweep of Philosophy
Many illustrious and inﬂuential thinkers of the past have been, ﬁrst and foremost,
philosophers. They have also been among the pre-eminent mathematicians and
scientists of their day. The beginner in Philosophy will beneﬁt from having some
initial sense of the ancient roots of the discipline, so as better to be able to
understand its relationship to other disciplines, especially Mathematics and the
various empirical sciences. Moreover, the names of certain famous philosophers
crop up so often in contemporary philosophical discussion that it is helpful
to have some sense of the timeline of major developments, and the historical
succession of famous philosophers and the philosophical systems named after
them. To that end, the reader will ﬁnd in Appendix A a chronological table of
some of the greatest philosophers in the Western tradition, along with mention
of some of their most important works, for each of the main periods customarily
identiﬁed by contemporary historians of Philosophy.
The ancient cosmological systems,
such as those of the Pre-Socratics
(beginning in the sixth century bc), of Plato, and of Aristotle, sought to
characterize completely the cosmos and the human condition. These ancient
philosophers succeeded in formulating many of the main philosophical problems
and conceptual distinctions that have occupied philosophers’ attention ever
since. To the ancient Greeks we owe the axiomatic method in Mathematics,
as so magniﬁcently founded for geometry by Euclid’s Elements. To them
we owe also the distinctions between appearance and reality; necessity and
contingency; the senses and the intellect; substance and attribute; free will
and determinism; knowledge and true belief; and between mechanical and
teleological explanation – to mention but a handful. The ancient Greeks also

18
The Nature of Philosophy
initiated Philosophy’s preoccupation both with the nature of the self and with
the possibility of immortality. As Alfred North Whitehead once wrote, ‘The
safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that it
consists of a series of footnotes to Plato’ (Whitehead (1929), p. 39).
Medieval philosophy (beginning in the late ﬁfth century, and lasting until the
fourteenth century) was, in the main, a project of reconciling the doctrines of the
three great monotheistic religions, especially Christianity, with ancient Greek
metaphysics – to which, as just noted, we owe the doctrine of the immortality
of the soul. This is not to imply monolithic agreement among the ancients
on this score. As with the contemporary philosophical community, there were
representatives among the ancients of diametrically opposed views on the matters
just mentioned. The Roman philosopher Lucretius (99–55 bc), for example, did
not believe in the immortality of the soul, and argued that death was therefore
nothing to be feared. Medieval philosophers such as Anselm (1033–1109) and
Aquinas (1225–74) also bequeathed to the philosophical tradition some of the
most famous arguments for the existence of God ((−∞,∞), should He/She/It
exist). And quite apart from addressing theological and metaphysical questions,
medieval philosophers also grappled with problems concerning the structure of
language and logical reasoning.
Early Modern Philosophy (mid-sixteenth to mid-seventeenth century) began
the movement that celebrated the individual’s exercise of reason and judgment,
even (and especially) when the results were in conﬂict with established
superstition or authoritarian dogma or unquestioned tradition. It laid the
foundation of political liberalism, and offered contractarian explanations of
society and morals. Early Modern Philosophy also laid the foundation of modern
scientiﬁc method. Modern science bases theories on observational evidence, and
rejects theories that conﬂict with it. In doing so, it stands indebted to the ‘early
moderns’. This period saw the birth of experimental science, with a new emphasis
on the priority of observation and experiment. It bequeathed to us the ﬁrst major
works on scientiﬁc method, as one based on the testimony of our senses, and
using rational methods to explore the consequences of suggested explanations.
The Copernican revolution in astronomy (De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium,
published in 1543, as Copernicus lay on his deathbed), which ushered in our
current understanding of the arrangement of the Sun and the various planets in
our solar system, de-emphasized our position in the universe.
The era of so-called Modern, or Enlightenment, Philosophy (approximately
1650–1800) developed its impetus in the immediate wake of the Newtonian
revolution in physical science, occasioned by the great Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica (1687) of Isaac Newton (1642–1727). This was shortly
after the major founding ﬁgure of Early Modern Philosophy, namely René
Descartes, had helped earlier to shape the intellectual climate in which Newton’s
work became possible. This era was dominated by the opposition of Rationalism,
whose main representatives were Descartes, Baruch Spinoza (1632–77) and
Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz (1646–1716), and (mainly British) Empiricism,
whose earliest representatives were Francis Bacon (1561–1626) and Thomas

Philosophy’s History and Legacy
19
Hobbes (1588–1679), but whose most famous, mature representatives were
John Locke (1632–1704), George Berkeley (1685–1753), and David Hume
(1711–76). Rationalists took logical, mathematical, and theological knowledge
as the standard to which all other forms of knowledge should be held; whereas
empiricists claimed to the contrary that all our knowledge is based, ultimately,
on the deliverance of our senses. The opposition between rationalism and
empiricism that came thus to the fore was, however, but a reprise of these
conﬂicting themes in the works of many of the ancients. It is, after all, to Sextus
Empiricus (160–210) that we owe the label ‘empiricism’.
This polar opposition between Rationalism and Empiricism in the Early
Modern and Modern periods was resolved in the ‘Kantian synthesis’, also known
as the ‘Copernican turn’ in philosophy. It ushered in the period now known
as ‘Post-Enlightenment’ Philosophy. Philosophy was re-conceived as concerned
with the a priori and necessary pre-conditions – concerning substance, cause, space,
and time – for the very possibility of scientiﬁc knowledge.
One part of the mind, Kant held, contributed the ‘forms of intuition’ of space
and of time, whose role is to impose spatiotemporal order upon the ﬂux (or
Wirrwarr) of our sensory impressions. This Kant called ‘the ﬁeld of apperception’,
consisting of our sensory intuitions. (Quine was later to call this a ‘booming,
buzzing confusion’. Note that it is very easy to mispronounce this.)
The ﬂux of impressions would also be shaped by another faculty of mind,
the understanding, so that it yielded experience as of enduring objects engaged
in causal interactions with one another. This was courtesy of the concepts
of the understanding, most prominent among them the concept of individual
substance (or ‘thing’), and the concept of causation. Kant’s famous slogan was
Concepts without intuitions are empty; intuitions without concepts are blind. This
combination of ‘-isms’ was new: Kant combined ‘transcendental idealism’, which
emphasized the a priori structuring of experience provided by the mind, with
‘empirical realism’, which emphasized the mind’s need to be supplied with
sensory impressions of things in the external world. He then sought to investigate
the limits of rational understanding, and the enigmas of self, freedom, morality
and God.
Thinkers in the late nineteenth century grappled with the profound implica-
tions of the revolution in our understanding of the extremely long history of life
on our planet that was provided by Charles Darwin (1809–82) in his masterwork
The Origin of Species (1859). On Darwin’s view, all living organisms, ourselves
included, have descended over aeons, and by natural selection, from more
primitive ancestors. Darwinian thought led to a de-emphasizing of humankind’s
position in the animal kingdom. It challenged teleological modes of thought, by
offering a convincing prospect of explaining all aspects of nature by appeal only
to efﬁcient causes, and not by appeal to the intentions of an almighty creator
or ‘designer’. Through the participation of many different scientiﬁc disciplines
in the ensuing ‘neo-Darwinian synthesis’ we now have the beginnings of what
Richard Dawkins (b. 1941), has called an ‘intellectually satisfying atheism’.
(Dawkins, who gained fame with his ﬁrst popular book, The Selﬁsh Gene, is

20
The Nature of Philosophy
now retired from the Charles Simonyi Professorship in the Public Understanding
of Science at the University of Oxford. He has been a vigorous proponent of
atheism, and acerbic critic of what he regards as both the intellectual and the
moral shortcomings of organized religions.)
Thinkers in the twentieth century likewise grappled with the implications and
the presuppositions of the major scientiﬁc revolutions that followed Darwin:
quantum mechanics and relativity theory. The former theory seems to paint an
indeterministic picture of the world; and the latter theory seems to dissolve
important distinctions such as those between space and time and between matter
and energy. The late 1900s and the ﬁrst two decades of the twentieth century also
saw the birth of modern logic, with the seminal work of Frege mentioned above,
and the ﬁrst rigorous study of the foundations of mathematics. The movement
known as Logical Positivism, centered on the famous Vienna Circle in the
1920s, reacted against Kantian metaphysics in light of these recent advances
in metamathematics and science. Logical Positivism sought the ‘elimination of
metaphysics’ – arguing, in particular, against Kant, that there are no synthetic, a
priori truths.
Philosophy subsequently took the ‘linguistic turn’: language was seen as the
source both of philosophical problems and of their solutions. This ushered in the
era of linguistic or conceptual analysis. The task of philosophers was taken to be
the study of analytic truths, or the conceptual connections that they expressed.
There was further progress also in the biological and the ‘soft’ sciences. Molecular
biologists discovered the genetic code. Advances in cognitive psychology and
neuroscience began to undermine mind/body dualism. Intellectual conditions
became ripe for the development of a materialist or naturalist metaphysics (and
epistemology).
Ancient and medieval philosophers, and to a certain extent philosophers of
the Renaissance, were able to be conversant with the full range of sciences
of their day, because the knowledge gained thus far was quite limited. They
sought to integrate what was known to them into one intellectually satisfying
system. Today, however, it is impossible for any one mind to master fully all
the discovered facts and explanatory theories that are available across the whole
range of extant scientiﬁc disciplines. There is simply too much in the way of data,
and there are too many different mathematical, statistical and computational
techniques. There are too many specialized sub-disciplines for it to be possible
any longer for a scholar, however naturally gifted and dedicated to the life of the
mind, to earn the title ‘Renaissance man (or woman)’.
This predicament, if not handled carefully, can make the intellectual position
of the philosopher rather precarious. Modern scientists are quick to point out
that Science itself has co-opted domains of knowledge and theorizing that once
upon a time were regarded as special provinces of Philosophy.
For example, the study of mind itself has morphed into the scientiﬁc disciplines
of cognitive and social psychology, and neuroscience. Philosophical accounts
of the ‘social contract’ as the basis of morality, the law, and of institutions of
governance have likewise morphed into modern political science, drawing on

Philosophy’s History and Legacy
21
arcane methods from game theory and the theory of the evolution of equilibria in
dynamical systems of interacting agents. In yet another scientiﬁc encroachment
upon a sub-domain of Philosophy, evolutionary psychologists are beginning to
probe, with empirical methods, the sources of our inner convictions that we
are free to act as we choose. They claim to be in a position, now, to reveal
that these common-sense convictions are, in all likelihood, false. Evolutionary
epistemologists, likewise, have re-visited standard problems in the theory of
knowledge, and have tried to ‘naturalize’ epistemology itself. Instead of pursuing
epistemology as a branch of ‘ﬁrst philosophy’, setting out the foundations for the
possibility of any kind of scientiﬁc knowledge, evolutionary epistemology boldly
applies current scientiﬁc theory to account for our ability to know things and
truths about them. For the evolutionary epistemologist, the brain and our sensory
transducers are cognitive organs. They have been shaped by natural selection
because of the advantages that even more primitive versions of those organs
would have conferred on the ancestral organisms that possessed them, in the
competition for survival and reproduction.
The history of scientiﬁc encroachment, albeit with rapid budding off of ever
more specialized sub-disciplines, has seen the old-fashioned philosophical agenda
eroded in big chunks. Some of these chunks fall off the edges as they are
overcome by the incessant pounding of scientiﬁc inquiry. Yet others, more
centrally positioned, ﬁnd their once-ﬁrm conceptual ground suddenly giving way
to a new, gnawing sinkhole of science undermining the philosophers’ claims to
privileged intellectual status from within.
Some philosophers’ reaction has been to re-conceive the very role of Philosophy
in relation to Science. They have urged that the primary role of the philosopher
is to clarify and to integrate the various ﬁndings of Science. This is a far cry from
the conception of ‘ﬁrst philosophy’, going back to Descartes, according to which
one has to solve certain major philosophical problems in an a priori fashion before
even being positioned to pursue any particular scientiﬁc inquiries. Pale imitation
of that former role now comes with the contemporary philosopher being tasked
with ‘keeping Science honest’ by critically assessing various aspects of scientiﬁc
method as these change over time. This deferential reaction set in with the
Logical Positivists, with Rudolf Carnap prominent among them. Deference to
science was advocated also by Willard Van Orman Quine (1908–2000), who was
heavily inﬂuenced both by Carnap and by the earlier American pragmatists, and
whose (meta)philosophy has been extraordinarily inﬂuential in North America
and beyond, in the latter half of the twentieth century.
2.2 The current legacy
The current legacy of all these developments is that Philosophy places a strong
emphasis on intellectual rigor: it calls for exactitude and clarity in the way we
express ourselves, and reason. It also has an overriding concern with analysis of
meaning: getting clear about concepts by getting clear about the meanings of the
words that express them.

22
The Nature of Philosophy
Philosophers by intellectual inclination immerse themselves in the history
of thought, for their tradition is a long and proud one. They are thereby in a
position to offer enlightening perspectives on conceptual evolution and theoretical
revolutions. It is fair to say that it is to philosophers such as Popper that we owe
our contemporary awareness that even the most ‘authoritative’ science is at best
tentative. There remains, of course, the tension between Philosophy’s aspiring to
apriority and its systematic integration with the sciences; and Philosophy needs new
ways to cope with ‘cannibalization by the special sciences’.
Philosophy in the twentieth century began to mount a rearguard action against
this cannibalization by feeding off the cannibals one at a time, as it were.
There was an interesting trend towards sub-specialization within Philosophy,
as its practitioners acquired competence in particular disciplines X, and then
developed the corresponding ‘Philosophy of X’. The aim and effect was to show
that each discipline X has its own particular philosophical problems, concerning
its concepts, its foundations, and its methods. Also, each discipline X could
provide interesting material for philosophical reﬂection on that part of the Big
Picture that X sought to study. The relationship between X and the Philosophy
of X could become symbiotic: each stood to gain illuminating material from
the other. In this spirit, the twentieth century saw the development of the
‘Philosophy of X’ for X taking the values
Logic; Mathematics; Science; Social Science; Physics; Chemistry; Biology;
Archaeology; Art; Education; Sport; Medicine; Mind; Psychology; Per-
ception; Action; Cognitive Science; Language; Linguistics; Information;
Literature; Economics; Politics; Law; ...
These ‘Philosophies of ...’ are now well recognized as areas of specialization or
competence on the part of well-trained graduate students in Philosophy who
are entering the academic profession as teachers and researchers. Philosophy
Departments in universities standardly list the so-called AOSs (Areas of
Specialization) and AOCs (Areas of Competence) of their faculty members by
drawing on entries from the foregoing list. The ‘Philosophy of X’s are routinely
named alongside the ﬁve ‘main areas’ – Metaphysics, Epistemology, Logic, Ethics,
and Aesthetics – as are the various Histories of (Western) Philosophy within
the major periods identiﬁed in Appendix A (Ancient, Medieval, Early Modern,
Modern, Twentieth Century).
As disciplinary boundaries expand and contract or are re-drawn, Philosophy
within the universities continues to explore new opportunities to create
synergies, and encourage cross-fertilization of ideas, from neighboring disciplines
with which it engages. This means that the philosophers of the future – if they
are to enjoy a continuing, and lasting, intellectual presence in our havens of
higher learning – have to be not only intellectually honest and rigorous, but also
versatile, interdisciplinary, open-minded, thirsty for new scientiﬁc knowledge,
and intellectually catholic, with a small ‘c’. This is a tall intellectual order, to
stave off institutional short shrift.

Philosophy’s History and Legacy
23
One of the most valuable services that Philosophy can now render is to enable
thinkers and leaders of the future to reﬂect on how science enlightens us as to
the ultimate nature of things, and on the place of humankind in the scheme
of things. We need continuing vigilance over the rationality of any proposed
new scientiﬁc method, and we must continue to be able to identify the use
of illicit philosophical assumptions when doing science. We need continuing
vigilance also over the claims made by those who exploit the ﬁndings of modern
science in order to create new technologies and therapies. It would appear that
with ever-gathering pace, these technologies and therapies are generating ethical
dilemmas because of their unforeseen and unintended consequences.
Thus ethicists have a unique opportunity to make the principled ﬁndings
of their sub-discipline more vitally relevant to current concerns. Ought we to
allow gene therapy to be performed on the unborn? Ought we to grow and eat
genetically modiﬁed organisms? Ought we to allow our own blood and body tissues
to be used in vast statistical studies whose results might end up being frightening
chickens come home to roost? Ought we to continue to exploit and consume
natural resources because of current demand and available technologies, without
caring about the possibly devastating long-term effects on ourselves, on our
water- and food-supply, on other species of life, and on our planet? Philosophy’s
renewed engagement with technology and medicine has given a great impetus to
new subﬁelds of Applied Ethics. This is also one particular area where the mainly
a priori methods of the philosopher can fruitfully be combined with the empirical
discoveries of the relevant sciences, to provide a context in which matters of
ultimately moral import become more pressing. What sort of life do we wish to
lead? – one in which we push for the short-term beneﬁts (and corporations
push for the short-term proﬁts) that may result from the application of new
technologies? Or one in which we are more circumspect – wiser, perhaps – in
stressing our moral responsibilities and obligations to the as-yet-unborn, to
preserve a planet that will be habitable by them? (The English word ‘philosophy’
comes, after all, from the Greek words ‘philo’, meaning love, and ‘sophia’,
meaning wisdom. Love of wisdom ... a precious commodity that is itself, like
carbon-based fuels, in increasingly short supply.)
Also, metaphysicians and philosophers of science have a unique opportunity
to make intellectual contributions to contemporary theoretical physics. Here,
the concepts deployed are so arcane, and the new mathematics involved is so
searingly abstract, that one begins to lose any intuitive grasp of what sorts of
processes or interactions are being described. Philosophers of science can take a
critical look at the sense in which the Big Bang might or might not be a ‘creation
event’ with potential theological signiﬁcance. They can involve themselves in
advocacy or critique of ‘hidden variables’ theories in quantum mechanics, on
whose existence or success the debate over the nature and extent of causation
might turn. Philosophers of science can also contribute to debates about the
possibility of emergent systems, and of ‘top-down’ causation, in the context of
complex evolving systems whose behavior is highly non-linear, and subject to
both phase transitions and ‘catastrophic’ qualitative change.

24
The Nature of Philosophy
Philosophers of mathematics have joined forces with philosophers of mind,
and of cognitive science, to explore the consequences of our conceiving of the
mind in computational terms – as the ‘software’ of the brain that mediates
between sensory input and motor output. The celebrated incompleteness
theorems of the famous Austrian logician Kurt Gödel have been used by some
‘transcendentalists’ to argue that the human mind cannot possibly be conceived
in these computationalist terms. They argue that a computational system cannot
(as the human mind allegedly can) comprehend, and then transcend, the proven
limits to the capacity of any formalized deductive system for mathematics.
The human mind, they maintain, could always ‘out-Gödelize’ any formal
computational system that might be put forward as a model of the mind’s
workings. Thus, they conclude, minds transcend machines; so Mechanism is
false.
These are just a few examples of the challenges and opportunities that present
themselves to the enterprising student of Philosophy who seeks to master its
intellectual methods and then apply them to newly arising problems in a rapidly
changing world.
Problems
1
Why do you think Philosophy has undergone the evolution brieﬂy described
in this chapter?
2
In the distant past, great philosophers were also among the great scientists of
their times. Are any of today’s great scientists still doing Philosophy?
3
What, in your view, is the proper role for Philosophy in relation to the
contemporary physical, social, and human sciences?
4
Are any of the ethical precepts of established religions under threat from
contemporary scientiﬁc ﬁndings?
5
Must Philosophy at least harmonize with the sciences, even if it is not itself
pursued as an empirical discipline? How can contemporary scientiﬁc theories
be made relevant to traditional philosophical problems?
6
Does the trend towards increasing specialization and fragmentation in every
area of intellectual inquiry pose a special threat to Philosophy as an ongoing
discipline? How would you argue for its continuing intellectual value against
a skeptic who thinks there should not even be funding for it within a system
of public education?

3
The Philosophical Temperament
3.1 Keeping an open mind
Philosophy, as we have seen, deals with fundamental concepts, and with important
questions that can be posed by means of them. But both mathematics and
the natural sciences have fundamental concepts, and pose important questions
using them. How, then, does Philosophy differ from both mathematics and the
sciences?
First, note that scientiﬁc or mathematical questions are ones that scientists
and mathematicians think could, in principle, be deﬁnitively answered; or, at
the very least, could be considered in the light of evidence and argumentation
that would incline a rational thinker one way rather than the other.
A ‘deﬁnitive answer’ need not be one that we can conﬁdently claim to know
with complete certainty. Rather, it need only be one that we are strongly inclined
to accept, on the balance of the evidence and on the strength of the arguments
that marshal that evidence. This inclination, however, has to be rational; it
cannot be a matter of arbitrary whim, or dogmatic insistence in the teeth of
evidence to the contrary. This in turn raises the question What is rationality?, to
which I hope some sort of answer will have emerged by the end of this book.
3.2 Philosophy contrasted with Mathematics and Science
Almost every beginner in Philosophy has had at least some exposure to
Mathematics and various sub-disciplines in Science (physics, chemistry, biology,
etc.). So the beginner in Philosophy can be helped by some initial foreshadowing
of the ways in which philosophical questions, and the sorts of answer one can
provide to them, differ from those with which they might already be familiar in
Mathematics and Science respectively.
The main differences, in their most telegraphic form, are these:
1
Mathematical questions can be settled by proof from ﬁrst principles.
2
Scientiﬁc questions can be settled by observational evidence and reasoning.
3
Philosophical questions are settled in a ﬁnal reﬂective equilibrium; and there are
potentially many of the latter.

26
The Nature of Philosophy
Take a mathematical conjecture like ‘Every even number greater than 2 is the
sum of two prime numbers’. Is it true or is it false? This is a famous unsolved
problem in number theory. It is named after Christian Goldbach (1690–1764),
who ﬁrst posed the question. Goldbach’s Conjecture has the following signiﬁcant
features:
1
We would recognize a counterexample to the conjecture, if there is one.
2
We would recognize a proof of the conjecture, if there is one, within a system
of currently accepted mathematical axioms.
3
We could also recognize a proof of the impossibility of being able to settle the
question within a given axiomatic system.
This last would be an example of what metamathematicians call a ‘natural
independence result’. In the last two centuries such results have established
the independence of the Parallels Postulate from the other axioms of Euclidean
geometry, and the independence of Cantor’s Continuum Hypothesis from the
standard axioms of modern set theory, including the Axiom of Choice.
A counterexample to Goldbach’s Conjecture would be a number n – and, if
such a number exists, there would be a least such – that is not the sum of any two
primes preceding n.
3.3 Scientiﬁc questions
There are many scientiﬁc questions that have one or the other of the following
two basic forms:
1
Existential. ‘Are there any Xs?’ – we can imagine experimental and
observational circumstances favoring an afﬁrmative answer. We would need
only to be presented with an X.
2
Universal. ‘Are all Xs Ys?’ – we can imagine experimental and observational
circumstances favoring a negative answer. We would need only to be presented
with an X that is not also a Y.
Someone presented with the basic principles of, say, Einsteinian relativity theory
and cosmology could contemplate an Existential question such as ‘Are there any
black holes?’ or ‘Does the gravitational ﬁeld of the sun cause light rays from some
distant star to curve on their way to the earth?’, and can imagine experimental
and observational circumstances in which they would give a deﬁnite afﬁrmative
answer to the question. Or, in the case of scientiﬁc generalizations such as
‘All planets move in elliptical orbits around the Sun’, they can imagine what
would be required, of observations of the orbit of a given planet, to falsify the
generalization.
The philosophical generalization suggested by these examples from scientiﬁc
practice is this: a scientiﬁc question is posed in such a way, and with
such conceptual resources, as to permit the possibility of deﬁnitely answering

The Philosophical Temperament
27
the question one way or the other (Existentials afﬁrmatively and Universals
negatively).
3.4 Mathematical questions
The same holds true for Mathematics. Consider once again the simple, as yet
undecided mathematical conjecture of Goldbach: Every even number greater
than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers. No proof has yet been given; nor
has any counterexample been found. But, while the conjecture is undecided,
mathematicians would hesitate to say that it is, in principle, undecidable. For,
they can imagine what it would be to have a proof of this conjecture; and someone,
some day, might very well produce such a proof. On the other hand, they also
know what it would be to falsify the conjecture: simply produce an even number
greater than 2, which is not the sum of any two preceding primes. The status of
such an even number, as a counterexample to the conjecture, could be settled in
a ﬁnite time, by means of a ﬁnite (mechanical) computation.
So, in summary: scientiﬁc and mathematical questions are essentially soluble, in
the sense that practitioners of those disciplines tend to have a good idea of what,
in principle, would be required, by way of evidence and argument, in order to
convince themselves of the truth, or the falsity, of any given statement using the
conceptual resources available to them. When a correct solution is offered, the
scientiﬁc or mathematical community eventually reaches consensus – no matter
how deep or difﬁcult the question being answered.
Answers to mathematical questions, when we attain them, are wholly
objective and dispositive. Answers to scientiﬁc questions, when we ﬁrst ﬁnd
them, are reasonably objective. Whether they are dispositive, however, will
depend on their logical form. A properly evidenced afﬁrmative answer to an
Existential question (‘Are there any Xs?’) will be dispositive; and so too will be
a properly evidenced negative answer to a Universal question (‘Are all Xs Ys?’).
But no ﬁnite amount of evidence can in principle provide a dispositive negative
answer to the former kind of question (‘Is there life on some other planet?’), or a
dispositive positive answer to the latter kind (‘Are all Xs Ys?’).
That being said, however, we can at least say that the methods for determining
answers are, in both Mathematics and Science, public and accessible. And the
answers are continually tested and applied.
3.5 Philosophical questions (by contrast)
Philosophy is different. Philosophy differs by posing questions that are essentially
controversial. These questions are important and of long standing; yet they
continue to invite speculative answers, or even answers backed by arguments,
that vary widely across the spectrum. Given any philosophical question, one
can always ﬁnd thinkers responding to it from opposing extremes. Moreover, they
do not simply assert their views dogmatically; rather, they tend to be able to
offer detailed, complex, and substantive reasons and arguments for them. That is

28
The Nature of Philosophy
where, in Philosophy, critical acumen is at a premium: when one needs to ﬁnd
whatever ﬂaws one can in a case presented by an opponent with a diametrically
opposed view to one’s own.
Philosophical questions are often reﬂexive,
and especially so when,
as
meta-questions, they challenge philosophical positions themselves. So let us go
reﬂexive on the very characterization that we have just given of the supposed
contrast between scientiﬁc and mathematical knowledge, on the one hand, and
philosophical ‘knowledge’, on the other.
3.6 Realism v. Anti-realism
Is it really the case that every scientiﬁc or mathematical question has a deﬁnite, correct
answer?
The realist will answer ‘Yes’. The realist holds that every scientiﬁc question,
and every mathematical question, admits in principle of a deﬁnite correct
answer – whether or not we could ever discover it. Either there are black holes,
or there aren’t. Either every even number greater than 2 is the sum of two prime
numbers, or some even number greater than 2 is not the sum of two prime
numbers. The realist says that the truth is ‘out there’, even if we do not know
it, and even if we could never, in principle, come to know it. That is to say, the
truth can transcend our knowledge of it, and indeed our means of ever coming to
know what it might be.
By contrast, the anti-realist holds that all truths are knowable. If there really
are black holes, then there must be a way for us to ﬁnd out that there are.
Likewise, if there are no black holes, then we must be able to ﬁnd out that this
is so. If every even number greater than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers,
then we must be able one day to prove this; otherwise, we must be able to
disprove it.
So we see already that there is a huge disagreement between two philosophical
positions, concerning truth itself and our possible means of coming to know
it. The realist, if she thinks that Philosophy uncovers truths, will regard the
essentially controversial nature of certain philosophical questions as explained
by the intellectual inaccessibility of whatever answer happens to be the right answer.
She will think that such questions, like scientiﬁc and mathematical ones, do have
deﬁnite answers, but that those answers can elude even our best efforts to discover
them. So the realist can suffer a certain kind of intellectual frustration, or
disappointment, or humiliation, in not being able to discover what is supposedly
a settled answer to her question.
The anti-realist, by contrast, will regard the essentially controversial nature
of certain philosophical questions as reﬂecting the open-ended but so far
inconclusive nature of our investigations. Certain philosophical questions, like
any number of sufﬁciently deep and difﬁcult scientiﬁc and/or mathematical
questions, simply cannot, at any given stage of inquiry, be settled one way or
the other. When there is no outright proof or disproof, and no preponderance of
evidence either way, the anti-realist is resigned to neither asserting nor denying

The Philosophical Temperament
29
p, in response to the question whether it is the case that p. The anti-realist can
remain intrigued, deeply interested, and puzzled; but will not think it appropriate
to react to the current state of indecision and controversy the way the realist
does.
Let us have a look, now, at one of the greatest and most controversial of all
philosophical questions.
3.7 Example of a philosophical question: does God exist?
This is a philosophical question. At one extreme, the theist will answer ‘Yes’, and
offer all manner of arguments and considerations in support of that answer. At
the other extreme, the atheist will anwer ‘No’, and likewise offer all manner of
arguments and considerations in support of that answer. We shall be examining
all these arguments later, in Part III.
By way of foreshadowing: in Part III we shall ﬁnd that two of the famous
arguments that a theist might offer for the existence of God – Anselm’s
Ontological Argument, and Aquinas’s Cosmological Argument – are presented
as conceptual, a priori pieces of reasoning. They are comparable in their logical
structure to mathematical proofs, which set out to establish theorems on the basis
of axioms that are accepted as self-evident. By contrast, another argument for the
existence of God, namely the Argument from Design, is comparable in its logical
structure to a scientiﬁc explanation, in which an hypothesis is invoked in order
to explain certain observational evidence.
Finally, the atheist’s main argument against the existence of God, known as
the Argument from Evil, is an attempt to employ a priori reasoning in order to
reduce to absurdity the assumption that God exists. The argument’s premises are
statements of the usual powers that religious tradition vests in the Deity, along
with the premise – accepted by both sides of the debate – that there is much evil
and suffering in the universe. (Hence the name of the argument: the Argument
from Evil.)
In between the atheist and the theist is the agnostic. The agnostic remains
uncommitted to any particular answer. The agnostic is not persuaded one way
or the other by the respective arguments and considerations. The agnostic,
however, keeps an open mind. She is prepared to be swayed either way, provided
only that a sufﬁciently persuasive argument can be presented to her. It is just
that as of now – so she claims – she has yet to be presented with a conclusive
argument either way.
The term ‘agnostic’ has come to be closely associated with the undecided
position in response to the question of God’s existence. But the term can
have wider application. In response to any philosophical question – Is mind
distinct from body? Can we be sure that the future will resemble the past? Are
there moral facts? Could truth transcend what we could possibly know? – there
is room for the agnostic answer: ‘I don’t know. I cannot make up my
mind. The currently available evidence and arguments are not compelling
either way.’

30
The Nature of Philosophy
3.8 Adopting a philosophical position
If philosophical questions are essentially controversial, why shouldn’t one simply
be an agnostic in response to all of them? In theory, one could; perhaps, even,
should. But even the most sophisticated and open-minded thinkers are not
inclined to agnosticism in response to every philosophical question. Instead,
they become committal with respect to at least some such questions, if not to
all of them. That is, they take a deﬁnite stand; they make up their minds.
In so doing, they adopt what is sometimes called a Weltanschauung, or way of
looking at the world. They do so, however, while yet keeping very open minds
about the possibility of encountering new evidence and new arguments that
might make them change their point of view. They do so, moreover, only after
thoroughly thinking through all the alternatives, so that they truly know where they
stand.
3.9 Undergoing a philosophical education
The purpose of a philosophical education is to enable one to ﬁnd reasons to commit
oneself one way or another in response to important philosophical questions.
What is important is not so much the particular set of answers one arrives at
by way of reﬂective equilibration (the process of reaching equilibrium). Rather,
what is important is the process of rational reﬂection that one has undergone in
order to arrive at such equilibrium. One needs to open one’s mind to the possibility
that one has premised one’s personal and intellectual life thus far on unexamined
assumptions about God, self, life, personhood, purpose, meaning, rationality,
value, thought, language, the future, free will, morality, causation, space, time,
the physical universe, and our place in it. And not only that; some of those
assumptions (or indeed many of them, or perhaps even all of them) might, upon
being more consciously considered, wilt in the light of critical scrutiny. One may
need to suspend them or abandon them; indeed, one might even need to reject
them. This is an extreme, and often emotionally unsettling, case of rational belief
revision.
Part of the excitement of doing Philosophy seriously comes from taking on the
huge issues, and examining even widely held assumptions critically, and from
scratch, as it were. The philosopher is always looking for the precise reasons for
which one might hold any view on any important matter. For many a beginning
student, this process of rational examination can be challenging, disorienting,
at times even upsetting. But by embarking on the intellectual journey, and
uncovering one’s own reasons for ending up at whatever reﬂective equilibrium
one eventually reaches, one occupies that position with deeper understanding,
deeper commitment, and deeper justiﬁcation. One acquires, shall we say, one’s
moral and intellectual compass.
One needs to become familiar with the space of alternative viewpoints that
can importantly differ from one’s own. This is the great hallmark of invisible
diversity, perhaps the most important kind of diversity to appreciate, foster, and

The Philosophical Temperament
31
respect. This is the diversity of deep intellectual conviction about how ‘everything
hangs together’ – or perhaps doesn’t. It is a diversity that transcends race,
religion, gender, sexual orientation, socio-economic class, and the various other
dimensions on which variation makes up the diversity that politicians (and
higher educators) like to stress.
The invisible diversity of deep and well-thought-out intellectual conviction
is, to this author’s mind, humanity’s greatest asset. It is also the asset that
is the easiest to squander, to neglect, to allow to fall into disrepair, if
institutional forces for conformity seek to limit it, constrain it, or undervalue
it. Those institutional forces can be ‘higher’-educational; political; theocratic; or
plutocratic. Usually they emanate from the decisions, inﬂuence and actions of
individuals who themselves are bereft of any sense of the intrinsic value of that
which they are neglecting, or undernourishing, or dismantling, or vandalizing, or
rendering inaccessible to persons of ordinary means. Philosophy is that discipline
best positioned, from reﬂecting on its own turbulent history – and, thereby,
uniquely obliged – to sound the alarm, whenever necessary, about barbarians at
the gate.
3.10 The need to avoid dogmatism
A ﬁrst requirement on undertaking this intellectual journey is that one should
free oneself of dogmatic commitments to any particular answers in response to
philosophical questions. This might entail internal conﬂict of high order. The
God-fearing synagogue-, church-, mosque-, or temple-goer might be seriously
conﬂicted in trying to ‘suspend belief’ in the existence of God. Yet such
suspension of belief is required in order to undertake a critical examination both
of the evidence and arguments for the existence of God, and of the evidence and
arguments against the existence of God. Likewise, the atheist scientist might be
seriously conﬂicted in trying to ‘suspend disbelief’ in the existence of God. Yet
suspension of disbelief is required for that critical examination just as much as
suspension of belief is required.
There are many other fundamental beliefs, besides belief in the existence
of God, that are prone to being held dogmatically, with insufﬁcient critical
examination. Some of the most important of these are the following:
•
one’s mind, or soul, is immaterial, and is distinct from one’s body;
•
one’s mind, or soul, is immortal;
•
we have free will;
•
certain central beliefs have to be held on faith, and not in response to total
available evidence and one’s exercise of reason and understanding;
•
there are fundamental mysteries – but with factual answers – that lie beyond
all human comprehension;
•
one’s good or bad conduct in life will be rewarded or punished in the afterlife;
•
moral laws are ‘God-given’;

32
The Nature of Philosophy
•
certain kinds of testimony, deriving from divine revelation, have to be taken
on trust, and never subjected to rational criticism on the basis of the total
evidence.
3.11 The need to avoid fallacious thinking
A second requirement on undertaking this intellectual journey is that one should
free oneself of all habits of sloppy thinking or argumentation. There is no better
introduction than a grounding in Philosophy, to the topic of ‘Critical Thinking’
(often taught – quite unnecessarily, in the author’s view – as a separate course
from Introduction to Philosophy). Immunization against the most important
of these intellectual contagions is so important that we devote an appropriate
measure of attention to them here.
We shall in later chapters engage in some quite reﬁned examination of some
subtle logical matters. Here we seek to prepare the beginner for the required
level of rigor. The intention in this early section is wholly prophylactic: we are
concerned to identify various crass errors in argumentation, of kinds that reveal
the arguer to be very illogical. In order to learn logic thoroughly, the student
must make the acquaintance not only of patterns of thinking that are good, but
also of some that are bad, and indeed with some that are downright ugly. The
rest of this section furnishes a sort of chamber of horrors for the logical acolyte.
The examples on display here might not have the same harrowing effect on the
logical sensibilities of impressionable young minds as would medieval instruments
of torture on their moral sensibilities; but they should come close.
Fallacies are invalid arguments or inferences. There are inﬁnitely many of them.
But there are a few forms of fallacy that crop up quite frequently, and for which
one must be vigilant. They should be avoided in one’s own argumentation, and
exposed and criticized in one’s opponent’s argumentation. As already explained,
an argument is an attempt to move in thought from certain premises to a sought
conclusion, in such a way as to transmit truth. A fallacy in an argument will
undermine the guarantee (deductive or inductive) that truth is being transmitted
from the premises to the conclusion.
One can also, with a fallacy, botch an attempt to show that a set of assumptions
is inconsistent. A fallacious reductio ad absurdum argument will lead one to the
over-hasty conclusion that the premises form an inconsistent set. But perhaps
they form a consistent set after all, and it is only the fallacious step that produces
a mistaken impression of inconsistency.
Logical fallacies, then, are mistaken steps in reasoning – reasoning in which
the propositions involved are correctly identiﬁed, but in which the attempted
inferential transitions among those propositions are not properly made. Here
we have space to mention only a select several of the most prominent logical
fallacies.
We turn now to the logical fallacies, which are less gross than the rhetorical
ones, and therefore at times harder to detect. They turn on incorrect attention
to the logical forms of the statements involved, while masquerading as logically
correct.

The Philosophical Temperament
33
The fallacy of equivocation.
Example:
All knowledge is power. All power corrupts. Therefore all knowledge
corrupts.
Here, the word ‘power’ is the source of equivocation. In the ﬁrst premise, it
alludes to increased understanding, an ability to work things out for oneself (a
power for self-improvement, if you like). In the second premiss the kind of ‘power’
in question is political power, power over people’s lives, power to inﬂuence
governmental decision-making, both legislative and executive. Obviously, the
conclusion does not follow from the premises once one has distinguished the two
very distinct meanings of the word ‘power’ in question. (Ironically, the more
knowledgeable the citizenry, the less likely they are to be helpless in the face of
political power wielded corruptly.)
The fallacy of composition.
Example:
Norman Tebbit, the saturnine British Secretary of State for Employment
(1981–83) once made a famous remark about how his unemployed Welsh
coal-miner father ‘got on his bike and looked for work’. This was by way of
comment on British unemployment in 1981. He was trying to persuade his
audience at the Conservative Party Conference that it would be possible for
the British population to achieve full employment if only each worker had
the same determination as his father.
Tebbit was exploiting (implicitly) the following inference pattern:
Any person who tries hard enough can ﬁnd work.
So, it is possible for everyone to ﬁnd work if they try hard enough.
The logical form of this fallacy is:
For every x: it is possible that Fx.
So, it is possible for it to be the case that: for every x, Fx.
In symbols:
∀x3F(x)
3∀xF(x) ,
where 3 represents ‘it is possible that’ and ∀is to be read as ‘for every’.

34
The Nature of Philosophy
The conclusion, thus analyzed, simply does not follow from the premise. There
is the depressing phenomenon of so-called ‘structural’ unemployment: no matter
how hard a society tries, it cannot attain full employment. Granted, in ordinary
circumstances, when not everyone is making a tremendous effort to ﬁnd a job,
the go-getters like Tebbit Senior can land a job by making a special effort. But,
if everyone got on their bikes to look for work, the relatively few available jobs
would quickly be ﬁlled, and, after the trafﬁc jam had died down, there would still
be many willing workers unemployed.
The fallacy of quantiﬁer-switch.
Example:
St. Thomas Aquinas’s ‘Second Way’, also known as the Cosmological
Argument for the Existence of God, contains the following essential but
fallacious step:
Every thing or event is caused, or brought into being, by some other
thing or event.
So, some thing or event caused, or brought into being, all other things
and events.
Aquinas thought that this Prime Mover was God. This questionable step has the
same logical form as the following:
Every number is greater than some other number.
So, some number is less than all other numbers.
The latter inference is clearly invalid: the premise is true of the real numbers
(negative and positive), while the conclusion is false. (There is no least number;
they keep on going back inﬁnitely far ‘to the left’.) Another argument of the
same form, which is clearly invalid, is the following:
Everyone is fathered by someone else.
So, someone fathered everyone else.
The fallacy of afﬁrming the consequent.
Example:
If it rains, then the ground gets wet. The ground is wet. So, it’s raining.

The Philosophical Temperament
35
This has the form:
If A then B.
B.
So, A.
The ‘if-then’ claim is generally true. But the ground might be wet because the
sprinklers have been on, not because it is raining.
The fallacy of denying the antecedent.
Example:
If it rains, then the ground gets wet. It’s not raining. So, the ground isn’t
wet.
This has the form:
If A then B.
Not-A.
So, not-B.
Again, it may not be raining, but what if the sprinklers are on?
The fallacy of over-hasty generalization.
Example:
3 is prime; 5 is prime; 7 is prime. So, all odd numbers are prime.
The arguer has not looked at all odd numbers; indeed, the very next odd number,
9, is not prime. The mathematician needs special methods for proving universal
claims about natural numbers. She cannot simply enumerate instances, because
there are too many of them (i.e., inﬁnitely many). Instead, she has to show that
the property in question is possessed by 0, and that if any number n has the
property, then so too does n + 1. This is the so-called Principle of Mathematical
Induction.
There can also be over-hasty generalization in inductive reasoning (the kind of
reasoning that is concerned to reveal regularities in the behavior of objects in
the external world). Unless one has a large enough sample of a given population,
it would be unwise to extrapolate trends that you think you have found in the
sample. For example, if you were to choose ﬁve people at random coming out of
the election booths, and ask them how they voted, and were told ‘Republican’
by three of them, and ‘Democrat’ by the other two, you would be unwise to
conclude that the Republicans would win with three-ﬁfths of the vote. There is

36
The Nature of Philosophy
a signiﬁcant chance that your sample might be very unrepresentative: perhaps,
even, the Democrats are on their way to a landslide victory. Even with much
larger samples of a few hundred or so, there is still a margin of error of a few
percentage points either way. (This, in a ‘ﬁrst past the post’ voting system, makes
psephology a precarious science.)
The fallacy of post hoc, ergo propter hoc.
Example:
Lots of migraine sufferers used to believe, before we were all better informed
by the relevant science, that eating chocolate would bring on a migraine.
They believed this because almost every time they ate chocolate, they would
shortly thereafter suffer a migraine. Their reasoning was that, since the
migraines followed upon eating chocolate, the chocolate was causing the
migraine.
This is mistaken. When a migraine is about to come on, the brain is in a state
that results in your craving chocolate. So, usually, you eat chocolate – and, as
luck would have it, manage to do so just before the onset of the migraine. Both
the (craving for, hence) eating of chocolate, and the migraine, have a common
cause. It is not the chocolate that is causing the migraine, it is whatever state is
behind your craving the chocolate in the ﬁrst place.
This brings to a conclusion our prophylactic account of some of the worst
logical fallacies to which untrained thinkers can be prone. (We shall, however,
identify an excruciating new one in Chapter 17.) The beginner in Philosophy
must be on guard against them. And one of the most effective ways to ensure
that one’s thinking is free of such fallacies is to study the essentials of Logic.
That is why an introductory course in Logic is so often a prerequisiste for more
advanced courses in Philosophy.
3.12 The need for dispassionate contemplation
Another requirement on undertaking this intellectual journey, especially in the
company of others, is that one conduct it as a civilized conversation. The best
way to do this is to regard the questions, the evidence one way or the other,
and the arguments one way or the other, as impersonal, abstract objects that are not
the personal property of any one thinker, but are rather communal property, and
the subject of dispassionate contemplation. Although it is important to attribute
original ideas, insights, lines of argument, etc., to the thinkers who ﬁrst thought
of them, their contribution is nevertheless to what is sometimes called ‘The Great
Conversation’. It engages all minds willing to communicate about these issues,
regardless of their own convictions, or ‘where they are coming from’.
The best way to prevent philosophical differences from developing into hostile
personal conﬂicts is to de-personalize the issues. Talk about ‘the concept C’, or ‘the

The Philosophical Temperament
37
theory T’, or ‘the argument A’, or ‘the refutation R’, as an intellectual object that
can be dispassionately scrutinized. Never let any argument of yours be an attack
on a thinker; make it an attack only on certain propositions or theories. Make it
impersonal and objective. In intellectual migration, avoid personal denigration.
One can venerate a great thinker, and still beg to differ. Many a great thinker has
held a false belief; or developed a vague or incoherent or trivial or platitudinous
theory; or given a fallacious argument; or deployed a confused concept. Refute
the false belief; criticize the theory; diagnose the weak spots in the argument;
and reveal the confusion in that concept. But do not denigrate the thinker in
doing so.
Even more crass than logical fallacies are rhetorical ones – and these must be
avoided at all costs in The Great Conversation. Rhetorical fallacies don’t even
correctly identify the propositions on which the argument at hand should be
concentrating. When someone commits a rhetorical fallacy, it is because they are
trying to deceive the audience over what is at issue, or over what their opponent
believes, or over the relevance of their own claims to the matter at hand. Here
we have space to mention only three of the most important rhetorical fallacies.
The fallacy of Argumentum ad baculam.
Example:
The Pope appealed to the leaders of the Allied forces, Roosevelt, Churchill,
and Stalin, to avoid a certain course of military action that might have
endangered some great European ecclesiastical architecture. Roosevelt and
Churchill wanted to accede to the Pope’s request, and reiterated the reasons
for restraint to Stalin. Stalin refused to be moved. He leaned forward and
asked ‘Exactly how many divisions does the Pope have?’
‘Bacula’ is the Latin word for ‘club’, as in the kind of thing that would have
been used, in the old days, to clobber an enemy’s head. So Argumentum ad
baculam is argument that appeals to the implied threat of force – force by means
of which one will ensure that one’s own view (or decision) will prevail. It has
absolutely nothing to do with intellectual reasons or justiﬁcations. It is simply a method
of intimidation.
The fallacy of arguing against a straw person.
Example:
So you’re an atheist, eh?! You Godless swine! Look at what those atheist
Commies did in Cambodia! No doubt you condone that. You think it’s OK
to blow prisoners’ heads off when they’re eating apples ...
The atheist in question might be the most moral person you will ever meet. She
might have more reﬁned ethical sensibilities, and a much deeper understanding

38
The Nature of Philosophy
of South-East Asian politics, than the Bible-thumping interlocutor who would
have the audience believe that she was Pol Pot’s spokeswoman. Her views
are being misrepresented. By constructing a ‘straw person’ – a set of opinions
mistakenly or dishonestly attributed to one’s opponent – the arguer tries to win
a cheap victory. It is usually much easier to refute an absurd or exaggerated or
ill-informed view not held by one’s opponent, than to ﬁnd out exactly what one’s
opponent really believes, and why, and then to criticize her for her genuinely
held views.
The fallacy of Argumentum ad hominem.
Example:
A: I believe there should be universal health care. I believe that every child
has a right, regardless of parental income, to receive free preventive and
curative care whenever she needs it. I believe that senior citizens should be
completely relieved of the anxiety over how to pay for their medications
in their old age. Our society is rich enough to do this; and we’re lagging
behind all the other major industrialized nations in this regard. We can equip
our army with nuclear weapons, but we can’t even ensure the health of our
children and grandparents.
B: You’re saying all this only because you’ve got ﬁve runny-nosed kids
whom you don’t feed properly, four sick grandparents whom you’ve been
neglecting, and have just moved all your aggressive-growth stock out of
health funds and into telecommunications funds.
Here, B is trying to discredit A (and his views) by making a personal attack
on A that has nothing to do with the principled issues (concerning universal
health care), or with the reasons that A might offer for his views on them.
You don’t refute a proposition by discrediting the character or credentials of the
person stating it. You have to argue against the proposition by giving grounds for
rejecting it. You need to lead appropriate and relevant evidence, marshaled in a
logical way that will persuade a bystander who knows nothing about anyone who
might assert the proposition in question.
At the end of the road, one who lives ‘the examined life’ might well have
the same fundamental beliefs as they held before this intellectual journey was
embarked upon and completed. The newly won advantage, however, is that those
beliefs will be held with a much deeper understanding of all the relevant issues
involved – and, one hopes, greater respect and tolerance for those who beg to
differ.
3.13 Abilities demanded by Philosophy
The beginner in Philosophy does not need much by way of preparation. It usually
sufﬁces to have a healthy respect for intellectual pursuits of all kinds. There are

The Philosophical Temperament
39
certain abilities, however, which will stand the beginner in good stead. These are
the abilities to:
1
spot hidden assumptions;
2
ﬁnd fallacies in arguments;
3
think up unusual situations in order to test the applicability of concepts;
4
argue rigorously;
5
anticipate objections; and
6
express oneself in clear, simple, and precise terms.
With that basic intellectual equipment, and a willingness to consider challenges
to even the most ﬁrmly held beliefs, the beginner can enjoy a promising future in
the discipline.
Problems
1
Do you think that the ability to pose distinctively philosophical questions is
a gift enjoyed by relatively few? What questions can you recall ever raising at
a very early age which could properly be called philosophical questions?
2
Which of the abilities listed in §3.13 do you think you have, and which do
you think you lack? How would you set about making good those lacks?
3
Do you think that a person’s religious convictions rule out the possibility that
they might be seriously reconsidered from a philosophical standpoint?
4
Why, do you think, are so many thinkers prone to commiting serious fallacies
in their thinking? Is not fallacious reasoning counterproductive? Should not
that tendency have been eliminated by natural selection?
5
What do you think is the source of the realist’s belief that every declarative
sentence has a determinate truth-value?
6
If a mathematical conjecture is provably unprovable from our current axioms,
and also provably irrefutable on the basis of those axioms, does it follow that
the conjecture must be false if those axioms are true?

4
Important Concepts and
Distinctions
Despite its readiness to engage with all the various scientiﬁc disciplines on
matters metaphysical, epistemological, ethical, and foundational, it is likely
that Philosophy will remain centrally concerned with perennially important
conceptual distinctions. These distinctions are formulated by means of certain
important philosophical concepts. Mastery of those concepts requires one
to understand and be able to apply the distinctions involving them. So
these philosophically important concepts and distinctions really go hand
in hand.
Those who challenge the value of Philosophy often point to how its
fundamental problems appear to remain unsolved; or, worse, are completely
insoluble; and how they tend to re-surface, in perhaps different guises, at every
important juncture in the history of ideas. If Philosophy, contra these detractors,
can claim any kind of progress at all, then it is in large measure owing to its
accumulation of the important distinctions to be discussed in this chapter. Once
drawn and grasped by practicing philosophers, these distinctions re-shape the
discussion of any topic to which they are relevant. They can never subsequently
be ignored or neglected, without vigorous argument in support of doing so.
(On this point, see the Introduction to Kenny (2004).) An understanding of
these distinctions is a major aim of any contemporary philosophical education.
Philosophical naïveté on any topic is by and large attributed in proportion to
ignorance of the relevant distinctions that the preceding philosophical tradition
has drawn.
Successive generations of philosophers might come (i) to wield certain
conceptual distinctions slightly differently than intended by their originators;
or they may even come (ii) to reject them as untenable, or intellectually
fruitless. Still, familiarity with these distinctions, and with the concepts
they involve,
is absolutely essential for a fully developed understanding
of Philosophy as a discipline. The beginner needs at least a rudimentary
understanding of these distinctions at the very outset, since so much of
philosophical theorizing and controversy involves their application. (An exam-
ple of (i) is how Kant’s delineation of analytic, as opposed to synthetic,
truths was amended after the adoption of Frege’s logic in place of Aristotle’s
syllogistic.)

Important Concepts and Distinctions
41
Here is a summary list of the most important distinctions that we shall be
covering in this chapter:
appearance/reality; mind/body; objective/subjective;
abstract/concrete; descriptive/normative;
empirical knowledge v. rational knowledge;
necessary/true/false/impossible; and theory/evidence.
Chapter 5 is devoted to the two famous distinctions whose importance was
heavily stressed by Kant: a priori/a posteriori, and analytic/synthetic.
Let us take these distinctions in order, so as to impart some preliminary sense
of how they can be brought to bear on matters that interest the contemporary
philosopher.
4.1 The appearance/reality distinction
The appearance/reality distinction is motivated by (i) perceptual illusions, and (ii)
disagreements arising from limitation of point of view, or unusual conditions.
Let us consider perceptual illusions ﬁrst. There is the well-known and widely
experienced illusion of sticks looking bent when half-submerged in water. Our
pre-historic ancestors almost certainly knew about that illusion, and that it was
indeed illusory. More recently, cognitive psychology has given us the Müller-Lyer
illusion. The upper horizontal line in the following diagram looks longer than the
lower one, but in fact it is exactly as long:
Now let us consider disagreements arising from limitation of point of view, or
unusual conditions. You and I see different aspects of the same scene: was that
object obliquely glimpsed really square, or was it just a rhombus? was that object
presented almost on edge really circular, or just elliptical? is that object really
yellow, or is it just this sodium lighting making it look that way?
In the case of disruptive illusions, or perceptual circumstances known to be
compromised, the reasonably reﬂective observer is all too keenly aware of the
gap between appearance and reality. One would be preaching to the choir to
stress it to him. But what about when the gap is there, but escapes the observer’s
notice? The need to be mindful of the appearance/reality distinction, for the fully
reﬂective thinker, never goes on vacation.
Thus a certain kind of philosopher (an extreme skeptic, or irrealist) may draw
to the attention of a moral agent who is happily reconciled to the duties and

42
The Nature of Philosophy
obligations of her moral code the disquieting (or potentially liberating?) thought
that perhaps she is not really under any of those obligations, or beholden to
discharge those duties, after all. Perhaps the appearance, to the ‘moral intellect’,
of the bindingness of those moral norms is purely ﬁctitious. Perhaps there are no
moral facts at all. That would be a gap between appearance and reality, if ever there
was one. Unprompted by any intimations of illusion, or of occupying a severely
limiting vantage point, the thinker is confronted by a possibility that had never
even occurred to her before: that her whole way of ‘taking the world’ – here,
its moral dimension – is, as it were, founded upon a global illusion. This kind of
‘irrealism’ can be radically unsettling. The suggestion is that all appearance is
mere, and that there is no underlying reality of the kind she thought she had
been perceiving, or attuned to.
Whether or not we wish to side with any irrealist by entertaining such radical
misgivings, we nevertheless have to acknowledge that our senses can give us the
mistaken impression that things are thus-and-so. Appearances can be misleading.
Perceptual judgments – those judgments that are most sensitively attuned to
the sensory data – can be in error. We learn, however, to correct the mistaken
deliverances of one sensory modality, such as vision, when it is prone to error,
by attending to another sensory modality, such as touch. This stratagem will
work, for example, with the illusion of bent sticks in water. The stick might
look bent, but it certainly does not feel bent. We also learn to correct for the
limitations of our point of view. This includes distance from the perceived
object(s), angle or color of lighting, spatial orientation, employment of extra
senses, etc. When we get different ‘takes’ on a situation in this way, and attend
to all the different kinds of sensory information that they might afford us, and
employ methods of measurement and other more objective criteria, we are able
to form cognitive representations of how things actually are, as opposed to how
they might misleadingly, ‘at ﬁrst glance’ as it were, appear to be.
But that is not all there is to the appearance/reality distinction. Thus far, it
seems, the prospect is held out of attaining a correct representation of how things
are by simply acquiring a richer range of sensory impressions, and processing them
more carefully. But surely, the naïve thought might go, getting a proper grip on
reality involves more than just piling up perceptions, in the hope that errors
will largely cancel one another out, and a consensus across sensory channels
will emerge? Surely we need to get a deeper grip on how things really are – in
themselves, as it were? Surely we should be able to do so quite independently of
how things might appear to us, or indeed to any other kind of rational agent that
is able to perceive the world in some fashion, and represent it in thought?
This is a yearning for the ‘real’ as something more than just a superposition and
integration of sensory impressions from the different sensory modalities. This is
a longing to be able to grasp, intellectually, how things are in themselves, quite
independently of how they might appear to be to any observers. It was a major
feature of Kant’s critical philosophy that he argued that this is an unrequitable
yearning or longing, and one that is deeply irrational. The appearance/reality
distinction is important. It needs to be drawn. But in drawing the distinction

Important Concepts and Distinctions
43
we do not need to resort to the philosophical extravagance of postulating things
in themselves whose true nature cannot be revealed by perception augmented by
explanatory hypotheses based thereon.
4.2 The mind/body distinction
We are aware of our own bodies in two importantly different ways.
The ﬁrst way is the ‘merely mechanical’. We realize that our bodies are physical
objects, subject to the laws of energy and motion in the inanimate world. We are
most acutely aware of this when we are at the mercy of physical forces that we
cannot resist – tumbled by crashing waves in rough surf; falling out of a tree;
losing one’s footing on a steep slope ...
The second way, however, is that our bodies will, within certain limits, ‘do
our bidding’. We can struggle to surface from the undertow; grab at branches
as we fall; spreadeagle ourselves to exert friction on the screed ...In trying to
move our own bodies, we are aware of our own exertion of will (as well as of our
spontaneous reﬂexes). We realize we do things for good reasons, such as avoiding
injury and death. We are mindful of the extent to which we can will our own
movements – movements, however, that are possible only within the constraints
of the physical laws that govern our anatomies, and all other bodies, animate or
inanimate. These laws we cannot change.
One can be, then, in a state of heightened awareness as a result of immediate
physical dangers. Paradoxically one can be in a state of heightened awareness at
the other extreme – comfortably ensconced in a safe and tranquil retreat, with
one’s eyes closed, not distracted by any extremes of heat or cold, or sounds, smells
or aftertastes. In such circumstances one can become acutely aware of one’s trains
of thoughts, memories, reﬂections; pangs and plans; joys and regrets. One can
engage in abstract contemplation of prime numbers, computable functions and
inﬁnite sets.
Comfortably thus ensconced, one might entertain the conceptual possibility
of zombies – creatures supposedly like us in all observable respects, but strangely
devoid of the kind of inner life we are currently discussing. One might wonder
whether zombies are metaphysically possible (Chalmers (1996) argues that they
are).
At the other extreme, one might entertain the possibility of a locus of
awareness such as we take ourselves, under those congenial circumstances, to
be, that is no more than that – just a locus of awareness, without a body to do its
bidding. Such a locus of awareness would, presumably, spend a great deal of its
time thinking about numbers, functions and sets, since there would be precious
little else it could think about, given that, ex hypothesi, it has no body, hence no
sensory organs or brain, that might have accumulated any memories, suffered any
pangs, executed any plans, experienced any bodily joys, and committed any acts
that it would later regret.
The experience of being conscious curiously presents itself, then, as possible
without having a material body. Such a locus of awareness is what philosophers

44
The Nature of Philosophy
nowadays call a disembodied Cartesian soul. One does not, however, need to
believe in the metaphysical possibility of disembodied Cartesian souls in order to
grasp the important qualitative difference between mind and body. It is enough
to acknowledge a rudimentary ‘pre-reﬂective awareness’ that accompanies any
sensations one enjoys – for these are always experienced as sensations of one’s
own.
We have hinted that we might not really be able to make sense of being
disembodied but conscious beings. And zombies might just be a philosopher’s
fancy – a conceptual possibility, but a metaphysical impossibility. Prescinding
from questions about zombies and disembodied Cartesian souls, however, we can
still sensibly ask ‘What is fundamental to a person’s identity?’ – her ‘stream of
consciousness’, regardless of potential body-hopping; or the identity of her body
itself, regardless of how disease, or injury to, or operations on it might impair
or change her personality, memory, preferences, values, aspirations and chosen
life-projects? What is a person, ultimately – her mind, or her body? Note how
this major problem about personal identity could not even be posed without our
grasping the distinction between mind and body. And, with that distinction
grasped, one can also ask: What is the relationship between a person’s mind and
her body? That is what is known as the ‘mind–body problem’. We devote the
greater part of Part IV to it.
4.3 The objective/subjective distinction
It is difﬁcult to isolate a ﬁxed sense in which philosophers understand the
‘subjective’ and the ‘objective’, even though they are agreed that there is a sharp
contrast between them. This leads to a certain looseness of understanding of the
distinction itself. One has to be careful, in philosophical discussion and debate,
to make clear the exact sense in which one is intending the notions of ‘subjective’
and the ‘objective’ to be understood, in the context at hand.
The objective/subjective distinction is best motivated or illustrated by a few
main independent contrasts that can be intuitively drawn. These contrasts are as
follows:
(i)
The contrast between so-called secondary qualities (such as color) and
primary qualities (such as shape, size and mass).
(ii)
The contrast between an isolated agent’s perspectivally limited, and
perhaps biased, perceptions and opinions; and those beliefs that arise as
the consensus of a group of individuals who are able to communicate with,
hence are able also to criticize, one another.
(iii)
The contrast between rational agents’ subjective assessments of probabil-
ities (often called credences); and the supposedly independent, objective
chances that are thought to be built into the physical world.
(iv) The contrast between, on the one hand, thinking of ethical or moral
qualities as ‘projected’ by the mind onto the world; and, on the other hand,
thinking of them as properties of agents’ characters and actions and of

Important Concepts and Distinctions
45
situations in the world, which can be discovered, represented and reﬂected
in ethical or moral judgments.
(v) The contrast between the ‘ﬁrst-person’ perspective on experience, on the
part of the perceiving subject – how things seem to me, how things feel
to me; and the ‘third-person’ perspective on the world that results from
observers’ shared experience of things outside of themselves.
The ﬁrst contrast (i) we owe to John Locke. He highlighted the intuitive
difference between the shapes and the colors of physical objects. Shapes we
take to be independent of our perceiving them; colors, we realize, depend on
our perceiving them. Science, Locke thought, could address only the problem
of describing the primary qualities of objects, and the laws governing them.
The primary qualities are shape, size, mass and location of physical bodies, in
the case of the science of mechanics. There are also, of course, the forces of
interaction, such as gravitational and electromagnetic forces; but these relational
properties are also primary, or (metaphorically speaking) ‘colorless’. They are
‘there in the world’ independently of any perceiving subjects. Objective truth,
on this view, is to be had only about primary qualities. The rest – all secondary
qualities included – is at best subjective. (Secondary qualities have recently been
re-named within the analytic tradition: they are now called ‘response-dependent
concepts’.)
Another feature of Science, stressed to a greater extent by ﬁgures later than
Locke (and especially by Popper), is its independent and objective testability.
Here is where the second contrast (ii) is important. Scientiﬁc hypotheses, unlike
mere subjective opinions, earn their status as attempts to get at the objective truth
about the world because they can be tested and criticized and possibly even refuted
through the investigations of others.
The third contrast (iii) between subjective and objective is in the modern
theory of probability. There are different accounts of what probabilities are.
At the ‘subjective’ end, they are taken to be degrees of belief (credences)
of rational agents. At the ‘objective’ end, probabilities are thought of as
long-run frequencies, or as determined by certain objective features in the
physical world (such as the uniform composition and geometric symmetries of
a die). Interestingly, despite the apparent gulf between these two conceptions of
probability, they both satisfy the mathematical laws of probability theory due to
Andrey Kolmogorov (1903–87).
The fourth contrast (iv) between subjective and objective underlies the
opposing meta-ethical views of emotivism and projectivism, on the one hand, and
cognitivism and realism, on the other. The issue at stake is whether ethical and
moral judgments are mere expressions of emotion, desire or sentiment, which are
not fact-stating; or are genuine judgments of fact that can be evaluated as true or
false.
The ﬁfth contrast (v) between subjective and objective is the one explored
in greatest depth by the area of Philosophy known as Phenomenology. It has
ramiﬁcations for Metaphysics, Epistemology, and Ethics, as well as for theories of

46
The Nature of Philosophy
personal identity and socio-political relations. Varieties of Phenomenology are
professed by philosophers in the Continental tradition, such as Franz Brentano
(1838–1917), Edmund Husserl (1859–1938), Martin Heidegger (1889–1976),
Jacques Lacan (1901–81), Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–80), Simone de Beauvoir
(1908–86), and Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–61). Vestiges of the phenomeno-
logical way of thinking are arguably to be found even in the epistemologies
of the analytical philosophers Bertrand Russell and Rudolf Carnap, both of
whom began with the sensory data of a perceiving subject as basic or given,
and sought to ‘construct’ the objects of the exernal world out of those data
(exploiting the various similarities and continuities to be descried among the
data). More recently, Thomas Nagel (b. 1937) has advanced an extreme realist
phenomenological thesis: that there is something that it is like to be a bat (say), or
any other creature that senses things and acts within the world. The inner nature
of that ‘being-for-itself’ (as Sartre might have put it) is in principle inaccessible
to us human beings; but, for all that, says Nagel, there is something that it is like
to be a radically different life-form that perceives and acts.
If, after these ﬁve very different examples, the reader still wishes to have
univocal senses for ‘subjective’ and the ‘objective’, and the distinction between
them, it would appear that the best one can offer is something along the following
lines. If one thinks of an axis joining a rational agent to an external world
that contains both other agents and objects of other kinds, the rule of thumb
is that those features that are located at the agent’s end (especially within the
agent’s mind) are subjective; while those located at the other end, ‘in the world’,
are objective. But of course as soon as one takes a naturalizing view of the
agent – regarding her as a complex physical object, interacting with other objects
in a shared world – the dual prospect arises of objectivity about subjectivity, and
subjectivity about objectivity.
4.4 The abstract/concrete distinction
The abstract/concrete distinction is motivated by this prime example: numbers
are abstract; physical objects are concrete. These are the reasons why:
1
Numbers have no causal role; physical objects do.
2
Numbers lie ‘outside’ space-time; physical objects do not.
3
Numbers are not sensed; physical objects are.
4
There are inﬁnitely many numbers, and necessarily so; but there could well
be only ﬁnitely many physical objects.
5
Finally, there are systematic logical differences in the way we learn to talk
about numbers and the way we learn to talk about physical things.
But if numbers are abstract, and knowledge is the result of how our brains are
affected by things in the real world, how can we ever come to know (with
certainty) facts about numbers?

Important Concepts and Distinctions
47
Numbers serve here as a paradigm example of abstract objects. Note that we
did not even specify whether we were thinking of natural, or whole numbers; or
of integers (negative and positive); or of rationals (fractions); or of reals. There
are, of course, yet other mathematical objects, and they are all abstract. Sets, for
example, are abstract, even ones whose members are concrete.
Even outside Mathematics, we have occasion to deal with abstract objects.
In grammar, for example, we distinguish between types and tokens of linguistic
expressions. Tokens are physical things or events: typically, utterances or
inscriptions. But different tokens can be of the same type. And types are abstract
things. For example, if I say that there are two tokens of the word ‘one’ in the
following sentence-token:
One plus one equals two
then I am thinking of the word ‘one’ as an abstract expression-type. If I think of
the type of the sentence just displayed, I realize that it contains two occurrences
of the word-type ‘one’. These distinct (and still abstract) type-occurrences of
the word ‘one’ within the sentence-type become two corresponding and distinct
tokens of that word-type when the sentence-type is tokened. Sentence-types are
sequences of word-types; and sequences of words can of course have repetitions
of words within them. When speaking of types, we call these repetitions
occurrences. When sentence-types (i.e., abstract sequences of word-types) are
tokened, distinct occurrences (of word-types) become distinct tokens (of the
same word-type). The notion of an occurrence ﬁnds application also when
words are construed as sequences of letters. The word-type ‘deed’ contains two
occurrences of the letter ‘d’, and two occurrence of the letter ‘e’. The token
of the word-type that you have just read between the quote marks contains,
correspondingly, two distinct tokens of the letter ‘d’ and two distinct tokens of
the letter ‘e’.
Carefully distinguishing types from tokens, and tokens from occurrences, is
not a captious exercise. It is very important for an understanding of certain major
philosophical positions, such as the type-type- and token-token-identity theories
of the relationship between mind and body. More on these anon.
Some theorists hold that colors are abstract objects. The color red, or
the universal redness, they maintain, is the abstract thing or attribute that
is instantiated by, or ‘partaken in’, all and only red things. This is sup-
posedly the case even though redness inheres only in concrete, observable
objects.
Philosophers tend to agree that we have a reasonably ﬁrm understanding of the
distinction between abstract and concrete. They tend to disagree, however, over
whether there actually are any abstract objects, and, if so, which ones these really
are. A nominalist is someone who denies the existence of any abstract objects,
maintaining that to believe in them is to be in the grip of an intellectual illusion.
We label as a Platonist someone who (especially in Mathematics) believes in the
existence of abstract objects.

48
The Nature of Philosophy
4.5 The descriptive/normative distinction
Think of the word ‘ought’ here as expressing a moral ‘ought’, as in ‘One ought not
to kill innocents’. We are acutely aware that, all too frequently, what is the case
ought not to be the case; and that what was the case ought not to have been the case.
Examples would be otiose for those with reasonably normal moral sensibilities;
and would be useless for those without them. So we shall refrain from the usual
list that ends with the Holocaust.
Put another way:
The deontic operator ‘It ought to be the case that ...’ (O) is non-factive. That
is to say, the inference ‘Op, therefore p’ is invalid, or fallacious.
Contrast this with the factive operators ‘It is known that ...’ (K) and ‘It is
necessary that ...’ (2). The inferences ‘Kp, therefore p’ and ‘2p, therefore p’
are both valid.
Statements of the form Op are normative. In fact, statements of the form Op are
most frequently made when p is not the case – their role being to draw attention
to the latter fact as a source of moral concern or even outrage, and as grounds
for reforming or retributive action. By contrast, the statement p in question,
especially when it is devoid of any operators like O, is a descriptive statement,
possessed of truth-conditions that can be veriﬁed as obtaining, when they do
obtain, by straightforwardly mathematical and empirical investigation – in the
broadest sense, by the natural sciences.
Now, the distinction between the descriptive and the normative is a genuine
distinction only if the grounds for the truth or assertability of normative
statements are not themselves part of the reality that can be investigated by
the natural sciences. The distinction is useful, and worth making, mainly
to a theorist who is not committed to the view that the normative is
‘naturalizable’.
Many theorists of the normative, indeed, think of normative statements as not
making factual claims whose truth (in the best cases) can be discovered by the
usual methods of scientiﬁc investigation. They are non-cognitivists or quasi-realists
or irrealists about the normative. Non-cognitivists think of normative statements
as expressing the preferences or pro-attitudes of the speaker; or evincing certain
emotions on her part. Their leading idea is that what appear to be statements
(of fact) in the case of morals are no such thing; rather, they express or project
a speaker-attitude. Quasi-realists, by contrast, do not go so far. They still take
seriously one’s making of what appear to be moral statements, in an assertoric
mode; but they propose that we should suitably revise our understanding of such
statements’ role in discourse, so as to (i) cordon them off from the genuinely
descriptive statements that science is supposed to deliver, but also (ii) earn us
the right to continue speaking in moral terms, as though we were indeed making
genuine statement in doing so. They seek, as it were, to ‘save the appearances’ of
moral assertions while re-construing them as not about genuinely factual matters.

Important Concepts and Distinctions
49
Irrealists go much further, grabbing the bull by the horns. They say that moral
assertions are uniformly false, for want of a real subject matter.
It is to theorists such as these that Hume appealed (since he was one of them)
when he drew attention, in his famous Treatise on Human Nature (Hume (1738))
to what is now known as the ‘is–ought’ fallacy, or, after Moore (1903), the
‘naturalistic fallacy’. According to Hume and Moore, no conclusion of the form
Op may be validly derived from descriptive premises (no matter how numerous)
of the form ‘It is the case that q1, ..., It is the case that qn’.
The descriptive/normative distinction is sometimes referred to as the
‘fact/value’ distinction. Clearly, the value-theorist who insists on it, and who
believes, with Hume, that all ‘is–ought’ transitions are fallacious, cannot allow
that evaluative statements are statements of fact. For that would undermine the
very framing of the problem highlighted by the ‘is–ought’ fallacy (assuming that
it is indeed a fallacy).
4.6 The empirical/rational distinction
Empirical knowledge depends for its justiﬁcation on the operation of our ﬁve
senses (sight, hearing, touch, taste, smell; possibly also proprioception, and
‘internal’ sensing, such as is involved with pain and nausea). Examples of
propositions known (or believed) on the basis of empirical evidence are:
Grass is green.
All ravens are black.
All emeralds are green.
All metal bars, when heated, expand.
Any two bodies attract each other with a gravitational force.
This lectern is made of wood.
Water is H2O.
She’s feeling queasy.
I have a toothache now.
Rational knowledge is knowledge that can be acquired and justiﬁed without
appealing to sensory evidence. It derives solely from the exercise of reason and
understanding.
A logical example of rational knowledge would be the Law of Non-Contradiction:
It is not the case that both P and not-P.
(For ‘P’ here substitute any proposition you wish.)
Conceptual examples of rational knowledge are:
Every red thing is colored. Nothing can be both red and green simultane-
ously all over. It is possible that there could be a transparent white object,

50
The Nature of Philosophy
even if one does not actually exist. All horses’ tails are animals’ tails. Every
physical object is extended. Every bachelor is an unmarried man. Persons in
pain know they are. I am here now. (A priori true for the author, when
he wrote it down. A priori true for you, dear reader, as you read it for
yourself.)
Arithmetical examples of rational knowledge are:
Zero is the ﬁrst natural number. Every natural number has a successor. No
two distinct natural numbers have the same successor. There is no last
(i.e., greatest) natural number. 2 + 3 = 5.
For those readers unfamiliar with this terminology: the successor of a natural
number n is the natural number that comes immediately after n, i.e., n + 1.
In any account of rational knowledge, the subject of Logic looms large. Logic
is that branch of Philosophy that studies valid argument, or the ‘laws of thought’.
These laws are normative or prescriptive, not descriptive. They tell us how we ought
to reason. Logic is the purest means by which we can generate newer knowledge
from knowledge we already have.
The most basic valid forms of reasoning may be stated as rules of inference,
such as
P
Q
P
if P then Q
F(a)
a = b
Pand Q
Q
F(b)
.
You may think of these rules as templates for truth-preserving transition in
thought downwards (on the page). The ﬁrst rule assures you that if you have
already shown that P is true, and have shown that Q is true, then you may
immediately infer (i.e., make the deductive transition to) their conjunction ‘P
and Q’. The second rule assures you that if you have already shown that P
is true, and have shown that the conditional statement ‘If P then Q’ is true,
then you may immediately infer the conclusion Q. Finally, the third rule is
one we use all the time when reasoning in mathematics with equations: if you
have shown that some object a has the property F, and have shown that a
is identical to b, then you may immediately infer that b has the property F.
Example: from ‘7 is prime’ and ‘7 = 3 + 4’, you may immediately infer ‘3 + 4 is
prime’.
The adverb ‘immediately’ here (in the phrase ‘immediately infer’) is very
signiﬁcant. It means that these rules are utterly primitive, and cannot be derived
from other rules. If you cannot grasp the validity of the rule
P
Q
Pand Q

Important Concepts and Distinctions
51
then you cannot be credited with an understanding of the word ‘and’. If you
cannot grasp the validity of the rule
P
if P then Q
Q
then you cannot be credited with an understanding of the conditional construc-
tion ‘if ...then
’. And if you cannot grasp the validity of the rule
F(a)
a = b
F(b)
then you cannot be credited with an understanding of the logical relation of
identity (represented by ‘=’).
Chains or, more generally, tree-like arrays of (instances of) such basic steps
of inference are called proofs. Logical proofs show what conclusions are logically
implied, or entailed by given assumptions. Proofs establish valid arguments.
Validity turns on logical form; it depends only on the meanings of the logical
constants such as ‘not’, ‘and’, ‘or’, ‘if ...then ...’, ‘some’, ‘all’, ‘is identical to’; and
on the repetitions of non-logical expressions within the sentences concerned. The
logical constants we have mentioned are the ones whose inferential powers are
characterized by the modern system of ﬁrst-order logic.
Logic can also provide proofs of inconsistency of systems of belief that are
inherently contradictory. Our scientiﬁc theories, for example, can be found to
contradict what we observe. For predictions are logically deduced from those
theories taken in combination with statements of initial or boundary conditions.
These predictions may conﬂict with what we observe when we perform an
experiment satisfying the initial conditions. When this happens, we may regard
the scientiﬁc theory as refuted. So Logic plays a crucial role in testing scientiﬁc
theories against the observable evidence. That is why even the most extreme
empiricist has to concede that rational knowledge of ‘relations among ideas’ is
involved in choosing from among competing scientiﬁc theories that have been
constructed on the basis of the empirical data.
Mathematicians use Logic to prove mathematical theorems from mathematical
axioms. The axioms are usually obvious, self-evident, certain. Logical proofs
draw out from the axioms deep,
elegant,
and arresting theorems. This
poses an interesting problem: how can logic produce arresting theorems
from obvious axioms when all its primitive steps are obvious and necessarily
truth-preserving? Many of those theorems subsequently ﬁnd application in the
natural and social sciences. This poses another interesting problem: how can
Mathematics, which is all about abstract objects, be brought to bear on an
external world of concrete objects, in such a way as to enable us to anticipate
their behavior, and perhaps even control it? What explains, in the memo-
rable phrase of Eugene Wigner (1902–95), the ‘unreasonable effectiveness of
mathematics’?

52
The Nature of Philosophy
4.7 The distinctions between the necessary and the true, and
between the false and the impossible
Think of the rectangle below as containing all propositions, or all statements in
one’s language. The usual picture is that it is partitioned into the true and the
false; and that among the former are the necessary propositions, and among the
latter are the impossible ones:
N
T
I
F
The way we explain the difference between the ‘merely’ true and the necessarily
true is by invoking the notion of a possible world, due to Leibniz. Possible worlds
were belatedly exploited by Saul Kripke (b. 1940) in the ﬁrst formal semantics
for formal languages containing symbols representing the notions ‘it is necessary
that ...’ and ‘it is possible that ...’. These are the two main operators in so-called
modal logic. The formal notation 2p represents ‘It is necessary that p’, and the
notation 3p represents ‘It is possible that p’.
‘Mere’ truth is truth in the actual world. Necessary truth, by contrast, is truth
in every possible world. Possible worlds are coherent alternatives to the actual
world, embodying how the contingent facts might otherwise have been. The
explanation of the difference between the ‘merely’ false and the impossible is
exactly the same, but with ‘true’ replaced by ‘false’ throughout.
Here are some examples to help ﬁx ideas.
Necessarily true (N):
Not(P and not P).
[Logical]
2 + 3 = 5.
[Mathematical]
All red things are colored.
[Conceptual]
True but not necessarily so (T ):
Grass is green.
[Empirical]
All metal bars, when heated, expand.
[Empirical]
There are eight planets in our solar system.
[Empirical]

Important Concepts and Distinctions
53
False but not impossible (F):
Grass is purple.
[Empirical]
Some metal bars, when heated, contract.
[Empirical]
There are only seven planets in our solar system.
[Empirical]
Impossible (I):
P and not-P.
[Logical]
2 + 3 = 7.
[Mathematical]
This ball is red all over and green all over.
[Conceptual]
Now, the astute reader will have noticed a threat of circularity in our explanation
above of possible worlds. In our characterization of them, we used the notions
‘coherent’ and ‘contingent’. The former might just be a synonym for ‘possible’,
and the latter means ‘neither necessary nor impossible’. So have we really made
any progress in explaining the concepts of necessity and possibility with the
required level of generality, as opposed to gesturing at the concepts via the
illustrative instances that we have provided?
First, let us relate the two modal concepts to one another. The necessity of a
proposition p may be equated with the impossibility of its negation, not-p:
It is necessary that p if and only if it is not possible that not-p.
Or, in symbols:
2p ↔¬3¬p.
Given that we understand negation (¬), we can focus our clariﬁcatory efforts on
possibility (3). The challenge is to specify senses in which one world is a possible
alternative to another. From our vantage point in the actual world, which
alternative worlds can we countenance as (i) logically or conceptually possible?
(ii) metaphysically possible? (iii) nomologically possible?
Ad (i).
Logical or conceptual possibilities include those that are the
furthest-fetched. In this sense we can regard as possible certain worlds where the
weirdest things might be the case, provided only that no logical or mathematical
contradiction is involved in imagining them. These could include the imaginary
worlds of hallucinating acid-heads.
Ad (ii). More tightly constrained are the metaphysical possibilities. An example
of such a constraint is that no metaphysically possible world W can contain
you as an inhabitant unless W contains also the very same egg and sperm from
whose union you actually resulted in the actual world, and in W you result from
that same union. It is not just a matter of ﬁnding for you, in the other world
W, a Doppelgänger who is passingly similar to you in outward appearance or is

54
The Nature of Philosophy
called by the same name. The identity has to be more thorough than that; it
has to be much more ‘intrinsic’. On the other hand, there are metaphysically
possible worlds W′ in which your parents exist, but did not produce you or your
siblings, even though they produced other children in W′. This is an interesting
metaphysical asymmetry: our parents are essential to us – they are necessary for
our own existence – but not conversely.
The reader might have seen those strange ‘worlds’ depicted in the ingenious
drawings of M. C. Esher. A particularly famous one involves weird convolutions
of ever-ascending but back-looping stairways.
This is a spatially,
hence
metaphysically, impossible world.
Ad (iii). Most tightly constrained of all are the nomological possibilities. As the
adjective suggests (nomos in Greek means law), these are possible worlds in which
the same laws of nature govern what goes on as govern what goes on in the actual
world. An alternative, nomologically possible world might be one where, say,
the Sun happens to have fewer planets than it actually does; or the Milky Way
galaxy happens to contain more habitable planets than it actually does; or the
furniture in your living room has been rearranged. But all these alternative facts
are contemplated as obtaining in a world in which the laws of general relativity
and quantum mechanics (say) still hold.
Recall the following important distinction from Chapter 1, which we shall be
discussing at greater length in Chapter 5. A posteriori truths are ones we can know
only on the basis of sensory experience; by contrast, a priori truths are those that
are knowable without recourse to any sensory experience. (We set aside here any
sensory experience that might be needed in order to acquire grasp of any of the
constituent concepts involved. The point is just that, once those concepts are
mastered, no further sensory experience would be relevant to the determination
of the truth of the a priori proposition involved.)
For a long time, philosophers thought it was obvious that
(i)
all necessary truths are knowable a priori,
and that the following corollary of (i) is also obvious:
(ii)
all truths knowable only a posteriori must be contingent,
i.e., not necessary (and obviously also not impossible).
Many, however, have now been persuaded by some resourceful examples from
Kripke that these two principles are mistaken. Counterexamples to (i) and (ii)
appear below.
Necessarily true (N):
Water is H2O.
[Empirical; knowable only a posteriori]

Important Concepts and Distinctions
55
True but not necessarily so (T ):
The standard meter rod is one meter long.
[Conceptual; knowable a priori]
4.8 The theory/evidence distinction
Our discussion of this distinction has been saved for the very end of this chapter
because of the signiﬁcantly increased demands that §4.8.2 makes on the reader’s
attention. The considerations, however, are laid out as clearly and accessibly as
the intrinsic difﬁculty of the material permits. The slow and careful reader will
be rewarded for patient effort.
The theory/evidence distinction is important for our understanding of how
our systems of knowledge are organized, and how the various items of knowledge
that they contain are justiﬁed. It is important to understand, at the outset,
that evidence for a theory is not necessarily what ‘ultimately justiﬁes’ all the
statements of the theory. We need to distinguish between evidence for a theory,
and any foundational basis that the theory might enjoy. All that is required,
logically, of the evidence for a theory is that the theory should logically imply
the evidence. But it would be the exception rather than the rule that the
evidence would logically imply any theory that explains it. Evidence itself is, in
general terms, comprised of statements that are evidently true to well-positioned
and competent observers (in the empirical case), or are evident upon suitable
intellectual reﬂection (in the mathematical case, or in the area of a priori
normative theorizing).
4.8.1 The empirical case
In the case of empirical knowledge, the evidence should consist of very basic,
observable matters of particular fact, about which one can expect different
observers’ agreement to be reliable. We should be aware of how other statements
not directly included in the evidence are ‘inferred’ from it. Frequently, so-called
inductive inferences will be involved. These are inferences that go beyond the
singular bits of evidence that prompt them (the premises for the inference),
by arriving at conclusions that are logically stronger than the premises, taken
collectively. For this reason such inferences are sometimes called amplifying or
ampliative. An ampliative inference is, by deﬁnition, logically fallacious from the
point of view of deductive logic. But with inductive reasoning about the external
world, matters are different. Such inferences can and often do strike one as
‘sound’, in so far as world is concerned. ‘What does one mean here by “sound"?’,
the reader might ask. Quick answer: the truth of the premises provides some sort
of guarantee that the conclusion is highly likely to be true. Here are some examples
of inductive inferences that are sound in this informal sense:
1
Raven #1 is black; Raven #2 is black; ...; Raven #n is black;
so, all ravens are black.

56
The Nature of Philosophy
2
Emerald #1 is green; Emerald #2 is green; ...; Emerald #n is green;
so, all emeralds are green.
3
Metal bar #1 expanded when heated; Metal bar #2 expanded when heated;
...; Metal bar #n expanded when heated;
so, all metal bars expand when heated.
4
Every otherwise unsupported object of which anyone has let go has dropped
to the ground;
so, every otherwise unsupported object of which anyone lets go drops to the
ground.
5
Every lump of sugar that has been dropped into boiling water has dissolved;
so, every lump of sugar that is dropped into boiling water dissolves.
The conclusions of these inductive inferences are not logically implied by the
immediately preceding data (their premises); rather, the logical implication is
the other way round.
To what extent does the evidence really support, or conﬁrm, or make more
likely, a theory built upon it? Does the theory integrate and explain the evidence?
Does the theory generate new predictions that can be put to evidential or
experimental test? These are questions that are to be raised about any theory
put forward on the basis of the evidence.
The important thing about a good empirical theory that is ‘based’ on a certain
body of observational evidence is that it is not just a summary of the evidence;
logically, it goes beyond the evidence, by implying observation statements that
have yet to be veriﬁed or falsiﬁed. It is a major problem for the articulation
of good scientiﬁc method to explain how theories ought to be constructed on
the basis of given evidence. (Philosophical observation: this is a methodological
‘ought’, not a moral one. Metaphilosophical question: Really? Might not the ﬁrst
kind of ‘ought’, upon deeper analysis, turn out to be a special case of the second
one?)
4.8.2 The mathematical case
The beginner who has had no experience of university-level Pure Mathematics
might wish to skim this subsection, but should not neglect it altogether. It
contains explanations of some terminology that will be used again later.
It is important to consider an a priori case such as Mathematics, when seeking
a fuller understanding of how any theory relates to the possible evidence for it.
Matters are slightly different in the case of mathematical knowledge from
what has just been explained for the case of empirical knowledge. Consider,
as an instructive example, the theory of natural numbers (the familiar ‘whole
numbers’). This theory is what foundationalists call ‘arithmetic’. The natural
numbers form the inﬁnite progression
0,1,2,3,... ad inﬁnitum.

Important Concepts and Distinctions
57
(A progression can also be characterized, more long-windedly, as a discrete linear
ordering in which exactly one element is not immediately preceded by any element.)
We have an inﬁnite supply of ‘particular’ or ‘singular’ facts about these numbers
(the ‘numerical data’, so to speak). A hackneyed example is ‘2 + 2 = 4’. A
less hackneyed one is Kant’s famous ‘7 + 5 = 12’. These two examples concern
addition. But we would wish also to consider multiplication. Particular (true)
statements of the forms ‘n + m = p’ or ‘i × j = k’ comprise what we are here
calling the ‘numerical data’. These are the simple arithmetical truths (the ‘basic
equations’) that one could take to be the direct analogues of observational
statements in the case of empirical knowledge – in spite of the fact that there are
inﬁnitely many of these simple truths. We are going to examine the relationship
between the ‘numerical data’ and the arithmetical theory that seeks to capture all
the truths about the natural numbers, i.e., all the true sentences in the language of
arithmetic, no matter how complex they might be, grammatically. Among such
statements are those of more general but still readily understandable forms, such
as ‘Every number is less than some prime number’.
The notion ‘n is prime’, it is worth pointing out, can be explicitly deﬁned in
terms of the primitive notions we shall be using:
for all m, for all k, if m × k = n, then either m = s0 or k = s0.
In symbols:
∀m∀k(m × k = n →(m = s0 ∨k = s0)).
Likewise, the notion ‘n is less than m’ can be so deﬁned:
for some k, k ̸= 0 and n + k = m.
In symbols:
∃k(¬k = 0 ∧n + k = m).
The standard theory about the natural numbers uses the name 0 and the
successor-function symbol s, to re-designate the inﬁnite progression as
0, s0, ss0, sss0, ... ad inﬁnitum.
To repeat: we are interested in the behavior of these numbers under addition
(+) and multiplication (×). We want to know not only the ‘computational’ facts
(the true equations), but also all the true generalizations about numbers. We have
suggested that we take the basic equations as the data for the theory of arithmetic.
But now we must address the following question:
Can those data form a sufﬁcient foundation for the theory of arithmetic?
The data can be arranged in the following two inﬁnite tables. (Here we revert to
standard decimal notation, for obvious reasons of economy of display.)

58
The Nature of Philosophy
Each table contains, in its i-th row and j-th column, the sum, or product,
respectively, of i and j, in that order. The addition and multiplication tables
contain the basic information about the two operations + and × that the
logician or mathematician would have to express by means of inﬁnitely many
equations:
0 + 0 = 0
0 × 0 = 0
1 + 0 = 1
1 × 0 = 0
0 + 1 = 1
0 × 1 = 0
0 + 2 = 2
0 × 2 = 0
1 + 1 = 2
1 × 1 = 1
2 + 0 = 2
2 × 0 = 0
3 + 0 = 3
3 × 0 = 0
2 + 1 = 3
2 × 1 = 2
1 + 2 = 3
1 × 2 = 2
0 + 3 = 3
0 × 3 = 0
...
...
The result of any (ﬁnite) addition or multiplication problem, of whatever
complexity of nestings of operations, can be worked out by developing each table
just (ﬁnitely) far enough. Answers to these computational problems are given by
equations. The part already on display in the tables above sufﬁces, for example, to
‘verify by look-up’ the equation
(2 + 3) × (1 + 2) = 15
and the equation
2 + ((3 × 1) + 2) = 7.
0
0 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11

Important Concepts and Distinctions
59
Look-up operations, however, fall short of theoretical insight. In particular, they
do not afford any awareness of generalities, such as
for all n, n + 0 = n
(in symbols: ∀nn + 0 = n)
and
for all n, n × 0 = 0
(in symbols: ∀nn × 0 = 0).
From now on, we shall give the full symbolizations immediately after the
sentences in ‘logician’s English’. This will help the logically unversed reader to
acquire a sense of the logical syntax of formal languages.
Standing ‘outside’ the tables, and imagining them rotated about their diagonal
axes from top left to bottom right, we can ‘see’ that the laws of commutativity hold
for the two operations of addition and multiplication:
for all n, for all m, n + m = m + n
∀n∀m n + m = m + n
and
for all n, for all m, n × m = m × n
∀n∀m n × m = m × n.
It is harder, however, to ‘see’ in similar fashion that the laws of associativity hold:
for all n, for all m, for all k, (n + m) + k = n + (m + k)
∀n∀m∀k (n + m) + k = n + (m + k)
and
for all n, for all m, for all k, (n × m) × k = n × (m × k)
∀n∀m∀k (n × m) × k = n × (m × k),
let alone that the law of distributivity holds:
for all n, for all m, for all k, n × (m + k) = (n × m) + (n × k)
∀n∀m∀k n × (m + k) = (n × m) + (n × k).
Here is the basic conundrum for the theorist about numbers. The tables above,
or the inﬁnite lists that spell out their information as basic equations, determine
all the computational (or equational) facts about addition and multiplication on the
natural numbers. So, in an intuitively obvious sense, they should ﬁx also the

60
The Nature of Philosophy
truth-value (True or False) of any statement in the language of arithmetic, no matter
how logically complex that statement might be. But the inﬁnite set of true
basic equations above (the ‘basic computations’) fails to entail any generalities
about numbers. Indeed, not even the set of all true equations entails any
generalities about numbers. As is the case with ordinary scientiﬁc induction,
we confront here the hard logical fact that no amount of evidence in the form of
‘particularities’, not even an inﬁnite amount, can collectively entail a statement of
universally generalized form about the inﬁnite domain of things in question (here: the
natural numbers).
The mathematician is therefore forced to lay down at least some generalities
as ﬁrst principles, to be used as starting points in proofs of generalizations about
the numbers. In a triumph of distillation, Richard Dedekind (1831–1916) and
Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932) between them did two things. First, Dedekind laid
down two axioms (ﬁrst principles) to ﬁx the idea of the progression
0, s0, ss0, sss0, ... ad inﬁnitum.
The axioms in question were
for all n, sn ̸= 0
∀n ¬sn = 0;
and
for all n, for all m, if sn = sm then n = m
∀n∀m(sn = sm →n = m).
These say, respectively, ‘0 is initial’ and ‘The successor relation never branches
backwards’.
Secondly, Peano laid down what are now known as the recursion equations for
addition and multiplication:
Logician’s English:
Fully formal logical notation:
for all n, n + 0 = n
∀n n + 0 = n
for all n, for all m, n + sm = s(m + n)
∀n∀m n + sm = s(m + n)
for all n, n × 0 = 0
∀n n × 0 = 0
for all n, for all m, n × sm = (n × m) + n.
∀n∀m n × sm = (n × m) + n.
All by themselves, the recursion equations logically imply every true equation of
arithmetic. They encapsulate the total content of the addition and multiplication
tables above, as well as all results of their iterated applications. But – and this is a
signiﬁcant ‘but’ – they do not, by themselves, entail the theoretically interesting
generalities mentioned above (commutativity, associativity, distributivity).

Important Concepts and Distinctions
61
In order to capture these and other generalities as logical consequences of our
ﬁrst principles, we need one more ﬁrst principle of overriding importance: the
Principle of Mathematical Induction. The aim behind the postulation of this
principle is to capture the idea that the progression
0, s0, ss0, sss0, ... ad inﬁnitum
contains all the natural numbers. It does this by stipulating that any property P
holds of all numbers provided that P holds of 0, and P holds of the successor of
any number of which it holds:
if (P0 and for all n, if Pn then Psn), then for all m, Pm
(P0 ∧∀n(Pn →Psn)) →∀mPm.
Here, now, is the rub. If we want the Principle of Mathematical Induction to be
a single statement, we need to include in it the explicit second-order preﬁx ‘For
all P’:
For all P, if (P0 and for all n, if Pn then Psn), then for all m, Pm
∀P((P0 ∧∀n(Pn →Psn)) →∀mPm).
That, however, makes our language a so-called second-order language, because
it allows one to express generalizations not only about individuals (here, the
numbers) but also about properties of individuals. And the problem with a
second-order language is that it has no complete proof-system (see §1.2.3).
One can seek to avoid that limitation by insisting, instead, on regarding ‘P’ in
if (P0 and for all n, if Pn then Psn), then for all m, Pm
not as a second-order variable with a universal reading, but rather as a schematic
‘placeholder’ for all the inﬁnitely many formulae of the ﬁrst-order language that
could be substituted for those occurrences of ‘P’ in what is now the (ﬁrst-order)
Axiom Scheme of Mathematical Induction. This brings with it the reassurance
that we have a complete proof-system for the ﬁrst-order language we are working
with; and we also know that every important result that mathematicians
have already proved by appeal to Mathematical Induction can have its proof
formalized at ﬁrst order by choosing suitable substituends for ‘P’ in the uses the
proof makes of Mathematical Induction.
The aforementioned Dedekind–Peano axioms, along with the Axiom Scheme
of Mathematical Induction, form what is now known as the theory PA (for
‘Peano Arithmetic’ – Dedekind, sadly, losing thereby the credit he richly
deserved for his own pioneering contributions).
But now we face another, quite extraordinary, problem. It turns out that
there is no unique consistent theory in the ﬁrst-order language of arithmetic that
contains all the true numerical equations. Put another way: within the conﬁnes of
a ﬁrst-order language, anyone who takes the set of true numerical equations as the

62
The Nature of Philosophy
sole ‘data’ that need to be explained (i.e., logically implied) by their theory of
arithmetic has to choose somehow from among inﬁnitely many different theories
when seeking to capture all the truths about numbers. These competing theories,
we repeat, all agree on the true numerical equations.
It turns out, for reasons too deep and technical to broach here, that the
guiding methodological principle governing choices of ever-stronger theoretical
principles for arithmetic has to be to ensure that the standard progression of
numbers captures all the numbers there are. This is remarkably like applying
‘Occam’s Razor’, which in the natural sciences is the admonition not to ‘multiply
entities beyond necessity’. Occam’s Razor, it turns out, applies just as sharply
in the foundations of arithmetic. We have to do everything we can to avoid
being obliged to acknowledge the existence of so-called ‘non-standard’ natural
numbers – those shadowy entities that lie ‘beyond’ all the whole numbers,
in any so-called ‘non-standard model’ for arithmetic. The only way to avoid
commitment to them is by making the right choices of new theoretical principles.
And this process, ironically, takes us way beyond the numerical ‘data’. The
data concern what is. The arithmetical principles we need (beyond instances of
Mathematical Induction) seek to tell us what is not. These principles come from a
much deeper source – from Logic, or from a priori intuitions – than the ‘numerical
evidence’ itself.
Problems
1
You have almost certainly heard the dismissive comment (about a certain set
of beliefs or assertions) that it is ‘just a theory’. Under what conditions would
such a comment actually succeed in being dismissive or critical?
2
Do you think that the alleged ‘naturalistic fallacy’ is an impediment to
bringing any scientiﬁc ﬁndings or hypotheses to bear on the question of how
we ought to conduct ourselves?
3
Is it at all important for the pursuit of science that we resolve the question
whether numbers exist?
4
In light of the distinction between primary and secondary qualities, in what
sense would a ‘science of color (vision)’ be possible?
5
Do any of the distinctions listed and discussed in this chapter strike you as
unclear in principle? insufﬁciently motivated? unlikely to serve any useful
intellectual purpose? a ‘distinction without a difference’? undermined or made
obsolete by more recent scientiﬁc ﬁndings?
6
Choose a simple phenomenon or regularity in nature whose scientiﬁc
explanation you understand. Can you clearly distinguish the respective
contributions, to that explanation, of empirical statements and of mathematical
statements?

5
Kant’s Two Distinctions
The previous chapter covered the following distinctions:
1
appearance/reality
2
mind/body
3
objective/subjective
4
abstract/concrete
5
descriptive/normative
6
empirical knowledge v. rational knowledge
7
necessary/true/false/impossible
8
theory/evidence.
This chapter is devoted to the two famous distinctions whose importance was
heavily stressed by Kant:
1
a priori/a posteriori
2
analytic/synthetic.
5.1 The distinction between a priori and a posteriori knowledge
We have already, in §1.1, provided some brief remarks about this distinction
and about the distinction to be discussed in §5.2 (between analytic and
synthetic truth). The logical, conceptual and arithmetical examples of rationally
knowable truths given above are also ﬁne examples of a priori knowledge.
One can come to appreciate that they are true merely by exercising one’s
reason and understanding. One does not need to undertake any empirical
investigations in order to establish them as true. No observations are needed; no
compilations or analyses of observational data; no experimental set-ups; no ﬁeld
work.
By contrast, the propositions in the earlier list in §4.6, beginning with the
jaded example ‘Grass is green’, are said to be a posteriori: that is, they are knowable
only after taking in the relevant sensory evidence for their truth.

64
The Nature of Philosophy
Many a priori truths of the conceptual kind are generated by the relations of
subordination and superordination of concepts or attributes. Thus:
Human beings are rational animals.
All red things are colored.
One can think of concepts as arranged in a tree-like structure. A portion of the
tree might be:
object
concrete    abstract
composite     simple (fundamental)
animate    inanimate
animal     plant
human being.
Let us be clear about how the indicated relations of subordination are to be
understood. Look, for example, at the subordination of animate to composite. We
are saying that it is a priori that all animate things are composite. If someone
questions whether this is so, the answer is afﬁrmative: given that we already
deploy the concepts animate and composite, as these have been developed in the
appropriate regions of our language and our theorizing, we can, without needing
any further recourse to sensory experience, respond with a conﬁdent ‘Yes’ to the
question ‘Are all animate things composite?’ The only non-composite things are
(whatever turn out to be the absolutely) fundamental particles. So the only way
to falsify the claim that all animate things are composite would be to describe
a possible case, without insult or injury to the concepts involved, of an animate
fundamental particle. But this cannot be done. For suppose the critic proffers α
as a would-be animate fundamental particle. Qua fundamental particle, α would
be governed by the laws of fundamental particle physics. Yet, qua supposedly
animate thing, α would have to behave in ways characteristic of animate things.
It would have to respire; take in nutrients; grow; and potentially reproduce after
its own kind. All that is behavior incompatible with the behavior allowed (on
α’s part) by the laws of fundamental particle physics.
The branch of Philosophy known as ontology is concerned with the fundamen-
tal ‘branchings’ that one would want to make within the ‘tree of being’. It would
be concerned with whether the distinctions involved get at an independent fact
of the matter, or merely reﬂect human interests, be these the accidental results of
our biological make-up or of our social and linguistic conditioning.

Kant’s Two Distinctions
65
It is a matter of controversy whether all the relations of subordination and
superordination represented by the arrows in such a ‘tree of being’ are purely
conceptual, or whether they incorporate empirical ﬁndings. The conceptualist
contends that sensory experience might well be needed in order to acquire a grasp
of the concepts involved in the tree; but that, once the concepts are grasped, or
understood, it is by virtue of that understanding alone – by virtue of the exercise of that
grasp – that one can appreciate that certain subordinations and superordinations
obtain. Thus rational knowledge of the conceptual variety is possible. (For
example, from the tree fragment above: ‘All human beings are animals.’)
5.2 The analytic/synthetic distinction
Logical and conceptual truths are often called analytic. They are supposed to be
true by virtue of their meanings alone. Statements that depend for their truth not
only on their meanings but also on ‘the way the world is’ are called synthetic.
One of the major controversies of post-Kantian philosophy is over the
question:
Are there any synthetic a priori truths?
This is why ‘synthetic’ cannot be equated with ‘empirical’. Kant maintained
there were important synthetic a priori truths, and that among these were the
fundamental principles of natural science (such as the principle of causation:
Every event has a cause) and mathematical truths (both arithmetical and
Euclidean-geometrical). In inventing the analytic–synthetic distinction in the
ﬁrst place, Kant had wanted to show that mathematics was (wholly) synthetic
a priori, arising out of the pure forms of intuition of space and time. (Cf. Kant
(1781), tr. Norman Kemp Smith.) Arithmetic arose out of the pure form of
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Logic
Arithmetic
Geometry
Principle of
Causation
Physical laws,
e.g., gravitation
Observational
truths
Kant’s Boxes

66
The Nature of Philosophy
intuition of time, and Euclidean geometry out of the pure form of intuition of
space. So for Kant the arrangement of truths was as in the diagram just given.
Note that everyone is agreed that the top box on the right, for ‘analytic a
posteriori’, has to be empty.
It is worth devoting some space to tracing the subsequent re-arrangements of
truths among the three boxes of interest that were effected by later philosphers.
That there could be so many forms of disagreement over the classiﬁcation of
truths among the three available boxes speaks to the pervasive hold that the two
distinctions (analytic/synthetic, a priori/a posteriori) have had on the thinking of
almost all of Kant’s successors.
Before embarking on an historical account of the most important classiﬁcatory
vacillations, let us point out that the following assignments of truths to boxes
remained untouched. This enables us to omit, for the time being, further mention
of them.
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Logic
Physical laws,
e.g., gravitation
Observational
truths
Constant
Contents
of Boxes
From now on the reader will not see these particular boldface entries any more,
until they re-enter the philosophical action.
Frege, while agreeing with Kant that geometry was synthetic, nevertheless
sought to argue that arithmetic, on the contrary, was wholly analytic (hence still
a priori), by virtue of reductive deﬁnitions to, and derivations within, pure logic.
(Cf. Frege (1884; reprinted 1961), tr. J. L. Austin.)
The founding father of Logical Positivism, and patron of the Vienna Circle,
Moritz Schlick (1882–1936), agreed with Frege’s views on arithmetic, as
developed further by Russell and Whitehead in Principia Mathematica.
But Schlick dealt with geometry somewhat differently from Frege, given
the success of the axiomatizations of Euclidean and various non-Euclidean
geometries by David Hilbert (1862–1943), and the use of non-Euclidean

Kant’s Two Distinctions
67
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Arithmetic
Geometry
Principle of
Causation
Frege’s Boxes
geometries in the theory of general relativity of Albert Einstein (1879–1955).
Schlick distinguished between pure (or formal) geometry, and applied (or
physical) geometry. On Schlick’s view, the geometry of physical space (that
is, applied geometry) was indeed synthetic, as both Kant and Frege had
maintained; but, moreover, was a posteriori. Pure geometry, by contrast, followed
logically (hence: analytically) from axioms that were conventions, or implicit
deﬁnitions of the concepts involved in them. Thus the a priori status of pure
geometry is compromised by its being analytic. Either way, geometry is not both
synthetic and a priori. (Cf. Schlick (1918); revised edn. of 1925 translated (by
A. E. Blumberg) as General Theory of Knowledge, Open Court, La Salle, 1985.
See especially II.C.38: ‘Is there a Pure Intuition?’, pp. 348–58.)
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Arithmetic
Pure geometry
Applied
geometry
Schlick’s
Boxes

68
The Nature of Philosophy
Moreover, Schlick and others maintained further that the principle of
causation is actually false. This was because they took seriously the quan-
tum mechanical account of the uncaused and random nature of radioactive
decay of fundamental particles. According to quantum mechanics, individual
micro-events are not caused, and are accordingly unpredictable. All that
quantum mechanics allows is that statistical frequencies of such events within
large ensembles can be predicted.
Carnap wrote his Habilitationsschrift under Schlick’s direction in Vienna, after
studying with Frege in Jena. In this work (Carnap (1922)) Carnap took a slightly
different line from Schlick on geometry. For Carnap the topological core of applied
geometry (common to projective, afﬁne, Euclidean and various non-Euclidean
geometries) was a priori. Topology was the only part of the science of space
that was still a transcendental precondition for our being able to think about
things in space at all. Only the metrical part of applied geometry was a posteriori.
The correct choice of axioms for the geometry of physical space, in so far as
the measurement of distances and angles was concerned, could only be made a
posteriori.
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Arithmetic
Pure geometry
Topology of
physical space
Metric
geometry of
physical space
The Early Carnap’s
Boxes
The later Carnap, however, as the main representative of mature Logical
Positivism, eventually abandoned that slight resuscitation of the synthetic a
priori. For the Logical Positivists, natural science took care of the synthetic a
posteriori truths; logicians, mathematicians, and ‘analytical’ philosophers took
care of the analytic a priori truths; and those were all the truths there were.
So mature Logical Positivism reverted to Schlick’s Boxes. We restore here, as
a reminder, the truths in boldface of which we have been making no mention.
Logical Positivism famously evacuated the synthetic a priori. According to Logical

Kant’s Two Distinctions
69
Positivism, there were no synthetic a priori truths at all. If this is so, then the two
distinctions analytic/synthetic and a priori/a posteriori coincide:
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Logic
Arithmetic
Pure geometry
Applied
geometry
Physical laws,
e.g., gravitation
Observational
truths
Logical Positivism’s
Boxes
Later, with Gödel’s proof of the incompleteness of arithmetic (Gödel (1931)),
it was thought that the logicist reduction of arithmetic must fail, and that
arithmetic was after all synthetic (albeit still, of course, a priori):
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Pure geometry
Arithmetic
Applied
geometry
Gödel’s Boxes
Behind the classiﬁcation of arithmetic as synthetic is Gödel’s Platonism. He
regarded arithmetical knowledge as knowledge of facts concerning an abstract
structure, the progression of natural numbers, to which we had intellectual
access by means of a faculty of intuition akin to perception. So our arithmetical
statements were about an aspect of our world, albeit a wholly abstract one.
It should come as no surprise that a distinction that had led to such vacillating
classiﬁcations of these important areas of human knowledge should eventually

70
The Nature of Philosophy
come under attack. After all, if one couldn’t classify major areas of human
knowledge uncontentiously by using the distinction, the distinction itself must
be at best unclear and at worst useless. So, according to Quine (see Quine
(1951)), we should dismantle both distinctions – analytic/synthetic and a
priori/a posteriori – and think at best in terms of the degrees of entrenchment of
our knowledge-claims (or, better: our beliefs) in their collective confrontation
with sensory experience. This essay of Quine’s is one of the most famous and
inﬂuential essays in twentieth-century Analytical Philosophy. It was Hilary
Putnam (b. 1926) who pointed out that Quine’s attack on the analytic/synthetic
distinction was just as much an attack on the a priori/a posteriori distinction. (See
Putnam (1983).) For a retrospect ‘forty years on’, see Quine (1991). Quine’s
alternative picture is as follows.
Sensory experience
– Periphery –
Observation sentences
Standing sentences
Low-level generalizations
Quine’s Bolus
Scientiﬁc hypotheses
Mathematics
Logic
– Core –
Those claims that lay nearer to the core were, for Quine, more immune to
revision than those that lay nearer to the periphery. But, in principle, every
statement was liable to revision, including even laws of logic.
These last two claims can be construed within boxes rather than a bolus if we
like. If the distinctions were still in play, and not jettisoned as groundless, or
hopelessly vague, or nonsensical, we could picture the latest position as follows:
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Logic
Arithmetic
Geometry
Physical laws,
e.g., gravitation
Observational
truths
The Quine–Putnam
Boxes I

Kant’s Two Distinctions
71
One begins to appreciate, however, the futility of maintaining the two
distinctions when the boxes look like that.
One well-known criticism of the Quinean position of radical revisability is that
there still have to be some constraints on how truth-values are to be reassigned
to statements in the light of sensory experience. (See Priest (1979).) And these
constraints must surely belong to Logic, and be a priori. Moreover, the only
explanation for their being a priori is that they are legitimated by the very
meanings of the logical operators involved. Thus they (that is, their sentential
renderings) are also analytic. (Ideally one would wish to treat inferences on a par
with statements, and apply the distinctions in play to inferences as well. But the
weight of convention limits discussion to the status of statements, or sentences,
thereby excluding transitions among sentences.)
The foregoing considerations imply that the boxes, in just the relevant regards,
should really look like this:
a priori
a posteriori
analytic
synthetic
Logic of
Revision
Rest of logic
Arithmetic
Geometry
The Quine–Putnam
Boxes II
Against the background of such a variety of competing classiﬁcations of logic,
arithmetic, and geometry based on the two distinctions, and of Quine’s attack on
the distinctions themselves, it might seem futile:
1. to invoke or rely upon the distinctions, and
2. to offer a classiﬁcation of logical and mathematical knowledge using them.
But the two distinctions just will not die. In late twentieth-century Analytical
Philosophy the notions of analyticity and apriority were vigorously rehabilitated,
in a predictable rearguard action against Quine. Whatever one’s stand on the
two distinctions, as either intelligible or useful, one simply cannot do Philosophy
competently without grasping how the distinctions have been both formulated
and applied.

72
The Nature of Philosophy
Problems
1
Do you think that the analytic/synthetic and a priori/a posteriori distinctions
coincide? Give detailed reasons for your answer.
2
Konrad Lorenz, the famous ethologist, suggested that what is known a priori
by an individual is so by virtue of the fact that, for the individual’s species, the
knowledge in question is a posteriori. So the a priori is what natural selection
has caused to be innate. What do you make of this suggestion? (The original
source is Lorenz (1941).)
3
Does Quine’s ‘Two dogmas of empiricism’ (1951) make a convincing case
against the clarity and value of Kant’s distinction between analytic and
synthetic truths?
4
Do you think that one can distinguish clearly between the sensory experience
required in order to acquire mastery of various concepts or word-meanings,
and the sensory experience (or lack of it) that is required in order to verify a
sentence involving the words in question?
5
A neo-Kantian offers the following argument. ‘Logical truths are true by virtue
of proofs from the empty set of assumptions. Proofs are abstract objects whose
study forms a branch of combinatorial mathematics. So, knowledge of logical
truth is attained only through acquaintance with (quite complicated) abstract
objects. Logical truth cannot, therefore, be analytic. At best it is a priori; but,
like mathematical truth in general, it is synthetic.’ Discuss.
6
Could the analytic/synthetic distinction be drawn in such a way that some
parts of Mathematics count as analytic, while other parts count as synthetic?
7
The realist about truth (see §6.1) maintains that there could be truths that
transcend all possible means of verifying, or coming to know them. A priori
truths are ones that can be known without recourse to sensory experience.
Does this entail that the realist’s veriﬁcation-transcendent truths cannot be
classiﬁed as a priori?

6
Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
Most philosophical debate takes place between representatives of extremely
opposing viewpoints. Through the long history of the discipline, these opposing
positions have become quite well deﬁned, even if somewhat loosely in certain
cases. Part of the interest of contemporary philosophy derives from trying to
state certain positions more clearly, using more recent methods or concepts.
That is why so often, in the writings of contemporary philosophers, one detects
an element of reprise, a hint of variation-on-a-well-known-theme, in the ideas
being put forward. In broad terms, what they are claiming might well have
been anticipated by some ancient, medieval, or early modern philosopher. The
contemporary philosopher can plead, in mitigation, that there is somehow some
new energy or interest in the view, given the more recently created conceptual
materials being used to express it.
The following pairs of polar opposites are examples of conﬂicting philosophical
outlooks/temperaments/world-views. It is difﬁcult to give succinct deﬁnitions of
each of them. They are best explained by giving a short list of their major theses
and preferred methods. That they are substantive positions, however, is borne
out by the fact that when one is confronted with a new topic of philosophical
interest, one can ‘extrapolate’ each of the opposing views so as to make a good
guess about what proponents of each of them would say about the new topic in
question.
Sometimes we have to specify an ‘-ism’ as being about some property or kind of
thing. Examples:
realism about truth;
skepticism about meaning;
individualism about mental content;
Platonism about mathematical entities;
foundationalism about morals;
objectivism about logic;
dualism about mind;
subjectivism about color;
innatism about grammar;
evolutionism about language.

74
The Nature of Philosophy
6.1 Realism v. [Anti-realism, Idealism, Irrealism,
Instrumentalism, Eliminativism, Solipsism]
There is realism about truth; and there are realisms about different kinds of entities.
Realism about truth is the view that propositions are determinately true or
false, independently of us, and whether or not we could ever come to know
their truth-values. Thus truth is thought of as potentially veriﬁcation-transcendent.
‘Coming to know’ is thought of as discovering what the facts are, rather than as
constituting or creating those facts.
Anti-realism about truth is the view that truth is in principle knowable: there
can be no facts of the matter transcending our ability, in principle, to establish
what they are. On this view, truth is epistemically constrained.
Realism (or anti-realism) about truth is often called semantic realism (or
anti-realism).
Then there is realism about different kinds of entities. One can take a realist
view, for example, of the theoretical entities of science: molecules, atoms, protons,
neutrons, electrons, ..., hadrons, leptons. These things (if they exist) would be
too small to see or feel or perceive in any (instrumentally unaided) way. But the
realist claims that they exist, they are real, for all that. Similarly, a realist view
can be taken of the abstract entities that mathematicians seem to be talking about:
numbers (natural; integral; rational; real; complex; ...); points, lines and planes;
functors and categories; sets and classes; groups, rings, ﬁelds, lattices, Boolean
algebras; vector spaces, topological spaces, etc. Realism about mathematical
entities is also called Platonism. The anti-realist about mathematical entities
is called a nominalist. Nominalism, in general, is the view that there are
no abstract entities: they are just convenient ﬁctions, or ﬁgments of our
imagination.
Idealism is the view that the ultimate reality is mental (the contents of our
own minds, or perhaps the contents of all minds); and the so-called ‘external’
world of physical objects is nothing more than some sort of logical construction
out of sensory states. Our minds do not mirror nature; they make it up. The most
extreme form of this already extreme doctrine is solipsism: the view that the only
reality is one’s own mental reality. According to the solipsist, even other minds
are logical constructs out of the contents of one’s own mind.
Irrealism about Xs is the view that there are no independent, objective,
substantive facts about Xs; indeed, Xs might not exist at all. Thus our assertions
about Xs, if we wish to keep making them in order to communicate with one
another and coordinate our social actions, would have to be construed as not
really representing how Xs are. Either these assertions are uniformly in error
(there being no Xs, really); or they are not really assertions at all. If the latter,
then the speech act of apparently ‘asserting’ a claim about Xs would have to be
re-construed as a use of language to do something else. If for X here we take
‘moral value’, then we see that irrealism is very like projectivism, subjectivism,
and emotivism. When one asserts that it is good to help the poor, the irrealist about
moral value might well re-construe this as not really an asssertion about matters

Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
75
of fact, but rather an exhortation: Help the poor!; or an interjection: Helping the
poor? Hurrah!
Instrumentalism is an anti-realist view about theoretical ‘entities’ in science
(the scare quotes here are supplied by the instrumentalist). The instrumentalist
sees no reason to believe in these entities; rather, they are no more than
convenient ﬁctions that we ‘posit’ in order to be able to make predictions
about our observations of medium-sized observable entities – which, for the
instrumentalist, are the only real things there are.
Eliminativism about Xs is the view that there are no Xs, and we should not even
engage in the convenient ﬁction of theorizing as if there were any Xs. Rather, we
should commit ourselves to there being no Xs, eschew all (apparent) reference
to them, and talk about only such things as really exist, and are genuinely
explanatory of our observational data. Eliminativism is the correct attitude about
witches, goblins, elves and fairies. It is the correct attitude to the misguided
scientiﬁc posits of phlogiston and the ether. And some philosphers of mind
(called eliminative materialists) even go so far as to claim that it is the correct
attitude towards mental states such as beliefs and desires. There aren’t really any
such states, they say, in a completed and perfected scientiﬁc account of the world
and everything in it. There are only complicated physical states of the brain and
central nervous system. Unable to cope with the complicated details, they say, we
make do with simplistic, but ultimately false, mentalistic accounts of the causal
springs of human behavior.
6.2 Substantialism v. Deﬂationism about Truth
One of the age-old questions in Philosophy, going back to Plato, is ‘What is
truth?’. There is a kind of opposition among answers to this question that is
not neatly classiﬁable as a contrast between Realism and any of the versions of
Anti-realism discussed in §6.1 – even though the latter contrast is characterized
in terms of divergent views about the nature of truth.
The divergence of view between the Substantialist, on the one hand, and the
Deﬂationist, on the other hand, is of a quite different kind. For the semantic
Realist and the semantic Anti-realist of §6.1 are both Substantialists. Each of
them holds that truth is a substantial property of our thoughts, or of declarative
sentences of our language. They differ only in whether they regard truthmakers,
or states of affairs, or realizations of truth-conditions, or grounds-for-truth, as
always epistemically accessible. For the Realist, substantial truth can consist in
states of affairs that transcend our capacities for veriﬁcation; whereas for the
Anti-realist, a proposition p’s being true consists in there being a proof of p, or
there being a warrant for asserting that p – an intrinsically knowable matter.
The Deﬂationist about truth holds that truth is a very insubstantial notion.
Here we use the modern label ‘Deﬂationist’ for the position most simply and
directly opposed to substantialism about truth. Most Deﬂationists regard their
position as directly descended from the so-called Redundancy Theory of Truth
of Frank Ramsey (1903–30). According to the Deﬂationist, there is nothing

76
The Nature of Philosophy
more to a proposition p’s being true than ... p, or its being the case that p.
The Deﬂationist claims that to assert ‘It is true that p’ is to do no more, and
no less, than to assert that p. Thus the claim ‘It is true that p’ is no more, and
no less, than the claim that p. The talk of truth adds nothing, so the Deﬂationist
maintains; and, in a more extreme mood, some Deﬂationists even conclude that
there cannot therefore be any such property as truth for the truth-operator or
truth-predicate to stand for. If you wish to continue with your talk about truth,
the Deﬂationist says, then you can capture everything there is to know about
it by simply postulating the inﬁnite ﬂock of biconditionals of the form ‘p if and
only if it is true that p’ – one for each sentence p in the language. Now of course
whether p itself can be allowed to contain occurrences of ‘it is true that ...’ is a
deep and difﬁcult question. The reader is referred to Chapter 28 for a discussion
of some of the difﬁculties that arise from allowing languages to contain their own
truth-operators or truth-predicates.
6.3 Descriptivism v. Projectivism
Descriptivism about a given area of discourse – say, morality – is the view that one’s
declarative statements really can succeed in representing things the way they
are. And the way they are is independent of our thus representing them. Things
would be that way even if we were not here to represent them as being that way,
or were here but represented them as being some other way. The opposing view
of projectivism maintains that we are merely projecting our sentiments or attitudes
onto states of affairs that do not genuinely involve any of the projected qualities
or properties.
Thus, the descriptivist will say that a true claim of the form ‘X is morally
good’ registers the genuine possession, by the action X, of the moral property of
goodness. By contrast, the projectivist will say that that ‘property’ of goodness
is chimerical; at best we are projecting our attitude of commendation, thereby
trying to get other people to act in X-like ways. But in no way, according to
the projectivist, are we registering a genuine property of X that inheres in X,
independently of our human moral sensibility.
Similar moves would be made by the descriptivist and the projectivist about
ascriptions of color to physical objects. Indeed, that is why Hume famously
characterized projectivism in general as involving ‘the gilding and staining’ of
things with ‘the colors of our internal sentiments’.
6.4 Transcendentalism v. Positivism
Transcendentalism is a view that comes from the critical philosophy of Immanuel
Kant, according to which the mind makes an essential contribution to the
constitution of what we take to be external reality. Transcendentalism incor-
porates, importantly, the claim that because of the way the mind is structured
and operates, certain kinds of knowledge are available without recourse to any
sensory experience. Moreover, these kinds of knowledge signiﬁcantly constrain

Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
77
the way the world is or can be; it is knowledge going beyond what one could ‘read
off’ from the meanings of the words involved in its expression. Such knowledge is
called synthetic a priori. Here, ‘synthetic’ means ‘not analytic’, i.e., not attainable
simply by analysis of the meanings of the words involved in the expression
of that knowledge. And ‘a priori’ means – as has already been explained in
§1.1 and §5.1 – that the knowledge can be attained without any recourse to
sensory experience. For Kant, both mathematics (i.e., arithmetic and [Euclidean]
geometry) and the metaphysical foundations of science (involving principles of
substance, causation, and reciprocal interaction) were examples of synthetic a
priori knowledge.
Positivism, by contrast, is the view that there simply are no synthetic a priori
truths. No proposition can be true simply because of the way the mind ‘makes the
world have to be’ in order for any knowledge of the world to be possible. Rather,
the only propositions that can be known to be true are either analytic (true by
virtue of the meanings of the words involved in them) or a posteriori (knowable
only on the basis of sensory experience). And analytic truths, remember, are
knowable without recourse to sensory experience, hence are a priori.
6.5 Absolutism v. Relativism
Again, moral values provide a good illustration for this pair of polar opposites.
The moral absolutist claims that there is a ﬁxed, independent, culturally invariant,
and eventually attainable, ‘right’ system of morality. This system would provide
a vantage point from which deﬁcient systems could rightly be criticized. This
system is the one we are heading towards when we talk of making ‘moral progress’.
Presumably this system would label as immoral such past or present practices
or social traditions as: human sacriﬁce to appease the gods; incest; forced
child labor; slavery; rape and pillage; genocide; the inﬂiction of pain on, or
killing of, innocents; cannibalism; religious persecution; terrorist assaults on
civilians when doing battle for a political cause; rites of unwilling passage,
such as forced genital mutilation; performance of medical procedures without
the patient’s informed consent; oppression of women; drunk driving; child
pornography; and statutory apartheid for the different racial or ethnic groups
in a multicultural nation, etc. Interestingly, Chrysippus (d. 206 bc) argued for
the permissibility of both incest and cannibalism. More controversial items for
inclusion on the list of immoral practices would be: systems of polygamy; the
use of addictive substances; abortion; suicide; euthanasia; revolutionary violence
against politically oppressive regimes; and capital punishment. But one would
hesitate to go so far as to add adult pornography, prostitution, fervent displays of
religiosity, gambling, punk rock, heavy metal, or body-piercing.
Against this, the moral relativist claims that what counts as a moral code within
any human group at any time and place is a wholly conventional matter. They
could have chosen different moral norms, but happened to choose the ones they
did. Only those within that group are bound by them. But, importantly: there
is, in principle, no external moral vantage point from which one could say that

78
The Nature of Philosophy
one system of norms is inferior to some other. Inter-systematic comparisons are
impossible. Every moral judgment has to be made from within one historically
conditioned (and conventional) system. That system will be but one from
among the many out there. It cannot (without being disagreeably chauvinistic)
provide an absolute vantage point from which competing systems could rightly
be condemned as ‘primitive’ or ‘barbaric’ or ‘evil’ or what have you. Ultimately,
says the relativist, there is no such thing as absolute right or wrong. There are
only historically changing opinions as to what is right or wrong; and there is no
reason to believe that these evolving opinions would ever converge on one ﬁnal,
stable, perfected system on which no further improvements could be made.
6.6 Objectivism v. [Subjectivism/Psychologism]
We shall illustrate this contrast with the topic of logical inference. Objectivism
about logic maintains that certain patterns of inference really are the right ones.
They are objective norms that should govern our thought processes when we
work out predictions of scientiﬁc theories (say), or consequences of sets of
mathematical axioms. An example of such a pattern of inference is Modus
Ponens:
P. If P then Q. Therefore, Q.
In symbols: P
P →Q
Q
.
This pattern will preserve truth from its premisses to its conclusion, whatever
propositions one has in place of P and Q. Many a beginning student of logic,
however, will reason fallaciously with the pattern called Modus Morons (or
‘afﬁrming the consequent’):
P. If Q then P. Therefore Q.
In symbols: P
Q →P
Q
.
Now, what if a majority of people reasoned this silly way? Would that make
Modus Morons a ‘law of thought’, worthy of inclusion in the science known as
Logic? Of course not, replies the objectivist. No amount of incorrect human
thinking can alter how we ought to think.
Psychologism in logic, by contrast, is the view that Logic is (or should
be?) simply the codiﬁcation of the ‘actual’ laws of thought, in the sense of
‘statistically average patterns of actual reasoning’. It also involves the view
that meaning-phenomena have only to do with the mental ideas and images
that people carry in their heads. Psychologism does not admit the existence
of independently graspable senses, or meanings, that could be the common
intellectual property of communicating thinkers. Psychologism, rather, sees all

Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
79
meaning as essentially tinged with mental imagery, which of course could vary
greatly from one thinker to the next, and would make it puzzling how, and that,
thinkers do succeed in communicating objective thoughts to one another.
6.7 Cognitivism (in ethics) v. Emotivism
Cognitivism in ethics is closely connected with descriptivism. It is the view that
moral truths are knowable, by appeal to certain kinds of relevant evidence, and
by the exercise of the right parts of our cognitive equipment and sensibilities. For
the cognitivist, one’s moral convictions are beliefs, which are capable of being
true or false. There are moral facts ‘out there’, and we can correctly register them,
or even come to know them. We discover them. We cannot just make up our
moral rules as we go along, exercising only arbitrary whim or selﬁsh desires. For
in doing so we will in all likelihood be failing to track the moral facts.
Emotivism, by contrast, holds that when we make our moral judgments we
cannot be aiming at any knowable truths, and sometimes hitting them; rather,
we are not expressing truth-apt beliefs at all. When we make moral judgments
we are just registering our emotional reactions to action X or personality trait Y
or policy Z or whatever it is that has evoked that reaction. Emotivism has been
called the ‘Boo-Hurrah’ theory. The proposition Killing the innocent is morally
wrong means, according to the emotivist, no more than:
Killing the innocent? Boo!
The proposition It is morally right to keep your promises means, according to the
emotivist, no more than:
You intend to keep your promises? Hurrah!
6.8 Theism v. [Atheism/Naturalism]
(Mono)theism is the view that God exists. It is the essential kernel common to the
three main religious traditions historically emanating from the ancient cultures
of the Middle East: Judaism, Islam, and Christianity. Each of these traditions
differs only in the ‘extra’ propositions attached to the proposition that God exists.
These extra propositions will concern God’s possession of certain perfections
(omniscience, omnipotence, omnibenevolence); God’s role in the creation of
the universe; God’s being both the source of moral law and the dispenser of
reward or retribution in the afterlife; God’s interventions in human history, etc.
Atheism is the view that there is no God. Students raised in God-fearing
families often need to be reassured that atheists are every bit as likely as followers
of an established religion to be morally principled people. The commonest kind
of atheism is naturalism: the view that everything about the natural world and
human existence within it can be explained in purely naturalistic terms, without
recourse to God as creator, designer, intervener or sustainer.

80
The Nature of Philosophy
In Part III we shall examine all the main arguments for or against the
existence of God. Chapter 17, in particular, addresses the creationist’s case
against naturalistic atheism. It examines the book-length argument provided by
the creationist Philip Johnson, who holds naturalists responsible for the moral
and political decay that he believes afﬂicts the USA.
6.9 Determinism v. Libertarianism
Determinism is the metaphysical thesis that every event taking place at any given
instant of time is ﬁxed, or determined, by earlier events. ‘Event’ is to be construed
broadly, so as to include physical events like volcanic eruptions, psychic events
like falling in love, and political events like the tearing down of the Berlin
Wall, or a declaration of war, or the making of an international treaty. Also
included are human decisions – including any decision to try to refute the thesis
of determinism. So it would seem, at ﬁrst blush, that the determinist denies
the possibility of any exercise of so-called ‘free will’ by human beings. To be
more precise, the determinist maintains that every caused event (including those
directly caused by human ‘choices’ or ‘decisions’ – note the scare quotes here) is
determined by antecedent physical events. Uncaused events (such as the random
radioactive decay of radium atoms) are not determined.
Libertarianism in metaphysics is the prima facie contrary thesis that human
beings are able to make free, unconstrained and unforced choices, especially ones
that will have a signiﬁcant effect on their future lives. These include such choices
as whom to take as a romantic partner; what major to study in college; whether
to attend college at all; what career to embark upon; whom to marry; whether
to have children; whether to write a book attempting to refute determinism,
etc. (Not all metaphysical libertarians are libertarians in the sense of that word
in the political domain. Political libertarians advocate minimal government
regulation or intervention in the lives of citizens. It would not be a contradiction
in terms for a political libertarian to say, in gloomy metaphysical terms, that
it was predetermined by her unhappy childhood at the hands of aggressively
over-attentive parents that she would end up being a political libertarian.)
Uncaused events offer no succor to the person who believes in free will. For
random micro-level sputterings in brain cells are hardly the sort of event that the
libertarian would wish to hold up as evidence that one has freely made up one’s
mind to do something. The libertarian believes – even while conceding that
there might be quantum-mechanically random ﬁrings in brain cells – that human
choices really are free, and that in making them we are the genuine authors of
our own destiny. For the libertarian, we cannot be wholly in the grip of unfolding
physical forces operating independently of our exercises of will. The exercise of
free will cannot be an illusion; we must be making a difference to our own lives
when we freely choose to act one way rather than another.
Compatibilism is the view that physical determinism can be reconciled
with libertarianism. The compatibilist seeks somehow to make sense of the
phenomenology of our free exercise of will, and of its felt importance to the

Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
81
moral evaluation of human actions, while yet subscribing to a thoroughly
‘physical-causal’ account of all the happenings in the universe. In Chapter 25
we examine the debate over free will in greater detail, and commend for
consideration a personal version of compatibilism, based on evolutionary
considerations.
6.10 Rationalism v. Empiricism
In a nutshell: Rationalism is the view that all worthwhile knowledge is produced
solely by the exercise of reason, without recourse to sensory experience. By
contrast, Empiricism is the view that all knowledge (including even mathematical
knowledge) is the product of reasoning in various ways from the data of sensory
experience. There is no knowledge to be had completely independently of any
sensory experience.
Rationalism faces the challenge of how knowers could come to know both
mundane facts about the observable world, and higher-level regularities within
it, without any recourse to sensory experience. Empiricism, by contrast, faces
the challenge of how to account for our logical and mathematical knowledge,
which appears to be gained in a completely a priori fashion, by means of proofs
employing principles and rules that appear to be intuitively self-evident, and at
times even analytically so.
6.11 Foundationalism v. [Anti-foundationalism/Coherentism]
Consider any region of knowledge: scientiﬁc; mathematical; moral; or theolog-
ical. The foundationalist about that region says that its known propositions can
all be organized in a structure involving logical dependencies on some ultimate
‘immediately or directly’ knowable basis.
For empirical Science, this basis might consist of sensory experience (percep-
tual reports), and the dependencies would be those that could be articulated by
some inductive logic or abductive logic or logic of discovery.
For Mathematics, the basis would consist of axioms (such as Euclid’s axioms
for geometry), and the dependencies would be those of deductive logic, whereby
theorems are derived from the axioms.
For morality, the basis might be some simple principle such as (i) the
Utilitarian claim that the good is to be determined by what maximizes happiness,
and minimizes suffering, for the greatest number; or (ii) the Kantian claim
that the right action is to be determined by asking oneself whether one could
consistently will the maxim describing the action to become a universal law of
human nature. One would then have to account for how the more derivative
moral assessments would be derived, either within Utilitarianism or within
Kantianism. Utilitarianism, certainly, will require ancillary premises of an
empirical kind, about the ways in which various contemplated actions or policies
would actually increase the happiness, or the suffering, of those affected by them.

82
The Nature of Philosophy
By contrast, the anti-foundationalist maintains that there are no privileged
or especially secure starting points upon which we can build our ediﬁce of
knowledge by inferential means. Rather, different propositions can be taken as
immune to doubt, or given, or basic, or provisionally unquestioned, depending
on the purposes at hand. All our knowledge is a logically interwoven fabric of
propositions lending one another mutual support. No proposition ever receives
absolutely preferential treatment, either by virtue of the kind of concepts it
involves, or by virtue of its logical structure. Every proposition is liable to be
revised (disbelieved rather than believed) on the basis of possible future courses
of sensory experience.
6.12 Dualism v. [Monism/Materialism]
In the philosophy of mind, dualism (usually attributed to Descartes) is the
doctrine that minds are distinct entities (or substances) from physical bodies.
Although each mind has its own human body, and each human body its own
mind, they are nevertheless distinct kinds of entities. Minds are in time but not
in space; whereas human bodies are in both time and space. Bodies are extended;
minds are not. Minds can also (according to Descartes) be disembodied; they
can survive the destruction of the body, and might even be immortal. Yet,
somehow, minds interact with the living bodies that they inhabit. Thus physical
inﬂuences on the body, interpreted as sensations, can induce within the mind
various beliefs, desires, fears, hopes, etc. Conversely, mental processes (such as
deliberating about what to do) can induce the body to move in various way.
The ‘twoness’ implicit in the term ‘dualism’ is that of two distinct kinds of
entities: minds and bodies; as well as two distinct kinds of causation: mental and
physical.
Monism, by contrast, is the view that there is only one kind of entity,
broadly speaking: physical bodies. Galaxies, stars, planets, organisms, cells,
chromosomes, genes, codons – these are all very different kinds of physical
entities, but at least they are all just that: physical. They are all subject, ultimately,
to the laws of physics. For the monist, there are no such ‘things’ as minds; there
are only organisms behaving in such complicated ways that we ﬁnd it natural and
compelling to think of them as occupying various mental states and undergoing
various mental processes: sensing, perceiving, believing, desiring, intending,
deciding, acting ...
This is monism about things. They are all physical things. But some physical
things – these organisms – can be thought of as having mental attributes. And,
if we do not think that these attributes are deﬁnable in physical terms, then
we might be drawn to what is called attribute-dualism, even while holding
entity-monism. Attribute-dualism is the view that physical things, while being
the only kind of things there are, can nevertheless possess radically different,
mutually irreducible, kinds of attributes (or properties). First, there are the things’
physical properties, whose distribution across matter in space and time is the
subject of the physical sciences. Secondly, there are (on the part of at least some

Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
83
of those things) their mental properties, whose possession by organisms would be
the subject of an independent, irreducible science of psychology.
It is this way of looking at the relationship between the physical and the
mental that allows one to insist that the level of psychological explanation is
autonomous. It serves purposes and achieves explanatory insights that cannot be
replicated within the conﬁnes of a purely physicalistic theory.
Another way of putting this is to say that the psychological theory cannot be
reduced to the physical theory. In due course we shall go into the question of
reductionism in greater detail. We shall see that there is theoretical room for
one to agree that the physical facts ‘ﬁx’ what the mental facts might be, but
that nevertheless the theory of the mental facts cannot be reduced to any theory
about the physical facts. This ‘ﬁxing’ of one level of facts by another level of facts
is called supervenience – for more on which, see §6.13 and §14.2.
6.13 Reductionism v. Anti-reductionism
The attribute dualism described in §6.12 is a species of anti-reductionism
(concerning mental attributes).
Reductionism (concerning mental attributes), by contrast, is the view that
all mentalistic properties (such as ‘x has a toothache’, ‘x believes that snow
is white’, ‘x wants blue skies’, etc.) can be reduced to, or expressed in,
purely physical terms: ‘x’s brain (and nervous system) is in such-and-such a
neurochemical/electro-physiological state’.
Reductionism can be assessed by two criteria, one more demanding than the
other. The less demanding question to ask is this:
Would it be possible, in principle, to reduce the higher-level theory to the
lower-level theory?
In posing this question, it is very important to understand how the qualiﬁer ‘in
principle’ governs our considerations. It means that any prospect of reduction
on offer from the reductionist need be no more than logically and conceptually
possible. That reductionism is possible in this weak sense has been maintained by
certain foundationalists and methodologists apprised of the deep and intriguing
implications of a result in mathematical logic known to its practitioners as ‘Beth’s
Deﬁnability Theorem’. We cannot go into these implications at this stage, but
shall reserve that important discussion for §14.2.1.
A permissible case for reduction in the weaker sense under consideration
here could be made even if the ‘reducing deﬁnitions’ and the resulting ‘reduced
sentences’ standing in for higher-level sentences of manageable length were
super-exponentially longer than their higher-level counterparts. They might
need, say, as many symbols as there are fundamental particles in the universe. Just
as Russell once tartly remarked that our human inability to complete an inﬁnite
task is a ‘merely medical’ impossibility, so too could we offer here the observation
that reductions of this kind would be ‘merely cosmic’ impossibilities. And it would

84
The Nature of Philosophy
be the kind of impossibility which, by the rules of this particular game – adjudicating
answers to the question posed – one is allowed to ignore.
This is a much easier standard to meet than the one implicit in the more
demanding question:
Would it be practically possible, or feasible, to reduce the higher-level theory to
the lower-level theory?
The reductionist who proposes an afﬁrmative answer to this question is, by the
prevailing consensus, both overly ambitious and highly implausible. No one
knows remotely how one might carry out a full theoretical reduction both feasibly
and in detail, in the case of mental states and brain states.
Some reductionists might take their inspiration from the mathematical case,
where we have a successful paradigm of reduction. Every mathematical theory,
about any kind of mathematical structure, can be reduced to purely set-theoretic
terms. One can deﬁne one’s chosen mathematical structure as a complicated kind
of set, and, using that deﬁnition, derive as theorems of set theory all the axioms
(or, more accurately, their translations into the language of set theory) of the
mathematical theory in question.
Reductionism (of the mental to the physical) is not at all like the reduction
of, say, number theory to set theory. There are no clean deﬁnitions of mental
states in terms of physical states; and the physical theory is nowhere near being
formulated as deﬁnitively as set theory is today. Hence there is no immediate
prospect of ever deriving principles of psychology, via still-to-be-formulated
deﬁnitions of mental states in terms of physical states, from the basic principles
of physics (or of chemistry or neurobiology).
Nevertheless, there is an implicit metaphysical article of faith behind the
yearning for reduction that affects some materialists. This is that we somehow
owe our mental states to the physical states of our brains (and nervous systems).
Surely, the thought goes, it is the physical states that somehow ‘ﬁx’ what our
mental states are, rather than the other way round?
Another way of putting this idea is as follows. Imagine that you occupy
mental state M (holding a particular belief, say) by virtue of occupying (on
this occasion, at least) the physical state P. Then: if you were, counterfactually,
not in mental state M, then you would have had to be in some physical state
other than P. The slogan would be: ‘No difference in mental state without a
corresponding difference in physical state’. Another way of putting it would
be: ‘The physical determines the mental’, or ‘The mental depends on the
physical’. This kind of determination or dependency is not causal. It is an acausal,
synchronous covariance. Philosophers have a name for this welcome, if rather
mysterious kind of determination or dependency: supervenience of the mental on
the physical. The mental supervenes on the physical. Literally, from the Latin
roots: ‘comes down (on it) from above’. That is why one speaks metaphorically
of a higher level of facts supervening on a lower level of facts. The physical is also
called the supervenience basis for the mental. (The word ‘basis’ often carries the

Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
85
connotation of being something determinative, located, metaphorically, lower
down.)
The advantage of thinking in terms of supervenience is that one need not go
so far as to claim that reductionism must be true. The physical might determine
the mental (i.e., the mental could supervene on the physical) without it being
the case that our theorizing about the mental is reducible, even if only ‘in
principle’, to our theorizing about the physical. As some philosophers also like
to say: psychology is an autonomous discipline. It is irreducible in principle to any
‘lower-level’ physical theorizing. It uses its own basic concepts that cannot, even
in principle, be deﬁned in physical terms. By means of these mentalistic concepts,
it explains and rationalizes human behavior. It makes human actions intelligible.
It represents human beings as capable of being in various cognitive and appetitive
states, and acting in purposive ways to achieve understandable goals. It represents
us as occupying intentional states: states of mind that are ‘about’ things and events
in the external world. These intentional states, says the supervenience theorist,
will never be reducible to purely physical terms – certainly not reducible in any
feasible way, and possibly even irreducible in principle. States of mind are sui
generis, and indispensable for fully explanatory theorizing about the behavior of
human beings. This is especially the case when the behavior is conduct – that
is, social behavior regulated by norms of morality, the law, institutional rituals,
protocol, and etiquette.
The same broad considerations concerning the relationship between two
‘levels’ of wordly facts arise at other interfaces besides that of neurophysiology
with psychology. For each pair of neighboring levels, the same question of
reducibility (of theorizing at the higher level to theorizing at the lower level) can
be raised, in both the weaker and the stronger forms explained above. Further
examples of such pairs (of levels of fact appropriately describable by the given
disciplines) are: fundamental particle physics, interfacing with chemistry; organic
chemistry, interfacing with molecular biology; individual psychology, interfacing
with sociology/anthropology/economics. We omit mention of many other similar
pairings here; the general idea is clear enough. This theme will be re-visited in
§14.1; and the discussion of reductionism will be resumed in §14.2.
6.14 Innatism v. [Behaviorism/Environmentalism]
Innatism is the view that there are important structures already in the new-born
or infant mind/brain, which do not require sensory experience in order to
be instilled. They are inborn (hard-wired) or at least ‘wet-wared’. Sensory
experience might be required in order to activate or trigger them, and to
stimulate their full development. The triggered growth, however, will be
rapid. It will outpace any developments that would result from simple learning
by an ‘unstructured’ mind/brain. (The philosopher’s favorite phrase for the
unstructured mind/brain is tabula rasa – the Latin for ‘blank slate’.) The various
structures involved tend to be domain-speciﬁc. They enable categorization of
objects, perception of spatio-temporal arrangements and processes, diagnosis

86
The Nature of Philosophy
of causal sequences and interactions, development of linguistic vocabulary and
grammar, etc.
With such rich structure already in place, and making for sophisticated
intellectual processes, it becomes less likely that all that is in the mind/brain
can be revealed in gross bodily behavior – the externally observable movements
of the whole organism. This is where the tension arises with the doctrine of
behaviorism.
According to the behaviorist, one should avoid attributing too much internal,
cognitive structure to the mind/brain. The aim of psychology, or the science
of the mind, is simply to explain the relationship between sensory stimuli and
behavioral responses. The behaviorist couples this ‘stimulus-response’ doctrine
with the methodological principle that one should not posit more entities (or
structures) than are needed in order to generate the explanations that one is
seeking. If the correlations between sensory input and motor output can be
accounted for by postulating more meager structure, then that is well and good.
Thus the behaviorist seeks ﬁrst to model the mind/brain as no more than a
‘general problem-solving device’, a ‘black box’ mediating efﬁciently between
perception and action.
The big question, of course, is whether behaviorism can accomplish its
aims without having to resort to the richer postulations of the innatist. How
should the behaviorist account for, and exploit, the known ‘modularity’ of the
mind/brain? And how should the behaviorist account for the child being able to
learn the rich grammar of a natural language on the basis of relatively meager
amounts of evidence (in the form of utterances heard, and utterances produced
and corrected)? This is known as the innatist’s poverty of stimulus argument
against behaviorism. It is owed to the theoretical linguist Noam Chomsky
(b. 1928).
6.15 Essentialism and Necessitarianism v. Anti-essentialism and
Accidentalism
Essentialism is the view that individual objects have certain properties essentially,
in the sense that if they lacked such properties, they would not be the objects
they are. For example, membership of a natural kind might be essential to
any given organism. Take an individual horse. If it were not a horse, then it
would not be that individual. By contrast, that it was grazing in such-and-such
a ﬁeld at noon on January 1, 2015 is an accidental (non-essential) property of
this horse. It may well be that it was so grazing. But we can make sense of the
thought that it might not have been so grazing. We can keep hold of the very
same horse in thought, as it were, while ringing the changes on those properties
that are not essential to it. Such properties are called accidental properties of the
horse.
An even more exigent natural property that has been suggested (by Saul
Kripke) as essential for the individual horse is that it should have been the result
of the union of exactly the very sperm and the very egg that did, in fact, unite

Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
87
to bring it into existence. Had the sperm or the egg been different, the resulting
creature (although a horse) would not have been that very horse.
Accidentalism simply denies essentialism. On this view there is no reason to
regard any property of any thing as essential to its identity (and existence). Our
ability to think of an individual in counterfactual circumstances, where some of
its properties are imagined as being different than they actually are, is very robust,
according to the accidentalist: we need only preserve some sensible cluster of
properties in order to be able to keep on thinking of the individual thus varied as
one and the the same individual.
6.16 Philosophy as a priori (‘ﬁrst philosophy’) v. Philosophy as
continuous with science and common sense
Earlier, we described Philosophy as a conceptual discipline, implying that it could
be pursued without any regard for empirical facts. This is the conception of ‘ﬁrst
philosophy’: a discipline of thought, involving analysis and clariﬁcation of both
methods and concepts, that would be prior to any scientiﬁc investigations of how
the world happens to be. ‘First philosophy’ held sway until the twentieth century,
when a counter-movement began, with the aim of naturalizing philosophy.
The naturalizing philosopher takes science seriously, and as not in need of
preparatory foundations of the kind that the ‘First philosopher’ thought had
to be provided. Science and Mathematics together serve as our best model
of truthful theorizing; philosophical insights should be attained by integrating
and synthesizing what the various branches of modern science tell us about the
fundamental features of the world, and the place of humankind within it.
The main problem to be faced by any naturalizing philosophy is to provide
an account of the special status of the norms that govern our thinking. Why do
logically correct steps of inference have the necessity and cogency that they do?
How can the naturalizer account for the ‘hardness of the logical must’, and for
Kant’s ‘moral law within me’?
6.17 Individualism v. Communitarianism
Individualism (about meaning) is the view that the facts about what an individual
might mean by his or her words – the conditions that make it the case that this
is meant, as opposed to that – are entirely within the individual’s mind/brain (or,
as one might say, are hide-bound). Only the internal states of the speaker can
contribute to the determination of what the speaker means by any word, phrase
or sentence.
Communitarianism holds, by contrast, that no individual could mean anything
by a sequence of words or gestures or written marks unless there were
other individuals (forming a linguistic community) helping to determine the
linguistic norms in virtue of which any word or gesture or mark could have
its meaning. And even in the case where the speaker is doing something
entirely unprecedented, and relying on having his innovative sounds or marks

88
The Nature of Philosophy
be interpreted as intended to communicate a new meaning in context, we still
require an audience to appreciate these meaningful innovations. In the absence
of any audience, the innovating would-be communicator would not be meaning
anything at all.
6.18 Skepticism and Revisionism v. Quietism
Skepticism comes in many varieties. There is skepticism about divine beings;
about the external world of physical objects; about other minds; about causation;
about abstract objects; and about values, norms and meaning. The skeptic denies
that we really know the reality of the things or properties or relations in question.
Typically this involves making out that the seemings to the contrary are just that:
mere seemings. The ‘knowledge’ that we think we have is not really knowledge at
all. Not only is it not justiﬁed or certain; it is false. Skepticism is a philosophically
valuable provocation: it makes us try to get clear about why we hold the beliefs
that we do about certain kinds of thing, property, or relation. It challenges us
to justify those beliefs. If ever it succeeds, it forces us to re-assess the role, in our
previous thought, of our apparent commitment to whatever has been subjected
to the skeptical challenge.
Quietism is the frame of mind in which one refuses to be disturbed or provoked
by skeptical worries. Its rule of thumb is that what appears, to common sense,
to be in order is in order. At best the quietist will try to diagnose the source
of the skeptic’s worry, and reveal it as somehow wrong-headed or pathological.
The quietist sees the right task of philosophy as that of providing the necessary
therapies to help philosophically confused thinkers get back on an even
keel.
A good rule of thumb is that one has to pick and choose carefully those things
about which one will entertain skepticism, and those things about which one
will be quietist. What appears to common sense to be in order might very well
not be, on closer examination. On the other hand, some skeptical worries might
be ridiculously far-fetched, made up in a ﬁt of philosophical cleverness, and not
worth taking at all seriously. Naturally, the skeptics in question would not agree
with such an assessment; and that is why skeptical debates rage on indeﬁnitely,
once they are launched. Skepticisms never go away.
In Part IV we go to the most famous source, in modern philosophy, for
skepticism about the external world: Descartes. We examine the radically
skeptical case he raised, and the way he sought to resist its conclusion.
6.19 Evolutionism v. Saltationism
The hallmark of evolutionism is its claim that complex structures (such as
the mind/brain, or human languages) have evolved from less complex pre-
cursors.
Each of the precursor stages would have arisen randomly,
and
conferred some advantage on those that possessed it. They would, consequently,
have left more descendants enjoying the (heritable) structures in question.

Important Opposing ‘-Isms’
89
The next round of improvement or further development would then have
been able to build on the previous ones, since these would have become
widespread.
The process of changes over long periods of time and across many generations
can be thought of as ‘incremental’ or ‘gradual’. These metaphors, however, have
to be qualiﬁed in view of the obvious possibility of eras of very rapid change under
strongly directed selection pressures for particularly advantageous innovations.
Also, precursor components of some systems might be assembled for purposes of
their own; and only later, when they suddenly ﬁnd themselves able to interact,
will a new function emerge for the ensemble of those previously independent
components. (This is what evolutionary biologists call ‘exaptation’.) The
ensemble can have features never before selected for; which, once in place, will
be the target of strong selection pressures.
Two challenging areas for the application of such evolutionism are the
development (over thousands of generations) of (i) human language and
(ii) human consciousness.
What might the primitive precursors of today’s natural languages have been?
How might language have acquired its logical and grammatical complexity?
It is tempting to think of human language as having had its evolutionary
origins in the simple gestures or grunts of hominid ancestors. These could
have acquired reliable meanings, and even become stylized and conventional.
But how does one get from a system of ‘atomic’ grunts to a system of
grammatically complex utterances? Surely there is a richly detailed story to
be told, even if (alas) there is, in the nature of things, not much accessible
evidence on which it could be based or tested. (After all, our more tongue-tied
evolutionary ancestors have all died out.) Such, anyway, is the evolutionist’s
supposition.
The famous linguist Noam Chomsky is rather notorious for having insisted
on a conﬂicting saltationist view: that language came onto the evolutionary stage
all in one piece (or all in one go), as a result of some catastrophic mutation
event.
Likewise, the philosopher Colin McGinn (b. 1950) has a saltationist view of
consciousness: that consciousness must have come onto the evolutionary stage
suddenly and all in one go, the way a light gets switched on. But why should it be
so? Why should there not be, as it were, dim precursors of consciousness, all the
way down the phylogenetic order? Little twinges of pain or pleasure, glimmerings
of visible light (via primitive eyes), etc.? Why shouldn’t McGinn’s metaphorical
light switch have been equipped with a rheostat?
Another saltationist about consciousness is the psychologist Julian Jaynes
(1920–97), whose theory is even more radical. Jaynes maintains that our
present-day consciousness, as human agents, of our own beliefs, desires and
willings – a consciousness that ‘unites’ these mental states as states of one
undivided mind – is something that postdates the ancient Greeks. In early Greek
literature, Jaynes claims to ﬁnd evidence for the claim that human beings’ minds
were ‘bicameral’.

90
The Nature of Philosophy
6.20 Mentalism v. Linguisticism (concerning relative priority of
thought and language)
Mentalism is the doctrine that thought can be complete,
complex,
yet
essentially silent – languageless. According to the mentalist, one could entertain
propositions, or hold beliefs, or harbor desires, without having any linguistic
means for articulating them. In acquiring language, one would only be acquiring
a medium for the public communication of what one already had, privately, in
one’s mind.
For the linguisticist, nothing could be further from the truth. Language is
essential to thought. It is only through language, in fact, that we can have
thoughts. There is no thought without talk. Linguisticism has dominated recent
analytical philosophy as a widely held dogma. It is a dogma, however, that
is beginning to crumble at the edges, as we learn more about the richness of
pre-lingistic infants’ conceptual repertoires, and about the richness of social
interactions in species that have only rudimentary systems of communication.
Problem
Choose any one of the distinctions discussed above. Go to a respectable
resource such as the online Standford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, and ﬁnd out the
following:
1
the original source(s), in the literature, of the distinction in question;
2
the most inﬂuential and canonical statements of the opposing ‘-isms’ on each
side of the distinction;
3
the most important objections that have been raised against the same;
4
how each ‘-ism’ responds to the objections in question;
5
whether you yourself have your mind made up as to which of the ‘-isms’ you
favor.
Note that this is a question template with twenty instances.

Part II
Philosophy and Method

Thispageintentionallyleftblank

7
What is Logic?
Logic is the science or art of good reasoning. Informal logic is concerned with
reasoning expressed in ordinary language, with a minimum of symbolism. Formal
logic is a more precise and systematic study of reasoning that employs symbolism
for the purposes of brevity, clarity, generality and abstraction.
7.1 The basics of symbolizing sentences in logical notation
One needs only a modicum of symbolism in order to formalize arguments of
considerable logical complexity, such as are found in Mathematics. Typically
we need formal symbolic analogues of names, and predicates. Predicates come in
various arities – indicating how many names would need to be supplied in order
to form a simple sentence from the predicate in question.
Thus, with a one-place predicate F( ) (symbolizing, say, ‘... is fat’) one need
only supply one name, say j (symbolizing, say, ‘John’) in order to form the
simple sentence F(j) (symbolizing ‘John is fat’). With a two-place predicate L( , )
(symbolizing, say, ‘... loves ...’) one needs to supply two names, say j and m
(symbolizing, say, ‘John’ and ‘Mary’) in order to form the simple sentence L(j,m)
(symbolizing ‘John loves Mary’).
In order to symbolize ‘Someone loves Mary’, one uses a variable-binding
expression called the existential quantiﬁer: ∃xL(x,m). This formal sentence is
rendered in logician’s English as ‘for some x, x loves Mary’. Likewise, ‘Everyone
loves someone’ would be symbolized as ∀x∃yL(x,y); and ‘Someone is loved by
everyone’ by ∃y∀xL(x,y). Here, the universal quantiﬁer ∀x is to be read as ‘for
every x’.
It is easy to see that in order to form these symbolic sentences in a step-by-step
fashion, one needs to build up formulae, containing free occurrences of variables.
Thus the last formal sentence was built up as follows. First, form L(x,y) from the
two-place predicate L and the variables x and y. These two variables are free at
their occurrences in L(x,y). Because x enjoys a free occurrence in L(x,y), one may
append the quantiﬁer preﬁx ∀x, so as to obtain the formula ∀xL(x,y), in which
the occurrences of x are now bound (hence, no longer free), but the occurrence
of y is still free. So one can now append the quantiﬁer preﬁx ∃y so as to obtain
the formula ∃y∀xL(x,y), in which y is likewise bound. The result of the two

94
Philosophy and Method
bindings is that the well-formed formula just formed contains no free occurrences
of variables. And that, for the logician, is what turns it into a formal sentence,
capable of being true or false; and capable of serving as a premise in an argument,
or as a conclusion. Formulae without free variables are called closed formulae, or
sentences; and formulae with at least one free occurrence of a variable are called
open sentences.
We aim here to keep symbolism to a minimum. But saving students from being
exposed to logical symbols is a form of cognitive neglect. It dumbs the curriculum
down to a point of intellectual deprivation. Those trying to save Humanities
students from the sheer joy and exhilaration of symbol-mastery are being both
patronizing and discriminatory. But that is a wider issue, to do with the politics
of pedagogy, into which we cannot here be drawn.
7.2 Arguments
In reasoning, we produce arguments. An argument is made up of premises and
a conclusion. The premises are the ‘starting points’ of the argument, and the
conclusion is its ‘endpoint’. The argument seeks to establish its conclusion on
the basis of its premises. Viewed another way, the argument seeks to show
that the premises would, if believed to be true, provide adequate reason to
believe in the truth of the conclusion. So, if one believed, or was willing to
assert, all the premises, then one should believe, or be willing to assert, the
conclusion.
But it is not necessary that one believe all the premises. An argument can
be good even if its premises, taken jointly, constitute a quite incredible story.
Indeed, the whole point of the argument might be to bring out the utter
incredibility of the set of premises involved. The argument might establish an
obviously false conclusion on the basis of those premises, thereby showing that
it would be unwise to believe all the premises. The most extreme case of this
is the form of argument known as reductio ad absurdum, where the conclusion
is a patent contradiction (something of the form ‘P and not-P’; or, just as
bad, a primitive contrariety such as ‘It’s green all over and it’s red all over
(at the same time)’. A reductio-ad-absurdum argument shows that the premises
precipitating the contradiction cannot all be true. This is for the simple reason
that no contradiction or contrariety can be true.
If the premises are true, then the conclusion is true ... that, at least, is what a
good argument would show.
The logician has a special word for ‘good’ when talking about arguments. Good
arguments are said to be valid.
Deﬁnition 1. An argument of the form
Premise no. 1, Premise no. 2, ...; therefore, Conclusion

What is Logic?
95
is valid just in case the following holds: under any interpretation according to
which Premise no. 1, Premise no. 2, ... are all true, the Conclusion is true
also.
This deﬁnition calls for premises and conclusions of argument to be capable
of being true or false. Thus they must be propositions, or statements, or
declarative sentences in some mutually understood language. Such things are called
truth-bearers. Truth-bearers are what can be asserted (or denied).
Truth-bearers also serve as the ‘core’ of other so-called ‘speech acts’, such as
asking a question, issuing an order, or expressing a wish. In the question Is the
door shut?, we have no assertion, but rather a request for information. The request
can be met by making an appropriate assertion: The door is shut or The door is
not shut. Likewise, in the order Shut the door!, we have no assertion, but rather
a contextually sanctioned command that the door be shut. The order can be
obeyed by shutting the door. Then it will be true to say The door is shut. Finally,
in the wish Would that the door were shut!, we have no assertion, but rather an
expression of preference. The wish can be fulﬁlled by shutting the door. Then it
will be true to say The door is shut.
Note how in all these non-assertoric speech acts, the core proposition The
door is shut features essentially in explaining the nature of the act, and the
conditions for its success. There is something primitive in the notion of
assertion, or fact-stating. Truth-bearers are at the heart of all communication,
and are presupposed in all the uses that we make of our language. And Logic
focuses, in the ﬁrst instance, on truth-bearers. In Logic we week to account
for how the truth of certain truth-bearers would guarantee the truth of certain
others.
Now of course, guarantees vary in their strength or reliability. If you want an
absolute guarantee, whereby it is necessary that, if the premises are true then the
conclusion is true also, then you need to engage in deductive logic. If, however,
you will be satisﬁed by a non-absolute, but still pretty reliable guarantee, given
how things in the world tend to behave, then you will be able to engage in
inductive logic.
Let us illustrate this with two examples, one from deductive logic, the
other from inductive logic. Each is a good example of its kind. The logi-
cian’s or methodologist’s aim, in each case, is to explain why they are
good.
Deductive example.
Premise 1: All Armenians are Bolsheviks
Premise 2: All Bolsheviks are Communists
therefore
Conclusion: All Armenians are Communists

96
Philosophy and Method
Inductive example.
Premise 1: Emerald no. 1 is green
Premise 2: Emerald no. 2 is green
...
Premise N: Emerald no. N is green
therefore
Conclusion: All emeralds are green
The ﬁrst argument is deductively valid. The truth of its premises provides an
absolute guarantee for the truth of its conclusion. It is impossible – no matter
even if one were to change the laws of nature, or any of the contingent
facts about our world – for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be
false.
The second argument, about the emeralds, is by contrast not deductively valid;
but it is inductively valid. It is not deductively valid because it could possibly be
the case that emerald no. N + 1 turns out not to be green. We know, however,
especially when N is large enough, that for a ‘natural kind’ of things like emeralds
this is highly unlikely. Natural kinds are precisely the sorts of things whose
observable properties (or certain important ones, at least) are reliably projectible,
when possessed by sufﬁciently many members in a sample within the kind, to
all members of the kind in question. Natural science relies on such inductive
reasoning all the time, when arriving at general ‘laws of nature’. Let us re-visit
our earlier deﬁnition of validity of arguments:
An argument of the form
Premise no. 1
Premise no. 2
...
therefore
Conclusion
is valid just in case the following holds: under any interpretation according
to which Premise no. 1, Premise no. 2, ...are all true, the Conclusion is true
also.
We see now that the difference between deductive and inductive logic is
really a difference over how generously (or permissively) to interpret the
word ‘interpretation’ in this deﬁnition. The deductive logician wants to give
‘interpretation’ the widest possible interpretation. She is willing to consider as
admissible interpretations the most bizarre stories or situations, provided only
that we do not change the meanings of the logical words like ‘all’, ‘some’, ‘not’,
‘and’, ‘or’, ‘only if’, etc. Provided that one keeps those words’ interpretations
ﬁxed, one is at liberty to re-interpret all the other, non-logical, words as one

What is Logic?
97
pleases. In the example above, these would be the words ‘Armenian’, ‘Bolshevik’
and ‘Communist’. Thus the deductive logician’s notion of validity ends up being
very demanding: truth must be preserved from premises to conclusion in a
vast host of situations, covering normal, not-so-normal and even downright
bizarre ones.
By contrast, the inductive logician is willing to countenance only those
interpretations that conform to the broad uniformity of nature that is presupposed
by our inductive practices. We believe that the future will be, in certain
important respects, like the past; that the deep regularities in nature hold in
all places and at all times; that like causes produce like effects; that members
of a given natural kind resemble each other in important respects; etc. This is
what is involved in believing in ‘the uniformity of nature’. Now, if we insist that
any admissible interpretation of our language must be one that respects these
uniformities, then (when assessing validity) one will have a much narrower class
of interpretations to consider than is the case in deductive logic. Accordingly,
the notion of inductive validity will be more liberal, or lax: it will be easier
for an argument to be inductively valid than it will be for it to be deductively
valid. For, only a restricted collection of situations or interpretations need
be considered, when asking (in the inductive case) whether the truth of the
premises will secure the truth of the conclusion. If we are considering only
the orderly, uniform worlds of the inductivist, truth will transmit more easily
from premises to conclusion. Nevertheless, there are still many examples of
inductively invalid arguments. And one needs to be on one’s intellectual guard
against them.
Both kinds of logician – deductive and inductive – are concerned to
characterize the good arguments (by their standards) and the bad arguments (by
those same standards). It is just that their standards differ. It is much harder
for an argument to be deductively valid. There is, however, a compensation:
it is much easier to characterize which arguments are deductively valid. This is
because every argument that is deductively valid is inductively valid, but not
vice versa. It is easier to generate the class of deductively valid arguments than
it is to generate the class of inductively valid ones. In fact, some philosophers
have expressed pessimism over the prospect of ever formulating an ‘inductive
logic’. So far, no such thing has been produced. All we have are various
rag-bag methods for inductive reasoning in speciﬁc kinds of situation. We do
not yet have a ‘canon of induction’ that would apply uniformly in all cases
of (inductive) reasoning presupposing only the most general uniformity of
nature.
So, although most of our everyday reasoning aspires only to be inductively
valid rather than deductively valid, we have the irony that, when we study Logic,
we tend to concentrate on deductive validity rather than inductive validity. This
is for the simple reason that deductive validity is better understood, and more
successfully systematized, than inductive validity.
Indeed, deductive validity has become a science of logico-linguistic form,
which is why deductive logic is sometimes also called formal logic.

98
Philosophy and Method
The most important property of a deductive argument, as already stressed, is
its validity:
P1,...,Pn
Q
is valid
if and only if
whenever P1,...,Pn are all true, Q is true also.
That is, deductively valid arguments are truth-preserving.
From now on, unless indicated otherwise, we shall mean deductive argument
by ‘argument’, and deductively valid by ‘valid’.
The best arguments, of course, are ones with true premises validly implying
true conclusions. But note that a valid argument may have false premises and a
true conclusion:
Dubya is a liberal
Either Dubya is a liberal or snow is white ;
and it may have false premises and a false conclusion:
Reagan is immortal
Someone is immortal .
What a valid argument cannot do, however, is take one from true premises to a
false conclusion. Hence their importance.
Valid arguments, ideally, can be proved; invalid arguments can be counterex-
empliﬁed.
A proof is a piece of discourse from which one can read off the premises and
the conclusion, and in which steps are arranged from the main premises to
intermediate conclusions, which then become intermediate premises for further
steps, which ...ﬁnally terminate with the main conclusion. Each step should be
convincing, obviously valid, easy to understand. An example of such a step would
be so-called ‘and-Introduction’:
P, Q; therefore (P and Q). In symbols: P
Q
P ∧Q .
Anyone who doubts the validity of this step does not understand the logical
connective ‘and’.
A counterexample to an invalid argument is a ‘possible world’ (an imaginary
or actual state of affairs) in which its premises are true but its conclusion is
false.

What is Logic?
99
Example 1. The invalid argument
Someone is fat
Someone is bald
Someone is fat and bald
has many counterexamples, one of them being:
John – fat but not bald;
Mary – bald but not fat;
John distinct from Mary;
John and Mary the only two individuals in existence.
Example 2. The invalid argument
Someone loves everyone else
People who are loved by anyone love themselves
Someone loves him/herself
has only one counterexample: a world in which there is only one person, who
does not love him/herself. In this world the premises are (vacuously) true – for
what counterinstances could there be? – and the conclusion is obviously false.
The argument would become valid if we supply an extra premise such as ‘There are
at least two people’ or ‘Someone loves someone’. The ﬁrst of these has the advantage
that, when adding it, one still needs both the original premises to secure the conclusion.
(Italics added here for later reference.)
Arguments that are invalid as strictly stated, but which become valid by adding
explicitly an extra premise that is tacitly assumed (and which is most likely true,
in the context of the discussion) are called enthymemes.
Sometimes arguments have as their conclusions a contradiction, or an
absurdity. Such arguments are to the effect that their premises form an
inconsistent set. They cannot all be true together in any possible world. An
argument of this kind is also called a reductio ad absurdum. They are used to
show that an opponent’s position is internally contradictory, or incoherent. The
solution to Problem (3) below is an example in point, in that it brings out the
(possibly unexpected) incoherence of a set of four principles concerning truth
and knowledge.
If an argument is valid, then its premises together with the negation of its
conclusion form an inconsistent set. Conversely (for the classical logician) if the
premises together with the negation of the conclusion of an argument form an
inconsistent set then the argument is valid. This conceptual fact is exploited by
the so-called ‘resolution-method theorem-provers’ in computing science.
Most ‘arguments’ in everyday life fall far short of the ideal of logical validity.
They do not state all the premises that would be needed in order to secure the

100
Philosophy and Method
conclusion; they are almost all enthymemes. But the worst ones involve various
more serious fallacies, or use cheap debating tricks – as we saw in §3.11.
7.3 Philosophical notions employed in the study of logic
and language
The study of valid argumentation leads one to consider many other notions
of philosophical importance. They are directly relevant to our understanding
of the structure and content of our linguistic expressions. Arguments consist of
premises and conclusions. These are sentences (or statements, or propositions, or
assertions) that have meaning and truth-conditions. They may involve reference
to objects, by means of names, such as ‘John’, and deﬁnite descriptions, such as
‘the integral of the real-valued function y = 2x from x = 3 to x = 5’ – in the
mathematician’s usual symbolism,
 5
3
2xdx.
We predicate properties of the things to which we refer: John is bald; 7 is prime.
Our declarative statements may also involve generalization or quantiﬁcation:
existential, as in ‘There are milestones on the road to Dover’, or universal, as
in ‘All prime numbers are odd’. They may involve identity: the Morning Star
is the Evening Star; the logarithmic base e raised to the exponent πi, plus 1, is
equal to (that is, is identical to) 0:
eπi + 1 = 0.
These notions are involved in the ﬁrst rudimentary investigations of the
logico-linguistic skeleton of our language. All the bones and joints are reasonably
well understood now, and a course in ﬁrst-order logic with identity is the
standard way to learn what philosophers, logicians, and mathematicians have
clariﬁed and systematised in this connection. For an introduction to the system
of ﬁrst-order logic with identity, and an exposition of the major completeness
and incompleteness results for logic and arithmetic, see Tennant (1978).
Full-blown natural languages such as English harbor many sources of difﬁculty
for logicians, however, and the closer study of these has given rise to areas of
philosophy known as philosophical logic, philosophy of logic, and philosophy of
language. A few words are in order about the most important problematic features
of natural language, from the logician’s pont of view.
7.3.1 Token-reﬂexiveness
Words such as ‘I’, ‘you’, ‘here’, ‘now’ depend on the token of the sentence used for
their reference in context. (A token is an utterance or an inscription.) Natural
language owes its ﬂexibility and utility largely to these ‘all-purpose’ words that

What is Logic?
101
require the context to be speciﬁed before one understands the full import of what
is being said by means of them. See Barwise and Perry (1984).
7.3.2 Semantic closure
A language is semantically closed if it is able to ‘talk about itself’ and about
the relation between itself and the world. Semantic closure gives rise to the
well-known semantic paradoxes, of which perhaps the most famous is the Liar
Paradox: ‘This sentence is false’. If it is true, it is false; if it is false, it is true.
The workings of semantically closed languages are very mysterious, and modern
logicians are developing some very complicated and sophisticated theories to deal
with them. For a good exposition of the paradoxes, see the titular essay in Quine
(1966), and Sainsbury (1987).
7.3.3 Vacuous terms
Names like ‘Pegasus’ and descriptive phrases like ‘The King of France’ do not
denote. Frege thought they represented a logical imperfection; logically perfect
languages, according to Frege, would not contain vacuous terms like these. All
terms would denote. But modern logicians have given up this overly restrictive
view. Logics that recognise such possibilities for the singular terms of the
language are called free logics. They are free of the implicit default assumption,
in standard logic, that every singular term of the language denotes.
Special care is needed when reasoning with free logics. For an account of the
ways in which the standard rules of deductive logic need to be qualiﬁed and
amended in order to obtain free logic, see Tennant (1978), Chapter 7. These
amendments involve judicious use of so-called existential presuppositions, which
are sentences of the form ‘t exists’, where t is a singular term. In symbols: ∃xx=t.
Sentences of this form are commonly abbreviated to ∃!t.
Examples of sentences enjoying this logical form would be ‘Pegasus exists’
(false); ‘Santa Claus exists’ (false); ‘The King of France exists’ (false – see Russell
(1905); this is the famous example used by Russell when setting out his theory
of deﬁnite descriptions); ‘0 exists’ (true); ‘for all numbers m and n, their product
m.n exists’ (true); ‘{x|¬x=x} exists’ (true); ‘{x|x=x} exists’ (false – see the brief
explanation of the fundamentals of set theory given in §28.4.3 and §28.4.5); ‘for
all numbers m and n, m
n exists’ (false, because this quotient is undeﬁned for n = 0);
‘God exists’ (jury out – see Part III).
7.3.4 Vagueness and ambiguity
Predicates like ‘bald’ and ‘rich’ are vague, in that they have borderline cases,
for which it is not determinate whether the predicate applies. Sentences can be
ambiguous (that is, have more than one meaning) because of ambiguous words or
ambiguous structure. Examples are ‘He was hiding near the bank’ and ‘Visiting
relatives can be boring’.

102
Philosophy and Method
The idea behind ﬁnding the logical form of a sentence (in a given use) is to
specify exactly how it is constructed from its constituent words, so that there is
no problem of structural ambiguity. Word ambiguity has simply to be legislated
out of a logically possible language. Vague predicates present another problem,
put into focus by the Sorites Paradox: if one has a heap of sand, it remains a
heap upon removal of one grain of sand. By iteration of this principle, ‘it’ is still a
heap when every grain has been removed. Do we have to surrender transitivity of
deduction if the language contains vague predicates? (The transitivity principle
is that if A implies B, and B implies C, then A implies C.) For an exploration of
the issues raised by vagueness, see Keefe (2000).
7.3.5 Referential opacity
The Principle of Substitutivity of Identicals is the following rule of inference:
From P(a) and a = b, one may infer P(b).
Symbolically:
P(a)
a = b
P(b)
.
Example:
7 is prime; 7 = 5 + 2; therefore, 5 + 2 is prime.
Another example:
The Morning Star has nitrogen in its atmosphere; the Morning Star is the
Evening Star; therefore, the Evening Star has nitrogen in its atmosphere.
The Principle of Substitutivity of Identicals runs into difﬁculties, however, in
contexts of propositional attitude (such as belief) and in contexts of modality
(such as necessity). For example, are the following two inferences valid?:
The Propositional-Attitude Inference:
Hegel believed that 8 is greater than 7; the number of planets is 8; therefore,
Hegel believed that the number of planets is greater than 7.
(For the record, Hegel believed there were exactly seven planets.)
The Modal Inference:
It is necessary that 8 is greater than 7; 8 is the number of planets; therefore,
it is necessary that the number of planets is greater than 7.
(It is a logical possibility that there might have been only seven planets.)

What is Logic?
103
Speakers of English with ﬁne-tuned grammatical sensibilities will object to the
foregoing rendering of the modal inference: more precisely, to the rendering of
its conclusion ‘It is necessary that the number of planets is greater than 7’. They
will insist that the conclusion ought rather to be expressed in one or other of the
following two ways:
1
It is necessary that the number of planets be greater than 7.
2
The number of planets is necessarily greater than 7.
These two forms of English sentence are more discerning. The ﬁrst uses the
subjunctive mood; the second makes the modal operator adverbial. They serve
to mark an important contrast: that between necessity de dicto and necessity de
re. ‘De dicto’ means about the proposition (the thing said). The dictum in question is
the proposition
The number of planets is greater than 7,
which can be symbolized as
#xP(x) > 7.
‘De re’ means about the thing (that is under discussion). The thing in question
here is that number which, in the actual world, is the number of planets. That
happens to be the number 8 (now that the International Astronomers’ Union has
demoted Pluto from being a planet). We are dealing with necessity de dicto when
we make the necessity operator dominant, as in the following rather lumpen
form:
It is necessary that (the number of planets is greater than 7),
which we may symbolize as
2(#xP(x) > 7).
We are dealing, by contrast, with necessity de re when we make the singular term
(referring to the number of planets) dominant:
The number of planets is such that it is necessarily greater than 7,
which we can re-write as
The number of planets is such that (it is necessary that (it is greater than 7)).
This we may symbolize as
(#xP(x))y2(y > 7).

104
Philosophy and Method
Here, we are treating singular-term insertion as a logical operation that has scope.
The insertion of a singular term is understood as occurring at a certain stage in the
logico-grammatical construction of a sentence. To illustrate, using the examples
at hand: we can take the predicate
... > 7
and apply the necessity operator to it:
2(... > 7)
and only thereafter insert the term #xP(x) into the gap indicated by the dots. In
order to indicate this, the logician uses a ‘bound variable’ (here, y) once again:
(#xP(x))y2(y > 7).
The singular-term occurrence is now said to have wide scope. The displayed
occurrence of the operator 2 is said to be within the scope of the singular term.
This gives us the de re reading of the (structurally ambiguous) English sentence
‘It is necessary that the number of planets is greater than 7’.
The de dicto reading is obtained by reversing the order of the two construction-
steps just identiﬁed. Start once again with the predicate
... > 7,
but this time insert the term ﬁrst:
(#xP(x))y(y > 7).
Since no other operator intervenes between the term #xP(x) and its insertion
point, this can be simpliﬁed to
#xP(x) > 7.
Then apply the modal operator:
2(#xP(x) > 7).
Now we have the promised formalization that captures the de dicto reading.
The availability of alternative logical forms, for different ‘readings’ of what
might appear to be a single English sentence, is crucial to resolving the
issues surrounding referential opacity. The two symbolic forms above are to be
evaluated differently, because of the different ways they are composed from their
constituent expressions. Let us explain.
In order for the de dicto claim
2(#xP(x) > 7)

What is Logic?
105
to be true, the subordinate sentence #xP(x) > 7 needs to be true not only in the
actual world, but also in every possible world that is an alternative to the actual
world. But there are, presumably, alternative possible worlds in which there are
fewer than seven planets, and in such worlds the sentence #xP(x) > 7 is false.
We see that the denotation of the complex singular term #xP(x) (‘the number of
planets’) depends on the world one is in. In the actual world, this denotation is
the number 8. But in certain alternative possible worlds, the denotation of the
term #xP(x) might be (say) the number 6. It is false that 6 > 7. Hence, in such
a world, it would be false that #xP(x) > 7. Hence, in the actual world (to which
such a world is a possible alternative), it is false that 2(#xP(x) > 7). So, on its
de dicto reading, the conclusion of the modal inference is false, even though its
premises are true – whence the modal inference is invalid.
Consider now the de re reading of the conclusion, given by the symbolization
(#xP(x))y2(y > 7).
What is the status of the modal inference on this reading of its conclusion? In
order for the de re claim to be true, we start by latching onto the denotation of
the ‘wide-scope’ singular term #xP(x), this denotation being determined by the
facts in the actual world. So the denotation in question is the number 8. We now
‘hold onto’ that number as the mathematical object that it is, and consider it in
each possible world, ‘in place of’ y within the formula y > 7. In each possible
world, that is, we are evaluating the claim 8 > 7. This claim is true in every
world – it is a mathematical truth, and mathematical truths are true of necessity.
So the formula 2(y > 7) is made true by ‘plugging in’ the value 8 for y. And 8
is the denotation, in the actual world, of the singular term #xP(x). Hence the
sentence (#xP(x))y2(y > 7) is true. So, on its de re reading, the conclusion of the
modal inference is true, and the modal inference is valid.
The de re/de dicto distinction can be applied also in the case of propo-
sitional attitudes. There are two ways of reading the conclusion of the
propositional-attitude inference (concerning Hegel’s beliefs):
De dicto reading: Hegel believed that the number of planets is greater than 7.
In symbols:
hB(#xP(x) > 7).
De re reading: Hegel believed, of the number that happens to be the number
of planets, that it is greater than 7. In symbols:
(#xP(x))yhB(y > 7).
On the de dicto reading of its conclusion, the propositional-attitude inference is
invalid. Not so, however, on the de re reading.
One of the intellectual tasks that philosophers willingly undertake is this kind
of disambiguation of grammatically ambiguous claims, in order to obtain a more

106
Philosophy and Method
precise understanding of both the truth-conditions of speakers’ assertions and
the validity of the various inferences they may draw. The study of the logic(s)
governing the so-called ‘modalities’ of necessity and possibility is known as modal
logic. The study of the logic governing the propositional attitude ‘x knows that
p’ is known as epistemic logic. The study of the logic governing the propositional
attitude ‘x believes that p’ is known as doxastic logic.
Modal operators, and verbs of propositional attitude, as we have seen above,
create referentially opaque contexts. Referential opacity reveals itself in the failure
of the Principle of Substitutivity of Identicals:
P(a)
a = b
P(b)
,
whose validity is a centerpiece of the standard, extensional, ﬁrst-order logic
governing the logical operators not (¬), and (∧), or (∨), only if (→), some (∃),
all (∀), and is identical to (=), which sufﬁce for the logical formalization of
Mathematics. With an extensional language, the truth or falsity of a sentence
depends only on what the objects are and how they are related. Truth-values of
sentences of an extensional language do not depend on the way in which an object
is denoted. That is why Substitutivity of Identicals holds. This, however (as we
have seen), is not the case with languages containing modal operators or verbs
of propositional attitude. In the extended languages containing those sorts of
expression, it can make a great deal of difference to the truth-value of a sentence
to have a particular object denoted in one way rather than in another. Languages
for which this is the case are called intensional languages, by contrast with the
extensional language of Mathematics.
For classic essays on the problem of referential opacity, and intensionality more
generally, see Linsky (1971).
7.3.6 Paradoxes of relevance
At its inception in the hands of Aristotle, formal logic employed a notion of
‘following from’ that involved the premises being relevant to any conclusion
that follows from them. The two premises of any valid Aristotelian syllogism,
moreover, are always consistent with each other. One can always supply an
interpretation of their predicate-terms that makes them true.
By the early twentieth century, logicians had broadened the scope of their
inquiries, so as to include arguments whose premises form an inconsistent set.
With such a set of premises, no possible interpretation of their predicate terms
makes all of them true. Clearly, a good system of logical proof ought to be able to
reveal any inconsistency lurking within a given set of premises. That is, we need
to be able to disprove such a set of premises, taken together, by deducing absurdity
(symbolized by ‘⊥’) from them.
The question then arises: how is one to understand the possibility of anything
other than ⊥itself ‘following from’ an inconsistent set of premises?

What is Logic?
107
Modern logic has settled for an intuitively startling answer: every proposition
whatsoever is held to follow logically from any inconsistent set of premises.
Distilled to its simplest form, modern logic has nailed to its mast the following
principle of inference:
A; not-A; therefore, B
– or, symbolically:
A
¬A
B
,
where A and B may be utterly unrelated propositions that are completely
irrelevant to one another. The latter has become known as Lewis’s First Paradox
of irrelevance (in modern logic). It meets with tremendous resistance from almost
all acolytes and a signiﬁcant number of experts alike. The simple thought is:
Why should the blatantly inconsistent set {A,¬A} logically imply any wholly
disconnected, unrelated, irrelevant conclusion B?
Modern logicians regard the ‘simple thought’ in question as overly naïve,
and as symptomatic of a beginner’s failure to appreciate the alleged advantages
of ‘rounding out’ and ‘simplifying’ our formal system of logic. A great deal of
pedagogical energy is expended on getting students to accept that the apparently
paradoxical principle is one that earns its keep. Students are assured that the
principle can come to be accepted with equanimity as one masters the system,
and that indeed it is necessary as a part of the system if that system is to serve our
deductive needs adequately.
Trained logicians who ‘buy this line’ have clearly reached a reﬂective
equilibrium about the workings of thought and language in which certain
high-level principles are allowed to outweigh the nagging counterintuitiveness
(at the level of ‘logical phenomena’) of Lewis’s First Paradox.
Other logicians, known as relevantists – the ones who beg to differ with the
‘standard line’ on the Lewis Paradox – are anxious to ‘clean up’ modern logic by
expunging the paradoxes of relevance. They wish to respect those intuitions about
the ‘logical phenomena’ – the intuition, for example, that it is manifestly silly to
say that the pair of premises {2 + 2 = 4, 2 + 2 ̸= 4} logically implies that the
moon is made of green cheese. Relevantists wish to eschew such silliness while
yet retaining as many proofs, or valid arguments, as are needed in order to serve
the methodological needs of Mathematics, Science and common sense.
At the time of this writing, there is ongoing debate over relevance – over
whether, and, if so, how, one ought to ensure relevance between the premises
and the conclusions of good arguments. The main manifesto for relevantists
is Anderson and Belnap (1975). These authors, however, favor an approach
on which classical logic’s missing ingredient of relevance has to be restored to
the connective ‘if ... then ... ’, while all the usual properties of deducibility are
preserved. The present author advocates an alternative approach, on which the
major reforms are to be made to the structural properties of proofs, hence also

108
Philosophy and Method
of deducibility. For further details, see Tennant (2005). It is a good thing for
the beginning student of Philosophy to know that, even in matters this deeply
foundational for rationality at large, philosophers and logicians have not yet
arrived at a universal consensus.
Problems
1
Why is the validity of an argument in formal logic, as the adjective implies,
said to be a matter of form, and not content?
2
How has modern logic improved upon Aristotle’s system of syllogistic?
3
Do these principles form a consistent set?
Every known proposition is true.
If (P ∧Q) is known then P is known and Q is known.
Some true proposition is not known to be true.
Every true proposition can in principle be known.
4
The Absurdity Rule in classical logic allows one to derive any proposition
from a contradiction. (Example: 2 + 2 = 4; 2 + 2 ̸= 4; therefore, the moon
is made of green cheese.) Consider how one might preserve all the logic one
reasonably needs, while giving up this rule.
5
Verify the italicized claim in the discussion of Example 2 above.
6
What is free logic? How exactly does it differ from standard logic?

8
Inductive Reasoning
8.1 The structure of arguments
Any argument, as we have seen, has premises, an inference marker, and a
conclusion:
P1,...,Pn
Q
.
See Copi et al. (2010) for a wealth of examples of arguments from Economics,
Politics, Philosophy, etc. The reader can use these to practice identifying the
premises, the conclusions, and the inference markers in various prose passages
purporting to be arguments.
In Chapter 7 we contrasted two importantly different types of argument:
inductive and deductive. So far we have laid stress on the latter. These are
arguments that are logically guaranteed to preserve truth from their premises to
their conclusions. Deductive arguments can be systematically characterized.
8.2 Inductive arguments
There are, however, other arguments that pass as convincing to various degrees,
in that their premises render their conclusions probable or likely, without
necessarily entitling one to be as conﬁdent about the conclusions as one might
be about the premises. These are the inductively valid arguments.
The problem with inductive arguments is that no one has yet come up with a
satisfactory systematic theory about them, and a formal logical system that would
allow one to construct all and only the inductively valid arguments. Indeed, some
philosophers believe that the very notion of inductive validity is a chimera. They
maintain that what passes for inductively valid reasoning is simply the process of
making a conjecture on the basis of evidence. There is no way that the evidence
can justify the conjecture. All one can require is that the conjecture explain the
evidence; and make new predictions. Future failure of these predictions would
justify the jettisoning of the conjecture.
This, however, is an extreme view (associated with the name of Popper).
It calls on us to relinquish all intuitions about inductive validity. But surely

110
Philosophy and Method
we have some such intuitions? A more moderate view would hold that we do
indeed have strong intuitions about inductive support. These intuitions are to
the effect that certain kinds of evidence provide strong grounds for certain kinds
of conclusions. On this view it may be our intellectual inadequacy as analysts
and theorists and system-builders that explains our failure, thus far at least,
to formulate a satisfactory formal system of inductive reasoning. C. D. Broad
(1887–1971) did, after all, call the failure to solve the problem of induction ‘the
scandal of Philosophy’.
Some arguments combine both deductive and inductive elements. A good
example would be legal arguments. In legal arguments one reasons (often in an
inductive fashion) to a verdict; then one reasons (deductively) to the passing of
sentence (imposition of a jail term; instruction to pay damages, etc.).
8.3 A Leitmotif
We now introduce what will be a Leitmotif for much of what follows. This simple
diagram encapsulates a fundamental distinction between two kinds of statement,
within a deductive context: those that can be proved, and those that can be
refuted (or disproved):
P
T
P
On the left is our generic symbol for a proof of a statement P: an isosceles triangle
with P at its bottom vertex, and with the triangle’s base at the top representing
the premises (here, not mentioned) on which the conclusion P rests. On the right
is our generic symbol for a refutation of a statement P. The symbol ⊥stands for
absurdity. We make a point of mentioning P as one of the premises on which the
conclusion ⊥rests, because we wish to draw attention to the fact that P has been
refuted, possibly with the assistance of premises that are not explicitly mentioned
alongside P.
Both a proof and a refutation would in general have ﬁne structure – that
is, would contain other sentences appropriately arranged to effect the logical
passage towards P (in the case of the proof) or from P – along, perhaps, with
some side-assumptions – to absurdity (in the case of the refutation).
In Mathematics, one is primarily interested in proofs of theorems P. These
proofs would make the conclusion P rest ultimately on simple, indubitable
axioms. (That is why we have the horizontal line at the top of the proof schema.
It represents the secure foundation for the inverted pyramid that is the proof.)
In Natural Science, by contrast, one is primarily interested in testing
hypotheses P by trying to construct refutations of them. These refutations will

Inductive Reasoning
111
make the absurd conclusion ⊥rest ultimately on P along with other statements
about which one is more certain than one is about P. These other statements
likewise are not shown explicitly on the horizontal line at the top of the
refutation schema; for we want to pinpoint our interest in P. It is important
to bear in mind, however, that both proofs and refutations can have those extra
assumptions.
In Mathematics we go for outright assertions (theorems) backed by proofs.
Once proved, a theorem remains proved. It is every bit as certain as are the
axioms on which it rests. The proof gives us a guarantee that if the axioms are
true, then the theorem proved from them is true also.
In Science, by contrast, we set up hypotheses and then test them against the
evidence, alongside other (less tentative) hypotheses. The evidential statements
and these other hypotheses are the extra assumptions not indicated explicitly in
the refutation schema above.
Now there is of course an interplay between proofs and refutations. In
Mathematics, for example, one may wish to prove a statement of the form ‘not-P’.
(A good example would be: it is not the case that the square root of 2 is the ratio of
two whole numbers.) One would prove not-P by assuming P and constructing a
refutation of it (that is, a proof of ⊥from the assumption P). Then one would
take one more step to conclude to not-P, getting rid of the assumption P in the
process. So one would end up with a proof of not-P, with not-P standing as the
ﬁnal sentence at the very bottom.
In Science, likewise, one might construct a refutation of an hypothesis P
by invoking, among other results, some theorems Q of (applied) Mathematics.
These would have their place as conclusions of subproofs on the way to
constructing the overall proof of absurdity from P plus all the other extra
assumptions that may be involved.
So we see that proof and refutations can depend on one another; can indeed
form parts of one another. It is only the overall end-result which we have
distinguished by means of our schemata above. In Mathematics, one wants,
ultimately, proofs of theorems P; in Science, all one can get, ultimately, is a
refutation of an hypothesis P.
Note that general hypotheses in Science – hypotheses of the form ‘All Fs are
Gs’ – can never be proved outright, the way that a mathematical theorem can.
Experience can only lead to their refutation. All our general scientiﬁc theories
are, in effect, tentative conjectures that have survived a wide range of testing
against experience. We gain conﬁdence in them the more such tests they pass
without succumbing to refutation. But we can never have the same conﬁdence
in them that we have in a mathematical theorem once possessed of an outright
proof of it.
Now both proofs and refutations, in Mathematics and in Science, are
rigorous. They can in principle be formalized so that every step is correct and
unquestionable, leading inexorably to the result claimed. There is a trade-off,
however, between the need to convince and the time available to do so. We
typically ﬁll in only as much deductive detail as is needed in order to satisfy a

112
Philosophy and Method
critical interlocutor. If the interlocutor is skilled at ﬁlling in missing details, and
can ‘see’ how the proof would go without having every step explicitly ﬁlled in,
then one can get on with the job more quickly, emphasizing in one’s presentation
only the most salient points that signpost the rigorous deductive route. This can
be done, for example, when writing a technical paper for a learned journal, whose
readers will all be experts in the discipline.
But one has to bear in mind that whatever argument one gives, it should
be possible in principle to spell out every step in full detail if pressed to do so by
someone who does not follow, or who is not persuaded by, the compressed version.
It might not be enough simply to say ‘It is obvious that ... ’ (which is the
mathematician’s favorite way of masking a potential error when the going gets
tough or indeed impossible). The italicized principle is one that applies also to
philosophical argumentation. We shall have occasion, in Chapter 15, to apply
this principle with a vengeance, in order to see whether the famous ‘Ontological
Argument’ for the existence of God can be made logically convincing.
When criticizing or appraising philosophical arguments – whether one’s own,
with hindsight, or those of another – one should likewise be prepared to attend
constantly to the structure of argument. In so far as that structure is lacking, one
has a defective piece of philosophical theorizing.
Now there are some brands of philosophy that ﬁnd argumentative rigor and
depth a kind of intellectual anathema. These opposing brands of philosophy
extol instead the virtues of loosely connected aphorisms and insights. But in
the absence of any tighter organisation of these insights, one is left with a loose
jumble, a mélange, a farrago of half-baked inspirations. The theses, such as they
are, will only intersect by sharing a notion or two. They will be as unrelated as
are two words that have only a letter in common. Philosophical theory requires
organisation of a deeper kind than would be found in a conceptual crossword
puzzle.
8.4 Inductive arguments (resumed): Hume’s ‘old riddle’ of
induction
We began above by representing the structure of arguments in general in terms
of premises P1,...,Pn and conclusions Q:
P1,...,Pn
Q
.
When the argument is deductive, this is ﬁne. But when the argument is inductive,
we must be very careful to appreciate the exact relationship such an argument
would bear to appropriate deductive arguments.
To put it simply: inductive ‘arguments’ try to bridge the gap between evidence
and explanatory hypothesis. Recall how we said earlier that there is no logic of
scientiﬁc discovery; there is only a logic of scientiﬁc testing. The creative leap
from evidence to hypothesis was left mysterious and unexplained. But the return

Inductive Reasoning
113
passage from hypothesis to evidence had to be a deductive one. Inductive logic
would be an attempt to systematise and codify the means whereby one can make
that leap from evidence E to hypotheses H that would explain E. We have been
accustomed to representing the hypotheses as ‘above’ the evidence in our pictures
so far:
E
H
deductive
inductive
What we must now note is that the passage ‘upwards’ in these diagrams from the
evidence E to the hypothesis H would be turned upside down when representing
it as an inductive argument. For in the inductive argument the premises would
be the bits of evidence, and the conclusion would be the hypothesis induced:
E1,...,En
(= E)
H
.
The commonest examples of inductive arguments involve extrapolation of
observed properties of members of natural kinds: so-called enumerative induction.
Natural kinds are the categories appropriate for scientiﬁc generalizations; indeed,
the notions of induction and of natural kind are co-eval. Induction is justiﬁed on
natural kinds; natural kinds are what induction applies to best.
Take, for example, the natural kind emerald. Suppose e1,...,en are all the
emeralds we have seen so far. Suppose moreover that each of them has turned
out to be green. Then the evidence is
{G(e1),...,G(en), e1 is an emerald, ... , en is an emerald}.
We then make the inductive leap to the conclusion that every emerald is green:
for every emerald e, G(e). This leap can be displayed as
G(e1),...,G(en), e1 is an emerald, ... ,en is an emerald
for every emerald e, G(e)
.
The inductive step takes us from the particular to the general. If it is reliable,
then it is inductively valid. But the step is not deductively valid. That is, the
evidence {G(e1),...,G(en), e1 is an emerald , ... , en is an emerald} cannot
logically guarantee the conclusion ‘for every emerald e, G(e)’. For it is logically
possible for the evidence to hold while yet not all emeralds be green. Some
as-yet-unexamined emerald might turn out not to be green.

114
Philosophy and Method
This is Hume’s famous skeptical point about induction. The truth of the
evidence does not logically guarantee the truth of the induced conclusion.
This is what makes induction so distinctively (and disturbingly) different from
deduction. Hume’s point makes clear what might be called the old riddle of
induction. It can be given many illustrations.
Suppose that whenever we have, in the past, hit a cue ball in snooker at a
red ball, accurately enough to make the cue ball collide with the sitting red
ball, the red ball has moved off from where it was sitting before the collision.
Unfortunately, there is no logical reason at all why, despite this regularity in the
past, it should be manifest when next we strike the cue ball so as to put it on
course to hit the red ball. The red ball could simply sit still despite the collision,
as though ﬁxed to the table, deﬂecting the cue ball. That is a logically possible
state of affairs. Or it could spontaneously ‘dodge’ the approaching cue ball. This
too is a logically possible state of affairs. In fact, there are myriad possibilities,
logically speaking: the red ball might levitate just high and long enough for the
cue ball to pass underneath it. Or the collision could take place alright, but with
the unusual result that the two balls just sit there, at rest, in continuing contact
with each other. Yet another logical possibility is that the cue ball (or the red
ball) could, at the moment of collision, simply vanish before our eyes.
Suppose that the Sun has risen above the eastern horizon every morning in
the history of the human species. Unfortunately, there is no logical reason why
it should rise there tomorrow, or indeed rise at all. The Earth could suddenly
stop rotating, and roast one of its sides. Indeed, the side nearest the Sun could
even turn to ice, rather than roast. Or the Earth could start rotating in the other
direction around its axis. That is a logically possible state of affairs.
Suppose that every raven we have examined has turned out to be black.
Unfortunately, there is no logical reason why the next raven to be examined
should turn out to be black. It might be white. That is a logically possible state
of affairs.
Suppose that every swan we have examined has turned out to be white.
Unfortunately, there is no logical reason why the next swan to be examined
should turn out to be white. It might be black. That is a logically possible state
of affairs. (Indeed, it is actual: there are black swans in Western Australia.)
Suppose that every emerald we have examined has turned out to be green.
Unfortunately, there is no logical reason why the next emerald to be examined
should turn out to be green. It might be blue. That is a logically possible state of
affairs. Indeed, it might even be grue. (For an explanation of ‘grue’, see §28.1.2.)
Suppose that for as far as we have been able to determine by means of our
telescopes, the speed of light has a particular constant value c. Unfortunately,
there is no logical reason why in some galaxy so distant that its light since its
formation has not yet reached us, the speed of light should be c. It might be some
other value c′. That is a logically possible state of affairs.
How can we be sure that the future will be like the past? How can we rely
on the uniformity of Nature? Why should like causes produce like effects? Why
should things of a kind all have particular properties (such as color) in common?

Inductive Reasoning
115
There are many ways of posing the riddle; and no satisfactory way of answering
it. It remains, as Broad once said, the scandal of Philosophy that no one has yet
answered the riddle satisfactorily.
The riddle rests simply on the following logical observations, of which we have
just given examples above:
1
no past observations can logically imply any future observations (predictions);
2
no observations about states of affairs close by can logically imply any
observations (predictions) about distant states of affairs;
3
no observations about some things of a kind can logically imply any
observations (predictions) about all things of that kind.
Note that what we are calling predictions here are the would-be conclusions
of inductive inference. The notion of prediction does not essentially involve
future time. It involves only the notion of projection to cases not covered by
the evidence at hand. Our negative logical observations can be summed up by
saying that neither time nor space nor kindredness can provide the logical glue
that would make the predictions stick. That is the old riddle of induction.
By contrast – in the case of the emeralds, for example – the hypothesis we
have induced (‘for every emerald e, G(e)’) will deductively imply each bit of
evidence G(ei). That is, each argument of the form
for every emerald e, G(e)
ei is an emerald
G(ei)
will be deductively valid. This is a minimal adequacy condition in induction:
namely, that the conclusion induced from the evidence should deductively imply
the evidence.
Compatibly with this minimal adequacy condition, however, there will
in general be many conclusions that could be induced. Remember, each
such induced conclusion is to serve as an hypothesis that both explains the
observational evidence obtained under boundary conditions BC, say, and also
allows us to make predictions about further observations that might be obtained
under yet other conditions. Each such hypothesis will explain the evidence by
deductively implying it; and will generate predictions by deductively implying
them. In each of the deductions, the statement BC of boundary conditions may
be taken as another premise alongside the hypothesis concerned.
But there will in general be more than one hypothesis that will do this,
no matter how extensive the evidence E may be. This is the problem of rival
hypotheses. It is also known as the problem of underdetermination of theory by
evidence. It is what makes scientiﬁc controversy possible. It is what underlies the
claim that all our scientiﬁc theorizing, however successful it has been to date, is
really no more than conjecture. For the evidence does not dictate exactly which
hypothesis is justiﬁed as the explanation of the evidence. A good inductive logic
would constrain as narrowly as possible the set of rival hypotheses that can be

116
Philosophy and Method
induced from the evidence E under given conditions BC. It would then leave to
other methodological considerations (such as simplicity) the ﬁnal choice of just
one among the set of rivals.
Let us make clear with a picture what is involved in there being rival
hypotheses with regard to evidence E under conditions BC. We shall deal with
the simplest case, where there are ony two rivals. The treatment will generalize
in an obvious way to any number of rivals. They just have to be pairwise rivals
in the sense about to be explained for hypotheses H1 and H2. We are supposing
that each of H1, H2 can be induced from the evidence E that was obtained under
conditions BC. Thus the deductive picture is that each of the hypotheses, by
itself, explains the evidence by deductively implying it, with the help of BC as
another premise:
E
E
H1, BC
H2, BC
So far so good. But H1 and H2 are supposed to be rivals. How so? The rivalry
arises with respect to the predictions they generate (by deductively implying
them). The predictions will be (observational) statements P not yet ‘in’ the
evidence E. That is, E will not deductively imply P. The rivalry will lie in the fact
that H1, in conjunction with some description BC′ of boundary conditions (not
necessarily the same conditions as BC above), will deductively imply some such
P; while H2, along with the same boundary conditions BC′, will deductively
imply not-P – or vice versa. Let us look at the former case. We have H1 and
BC′ deductively implying P, but H2 and BC′ with P leading deductively to
absurdity:
P
H1, BC′
H2, BC′ , P
T
This gives us an idea as to what scientiﬁc testing aims to establish. Suppose we
wish to adjudicate experimentally between two rival hypotheses, each of which
explains the evidence E. What the scientist needs to do is identify some ‘crucial’
observational statement P for certain experimentally contrivable conditions BC′.
The logical situation should then be that P is deductively implied by one of the
hypotheses H1 in conjunction with BC′; but that P is contradicted by the other

Inductive Reasoning
117
hypothesis H2 in conjunction with BC′. The diagram above once again makes
this clear. The creativity of the experimental scientist (as already remarked)
lies in the ability to contrive the conditions BC′, and to identify the crucial
observational statement P. When the experiment is performed – that is, when
the conditions BC′ are realized – then ‘Nature takes its course’, leading either to
the observation P or to the observation not-P. Whichever it is decides the fate
of one of the hypotheses. Only one of H1 and H2 will survive the test; the other
will have to be discarded.
The great problem for inductive logic is that there is in general too bewildering
a variety of rival hypotheses that explain the evidence E. Remember our minimal
adequacy condition in induction: namely, that the hypothesis H induced as
conclusion from the evidence E, under given conditions BC′, should deductively
imply the evidence E. There is one obvious and trivial ‘hypothesis’ that meets
this minimal adequacy condition: namely, the statement ‘if BC′ then E’.
Conjoined with BC′, this hypothesis immediately yields E. But does it yield
anything else? That is, does it allow us to make new predictions? It would appear
not. The hypothesis ‘if BC′ then E’ amounts to no more than a statement of
the evidence under the stipulated conditions. The hypothesis is as certain as the
evidence, because it does not venture beyond it. ‘If BC′ then E’ tells us nothing
about what to expect under other conditions BC∗.
But we know that we need more than this from a good hypothesis H: it is
both to explain all the evidence E to date, and to predict new observations P not
already implied by E. The requirement of ‘predictive power’ works against the
otherwise comforting fact that the hypothesis is no less certain than the evidence
for it.
So there are two requirements in tension with one another here. The ﬁrst
requirement is that the hypothesis should be supported as strongly as possible
by the evidence E. This requirement inclines us to the likes of ‘if BC then E’
in hypothesis choice. But the second requirement is that the hypothesis should
tell us more about the world than we have already observed to be the case. This
requirement inclines us to an hypothesis H that ventures beyond the evidence,
implying predictions that are no part of the evidence E to date. In this way the
hypothesis acquires predictive power. It thereby becomes less certain than the
evidence E, but it becomes open to test.
At no stage of our investigations does the total evidence acquired sufﬁce for
the truth of our scientiﬁc hypotheses, in the way that mathematical axioms sufﬁce
for the truth of mathematical theorems. As already noted, hypotheses in Natural
Science venture beyond the available evidence. These hypotheses venture to say
something about all objects or events of a particular natural kind, even when only
a limited sample of these might have been observed when gathering the evidence
from which the hypothesis is induced. Such universal claims are both stronger and
simpler than the detailed statement of the particular evidence on which they are
‘based’. The price paid for logical strength and simplicity is uncertainty. The truth
of the evidence cannot logically guarantee the truth of those strong and simple
hypotheses.

118
Philosophy and Method
It would appear, then, that the task is to optimize between the conﬂicting
requirements of evidential support and predictive power. The question is: is
there an inductive logic that can do this? We might feel conﬁdent that there
is, since it seems that we manage it (albeit inchoately) ourselves. That is, we
make successful inductions. Surely, the optimist would say, we should be able to
systematize what it is that we do as scientists when thinking up hypotheses H
to explain evidence E under conditions BC? After all, haven’t we successfully
done the same thing with mathematical reasoning? Have we not succeeded in
analyzing all the logical moves that we make in Mathematics, so as to have now
a complete system of rules of deductive inference according to which all good
mathematical arguments can be proved rigorously?
The answer of course is ‘yes’ – we have done this for Mathematics, and with
resounding success. We even have as a result some deep metatheorems about the
formal logical systems we have set up and about the mathematical theories that
can be developed within these systems. We know a great deal about the power,
both expressive and deductive, of such systems and theories. We know how
that power is limited in various ways; but a detailed exposition of these insights
would be out of place here. (The interested reader can look forward to Part V.)
It is enough to concede to our optimistic questioner the success of deductive
systematization. But when it comes to systematization of inductive reasoning,
there does not appear to be much ground for the optimism just expressed.
Since we never establish the truth of any scientiﬁc hypothesis as certain, what
is the value of our science? A reasonable answer here is that we use science to
guide our actions. And our actions are based on (what we take to be) our most
reliable beliefs. We are fully aware that our actions cannot always be based on
certainties. The best beliefs we have are, by default, those which have saved
all appearances, including the appearances involved in critical tests. If anyone
does not wish, with this explanation, to trust science as a guide to life, that
person is invited to show what other sorts of beliefs would fare better, in the sense
that they would make us fare better. What other sorts of beliefs would enable
us to anticipate the future course of events, build our technologies, devise our
therapies, and explain why the world appears the way it does?
8.5 How probability ﬁgures in scientiﬁc reasoning:
Reichenbach’s straight rule
It would be a mistake to think that the problem with inductive inferences is
that they are conﬁned to examples like the one above, concerning the color of
emeralds (or, in other oft-cited examples, the color of swans, or of ravens). The
unusual feature of that example was that 100 percent of the emeralds ‘sampled’
thus far had been observed to be green. It is a reasonable default assumption
that the sample of actually observed emeralds had not been selected with any
biased intention (conscious or unconscious) in favor of getting this 100 percent
rate of observed greenness. It is not as though the observers who are scientiﬁcally
interested in the color of emeralds could have been hoodwinked by the suppliers

Inductive Reasoning
119
in the long supply chain originating with the workers who actually dug the
emeralds out of the ground. It is not as though the diggers or the middlemen
found signiﬁcant numbers of non-green emeralds (purple ones, perhaps? or
cerise?) and surreptitiously disposed of them so that they did not end up in the
‘sample’ to be viewed by those with scientiﬁc interests.
The inductive inference concerning the emeralds can be re-written in a
slightly different, interesting form:
In the sample of observed emeralds, 100 percent of them were green.
The sample was fair.
Therefore, among all emeralds at large, 100 percent of them are green.
It is immediately seen that this is but a special case of a more general rule of
inductive-statistical reasoning, where 0 ≤X ≤100:
In the sample of observed instances of natural kind K, X% of them had
property P.
The sample was fair.
Therefore, among all instances at large of natural kind K, X% of them have
property P.
This more general rule is (a simple form of) what statisticians call Reichenbach’s
straight rule. It admits of more sophisticated tweakings, in which the sample size
is taken into account:
In the sample of N observed instances of natural kind K, M of them had
property P.
The sample was fair.
Therefore, among all instances at large of natural kind K, M
N of them have
property P.
In this form, the rule is still vulnerable to the same kind of inductive skepticism as
was directed against it when X took the value 100 (or, in the notation of this last
version of the rule, when M = N). Any value for the actual at-large frequency
distinct from X or M
N affords, technically, a falsiﬁcation of the conclusion of the
rule. Yet we do not commonly think of our reasoning as in serious error if we
discover, in the fullness of time, that the true at-large frequency of P-type Ks is
only slightly different from X or M
N . We happily allow, that is, for margins of error
in our predictions of frequencies.
A more acceptable form of the ‘straight rule’, therefore (which the reader
might think is becoming more crooked by the minute) is as follows:
In the sample of N observed instances of natural kind K, M of them had
property P.
The sample was fair.

120
Philosophy and Method
Therefore, the probability-density function of the actual frequency of Ps
among all instances at large of natural kind K is centered on the value M
N ,
and quite tightly clumped around it.
We shall spare the reader the mathematics involved in making more precise what
is meant by ‘centering’ here, and being ‘tightly clumped’. The looser intuitive
formulation is quite adequate for the philosophical point to be made.
Which is this: by invoking the notion of probability, and long-run frequencies
within large populations, we can make habitual forms of inductive reasoning
appear more intelligible and less vulnerable to skeptical doubts about its validity
(in the newly explicated sense).
8.6 How probability ﬁgures in scientiﬁc reasoning: making
hypotheses more probable
[Note: This section presupposes the reader’s familiarity with the notion of a
logical consequence relation, denoted here as ⊢. If readers read this symbol
as ‘logically implies’, with a not-yet-fully-explicated grasp of what this notion
amounts to, they will still get the important gist of what is being laid out in this
section. But readers who ﬁnd themselves at sea with these technical notions can
return to this section after learning a little more about logic in later chapters of
the book.]
8.6.1 The various interpretations of the notion of probability
The notion of probability is subject to various interpretations. The probability
of an event (alternatively, of the proposition that the event in question occurs)
might be thought of as:
•
the objective chance that it occurs; or
•
the physical propensity of the physical system to produce events of that kind,
or to bring about the truth of that kind of proposition; or
•
a human subject’s (hopefully rational) degree of belief that it occurs; or
•
the long-run frequency of occurrence of events of that kind with respect to
some suitably chosen reference class (such as the long-run frequency of a
coin landing heads, within the reference class of tosses of the coin).
Probability can also be thought of as:
•
the degree of conﬁrmation
of the proposition concerned.
Degrees of belief (see the third interpretation of probabilities above) might be
operationalized, or measured, by the odds in a wager that the agent is prepared
to accept. One requirement of rationality – a normative requirement that is

Inductive Reasoning
121
not always met by actual people – is that the odds on various bets that the
agent would accept should ‘cohere’, in the sense of satisfying the axioms of the
probability calculus. If they do not satisfy those axioms, it will be possible for
a bookmaker to make out a so-called ‘Dutch book’ of judiciously chosen bets,
so that the bettor is bound to lose money in the long run. That is, the bettor’s
expected return, given his incoherent odds, will be negative.
Despite the foregoing variety of interpretations of the real-valued function
p(A) of events or propositions A, there is widespread agreement on the
mathematical properties of the function. Let us suppose that its domain of
deﬁnition is a set or class of propositions, and that these propositions form the
ﬁeld of a logical consequence relation ⊢.
8.6.2 The axioms of the theory of probability
We begin our discussion by stating four utterly basic axioms for any real-valued
probability function p( ) deﬁned on propositions A. The ﬁrst axiom limits the
range of possible numerical values for probability. The other three axioms impose
logical constraints on the probability assignment, as it collapses the partial
ordering of logical consequence among the propositions involved to the linear
ordering of their probability values (i.e., the linear ordering that they enjoy as
real numbers).
In plain English, the axioms are as follows:
1
Probabilities lie between 0 and 1 inclusive.
2
Logical truths have probability 1.
3
Logical falsehoods have probability 0.
4
The probability of any proposition is at least as great as that of any proposition
that logically implies it.
We can express these axioms slightly more formally as follows. Axioms (1)–(3)
hold for all propositions A. Axiom (4) holds for all propositions A and all
propositions B.
1
0 ≤p(A) ≤1.
2
If ⊢A (i.e., A is logically true), then p(A) = 1.
3
If A ⊢⊥(i.e., A is logically false), then p(A) = 0.
4
If A ⊢B (i.e., A logically implies B), then p(A) ≤p(B).
Intuitively, the simple thing one needs to understand about probability is this:
assigning probabilities to propositions effects a linearization of the partial ordering
already imposed on the propositions by the relation of logical consequence or
deducibility. Before dealing with probabilities, we have the relation ⊢, which
partially orders the sentences of the language. Upon introducing probabilities
subject to the foregoing axioms, one goes further and linearizes this ordering of the
propositions (that the sentences express). The main constraints are really quite

122
Philosophy and Method
minimal: logical falsehoods must be assigned probability 0; logical truths must be
assigned probability 1; and ‘in between’, as it were, the probability assignments
on contingent propositions must ‘respect’ the relation ⊢that is already in place.
Axiom (4) requires only that if A ⊢B, then p(A) ≤p(B).
Thus far we have introduced only the notion of absolute probability. There is a
companion notion of conditional probability, p(A|B), to be read as ‘the probability
of A, given B’. The latter notion is deﬁned as follows. Note that it is admissible
only when 0 < p(B). The reader is reminded that the connective ∧means ‘and’.
Deﬁnition 2. If 0 < p(B) then
p(A|B) =df
p(A∧B)
p(B)
.
8.6.3 A theorem about probability that is philosophically signiﬁcant
We now employ the notions of absolute and conditional probability to state
a theorem in the theory of probability that has important philosophical
consequences. Explanation of our choice of symbols (H, S, K, and E) will emerge
in due course.
Theorem 1. Suppose
1
H,S,K ⊢E;
2
0 < p(H∧(S∧K));
3
p(H|S∧K) = p(H|K); and
4
p(E|S∧K) < 1.
Then
p(H|E∧(S∧K)) > p(H|K).
The proof of Theorem 1 will be found in Appendix B.
The reader is asked to take on trust that careful inspection of the formal
proofs given there reveals that the only probability axiom used in the proof of
Theorem 1 is Axiom (4).
Philosophical comment on Theorem 1
We shall describe the import of each of the four assumptions of Theorem 1, in the
context of experimental testing of a scientiﬁc theory. Think of S as describing the
initial- and boundary-conditions of some experimental set-up, devised against
the background of our knowledge K to date. The hypothesis H to be tested is used
as an assumption, along with K and S, to logically deduce some prediction E (an
evidential statement whose truth we can eventually determine by running the
experiment). Thus assumption (1) of Theorem 1 is satisﬁed, namely H,S,K ⊢E.

Inductive Reasoning
123
So too is assumption (2), namely 0 < p(H∧(S∧K)), since otherwise we would
not, as rational agents, even be considering the hypothesis H.
Assumption (3), namely p(H|S ∧K) = p(H|K), tells us that, against the
background of our knowledge K to date, simply setting up the experimental
apparatus (thereby making S true, and known) cannot change the conditional
probability of the hypothesis H, given what is known. Setting up the apparatus
cannot increase that conditional probability; nor can doing so decrease it. This is
because the truth of the hypothesis H (should H be true) is supposed to transcend,
and not depend in any way on, the observable truths that may come to be known
as a result of human beings’ experimental intervention in the natural order. (H
will be a suitably ‘high-level’ hypothesis.)
Finally, assumption (4), namely p(E|S∧K) < 1, tells us that without the help of
H as an assumption, we are less than fully certain that E will turn out to be true,
even given the conjunction of our background knowledge K with the knowledge
S that the experimental set-up is in place (but without the experiment yet having
been run).
When the experiment is run, however, and E is discovered to be the case,
the epistemic result (as stated by the consequent of Theorem 1) is that the
conditional probability of H (given all that is now known) has been raised:
p(H|E∧(S∧K)) > p(H|K) = p(H|S ∧K).
That is, the ‘posterior’ conditional probability p(H|E∧(S∧K)) is greater than
the ‘prior’ conditional probability p(H|K). Moreover, there is an important
intermediate result within the proof of Theorem 1 (as the reader will see in
Appendix B):
p(H|E∧(S∧K)).p(E|S∧K) = p(H|K).
From this it follows that the posterior conditional probability p(H|E∧(S∧K))
will be all the greater the smaller the value of p(E|S∧K). That is, if E is a very
surprising result – corresponding to a very low value for p(E|S∧K) – it will lend
more conﬁrmation to the hypothesis, in the sense that the posterior conditional
probability p(H|E∧(S∧K)) will be all the greater than the prior conditional
probability p(H|K).
Thus we have a probabilistic vindication of our tendency to be more
conﬁdent about an hypothesis whose predictions E, on the basis of initial- and
boundary-conditions S, are borne out by experiment.
Perhaps the correct response to the extreme inductive skeptic, then, is to
inquire respectfully whether the founding ﬁgure for the skepticism being pressed
was one of those great and admirable philosophers who did their work before
the advent of probability and statistics, or at least before they could have been
expected to take it into account in their own work. To put matters in perspective:
Jacob Bernouilli (1654–1705) proved his (Weak) Law of Large Numbers in 1689,
but his Ars Conjectandi was published only in 1713, eight years after he died.
Abraham de Moivre (1667–1754) published The Doctrine of Chances, the ﬁrst

124
Philosophy and Method
textbook on probability theory, in 1718. The great inductive skeptic David
Hume (1711–76) wrote his Treatise of Human Nature in 1739–40. But Hume
was not a mathematician, and was probably not inﬂuenced deeply enough by
the work of de Moivre and of Bernouilli and other Continental probability
theorists. Hacking (2001), at pp. 251–52, conjectures ‘I think [Hume] had read
Abraham de Moivre’s book ... but probability theory had hardly begun when
Hume proposed the problem of induction’.
Pace Hume, the quietist about induction appears to gain some support, at
least, from developments in the modern theory of conditional probabilities and
statistical inference. (This line of thought can be found in Carnap (1947). In
Hacking (2001), Chapters 20–22 are very useful for a more detailed defense of
this view.)
Problems
1
Does our habit of using induction to form beliefs about the external world
stand in need of any a priori justiﬁcation?
2
How, do you think, did our species acquire the habit of inductive reasoning?
3
Does inductive reasoning require the use of language, or do even languageless
creatures engage in certain forms of inductive reasoning?
4
Explain the connections among empirical support for a theory, the theory’s
predictive power, and its simplicity.
5
Describe the role of Mathematics, as you understand it, within scientiﬁc
explanation and prediction.
6
How does the reliability of Reichenbach’s Straight Rule relate to sample size?

9
The Method of Conceptual
Analysis
Analytical philosophers, as the designation suggests, set great store by possible
analyses of concepts of philosophical importance. This does not mean that
analytical philosophy is concerned solely with such matters. Rather, analytical
philosophy is Philosophy conducted with a readiness to require and provide
conceptual analyses when this is called for; and to challenge and criticize
conceptual analyses that may be defective.
9.1 Conceptual analysis as provision of necessary and
sufﬁcient conditions
Conceptual analysis is an important means to an end. The means is clariﬁcatory;
the end is the pursuit of truth and understanding. Introspection on our concepts
enables us to clarify them, and enables us thereby to reach a more perfect
understanding of them: of how they hang together, and of how they apply to
things and events in the world. The standard way of trying to clarify a given
concept is to provide an analysis for it: that is, a statement of the individually
necessary and jointly sufﬁcient conditions for its application. The statement of
such conditions usually involves other concepts, taken to be better understood
or previously clariﬁed.
But such attempts at conceptual analysis might be faulty; and philosophers
have to police themselves, and be on the lookout for inadequate analyses.
Philosophically sharpened intuitions are involved in the attempt to demonstrate
the inadequacy of particular attempts to clarify our concepts. These intuitions
lead to the construction of thought-experimental counterexamples to faulty
conceptual analyses on offer; on which, more below.
The beginner in Philosophy needs to be informed that a great deal of
contemporary philosophical discussion in the journals is concerned with
providing counterexamples to proposed conceptual analyses. It is part of what
philosophers call ‘negative critique’. This is to be contrasted with (allegedly)
positive contributions, such as: offering a newer, better analysis of the given
concept; or offering a new philosophical system; or providing newer and better
arguments for the main theses of an existing philosophical system. Despite the
negative connotations of the word ‘negative’ in the context ‘negative critique’,

126
Philosophy and Method
however, a great deal of positive fame accrues to those who excel at such
critique.
Philosophers who engage in conceptual analysis are concerned with the modal
features of relationships among concepts. Thus we ﬁnd them considering such
questions as whether it is necessary to have a language in order to have thoughts;
or whether it is necessary to be embodied in order to be a locus of consciousness;
or whether it is possible that there be a true proposition that is in principle
unknowable. A metaphysician might inquire whether any of one’s properties is
essential to one’s identity. An epistemologist might inquire whether there could be
a justiﬁed true belief that did not amount to knowledge. And a moral philosopher
might inquire whether the moral qualities of an act necessarily involve the agent’s
intentions.
In all these examples, the modal element is crucial. Words like ‘necessary’,
‘possible’, and ‘essential’ are clues to the philosophical nature of the con-
cern. Note that even modern philosophers like Quine and Donald Davidson
(1917–2003), who are opposed to any purported distinction between truths
of fact and truths of meaning, nevertheless display considerable expertise as
analytical philosophers in the way they treat the conceptual issues posed by
questions with the modal ﬂavor of the examples just given.
Let us now explain in schematic detail the technique of conceptual analysis.
It involves stating individually necessary and jointly sufﬁcient conditions for
the application of the concept in question. Accordingly, suppose one is
dealing with an intuitively understood relational (two-place) concept of the
form
C(x,y).
Take this as the analysandum (i.e., that which is to be analyzed). We want
to understand the exact conditions under which this relationship actually
holds. To this end, we need to state an analysis, in the biconditional
form
C(x,y)
if and only if
(Condition1(x,y) and Condition2(x,y) and ... and Conditionn(x,y)).
Here, Condition1, ..., Conditionn are the so-called individually necessary and
jointly sufﬁcent conditions on x and y that we are seeking. They are individually
necessary because each of them has to hold in order for the analysandum C(x,y)
to hold; and they are jointly sufﬁcient because if they all hold together, then the
analysandum holds. The n-fold conjunction of these conditions on the so-called
‘right-hand side’ of the above biconditional is called the analysans. (That is, the
analysans is the n-fold conjunction of the n actual conditions that we might try
to specify, in order to give the sought analysis.)

The Method of Conceptual Analysis
127
Moreover, the analysis is supposed to hold as a matter of necessity:
It is necessarily the case that:
for all x, y
[C(x,y)
if and only if
(Condition1(x,y) and Condition2(x,y) and ... and Conditionn(x,y))].
More often than not, however, this explicit modal preﬁx is omitted. Everyone
involved knows that, by the rules of the game, it implicitly governs the
biconditional on offer.
We begin with the most famous example of conceptual analysis in the history
of the subject.
9.2 X knows that p
9.2.1 Plato’s analysis
Consider, for example, the (relational) concept
X knows that p,
where X is a rational agent and p is a proposition. What does it mean to say this,
for particular values of X and of p?
The traditional analysis of knowledge, which goes back to Plato (in the
Theaetetus), and which was not seriously challenged until the twentieth century,
is as follows:
X knows that p
if and only if
[X believes that p
and
p is true
and
X is justiﬁed in believing that p].
Knowledge, in short, is justiﬁed true belief. The three conditions in the analysans
are individually necessary:
X knows that p only if X believes that p;
X knows that p only if p is true; and
X knows that p only if X is justiﬁed in believing that p.

128
Philosophy and Method
And the three conditions are jointly sufﬁcient:
if [X believes that p
and
p is true
and
X is justiﬁed in believing that p],
then X knows that p.
9.2.2 Gettier counterexamples to Plato’s analysis
A serious problem for the traditional analysis of knowledge came from Edmund
Gettier (b. 1927), who described what are nowadays known as ‘Gettier cases’.
These are cleverly thought-up situations involving a particular agent X and a
particular proposition p, described in such a way that they plausibly satisfy the
three conditions of the foregoing analysans, but in which, intuitively, one does
not want to say that X really knows that p. A Gettier case challenges the joint
sufﬁciency of the three conditions in the traditional analysis. (See Gettier (1963);
and Nozick (1981).)
Here is a Gettier case.
Smith and Jones have both applied for a certain job, and are being
interviewed for it. While Jones is interviewing, and before Smith goes in
for his own interview, two things happen. First, Smith carefully counts the
coins in Jones’s jacket pocket (Jones having left his jacket hanging over a
chair in the waiting room). There are ten such coins. Secondly, the company
president drops by and tells Smith that Jones will get the job. Normally such
an assurance would justify the resulting belief, namely the belief that Jones is
the man who will get the job. So too would it justify any logical consequence
of that belief and other justiﬁed ones, such as the belief that Jones has ten
coins in his pocket. One such logical consequence is the belief p that the
disappointed Smith now happens to infer:
p: The man who will get the job has ten coins in his pocket.
It later turns out that the company president’s assurance was wrong. The job
is offered to Smith. As it happens, unknown to the nosey Smith, he also has
ten coins in his own pocket. So Smith’s belief p is both true and justiﬁed. We
would not, however, wish to count it as knowledge on Smith’s part.
Gettier’s challenge to the analysis of knowledge as justiﬁed true belief has
had a signiﬁcant impact on recent Epistemology. Reactions have ranged from
the optimistic to the pessimistic. Optimists have attempted to tighten the
requirement of justiﬁcation; and the results have been mixed. Pessimists have

The Method of Conceptual Analysis
129
urged that we should give up altogether on what, they maintain, is a misguided
attempt to analyze knowledge as a special kind of belief. Rather, they claim,
knowledge is a more primitive notion than had hitherto been appreciated. It
cannot be fashioned from the notion of belief by simply supplying suitable extra
constraints on what kind of belief is in question.
There are other analyses, too, of philosophically important notions that have
likewise been challenged by philosophical dissenters. Some have concerned the
notion of causation; others have concerned the notion of meaning; yet others
have concerned the notion of free will; and so on. The aim of such analyses is
to establish important connections among concepts, some of which are perhaps
simpler to grasp than others, and which may therefore be used, in an analysans,
to cast light on an analysandum. The aim of the critics is to show that a given
analysis is in error, and does not establish the conceptual connections that
its proponent thinks it does. The critic can either challenge the alleged joint
sufﬁciency of the conditions in the analysans; or challenge the alleged necessity
of any one of them. Those engaged in such negative critique of philosophical
analyses have generated some highly imaginative counterexamples, in which the
ranges of application of our concepts are tested to their limits. This is all in an
attempt to get clear about what exactly we mean when we use philosophically
important terms (like ‘knows’, ‘causes’, ‘person’, ‘freely chooses’, ...). These terms
are important not least because of the role they can play in our determinations of
moral and legal guilt and responsibility.
9.3 The Paradox of Analysis
The Paradox of Analysis is this: for an analysis to be correct, it has to preserve the
meaning of the concept or claim being analysed. How then can an analysis ever
be informative?
Sometimes it is not possible to ensure that only more familar or more basic
and less problematic notions appear in the analysans. Nevertheless, the analysis
might be of interest. Where it is not possible, the analysis might still be of interest
because of the way it links the truth of
Analysandum(x1,...,xn)
in general to the truth of
Analysans(x1,...,xn),
where ‘Analysans(x1,...,xn)’ involves other, so-called co-eval, concepts.
Co-eval concepts are ones which have to be mastered together, because of
the way they depend on each other. They are just as obscure, elusive, important,
fundamental, problematic, ... as one another. Thus it is open to one who opposes
the claim that Plato’s analysis of knowledge is a reductive analysis to point
out that, even if the necessary equivalence holds, nevertheless the concept of
knowledge is just as basic as the concept of belief, and that (perhaps) the notion

130
Philosophy and Method
of truth is on a par with that of belief: truth can attach only to beliefs, and the
only thing that matters about a belief is whether it is true.
What is interesting about co-eval concepts is how they might have to
interanimate: that is, they might have to come all together in one package, as it
were, in order for any of them ever to have any purchase. In such circumstances
philosophical analysis is still important, in bringing out precisely this ‘keystone
arch’ principle in the architecture of our conceptual apparatus. Our conceptual
apparatus may be less like a pyramid, and more like a geodesic dome made of
interlocking struts.
9.4 The analysis of the notion of valid argument
The modern analysis of validity of argument owes much to Frege, Bernard
Bolzano (1781–1848), Tarski, and Gerhard Gentzen (1909–45). It is dealt with
in Chapter 7.
9.5 Russell’s analysis of the truth-conditions of sentences of the
form ‘The F is G’
Russell (1905) gave an analysis of deﬁnite descriptions in order to clarify the
logical forms of various statements in mathematics, and in order to provide
his theory of knowledge-by-acquaintance and knowledge-by-description. Frank
Ramsey once called it a ‘paradigm of analytical philosophy’.
The problem Russell addressed was that of how to understand descriptive
phrases that did not denote. Russell offered the following analysis of the
truth-conditions of any sentence of the form ‘The F is G’:
There is exactly one F and it is G,
or, equivalently,
The F (exists and) is G.
In symbols:
∃x(∀y(y = x ↔Fy) ∧Gx).
Note that Russell’s analysis, on this account of it, does not really involve
the provision of an analysans consisting of various individually necessary and
jointly sufﬁcient conditions for the truth of ‘The F is G’. Rather, it involves
providing a perspicuous logical form for the analysandum, and exploiting formal
logical symbolism to that end. One could, of course, ‘bash it into’ the shape

The Method of Conceptual Analysis
131
of a conventional analysis by providing an analysans of the more roundabout
form
there is at least one F
and
there is at most one F
and
every F is G.
But this is not nearly as elegant as the single logical form that we furnished above.
On Russell’s analysis, ‘The King of France is bald’ is false, because there is no
King of France. (See Russell (1910).) The analysis also affords a useful distinction
between two kinds of negation, which one can call internal and external:
Internal negation
∃x(∀y(y=x ↔Fy) ∧¬Gx)
The F (exists and) is not G.
External negation
¬∃x(∀y(y=x ↔Fy) ∧Gx)
It is not the case that the F
(exists and) is G.
Here once again we see the different expressive possibilities that are opened up
by allowing different operator-occurrences to fall within one another’s scopes in
different ways. (See the discussion in §7.3.5.) With the necessity operator, we
can distinguish the de re and de dicto readings of ‘It is necessary that the F is G’:
De re
∃x(∀y(y=x ↔Fy) ∧2Gx)
The F (exists and) is necessarily G.
De dicto
2∃x(∀y(y=x ↔Fy) ∧Gx)
It is necessarily the case that the F
(exists and) is G.
Russell’s analysis can be effected in two other notationally different, but
expressively equivalent ways. First, one can introduce the term-forming operator
ι, corresponding to the deﬁnite article ‘the’, so that the English descriptive phrase
‘the F’ can be translated as
ιxF(x).
For obvious reasons, this ι is called a variable-binding term-forming operator. With
ι-terms one can proceed to employ the ‘term insertion’ operation explained in
§7.3.5. Thus we would have the following pithier formalizations:
De re
(ιxF(x))y2Gy
The F (exists and) is necessarily G.
De dicto
2G(ιxF(x))
It is necessarily the case that the F
(exists and) is G.
Secondly, one could treat ι not as a variable-binding term-forming operator,
but rather as a binary quantiﬁer. On this treatment, ι is regarded as taking two

132
Philosophy and Method
predicates to form a sentence. With ι in this capacity, the formal sentence
ιx(F(x),G(x))
symbolizes the English sentence ‘The F is G’. Once again, we are afforded the
expressive nuances of de re and de dicto:
De re
ιx(F(x),2G(x))
The F (exists and) is necessarily G.
De dicto
2ιx(F(x),G(x))
It is necessarily the case that the F
(exists and) is G.
9.6 Grice’s analysis of meaning in terms of belief and intention
This analysis is important in that it attempts to reduce the notoriously
problematic notion of (linguistic) meaning to others that are supposedly easier
to understand. The reader should be aware that the term ‘intensional’, as used by
philosophers, means ‘having to do with meaning’.
No claim is made by Grice or any of his followers to the effect that his
analysis of meaning would enable one to ‘break out’ of the so-called ‘intensional
circle’; rather, one is exploring conceptual relations within it. The concepts
involved are co-eval, to use the terminology introduced earlier. To break out
of the intensional circle, one would have to provide analyses of meaning,
belief, desire, intention, etc., that involved only physicalistic (e.g., biochemical
or neurological) vocabulary. It is hardly likely that such reductions of one
domain of discourse (here, the psychological or intensional) to another (here,
the physicalistic) would ever preserve meaning – which it is the task of
analysis to do.
Grice’s analysis of ‘X means p by S’, very roughly, is as follows:
X intends that his use of S should get the audience to believe that p;
and
X intends the audience to recognise this intention;
and
X intends that his audience’s recognition of that intention should be part of
the reason why they come to believe that p (if they do not already believe
that p).
For the original analysis, see Grice (1957), and for further developments and
reﬁnements, see Grice (1969).
9.7 Mackie’s analysis of ‘event A caused event B’
Event A can cause event B without A’s being necessary in order for B to occur. For
example, Adolf might shoot someone and kill them an instant before a 10-ton
rock crushes them. Adolf’s shot caused the death, but was not necessary for it.

The Method of Conceptual Analysis
133
Likewise, event A can cause event B without A’s being sufﬁcient for B to occur.
For example, Guy’s striking the match might cause the explosion, without being
sufﬁcient by itself. For, there might not have been enough oxygen; in which
case, Guy’s striking the match would not have caused the explosion. Also, the
matchbox might have been wet; in which case, Guy’s striking the match would
have been similarly ineffectual.
Mackie gives the following analysis of the cause–effect relation:
A causes B
if and only if
A is an insufﬁcient but necessary part of an unnecessary but sufﬁcient
condition for B to occur.
There are also many rival analyses to Mackie’s. See Mackie (1974).
9.8 Frege’s analysis of the notion of number
For Frege, numbers were concepts of concepts. When we say ‘The number of
apples is 2’ we are invited to think of numbers being referred to on a par with
apples. But what we have said is equivalent to ‘There are two apples’, and
this involves merely predicating twoness of the concept ‘x is an apple’, without
commitment to numbers as objects.
Objects (like apples) fall under ﬁrst-order concepts (like ‘x is an apple’).
First-order concepts in turn fall under second-order concepts (like ‘There are two
...’ or ‘There exist some ...’). This last expression is worth noting: existence, for
Frege, is not a ﬁrst-order concept. It is not a property of individuals. Rather, like
number, it is a concept of concepts (or, if one prefers: a property of properties)
of individuals. (See Frege (1884; reprinted 1961). With this analysis of number
and existence one can fault the Ontological Argument for God’s existence. See
§15.1.6.)
There has to be a linkage, however, between saying ‘The number of apples is
2’ (which involves the substantival use of the expression ‘2’) and saying ‘There are
exactly two apples’ (which involves the adjectival use of the word ‘two’). Indeed
there is: the two ways of expressing oneself are necessarily equivalent. We may offer
the following (schematic) analysis of number-attributions:
The number of Fs = n
if and only if
there are exactly n Fs.
Instances of this scheme involve, on their left-hand sides, identity statements
in which there occur the abstractive term ‘The number of Fs’,
and the
numeral n.

134
Philosophy and Method
The numeral n is the canonical name for the number n itself, considered as an
object of pure-mathematical interest. Thus, in the standard notation of Peano
arithmetic:
0 is the numeral ‘0’;
1 is the numeral ‘s0’;
2 is the numeral ‘ss0’;
3 is the numeral ‘sss0’; ... and so on.
The abstractive term ‘The number of Fs’ is what gives the abstract world of
numbers its purchase on the world of ordinary things. It makes clear how numbers
can ﬁnd application in our thought about things of any kind. The Fs can be
physical things. By counting them, one attains a number (the number of Fs), which
is an abstract thing. One can also, of course, count abstract things. One can say,
for example, that the number of prime numbers between 2 and 20 is 7:
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20.
Instances of the scheme above involve, on their right-hand sides, numero-
sity-quantiﬁcations of the form ‘there are exactly n Fs’; in symbols: ∃nxF(x).
These can be deﬁned in the obvious inductive way, without reference to, or
quantiﬁcation over, numbers as objects. The ﬁrst few deﬁnitions in the series are
as follows:
∃0xFx = df ¬∃xFx;
∃1xFx = df ∃x(Fx ∧∀y(Fy →y = x));
∃2xFx = df ∃x1∃2(Fx1 ∧Fx2 ∧∀y(Fy →(y = x1 ∨y = x2)));
∃3xFx = df ∃x1∃2∃x3(Fx1 ∧Fx2∧Fx3 ∧∀y(Fy →(y = x1∨y = x2 ∨y = x3)));
...
In general, we have Schema N for natural numbers (see Tennant (1987), at
p. 234):
∃nxFx = df ∃x1...∃xn(Fx1 ∧... ∧Fxn ∧∀y(Fy →(y = x1 ∨... ∨y = xn))).
The biconditional scheme above can now be seen to be a deep logico-mathematical
principle governing all our thought about the whole numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, ... By
this we mean thought about the numbers themselves (mathematical thought)
and thought about other things, in which we apply the numbers, when counting
ﬁnite collections of those things.
9.9 Lewis’s analysis of conventions
Any analysis of conventions faces the following problem. The analysis must be
consistent with the claim that the words of our language have the meanings that

The Method of Conceptual Analysis
135
they do as a matter of convention. This immediately implies that the conventions
that bestow meanings on words cannot be conventions in that sense of the word
that conjures up images of people convening, to hammer out an agreement,
using language to do so. For the question would immediately arise: How did the
expressions of that language acquire their meanings? – and we would be off on a
vicious inﬁnite regress.
David Lewis (1969), however, gave an ingenious analysis of conventions
(especially linguistic ones) that avoids this pervasive problem. His analysis
proceeds in terms of the reciprocal beliefs and expectations concerning other
people’s coordinated behavior when they face a recurring communal problem,
and are aware of past salient solutions. The solutions can arise, in the ﬁrst
instance, as quite arbitrary or accidental choices to deal with a coordination
problem.
Imagine, for example, people newly possessed of self-propelled vehicles, who
make their way about the countryside on paths that just happen to be a little
wider than two of these vehicles side by side. On the ﬁrst occasion that two
drivers appear to be on course for a head-on collision, they might happen to
avoid it by veering slightly to the left, and passing each other safely by. The
next time they encounter each other in a similar situation, they both recall the
way they dealt with the problem the ﬁrst time round. Once again, they veer to
the left, and avoid colliding. In due course, they come to expect each other to
stick to this ‘discovered’ solution to their coordination problem. In this little
community of two drivers, veering to the left becomes the conventional way to
avoid colliding. One can imagine how the convention can spread to yet other
drivers, until it becomes ﬁxed as the community-wide solution to that particular
recurring coordination problem. I expect you to veer to the left; and I expect you
to expect me, likewise, to veer to the left. In due course, the convention might
become formalized and explicit, as in a written code of rules of the road. But at its
inception, the convention had no need for language. It was born of the mutual
expectations of the different parties to it. All the while, there was the alternative:
veer to the right. But history and happenstance never lit on it. The conventional
solution to the recurring coordination problem was arbitrary. It didn’t have to be
that way; it might have been some other way. But it wasn’t.
Lewis, in his book Convention (1969), begins with a ﬁrst pass at a deﬁnition of
what a convention is, and proceeds to reﬁne it further on the basis of objections
or problems that he raises for his own account. His settled offering comes
on p. 78:
A regularity R in the behavior of members of a population P when they are
agents in a recurrent situation S is a convention
if and only if
it is true that, and it is common knowledge in P that, in almost any instance
of S among members of P,

136
Philosophy and Method
1
almost everyone [in P] conforms to R [in S];
2
almost everyone [in P] expects almost everyone else [in P] to conform
to R [in S];
3
almost everyone [in P] has approximately the same preferences regarding
all possible combinations of actions [in S];
4
almost everyone [in P] prefers that any one [in P] more conform to R [in
S], on condition that almost everyone [in P] conform to R [in S];
5
almost everyone [in P] would prefer that any one [in P] more conform
to R′ [in S], on condition that any one [in P] more conform to R′ [in S],
where R′ is some possible regularity in the behavior of members of P in S,
such that almost no one [in P] in almost any instance of S among members
of P could conform to both R′ and R.
Condition (5) is what shows that the chosen conventional form of behavior R is
arbitrary in the appropriate sense – namely, that there are possible alternatives
R′ that might have been chosen instead, but which happened not to be (when
the convention to behave in way R in situations S was established.) Thus in
our imagined community of beginning drivers, veering to the left in order to
avoid collisions on narrow paths became the conventional behavior R; while
the alternative R′, of veering to the right, did not get a foothold.
That is the breakthrough thought behind the success of Lewis’s treatment of
another very important set of conventions, namely the conventions governing
the use of linguistic expressions themselves within a linguistic community. The
required linguistic conventions can get established without any need for language
in which to express them, and agree upon them. There need not be any convening
in order for a convention to take hold within a community.
At the dawn of language, one tribesman might have warned another of the
presence of a venomous snake, say, by improvising a wave of his hand with a
hissing noise. In situ it does not take a lot of noûs to work out what the warner is
‘getting at’. (The reader will be able to provide a rudimentary Gricean account
of the reciprocal beliefs and intentions of the parties to this communicative
exchange on this occasion. See §9.6.) The beneﬁciary of this warning might, the
next day, ﬁnd himself in a situation where the roles are reversed. He then warns
the other of that same sort of danger, by using the very same form of expression of
which, the day before, he had been the beneﬁciary. For that form of expression
is salient, as a solution to this kind of coordination problem. Long story short:
eventually, merely hissing to one another can come to have the conventional
meaning ‘Watch out, there’s a poisonous snake nearby that right now you
cannot see!’
Something along these lines, writ large, must be behind the emergence of
human languages with their large but idiosyncratic vocabularies and varied but
(at a deeper level) commonly structured grammars. One of the fascinating
problems that accompanies such an account is whether the linguistically
structured expression of thought is subject to conventionally invariant logical rules

The Method of Conceptual Analysis
137
governing the logical operators. Languages vary, of course, in the sounds they use
to express a logical operation like negation. But is the operation of negation itself
something inevitable, something transcendental, something independent of any
particular language, something that must behave the same logical way in any and all
languages? Similar questions can be raised for all the other logical operators that
have already been mentioned: conjunction, disjunction, implication, and both
existential and universal quantiﬁcation. Is the logical skeleton (of inferential
necessities) that these operators afford something that must be built into any
language, notwithstanding the fact that any given language may have its own
uniquely quirky ways of actually expressing these operators?
9.9.1 An afterword on the form of Lewis’s analysis of conventions
The attentive reader might be wondering how it is that Lewis’s analysis given
above displays the general form of analyses that we gave earlier. We said that for
an analysandum C(x,y) we would be looking for a biconditional of the form
C(x,y)
if and only if
(Condition1(x,y) and Condition2(x,y) and ... and Conditionn(x,y))
where Condition1, ..., Conditionn are the so-called individually necessary and
jointly sufﬁcent conditions on x and y that we are seeking.
In Lewis’s case, the analysandum is C(R,P,S) – ‘A regularity R in the behavior
of members of a population P when they are agents in a recurrent situation S is a
convention’.
In his foregoing analysans, however, the conjunction signs linking the ﬁve
conditions that Lewis states are not dominant. Instead, the conjunction of
Lewis’s ﬁve conditions is preﬁxed with ‘it is true that, and it is common
knowledge in P that, in almost any instance of S among members of P,
...’. But this is no great drawback, for this preﬁx can be distributed across
the ﬁve conditions. Let us call those conditions Condition1(R,P,S), ...,
Condition5(R,P,S). Note that ‘it is true that, and it is common knowledge
in P that’ boil down to ‘it is common knowledge in P that’, since (common)
knowledge is factive: knowledge implies truth. Moreover, knowledge distributes
across conjunctions:
K(ϕ1 ∧... ∧ϕn) ↔(K(ϕ1) ∧... ∧K(ϕn)).
Problems
1
Is the Paradox of Analysis a good reason to abandon the project of conceptual
analysis?
2
What is the difference between providing conceptual analyses and writing a
dictionary?

138
Philosophy and Method
3
Choose one of the well-known examples of analysis described above, and
conduct research on the original source and the critical secondary literature
in response to it. Let Google be your guide ...
4
Would you be prepared to say that a person who is unable to provide even a
rudimentary analysis of some concept has not properly mastered it?
5
Why, in your opinion, did philosophers get involved in the project of
providing conceptual analyses?
6
Do Gettier-type examples convince you that Plato’s analysis of knowledge as
justiﬁed true belief is defective?

10 The Method of Conceptual
Explication
In Chapter 9 we examined the method of conceptual analysis, which is
concerned with providing individually necessary and jointly sufﬁcient conditions
for the application of certain important concepts.
There is another, related, treatment of important concepts that needs to
be explained and discussed. This is the slightly different project of conceptual
explication.
10.1 Conceptual explication provides a precise theoretical
substitute for an informal concept
Explication is a matter of replacing an intuitively grasped, but pre-theoretical,
concept with a more exactly characterized one. This characterization will be
within a formal theory of the subject matter within whose informal description
the intuitive concept (the explicandum) has been deployed. So, explication is
typically called for when one is seeking to make an informal theory or description
of a subject matter more formal and precise.
The formal theory can furnish an explicans in two possible ways. First, it might
provide an explicit deﬁnition of the explicandum. It will deﬁne the explicandum
in terms of simpler concepts already characterized by the formal theory. Secondly,
and alternatively, the explicans may be embedded in theoretical postulates.
These will show exactly how it relates to other concepts already characterized
by the theory in question.
Perhaps the best example of conceptual explication is that developed in the
1930s, of the intuitive notion of computable function on the natural numbers. We
shall devote some space to this example, since it is such a paradigm instance
of explication – indeed, perhaps the ‘founding instance’ of the method. It is
an example so good that all subsequent explications of other concepts may be
measured against it, when assessing their degree of success.
10.2 The intuitive notion of a computable function
Intuitively, a function f from natural numbers to natural numbers is computable
just in case there is an explicit set of instructions, which is ﬁnitely long, and which

140
Philosophy and Method
enables one, for any given input n, to compute the output f(n), if such output
is deﬁned. When the output is deﬁned, such a computation will involve only
ﬁnitely many steps, and will take a ﬁnite period of time to carry out. The
method of computation will be mechanical and deterministic. Carrying out the
instructions will require no creativity or ingenuity or insight.
Some examples of computable functions on the naturals are: adding two
numbers; multiplying the same; ﬁnding the highest common factor of two
numbers; ﬁnding their least common multiple; ﬁnding whether a given number is
the square of another number (yielding 0 if it isn’t, but yielding the latter if it is).
All these examples involve at least two numbers as inputs. For the rest of the dis-
cussion, we shall conﬁne ourselves to functions involving only one input. A good
example of this kind is the function taking the value 1 on prime numbers, and
taking the value 0 on composite ones. How many such functions might there be?
By well-known combinatorial considerations, there can be at most countably
many ﬁnitely long sets of instructions. The so-called ‘diagonal argument’ in
§10.2.2 establishes that there are uncountably many functions from N to N. So:
among the uncountably many functions in general (computable or not) from N
to N, there are only countably (inﬁnitely) many computable ones. The notion of a
computable function from N to N is therefore a tightly constraining one. Moreover,
it appears, intuitively, to be a stable and robust notion, at least to mathematicians
and computer scientists. More evidence to vindicate this appearance will emerge
in due course.
A very similar diagonal argument in §10.2.3 establishes that among the
(countably many) computable functions there must be partial functions. Not
every computable function is everywhere deﬁned.
We proceed now to examine these two diagonal arguments.
10.2.1 The diagonal argument: preliminaries
A total function f from N into N determines, for every natural number n as ‘input’,
a natural number f(n) as ‘output’. A partial function g from N into N, by contrast,
might have, for certain numbers n as input, no number g(n) as output. For such
input n, the function g would be undeﬁned. And if g were moreover a computable
function, we would say that the computation ‘of’ g(n) does not terminate.
Take the simplest case of one-place functions (not necessarily computable
ones) mapping the set N of natural numbers into N. As already indicated, a
simple so-called ‘diagonal argument’ (set out in §10.2.2) shows that there are
uncountably many such functions that are total (that is, strictly more of them than
there are natural numbers). It is therefore obvious that there are uncountably
many functions from N into N tout court, total or partial.
The diagonal argument is a reductio ad absurdum argument. The two main
assumptions which, jointly, precipitate the absurdity, are the following:
1
The functions under discussion are all total.
2
The diagonal function whose construction the argument describes belongs to
the very class of functions that are under discussion.

The Method of Conceptual Explication
141
Since the diagonal argument, as we have indicated, reduces this pair of
assumptions to absurdity, there are (at least) two rational reactions in response
to it, respectively contradicting each of the foregoing assumptions. It would be
rational to react by drawing one or other of the following conclusions.
1
The diagonal function whose construction the argument describes is not total.
2
The diagonal function whose construction the argument describes does not
belong to the very class of functions that are under discussion.
Whether we opt for conclusion (1) or conclusion (2) will depend on whether we
wish to hold on to assumption (1) or to assumption (2).
Let us now proceed to the diagonal argument itself.
10.2.2 The diagonal argument, ﬁrst version
Suppose for reductio ad absurdum that there is a countable list of total functions
from N into N:
f0,f1,f2,... .
Consider now the following inﬁnite array, in which the i-th row represents the
respective outputs of the particular function fi on the inputs 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ...:
f0(0)
f0(1)
f0(2)
f0(3)
f0(4)
...
f1(0)
f1(1)
f1(2)
f1(3)
f1(4)
...
f2(0)
f2(1)
f2(2)
f2(3)
f2(4)
...
f3(0)
f3(1)
f3(2)
f3(3)
f3(4)
...
f4(0)
f4(1)
f4(2)
f4(3)
f4(4)
...
...
...
...
...
...
Consider now the ‘diagonal’ function f deﬁned as follows:
for all n, f(n) = fn(n) + 1.
Note how the function f is deﬁned by altering the values on the diagonal of the
array above, indicated in boldface. (This is why the function f is called ‘diagonal’,
and why the present form of argument is called a ‘diagonal’ one.)
Since each fi is total, the diagonal function f is total.
The diagonal function f : N →N will therefore be on our imagined list of all
total functions as fk, for some k. Thus for this k we have
for all n, f(n) = fk(n).
But now, instantiating our two displayed generalizations above with respect to k,
we have
f(k) = fk(k) + 1

142
Philosophy and Method
and
f(k) = fk(k).
Hence
fk(k) = fk(k) + 1.
Contradiction.
Conclusion: There are uncountably many total functions from N into N.
10.2.3 The diagonal argument, second version
The second version of the diagonal argument is governed by the assumption (into
whose justiﬁcation we can subsequently inquire) that, if one were to be presented
with a ﬁnite list of instructions (in English) for the ‘computation’ of an output
for any given number as input, one would be able to tell whether the function
in question is guaranteed to be a computable function. Call this the Governing
Assumption.
On the Governing Assumption it follows that there is an effectively
enumerable list of the respective methods of computation for all the computable
functions from N into N:
f0,f1,f2, ... .
To see this, enumerate ﬁrst, in any inﬁnite list, all the ﬁnite sets of English
instructions for ‘computation’ of outputs on arbitrary numbers as inputs. By the
Governing Assumption one can go down this list, deleting any set of instructions
that one can tell does not offer a guarantee that the function being ‘computed’ is
really a computable function. The undeleted members of the list, we shall assume,
are those ﬁnite sets of English instructions that do offer the guarantee of genuine
computability.
Here is a ﬁnite list of instructions in English for the ‘computation’ of a number
as output, from any given number n is input, that does not offer the guarantee of
genuine computability:
Take n as input. Wait for the beginning of the Third World War. If your side
wins, return the output 2n. Otherwise, return the output 2n.
Suppose now, for reductio ad absurdum, that every one of the genuinely
computable functions fi is total.

The Method of Conceptual Explication
143
Consider the inﬁnite array
f0(0)
f0(1)
f0(2)
f0(3)
f0(4)
...
f1(0)
f1(1)
f1(2)
f1(3)
f1(4)
...
f2(0)
f2(1)
f2(2)
f2(3)
f2(4)
...
f3(0)
f3(1)
f3(2)
f3(3)
f3(4)
...
f4(0)
f4(1)
f4(2)
f4(3)
f4(4)
...
...
...
...
...
...
as we did in §10.2.2, and deﬁne the ‘diagonal’ function f once again as follows:
for all n, f(n) = fn(n) + 1.
Since (by assumption for reductio) each fi is total, the diagonal function f is total.
Each fi is computable, and (by the Governing Assumption) the list of the
respective methods of computation for f0,f1, ... is effectively enumerable. We
shall now show that the diagonal function f is therefore computable. For, take
any given input n. In order to compute the value f(n), proceed mechanically as
follows. Effectively enumerate the ﬁnite descriptions of the respective methods
of computation for the functions on the list until you arrive at the one for fn.
Use it to compute the value fn(n). Then add 1. Clearly we have just given a
ﬁnite description of a method of computation for the diagonal function f. And
one can tell that this method of computation is genuine (given the Governing
Assumption).
The diagonal function f : N →N will therefore be on our imagined list of all
total computable functions as fk, for some k. Thus for this k we have
for all n, f(n) = fk(n).
But now, instantiating our two displayed generalizations above with respect to k,
we have
f(k) = fk(k) + 1
and
f(k) = fk(k).
Hence
fk(k) = fk(k) + 1.
Contradiction.
Conclusion:
Not every computable function is total (provided that the
Governing Assumption holds).

144
Philosophy and Method
10.3 Explicating the notion of computable function
With explication we take an intuitive, pre-formal notion (the explicandum)
and ‘ﬁrm it up’ by means of a precisely deﬁned one (the explicans), which
henceforth does duty for it. In the early 1930s, the intuitive, pre-formal notion
of a computable function was crying out for explication. It was serendipitous – or
was it? – that the Allied nations’ dire need for high-speed cryptography was
looming on the historical horizon.
The class of (intuitively) computable functions from natural numbers to natural
numbers began to engage mathematicians’ interest in the 1920s. Once logicians’
and mathematicians’ interest was focused on the notion of computability,
there soon emerged several different formal explications of the notion ‘f is a
computable function’. These were owed to various famous ﬁgures, among them
Kurt Gödel, Alan Turing, Alonzo Church (1903–95), Emil Post (1897–1954),
and Stephen Kleene (1909–94). Each of them furnished a different formal
deﬁnition intended to explicate the notion of computable function. All these
deﬁnitions were in due course shown (mathematically) to characterize exactly
the same functions. This was strong evidence that the intuitive concept
of a computable function was stable and signiﬁcant. Here we shall provide
details for only two of these explications, due to Gödel and to Turing
respectively.
On the one hand, Gödel’s explication (Gödel (1986)) provided an ideal basis
for metamathematical proofs of the famous limitative results, in particular his First
and Second Incompleteness Theorems for formal arithmetic.
On the other hand, Turing’s explication (Turing (1937), Turing (1938)) really
stands out because of the way it treats the process of mechanical computation as
abstractly as possible, with amazing conceptual economy.
We shall now examine each of these two explications in turn.
10.3.1 Gödel’s general recursive functions
Gödel offered the precise concept of a general recursive function, taking as
basic certain ‘easy’ and familiar functions like addition and multiplication, and
providing ways of combining recursive functions that one has already speciﬁed, so
that one can form new ones. Gödel’s recipe for generating recursive functions was
a very natural ‘mathematical’ one, working from the most familiar arithmetical
operations through to more complicated computable ones, by employing an
incisive analysis of the various means by which mathematicians build up those
more complicated, but still computable, functions.
Remember that computable functions are functions deﬁned on the natural
numbers, and taking natural numbers as values.
The basic recursive functions to which Gödel helped himself were fourfold.
First, he took as basic the functions of addition and multiplication (both of which
are so familiar to the reader as not to need any explanation). Secondly, he took
as basic two other less familiar functions. The ﬁrst of these less familiar basic
functions was the ‘characteristic function for identity’ for which we shall use the

The Method of Conceptual Explication
145
notation c=(m,n). It is a two-place function. It takes the value 1 if m = n, and
takes the value 0 if m ̸= n. If one thinks of the value 1 as the answer ‘Yes’, and the
value 0 as the answer ‘No’, then the characteristic function of identity provides
truthful answers to the question ‘Is the number m identical to the number n?’. The
second less familiar kind of function that Gödel took as basic was actually a family
of similar functions: the ‘coordinate projection’ functions. Coordinate projection
functions take the form idm
k , for varying values of m and k. Given an m-tuple of
numbers n1,...,nm, the value idm
k (n1,...,nm) is nk. Using the projection function
idm
k is just a matter of picking the k-th member of the m-tuple in question.
It is intuitively clear that all these basic recursive functions are computable.
Next Gödel provided some means of building up more complicated recur-
sive functions, using operations which, intuitively, preserve the property of
computability. Think, for example, of the four-place function (m + n).(j + k).
We know we can compute the two sums m + n and j + k; and that we can
then multiply together the outputs of these two computations as inputs for a
ﬁnal computation of the product (m + n).(j + k). Thus the outputs of the more
deeply embedded functions (the additions in question) become the inputs to
the function ‘on the surface’, so to speak (the multiplication in question). This
feature can be generalized; it becomes the principle of composition of recursive
functions:
If f is an n-place recursive function, and g1,...,gn are m-place functions,
then f(g1,...,gn) is an (n.m)-place recursive function.
Composition is not the only operation for building recursive functions that
intuitively preserves the property of computability. There was one other such
operation that Gödel invoked, call minimization of regular functions. This calls for
some explanation; but every part of it is very clear. First, we have to explain what
is meant by a ‘regular’ function.
Deﬁnition 3. Suppose f is an (n + 1)-place function. Then f is a regular function just
in case
for all m1,... mn there is some p such that f(m1,... mn,p) = 0.
Now we are in a position to deﬁne the operation of minimization mentioned
above.
Deﬁnition 4. Suppose f is a regular function in the sense of Deﬁnition 3. Then the
n-place function g is said to be obtained from f by minimization just in case for all
m1,... mn, g(m1,... mn) is the least number p such that f(m1,... mn,p) = 0.
That completes Gödel’s recipe for constructing recursive functions in general.
Any such function can be built up from the four basic functions (addition,
multiplication, the characteristic function of identity, and projection of the k-th

146
Philosophy and Method
member of an n-tuple), using only the two computability-preserving operations
of composition, and minimization of recursive functions.
This elegant mathematical explication takes the form of what a logician calls
an inductive deﬁnition. There are base clauses, dealing with the simplest of the
entities being deﬁned. Then there are inductive clauses, dealing with the means
by which more complex entities of the kind in question can be built up. Finally,
there is a closure clause to the effect that any entity of the kind in question can
be built up according to the basis clauses and inductive clauses already stated.
This kind of deﬁnition permits the mathematician to prove results of the form
‘All entities of the kind in question have property ’. First, one proves that the
basic entities enjoy the property . Next, one shows, for each entity-building
operation, that if the building blocks enjoy property , then the result of
operating on them to produce a more complex entity also enjoys property .
Having done that, one is justiﬁed (by the closure clause) in concluding that all
entities of the kind in question have property .
10.3.2 Turing machines
We shall explain here, at preferential length, the concept of a Turing machine.
This is because it ﬁnds an important application in the Functionalist philosophy
of mind (see Chapter 24).
Turing, by contrast with Gödel, offered a prima facie wholly different kind of
explication of the notion of computable function, in terms of idealized ﬁnite-state
machines. Such a ‘computing machine’ scans a tape on which it can read one
cell at a time. Each cell contains a ‘1’ or is blank. That is all that the machine
can register. The machine is equipped with a ‘program’ that tells it unerringly
what to do next, given the state it is currently in and the condition of the
cell that it is currently scanning. The possible actions that the machine can
perform are: delete the ‘1’; inscribe a ‘1’; move one cell to the left; move one
cell to the right; or halt (and signal that you have done so). These utterly basic
mechanical operations, astonishingly, prove to be sufﬁcient unto all the demands
of computation in general. Indeed, the laptop computer on which this is being
written is, in a straightforward sense, no more than a gloriﬁed Turing machine.
(Well ... almost. Unlike a Turing machine, a laptop does not have an inﬁnite
tape, for storage of the intermediate results of sub-computations. But one could,
in principle, add arbitrarily many hard drives.)
With computable functions, the dependency of output on input can be spelled
out as a mechanical, or rule-governed, way of actually calculating the output for
any given input. Take the example of the two-place function + of addition
on the natural numbers. Given any two natural numbers x and y, their sum
(x + y) is not only uniquely determined – as beﬁts functions in general – but
also mechanically determinable. Take, for example, the inputs 5 and 7. The output
(5 + 7) is mechanically determinable as 12. One can give an explicit recipe for
ﬁnding the answer 12 from the inputs 5 and 7. One can spell out the steps
of calculation that need to be undertaken in order to arrive at this answer.

The Method of Conceptual Explication
147
These steps are exhaustive, exact, and unambiguous. They leave nothing to
the creativity or imagination or inspired insight of the mathematician. They
are ‘rote’, or algorithmic. And in any computation, only ﬁnitely many steps are
involved, before the computation terminates with a deﬁnite answer.
We are so familiar with addition that we lose sight of the fact that it is special
in this way, especially when small inputs are involved. But even if you learn
off by heart that 7 + 5 = 12, this does not undermine the fact that addition is
computable. Indeed, all it underscores is that the ‘computation’, in such a case, is
trivial – in the case of 7 and 5 as inputs, one simply takes one look at a ‘look-up’
table stored in memory. The recipe is as simple as that.
A more interesting case, involving more complex computation, would be to
compute, for highish inputs like 1,000, outputs of the function that maps each
natural number n to the n-th prime number. A prime number is a natural number
greater than 1 that cannot be divided without remainder by any natural numbers
besides itself and 1. The ﬁrst few prime numbers in the inﬁnite series of primes
are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, ... . What is the 1,000-th number in this
series? No doubt, very large – but you could in principle compute it by following
a ﬁxed recipe of explicit rules.
A Turing machine is understood as a device capable of occupying only
ﬁnitely many physical states (at least, in so far as these states are to have any
computational or informational signiﬁcance). One of these states is designated
as the initial state for any computation that the machine is to perform. The inputs
and outputs to a Turing machine are written on the cells on a linear tape, which
is potentially inﬁnite in both directions. The machine has a ‘scanning head’ that
can read the conditions of these cells one at a time. To keep matters as austere as
possible, Turing allowed for each cell to have only one of two conditions: marked
v. unmarked, full v. empty, 0 v. 1, black v. white, magnetized v. demagnetized,
or what you will. That is, the machine will use a binary alphabet. (It can be shown
that we get the same class of possible machines this way as we would if we allowed,
in general, any ﬁnite alphabet. This is important for the philosophical application
of the notion to be made below.) The machine is capable of a limited range of
actions in response to the condition of the scanned cell. It can move one cell to
the right; or one cell to the left; or change the condition of the cell; or halt.
(Remember that all this quasi-mathematical discussion will eventually assume
philosophical signiﬁcance. The concept of a Turing machine is centrally
involved in the Functionalist philosophy of mind – perhaps the most inﬂuential
contemporary conception of the nature of mind.)
How does a Turing machine ‘know’ what to do when computing a particular
function? Answer: it has a program, which is nothing more or less than a ﬁnite set
of instructions. And what is an instruction? It is a command of the form
If you are in such-and-such state, and the cell you are scanning is in
such-and-such condition, then perform such-and-such action, and thereafter
enter such-and-such state.

148
Philosophy and Method
For example, the instruction
(131,0,1,17)
will mean
If you are in state #131, and the cell you are scanning has a 0 in it, then
change it to a 1, and enter state #17.
The way a Turing machine M computes an output M(k) for a given natural
number k is as follows:
•
Set up the machine in its initial state.
•
Feed the (otherwise empty) tape into the machine from the left, with just k
successive cells inscribed with 1. That is, the tape will have the overall form
.../0/0/0/1/1/1/1/...(k occurrences of 1).../1/1/1//0/0/0/...
•
Wait for the machine to halt. (We can assume that a light on top of the
machine starts ﬂashing when, and only when, the machine halts.)
•
Read off the tape on the right of the machine. The output M(k) is n just in
case there are exactly n successive occurrences of 1 inscribed on the tape.
10.3.3 Other explications of computable functions
Church, Post, and Kleene also provided their own signature formal explications
of the notion of a computable function, using their own special conceptual
resources. Church furnished what is now known as the λ-calculus; Post deﬁned
what are now known as ‘production systems’; and Kleene deﬁned a class of
functions in terms of his so-called ‘equational systems’. Sufﬁce it to say that
these different explications really do look different, to the untrained eye. Each
results from addressing the problem of how to explicate the notion of computable
function by using an idiosyncratic, but suitably powerful, set of conceptual
materials and methods.
10.3.4 The Turing–Church Thesis
Here is the amazing result that emerged after a few years of foundational
foment, as these pioneers of the computing age started comparing notes: all
the different formal explications turned out to be provably co-extensive. That is
to say, any function deﬁnable in any one of the senses characterized turns
out to be deﬁnable also in each of the other senses characterized. Moreover,
the background mathematics that is needed in order to establish that these
different kinds of function are co-extensive is very weak indeed: the system of
so-called Exponential Function Arithmetic sufﬁces. So there is absolutely no
epistemological problem in taking their coextensiveness as an a priori certitude.

The Method of Conceptual Explication
149
Various independently motivated attempts were made, then, using different
formal conceptual materials, to characterize precisely a certain class of abstract
objects – here, the intuitively computable functions. The formal explications
all coincide in extension, and this is a matter of a priori certitude. They all agree
on which functions may be characterized as computable. We know, then, that
we are dealing with a stable and robust pre-theoretical notion. Accordingly, the
Turing–Church Thesis says that
a function is computable if and only if it is deﬁnable in any one (hence, in each) of
these various, provably equivalent, formal ways.
Computability, then, is a paradigm example of an informal, pre-theoretical
concept that has been satisfactorily explicated – in this case, by the formal
concept of a recursive function, or a function computable by a Turing machine
(to name the two most famous formal explications, due to Gödel and Turing
respectively).
One of the beneﬁts of (the presumed truth of) the Turing–Church Thesis
is that we can re-visit the diagonal argument given above, which rested
on what we called the Governing Assumption. We can now re-prove the
claim that not all computable functions are total, no longer making any use
of the Governing Assumption. This is because, courtesy of the Turing–Church
Thesis, we can effectively enumerate the computable functions by effectively
enumerating, ‘instead’, the Turing-Machine computable ones. The latter task
can be accomplished with absolute precision, with no hostages to fortune in
judging, intuitively, whether a given ﬁnite set of English instructions really
does guarantee that the function in question is genuinely computable. This
is because Turing machines themselves can be effectively coded as numbers,
and, given any such number, one can effectively determine whether it encodes
a Turing machine, and, if so, exactly which Turing machine it encodes. This
removes all doubt from the claim, in the proof above, that one can effectively
enumerate all and only the (Turing-machine)-computable functions. The diagonal
argument in question now goes through as before. Not all computable functions
are total.
Another signiﬁcant beneﬁt of the Turing–Church Thesis is that it affords an
exceptionally simple proof of Gödel’s famous result that ﬁrst-order arithmetical
truth is not axiomatizable. We shall be exploiting the Turing–Church Thesis to
this effect in Chapter 30. The argument to be presented there will involve yet
another application of the diagonal method.
Explicating the informal concept of a computable function was a magniﬁcent
achievement by the logicians and foundationalists of the 1930s. One of the
services that philosophers can render is to emulate this achievement in yet other
conceptual domains. That, for example, was what Carnap took himself to be
doing in his monumental work on the foundations of the theory of probability
(Carnap (1950)), in which he explicitly introduced, for the ﬁrst time, the very
idea of explication.

150
Philosophy and Method
10.4 Explication of the notion of cognitive signiﬁcance
The search for a criterion (or deﬁnition, or explication) of cognitive signiﬁcance
is of long standing. Unfortunately, for a very long time it was of dubious success.
The challenge is to analyze or explicate the notion of cognitive signiﬁcance,
so as to reveal just how the empirical content of the theoretical sentences of
science is acquired from the logical relationships they bear, within the scientiﬁc
theory in question, to the observation sentences by means of which the theory
can be tested. This tradition started with Ayer (1946), and continued through
the swan-song of Carnap (1956), although it began to peter out with the
famously pessimistic paper Hempel (1950). It has been revived again more
recently in various efforts by, among others, Wright (1986) and Tennant (1997),
Chapter 11.
Ayer sought to deﬁne the notion of cognitive signiﬁcance under the label
‘indirect veriﬁability’, in the second edition (1946) of his inﬂuential manifesto
Language, Truth and Logic, in which the main doctrines of Logical Positivism
were brought to the attention of the English-speaking world. The most difﬁcult
challenge now facing any attempted account of cognitive signiﬁcance is to ensure
that it is not vulnerable to the embarrassing sort of ‘collapse proof’ that was
visited by Church (1949) on Ayer’s misguided attempt to deﬁne the notion. A
collapse proof is one that reveals a really serious defect in the proposed deﬁnition
(or explication) of an intuitive notion. Such a proof shows (as Church’s proof
did in Ayer’s case) that the proposed deﬁniens turns out, quite unexpectedly, to
apply to all the sentences of the language (or to all but a negligible subclass), and
not just to those sentences satisfying the target notion (here, ‘being cognitively
signiﬁcant’). In the terminology of statistics, a collapse proof reveals that there
are too many ‘false positives’ for the deﬁniens in question. There could also be
too many ‘false negatives’ – that would be a deﬁnitional collapse of a different
kind.
A ‘false positive’ for a deﬁnition seeking to capture the notion of cognitive
signiﬁcance would be ‘The Absolute is perfect’. A ‘false negative’ would be ‘Snow
is white’ (or, indeed, ‘Snow is black’). At the every least one wishes, with one’s
deﬁnition of cognitive signiﬁcance, to rule in obvious cases such as observation
statements, and widely used and accepted scientiﬁc hypotheses such as Newton’s
Law of Gravitation, or the Maxwell–Faraday laws of electromagnetism. One also
wishes to rule in certain less obvious cases, such as now-discarded hypotheses that
ended up being falsiﬁed by experience but which, at the time they were proposed,
were not known to generate any false predictions. For that is the hallmark of a
good (i.e., cognitively signiﬁcant) scientiﬁc generalization: it admits, in principle,
of falsiﬁcation by experience.
Since there is no widely agreed deﬁnition of cognitive signiﬁcance, we shall
end this discussion without giving the details of any particular deﬁnition. It is
enough to mark, for the beginner, the fact that, of all the fraught notions that
philosophers have tried their hardest to explain and understand over the last
several decades, that of cognitive signiﬁcance appeared to be both signiﬁcant

The Method of Conceptual Explication
151
and cognitively accessible. Once a question mark was placed over its accessibility
(to our analytical and explicatory efforts), the reaction of many philosophers,
unfortunately, was to abandon the intuitive notion as not so signiﬁcant after
all – indeed, perhaps, as at best confused, and at worst incoherent and useless.
That is not the considered view of the present author, however, who regards the
notion as vital and important for the ‘science wars’. It is a notion still deserving of
a satisfactory analysis, and worthy of serious further consideration by young minds
entering the Philosophy profession. There just has to be something importantly
different between, on the one hand, the hysterical drivel one hears spouted on
evangelical TV channels, and, on the other hand, the sober-minded discourse of
Science. The former is not cognitively signiﬁcant; the latter is. And we need to
get clear about the deep reasons why.
Problems
1
Sketch an algorithm to compute the n-th prime number.
2
The Turing–Church Thesis says that all intuitively computable functions
are recursive (equivalently, can be computed by a Turing machine). Have
you thought about the converse claim: that all recursive (Turing-machine
computable) functions are intuitively computable? Make sure you understand
why this is so.
3
Why is the Turing–Church Thesis plausible?
4
(More advanced) Read around in the literature on recursive functions (Rogers
(1967) would be a good place to start) to ﬁnd the proof of the famous result
that the Halting Problem for Turing machines is undecidable. Make sure that
you can explain to a non-mathematician what the Halting Problem is. (Note
that the proof of this problem’s undecidability is yet another example of a
beautiful diagonal argument.)
5
Examine Hempel (1950) carefully in order to determine whether Hempel
proves anywhere in that paper that the notion of cognitive signiﬁcance cannot
be satisfactorily explicated.
6
What informal notions, besides those of computable function, probability and
cognitive signiﬁcance, do you think deserve to be properly explicated?
7
‘Axiomatic geometry is an explication of our intuitive concept of space.’
Discuss.

11 The Method of
Thought-Experiment
11.1 The role of thought-experiments in philosophical critique
Philosophical reasoning (like mathematical reasoning) can be criticized in either
one of two ways: (1) one can object to the assumed truth of a basic assumption
made in the course of the argument, and taken for granted for the purposes of that
argument; or (2) one can object to the validity or suasive power of a particular
step or transition made in the course of the argument.
In meeting a criticism of kind (1), the proponent of the argument has to
beware of the dangers of (a) inﬁnite regress, (b) circularity, and (c) inconsistency
or incoherence of the set of premises eventually taken as ‘ultimate’.
In Mathematics, criticisms of kind (2) (i.e., criticisms of fallacies in deductive
reasoning) can be backed up by displaying a ‘counterexample’. This will be some
model or construction that satisﬁes the immediate premises for the questionable
step, but falsiﬁes its conclusion. Any good teacher of Mathematics will have
considerable experience doing this for students. If a student, for example, makes
a step from ‘f is continuous on (0,1)’ to ‘f is uniformly continuous on (0,1)’, the
teacher will no doubt say something like
No, no! Consider the function f(x) = 1/x. This is continuous on (0,1)
but, because it gets ever steeper as x tends to 0, one’s choice of δ to take
care of every choice of tolerance ϵ is going to depend on the point x in
question ...
So too in Philosophy. When someone draws a questionable (i.e., fallacious)
inference in philosophical argumentation, the way we criticize it effectively
is to engage in a thought-experiment – one which reveals that the premises
could be true while yet the conclusion would turn out false. The literature of
contemporary analytical philosophy is replete with superbly inventive, ingenious
and creative thought-experiments of this kind. (In fact, it sometimes seems
to this author that philosophers acquire greater reputations for their ability to
construct counterexamples than for their ability to prosecute long trains of valid
reasoning.)

The Method of Thought-Experiment
153
Other cases of the exercise of introspective intuition are to be found
in the thought-experiments of metaphysicians, epistemologists and philoso-
phers of mind and language. In these thought-experiments, one tests to
the limit the application of concepts of philosophical importance.
One
imagines wildly different ‘possible worlds’ or bizarre situations which serve
to bring out distinctions among concepts that might otherwise be taken
to be the ‘same’, by virtue of applying to the same objects under normal
circumstances.
One can represent what is happening in a thought-experiment by means
of a pair of diagrams. In normal circumstances, two concepts F and G (for
example, ‘human being’ and ‘rational animal’; or, more suggestively, ‘fat’ and
‘greedy’) might coincide in extension. That is, they may apply to exactly the
same things. Let us represent things (or objects, or individuals, or particulars,
or entities) as dots within a rectangle, which represents the limits of the
world. Let us represent the extension of concept F within that world by a
solid boundary, and the extension of concept G by a dotted boundary. The
co-extensiveness of concepts F and G in the actual world may be represented
like this:
F
G
If normal circumstances were all that ever came under consideration, one
might be led to conﬂate the two concepts F and G: that is, to identify them
as concepts simply because they happen to apply to the same things. But
the identity of concepts is not owed to happenstance. It is owed to their
necessarily applying to the same things. For F to be the same concept as G, it
is necessary that anything that is F, is G; and it is necessary that anything that
is G, is F.
So suppose now that it is a mistake to conﬂate the concepts F and G.
That means that either it is not necessary that every F is G; or, it is not
necessary that every G is F. To bring out the failure of either of these
necessities, it is enough to describe (or imagine, or construct) a possible world

154
Philosophy and Method
or different set of circumstances in which something is F but not G; or is G but
not F:
F
G
G
F
These two diagrams illustrate the respective possibilities. Of these different
possible worlds one intuits that the concepts would, therein, apply to different
things, thereby bringing out the difference between those concepts. Of course
the force of the intuition depends on the way the details of the imagined ‘possible
world’ are ﬂeshed out.
Now in examining any analysis of a concept F on offer, a critically minded
philosopher often has recourse to the method of thought-experiment: the
construction, even in wild imagination, of a possible world in which there is an
object or situation to which the analysandum concept F applies, but the analysans
G does not (as illustrated in the diagram on the left above); or vice versa (as
illustrated in the diagram on the right above). Criticism of a proffered analysis
is an act of de-conﬂation. One imaginatively prises two concepts apart: the one
to be analyzed, and the (usually complex) one that has been offered by way of
analysis. One brings out a potential mismatch in their ranges of application (their
extensions).
Whenever conceptual analyses of important concepts are offered, the race
is on to ﬁnd counterexamples that will force a reﬁnement of the analysis, or
even the eventual abandonment of the analytical project in question. This
is when philosophical energies become focused on the search for ingenious
counterexamples. In this exercise one sees the philosophical imagination at work,
at times with inspiration, subtlety, genius. It is an intellectually creative exercise.
A training in logic is invaluable both for those who wish to engage in the analysis
or explication of concepts of philosophical importance, and for those who wish
to demonstrate that a proffered analysis is defective.
Someone outside academic philosophical circles may not be aware of just what
a staple the far-fetched thought-experiment has become. In no particular order,
we enumerate below some of the thought-experiments to be found in the late
nineteenth- and twentieth-century philosophical literature. They have become
a standard part of the analytical philosopher’s intellectual tool-kit.

The Method of Thought-Experiment
155
Almost all thought-experiments involve absurdly improbable scenarios; but
that does not detract at all from their dialectical potency. When students learn
Philosophy they learn, among other things, how to open their minds to the
most far-fetched, bizarre possibilities – situations which stretch certain concepts
to their limits, in order to explore the conceptual connections among the
concepts themselves. In acquiring this intellectual skill, they have to learn to
put aside their beliefs concerning the probability or likelihood or feasibility of the
imagined scenarios. Convictions about how remote these possibilities may be,
given one’s everyday experience (or even given one’s scientiﬁc knowledge as
well) will actually detract from the student’s ability to gain increased philosophical
understanding of what is at issue. All that is necessary is that the thought
experiment should be conducted in such clear and simple terms that certain
‘truths within it’ will be granted intuitively, or upon appropriate reﬂection.
Skillfully arranged, the right scenario will make the premises of the challenged
inference true, and make its conclusion false.
For the analytical philosopher, misunderstanding of the analytical method
is a recurrent risk when pursuing exchanges with scholars in other disciplines.
The present author once engaged in such an exchange with the well-known
mathematical popularizer Reuben Hersh, co-author, with Philip J. Davis, of the
best-selling book The Mathematical Experience (Hersh and Davis (1981)).
Hersh had alleged that numbers are non-abstract and humanity-dependent.
The present author sought to elicit certain conclusions from this view, and then
construct (perfectly licitly) certain thought-experiments that would confound
those conclusions. One of the thought experiments involved inviting Hersh
to consider the conceptual possibility of extraterrestrial intelligent beings who
are capable of mathematical thought and its linguistic communication. (It was
not even required that one maintain such ETI as a physical possibility modulo
our current best physical theories.) Another thought-experiment invited Hersh
to consider the possible extinction of all intelligent beings, followed by their
serendipitous evolutionary recapitulation, to the point of re-developing number
theory in the same form that it had had with their cosmic precursors.
The purpose of these two thought-experiments was to create difﬁculty for the
view that the natural numbers would cease to exist if human beings ceased to
exist; and for the view that human intellects would have a total monopoly on
intellectual access to the natural numbers. Both of these views were explicit, or
clearly implicit, in what Hersh had maintained.
Hersh expressed disbelief in the likelihood of such beings or sequences of
events. He failed to appreciate that such an objection would be entirely beside
the point in such a conceptual exercise. Among professional philosophers at least,
a certain erudite delight is sometimes to be had from making a well-known
thought-experiment even more preposterous and far-fetched than the original, in
order to establish yet another conceptual point not made by the original. The
perverse intellectual delight stems from making the needed ‘intuitively evident’
truths in the weird situation intuitively evident despite the utterly far-fetched
nature of the imagined scenario.

156
Philosophy and Method
The famous Cambridge mathematician John Littlewood (1885–1977) once
related a story of his visit to his old high school, to give an invited talk to
the sixth form (= senior year, for those in the USA). He was giving them
a simple proof, in the course of which he said ‘Suppose now that x is a real
number’. A hand went up in the back of the room. ‘But Sir, suppose x isn’t a real
number!’
Clearly the young objector had failed to grasp what was going on with
‘Let ...’-clauses in the kinds of quantiﬁed reasoning so essential to modern
mathematics. These forms of reasoning are now perfectly well understood, and
are codiﬁed exactly in highly developed systems of natural deduction.
In the same way, anyone who scoffs at a thought-experiment on the grounds
that the envisaged situation is hugely unlikely, or irrelevant to daily human
concerns, has simply failed to grasp what is going on with the ‘Let’s imagine
a case where ...’ clauses in the kinds of thought-experimental reasoning so
essential to contemporary Philosophy. These forms of reasoning are perfectly well
understood, and are a core component of highly developed forms of philosophical
argumentation. Naturally, being more discursive and open-ended, they have not
been codiﬁed in the precise way that ﬁrst-order logical reasoning has been. But
that is not the crucial issue at stake in this analogy.
11.2 Some famous thought-experiments in analytical philosophy
Two excellent sources providing accounts of thought experiments in much
greater depth than can be managed here are Sorensen (1992) and Gendler
(2000).
11.2.1 The ship of Theseus
Plutarch (ad 75) is the oldest extant source for the famous example of the ship
of Theseus, which is re-built plank by plank, until none of the original pieces
of wood remains. Is it still the same ship? To make the question more pressing:
suppose that the removed planks are reassembled to make another (?) ... or the
original (?) ... ship. Which one is the original ship? This is one of the oldest
thought experiments concerning the interplay among matter, form, persistence
and identity.
11.2.2 Descartes’s evil demon
This celebrated thought-experiment in Meditation I in Descartes (1641a) is
perhaps the progenitor of them all. Descartes’s evil demon is supposed to be
able systematically to deceive him in all his thinking about the external world.
Descartes’s aim was to thereby cast doubt on any inference roughly like ‘I (appear
to myself directly to) perceive that p, and that perceptual impression coheres with
all my other impressions; therefore, it is true that p’.

The Method of Thought-Experiment
157
11.2.3 Putnam’s brain-in-a-vat
Putnam (1981), Chapter 1, imagined an alternative scenario of a ‘brain in a vat’,
whose sensory stimulations are supplied by a mad scientist, and whose afferent
nerve signals are monitored by said scientist. Putnam’s aim was to make the
problem of skepticism about the external world more compelling.
11.2.4 Putnam’s Twin-Earth
Putnam (1973) undertakes a thought-experiment involving ‘Twin Earth’, where
everyone and everything on Earth has a molecule-for-molecule Doppelgänger,
except that what appears to be water on Twin Earth has the chemical
constitution XYZ rather than H2O. The purpose of this thought-experiment was
to challenge the assumption that ‘meanings are in the head’.
11.2.5 Gettier-type examples
We saw above that one of the most famous of philosophical analyses holds
that knowledge is justiﬁed true belief. Gettier-type examples seek to challenge
this analysis in its right-to-left direction. That is, they involve situations where
one would intuitively be prepared to say that a person is justiﬁed in holding a
particular belief, and that the belief in question is true; but where one would
nevertheless not be prepared to say that the person knew the truth of the
proposition in question. Gettier’s example was of a fellow who had a red Ford,
which gets stolen but is promptly replaced with an exact replica.
11.2.6 Williams’s example of ‘character and memory switch’
Williams (1970) gave an example of two people who are offered the prospect of
the ‘character and memory switch’, followed by reward to one and punishment
to the other. The purpose of this thought-experiment was to raise doubts about
whether bodily continuity is sufﬁcient for personal identity.
11.2.7 The problem of the inverted spectrum
The problem of the inverted spectrum was given in Locke (1689), in the
chapter ‘Of True and False Ideas’. Modern philosophers have resuscitated Locke’s
problem (where, say, one’s impressions of red and green get switched), in order
to challenge the functionalist in the philosophy of mind (see Chapter 24). For
the functionalist claims that every mental state is characterized by the logical
role it plays as a state in the ‘program’ that ‘is’ the human mind. This, in the
light of the example of the inverted spectrum, would appear to underdetermine
the phenomenal reality of particular color-impressions on the part of a conscious
subject.

158
Philosophy and Method
11.2.8 Jackson’s scientist Mary
Jackson (1982) gave an example involving the scientist Mary, who knows
everything there is to know about neurochemistry, etc., but who sees everything
in black, white, and grays. The purpose of this thought-experiment is to
challenge the notion that materialism could hold all the truth there is to know
about mental experience. (That is why it has earned the label ‘the knowledge
argument’.)
11.2.9 Kripke’s standard meter-rod
Kripke (1980), at pp. 54ff., gives the example of the standard meter-rod in Paris,
in order to challenge the inference from ‘proposition P is known a priori’ to
‘proposition P is necessary’. For, one knows a priori that the standard meter-rod
is 1 meter long; yet, for all that, it is possible that that very rod not be exactly
1 meter long. Its contingent length in the actual world happens to ﬁx for us
the precise length of 1 meter. But, with that precise length ﬁxed, we can then
imagine that very rod being of a different length in another possible world.
11.2.10 Ayer’s universe of sounds
Ayer (1963), at p. 34, gave an example of a universe consisting of four sounds,
repeated ad inﬁnitum, in a series with no beginning and no end:
... , A, B, C, D, A, B, C, D, ....
It was intended as a counterexample to the famous and contentious Principle of
Identity of Indiscernibles – the Leibnizian principle that maintains that any ‘two’
things possessed of exactly the same properties, and standing in exactly the same
relations to ‘other things’, are identical, i.e., are one and the same thing. Hacking
(1975), at pp. 254–55, turned Ayer’s example on its head. He points out that
[Leibniz]’s reply is to query whether this Ayerial world has anything except
the sounds A, B,C, and D, each occurring just once. We know that, if there
is absolute space-time serving as a receptacle for objects or sounds, then [the
Principle of Identity of Indiscernibles] is false. ... But if time is deﬁned in
terms of relations between objects, then we cannot use the temporal position
of the objects or sounds to show that, for example, there are two (or inﬁnitely
many) occurrences of A. ... There is not enough structure in Ayer’s universe to
guarantee a linear order to time. (Emphasis added.)
11.2.11 Searle’s ‘Chinese room’ argument
Searle (1980) advanced the famous Chinese room argument against any func-
tionalist or computationalist account of mind. He asks one to imagine a
monoglot English-speaker (such as himself) sitting in a locked room all by himself
(presumably with an ‘in’ slot and an ‘out’ slot in one of its walls), using a manual

The Method of Thought-Experiment
159
(written in English) to produce responses, written in Chinese characters, to
input-batches that are also written in Chinese characters. When he gets really
efﬁcient at it, any outside observer would think that the person inside the room
was a Chinese speaker (and reader). But, ex hypothesi, he is not. The English
manual that he is using contains the functionalist’s proposed ‘set of rules’ for
manipulating symbols on the basis of their form alone (which is the essence of a
computer program). Searle thereby challenges the notion that all that is involved
in linguistic understanding is mechanical, ‘symbolic’ computation. See §24.3.5
for further discussion.
11.2.12 Block’s ‘China brain’
Block (1978) popularized the following thought-experiment. Imagine every
person in China having a walkie-talkie radio, so that the whole population is
like a neural network, each Chinese person receiving and sending signals like
a neuron, with the walkie-talkie connections mimicking the pattern of axons
and dendrites in a human brain. The whole Chinese population would therefore
instantiate a functionalist’s program of supposedly mental states. Would this
macro-entity be conscious, the way a human brain is?
11.2.13 Zombies as a possible refutation of physicalism
Physicalists in the Philosophy of Mind form a category that includes, among
others, behaviorists, psycho-physical identity theorists, and functionalists. These
are all theorists who believe that the physical facts ﬁx all the mental facts; so they
are not denying the reality of the mental itself. All of them hold in common that
conscious mental states and processes arise somehow from the physical workings
of the brain and central nervous system. The most problematic imaginary
counterexample that these physicalists have to wrestle with is the possibility of
zombies – creatures that are constituted, and behave, like human beings, but
who (if a personal pronoun is appropriate here), we are invited to imagine, have
no inner experiences at all. The ﬁrst question to confront is whether zombies
really are metaphysically possible. (Not every imaginable type of thing need be
metaphysically possible.) Then, if they are held to be metaphysically possible, the
second question to confront is whether that possibility refutes the philosophical
thesis of physicalism about mind. The reader can gain good access to the debate
through Campbell (1970); Kirk (1974); Block (1980); Chalmers (1996); Kirk
(2005); and Kirk (2008).
Problems
Acquaint yourself,
using the cited sources, with the following thought-
experiments in the contemporary philosophical literature. In each case, decide
whether the thought-experiment in question achieves its inventor’s stated aim.

160
Philosophy and Method
1
The ‘deviant causal chains’ that are intended to create problems for any
attempt to give a causal analysis of knowledge. (Peacocke (1979))
2
Runaway trolley-car examples and doomsday machine examples, which are
intended to raise problems for various Utilitarian accounts of what the right
thing to do is. (Foot (1967))
3
The ‘Cretan translation manual’, which was invoked in an attempt to give a
clinching example of the necessarily indeterminate character of translation.
(Massey (1978))
4
The telecloning and split-brain examples that are intended to create
problems for various accounts of personal identity. (Dennett’s Introduction
to Hofstadter and Dennett (1981))
5
The ‘quadder’, who interprets ‘x + y’ in such a way as to get the sum of x
and y if they are both less than 57, but to get 5 otherwise. The quadder
poses problems for the view that what a speaker means by a certain expression
must be determined by past and present facts concerning the speaker. (Kripke
(1982))
6
Swampman – the being who is created by a bolt of lightning hitting an
old tree stump in a swamp; and is a molecule-for-molecule replica of the
thought-experimenter in question, who (in the thought experiment) had
been killed by another lightning bolt nearby, just moments before. The
example is best understood as a challenge to an insufﬁciently sophisticated
materialism about the mind, according to which current mental states are
wholly determined by current physical states. (Davidson (1987))
7
The ‘lifelong’ Robinson-Crusoe example, raised as a challenge to the view that
thought and language are necessarily social. (Ayer (1954))
8
The Makropulos case: adduced to disabuse one of what might otherwise seem
to be a rational longing for immortality. (Williams (1973b))
9
Languageless but obviously rational creatures: thought up as a counterexample
to the analytical dogma that thought requires talk. (Kirk (1967))

12 Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
12.1 Creativity and rigor in intellectual pursuits
From what has been said thus far about mathematical proof, scientiﬁc discovery
and testing, and philosophical analysis and criticism, one is in a position to
venture a general claim about creativity and accomplishment in all three of
those areas. This is an attempt to ‘get to the bottom’ of what is involved in
such creativity.
It is analogous to the way theoretical linguists try to ‘get to the bottom’ of
the various natural languages spoken by the peoples of this planet. Despite
their surface dissimilarities, these languages have yielded, upon investigation,
similarities at a deeper level. They appear to be cut to a common pattern, which
it is the task of theoretical linguistics to make clear. The linguist is after the
common pattern in these different systems of communication. This modern
approach to linguistics began with Chomsky (1965).
In a similar way, we are now after the common pattern in creative thinking in
the different areas of Mathematics, Science and Philosophy.
A great mathematician is one who can identify a statement of deep interest
and importance; (i) prove it, if it is true; and (ii) construct a counterexample
(a mathematical ‘possible world’), if it is false. The proof will be from a given
set of axioms. The counterexample will also be constrained by those axioms: it
must be a possible situation (a ‘model’, in the parlance of mathematicians) in
which the axioms are true but the conjecture turns out false. One of the classic
statements about mathematical creativity is Poincaré (1913), Book I, Chapter III:
‘Mathematical Creation’.
A great scientist is one who can identify a sweeping generalization H of
great predictive power. The scientist can then test it against available evidence
E, and reject H if it fails to explain E. The failure can be of two kinds:
E may not be deducible from H; or, worse, one may be able to deduce
absurdity from the conjunction of H and E. The ﬁrst kind of failure involves
the ability to ﬁnd a counterexample. The second kind of failure involves
the ability to construct a (dis)proof. The scientist must be able to ﬁnd the
counterexample, or the (dis)proof, as the case may be. (A disproof is a special
kind of proof – one whose conclusion is absurdity. A disproof shows that the set

162
Philosophy and Method
of assumptions that it used to derive absurdity cannot all be true, in any possible
world.)
If, however, the hypothesis H succeeds in explaining the evidence E (that is, if
there is a proof of evidence E as conclusion, from hypothesis H), then the scientisit
will go further. He or she will try to deduce from H new predictions P concerning
experimentally contrivable circumstances (scientiﬁcally ‘possible worlds’). In
thinking up the experimental situations that would provide a good test of an
hypothesis, the scientist is once more devising models: possible worlds in which
certain boundary conditions hold true. The idea is that, if the hypothesis is true,
then the observations ought to bear out the new predictions P that have been
deduced from the hypothesis in conjunction with the statement of the boundary
conditions. The new predictions P, that is, can then be tested against further
evidence E′ that comes to light once those experimental circumstances have
been contrived. Once again, this testing by E′ has the logical structure just
described. So we see that the scientist has to be involved in (i) ﬁnding proofs
and (ii) constructing models, or possible worlds.
A great philosopher, likewise, is one who can identify concepts and fun-
damental beliefs of great importance; offer interesting, illuminating analyses
of those concepts, or necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for the truth of
those beliefs; and construct imaginative counterexamples to defective rival
analyses. Once again, the thinker is (i) ﬁnding proofs, or (ii) constructing
counterexamples.
In all three cases – mathematician, scientist and philosopher – creativity
is patterned, logically,
in the same way.
It involves a search for order
and system; a high degree of logical or deductive insight, involved in the
discovery of proofs; and a fertility of imagination, involved in the discovery of
counterexamplary models. The mathematician can construct counterexamples
within a framework of given axioms; the scientist can think up experiments to
perform in the real world; the philosopher can think up a possible, perhaps even
bizarrely different, world to bring out the distinction between two concepts or
beliefs.
Behind these kinds of creativity, centrally at work in its exercise, is the ability
to construct a line of argument, a train of reasoning, a chain of inferences,
a proof. Note how with these metaphors – line, train, and chain – one has
the impression of thought being shackled, or manacled, or inexorably driven.
It is what Wittgenstein called the hardness of the logical must. Mathematical
conjectures, scientiﬁc hypotheses, and philosophical analyses have to be put
in leg-irons, and brought to the fatal shores of observation and introspective
intuition.
Moreover, ﬁnding a proof or a counterexample to a given conjecture is no rote
matter, contrary to the hope and expectation that Leibniz expressed with his
famous injunction Calculemus! For we now know, by Church’s undecidability
theorem for ﬁrst-order logic (see Church (1936a), Church (1936b)), that there
is no effective method for deciding whether there is a proof of a given conclusion
from given premises.

Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
163
12.2 General principles, rules and methods
In Science we count, measure, take readings, pick random samples, note
maxima and minima, calculate means and standard deviations and coefﬁcients
of correlation. We postulate that various measurable magnitudes are governed,
in their change over time, by certain differential equations; it is then a
mathematical task to ﬁnd out what sorts of function satisfy those differential
equations. When we feed in boundary conditions we determine constants of
integration; when we want a prediction for time t we compute the value of
the integrated function for time t. Science appears to be totally reliant on the
mathematics of number and probability.
Moreover, scientiﬁc breakthroughs tend increasingly to be associated with the
use of a new kind of mathematical theory, or a new use of an existing one.
(This is another justiﬁcation that can be offered for doing ‘pure’ mathematics:
one can never predict with certainty that it will forever remain ‘pure’.) Early
in the twentieth century we had Einstein’s theory of relativity, based on
non-Euclidean geometry; and the theory of quantum mechanics, due to Max
Planck (1858–1947), Niels Bohr (1885–1962), Werner Heisenberg (1901–76),
and Erwin Schrödinger (1887–1961), applying the mathematics of Hilbert spaces
and Hermitian operators. More recently, we have seen catastrophe theory,
invented by René Thom (1923–2002), applied to the description of sudden
changes – ‘threshold phenomena’ – of complex dynamical systems, in which it is
difﬁcult to trace out lines of local causal inﬂuence; and we have seen the theory
of chaos and fractals developed by Benoit Mandelbrot (1924–2010) applied to
describe the behavior of systems obeying non-linear equations. A new form of
Mathematics can bring with it a new ‘mind-set’, a new way of seeing phenomena,
a new way of conceptualizing cause and change in the domain to which it is
applied. So the role of Mathematics in Science is not just conﬁned to counting
and measuring and doing arithmetical or statistical calculations with the results.
It can provide instead part of the very language and conceptual apparatus for our
description of the world.
So: Science makes extensive, and apparently indispensable, use of Mathemat-
ics. In the rest of this chapter we shall examine Philosophy’s perennial fascination
with Mathematics. In the next chapter we shall show how Mathematics needs
Logic.
12.3 Philosophy’s perennial fascination with Mathematics
Plato, Descartes, Leibniz, Berkeley, Hume, Kant, Frege, Russell, Wittgenstein,
Carnap, and Quine are just a few of the great philosophers who have wrestled
with the nature of Mathematics. Mathematics raises problems in both ontology
(the study of what there is) and epistemology (the theory of knowledge). What
are mathematical objects? And what is the nature of mathematical knowledge?
Thought about these two main issues has been deeply inﬂuenced by the
following features of Mathematics. (These features are stated here in the way

164
Philosophy and Method
majority opinion among philosophers and mathematicians would have them. For
each such opinion there are always some dissidents.)
12.3.1 Mathematical truths are necessarily true
Another way of putting this is to say that mathematical truths are true in all
possible worlds. It would not matter how bizarrely different another world might
be. It could be the weirdest creation of science ﬁction; or a ﬁgment of the creative
metaphysician’s thought-experiments. In any such world it would still be true
that (for example) 7 + 5 = 12; and that for no whole number n > 2 can one ﬁnd
positive whole numbers a, b, and c such that an + bn = cn.
12.3.2 Mathematical truth seems to rest on a few primitive, self-evident
truths (so-called ‘axioms’)
From these axioms the remaining truths can be logically derived. This was the
great intellectual discovery of the ancient Greeks – speciﬁcally, Euclid. From just
a few basic postulates Euclid derived all of the then known geometry.
12.3.3 Mathematical truth is knowable without sensory experience
Another way of putting this is to say that mathematical truth is a priori. To come
to know a mathematical truth, it sufﬁces to have a proof. It is also necessary to
have a proof. We have to be careful to discount the sensory experience possibly
needed in order to acquire the concepts involved in formulating the truth in
question. Once one has mastered these concepts, one can come to know the truth
simply by reasoning – one does not have to observe the external world, or carry
out experiments within it. The proof is a purely intellectual construction, which
can be communicated to other mathematicians. That this involves processes in
the external world, such as writing symbols on a board or in the sand or on a piece
of paper, is neither here nor there. The existence of the proof type transcends
these physical manifestations or ‘tokenings’, as philosophers call them. The proof
type is indeed another mathematical object, in the same realm as the objects
talked about in the statements that occur in the proof itself. (One contemporary
problem has arisen for the idea that a mathematical proof does not require sensory
experience, or in general experience of the external world. The problem is that
nowadays we can use computers to carry through details of proofs that would take
us far too long. Here we seem to be relying on the correct functioning of physical
machines in arriving at mathematical knowledge.)
12.3.4 Mathematical objects are in an eternal realm other than
that of space-time
Where exactly is the number 0? If you point to any empty region and say ‘there’,
then answer this question: where exactly is ‘the’ square root of −1? (There are

Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
165
actually two of them; and no way to tell which is which. See Shapiro (2012).)
Where exactly is the power set of the set of natural numbers? Are there any
straight lines in physical space? Mathematical objects would appear to be sui
generis – of their own kind. They are abstract as opposed to concrete objects.
They do not inhabit space-time. They are not part of the causal order. Yet
the structures they form are invariant, immutable, and eternal, giving rise to
necessary truths about them. They seem to be accessible only to intellectual
intuition, or to thought ‘with one’s eyes closed’, as it were.
12.3.5 Mathematics begins with very simple concepts, and builds up
much more complicated ones by means of deﬁnitions
The ﬁrst kind of deﬁnition is explicit deﬁnition. Here, the concept to be deﬁned is
expressed as a logical compound of concepts already available and understood.
Take, for example, the concept ‘x is a prime number’. This can be deﬁned
as ‘x is a natural number divisible without remainder only by itself and 1’. The
latter deﬁnition involves the concepts of divisibility and of remainder. These
can in turn be deﬁned in terms of multiplication and addition, two of the
simple concepts that one takes as primitive when doing the arithmetic of whole
numbers.
Another example of explicit deﬁnition would be the concept of a triangle. In
a geometry using as basic the concepts of point, line and plane, a triangle can be
deﬁned as consisting of three non-concurrent lines each pair of which intersects.
Alternatively, it could be deﬁned as consisting of any three distinct points, along
with the lines joining each pair of them.
A ﬁnal example of explicit deﬁnition is that of the derivative f′(a) of a
real-valued function f(x) deﬁned on the reals, at the argument x = a:
lim
δ→0
f(a + δ) −f(a)
δ
.
This in turn requires an explicit deﬁnition of the notion
lim
δ→0g(δ),
which may be given thus:
ιy(∀ϵ>0∃γ >0∀x(|x| <γ →|g(x) −y|<ϵ)
(the unique real number y such that for every positive tolerance ϵ one can ﬁnd a
positive bound γ such that for every real number x within the bound γ of 0, g(x)
is within the tolerance ϵ of y).
Next there is the method of inductive deﬁnition. This is the kind of deﬁnition
that ‘stratiﬁes’ the instances of the concept C into levels C0, C1, ...ad inﬁnitum.
Level C0 consists of the simplest instances of the concept C, which can be
speciﬁed directly. Then at each subsequent level Cn+1 one includes instances

166
Philosophy and Method
that can be ‘constructed out of’ instances at any one of the preceding levels
C0,...,Cn. The means of construction can be speciﬁed clearly. Something is
an instance of the concept C only if it appears at some level Cn.
A simple example of an inductive deﬁnition is that of the function called ‘n
factorial’ (written n!):
0! = df1
(n + 1)! = df(n + 1).(n!).
Another example of an inductive deﬁnition is that of a formula of a logical
language. Here the simplest formulae are speciﬁed directly (as A, B, C,... or
what have you; so-called atoms, or propositional variables); and the means of
construction are the connectives of negation (¬), conjunction (∧), disjunction
(∨) and implication (if →). These connectives allow one to form, respectively,
formulae of the compound forms
¬ϕ, (ϕ ∧ψ), (ϕ ∨ψ), (ϕ →ψ)
from formulae ϕ and ψ that have already been formed.
The ﬁnal method of deﬁnition to be mentioned here is that of implicit deﬁnition.
This is the method whereby one ‘ﬁxes the meanings’ of terms by using them in a
set of basic principles. This, in effect, is how the notions of point, line and plane
are ‘deﬁned’ in geometrical theorizing. One can give informal hints, such as that
a point is that which has no length or breadth, a line is that which has length
but no breadth, etc. But these hints are not part of the theory itself. Rather,
the theory implicitly deﬁnes what counts as points, lines and planes by spelling
out all the structural interrelationships that obtain among such entities. Any
interpretation of the language that makes the theory true will then contain its
versions of points, lines and planes.
12.3.6 Mathematical concepts are the most ‘ideal’ types in science
Bishop Berkeley was exercised by the puzzle of how it is that we can prove results
quite generally for all triangles by thinking about ‘only one triangle’, namely the
one we happen to draw on the page when doing the proof. The modern logician’s
answer is that we use only such information about the drawn triangle as would be
available for any triangle whatsoever. All triangles have exactly the same features
in common in so far as their triangularity is concerned. The same cannot be said
about, say, horses (or could it?).
12.3.7 Mathematics is full of vivid metaphor at the informal level;
but can be treated in a rigorous, symbolic, fully formalized
way as well
When communicating mathematical ideas and results informally, we use
language rich in visual and spatial metaphor, and metaphors of motion and

Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
167
touch: impact, taking apart, putting together, constructing, choosing, ﬁnding,
selecting, ... Yet when a proof is completely reﬁned as a mathematical
object itself, it is simply a partial ordering of occurrences of formulae in a
completely formal language. Only the shapes of the symbols and the patterns
of their occurrences within the proof are relevant to determining whether the
arrangement is indeed a proof. The proof is completely purged of metaphor.
Informal mathematical creativity can involve the exercise of an almost poetic
power of intellect; and yet the ultimate object produced – the formal proof – is
utterly devoid of any traces of such origins. This polarity of discovery and
presentation is hardly equalled in any other branch of intellectual endeavor.
12.3.8 Really powerful mathematical intuition or insight appears to be
a gift of genius granted to but a few
Think of Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855), who worked out, at the age of ﬁve,
how to add every number from 1 to 1,000: 1,001 × 500 = 500,500. Think of
Srinivasa Ramanujan (1887–1920), writing down the results on inﬁnite series
summations that (so he claimed) an angel had done for him on a tablet in
his dreams, while he was asleep. (See Kanigel (1991), a fascinating biography
of Ramunajan.) Think of Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) boarding the Sunday
charabanc after drinking thrice-boiled coffee, and being hit in a ﬂash by the
series of Fuchsian functions. Think of Saul Kripke, who at the age of sixteen
invented possible worlds semantics for intuitionistic and modal logics. (See
Kripke (1963).) Think of Harvey Friedman (b. 1948), who at the age of sixteen
proved that if intuitionistic Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory is consistent, then so
is classical Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. Western and Eastern culture has long
had a deep reverence for such astonishing talent. Its products enter our cultural
heritage, and serve to elevate, edify, and enrich the lives of those who come after.
Mathematics is used to mediate in disputes. It was the measurement of land
on the Egyptian ﬂood plains that led to the birth of geometry. Mathematics is
used to whisk people from one place to another. It was the invention of the
differential and integral calculus that put the technology of aeronautics, rocketry
and ballistics within reach. Mathematics is used to store and process information
on any topic. The information-processing revolution would not have got under
way without the pioneering efforts of philosophers, mathematicians and logicians
in the 1920s and 1930s on the notion of computable function. Of course, all these
uses have their ‘downsides’. We have airplanes helping to destroy the ozone layer,
Scud missiles, nuclear weapons, the danger of Big Brother, and computer crime.
12.3.9 Mathematical knowledge is one of the best available examples of
objective knowledge
Even you and the computer criminal could agree on whether the computation
was mathematically correct. The scientists of one superpower can check the
mathematical calculations of defecting scientists from another superpower.

168
Philosophy and Method
12.3.10 Mathematical knowledge is one of the best examples of
knowledge that can be accommodated in an increasingly
generalized conceptual framework
Ever since Euclid, the process of axiomatization has led to the choice of more
basic concepts in various branches of Mathematics. The last century has also seen
the development of various theories aiming for the utmost generality, in which
all of extant mathematics could be developed. Such theories are type theory, set
theory and category theory.
12.3.11 Mathematics is curiously applicable to reality
Witness applied mathematics, and its ‘unreasonable effectiveness’ (Wigner
(1960)). The ﬁrst great physicist of the experimental age, Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642), wrote that
Philosophy is written in this grand book – I mean the universe – which
stands continually open to our gaze, but it cannot be understood unless
one ﬁrst learns to comprehend the language in which it is written. It is
written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles,
circles, and other geometric ﬁgures, without which it is humanly impossible
to understand a single word of it; without these, one is wandering about in a
dark labyrinth.
(Translated in Popkin (1966), p. 65)
12.3.12 Mathematics, at times of conceptual convulsion, can produce
paradoxes
The most famous example is Russell’s Paradox. Frege had tried to lay the
foundations of a set theory which had principles of such generality that (he
hoped) it could really be regarded as a branch of logic. In this theory all of
mathematics was to be derived by deﬁning numbers as suitable sets. Hence the
title of Frege’s program: Logicism.
Frege included in his theory the very general principle that any property
determined a set: the set of all and only those objects that possess the property in
question. This is nowadays known as the Principle of Naïve Comprehension. Its
naïveté was revealed as follows.
Russell asked Frege to consider the property ‘not being a member of oneself’.
According to Frege’s principle, this property must determine a set. Let R be
such a set. R is the set of all and only those things that are not members
of themselves. Now comes Russell’s question: is R a member of R (i.e., of
itself)? If it is, then it has the deﬁning property of R, namely that it is not
a member of itself. So R is not a member of itself. But now, since R is not a

Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
169
member of itself, it must belong to the set of all and only those things that
are not members of themselves – that is, to R. So, after all, R is a member of
itself.
Russell’s Paradox brings out the hubris involved in thinking that we can conceive
of the universe as a ﬁnished totality: that we can grasp as one thing all that
there is. For the Russell set is, in effect, the set consisting of everything. This is
because nothing is a member of itself. Thus the deﬁning property of the Russell
set – non-self-membership – applies to everything.
The ‘paradox’ can be understood now as a reductio ad absurdum of the
assumption that there is such a thing as the Russell set. This assumption is
lurking in the background, and implicitly used, when we ‘instantiate’ the general
claim that any thing is a member of the Russell set if and only if that thing
has that set’s deﬁning property, i.e., non-self-membership. The instantiation is
to the particular claim that the Russell set is a member of the Russell set if
and only if the Russell set has the deﬁning condition of non-self-membership.
Indeed, the unwarranted existence assumption is invoked even earlier, in the
initial passage to the general claim itself. For that general claim was derived from
the Naïve Comprehension Principle according to which for every property (in
particular, non-self-membership) there exists a set of things having that property.
So the proof of Russell’s Paradox is knee-deep (both knees) in commitment to
the existence of the Russell set.
The correct response to Russell’s Paradox is to get clear about the conditions
under which sets of different kinds exist. Frege’s principle was too naïve in its
generality. It was replaced by a family of principles that licensed the existence
of various less ambitious sets much more cautiously. Thus it was that modern set
theory was born, and came to be appreciated as a part of Mathematics rather than
of Logic.
12.4 How Mathematics needs Logic
Much of Mathematics is based on intuition, especially of a spatial or visual kind.
But even when doing something as vividly visualizable as plane geometry, the
rigorous development of any branch of Mathematics requires us to be able to
write down in an exact language the ﬁrst principles that we regard as self-evident
and true. We ask ourselves what the basic notions are; and what the basic
truths concerning them may be. The basic notions concern kinds of mathe-
matical entities, their primitive properties, and the primitive relations among
them.
When doing geometry, for example, we may take the primitive kinds of
entity to be points, lines and planes; or, alternatively, take as primitive entities
points and sets, thereby treating lines and planes as sets of points. Once having
chosen our primitive entities we have to specify their primitive properties and
relations. In geometry, these will include the relations of identity, coincidence

170
Philosophy and Method
and betweenness. We may also specify a distance function, or metric, whose job
it is to say how far apart from each other any two points are. Then we advance
to lay down axioms or postulates or ﬁrst principles governing these entities and
their functions, properties and relations. In geometry, we say that any two points
coincide with exactly one line; that for any three points x, y, z the distance
between x and y plus the distance between y and z exceeds or equals the distance
between x and z... and so on.
We must not postulate too much. For some truths (such as Pythagoras’s
Theorem) lack that immediate self-evidence that one demands of a postulate.
Such truths have to be uncovered as truths, by logically deducing them from the
postulates.
Nor may we postulate too little. For otherwise we shall fail logically to deduce
some of those truths. We deduce deep and interesting theorems from the
postulates or axioms by means of proof. A proof is simply an arrangement of
sentences, with dependencies among them clearly marked, that starts with the
axioms and ends with the theorem desired. The dependencies have to conform to
certain rules of inference, in order to ensure the preservation of truth. Examples
of such rules of inference (which we have already seen before) are:
A; if A then B; so, B.
a has property F; a is identical to b; so, b has property F.
Logic is the study of simple rules of inference such as these, and of the structural
properties of proofs that can be constructed in accordance with the rules.
In Logic we study rules of inference for the so-called logical words: ‘and’, ‘or’,
‘not’, ‘if ...then
’, ‘... is identical to
’, ‘some’, ‘all’. The rules of inference
spell out patterns, or forms, of correct reasoning. An important branch of Logic,
known as proof theory, studies how these small or local patterns can best be
put together to form large or global patterns, called proofs. The genius of a
great mathematician lies in being able to start with simple axioms and ﬁll in
the steps, in one of these global patterns, that lead one to a deep theorem as a
conclusion.
Proofs preserve truth. This is because all the rules of inference do, and proofs
are made up of steps of inference in accordance with those rules. So when we have
a proof of a theorem from certain axioms, we have a cast-iron, logical guarantee
that if those axioms are true, then the theorem is true also. Proofs can (ideally, in
principle) be checked. This is because proofs are ﬁnite pieces of discourse, every
step of which has to conform to one of only ﬁnitely many permissible patterns.
Each of these steps can be checked, mechanically, for correctness. Mathematics,
ideally, can be developed as a branch of abstract knowledge by employing the
method of logical proof from mathematical axioms. A mathematical theorem is
simply a statement that can be proved from those axioms. So: Logic lies at the
heart of Mathematics; and Mathematics lies at the heart of Science. We therefore
see how vital Logic is to Science.

Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
171
12.5 Logical reasoning v. creative or inventive insight
We speak here of an ideal Science, a Science in which every step of explanation
or prediction can be spelled out explicitly so as to pass logical scrutiny. But actual
scientiﬁc reasoning is not always like that. Even scientists reason unconsciously
and intuitively, and are not necessarily able to be rigorously explicit about how
they do it. Nevertheless, in principle, there should be a logical re-construction of the
train of reasoning that they have employed. We have encountered this dictum before
(towards the end of §8.3); and we are willing to reiterate it at every pertinent
opportunity.
We make this claim only in so far as we are considering how a scientist might
apply a given theory in order to explain or predict particular phenomena. This
explanation or prediction involves deducing a statement of particular fact from
general theoretical hypotheses and statements of boundary conditions, etc. We
are assuming that the hypotheses are already at hand; and that, using them
as logical starting points, the scientist then reasons towards the statement of
particular fact that has to be explained or predicted. We are claiming only that
this process of reasoning is a logical one, which can in principle be spelled out in
every detail, and formalized as a proof.
An entirely different matter is how a scientist arrives at a theory, or system
of hypotheses, in the ﬁrst place. This would, in a vivid sense, be the logical
reverse of what we have just been describing. If the inexorable steps of
logical progression are like heavy breakers impelling one towards the beach of
experiential test, how does the scientist ever head the board out from a known
stretch of beach, to get to the breakers farthest out? How does the scientist go
against the ﬂow, and tap into the deep swell? How does he or she ever get to
‘hang ten’?
Good scientists know which wave to choose; and then ride it for all it
is worth. The choice is deeply intuitive and creative. There is no ‘logic’ of
scientiﬁc discovery. There is only the logic of testing theories once they have
been discovered. This ironically, is the essential message of Popper’s great book
on scientiﬁc methodology, whose English title was, inappropriately, The Logic
of Scientiﬁc Discovery. The German title, Logik der Forschung, would have been
better translated as The Logic of Scientiﬁc Research.
12.6 Rigor
The message so far has been that deep thought, historically, has required rigor.
We speak here of the kind of conceptual and logical rigor that has been displayed
in the development of mathematics and modern science. This requirement of
conceptual and logical rigor entails the following.
1
A desire to penetrate to the heart of the matter when choosing basic concepts.
Examples: the concept of set in modern mathematics; the concepts of point,
line and plane in ancient geometry; the concepts of person and free will in

172
Philosophy and Method
metaphysics and moral philosophy; the concepts of space, time and causation
in the metaphysical foundations of Science.
2
A desire to isolate the most logically fruitful and yet self-evident truths involv-
ing those concepts. Examples: Euclid’s and Hilbert’s axioms for geometry; the
Dedekind–Peano axioms for number theory; the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for
set theory.
3
An intellectual honesty that involved respect for the demands of consistency.
Example: Frege’s response to Russell’s Paradox.
This last example is worth embellishing. Frege’s Afterword to volume II of
his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, written in October 1902, begins with the
heart-breaking admission:
Hardly anything more undesirable can befall a scientiﬁc writer than to have,
at the completion of his work, one of the foundation-stones of his ediﬁce
shattered.
(Frege (1903; reprinted 1962), p. 253; author’s translation)
Our next message concerning deep thought is that as we move away from the
most technical areas like logic, mathematics and theoretical physics, and address
other deep problems, especially philosophical ones – we still need rigor. We need
rigor to isolate fundamental concepts; to identify fruitful and self-evident truths
involving them; to maintain consistency in our theorizing; and to push for a
uniﬁed framework of thought and understanding in which all the pieces of the
jigsaw can fall into place.
These are central and essential features of any system of concepts, thought
and reasoning whose goal is knowledge of truths and effective communication
of those truths. Even if we believe that the history of Philosophy shows us that
it is arrogant to think that we could ever arrive at the deﬁnitive or self-evident
truth about any deep philosophical matter, we can insist at least on the following
requirements for openness and for critical mindedness. (Note that these are all
requirements on the formulation or presentation of theories once we have found
them. They are not guidelines for invention, or recipes for creation, or methods
of discovering theories.)
1
We should be prepared to put our theories forward in the clearest possible
terms. We should be prepared to explain our terminology. This might be
by ostension (pointing) or any of the various methods of deﬁnition. These
explanations come to an end when the audience understands all the terms
used in the deﬁnitions.
2
We should be prepared to meet arguments that reveal inconsistencies in our
theories. We must either be able to show that the arguments are somehow
defective (for example, by involving a misunderstanding of a term) or be able
to revise our theory in the light of the inconsistency revealed. This second
course of action may involve some sort of ‘entrenchment’ ordering of the

Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
173
different statements of the theory. The entrenchment ordering would reﬂect
our relative preparedness to give up the statements. (The theory of ‘theory
dynamics’, or ‘belief revision’, is a relatively recent addendum to the canon of
deductive logic. Ordinary deductive logic can be thought of as ‘logical statics’,
by contrast with the dynamics of theory change. For the author’s contribution
to the latter ﬁeld, with critical coverage of earlier approaches, see Tennant
(2012b).)
3
We should leave our audience in no two minds as to whether we have taken
a stand on any important issue, and, if so, what the stand is. That is, we
should spell out the consequences of our theory for all the important areas of
evidence, previously unsolved questions, etc., that prompted the search for
the theory in the ﬁrst place.
4
We should try to be honest in our presentation of our theories. We should
give our audience the best possible understanding of how we ourselves see the
logical priorities and interdependencies of different theses within our system.
That way one can help one’s own audience ﬁnd the weak spots, the mistakes,
the implausibilities, the internal contradictions.
5
We should interpret criticism of our theories as just that; not as personal crit-
icism of ourselves. We should take heart from the evolutionary epistemologist
who said that one of the great leaps in the evolution of our species came when
we were able to let our theories die in our stead.
6
We should hold our theories sincerely: that is, be prepared to act upon them.
This further entails (7):
7
We should so formulate our theories that it is evident what their ‘cash
value’ in terms of human action might be. This is a demand of the school
of thought known as pragmatism. It is not the philistine claim that higher
thinking has to yield advantages for the taxpayer (that notion is of rather
recent vintage in nations with ﬁne university traditions). The claim of
pragmatism is older, and more profound. It is at root a claim about the
possibility of meaningful theorizing on any topic. Such theorizing, if true,
must be such that its truth makes a difference to the potentialities of human
action and ﬂourishing (however remote). Otherwise, there is no way for the
‘content’ of the theory to manifest itself; no way even for anyone who puts
the theory forward to show that they themselves actually grasp what the
theory says.
This last requirement evolved historically into the Logical Positivists’ demand
for a criterion of ‘cognitive signiﬁcance’. The implicit contrast here is between
cognitive and appetitive. ‘Appetitive’ means having do do with felt needs, wants,
and desires. ‘Cognitive’ means having to do with the ways in which we come
to know or believe. A sentence is cognitively signiﬁcant just in case it has a
truth-value (true or false) that we could in principle come to know; or, rather
more carefully, just in case (i) it can be understood as possibly endowed with
such a truth-value, and (ii) in understanding the sentence, we have a clear idea
of what would lead us to regard it as true, or as false.

174
Philosophy and Method
A criterion of cognitive signiﬁcance – once a Holy Grail for twentieth-century
empiricists – would separate sensible scientiﬁc discourse from the rest. In particu-
lar, it would rule out meaningless and untestable metaphysical speculations. The
metaphysical speculations rife at the time of the emergence of Logical Positivism
did not seem to make any ‘connection’ with even the possibility of distinctively
conﬁrming or disconﬁrming sensory evidence. They could not be used as a
rational guide to decision, choice, and action. The demand that a good (scentiﬁc)
theory should make such a connection seems eminently reasonable, if its truth
is to matter. We do not free ourselves from this demand simply by showing that
various attempts in the past explicitly to formulate an exact criterion of cognitive
signiﬁcance have, for one internal reason or another, failed. The formulation of
such a criterion, as pointed out at the end of Chapter 10, is simply unﬁnished
analytical (or explicatory) business.
Philosophical analysis, as shown in Chapter 9, is the task of getting clear about
meanings of terms in our language. Such analysis involves tracing conceptual
dependencies and presuppositions, formulating necessary and sufﬁcient condi-
tions of various concepts, or, where such conditions cannot be found, indicating
criteria for the application of those concepts.
12.7 The nature of dialectic
The kind of reasoning in which skill needs to be acquired when doing Philosophy
is commonly called ‘dialectic’. The term derives from a dialogic conception of the
search for truth. Two interlocutors put forward ideas to one another, and either
rebut or accept critical amendments. Under the impetus of mutual criticism, the
hope is, one will be impelled towards the truth of the matter.
But one may object to this claim. The usual purpose of debate is to persuade or
browbeat, by foul means as well as fair. Consensus reached is therefore simply an
agreement in opinions, which are no likelier to be true for having been arrived
at by eventual unison.
This pessimism, however, is exaggerated. Provided both parties to the debate
are equally skilled in criticism, the truth is much more likely to emerge from
the give-and-take between them, than from their working in isolation. Each can
keep the other on his or her toes in the check for continuing consistency in
what one says. Each can alert the other to relevant considerations, observational
evidence, and intuitions that bear one way or another on the matter under
discussion. Remember here that we are talking about the ideal conditions of
joint intellectual inquiry. We are not seeking to justify aggressive, argumentative
habits of discussion.
The dialectical pattern of philosophical presentation has its roots in the
dialogues of Plato. (One canonical translation of Plato’s dialogues into English is
Hamilton and Cairns (1989).) In these dialogues Socrates and other discussants
get to grips with topics such as virtue, the soul, innate knowledge, etc., and
advance to enlightenment with Socrates always one step ahead. This dialectical
mode can be internalized when a single philosopher commits thoughts to paper

Intellectual Creativity and Rigor
175
when constructing a philosophical argument. There is no general prescription for
successful style when writing philosophy. But one always does well to attend to
the dialectical format in any piece of philosophical prose.
The format should make it clear what the main ideas and issues at stake
are. The author’s own thesis should emerge clearly. It can be contrasted with
well-known opposed theses of other writers. One can explore common ground
with them and then seek to justify one’s diverging line. One should anticipate the
main possible objections to one’s argument, and provide rejoinders. Since each
rejoinder usually involves more collateral argument, this process can potentially
be repeated.
When one speaks of the dialectical depth of an author’s argued position, one
has in mind the extent to which he or she has developed in the text this
to-ing and fro-ing between the author’s claims and those of all imaginable
opponents. Being able to imagine certain objections – particularly ones that no
opponent has yet raised – and rebut them in advance is a sign of intellectual
creativity and suppleness. Someone who can do this skillfully is clearly not so
dogmatically wedded to their view as to have blinkers on. The to-ing and fro-ing,
or dialectical deepening, should serve to make clear what basic assumptions the
author’s overall claims ultimately rest upon; and how those assumptions have
been marshaled in support of them.
Consistency is a prerequisite for truth; it is necessary for truth. So it is
especially important that the assumptions appealed to should be mutually
consistent. But consistency is not a guarantee of truth; it is not sufﬁcient for
truth. Consistency simply means freedom from internal contradiction. There are
many deranged and false stories that are free from internal contradiction. So
consistency is not enough for truth.
The only guarantees or quality-indicators of truth lie in the axioms; the
evidence; and in the correctness of the logical passages hence and thence
respectively. Another quality-indicator, one might add, is the simplicity and
unity of one’s theory.
Maintained truth has to begin somewhere. One cannot construct informative
truth out of nothing. The mathematician must appeal to axioms. The natural
scientist is answerable to the evidence of intersubjective reports of observation.
The philosopher relies on shared intuitions as starting points.
And therein lies the problem with much philosophical disagreement. First,
the intuitions are not always shared. Secondly, it is not always clear whether the
contestable philosophical thesis is one which is being derived from the intuitions,
like a mathematical theorem from the axioms; or whether the contestable thesis
is being put forward as an explanation of the intuitions, the way a scientiﬁc
hypothesis is put forward to explain the observational evidence.
In response to both these problems, part of the task in doing Philosophy is
to be able to reform the intuitions of one’s interlocutor. This is only possible
by creating a system of philosophical thought that does a great deal of justice
to central intuitions. One then sensitively extends it to the more problematic
areas where the disagreement may lie. The hope is that here, as in Science

176
Philosophy and Method
generally, systematicity and simplicity will be marks of truth. Thus it emerges
that a contestable philosophical thesis is more like a scientiﬁc hypothesis than
a mathematical theorem. The thesis gets tested against intuitions, in the way
that an hypothesis gets tested against its evidence. Seldom does one derive a
philosophical thesis from intuitions in the way that one derives a mathematical
theorem from axioms.
Problems
1
What did Leibniz mean by his injunction ‘Calculemus!’? Find out where in his
writings it appeared, and what he was concerned to explain and recommend
to his reader.
2
We said at the end of §12.2 that Science makes extensive, and apparently
indispensable, use of Mathematics. But does Science need Mathematics,
in principle (even conceding that it does so in practice)? (For a way into
considerations relevant to this question, see Field (1980).)
3
Explain the logical structure of a scientiﬁc explanation of a particular
phenomenon or regularity. What are the marks of creativity in the search
for such an explanation? What are the marks of rigor?
4
Why, in your view, is so much that is passed off as Philosophy very much
lacking in rigor? What do you think accounts for the survival, within the
corpus of much-cited works, of philosophical treatises that lack rigor?
5
In §12.3 we listed a dozen special features of mathematics ‘in the way majority
opinion among philosophers and mathematicians would have them’. And we
remarked ‘For each such opinion there are always some dissidents’. Formulate
a clear and thorough account of any such dissident views about mathematics
that you hold, either as a mathematician or as someone who is interested in
the nature of the subject quite generally.
6
In §12.7 we wrote ‘consistency is not enough for truth’. In mathematics,
however, ensuring the consistency of one’s theory is a major preoccupation.
Mathematicians seem to think that a theory’s consistency does ensure its
truth. Is there a contradiction lurking here?

13 Deduction in Mathematics
and Science
In Chapter 8 we were concerned with the contrasts between deductive and
inductive validity, and to that end we needed to give some account of deductive
proof and disproof. In this chapter, the focus is exclusively on deduction; and
we take the liberty of repeating some of the earlier parts of our exposition of the
basics of logic, since they are so important, and can never suffer from repetition.
It also means that this chapter can be read independently of Chapter 8.
13.1 Proof, truth and falsity
Mathematics and natural science both aim at the truth. Mathematics aims
at necessary truths about abstract structures and objects. Natural science, by
contrast, aims at law-like truths about the various natural kinds of physical
objects and events forming the causal order in space and time. It is a matter
of contemporary debate whether these laws are metaphysically necessary, even
though not logically necessary; and it is a problem for contemporary philosophers
to explain whether, and if so how, truths differ from truths. We cannot go into
these issues here.
Logic serves both mathematics and natural science. Logic does not itself aim at
the truth. Rather, it merely transmits truth. It transmits truth from the premises to
the conclusion of any logically valid argument. It also re-transmits falsity. That
is, it re-transmits falsity from the conclusion to the premises of any logically valid
argument. Logic provides proofs of logically valid arguments. We shall continue
to represent a proof schematically as a triangle, with its premises at the top and
its conclusion at the bottom:
Conclusion
Premises
Truth
Falsity.
It is the task of logic to provide means of constructing such proofs for any valid
argument.

178
Philosophy and Method
This is done by means of rules of inference that govern the so-called logical
words (words like not, and, or, if ... then ..., some, all, ... is identical to ...) in
the premises and conclusion of the argument. The formal symbols often used for
these logical words are as follows:
not
¬
and
∧
or
∨
if ... then ...
→
some
∃
all
∀
is identical to
=.
There are of course alternative notational conventions allowing the use of
different symbols than those displayed above. (Exactly what it is about a word
or phrase that makes it a logical one is a topic of considerable controversy among
philosophers of logic.)
When an argument is valid – that is, when it transmits truth from its premises
to its conclusion – we say that the premises logically imply the conclusion, or that
the conclusion is a logical consequence of the premises.
A proof is a ﬁnite piece of discourse that shows that a particular argument
is valid. Proofs are made up of various steps that are in accordance with the
rules of inference that govern the aforementioned logical words in the premises
and conclusion of the argument. An essential feature of a proof is that one can
tell (by inspection) that it is indeed a proof, and one can read off from it in a
straightforward way both the premises and the conclusion of the argument that
it establishes as valid.
When we have a proof of the conclusion from the premises, we say that we
have inferred or deduced the conclusion from the premises. In that case we shall
write the ‘turnstile statement’:
Premises ⊢Conclusion.
Recall from Chapter 1 that the symbol ⊢is called the turnstile, and is used
to claim the existence of a proof showing that the conclusion follows from
the premises. The turnstile statement is not itself a proof. It merely asserts the
existence of a proof. (In general such a proof would be much longer than the
turnstile statement.)
The orthodox view is that whether an argument is logically valid depends only
on the structure of its premises and its conclusion, and not on the existence of
a proof making clear that it is indeed valid. Thus one could give an argument
consisting barely of its premises and conclusion, with no hint as to how to
negotiate the route from the former to the latter; and assume that there is a
fact of the matter as to whether truth really is transmitted from the premises to
the conclusion. A proof would be welcome in establishing that fact, and making it

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
179
evident or certain; but, on this view, the proof would play no role in constituting
the fact that the argument was valid.
A less orthodox, opposed view is that the validity of any argument is indeed
constituted by the existence of a proof leading from its premises to its conclusion.
So long, however, as we concern ourselves only with systems of logic that do
provide proofs for every valid argument, we shall not need to take a stand on this
issue for the purposes of the ensuing discussion.
When logicians and philosophers talk about theories, they usually intend the
word in an idealized sense: a theory is a set of statements that is logically closed,
that is, a set already containing all statements that follow logically from it. Thus
a theory will contain inﬁnitely many statements, even if only because every
statement P logically implies its own double negation: P ⊢¬¬P. If T is a theory,
then a set of axioms for T is any subset of T whose logical closure is T itself.
We say that T is ﬁnitely axiomatizable just in case T has a set of axioms that is
ﬁnite.
A special case of proof is that of disproof: when the conclusion is something
absurd. This could either be a contradiction of the form P and not-P, or a
statement involving contraries, such as ‘This is solidly green all over now and
this is solidly red all over now’. We shall use the so-called absurdity symbol ⊥
to register situations of this kind. ⊥cannot be true. ⊥is always false. (It is an
interesting question whether contrariety is conceptually prior to the notion of
sentential negation, and therefore prior also to the formal notion of contradiction
afforded by negation and conjunction. Again, however, we cannot pursue this
question here.)
When a disproof, or reductio ad absurdum, is given:
Premises
Falsity.
we know that the premises cannot all be true. At least one of them must be false.
We say that they have, collectively, been reduced to absurdity by means of the
(dis)proof. They have been shown to be jointly inconsistent.
Consistency of a theory is necessary but not sufﬁcient for its truth. A remarkable
feature of the deranged stories or world-views of some highly intelligent paranoid
schizophrenics is that they are often consistent. As one challenges their
statements, they shore them up with more and more bizarre ones. Their story
spins on, always coherent, but – the normal observer feels – more and more
bizarrely. This should sufﬁce to show that mere consistency, or coherence, is not
enough for truth. Not enough for truth in the actual world, that is; but that is
not to say that no possible world could make such a story true. (Problem (6) of
Chapter 12 refers.)

180
Philosophy and Method
13.2 The foundational method in Mathematics
Mathematical proofs proceed from axioms that are self-evidently true,
via
primitively compelling inferential steps, to theorems as their conclusions. The
axioms used in a proof are called its premises. The conclusions of mathematical
proofs can be deep, difﬁcult, elegant and profound results. But – because of their
proofs – these conclusions are guaranteed to be true if the axioms are. Proofs
necessarily preserve truth from their premises to their conclusions.
The proofs themselves provide no guarantee of the truth of the axioms. The
axioms have to be intuited as true, or assumed to be true. The proof then gives
a logical guarantee that the (assumed) truth of the axioms will transmit to the
conclusion. This means that the conclusion will be at least as secure as the
axioms; but still depends on those axioms for its truth, in the sense that it is
the assumed truth of the axioms, plus the logically correct structure of the proof,
that furnishes our grounds for believing the conclusion of the proof to be true.
Indeed, we are usually certain about axioms of Mathematics; that is why we can
use them as a foundation for the rest of our mathematical knowledge:
Mathematical Theorem
Mathematical Axioms
Truth.
An example of a statement whose truth is not at all obvious, but which can
be rendered certain by means of a proof from axioms whose truth is obvious, is
Pythagoras’s Theorem in plane Euclidean geometry. Pythagoras’s Theorem states
that the area of the square on the hypotenuse (i.e., longest side) of a right-angled
triangle is the sum of the squares on the other two sides. This un-obvious claim
can be rigorously proved by means of simple logical steps, beginning with those
obvious geometrical axioms as starting points.
The geometrical axioms in question are simple claims about points, straight
lines and planes, such as that any two points lie on a unique straight line. A
full set of such axioms for Euclidean geometry (improving on Euclid himself)
was provided by the great mathematical foundationalist David Hilbert. Hilbert’s
axioms state basic properties of points, lines, incidence, congruence, and
betweenness.
So one example of the proof-scheme above would be:
Pythagoras’s Theorem
Hilbert’s Axioms for Euclidean Geometry
Truth.

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
181
This example, like those to follow, points to one of the great puzzles in
the philosophy of logic: how can deductive reasoning apparently ‘increase
information’ in this way, if the truth of the conclusion of a deductive proof is
logically guaranteed by the (assumed) truth of its premises? The logical guarantee
is a matter of necessity. The increase in information is a matter of fruitfulness. The
philosophical problem, in a nutshell, is: how can one reconcile the necessity of
deduction with its fruitfulness?
Another example of a mathematical theorem, this time one provable from the
axioms of number theory, is the statement that every whole number greater than
0 divides into any other whole number a unique whole number of times, and
exceeds the (unique) remainder. This is known as the Remainder Theorem. In
slightly more formal terms, it says:
For any whole number n > 0, and for any whole number m, there is exactly
one whole number q, and there is exactly one whole number r < n, such that
m = (q × n) + r.
The truth of the Remainder Theorem is tacitly assumed whenever we perform
‘long division’ in order to calculate the quotient, and the remainder, when one
is asked to divide any given whole number (the ‘dividend’) by a given whole
number (the ‘divisor’) greater than zero.
The axioms of number theory, like the axioms of Euclidean geometry, are
simple and self-evident – like the claim that the result of adding 0 to any number
is just the number in question: ∀x x + 0 = x.
The essence of the axiomatic method in Mathematics is that one can start
with self-evident claims, and proceed by means of Logic alone to less evident
ones. This makes the latter certain – because (as is by now becoming our constant
refrain) proofs necessarily preserve truth from their premises to their conclusions.
Here, the premises in question are the mathematical axioms; and the conclusions
in question are the theorems proved to follow logically from those axioms.
Correct proof from self-evident axioms always serves to make the conclusion
of the proof certain. There are, however, limitations on the potential scope of
logical-proof-from-axioms. One cannot blithely assume that, given any initially
simple-looking mathematical statement, it will be straightforward either to prove
it or to disprove it. An example of a statement that has not yet been been
proved true, and has not yet been shown to be false, is Goldbach’s Conjecture:
every even number greater than two is the sum of two prime numbers. Of course, it
is quite possible (epistemically speaking) that some clever mathematician will
produce a proof of Goldbach’s Conjecture tomorrow; or that some computer,
busily crunching away at ever-larger even numbers, will in due course ﬁnd one
that is not the sum of any two primes preceding it.
Indeed, some writers used to mention ‘Fermat’s Last Theorem’ as their favored
example of a simple, interesting general claim about numbers that had been
neither proved nor refuted. That example can no longer be used, however,
because Andrew Wiles (b. 1953) proved Fermat’s Last Theorem at long last,

182
Philosophy and Method
in 1992. It states that for no natural number n greater than 2 can one ﬁnd
non-zero natural numbers a, b and c such that an + bn = cn. Of course, when
n = 2, we have examples such as 32 +42 = 52 – which is why one of the standard
illustrations for Pythagoras’s Theorem is a right-angled triangle with sides of
lengths 3 units and 4 units enclosing the right angle, and a hypotenuse 5 units
long. What Fermat’s Last Theorem tells us is that there is something very special
indeed about that exponent 2, as far as integral multiples of the unit length are
concerned.
Another example of our schema for mathematical reasoning would be:
Cantor’s Theorem
Zermelo’s Axioms for Sets
Truth.
Cantor’s Theorem states that every set has strictly more subsets than it has
members. (Remarkably, one can prove Cantor’s Theorem by appealing only to
Zermelo’s Axiom Scheme of Separation.) Now the power set of any set is the set
of all its subsets. So, put another way, Cantor’s Theorem says that there is no
mapping from any set onto its power set – from which it follows that there is no
one-one mapping of that kind.
Zermelo’s axioms for set theory include simple and obvious-seeming claims
such as: given any two sets, one can form a set consisting of just those two sets;
given any set, one can form the set of all members of its members, etc. Cantor’s
Theorem shows how very powerful the Power Set Axiom is; that is, the axiom that
says that if a set X exists then so does the power set of X. The power set of X will
contain strictly more members than X itself. That means that if one postulates
the existence of any inﬁnite set such as the set {0,1,2,...} of natural numbers,
then one knows from Cantor’s Theorem that its power set will be ‘even more
inﬁnite’. So, at a stroke, there will be inﬁnitely many inﬁnities – all this from
some very innocuous and obvious-seeming axioms about sets. (We discuss this
further in §28.4.5.)
Logical proof somehow rearranges the import of the mathematical axioms
to reveal surprising, enlightening and profound further results about the
mathematical realm being studied. And it does so without going ‘beyond’ the
axioms taken as the starting points of the inquiry. It simply wrings from those
axioms new and informative content that was ‘already there’, so to speak, latent
within them. The new truths, arrived at as the conclusions of proofs, are
guaranteed by the truth of those simple axioms – necessity plus fruitfulness, again.
13.3 Logic and the axiomatic method in Mathematics
So far we have used, as examples, mathematical statements that have been
proved. Matters are different with certain other statements that have not been

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
183
proved or refuted – claims whose status as undecided derives from the deeper
fact that they are undecidable – in the available formal system, assuming it is
consistent.
Logicians are involved in the study of statements that may be undecidable on
the basis of the axioms at one’s disposal. A statement is undecidable by a given
theory if the theory contains neither the statement nor its negation. (Remember
that a theory is logically closed, that is, it contains every statement that it
implies.) So an undecidable statement for a given axiomatized theory is one that
cannot be proved from, nor be proved to be inconsistent with, the axioms of that
theory.
Goldbach’s Conjecture, as already observed, is at present undecided, but no
one knows whether it is undecidable (on the basis of our present axioms for
number theory).
We do know, however, that arithmetic cannot be completely axiomatized:
for any sufﬁciently strong consistent system A of axioms for arithmetic (number
theory), there will be true statements about numbers that cannot be decided
by the axioms. This famous result is due to the logician Gödel, and is known
as his First Incompleteness Theorem for arithmetic. (Gödel’s original proof was
given in Gödel (1931).) Gödel’s brilliant breakthrough involved constructing a
sentence G that was provably equivalent, in the system A, to a sentence which
‘said’, via arithmetical methods of coding linguistic expressions as numbers, that
there is no proof of G in the system A. The First Incompleteness Theorem
has been claimed by some philosophers, such as John R. Lucas (b. 1929), to
have profound implications for the question whether our minds transcend the
limitations in principle on the operation of any machine. (See the anthology
Anderson (1964). More recently the ‘mind-over-machines’ advocates have
included Penrose (1989) and McCall (1999). See Tennant (2001) for a rebuttal
of McCall.)
Another statement undecidable in A is the number-theoretic codiﬁcation of
the claim that A is consistent. This is the humbling impact of Gödel’s Second
Incompleteness Theorem, which states that no formal system of Mathematics, if
both consistent and strong enough to furnish the methods of number-theoretic
coding in question, can possibly prove its own consistency-statement. For the
system A, this would be the statement to the effect that there is no proof,
in the system A, of the sentence ‘0 = 1’. The system A cannot prove that. It
follows from the Second Incompleteness Theorem that we cannot prove the
consistency of arithmetic unless we use a system strictly stronger than arithmetic
itself.
The Second Incompleteness Theorem also has implications for the foun-
dations of knowledge. It put paid to the so-called Hilbert Program in the
foundations of mathematics. Hilbert had aspired to prove the consistency
of all mathematics by purely ﬁnitary and formalistic means. But the latter
means, when codiﬁed, yield a theory of numbers strong enough to provide
the numerical coding of expressions that Gödel’s method exploits. So the
ﬁnitary theory, if consistent, cannot even prove its own consistency, let alone

184
Philosophy and Method
the consistency of a stronger theory such as the Peano–Dedekind theory of
arithmetic.
Gödel’s original undecidable sentence G was constructed by means of an
ingenious, philosophically informed recipe of a ‘reﬂexive’ kind, inspired by the
ancient Liar Paradox ‘This sentence is false’. If one assumes this sentence to
be false, then one can quickly conclude that it is true. But then what it says is
indeed the case – so it is false. Contradiction.
Gödel’s inspired variation on the Liar Paradox ‘This sentence is false’ was to
put ‘unprovable-in-the-system’ in place of ‘false’, by considering the sentence
‘This sentence is unprovable-in-the-system’. If it is provable in the system, then
the system is inconsistent. But the system is consistent. So the sentence is
unprovable in the system. From this one can quickly conclude that it is true.
So all one needs is a way of constructing a sentence G in the language of
arithmetic that can be shown, somehow, to ‘say of itself’ that it is unprovable
(in the system A). Then G would have to be true (provided, of course, that A is
consistent).
It was of course an extremely ingenious and complicated construction that
resulted in such a sentence G. Keeping track of what G ‘means’ (in the
reﬂexive way just explained) involves a great deal of deﬁnitional abbreviation.
The result is that when G is actually written out in primitive notation,
with all the deﬁnitions ‘unwound’, it is an excessively long and complicated
sentence in the language of arithmetic,
making no readily graspable or
intrinsically interesting claim about the numbers themselves. Its philosophical
interest resides solely in the devilishly clever way in which the aforemen-
tioned motivating ideas found their expression through Gödel’s pioneering
method of coding. Expressions of a formal language can be coded (within
the formal arithmetical theory) as numbers, and one can therefore (within
that theory) represent grammatical and logical properties of, and relations
among, sentences and proofs as properties of, and relations among, their
code-numbers. This is what enables one to construct a sentence in the formal
language of the system that ‘says of itself’ that it is unprovable within the
system.
Since Gödel’s original breakthrough, however, mathematical logicians and
foundationalists have come up with more ‘natural’ examples of statements in
the language of arithmetic that can be proved to be undecidable in the system
consisting of the usual axioms for arithmetic.
In the more powerful and all-embracing system of set theory, as opposed
to ‘mere’ number theory, there have been two celebrated principles whose
‘decidability status’ (on the basis of other axioms) was of intense and lasting
interest dating from the time they were each formulated. We are speaking here
of the Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis.
The Axiom of Choice (AC) seems, intuitively, to be true. In order to express
it, it is useful to have the concept of a ‘choice set’ for any set of pairwise
disjoint sets.

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
185
Deﬁnition 5. Let X be a set of pairwise disjoint sets. Then Y is a choice set for X just
in case
(i) every member of Y is in a member of X; and (ii) every member Z of X has
exactly one member in common with Y.
The Axiom of Choice then says:
(AC) For every set X of pairwise disjoint sets, there exists a choice set for X.
It is easy to picture the upshot of the Axiom of Choice (see below). The picture
makes the Axiom of Choice seem plausible. The distinct horizontal rectangles
represent the members of X, and their members are the boldface bullets indicated.
The choice set for X is composed by choosing one member from each member of
X, so as to form a set like the one represented by the slender vertical rectangle on
the right. It ‘stands to reason’ that, if those chosen bullets had to exist in order to
help make up each of the respective members of X, then they should be available
for re-arrangement, as chosen, so as to form the choice set displayed. The choice
set exists ‘at the same level of complexity’, as it were, as do the member-sets
of the set X itself. By an intuitive ‘principle of plenitude’ – that we should be
able to form as many distinct sets as are logically possible, given the materials for
membership already at hand – it seems to us that such a choice set ought, surely,
to exist.
X

186
Philosophy and Method
AC has been shown to be undecidable on the basis of the axiom-system ZF
of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (assuming that ZF is consistent). Gödel himself
showed that there is a structure (the so-called ‘constructible universe’ of sets)
that makes all the axioms of ZF true, and makes AC true. (See Gödel (1940)
for a full treatment. The results were announced by abstracts in 1938 and
1939.) Later, Paul Cohen (1934–2007) showed that there is also a structure
that makes all the axioms of ZF true, but makes AC false. (See Cohen (1963),
Cohen (1964).) Hence (respectively) there can be neither a disproof nor a proof
of AC in ZF.
AC in the context of ZF is therefore similar to Euclid’s Parallels Postulate
in the context of the remaining axioms of Euclid’s geometry. Euclidean
space is a structure that makes those remaining axioms true, and makes the
Parallels Postulate true. But there are also well-deﬁned geometrical structures
that make the remaining axioms true, but make the Parallels Postulate false.
The ﬁrst such structure to be described was that of Beltrami (1868). The
straight lines of Lobachevskian geometry were identiﬁed with certain curves on
three-dimensional, ‘pseudospherical’ surfaces embedded within Euclidean space.
Under this interpretation, all the postulates of Lobachevskian geometry were
satisﬁed, including the non-Euclidean postulate to the effect that through any
point p off a given line l there are exactly two lines, called the extremals, that
do not meet l in any point, and between which all (the inﬁnitely many) lines
passing through p do not meet l either. (In some presentations of Lobachevskian
geometry, only the extremals are called parallels of l. See, for example, Kagan
(1957), at pp. 37–38.) This furnished a model-theoretic proof of the relative
consistency of the two geometries: if three-dimensional Euclidean geometry is
consistent, then so too is Lobachevskian plane geometry.
Apprised now of the logical independence of Euclid’s Parallels Postulate from
the other axioms of Euclidean geometry, the Euclidean geometer is happy to
acknowledge that the Parallels Postulate is an explicit ‘ﬁrst principle’ of that
system of geometry. It is indispensable for the pursuit of truths about Euclidean
space.
Likewise, the modern set theorist is now happy to acknowledge that the Axiom
of Choice is an explicit ‘ﬁrst principle’ of the system of axioms that seeks to
uncover the most important truths concerning ‘the’ set-theoretic universe V. The
system ZFC consists of the axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory along with the
Axiom of Choice. Most foundationally aware mathematicians nowadays take
ZFC as their working basis.
We turn now to the Continuum Hypothesis (CH). This celebrated conjecture
is to the effect that
every inﬁnite set of real numbers is either countable or in one-one
correspondence with the set of all real numbers.
Thus the inﬁnity of real numbers (also known as the cardinality of the continuum)
is the next-greatest inﬁnity after that of the natural numbers. Put another way:
the cardinality of the continuum is the ﬁrst uncountable inﬁnity. CH is therefore

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
187
to the effect that the real numbers, which, as we know from Cantor’s Theorem,
are more numerous than the natural numbers, are minimally so. They enjoy the
very next measure of inﬁnity after that of the natural numbers.
Gödel’s constructible universe of sets is one in which not only AC, but also
CH is true. Hence one cannot disprove CH in ZFC. Cohen’s achievement was to
construct a universe of sets that makes the axioms of ZFC true, but makes CH
false. Hence one cannot prove CH in ZFC either.
In fact, CH is independent not only of ZFC, but also of various powerful
extensions of ZFC that involve postulating the existence of very large cardinal
numbers. The independence of CH is proving to be intractably robust. The issue
of the ‘genuine’ cardinality of the continuum is as elusive as it has ever been.
The very ﬁrst problem on Hilbert’s famous list of unsolved problems was to settle
the question of the cardinality of the continuum. For over a century now, this
question has remained unanswered (except in the thinly negative sense supplied
by the independence results themselves).
13.4 Logic and scientiﬁc method
In §13.2, we have been at pains to stress that deductive reasoning in Mathematics
takes one downwards from axioms, or ﬁrst principles, to theorems as conclusions.
The axioms are self-evidently true. It is the theorems that are the deep and
interesting results.
In the natural sciences, the logical direction is reversed. The analogue of
a self-evidently true mathematical axiom is an observation statement or datum
(plural: data) – a statement that one can tell to be true simply by perceiving
things. But observation statements have no generality. They hold only for a
particular time and place.
Scientiﬁc hypotheses, by contrast, are often deep, elegant, profound – and highly
general. They make claims about all things of a given natural kind, and usually
do so with precise mathematical formulations of relationships among various
theoretical magnitudes (such as mass, force, acceleration, energy, momentum
...). So these hypotheses, from the point of view of interest, generality and the
non-obviousness of their truth, serve as analogues of mathematical theorems.
Scientiﬁc explanations employ important hypotheses as premises (not as conclu-
sions), along with statements of boundary conditions and initial conditions (of a
given system under observation in a controlled experiment, say). From these
statements the scientist deduces, as a conclusion, either an observationalprediction
about the behavior of the system in some observable respect (at some time, in
some place); or some ‘lower level’ generalization about the objects in the system.
An example of the ﬁrst type of prediction would be Halley’s Comet will be seen
at such-and-such a time on such-and-such date, at such-and-such position in the sky.
An example of the second type of ‘prediction’ would be the lower-level
generalization All planets in our solar system have (approximately) elliptical orbits
around the sun at one focus of the ellipse. Notice that what is here called a prediction
is not necessarily a statement about the future, whose truth-value has not yet
been determined by experience. Rather, it can be a statement that we already

188
Philosophy and Method
take ourselves to have good reason to believe, on the basis of past observational
data. The last example was of this kind.
Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) formulated this hypothesis (his so-called First
Law of Planetary Motion) – which, despite the label ‘Law’, is nevertheless
conjectural – after studying the observational data collected by Tycho Brahe
(1546–1601). In such a case, the higher-level scientiﬁc hypotheses that imply
the law in question will be said to provide an explanation of its (assumed) truth.
And failure to imply the lower-level law (in the absence of any independent
reason to doubt it) would be a mark held against the higher-level hypotheses,
rather than in favor of them.
The triumph of Newton’s Laws of Motion and Law of Universal Gravitation
was that, in conjunction with certain boundary and initial conditions, they
logically implied Kepler’s three laws of planetary motion:
1
Each planet travels in an elliptical orbit around the sun at one focus.
2
The radius of the orbit sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
3
The square of any planet’s ‘year’ is proportional to the cube of its mean (i.e.,
average) distance from the sun.
Kepler excogitated these laws from the observational data due to Tycho
Brahe.
Brahe took pains not only with his astronomical observations, but also in other
areas of his life. Another of his claims to fame was a brass (some say: silver) nose
(some say: part of his nose) to replace the one he lost in a duel (some say: to
syphilis), not over a woman (some say), but over a mathematical point. The
actual cause of Brahe’s death is a matter of great speculation and controversy too.
On one account, he was too polite to excuse himself from a royal banquet, and
his bladder burst, leading to his death shortly afterwards. On another account,
he was given mercury (around the time of the banquet) in his nightcap of hot
milk by none other than his assistant, Kepler – who, so this theory goes, resorted
to this desperate measure in order to gain access to Brahe’s huge collection of
observational data about the positions of stars and planets in the night sky. (See
Gilder and Gilder (2004).)
The logical structure of Newton’s explanation of Kepler’s laws of planetary
motion takes the following form, where the direction of logical deduction is
downwards:
Mathematical
axioms
Mathematical
theorems
,
Scientiﬁc hypotheses
of great generality
(such as Newton’s laws
of motion and gravitation)
,
Boundary and
initial conditions
Lower-level law about a certain class of phenomena
(such as one of Kepler’s laws of planetary motion)

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
189
The claim that motion under gravitational attraction will trace a conic (the
‘lower-level law’ in question) was the conclusion of a scientiﬁc argument, or proof.
In the foregoing display, the direction of logical inference is to be understood as
downwards.
The premises for the deduction are, ultimately, the mathematical axioms, the
scientiﬁc hypotheses, and the statements of boundary and initial conditions. In
the case of a planet in an elliptical orbit Newton required only certain initial
conditions in order to generate predictions as to the future whereabouts of a
planet whose present position and velocity are known. Other problem-settings,
however, call for statements of boundary conditions as well. Such is the case, for
example, when one speciﬁes a closed surface in space, with values for various
vector ﬁelds speciﬁed on that surface at time t = 0 (or indeed for the duration of
the experiment).
The premises mentioned occupy tips of the branches of the foregoing ‘proof
tree’. The conclusion – say, a lower-level law about motion on conics – is placed
at the root. The proof is deductive, hence logically valid. If its premises are true,
then its conclusion is true also. Concerning that inferential transition, there is
no possible doubt.
Kepler’s second law (that the radius of a planet’s orbit sweeps out equal areas
in equal times) can be shown to hold just in case whatever force is acting on the
planet – be it attractive or repulsive – is on a line through the center of mass of the
Sun. The fact that the orbits are closed (since they are elliptical) means that this
force has to be attractive, rather than repulsive. But how big is this force? How
does it vary through time? What does it depend on?
Newton’s inspired answer was that this centripetal, gravitational (i.e., attrac-
tive) force was proportional to the product of the two masses (of the Sun
and planet), and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between
them. Hence it is now called the inverse-square law of gravitation. When the
mathematical details are deduced, it turns out that the inverse-square form of the
force-law nicely accounts for Kepler’s ﬁrst and third laws as well. (Remember,
the centripetal nature of the force acting on any planet accounts for the
second law.)
When one thinks about the problem in broad qualitative terms,
the
inverse-square law makes intuitive sense. Given Kepler’s second law, the planet
would be travelling more and more slowly through space as it moved farther and
farther from the Sun. It would be travelling fastest when closest to the Sun; hence
the attractive force would have to be greatest at that point, to ‘whip the planet
round’ the tightest part of its orbit. At this point the radius is at its minimum,
hence also its square. Thus the inverse of that square is at its greatest – which
is what the force needs to be. Similarly, the planet would be slowed down to its
lowest speed as it reached the point farthest from the Sun. At that point it would
need only a weaker tug of gravity in order to be drawn back nearer the Sun at the
more distant of the two foci of the planet’s elliptical orbit. And the gravitational
force is indeed at its weakest at this point, since that is where the inverse square
is at its minimum. So much for rough intuitive sense ... What is needed for the
more precise mathematical details concerning the elliptical nature of planetary

190
Philosophy and Method
orbits, and especially for the third law, depends on the very speciﬁc mathematical
form of the inverse-square law. We cannot broach these details here. The reader
will ﬁnd them in Tennant (2010).
To repeat, so as to drive the point home: by framing his hypotheses – his
‘source-law’ of universal gravitation, along with his hypothetical laws of motion
(hypothesizing how it is that forces cause bodies to accelerate) – Newton was
able to deduce Kepler’s laws, which themselves were low-level generalizations
extracted from extensive observational data. Here we have a paradigm of
hypothetico-deductive explanation.
Newton’s dynamical theory held sway until the end of the nineteenth century,
when it was eventually discovered that it could not account satisfactorily for the
precession of the perihelion of Mercury. It was also discovered that the speed of
light appeared to be constant in all inertial frames. This experimental ﬁnding
(by Michelson and Morley) made it extremely difﬁcult for the combination
of Newtonian mechanics and Maxwellian electromagnetism to make sense of
all electromagnetic phenomena. Around this time also, investigations of the
interior of the atom were uncovering phenomena that could not be explained
within the Newtonian theory. Something had to give. Or, rather, something
had to overthrow or displace Newton’s so-called ‘classical’ view of the world,
in the small and in the large. The displacing theories were special relativity
(Einstein) and quantum mechanics (Einstein, Bohr, Schrödinger, Heisenberg),
respectively.
In addition, Newton’s hypotheses explained (or correctly predicted) a host
of other phenomena, from disparate domains: ocean tides; motions of pendula;
motions of vibrating strings; motions of waves in elastic media; motions of
projectiles, etc. When a high-level theory like this uniﬁes disparate phenomena,
it counts heavily in favor of the theory. For then all the different phenomena
are understood as manifestations, in different settings, of the same underlying
regularities in the world that are given expression in the theory.
As we saw in §8.6, if observation bears out any prediction of our hypotheses,
our belief in the hypotheses will be strengthened; but if it contradicts the
prediction, our belief might be weakened – even to the point of disbelief.
Logically, however, we can say that scientiﬁc hypotheses whose predictions
have not yet been contradicted by experience and observation are nevertheless
not conclusively proved. Rather, they are only as-yet-unfalsiﬁed. For no ﬁnite
amount of evidence (which is all we ever have at any stage of our investigations)
could ever logically imply the truth of scientiﬁc hypotheses that make universal
claims.
There could always be unexpected instances, or happenings, that would falsify
the hypotheses. One cannot rule out this logical possibility. (This principled
skepticism, as discussed in §8.4, we owe to David Hume.) So, even though
a theory might have passed the test of experience thus far, this affords no
logical guarantee that it will continue to do so. It might be falsiﬁed some time
in the future. Indeed, its potential falsiﬁability is what some philosophers of
science take to be the hallmark of a genuinely scientiﬁc theory. They say that

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
191
a theory has no real ‘cognitive signiﬁcance’ unless one could specify in advance
what consistent, imaginable course of experience would count as falsifying the
theory.
It was Karl Popper who ﬁrst clariﬁed this view of the logical role of scientiﬁc
hypotheses in providing predictions and explanations of phenomena. The
main thesis of Popperianism is that no matter how well our scientiﬁc theories
have fared thus far, they are nevertheless still only conjectural, hypothetical,
speculative, and potentially falsiﬁable. We only ever assume scientiﬁc hypotheses,
as premises in proofs that provide predictions (observation statements) as their
conclusions. No matter how many successful predictions we make, there will
be only ﬁnitely many of them. And this is not enough to exhaust the logical
content of an hypothesis whose logical form is that of a universal generalization.
No ﬁnite set of data can logically imply a universal conclusion. So our
hypotheses cannot themselves be proved from the evidence we have for them,
no matter how certain we may be about the evidence itself. Thus we can never
attain the same kind of certainty about our hypotheses as we do about those
mathematical statements that we have proved as conclusions from self-evident
axioms.
Sometimes the theoretical hypotheses invoke theoretical or unobservable
entities such as quarks, photons and electrons. We entertain only those
hypotheses that are based on or supported by the evidence. It is contro-
versial whether there is any such thing as an inductive logic that would
validate the transition from ﬁnite bits of evidence to hypotheses of universal
form.
The exact nature of this ‘support’ is a deep problem in the theory of knowledge
and the philosophy of science. It is known as the problem of induction.
To recapitulate the lesson of Chapter 8: so-called inductive logic (if there is
such a thing) would allow us to pass from the bits of evidence, as premises, to our
general hypotheses, as conclusions. The pattern would be this:
Inductive leap
Hypothesis as conclusion
Various bits of observational evidence as premises
The evidence would at best make the conclusion highly probable; it would not
provide a logical guarantee of its truth. The inductive leap is not deductively
valid. Good theoretical hypotheses, as we saw above, do not just summarize
the evidence and say no more. Rather, they ‘go beyond’ the evidence on which
they are based. For they imply predictions about the behavior of systems, or the
distribution of characteristics in a population, or the motions of heavenly bodies,
etc., that have not yet been observed or measured. In doing so, they allow us to

192
Philosophy and Method
anticipate the course of our future experience, and to exercise some control over
future events.
Note that the predictions are deductively implied by the hypotheses. Deductive
logic would yield proofs of the downward passages in the following schema:
Mathematical axioms
Mathematical theorems, Scientific hypotheses, Boundary conditions
Predictions
But our observations and measurements may conﬂict with, or disagree with, or
contradict our predictions:
Mathematical axioms
Mathematical theorems, Scientific hypotheses, Boundary conditions
Predictions, Observations/measurements
In such a situation we are (rationally) forced to revise our theoretical hypotheses.
They have been put to experimental test, and have been found wanting.
13.5 Theory revision
The problem of how to revise one’s theories in the light of new conﬂicting
evidence has recently become very important in computing science. So-called
expert systems with data bases are programmed to simulate human knowledge
and principled understanding of various aspects of the world (oil-drilling; the
legal system; automatic piloting; medical diagnosis). They have to up-date their
data, and sometimes revise their principles if they are to perform satisfactorily.
To do so (that is: for us to be able to make them do so) we have to understand
the logic of theory change, or theory dynamics, as it is now known. We may,
of course, refuse to revise our theoretical hypotheses in the face of conﬂicting
evidence. We may decide instead to blame our microscopes or our telescopes or
our measuring apparatus (‘bad data’). Or we may doubt whether the boundary
conditions for the experiment were properly controlled (‘bad control’). Or we
may just hang on to our hypotheses at all costs, because they are the best we
have, and choose to disregard the new evidence (‘it was a ﬂuke’; ‘unrepeatable
result’).

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
193
The problem of where, exactly, to lay the blame in a situation like
this – whether to fault the theoretical hypotheses or the ‘data’ or other auxiliary
assumptions – is known as the Quine–Duhem problem, after the two philosophers
who emphasized its importance for methodology. A few more words about the
extent of this problem are in order.
13.5.1 The Quine–Duhem problem
If we make a prediction from tried and tested hypotheses, and subsequent
observations conﬂict with, or contradict what we predicted, we may cast doubt
on any of the following.
1
The new evidence. Did we really make those observations correctly? Were those
readings correct? Can we trust our senses in this instance? Might we have been
distracted? Did we record incorrectly what we saw?
2
The boundary conditions. Did we control them properly during the experiment?
Did we monitor them thoroughly enough?
3
Auxiliary assumptions about our measuring equipment. Was the equipment
properly calibrated? Will it reliably produce the same readings in another
situation exactly like the one in the last experiment? Did it malfunction?
Was it inﬂuenced in some way of which we were unaware, and which would
invalidate its readings?
4
The hypotheses themselves. Might they really have been shown to be false, at
long last, in this new experimental situation, after surviving all the tests to
which they have been subjected in the past?
It is the whole set of premises, consisting of hypotheses, auxiliary assumptions
about measuring equipment, statements of boundary conditions, and experimen-
tal observations, which is reduced to falsity or absurdity. The problem now would
be: what statement(s) are we to ﬁnd at fault within that set?
13.6 Desiderata of a scientiﬁc theory
1
The theory should explain all the available evidence. When the theory is
conjoined with suitable statements of initial conditions, boundary conditions,
etc., of the system whose behavior it is describing, it should logically imply
the observation statements that form the evidence about its behavior through
time.
2
The theory should make testable predictions. By conjoining the theory with
suitable statements of initial conditions, boundary conditions, etc. (which
can be controlled experimentally), it should logically imply observation
statements concerning the outcome of those experiments. It should be
possible for those observational predictions to be false, so that the theory itself
is falsiﬁable.

194
Philosophy and Method
3
The theory should withstand several experimental tests after it has been
formulated and entertained as good scientiﬁc conjecture.
4
The theory should be economical. It should not ‘multiply entities beyond
necessity’ (Occam’s Razor). The entities that it posits (such as molecules,
atoms, electrons...) should be posited only because they enable one to make
genuine explanatory and predictive advances.
5
The theory should be formulated as simply as possible. This is a requirement
partially met by mathematical elegance and tractability, symmetries, level of
generality, etc.
6
The theory should unify disparate ranges of observable phenomena. It should
seek common patterns and mechanisms at the root of the apparent variety
in observable phenomena. An example of a good theory in this regard is
the Newtonian theory of mass, forces (including gravitational force), and
motion. This theory provides good explanations and predictions concerning
the following disparate ranges of phenomena:
•
the motions of:
–
the planets around the sun
–
a simple pendulum
–
a spinning and precessing top
–
ripples and waves in water
–
a projectile near the Earth’s surface
–
falling bodies near the Earth’s surface
•
the action of the tides;
•
the vibrations of a plucked guitar string;
•
the altitude of a communications satellite in stationary orbit above the
Earth’s surface;
•
the centripetal force to be exerted by an athlete in the Olympic hammer
throw.
13.7 A look ahead to the Argument from Design
The Argument from Design for God’s existence (see Chapter 16) is best
understood as providing a competing ‘scientiﬁc’ explanation of the observed
phenomena of design, complexity, adaptation, etc., that tend to provoke
reactions of admiration, wonder, and awe in the observer. That an all-powerful,
purposeful Designer exists is a high-level hypothesis from which one is supposed to
be able to deduce the facts of design as we observe them. Thus it is a rival to
the naturalist’s postulation, instead, of a causal process of random variation and
selective retention, which is maintained to have produced the same observed
results.
The way to counter the Argument from Design is to judge it on its merits
as a proposed scientiﬁc explanation; and that is where the criteria listed above
would be relevant. The way to criticize the Argument from Design is to

Deduction in Mathematics and Science
195
contrast its explanatory and predictive power, and its ability to unify disparate
ranges of phenomena, with those of alternative naturalistic theories – such
as Big Bang cosmology, neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory, and cognitive
neuroscience – that attempt to give an account of the origin, evolution and
function of complex physical systems.
In this regard the Argument from Design is unlike the Ontological Argument
and the Cosmological Argument for God’s existence (see Chapter 15). The latter
two arguments attempt (by philosophical consensus: fallaciously) to establish
God’s existence as a certain conclusion of a ‘conceptual’ proof. This is very
different from entertaining God’s existence as an explanatory hypothesis, as is
done by the Argument from Design. The way to criticize the Ontological
Argument and the Cosmological Argument is to locate conceptual confusions
and/or fallacious moves within the argument, or falsehoods among its premises,
so as to show that the argument’s conclusion is not secured as true.
Problems
Your responses are best attempted after a careful reading of the chapter, but
without returning to the text to recover main ideas or details.
1
Brieﬂy explain Karl Popper’s views about the logical character of scientiﬁc
theories.
2
Brieﬂy explain what the Quine–Duhem Problem is.
3
What are the desiderata of a good scientiﬁc theory?
4
What is the contrast in logical role between mathematical theorems and
scientiﬁc hypotheses?
5
How was Gödel’s breakthrough idea in proving the incompleteness of
arithmetic inspired by the Liar Paradox?
6
Does set theory, with its greater scope and power than arithmetic, manage to
decide every sentence of its language?

14 The Methodological Issue of
Reductionism
14.1 Levels of reality
The part/whole relation generates a conception of levels of reality. Quarks
are parts of protons; protons are parts of atoms; atoms are parts of molecules
and macromolecules; macromolecules are parts of cells; cells are parts of
bodies; bodies are parts of colonies, herds and societies. Corresponding to these
compositional or mereological ‘slicings’ of the world are the different disciplines
that study them: fundamental particle physics; chemistry; molecular biology;
histology; anatomy (and individual psychology); sociology, group psychology,
economics ...
Or, to take a slightly different route up a different hierarchy of containment:
once one reaches molecules, jump to ‘physical body’ (in the sense of ‘lump of
stuff’); clusters of physical bodies; clusters of clusters of physical bodies; ... and so
on. Then we have the sciences of mechanics and cosmology getting their look-in.
Planets with their moons, solar systems, galaxies, and super-galaxies are simply
larger and larger clusters of physical objects. There is a bewildering array of levels,
and a bewildering array of alternative vocabularies (even in the same language,
such as scientiﬁc English) tailored to the description of each of these levels. Thus
the physicists speak of quarks, leptons, hadrons; the chemists speak of elements,
compounds, ions, radicals, valencies, bonds; the molecular biologist speaks of
genes, chromosomes, alleles, recombination, replication; the histologist speaks of
organelles, mitochondria, membranes, cytoplasm; the anatomist speaks of tissues,
organs, etc.; the individual psychologist speaks of memory, perception, learning
by trial and error, reinforcement, cross-modal associations; the sociologist
speaks of group attitudes, peer group pressure, delinquency, leadership, poverty,
exploitation; the economist speaks of income groups, demand, supply, exchange
rates, balance of trade, levels of unemployment, capital.
Each one of these theorists makes a choice of systems and their characteristic
kinds of behavior, and takes these characteristics as their objects of study. Each
one uses basic terms appropriate to the features and behavior of objects discerned
as important for and at that chosen level.
Now it may turn out that one discerns important features at any given level
by attending to what goes on at a higher level. Thus a molecular biologist is

The Methodological Issue of Reductionism
197
interested in DNA making up genes because of the effects manifested at the
organismic or phenotypic level, when the genetic information is expressed. A
neurologist might be interested in the effect of pheromone molecules on the brain
stem because of how it is implicated in riots at football games.
Each of the theorists is interested mainly in what might be called, for his or her
discipline, the centrally leveled explanations of the behavior of the characteristic
objects of study. Such explanations are given at the chosen level. They invoke,
or make reference to, only such forces, inﬂuences, pressures, powers, etc., as are
manifest at that level. Thus the sociologist might seek to explain football riots
in terms of totemism, inter-group rivalry, initiation rituals, machismo, betting
habits, drunkenness, poverty, disappointment over the team’s performance, ...
All these are states, conditions or forces ‘at the same level’ as yobbish behavior.
Each theorist in turn is at times forced to look ‘downwards’ and ‘inwards’ to
come up with explanations that at last marshal the real forces that are doing
the work. Thus the sociologist, coming up empty-handed (or with hands only
half-full) when looking at all the social forces at work on the football rioters,
might have to turn to the neurologist and organic chemist in order to completely
explain football riots, by invoking the effects of micromolecules (pheromones)
ﬂoating in the air. Pheromones are chemical messengers that can have profound
effects on animals without their being in any way aware of them. (Sexual
attraction is saturated with them.)
There are also practitioners of some of these disciplines who sometimes look
‘upwards’ to the next level in search of such explanations if they cannot ﬁnd
them at the chosen level or at any lower level. An example would be the
practitioners of cybernetics, the science of systems behavior with feedback
loops. In the loose hierarchy of scientiﬁc disciplines, ranging from hard physics
to soft sociology, each discipline can draw on mechanisms characterised by
the discipline below, and indeed often does. There is a general tendency,
reinforced by past explanatory success, to look downwards and inwards for
efﬁcient explanations of behavior of the things in which one is interested. By
looking downwards we mean looking to the discipline concerned primarily with
the behavior of things at the ‘next level down’. By looking inwards we mean that
one looks inside the objects for causal structures and mechanisms mediated by
their constituents.
We are thinking here more of animate objects than of inanimate ones. For
Newton’s theory of gravitation was certainly not arrived at by looking downwards
and inwards into apples. He looked, rather, at the planet under his feet and was
struck by his idea that way.
Perhaps the most striking success story of the downward- and inward-looking
method is that of molecular biology. The discovery of the universal genetic code,
and the mechanism of replication, provides a bridge between organic chemistry
and evolutionary biology. Perhaps the most exciting – or chilling – prospect
is that a downward- and inward-looking methodology will one day furnish a
complete account of the psychological workings of the human mind solely in
terms of the underlying neurological reality: the network of neurons, joined by

198
Philosophy and Method
axons and dendrites, that form the gray matter of the brain. This would be a
triumphant example of reductionism, if ever it could be achieved.
We need, however, to be aware of these chilling prospects even in the
absence of any genuine, thoroughgoing reduction of psychological theorizing
to neurophysiological theorizing in the sense already explained in §6.13. It
would be ‘enough already’ if researchers at some drug company happened upon a
robust ‘bridge law’ connecting (in isolation, as it were) some particular aspect
of neurophysiology with some particular aspect of our mental lives. For then
they could intervene pharmaceutically to ‘treat’ certain mental conditions – or
to meddle with our minds, depending on one’s values. The danger of exploiting
bridge laws discovered in isolation, and not formulated within a comprehensive
reduction, is that one will begin one’s interventions and manipulations at
the lower level without fully appreciating the various side-effects they will
cause – effects at the higher level at which the symptoms to be allayed arise. Who
would wish to calm an energetic, or even rambunctious, child with brain-altering
drugs if the unanticipated long-term effect were to be an irreversible erosion of
intelligence, or of emotional warmth, or of focus and self-discipline?
14.2 Reductionism
We return to the task (begun in §6.13) of explaining what, in general, is meant by
reductionism. As philosophers commonly understand it, reduction is a relation
between theories designed to describe different levels of reality. Theories are
framed within a chosen vocabulary. When two theories concern different levels,
those vocabularies may not have much in common. All the more arresting, then,
if one of those theories can be reduced to the other, in the following sense:
T2 reduces to T1
if and only if
one can deﬁne the terms of T2 as logical complexes of terms of T1; and one
can use those deﬁnitions to derive within T1 all the statements of T2 as
(suitably re-written) statements of T1.
This is the strict sense in which reductionism is understood in the philosophy
of science. Its explication in the foregoing form is due to one of the visiting
members of the Vienna Circle, Ernest Nagel (1901–85) – see Nagel (1961). The
claim that T2 reduces to T1 implies, but is not implied by, the claim that the
second level of reality in question (the one described by the second theory T2)
supervenes on the ﬁrst level of reality (the one described by the ﬁrst theory T1).
One level L2 (commonly called the ‘higher’ one) supervenes on another
level L1 (commonly called the ‘lower’ one)
if and only if
by ﬁxing all the facts (in general, over time) at the level L1 one thereby ﬁxes
all the facts at the level L2.

The Methodological Issue of Reductionism
199
A prime example of supervenience, according to the physicalist, is that of mental
states (and processes) supervening on brain states (and processes). If we ﬁx all the
facts about the brain (in a metaphorical sense of ‘ﬁx’, of course – suppose, if you
will, that God sees to it) then we (or God; or laws of metaphysics perhaps beyond
our ken) ipso facto ﬁx all the facts about the mental life of the person whose
brain it is.
To make the idea vivid, suppose the person in question now believes that p,
and does not believe that not-p. His brain is in some total state S. For him to be
believing that not-p, his brain would have to be in some different state S′. Fixing
the lower-level facts ﬁxes the higher-level facts. The higher-level facts could
not be otherwise except in so far as the lower-level facts were permissively and
appropriately otherwise too. The inventory of lower-level facts makes possible
only one true higher-level story of all that is going on at the higher level.
To claim that a higher level supervenes in this sense on a lower level is a
way of having one’s metaphysical cake and eating it. One is acknowledging the
importance and priority of the lower level, since it determines the higher level.
The issue is one-sided: only one level (the lower one, L1) does the determining,
and the other level (the higher one, L2) is determined. Thus one can maintain,
say, the overriding importance of the physical level of reality (L1) for all of
psychology and social science (L2). The physical facts (L1) ﬁx the mental,
social and economic facts (L2). But at the same time the supervenience theorist
need not be committed to the claim that the higher-level theory T2 that describes the
level L2 can be reduced (even if only in principle) to the lower-level theory T1
describing level L1. That is, the supervenience theorist need not seek to undermine
the theoretical autonomy of the higher-level disciplines, such as psychology,
sociology, and economics. Indeed, those disciplines would retain their utility
and autonomy even if reduction-in-principle were possible, provided only that
the reduction in question were not feasible. (See §6.13 for the contrast between
reduction-in-principle and feasible reduction.)
To see that reductionism implies supervenience is easy. The higher-level facts
described by the theory T2 are, by virtue of the reduction, being described by
logical complexes in the lower-level vocabulary of the theory T1. So obviously
the lower-level facts are going to ﬁx the ‘higher-level’ facts. This is because the
higher-level facts are, given the reduction, simply lower-level facts in a complex
disguise. The reduction provides the disguise for the higher-level facts, as it were,
but also, in so doing, reveals them for what they really are.
14.2.1 Does supervenience imply reductionism? An investigation of the
philosophical implications of Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem
To see that supervenience does not imply reductionism is not at all easy.
Indeed, some foundationalists and methodologists might urge that the relevantly
qualiﬁed jury is still out on this question. It behooves us now to examine in
greater detail the nature of the case adverted to in §6.13 – the one that invokes

200
Philosophy and Method
Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem in mathematical logic. (The theorem is due to Beth
(1953). The form in which we shall invoke it was proved in Robinson (1956).)
This theorem, which we shall proceed to explain, concerns the so-called
ﬁrst-order languages of logic. In such languages, one can generalize about
individuals, but one cannot generalize about their properties and relations. One
can of course still make statements about any or all individuals having particular
properties, or standing in particular relations – witness ‘John is bald’, ‘17 is prime’;
‘John loves Mary’, ‘17 is less than 21’; ‘Everyone loves someone’, ‘Every number
is less than some number’. But one cannot say such things as ‘John is everything
but a mentor to Mary’, or ‘17 has all the properties enjoyed by any prime number’.
Despite this apparent expressive limitation, however, ﬁrst-order languages
are the prime choice of both mathematicians and scientists when it comes to
expressing their theories’ ﬁrst principles or hypotheses in a rigorous way, and
developing their consequences – so much so that Quine, the great regimenter,
called ﬁrst-order languages ‘Grade A idiom’. The great advantage of Grade A
idiom is that it affords us total deductive control, by way of compensating for its
occasional expressive limitations. Anything that follows logically from what we
say using Grade A idiom can be proved from the same, in ﬁnite and effectively
checkable fashion. (Thus ﬁrst-order language resolves the Noncompossibility
expounded in Chapter 29 in favor of maximizing deductive power, rather than
maximizing expressive power.)
So much by way of cautionary stage-setting: Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem
(which we have yet to state) applies primarily to Grade A idiom (a.k.a. ﬁrst-order
languages). It applies also to sundry inﬁnitary languages, and to certain fragments
of second-order languages. There are also languages for which it is known
not to hold; but these would be unlikely contenders for the title of ‘The
Formal Language of Ideal Total Science’. So the interesting question that would
immediately arise, of course, is whether Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem can be
proved for such language as is needed in order to express the combination of the
higher-level theory T2 and its lower-level counterpart T1.
The reason why it is so important to know whether Beth’s Deﬁnability
Theorem applies to what ends up being our language of choice for ‘total science’
is this: if the Theorem applies, and if the supervenience thesis is true (namely,
that the facts at Level 1 ﬁx all the facts at Level 2), then reduction-in-principle
(of our theory T2 about Level 2 to our theory T1 about Level 1) is guaranteed by
Beth’s Theorem.
How does this work? We offer here some necessarily informal explanation of
the terms in which Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem is stated, and how these relate
to the methodological discussion at hand of levels of fact and levels of theorizing.
The supervenience theorist employs a certain lower-level vocabulary V1
(consisting of what the logician would call primitive function symbols and
primitive predicates) to describe the lower-level facts about individual things.
Remember, this description covers not only particular ‘factoids’, but also the
law-like regularities in the behavior and properties of those things – behavior and
properties appropriately described at the lower level.

The Methodological Issue of Reductionism
201
The supervenience theorist also employs a certain higher-level vocabulary V2
(consisting, again, of what the logician would call primitive function symbols and
primitive predicates) to describe the higher-level facts about individual things.
Once again, this description covers not only particular ‘factoids’, but also the
law-like regularities in the behavior and properties of those things – behavior and
properties appropriately described at the higher level.
These two levels of theorizing do not, in general, pass each other by like
ships in the night, making no connection with each other. On the contrary,
within the picture of ‘total science’ there will also be various connections made
‘between the levels’. A simple example will make the point. Damage to certain
localized regions of the brain is known to impair or destroy various cognitive
faculties – memory, or aspects of linguistic competence, or impulse control. Any
adequate ‘total theory’ combining our descriptions of both the mental facts and
the neurophysiological facts would have to postulate these basic connections
between parts of the brain (when functioning normally) and possession of the
relevant cognitive capacities by the person whose brain it is. (These are examples
of what are called ‘ϕ-ψ correlations’ in §23.4.)
The upshot, then, is that our total theory  describing the world both at Level 1
and at Level 2 will be employing primitive terms from both the lower-level
vocabulary V1 and the higher-level vocabulary V2, not only to describe each
level separately (‘in its own terms’, so to speak), but also to describe various
interconnections between the two levels. Let this now be tacitly understood when
we use the notation (V1,V2) for our total theory.
Assume – very idealistically, and downright unrealistically – that the goal
of total science has been reached. That is, we have arrived at a ‘total
theory’ (V1,V2) that is satisfyingly complete, that covers all the available
evidence, and that continues to withstand all attempts to falsify it by further
experiment and observation. Time now to look inside it, and in particular at the
Level 1–Level 2 relationship that it establishes.
According to the supervenience theorist, that 1–2 relationship is one of
determination, by the Level-1 facts, of the Level-2 facts. This can be beautifully
explicated by the mathematical logician as follows.
Take any domain D in which we are to interpret the combined language based
on V1 and V2. That interpretation consists in assigning extensions within the
domain D to each primitive expression of the vocabulary. (For example, given
any one-place predicate, we need to specify of which individuals in the domain it
holds; and so on.) We seek in this way to specify a model M based on domain
D that will make the total theory (V1,V2) true. Success in this endeavor is
possible (says the supervenience theorist) only in accordance with the following
determination constraint:
Suppose one has ﬁxed extensions in D for each of the primitive expressions
in V1. Then for each primitive expression in V2, there is at most one way
to ﬁx its extension so as to produce a model M that makes the total theory
(V1,V2) true.

202
Philosophy and Method
The mathematical logician summarizes the foregoing by saying that each
term in V2 is implicitly deﬁned by (V1,V2) with respect to V1. And this is the
antecedent of Beth’s Theorem:
Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem
If each term in V2 is implicitly deﬁned by (V1,V2) with respect to V1, then
each term in V2 can be explicitly deﬁned relative to (V1,V2) using only
terms in V1.
This leaves thus far unanswered only the following question: what is it to deﬁne
a term in V2 explicitly relative to (V1,V2) using only terms in V1? The answer
is straightforward. Take, say, a two-place predicate R(x,y) from V2. It would be
explicitly deﬁned by any formula ϕ(x,y) (whose free variables, as indicated, are
just x and y) in the language of V1 such that the co-extensiveness claim
∀x∀y(R(x,y) ↔ϕ(x,y))
is provable in the theory (V1,V2). And the same would hold for any n-place
predicate P in V2. It would be explicitly deﬁned by any formula ϕ(x1,...,xn) in
the language of V1 such that
(V1,V2) ⊢∀x1... ∀xn(P(x1,...,xn) ↔ϕ(x1,...,xn)).
(Recall that  ⊢θ means that there is a proof of the conclusion θ from premises
drawn from the set .) Of course, any two competing such formulae would
themselves have to be coextensive, since each would be coextensive with P.
Note that we are talking here about intra-theoretic, or nomological coextensive-
ness of each higher-level predicate P with some lower-level ‘reducing’ formula
ϕ. It is according to the total theory  that that P is coextensive with ϕ. It is not
a matter of analytical connections or of Humean relations among ideas. It is just
that our overall best account of the world, as expressed in the theory (V1,V2)
dealing with the two levels of reality in question, forces each higher-level
predicate to be coextensive with some lower-level expressible relation. The world
can, as it were, be apprehended, and truly described, solely in V1-terms.
This is a deep, surprising, and perplexing implication of Beth’s Deﬁnability
Theorem. It says, in effect, that
supervenience guarantees reducibility-in-principle.
This view was ﬁrst articulated in Hellman and Thompson (1975), but with the
intention of raising a technical objection to the applicability of Beth’s Theorem.
(The ﬁrst source to provide a detailed argument for reductionism on the basis of
Beth’s Theorem was Bealer (1978). The ensuing debate was assessed in Tennant
(1985).)
The anti-reductionist confronted by these considerations has some wiggle
room to explore. There are four objections that she can raise.

The Methodological Issue of Reductionism
203
First, she can challenge the background assumption that the language of total
science will be a ﬁrst-order language, or at least one of those well-behaved
languages for which Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem holds. In the absence of Beth’s
Theorem – either because it can be shown not to hold for one’s chosen languge,
or because we do not yet have a proof of it for that language – the reductionist’s
case for reducibility-in-principle does not even get off the ground.
Secondly, the anti-reductionist can point out that the total theory  that
effects the assumed implicit deﬁnitions of the higher-level concepts in terms of
the lower-level ones needs to be very powerful indeed in order to accomplish
this. The theory  is a highly idealized construct. It is most unlikely ever to be
attained at any foreseeable stage of our ever-evolving scientiﬁc enterprise. The
historical record shows that our scientiﬁc theories always turn out either to be
empirically falsiﬁed, or to be cripplingly incomplete, in not being able to so much
as offer a positive or a negative answer to certain questions that we wish to pose.
So, even if  is formulated in a language for which Beth’s Theorem holds, we
may still be unable honestly to invoke the theorem on behalf of the reductionist.
This would be for the simple reason that the antecedent of the theorem is not
in fact fulﬁlled. The theory  at hand is not powerful or comprehensive enough
to effect the implicit deﬁnitions required (of the higher-level notions in terms of
the lower-level ones).
Thirdly, the anti-reductionist can point out that Beth’s Theorem itself does
not impose any constraints on how long and complicated the ‘reducing’ formulae
ϕ might be, whose existence is guaranteed for the higher-level concepts once
they are indeed implicitly deﬁned. One can fairly expect many, if not all, of
these reducing formulae to be unmanageably complex. They are hardly likely
to afford any guiding insights as to how things are at the higher level, even
when the supervenience basis of lower-level facts has been pinned down by the
preferred story that  provides in the lower-level language. It’s all very well that
her neurons are ﬁring in such-and-such a pattern, and that the concentrations
of testosterone, oestrogen, adrenaline, dopamine, serotonin, oxytocin and
vasopressin are changing thus-and-so in various parts of her brain ... but does
she really love you?
Fourthly, there is the technical objection in Hellman and Thompson (1975),
which was noted earlier but not explained. A word of explanation is now in order.
Hellman and Thompson point out that the deﬁnition of implicit deﬁnability
requires generalization over all possible ﬁrst-order models of the scientiﬁc discourse
in question. Among those myriad models will be ones in which there are
non-standard natural numbers, in the part of the model that interprets the
language of arithmetic. But, they urge, it would be reasonable to restrict the
deﬁnition of how it is that lower-level facts determine higher-level facts so
that it falls short of being tantamount to the antecedent of Beth’s Theorem.
They wish to restrict attention to just those models for the total theory in
which only standard natural numbers occur (as the natural numbers of the model
in question). This is a technical ‘out’ that evades the application of Beth’s
Theorem.

204
Philosophy and Method
Those who are moved by the foregoing considerations in opposition to
the application of Beth’s Theorem are left holding an attractive position:
supervenience-without-reductionism. It is a metaphysical and methodological
position that does justice to the overriding and underlying importance of physical
reality, while at the same time preserving a useful theoretical niche for the
higher-level disciplines such as psychology, biology, sociology, and economics.
Note that supervenience is not being disputed by the ‘ecological’ theorists of
mental content. These are the theorists, such as Hilary Putnam and Tyler Burge
(b. 1946), who maintain that the content of an agent’s belief depends at least
in part on the identity and nature of the external objects or stuffs which the
belief concerns. Thus, my belief that water can boil when heated depends for
its identity on what, precisely, the stuff called ‘water’ on this planet essentially
is. Imagine Twin Earth, a planet like Earth in every respect except that the stuff
called ‘water’ in Twin-Earth English is actually XYZ rather than H2O. According
to the ecological theorist, the word ‘water’ on Twin Earth means something
different from the word ‘water’ on Earth. When my Doppelgänger on Twin Earth
says that water can boil when heated, he is thereby expressing a different belief
from the one that we express using the same words. Even if one agrees with this
so-called ‘wide’ or externalist theory of content, it nevertheless remains the case
that facts about belief supervene on physical facts. Only now the supervenience
basis is wider than it is usually thought to be by the proponents of the opposing
‘narrow’ theory of content. The supervenience basis is wider because it includes
the actual stuff, XYZ or H2O, as the case may be. The latter is an additional
lower-level determinant (in addition, that is, to various neurophysiological facts)
of higher-level facts about the beliefs held by speakers mouthing the word ‘water’.
14.3 Emergentism and epiphenomenalism
Emergentism and epiphenomenalism go hand-in-hand. Emergentism is the view
that as various systems of constituents become more complex, they may acquire
properties or features that emerge from that complexity. These features could
in no way be predicted beforehand, even with the fullest possible knowledge of
how all the constituents would behave outside the context of the new system.
This is the stuff of Engels’s dictum that differences of quantity eventually lead
to difference of quality. It is also behind the slogan that the whole is more than
the sum of its parts. (This slogan is adopted also by those who believe in the
possibility of so-called ‘downward’ causation, whereby the whole can causally
affect or constrain the behavior of its parts. See Campbell (1974).)
The thesis that there are emergent properties may be arresting until we
reﬂect more closely on what it means. Then we begin to acknowledge emergent
properties all around us – or so it seems. Physical properties of chemical
compounds, for example, appear to be emergent properties. Why is water wet?
Could one have predicted that it would be, from a knowledge of the properties
of hydrogen and of oxygen in isolation? It would appear not. Why does salt
taste salty? Could one have predicted that it would, from a knowledge of the

The Methodological Issue of Reductionism
205
properties of sodium and of chlorine in isolation? It would appear not. Why does
the light from lush grass cause the sensation of greenness in the consciousness of
the perceiving subject, rather than the sensation of redness? Could the exact
nature of the color sensation have been predicted from a knowledge of the
wavelength(s) of the electromagnetic radiation, and from knowledge of the
neurological workings of the perceiver’s brain? It would appear not.
There is a response to such claims of emergence, however. It is to ask simply
whether we are doing justice to what there is to know about, say, sodium and
chlorine ‘in isolation’. What exactly is meant by ‘in isolation’ here? Are we to
preclude knowledge of the sodium (resp., the chlorine) in its relation to other
things and stuffs? Why should not the properties of common salt (including its
characteristic taste to human beings) simply be included among the properties
of sodium (‘in isolation’) and among the properties of chlorine (‘in isolation’)?
Isn’t our problem, rather, that we diagnose emergentism too readily? Isn’t this
because we fail to explore a wide enough basis of properties of things and stuffs?
In particular, shouldn’t we refrain from saying that we know the properties of
sodium (or of chlorine) until we have studied them in all their possible chemical
combinations? Aren’t we making the mistake of responding to the (naturally too
difﬁcult) challenge of predicting some of those properties from limited knowledge
of a few central ones?
One can try in this way to fend off the emergentist claim that a thing or stuff
has emergent properties only by pointing to the importance of a vast network
of relations into which the constituents of the thing or stuff enter. That is, one
can fend off emergentism only by adopting a degree of holism, maintaining that
the full range of properties of an object can be appreciated only by seeing it in
its relations to (many, perhaps all?) other objects. In the case where we try thus
to fend off emergentism, we do so by being holist about the constituents of the
thing or stuff with the allegedly emergent properties. Holism on constituents is
thus tantamount to emergentism on wholes.
Emergentism is also evident in the thinking of non-equilibrium thermodynam-
ics, the theory of dissipative structures and of self-organising systems. (See Eigen
and Schuster (1979) and Prigogine and Stengers (1984).) Systems of constituents
exhibit all of a sudden fresh patterns of self-organization and self-assembly when
the ﬂow of energy through those systems is increased. As a ﬁnal example
of emergentism, we have the age-old view that human consciousness is an
emergent phenomenon. Its precise nature and peculiarities could never have
been predicted from knowledge of, say, all the truths of theoretical physics. The
mind is sui generis. On this view, it poses its own special demands for explanation
and description. These demands cannot be met by recourse only to the physics
of hadrons and leptons.
As a special case of this view, the philosopher of language and mind might hold
that the notion of meaning is emergent. At some time in the distant past, after
the Big Bang and before the evolution of life, there was no such phenomenon as
meaning. That is, nothing ever meant anything to anything else. Now, however,
there is lots of meaning. Every day we engage in meaningful exchanges. We

206
Philosophy and Method
tell one another things. We exchange casual information and gossip; we convey
extraordinary conﬁdences and secrets. We do so using language. Precisely how
sentences of our language could have come to acquire the meanings-in-context
that they standardly have, is a question that still exercises the philosopher. (The
author’s own reﬂections on this topic can be found in Tennant (1984).) On
one proposition, however, most philosophers would now agree: there could not
be meaning without intentional human actions (the acts of communication:
utterances of sentences and the like). Meaning supervenes (so it would appear)
on human behavior.
But whether human behavior itself can in turn be explained without reference
to meanings raises the uncomfortable prospect that we are caught in a closed
circle of explanation. It is what is sometimes called the hermeneutic circle. It is
often stressed as an insuperable obstacle to a fully naturalized account of human
nature and behavior. Epiphenomenalism is like emergentism in holding that
the higher-level phenomena (such as consciousness) arise out of the lower-level
ones in an essentially unpredicable way. But it is also an important part of the
epiphenomenalist view that the epiphenomena themselves are causally inert
or idle. That is, the epiphenomena are mere ‘spin-off’, mere ineffectual ‘fog’
generated by the real workings below. They do not themselves constitute loci
of causal inﬂuence.
The denial of this latter view is characteristic of interactionism. The
interactionist can still be an emergentist. He or she maintains that the mind
does of course inﬂuence the body (even if numerically distinct from it). The most
famous interactionist is Descartes, with his account of the mind as an individual
substance distinct from the body, but interacting with it in a (perforce) rather
mysterious fashion, mediated, he thought, by the pineal gland. Karl Popper
and John Eccles (see Popper and Eccles (1977)) are modern proponents of this
dualist doctrine. It is characteristic of discoveries in empirical science that they
can stoke up renewed interest in hoary old philosophical positions. Popper and
Eccles make much of the lateralization of mental capacities across the left and
right hemispheres of the brain. The self is seen as a distinct entity interacting
with the left hemisphere.
In similar vein, chaos theory has been claimed by some writers to rehabilitate
the libertarian view that we have genuine free will: the universe, being in chaos,
is not determined after all. In this respect chaos theory is a johnny-come-lately
after quantum theory (and Hadamard’s theorem, which Karl Popper cites as
a precursor-insight of chaos theory). Likewise the Big Bang hypothesis in
cosmology has stoked renewed interest in creationist doctrines; and the discovery
of the delicate inter-calibration of fundamental constants (such as the speed of
light; Planck’s constant; the gravitational constant; Hubble’s constant) has led
to speculation that the cosmos must be a put-up job by God to ensure that we
intelligent creatures evolve at long last, to appreciate His handiwork. (This is
Wheeler’s so-called Anthropic Principle. See Wheeler (1983) and Rees (1999).)
Finally, contemporary quantum theorists, pondering such problems as the
collapse of the wave packet, seem to be edging towards a Janus-like conception

The Methodological Issue of Reductionism
207
of the universe in which consciousness is as primordial as matter-energy, and not
simply an idle epiphenomenon, nor even simply supervenient on the workings of
matter-energy.
14.4 Towards a tolerant synthesis
While it may sound as though we are making light of some serious-minded
concerns in that fraught region between Science on the one side,
and
Metaphysics and Religion on the other, we would nevertheless be the last to
criticize anyone for seeking to integrate and unify their empirical theories (which
are, after all, just a collection of hitherto well-tested speculations) with their
metaphysical or religious speculations, leanings, or yearnings.
This author’s only distaste is for beliefs that are the result of wishful thinking.
Given the tentative conclusion above that emergentism about wholes can at
best be avoided by adopting holism with respect to their constituents, it seems
that we have to take seriously the complaint that a strictly downward- and
inward-looking methodology is unlikely to throw light on the full picture. The
sensitivity to surround that comes in large part from the recent sciences of
ethology and reproductive ecology represents, in this author’s humble opinion,
a sensible concession to holistic concerns. That degree of holism in turn
is compatible with a methodological preference for bottom-up causal stories
wherever these are to be had, over their top-down rivals.
14.5 An alternative to the ‘web of belief’
With an underlying belief in supervenience-without-reductionism, we would
then be led to a conception of scientiﬁc discourse that differs somewhat from
that of Quine’s famous ‘web of belief’. (See Quine (1951) and Quine and Ullian
(1970).) Quine’s model is of a network or web of sentences forming a ball or
sphere. On the periphery are observation sentences, tuned most directly to the
impinging of sensory experience. At the core lie logical laws, Mathematics and
high-level theoretical hypotheses of well-tested empirical theories. In between
lie the generalizations of intermediate importance. Quine has often stressed how
the web responds to a change in the distribution of peripheral truth-values by
re-distributing truth-values inwards. These re-distributions could in principle
reach right into the core, forcing one to abandon a well-entrenched hypothesis.
No sentence is immune to revision.
This is a nice model, and it has many happy adherents; but it does not seem
to us to do full justice to the theoretical ‘layering’ that is involved in theories
that describe and explain things and happenings at different levels of reality.
Nor does it do justice to the idea that there are, locally, rather dense meshes
of logical connections among sentences of any one scientiﬁc discipline. It does
not do justice either to the idea that each scientiﬁc discipline on occasion
seeks explanatory causal mechanisms at the level below and locates interesting
problems by looking to the next level above. That is, it does not do justice to

208
Philosophy and Method
the possible ‘bridge laws’ that might serve to link theorizing at any one level with
theorizing at the levels immediately above and below, without yet underwriting
the possibility of theoretic reductions.
So in place of Quine’s model of the sphere or ball, it is proposed here that we
adopt a new one. We shall call it the Havisham Cake model. (Miss Havisham, in
Charles Dickens’s novel Great Expectations, remember, kept her unused wedding
cake mouldering next to her, gathering cobwebs.) The picture is of several layers.
As with the cake, the biggest layer is at the very bottom, and layers get smaller as
one moves up. This reﬂects the asymmetry of supervenience. The bottom layer
is physics; the next layer up, chemistry; then biology; ... and so on up, perhaps
with metaphysics and theology being the miniature bridal pair at the very top.
Now remember that the special thing about Miss Havisham’s cake was that
it gathered cobwebs. Imagine these cobwebs linking each level to the next one
below. We liken these linkages to bridge laws: those hypotheses that involve
vocabulary from each of two neighboring levels of theory, and that bring the
two otherwise logically independent bodies of theory into fruitful contact. As a
matter of mathematical-logical fact, the existence of a rich set of bridge laws is
compatible with there being no reduction in principle of any higher-level body of
theory to that of any lower level. The different layers of the cake are then loosely
connected modules, corresponding to the bodies of doctrine in well-established
scientiﬁc disciplines dealing with the respective levels of reality as discussed
earlier.
Each such discipline has its own periphery, and each its own core. At the
periphery of each lie the observation sentences couched in the vocabulary
appropriate for the disciplines concerned. The connecting strands between
layers still make for the possibility of ramifying reverberations resulting from the
re-distribution of truth-values at the periphery of any one of the layers.
We guess logic would have to be the steel rod that goes up the middle through
all the layers, that makes the whole cake stand up in the ﬁrst place. We like this
concession of the cake model, because we think that logic is analytic and a priori
and unrevisable (once we have got it right, that is ...). Logic is a precondition for
enquiry, rather than just another slice of the intellectual action. The Havisham
Cake model also does justice to another aspect of scientiﬁc lore. The explanatory
spread of the lowest level is the greatest. And the little bits at the top are just a
piece of cake.
14.6 Adequacy conditions on any methodological view
Given the variety of opposing views – reductionist v. anti-reductionist; epiphe-
nomenalist v. interactionist; holist v. individualist; top-down v. bottom-up
causal theorist – the following questions arise:
What would enable us to decide rationally among these competing alternatives?
What conditions would an adequate metaphysical and methodological picture have
to meet?

The Methodological Issue of Reductionism
209
The best answer, we submit, is this. Take the theories that are discovered
and formulated as a result of following any one of these methodologies. In
following such a methodology you will have been imbued with the metaphysical
outlook that underpins it. That metaphysical outlook guides your formulation of
concepts, your choice of descriptive categories, your mathematical models, your
organization of evidence, and your framing of hypotheses. Let the metaphysical
outlook (and associated methodology) simply stand or fall with the theories in
which it results.
And what do we demand of these theories? Why, as already stated in §13.6,
simply that they should:
1
account logically for the evidence;
2
make new and testable predictions;
3
unify explanations across a range of disparate phenomena;
4
be succinct and elegant and simple;
5
mesh smoothly with common sense; and
6
be as spartan as possible in what they postulate as existing.
All one’s talk about wholes being more than the sum of their parts, about
feedback loops, about top-down causation, and about emergent properties has
to yield a payoff somewhere. The only currency in which payment can be made
is the explanation and prediction of past and future sense experience. Whatever
trendy terms a new theory may employ, it has to face the crunch: it has to explain
how it was that things in the past appeared they way they did, and say how in the
future they will appear to be.
Problems
1
Explain what is meant by reducing one theory to another.
2
What considerations are relevant to the question whether supervenience
implies reductionism?
3
Choose one of the popular scientiﬁc books referred to in this chapter, and
summarize how its arguments and theses bear on the question of reductionism
in Science.
4
‘It is way too demanding to expect a philosopher, expecially one coming from
the humanities rather than the sciences, to understand how the technicalities
of a deep and difﬁcult result in mathematical logic can shed light on a central
philosophical problem.’ Discuss.
5
How do scientiﬁc theories cope with system-containments?
6
‘There is no point in seeking theoretical reductions if they do not preserve the
meanings of the higher-level terms that are being reduced.’ Discuss.

Thispageintentionallyleftblank

Part III
The Existence of God

Thispageintentionallyleftblank

15 A Priori Arguments for the
Existence of God
In Chapter 13 we looked at the different deductive roles of mathematical
theorems and scientiﬁc hypotheses. We saw that mathematical theorems stand
as the conclusions of proofs using axioms as their premises. By contrast, scientiﬁc
hypotheses stand as assumptions in proofs whose conclusions are predictions or
observation statements. No amount of observational evidence will ever make
an hypothesis certain; but the hypothesis can at least serve to explain the
observational data, and could, in principle, be refuted by it.
Take, now, the prospect of an argument ‘for’ the existence of God. There
would appear to be two possible forms for such an argument.
1. The argument is like a mathematical argument. Its premises are self-evident
truths about which all parties, hopefully, can agree. Its steps will be inferentially
compelling. Its conclusion will be the statement that God exists.
2. The argument is like a scientiﬁc explanation. One of its premises will be the
‘theistic hypothesis’ that God exists. Other premises will be statements on which,
hopefully, all parties to the debate can agree. The conclusion of the argument will
be some statement that all parties think is true, and badly in need of explanation.
Indeed, using the ‘theistic hypothesis’ over and over again, one might be able
to give a large number of such arguments, each with acceptable side-premises
and its own importantly true statement (as conclusion) that is badly in need
of explanation. Finally – and this is the difﬁcult requirement – the ‘theistic
hypothesis’ would have to be demonstrably better than any rival hypotheses that
might be used to furnish simplifying and unifying explanations of all the true
statements that stand in need of explanation.
There are two famous arguments for the existence of God that conform
to type (1). They are like mathematical arguments in that they try to reach
the existence of God as a conclusion, rather than using it as an explanatory
hypothesis. These arguments are called the Ontological Argument (due to
Anselm) and the Cosmological Argument (due to Aquinas). And there is one
famous argument for the existence of God that conforms to type (2). It is like
a scientiﬁc explanation, or set of such explanations, in that it employs the
statement that God exists as an explanatory hypothesis, rather than trying to
reach it as a conclusion. This argument is called the Argument from Design.
It is due to Newton and, later, William Paley (1743–1805). (A great irony in

214
The Existence of God
the history of ideas is that Charles Darwin made a close study of the writings of
William Paley, when he was training to become a member of the clergy.)
In this chapter we deal with the arguments of type (1). In Chapter 16 we deal
with arguments of type (2).
15.1 The Ontological Argument
I had gone out to buy a tin of tobacco, and was going back with it along
Trinity Lane, when I suddenly threw it up in the air and exclaimed: ‘Great
God in Boots! – the ontological argument is sound!’
(Russell (1967), p. 84)
Russell was in his fourth undergraduate year at Cambridge at the time (1894).
The mature Russell was perhaps the most famous atheist of the twentieth century.
As a non-smoker, this author urges greater circumspection with the young
Russell’s conclusion. Let us ﬁrst examine the outcome of a formal analysis of
Anselm’s argument, before making up our minds about its soundness and/or
validity.
We shall reach a formal analysis only after some extended investigations.
15.1.1 The original Latin version of Chapter 2 of Anselm’s Proslogion
Here is the original Latin of Anselm’s ontological argument (Anselm of
Canterbury (1078), Chapter 2). The reader who does not know Latin may skip
it, and proceed to the translation in §15.1.2.
2 Quod vere sit Deus
Ergo Domine, qui das ﬁdei intellectum, da mihi, ut, quantum scis expedire,
intelligam, quia es sicut credimus, et hoc es quod credimus. Et quidem credimus
te esse aliquid quo nihil maius cogitari possit. An ergo non est aliqua talis natura,
quia ‘dixit insipiens in corde suo: non est Deus’ [Ps. 13,1; 52,1]? Sed certe ipse
idem insipiens, cum audit hoc ipsum quod dico: ‘aliquid quo maius nihil cogitari
potest’, intelligit quod audit; et quod intelligit, in intellectu eius est, etiam si non
intelligat illud esse. Aliud enim est rem esse in intellectu, alium intelligere rem
esse. Nam cum pictor praecogitat quae facturus est, habet quidem in intellectu,
sed nondum intelligit esse quod nondum fecit. Cum vero iam pinxit, et habet
in intellectu et intelligit esse quod iam fecit. Convincitur ergo etiam insipiens
esse vel in intellectu aliquid quo nihil maius cogitari potest, quia hoc, cum audit,
intelligit, et quidquid intelligitur, in intellectu est. Et certe id quo maius cogitari
nequit, non potest esse in solo intellectu. Si enim vel in solo intellectu est, potest
cogitari esse et in re; quod maius est. Si ergo id quo maius cogitari non potest, est
in solo intellectu: id ipsum quo maius cogitari non potest, est quo maius cogitari
potest. Sed certe hoc esse non potest. Existit ergo procul dubio aliquid quo maius
cogitari non valet, et in intellectu et in re.

A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
215
15.1.2 A canonical English translation of Chapter 2 of Anselm’s
Proslogion
There are of course many translations of Anselm’s famous argument into English.
A reasonably canonical one is to be found in Hopkins and Richardson (2000), at
pp. 93–94:
CHAPTER TWO
God truly [i.e., really] exists.
Therefore, O Lord, You who give understanding to faith, grant me to
understand – to the degree You know to be advantageous – that You exist, as we
believe, and that You are what we believe [You to be]. Indeed, we believe You
to be something than which nothing greater can be thought. Or is there, then,
no such nature [as You], for the Fool has said in his heart that God does not
exist?[fn] But surely when this very same Fool hears my words ‘something than
which nothing greater can be thought’, he understands what he hears. And what
he understands is in his understanding, even if he does not understand [i.e., judge]
it to exist. For that a thing is in the understanding is distinct from understanding
that [this] thing exists. For example, when a painter envisions what he is about
to paint: he indeed has in his understanding that which he has not yet made,
but he does not yet understand that it exists. But after he has painted [it]: he has
in his understanding that which he has made, and he understands that it exists.
So even the Fool is convinced that something than which nothing greater can
be thought is at least in his understanding; for when he hears of this [being], he
understands [what he hears], and whatever is understood is in the understanding.
But surely that than which a greater cannot be thought cannot be only in the
understanding. For if it were only in the understanding, it could be thought
to exist also in reality – something which is greater [than existing only in the
understanding]. Therefore, if that than which a greater cannot be thought were
only in the understanding, then that than which a greater cannot be thought
would be that than which a greater can be thought! But surely this [conclusion]
is impossible. Hence, without doubt, something than which a greater cannot be
thought exists both in the understanding and in reality.
15.1.3 Our own, slightly more rigorous, English version of
Anselm’s argument
We shall give below a reconstruction, or exegesis, in ‘logician’s English’, of
Anselm’s Ontological Argument for the existence of God. Our concern here, in
presenting the argument in our own prosaic form with tweakings in ‘logician’s
English’, is to focus attention on the very important role played by the two
argumentative moves that we have rendered as ‘Call such a thing E’ and ‘Call
such a thing F’. Each of these moves marks the introduction, into the discourse,
of a so-called existential parameter (E and F, respectively).

216
The Existence of God
Such moves are governed by strict logical protocols, taking the modern
form of restrictions on modes of occurrence of the parameters involved, when
employing the so-called rule of ‘Existential Elimination’. (The reader may wish
at this point to take a quick look ahead to the end of §27.1, for the formal
statement of this rule.) In order to make such moves assume licit form within our
eventual regimentation of Anselm’s argument, we have to be very careful to
extract suitable existential statements that can serve as the major premises of
the required applications of the rule of Existential Elimination. So, to the extent
that our prose exegesis below of Anselm’s original argument departs in minor
ways from extant forms in the literature, the reader needs to be mindful of this
consideration: these departures are driven by a logician’s charitable concern to get the
argument into a formal shape that enjoys the best possible chance of being formally
correct, and valid.
After regimenting the argument as charitably as we can, we shall examine
various criticisms of it.
15.1.4 Exegesis
Before advancing to any such criticisms, however, we need an exposition or
exegesis of the Ontological Argument itself. The following is the best we can
do (in the investigative spirit of the foregoing remarks) to render the argument
in the most rigorous logical detail that the original text can support (while still
setting it out in prose).
The Ontological Argument for God’s Existence
We believe [God] to be something than which nothing greater can be
conceived. So we understand the expression ‘something than which nothing
greater can be conceived’.
Thus something than which nothing greater can be conceived exists in the
understanding. Call such a thing E. So E is a thing than which nothing greater
can be conceived, and which exists in the understanding.
Now suppose (for reductio ad absurdum) that E does not exist in reality.
We can conceive of something than which nothing greater can be conceived
existing both in the understanding and in reality. Call such a thing F.
Because F exists in reality but E does not, F is greater than E.
We have conceived of F; and F is greater than E.
But E is supposed to be a thing than which nothing greater can be
conceived! – a contradiction.
Thus our supposition that E does not exist in reality must be wrong.
Hence E does exist in reality.
But E is that than which nothing greater can be conceived.

A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
217
Hence that than which nothing greater can be conceived exists in reality.
That is, God exists in reality.
The argument is purely conceptual; and it is a priori. Like a proof of a mathemat-
ical theorem, it seeks to establish its conclusion by taking truth-preserving steps
of inference from ﬁrst principles that are presumed to be self-evident. Criticisms
of any such argument can be of two forms:
1
at least one of the ‘ﬁrst principles’ used as a starting point for the argument is
not true; or
2
at least one of the steps of inference taken in the course of the argument is
fallacious, i.e., not truth-preserving.
15.1.5 First objection: Anselm tacitly uses a mistaken principle about
linguistic understanding
Anselm’s argument, as regimented above, begins as follows:
We believe [God] to be something than which nothing greater can be
conceived. So we understand the expression ‘something than which nothing
greater can be conceived’.
Thus something than which nothing greater can be conceived exists in the
understanding. Call such a thing E. So E is a thing than which nothing greater
can be conceived, and which exists in the understanding.
The emphasized word ‘thus’ – which we call an inference marker – indicates a
basic or primitive inference being drawn at this point in Anselm’s argument.
That inference is an instance of the general form
We understand the noun phrase ‘N’.
Thus N exists in the understanding.
A different instance of this same pattern would be:
We understand the noun phrase ‘Pegasus’.
Thus Pegasus exists in the understanding.
Here is another one:
We understand the noun phrase ‘the square root of Jupiter’.
Thus the square root of Jupiter exists in the understanding.

218
The Existence of God
(One needs to understand the expression ‘the square root of Jupiter’ in order to
know that there is no such thing.)
Let us concentrate on the instance involving ‘Pegasus’. Could it possibly
be true to say that Pegasus itself – that winged horse of ancient Greek
mythology – actually exists in an individual understanding, or in the collective
understanding? What would it be for a mythical object so to exist? The answer
must lie in the fact that each individual understander has his or her own mental
image of Pegasus. For the sighted, this is probably a visual image of a steaming,
shimmering, silver-gray horse with wings. But that image (or those images) cannot
themselves be Pegasus. For if (miraculously) Pegasus really were to exist, he would
not be the mental image that I have of him, or the mental image that anyone else
might have of him. He would merely be the thing of which those various images
are images. If Pegasus really were to exist, he would not be in our heads. Our images
of him might be in our heads, as well as our thoughts about him; but he himself
would be outside our heads, prancing or grazing or doing whatever amuses him.
The images we might have of him, qua mental images or brain states, would be
ontologically distinct from him. They would be an interesting subject matter to
investigate, in cognitive psychology or linguistic semantics or neurophysiology;
but that investigation would concern Pegasus himself only indirectly. It would
be an investigation of intentional states having Pegasus as their object, not an
investigation of Pegasus himself.
Anselm’s insinuation of the thing itself (in the example at hand: Pegasus)
into the understanding is therefore objectionable. This is so even when we
concede that thinkers often do (perhaps unreﬂectively) think that part of their
understanding of certain expressions of their language consists in their having
various mental images associated with those expressions. But even if unreﬂective
thinkers think that this is how they understand their language, their mental
images are nevertheless accidental, not essential, to that understanding; and they
are irrelevant to an account of what such understanding consists in.
For, there could well be thinkers who understood the expressions of their
language without having any associated mental images. (Call these thinkers, if you
will, semantic zombies.) These zombies’ understanding would be fully manifest in
the publicly observable uses they made of the expressions of their language. Indeed,
one inﬂuential view about linguistic meaning and linguistic understanding – due
to the later Wittgenstein –
is that it consists precisely in the use that we
make of our expressions. That usage is all that is available as evidence when we
acquire a language; and is all that is available as evidence when we judge others’
competence in the language. We look at observable usage. We do not inquire
after people’s mental images when we judge of their linguistic competence.
Perhaps, then, Anselm is too easily generalizing from what happens to be true,
introspectibly, from his own case. He ‘looks within’ himself, and ﬁnds that he has
associated mental images for expressions that he understands. Then he mistak-
enly takes this to be an essential ingredient in anyone’s linguistic inderstanding.
But, the objector will say, he is mistaken. He has no entitlement to the inference
registered by the emphasized word ‘thus’ in the quoted passage above.

A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
219
15.1.6 Second objection: Anselm mistakenly treats existence as a
property of things
Anselm continues his Ontological Argument as follows. The reader should focus
on the claim marked with the asterisk:
Now suppose (for reductio) that E does not exist in reality.
We can conceive of something than which nothing greater can be conceived
existing both in the understanding and in reality. Call such a thing F.
(*) Because F exists in reality but E does not, [it follows that] F is greater
than E.
We have conceived of F; and F is greater than E.
But E is supposed to be a thing than which nothing greater can be
conceived! – a contradiction.
Thus our supposition that E does not exist in reality must be wrong.
Hence E does exist in reality.
Anselm is effectively treating existence as yet another property of things, to be
lumped in with all the other properties, consideration of which helps one to judge
individuals’ relative greatness.
But, the objector will say – as Kant did, most famously – existence is not a
property of things. Comparisons of relative greatness can be made only among
things – that is, among entities that already exist. It is to substantive properties
of actually existing things that we attend when judging of relative greatness.
Any non-existent ‘thing’ would be ruled out of such a comparison on logical
grounds. Existence is a pre-requisite for entry into the game of comparison. It is
not a feature that would earn its ‘bearer’ any ‘Brownie points’ in the Greatness
Stakes.
Existence is not a property of things. Rather, existence is a (higher-order)
property of properties of things. To say that something has the (ﬁrst-order) property
F is not to predicate a property of any particular thing. Rather, it is to predicate
(at higher order) a property of the property F: namely, that F has instances. This
central logical insight into the ‘logical grammar’ of the word ‘exists’ (and its
cognates in other languages) was the central contribution of the founding father
of modern logic, Gottlob Frege.
15.1.7 Third objection: The Ontological Argument keeps bad company.
There are other arguments, of the same form, for patently
unacceptable conclusions
Here is an ‘Ontological’ Argument for the Non-existence of Zero (courtesy of
Saint Anselm). It is patently misguided to think that one could prove that zero

220
The Existence of God
does not exist. Hence there must be something wrong with Anselm’s argument
as well, since it has the same form as the following one.
We believe [zero] to be something than which nothing of greater nullity
can be conceived. So we understand the expression ‘something than which
nothing of greater nullity can be conceived’.
Thus something than which nothing of greater nullity can be conceived
exists in the understanding. Call such a thing E. So E is a thing than
which nothing of greater nullity can be conceived, and which exists in the
understanding.
Now suppose (for reductio) that E does exist in reality.
We can conceive of something than which nothing of greater nullity can be
conceived existing only in the understanding but not in reality. Call such a
thing F.
Because F does not exist in reality but E (by supposition) does, F is of greater
nullity than E.
We have conceived of F; and F is of greater nullity than E.
But E is supposed to be that than which nothing of greater nullity can be
conceived! – a contradiction.
Thus our supposition that E does exist in reality must be wrong.
Hence E does not exist in reality.
But E is zero, i.e., something than which nothing of greater nullity can be
conceived.
So zero does not exist in reality.
15.1.8 Fourth objection (raised by the anti-realist): The Ontological
Argument uses a strictly classical form of reductio ad absurdum
to which the anti-realist would object
Consider once again the block of argumentation that we examined in connection
with the second objection above. This time we place an asterisk in a new
position, to draw the reader’s attention to an aspect of the argument to which
the anti-realist would take exception:
Now suppose (for reductio) that E does NOT exist in reality. We can
conceive of something than which nothing greater can be conceived existing
both in the understanding and in reality. Call such a thing F. Because F
exists in reality but E does not, it follows that F is greater than E. We have
conceived of F; and F is greater than E. But E is supposed to be a thing
than which nothing greater can be conceived! – a contradiction. Thus our

A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
221
supposition that E does not exist in reality must be wrong. (*) Hence E does
exist in reality.
The anti-realist refuses to assert a positive on the basis only of a reductio ad
absurdum of the corresponding negative. Only the realist is prepared to do that.
That is to say, only the realist will accept the rule of inference called classical
reductio ad absurdum. For the anti-realist, reducing not-P to absurdity provides
justiﬁcation only for the claim not-(not-P) – that is to say, that it is not the case
that it is absurd to assert P. Where P is the claim that God exists in reality, the
anti-realist agnostic could agree that it is not the case that it is absurd to assert P;
while yet she refuses actually to assert P. She will justify her refusal by pointing
out that it is one thing to show the impossibility of denying the existence of
God (in reality); but it is quite another thing to provide a constructive reason for
asserting the existence of God (in reality). The impossibility of denial amounts
merely to consistency; whereas what we want, surely, is some justiﬁcation for
asserting what we take to be true. The anti-realist is prepared to use classical
reductio ad absurdum only when the proposition P in question is effectively
decidable – that is, when we have an effective method for deciding what the
truth-value of P is. An effective method for deciding whether P is one that can
be applied in a mechanical way, according to a recipe that can be speciﬁed in
detail in advance. An effective method requires no ingenuity for its application,
and requires only a ﬁnite amount of time, for a ﬁnite number of steps, before it
yields a deﬁnite answer (here, to the question whether it is the case that P). It is
hard to think of a better example of a proposition that is not effectively decidable
than the proposition that God exists.
Logical cognoscenti, please note: if one accepts the force of this fourth
objection, one does not thereby undermine the force of the third objection. For,
as casual inspection will reveal, in the Anselmian argument for the non-existence
of zero the reductio ad absurdum is constructive, not classical. It involves assuming,
for the sake of argument, that E does exist in reality, and deriving a contradiction,
from which it then follows that E does not exist in reality. This step is an
application of the rule of negation-introduction, not an application of the
classical rule of reductio ad absurdum.
15.1.9 A completely rigorous regimentation of the argument
The foregoing objections can be underscored or highlighted by more rigorously
regimenting Anselm’s argument as a completely formal proof. The aim would be to
use only such axioms and primitive rules of inference as are used by Anselm, or at
least only such axioms and rules as would have to be put forward on his behalf, in
order to make good certain lacunae in his argument. Once one has constructed a
faithful formalization of his argument, the subtleties revealed might also give rise
to yet further objections.

222
The Existence of God
With the aim of fully regimenting Anselm’s argument, we must ﬁrst investigate
how best to provide his sentences with appropriate logical forms. To this task we
now turn.
15.1.10 A translation manual for Anselm’s primitives, into suitable
logical notation
‘We’
It is less likely that Anselm was using the ‘royal’ or ‘authorial’ ‘We’, than that he
was addressing his considerations to a community of believers whom he took to
share with him certain basic beliefs about God. His aim was to provide his fellow
believers with apodeictic grounds for their shared belief. So, for the ﬁrst-person
plural pronoun ‘We’, we shall use the uppercase constant W, and treat it like a
name.
‘God’
At the very outset, we have to decide whether (in Anselm’s argumentation)
we are to understand ‘God’ as a name (perhaps a name introduced as an
abbreviation of some deﬁnite-descriptive term) or as a one-place predicate. The
Quinean might say that it matters not, since he (Quine) has famously left on
the table a general proposal to treat all names as disguised deﬁnite-descriptive
terms involving one-place predicates, a proposal that invokes Russell’s theory of
descriptions by way of justiﬁcation. Thus the name ‘Caesar’, rather than being
rendered in logical notation as the name c, would be rendered as ιxC(x), i.e.,
‘the unique thing x such that x Caesars’. But this is a device of such recent
vintage that it might not be fair to regiment Anselm’s discourse about God in this
fashion.
A straightforward reading of various English translations of Anselm’s text
inclines this author to render ‘God’ in logical notation as a proper name – g,
say. We shall proceed on this simple assumption about translation into logical
notation until such time as we might discover any insuperable obstacle to doing
so. It might turn out, of course, that we have to construe the name g as an
abbreviation for a longer deﬁnite-descriptive term of the form ‘the being x such
that ... x ...’. But we shall deal with such a possibility only if and when we
encounter it.
‘X believes t to be ’
We shall regiment ‘X believes that p’ as
β(X,p),
where the propositional-attitude (doxastic) operator β joins a singular term and
a formula to form a formula. The form of expression ‘X believes t to be ’ can

A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
223
sometimes invite the sternly de re reading ‘t is such that X believes of it that it
s’, which the doxastic logician renders as
∃x(x=t ∧β(X,(x))).
On this reading, the singular term t (or its sense, or conceptual content) is neither
part of the content that X believes (for it is not within the scope of β), nor part
of any reason that X may have for believing the content in question.
But this is emphatically not the case when the term t is the name g for God. For
surely both the contents of one’s theistic beliefs (should one hold any), as well
as one’s reasons for holding those beliefs, would hinge crucially on conceiving of
the being whom the beliefs concern as God. Thus, when the form of expression
to be regimented is ‘X believes g to be ’, it is surely the de dicto reading that
would be called for: ‘X believes “of God’, as God, that He/She/It s’.
Note the scare double-quotes around the phrase ‘of God’. These are needed in
order to quash in advance any assumption, on the part of one’s listener, that one
is reporting X’s belief in such a way as to involve oneself (the reporter) in sharing
X’s own commitment to the existence of God. One needs to be able to report X’s
beliefs that are purportedly about God, without necessarily being saddled thereby
with X’s own commitment to God’s existence. That is why we deﬁnitely cannot
use any such regimentations as
∃x(x=g ∧β(X,(x)) or ∃x(x=g ∧β(X,(g))
with
their
up-front
(‘wide-scope’)
existential
quantiﬁers.
The
suitably
non-committal reading that we are after (non-committal, that is, for the reporter
of the belief) would be regimented more simply as
β(X,(g)).
This de dicto form of belief-attribution absolves the reporter of any supposed
commitment to the existence of God. The reporter is merely reporting X’s
belief about (hence also: in) God, but without necessarily endorsing any part
of it. Moreover, brief reﬂection on the dialectical situation (on Anselm’s behalf)
convinces one that the de dicto form of belief-attribution has to be correct. For, if
we had to regiment Anselm’s opening line ‘We believe [God] to be ...’ by means
of the de re, existentially committal formula, he would already stand accused of
blatant circularity, or begging of the existential question – explicitly assuming
God’s existence at the very outset, rather than deducing it from less obviously
commiting assumptions.
‘Greater than’
Anselm considers one thing being (judged to be) greater than another. This strikes
one as a straightforward binary relation. We shall regiment ‘x is greater than y’ as
x > y.

224
The Existence of God
The ‘greater-than’-ness in question is of course not to be confused with
the usual orderings of familiar mathematical objects, such as the natural,
rational or real numbers, that are conventionally represented by the relational
symbol ‘>’.
‘Conceiving, conceiving of, and conceiving as’
Anselm only ever uses the verb ‘conceive’ within the scope of an explicit or
implicit ‘can’. The verb phrase ‘can conceive’ can govern an accusative or a
subordinate clause:
x can conceive of t
or
x can conceive [of the possibility] that p.
We shall regiment these as C(x,t) and C(x,p) respectively. Context will make
clear whether the second argument is a singular term (t) or a (possibly open)
(recall from §7.1: an open sentence is a well-formed formula that contains a free
variable) sentence (p). We shall call the former occurrence of C ‘objectual C’,
and the latter one ‘propositional C’.
‘Exists in the understanding’
To speak of something as existing in the understanding strikes one nowadays
as rather quaint and outmoded, carrying with it a problematic commitment
to intentional objects existing only in the mind of an understander. But the
regimenter has to be faithful to Anselm’s text, and provide some way to
regiment this important Anselmian notion. So we shall regiment ‘t exists in the
understanding’ as
Ut,
and avoid having to deal with any explicit existential quantiﬁer preﬁx that may
call for an unusually specialized and problematic meaning.
‘Exists in reality’
With ‘t exists in reality’ we are closer to Fregean (and indeed Quinean) turf. A
Fregean would say that this is just an equivalent variant, in natural language, of ‘t
exists’. Adding ‘in reality’ is, as it were, to add nothing to what is being said. On
this Fregean and Quinean construal of univocal existence, we could regiment ‘t
exists in reality’ as
∃xx=t, or ∃!t.

A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
225
But it may be unfair to Anselm’s text to be that ruthless or peremptory
in imposing upon his (translated) words these contemporary forms of logical
expression. So we shall ‘back off’ here, and regiment ‘t exists in reality’ less
contentiously as
Rt,
thereby maintaining at least a symbolical analogy with our foregoing treatment
of ‘t exists in the understanding’.
15.1.11 Translating Anselmian chunks into logical notation
We are now getting close to the Anselmian chunks that stand in need of
regimentation. Consider ﬁrst Anselm’s ‘nothing greater than t can be conceived’.
This is the negation of ‘something greater than t can be conceived’. The
only reading of the latter that can serve the purposes of Anselm’s argument is
‘something actual can be conceived of (by some actual thinker) as being greater
than t’. This is to be regimented as
∃y∃zC(z,y > t),
which uses propositional C.
Thus Anselm’s form of words ‘nothing greater than t can be conceived’ has the
regimentation
¬∃y∃zC(z,y > t).
Let us use
(t)
as an abbreviation of this regimentation.
We are now in a position to consider how best to regiment the opening
Anselmian line
We believe [God] to be something than which nothing greater can be
conceived.
Note that the ﬁnal step of his argument involves a substitution of identicals: he
substitutes ‘God’ for ‘that than which nothing greater can be conceived’. The
latter descriptive phrase implies uniqueness, not mere existence. So the very ﬁrst
line of Anselm’s argument would serve his argumentative purposes much better
if it were to read
We believe God to be (as a matter of deﬁnition) that thing than which
nothing greater can be conceived.

226
The Existence of God
This is straightforwardly regimentable as
β(W,g =df ιy(y)),
and can be taken as an axiom, expressing an analytic (and a priori) truth about
the language used by Anselm and his interlocutors.
Another axiom to which Anselm could help himself is that we exist:
∃!W.
It features in the formal proof below, supplying the existential presupposition
that is needed in order to infer from the premise that we can conceive something
to be the case to the conclusion that someone can do so.
We regiment Anselm’s form of words ‘we understand the expression “...”’ as
Und(W,‘...’).
In the formal proof below, the axiom marked with an asterisk is seldom remarked
upon as an actual premise of Anselm’s argument. But it really does feature as
an undischarged assumption (hence, as a premise) within his argument. It is the
claim that we can conceive of there being a unique thing than which nothing greater
can be conceived existing both in the understanding and in reality. As an axiom, it
is presumably vouchsafed by simply reﬂecting upon an act of alleged conception
that is taken to involve the content in question.
With those ﬁnal clariﬁcations, we now present a completely formalized proof
as a regimentation of Anselm’s argument. We do so on Anselm’s behalf because
of the general principle (which we have invoked before) governing demonstrable
validity of argumentation. This is that no argument can be admitted as compellingly
valid unless it really can be regimented at the level of detail that is required in order for
all its steps to be justiﬁed by appeal to primitive rules of inference. The diligent reader
should identify within this formal proof all the loci for the objections already
raised against the prose form of the argument; and should also inspect each step
within the proof, in order to ask whether it really is a valid move of reasoning.
For each step, the reader should try to determine what generally valid form of
rule, if any, the step instantiates.
("=~o---cc-c==== 
C(W,F - ,y"yAU[F]AR[F]) --('l 
C(W,R[Fj) 
....,(RIEl) 
E=£YW'yAU[E](S) 
C(W,F>E) 
3!W -(1) 
E_~yW'y 
3zC(z,F>E) 
3!F 
W(E) Le., 
"C(W, 3x(x_l.YW'YAU[x]AR[x])) 
3y3zC(z, y>E) 
....,3y3zC(z,y>E) 
=~ __ == ~3.c=(~W~,~,~,y~,,~y~A~U~
[ '~]~A'CR>=['~])~) 
______ 
.L-{(1) 
(3) 
,8(W,9-d/£YW(Y)) 
~2) 
E=£yWyAU[E] 
Und(W, '~y"fl'y') 
R[E] 
E l.ywy 
3x(x £l/Wl/AU[x]) 
R[£l/Wl/l (s) 
,8(W,9-d/£YW(y)) 
R[£yW'y] 
9 d/ l.yW'(y) 
R[g] 
E=£yWyAU[E] 
E=£yWyAU[E] 
E=£yWyAU[E] 
E=£yWyAU[E] 
Law

A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
227
15.1.12 Further reading on the Ontological Argument
The interested reader should consult Sobel (2004) and Oppy (2011).
15.2 The Cosmological Argument
The Cosmological Argument is so-called because it involves concepts basic to
our understanding of the cosmos: causation and time. The argument was ﬁrst
presented by Aquinas as his ‘Second Way’ of proving that God exists. Here is the
relevant extract from Bratman et al. (2009):
The second way [to prove the Existence of God] derives from the nature
of efﬁcient causation. In the world that we sense, we ﬁnd that efﬁcient
causes come in series. We do not, and cannot, ﬁnd that something is its own
efﬁcient cause – for, if something were its own efﬁcient cause, it would be
prior to itself, which is impossible. But the series of efﬁcient causes cannot
possibly go back to inﬁnity. In all such series of causes, a ﬁrst thing causes
one or more intermediaries, and the intermediaries cause the last thing;
when a cause is taken out of this series, so is its effect. Therefore, if there
were no ﬁrst efﬁcient cause, there would be no last or intermediary efﬁcient
causes. If the series of efﬁcient causes went back to inﬁnity, however, there
would be no ﬁrst efﬁcient cause and, hence, no last or intermediary causes.
But there obviously are such causes. We must therefore posit a ﬁrst efﬁcient
cause, which everyone understands to be God.
15.2.1 Exegesis
Aquinas is thinking of God as the ‘Prime Mover’. He thinks that at the point
‘in’ time ‘at which’ the physical universe came into being, there was an act of
creation – an event – involving the Deity. God created all things, and ordained
the lawful order that has since constrained the behavior, in space and time, of
all the physical objects in His creation. From this alleged initial event – the
‘prime moving’ – ﬂow all causal chains through subsequent time. Take any of
these causal chains. According to Aquinas, if we follow it back through time,
we shall (in an atemporal sense) eventually arrive at a terminus in the past: the
act of creation itself. For Aquinas, there can be no back-tracking inﬁnitely far,
without end, into the past, along a causal chain of events. (The causal direction,
of course, would be the reverse – it would be the forward-tracking of the same
chain.)
15.2.2 First objection: there can be causal over-determination
It is somewhat naïve to think that causes and effects come in separable series,
each of which can be linearized. If one traces the relation of cause and effect
in a large class of events, one can well ﬁnd structures that look like ‘chicken

228
The Existence of God
wire’ – with both forward-branching and backward-branching (though with all
arrows pointing from left to right, as it were). The sheriff offers a large reward
for the outlaw, dead or alive. Two bounty-hunters make off to ﬁnd him. They
take different routes to his mountain hide-out. From opposite ends of the valley,
they ﬁre at him, simultaneously. Each bullet is deadly accurate (literally as well
as metaphorically). But one of them kills the outlaw a split-second before the
other hits him. The cause of the outlaw’s death was that striking by the ﬁrst
bullet. But even if that event had not obtained, the striking by the second bullet
would have killed him. This is a case of causal over-determination. It is not at all
clear, in general, that the removal (in counterfactual cases) of any member of a
‘series’ of causes and effects would prevent the later members from still obtaining.
For those ‘series’ (in the plural, now) are intertwined and intercalated in
complicated ways.
Important though this objection is, it is not necessarily fatal to Aquinas’s
argument. The next objection, however, is.
15.2.3 Second objection: Aquinas commits the quantiﬁer-switch fallacy
Aquinas’s central inference has the form
Every event has a (distinct) cause;
therefore, Some event caused all (other) events.
We saw earlier that one way to object to a step of inference is to exhibit
another instance of the same form, taking one from an obviously true premise
to an obviously false conclusion. (Mere truth and falsity, respectively, would
be sufﬁcient; but the objection is even stronger when those truth-values are
obvious.) Here now is another inference, of exactly the form displayed by
Aquinas’s inference:
Every integer is less than some (distinct) integer;
therefore, Some integer is less than all (other) integers.
Taken as an inference in a discussion of the negative and positive integers, it is
clearly fallacious. For the premise is clearly true, while the conclusion is clearly
false. There is no ‘ﬁrst’ (negative) integer. The series of integers goes backwards
(more conventionally: ‘to the left’) through the negative ones, without end. We
might talk of ‘minus inﬁnity’, but this phrase does not denote any integer. It is
just a helpful way of reminding ourselves that the series of integers goes on and
on through the negatives, without terminating in any ‘least’ integer. The series
is ‘unbounded to the left’.
Aquinas can be squarely criticized for not having said more to secure the
conclusion that there is a ﬁrst cause. He dogmatically rules out the perfectly
consistent and imaginable scenario of a class of events extending inﬁnitely far
back into the past, without there being any temporally ‘ﬁrst’ point. Each event

A Priori Arguments for the Existence of God
229
could be caused by a strictly earlier event, while yet no event is initial within the
temporal ordering.
15.2.4 Third objection: even in the Big Bang model, there is, strictly
speaking, no ﬁrst cause
Some modern thinkers suggest that Aquinas’s Second Way can be redeemed by
commitment to the so-called Big Bang model of the universe. The Big Bang itself
is supposed to be the ‘initial event’ that ‘caused’ all subsequent events. This,
however, is mistaken. What cosmologists call the Big Bang is not an event in
time. It is a singularity sitting as a limit point to, but not in, the spatio-temporal
manifold. It is like the way the number 0 sits as a limit point to, but not in, the
set of all strictly positive real numbers. In the positive real numbers, one can keep
taking ever-smaller ‘hops’ backwards, ad inﬁnitum, without actually reaching 0.
So too, in the spatio-temporal manifold, one could take inﬁnitely many hops
back in time, from an event E1 to its cause E2, thence to the latter’s cause E3, ...
and so on, ad inﬁnitum into the past – without ever having to reckon the Big
Bang itself into the causal chain. For the Big Bang is not in any causal series. It
‘sits outside’ the causal manifold. Indeed, the Big Bang is not even an event. An
event is a happening in space-time; while the Big Bang lies outside space-time, as
a singularity where no physical laws would be applicable.
In summary, we reject the suggestion that Aquinas’s fallacious uniformization
(the quantiﬁer-switching move from ‘every-some’ to ‘some-every’) can be
repaired by borrowing from the most popular current model in scientiﬁc (as
opposed to philosophical) cosmology.
15.2.5 Fourth objection: why should a ﬁrst efﬁcient cause,
if there is one, be God?
This is not a silly question, from the atheist’s point of view. So what if some
argument about the nature and structure of causation leads one to accept that
there was indeed some initial event, in which all causal chains have their source?
Why should that be taken, without further ado, to be God, or even simply to be
God’s doing? Why shouldn’t it simply have happened, in a Godless universe?
Problems
1
Is there any reason to believe that anything than which nothing greater can
be conceived would have to be the only such thing?
2
Might God exist, but only contingently?
3
In our formal regimentation of Anselm’s Ontological Argument, identify
exactly which formal steps are subject to the ﬁrst, second and third objections
raised in §§15.1.5–15.1.7. Do you think that the Ontological Argument could
be revised and made compelling, in response to the criticism leveled against it?

230
The Existence of God
4
Are there any more sophisticated versions of cosmological theorizing (such
as, say, the theory of inﬂation, parallel universes, and multiverses) that might
lend support to Aquinas’s cosmological argument for the existence of God?
But even if so, what becomes of the would-be a priori status of the argument
itself?
5
Anselm’s Ontological Argument exploits the notion of conceivability, which
needs to be distinguished from the notion of logical or metaphysical
possibility. After Anselm, both Descartes and Leibniz (criticizing and seeking
to improve upon Descartes) formulated versions of what are commonly
called ontological arguments. They did so, however, by using the notion of
possibility rather than the notion of conceivability. Read the Fifth Meditation
in Descartes (1641b), followed by Leibniz (1969a) and Leibniz (1969b).
Regiment as best you can both Descartes’s ontological argument, and Leibniz’s
attempted improvement of it.
6
The greatest logician of the twentieth century, Kurt Gödel, was deeply
inﬂuenced by Leibniz. Gödel even went so far as to formalize a Leibnizian
version of the Ontological Argument. Carefully study Gödel (1995), and try
to reach a judgment as to whether it is faithful to the lines of argument to be
found in Leibniz (1969a) and Leibniz (1969b).

16 The Argument from Design
We explained earlier how arguments for the existence of God could either seek
to derive the existence of God logically from premises acceptable to both parties
to the debate; or use the hypothesis or conjecture that God exists in order to
derive from that hypothesis, in combination with acceptable premises, various
important statements about the world that call for explanation.
It is the latter kind of argument that we confront in this chapter. The
Argument ‘from’ Design postulates the existence of God in order to explain the
appearance of design in the natural order, both physical and biological. Thus the
claim that God exists is functioning, strictly, like a scientiﬁc hypothesis, to be
tested against the evidence by the predictions that it affords us.
16.1 Main presentations of the Argument from Design
The best statement of the Argument from Design comes, rather remarkably, from
Isaac Newton, in the General Scholium that he ﬁrst put into the second edition
of his great work Principia. (The source for our quotation is Newton (1726).)
Newton was deeply impressed, not by biological design (on which he did not
remark), but by the design of the heavens and the universal laws governing the
motions of physical masses quite generally. These were the very laws that he
himself had discovered, and they had such mathematical beauty and simplicity
that he was moved to see the hand of God at work in the creation of any world
in which they held. From what Newton wrote in the Scholium, we quote a
representative, if somewhat extended, excerpt from the 1729 translation from
Newton’s Latin by Andrew Motte.
This most beautiful System of the Sun, Planets, and Comets, could only
proceed from the counsel and dominion of an intelligent and powerful being.
And if the ﬁxed Stars are the centers of other like systems, these, being
form’d by the like wise counsel, must be all subject to the dominion of One;
especially since the light of the ﬁxed Stars is of the same nature with the
light of the Sun, and from every system light passes into all the other systems.
And lest the systems of the ﬁxed Stars should, by their gravity, fall on each
other mutually, he hath placed those Systems at immense distances from one
another.

232
The Existence of God
This Being governs all things, not as the soul of the world, but as Lord
over all: And on account of his dominion he is wont to be called Lord
God ... or Universal Ruler. ... The supreme God is a Being eternal, inﬁnite,
absolutely perfect; ... from his true dominion it follows that the true God is
a Living, Intelligent, and Powerful Being; and, from his other perfections,
that he is Supreme or most Perfect. He is Eternal and Inﬁnite, Omnipotent
and Omniscient; that is, his duration reaches from Eternity to Eternity; his
presence from Inﬁnity to Inﬁnity; he governs all things, and knows all things
that are or can be done. He is not Eternity and Inﬁnity, but Eternal and
Inﬁnite; he is not Duration and Space, but he endures and is present.
It would not be too mischievous to point out that this is from the hand of the
same thinker who claimed Hypotheses non ﬁngo (‘I do not create hypotheses’).
The version of the design argument most familiar to philosophers, however,
is due to William Paley. (See Paley (1867).) This version stresses the obvious
intellectual ease with which we will postulate a designer whenever we encounter
a complicated artifact in a stark and barren setting. If one were to come across
a chronometer in a lunar landscape, the hypothesis would readily be at hand
that some intelligent designer had fashioned the watch, and caused it somehow
to be placed there. One would not countenance the possibility that the watch
itself might have arisen from the random interplay of natural forces, such as
wind erosion, volcanic eruptions, etc. That would be just too implausible. So,
thought Paley, when one turned to consider the magniﬁcent design features of
the living world, one would be hard-pressed not to attribute it all to the workings
of a divine designer. The designer would have to be divine, because to suggest
that beautifully designed mortal beings had mortal designers would only drive the
problem one step further back. Who or what would have designed those mortal
designers? It did not occur to Paley, however, that the answer might postulate
natural forces that would slowly bring about the appearance (and reality) of
design, without this being the realization of any agent’s purposes. An insight
of this magnitude was only to come later, with Darwin – see below.
Paley’s example of the watch in the desert landscape does not really speak
to the Argument from Design concerning biological creatures, except by very
weak analogy. Watches do not reproduce; whereas organisms do. This crucial
disanalogy gives an important advantage to the opponent of the Argument from
Design in the biological realm, as we shall presently see.
The theistic hypothesis (that there is a divine Designer) is really a big
conjunction: God exists, and God created the natural order, and God intended
the result to have a certain kind of order, beauty, harmony, regularity ...
Perhaps even also: God intended part of His creation to bring forth ‘intelligent
observership’, in the form of human beings (and perhaps other rational
creatures, elsewhere in this or other galaxies?) who can reason about His
creation, ponder its harmony and regularity, stand in awe of its beauty, and
investigate its underlying order with all the intellectual tools with which He has
furnished them.

The Argument from Design
233
16.2 The Anthropic Principle
A contemporary variant of the Argument from Design puts forward the so-called
‘Anthropic Principle’. This is the claim, which we encountered in §14.3, that
there must have been a divine creator in order for intelligent observership to
have been able to evolve in the natural universe. This is supposedly because
(it has been discovered that) the numerical values of the various fundamental
constants of nature (the speed of light; Planck’s constant; Hubble’s constant;
the gravitational constant; etc.) are amazingly delicately intercalibrated for the
‘purposes’ of allowing galaxies, stars, and planets to form, and indeed among
them a planet, like Earth, with conditions conducive to the origin and evolution
of organismic life. If any of the fundamental constants had had a slightly different
numerical value, this argument contends, cosmic evolution could not have
produced the causal pathway leading to us intelligent observers on the face of
the Earth, able to ponder this miraculous arrangement of inter-related numerical
values. So the evolution of intelligent observership is highly improbable ... so the
existence of a divine creator-designer is all the more probable ...? For a critique of
this kind of probabilistic reasoning, see Mellor (1969).
For all its sophistical sophistication, however, the Anthropic Principle is just
another way of postulating the existence of a divine creator, with intelligence
and purpose in undertaking the demanding job of creating the whole universe so
that we can eventually appreciate what has been achieved. It does not carry any
more predictive clout than the conjunctive God-hypothesis set out above.
16.3 The explanatory role of the theistic hypothesis
Given this rather long conjunctive hypothesis, one will be able to derive a
rudimentary set of statements that register important features of the world for
which we seek explanation. Why are there complicated organs like the eye, the
brain, the kidneys, the liver ...? Because God made them so that whole organisms
could live and reproduce. Why are there self-replicating molecules? Because it
pleased God to make them. Why is there sex? Because God ordained it, and
knew it would be enjoyable. Why are there multi-cellular organisms? Because
God brought them into existence. Why is there language and mind? Because God
made us in His image. In the beginning was the Word (Greek: logos), and this
means that linguistic consciousness was the primal stuff from which the cosmos
derived. So, it’s no wonder that we think in language ...
Some may be satisﬁed by these theistic explanations; others may want
something more. But one thing we can agree on: the God-hypothesis is
functioning here like a rudimentary scientiﬁc hypothesis, indicating the source
or origin, and the processes or mechanisms, whereby various things came into
existence and now operate and behave the way they do. Just how much more
detail can be wrung from this theistic hypothesis is of course rather moot.
Is the theistic hypothesis falsiﬁable? That is, can we imagine consistent
circumstances, no matter how far-fetched, that would reveal it to be false? If

234
The Existence of God
not, then the theistic hypothesis is not in contention as a scientiﬁc hypothesis,
and has no standing as an alternative to the scientiﬁc hypotheses deserving of
consideration in our classrooms. But if it is falsiﬁable, then one must consider
seriously any alternative, naturalistic theories that would work in place of it.
Moreover, one must consider the merits of the theistic hypothesis with the same
intellectual demands that one would be prepared to place on any alternative
explanatory hypothesis.
So let us suppose that the theistic hypothesis is falsiﬁable, and consider its
further scientiﬁc credentials. Can such an hypothesis make detailed, precise
predictions about a range of hitherto unobserved phenomena? Can it be tested
against accurately measured data? How does the theistic hypothesis ﬁt in with our
naturalistic theories about stellar and planetary evolution, about plate tectonics,
about population genetics, etc.? Is it intended by its proponents that the theistic
hypothesis meet such demands? If not, then just how is that hypothesis to be
understood as functioning?
16.4 Theory choice
This raises a pressing methodological question, which is of crucial relevance to
the status of the Argument from Design:
Which theory will a scientist believe or accept?
Answer: the best available one. This would be the theory that is doing
best from among all the available alternatives. Science is not monolithic
and cumulative. The real activity of science is the rational proliferation of
explanatory alternatives, all subject, ultimately, to the test of experience. The
prevailing ‘paradigm’ in, say, physics, might be dominant for the time being;
but it will have competitors at various stages of development, waiting to be
considered if the dominant paradigm ever falters.
So: how is one to choose among competing scientiﬁc theories?
In situations where theories compete to explain roughly the same range of
data thus far, and where we cannot devise crucial experiments to rule out
all but one contender, we appeal to pragmatic criteria of theory-choice. These
include:
1
simplicity
2
mathematical elegance
3
ontological parsimony
4
wide explanatory scope.
These notions are difﬁcult to analyze or explicate. But they have considerable
intuitive appeal, and deﬁnitely inﬂuence scientists’ preferences for one theory
over another.

The Argument from Design
235
16.4.1 Simplicity
An example of an intuition about simplicity is this: all other things being
equal, one would prefer a theory postulating linear relationships to one postulating
non-linear relationships.
Another way that simplicity is made manifest is in the curve-ﬁtting problem: we
prefer a curve through a set of data-points that ﬁts the data as closely as possible
(so that deviations from the curve can be explained by appeal to perturbating
inﬂuences on measurement). A well-known method for choosing between two
candidate curves y = f(x) and y = g(x) is called the method of least squares. For
each data-point ⟨x,y⟩, the f-curve will ‘miss it’ by the y-amount f(x) −y (the
x-deviation of f from y); likewise, the g-curve will ‘miss it’ by the y-amount
g(x) −y (the x-deviation of g from y). To ﬁnd out whether f ‘misses’ the data
points, overall, worse than g does, see whether the sum of squares of the deviations
of f is less than the sum of squares of the deviations of g. The lower the sum of
such squares, the closer the ﬁt of the curve to the data. In general, the simpler
the curve one tries to draw (i.e., the fewer the algebraic parameters that need
to be speciﬁed in the equation for the curve), the harder it is for the curve to
pass through each data-point exactly. So there is an immediate tension between
exactitude and simplicity. Usually, simplicity wins; for the scientist assumes that
all measurements are subject to error and perturbation, in either direction (up
or down from their ‘true values’). Thus, a smoother curve is preferred, especially
to the piecewise-linear zig-zag ‘curve’ that could be drawn by ‘connecting the
data-points’ by straight lines. The smoother curve (whatever it is, algebraically)
will be simpler than the zig-zag curve, even though the zig-zag curve is ‘spot on’
the data-points.
A ﬁnal example of simplicity is Einstein’s choice of non-Euclidean geometries to
describe the structure of space-time. He could have stuck to Euclidean geometry
instead, had he been willing to put up with an enormous complication in the
statement of his dynamical laws. But by opting rather for the unconventional
geometry, he achieved a much simpler form for his dynamical laws. And all
other scientists now follow him in this choice. This does not show that Euclidean
geometry is false. Rather, Euclidean geometry remains true of Euclidean spaces;
it’s just that physical space is now regarded as not Euclidean. This is on the
basis of overall theoretical considerations, the most important of them being the
preference for simplicity.
16.4.2 Ontological parsimony
The famous dictum ‘Do not multiply entities beyond necessity’ is called Occam’s
Razor, and is what the requirement of ontological parsimony amounts to. Strictly
speaking, it counsels against postulating the existence of too many kinds of entity.
It does not matter so much if any given kind of entity has a great many exemplars.
There are huge numbers of photons in the universe, for example. Occam’s Razor

236
The Existence of God
counsels only that we avoid postulating new kinds of fundamental particle unless
there is a real theoretical payoff to be had from doing so.
16.4.3 Wide explanatory scope
The requirement of wide explanatory scope answers to the intuitive need to
‘get to the bottom of things’. A fundamental scientiﬁc theory should carry
implications for a great variety of different domains within which we observe and
measure characteristic phenomena. Think of how Newtonian mechanics uniﬁes
into one simple and powerful explanatory scheme such diverse phenomena
as planetary orbits, trajectories of projectiles, tides, pendula, spinning tops,
gyroscopes, vibrating strings, sound waves, ripples in water, etc. Think of
how the modern synthesis in evolutionary and molecular biology reveals the
underlying unity in the myriad forms of life on earth. Think of how atomic theory
enables one to explain such diverse phenomena as erosion by wind and water;
combustion; chemical compounds; acidity and alkalinity; solubility; etc.
16.5 Revolutionary theory-change: a biological analogy
The famous historian of science Thomas Kuhn (1922–96) took the view that
periods of scientiﬁc development were of two kinds: normal science, and
revolutionary science. (See Kuhn (1970).) In a period of normal science,
theorists extend the explanatory and predictive reach of their hypotheses,
working largely on problems that can be solved. They enjoy a degree of success,
working ‘within’ the paradigm. But when the failings of their theory become
apparent – as so-called ‘anomalies’ crop up, which cannot be accommodated in
that theoretical framework – dissident creative minds will seek radically different
conceptual and theoretical frameworks in which to formulate a competitor
theory.
This begins a period of revolutionary science. Once the competitor theory
reaches a certain stage of development, its successful application to resolve the
growing numbers of anomalies for the old theory suddenly tips the balance in
favor of the new theory. The revolution is completed when a new generation of
adherents, trained in the new tradition, replace the old theorists who could not
change their intellectual ways.
The picture is very much like that of biological evolution, where a species that
has remained unchanged in physical form and forms of behavior, coping with
a relatively constant environmental niche, suddenly ﬁnds itself confronted with
a set of important environmental changes. Mutant variants within the species
will suddenly ﬁnd themselves at a selective advantage, because they have some
physical feature or behavioral capacity that enables them to cope better with
the new selective pressures. They leave disproportionately more descendants in
the next generation. These descendants inherit these features from their parents.
Indeed, all that is needed in the way of such ‘inheritance’ is that there be a
weakly positive correlation between parents and offspring in the newly important

The Argument from Design
237
regards. After sufﬁciently many generations – and often, surprisingly few – the
new features will have become almost universal within the survivors of that
species. Or perhaps, by now: this new species.
The analogy between scientiﬁc change (evolution of theories) and biological
change (evolution of species, and micro-evolution within them) serves two
purposes here. The ﬁrst purpose is to emphasize the sequence
•
random variation;
•
hitherto unencountered problem for survival;
•
sudden increase in ﬁtness of mutant strains;
•
eventual displacement of the now badly adapted by the now better adapted.
The second purpose is to introduce some basic evolutionary ideas and ways of
thinking about the world of living organisms. This enables one to appreciate,
later, the force of a certain historic challenge to the Argument from Design,
whose consequences all theists are wrestling with today. The challenge in
question comes from Darwin’s alternative, naturalistic way of explaining the
appearance of design in the living world. As we shall see, Darwin makes no
appeal to a divine creator or designer. He appeals only to known physical and
chemical forces and quantities in order to explain how, over long enough periods
of time, biological design can emerge from completely naturalistic processes and
interactions. More of that in due course.
The sequence above can be interpreted easily on each side of the analogy
between the biological world and the realm of scientiﬁc theories. What is being
varied and has to survive, but might become ‘unﬁt’ in the face of new problems
and be displaced by a mutant competitor, could be either a kind of organism or a
set of scientiﬁc hypotheses making up a theory.
Indeed, corresponding to Kuhn’s model of normal science (stasis) and
revolutionary science (sudden discontinuity and displacement) is the theory of
‘punctuated equilibrium’, due to Gould and Eldredge, in evolutionary biology.
(See Eldredge and Gould (1972).) They stress the long periods of stasis
during which evolutionary changes are minimized, punctuated by relatively
short periods of rapid speciation (involving changed bodily design and changes
in forms of behavior). These short periods of rapid change are probably
made possible by such events as heightened solar ﬂares, when the increased
radiation reaching earth gives rise to more mutations at the genetic level, in
the organisms’ DNA. When all species suddenly start changing, there is a
non-linear explosion in the way that environments vary, since any one species’
environment is made up, largely, by the various predator- and prey-species
that are important to it. When the relative stasis is disturbed by a burst
of mutations, the effects reverberate and get ampliﬁed through the whole
ecosystem.

238
The Existence of God
16.6 Evolution of ideas, concepts, theories and methods
And so it is, too, for the world of ideas, concepts, theories and methods.
When a new mathematical technique is invented, whole new areas of
scientiﬁc investigation can be opened up. Think of co-ordinate geometry; the
differential and integral calculus; non-Euclidean geometry; Hilbert-space theory
and group-theory; catastrophe theory; chaos theory and non-linear dynamics.
When a new kind of instrument for observation is invented, we gain access
to new kinds of data, which provokes new kinds of theorizing. Think of
the telescope; the microscope; the electron microscope; X-rays; CAT-scans;
PET-scans; the linear accelerator; supercolliders; the Hubble telescope.
When a new kind of instrument for thinking about (i.e., processing) the data
is invented, all manner of new patterns in the existing information can be
discerned, and can pose new demands for explanation. Think here of just one
thing: the computer.
New concepts are always born in the context of a new set of axioms or
postulates or hypotheses that endow new theoretical terms with content. (Some
might say: those contents are the new concepts in question.) Novel concepts
and theories come hand in hand. These are the novelties that represent the
greatest breakthroughs. Think here of the following concepts (and theories
involving them): gravitation; heat-energy; electromagnetism; quantized physical
magnitudes; chemical valencies; natural selection; the gene; double-helical
DNA; inertial-frame-relative measurements of space and time. (Note that we are
not observing the actual historical order in the development of these concepts
and theories.)
16.7 The relation between theory and evidence
Scientists – by training, intellectual inclination, moral conviction, professional
aspiration, and communal discipline – submit themselves and the theories
that they champion to the test of experience. This instils in them a certain
intellectual humility. (Or at least: it ought to.) The humility consists in being
prepared to admit, in the light of rival and better explanations of the data, that
their theory is either wrong, or not the best available theory after all.
It is a hard pill to swallow, if things work out badly for one’s favorite theory.
But one is, after all, engaged in the dispassionate search for the truth about the
natural world. Or at least: for an as-yet-unfalsiﬁed, elegantly formulated, simply
conceived, nicely unifying, broadly explanatory theory of the natural world. One
has to have a theory meeting this description in order to have any prospect at
all of getting at ‘the truth’. Indeed, when one reﬂects on the logical structure
of scientiﬁc hypotheses, scientiﬁc reasoning, and the hypothetico-deductive
method, one realizes that one cannot and will never do any better than that.
That is, one will never have anything more than an as-yet-unfalsiﬁed, elegantly
formulated, simply conceived, nicely unifying, broadly explanatory theory of the
natural world. No matter that you might be sitting on ‘the true theory’; you will

The Argument from Design
239
never be able to know that you are. At best, if you are that fortunate, you will ﬁnd
that you never have to give up your theory in the face of countervailing evidence.
But no amount of conﬁrming evidence is ever going to prove your scientiﬁc
theory with that degree of certainty attained exclusively in Mathematics, or
in introspection about one’s own states of sensory awareness and intellectual
concentration. Scientiﬁc theories are never conclusively proved; and they are
inherently fallible. But the only source of that fallibility is the rigor of logical
and mathematical deduction, combined with acknowledgement of the primacy
of observational evidence.
We seem to have ventured some way from our original topic: the Argument
from Design for God’s existence. But in fact we have not really strayed
beyond what is both essential and relevant in building up to confront that
argument.
16.8 The Darwinian theory
The range of ‘design phenomena’ that the theistic hypothesis ‘explains’ is what
Darwinian theory also sets out to explain. The difference, however, as stressed
earlier, is that Darwinian theory does not postulate God’s existence. The
theory is very accessible in its conceptual fundamentals; it does not involve
any sophisticated mathematics. (For a detailed case for this claim, see Tennant
(2014b).)
The main problem is to account for adaptive change in the design of organisms:
changes in their bodies and in their ways of behaving. These changes make them
‘ﬁt better’ within the niche in which they struggle to survive and reproduce. How
is this ‘ﬁt’ attained?
Darwin’s answer was very simple. It involved three observations and an
imaginative but logical leap to a startling conclusion.
The ﬁrst observation is that (in any given species) there is variation among
individuals. They vary in many ways, both in bodily characteristics and
their behavioral repertoire. These bodily and behavioral features are what the
evolutionary biologist calls the individuals’ phenotypic traits. Some examples of
variable traits are: stature; weight; coloration; immunities to infections; libido;
trustworthiness; intelligence; ﬂeetness of foot; balance and co-ordination; acuity
of vision; keenness of hearing; appetite for food; need for sleep; etc. It matters
not that these traits can be strongly affected by environmental inﬂuences during
maturation. What matters only is whether there is a non-random correlation
between such features on the part of parents and such features on the part of
their offspring. Note that all that we have said so far would apply just as much
to non-human animals as it would to human beings. (And: it applies to human
beings.)
The brings us to the second observation: there is a non-random correlation
of the kind just mentioned. Offspring take after their parents; they tend to
resemble them more than they resemble other, arbitrarily chosen members of
the population. In a word, we have heritability of phenotypic traits.

240
The Existence of God
The third observation is that individuals vary in the number of offspring
they leave behind. Some do not breed at all; some leave very many offspring
(comparatively speaking). And, in sexually reproducing species such as our own,
there is the further twist that variation in reproductive success is greater among
males than it is among females. This is the result of the asymmetry between
the sexes. Conception involves the male. But, while conception also involves
the female, gestation is the female’s preserve exclusively (biologically speaking).
Moreover, the female knows that her offspring is her own, whereas the male can
never attain the same level of certainty. But we digress ...
In summary, we observe:
1
inter-individual variation;
2
heritability; and
3
differential reproduction.
What can we predict, from this? The answer comes from the further con-
sideration that some of the inter-individual variations are responsible for the
differential reproduction that takes place. Individuals vary in reproductive
success largely because of the traits they have. (Example: the successful male
fruit-ﬂy dances more effectively than his competitors. So, in all likelihood,
will his sons.) And those traits that make for reproductive success will
be handed on to the relatively more numerous offspring that the success-
ful reproducer will leave behind. And so it will go on, generation after
generation.
The leap of imagination – which, we stressed earlier, is really only a logical
leap – is involved when we consider what will be the result of the repetition, over
a great many generations, of this stage-by-stage process of ‘natural selection’. The
process is called natural because it is the ‘blind forces of Nature’ against which the
individuals are struggling for survival, and with which they have to contend in
order successfully to reproduce. Natural selection is here contrasted with artiﬁcial
selection, which is the process whereby human beings selectively encourage
certain members of other species (such as homing pigeons, hunting-dogs, or
racehorses) to breed, with the aim of producing individuals exhibiting certain
traits that the human being would like them to have. Of course, artiﬁcial selection
is, ultimately, a form of natural selection, but both the original contrast betwen
natural and artiﬁcal selection, and the eventual dissolution of that contrast,
should be clear to the reader.
The logic of Darwin’s explanatory argument is compelling. Given sufﬁcient
variation, both existing or arising through further mutations, natural selection
alone can, over many generations, effect qualitatively huge changes in the
make-up of any species. Indeed, it can explain how a given species can speciate
into two distinct species. We need only a mechanism whereby the ‘storehouse of
variation’ can be stocked, as it were, and re-supplied from time to time. If this is
how species evolved (or ‘descended’, through eons), then we can expect traces
of their ancestry to exist in the fossil record. Here, evolutionary biology meets

The Argument from Design
241
paleontology, and the structure of the so-called ‘phylogenetic tree’ gets revealed
in a piecemeal, always incomplete, but very systematic fashion. Darwin gets
combined with the geologist Charles Lyell (1797–1875), the zoologist Georges
Cuvier (1769–1832), the paleoanthropologist Richard Leakey (b. 1944), and
others. This is where interest in dinosaurs, mammoths, Neanderthal man, and
ancient pre-hominid species in the eastern African savannah ﬁt in.
The storehouse of variation, which is the engine of evolutionary change, is the
complement of genes on the chromosomes in the cells of conspeciﬁc individuals.
Genes are postulated as particulate bearers of reproductive information, enabling
offspring to grow in a way that makes them resemble their parents. They
grow that way because they get their complement of genes from their parents,
in the form of a sperm cell and an egg cell (both of these being called
gametes). Each gamete contributes a parental chromosome towards each pair
of chromosomes that the new individual needs. Much is known, for various
species, about the relative dominance or recessiveness of the two alleles at a
great many of the genetic loci on a chromosome. Here, organismic biology
meets cellular biology, embryology and population genetics. Darwin gets
combined with philosopher-biologist Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919) and plant
geneticist Gregor Mendel (1822–84). Just over a decade ago, with more detailed
knowledge of the underlying molecular genetics, the complete genome of the
fruit-ﬂy Drosoﬁla melanogaster had at last been mapped. Something on the
order of a thousand chromosomal loci were involved. Since then big science
has busied itself to completion on the human genome itself – with 100,000
chromosomal loci.
When we inquire further after the mechanism of gene-transmission from
parent to offspring, we ﬁnd that the biochemical basis (or molecular-genetic
basis) of the gene is the double-helical strand of DNA, in which sequences
of codons correspond to genes. The genes’ information-theoretic content is
determined by how they code for the production of primary proteins, in ways
that modern science is still unravelling. Here, Darwin and Mendel get combined
with Francis Crick (1916–2004) and James Watson (b. 1928), the co-discoverers
of DNA.
16.9 The New Synthesis
The result of combining all these observationally driven, predictively and
explanatorily powerful, and testable theories, is called the New Synthesis. The
New Synthesis is a magniﬁcent intellectual product, of broad explanatory
reach. Moreover, it is completely naturalistic in all its various postulations of
mechanisms, processes, constituents, stuffs, forces, etc. Philosophers of science
really do mean what they say when they describe such a theory as the result of
making an inference to the best explanation. ‘Best’ is judged both with regard to
the conceptual and ontological economy of the theory, and with regard to the
totality of observational data that needs to be ﬁtted into the overall picture, with
adequate logical and explanatory structure superimposed.

242
The Existence of God
There are some propositions that have been uncovered only courtesy of the
New Synthesis, and which present a challenge to any previously entrenched, or
newly formulated, rival explanatory theory. An example of such a proposition
is: In all known terrestrial species, the genetic code is universal. Another one is:
Information ﬂows from the genotype to the phenotype, and never in the other direction.
The New Synthesis has ready explanations for these generalizations; its theistic
rival would be at some loss to explain them.
To be sure, there are still some hard and exciting explanatory problems
facing the New Synthesis. But that is precisely what one would want for any
ﬂourishing scientiﬁc theory: problems whose eventual solution will drive the
theory forward, making it extend its reach, making it uncover new forces or
processes or mechanisms or natural kinds of thing. (Note the stress on ‘natural’.)
Examples of such explananda are:
•
What might have been the ‘ur-species’ (the original kind of self-replicating
entities)?
•
How did cells arise?
•
How did sexual reproduction arise?
•
How did multi-cellular organisms arise?
•
How did sociality arise?
•
How did altruism arise?
•
How did consciousness arise?
•
How did language and logic arise?
•
Why are humans nevertheless so beastly?
A thriving scientiﬁc tradition is not to be downgraded just because it may not
yet have attained a satisfactory theoretical consensus in reply to questions such
as these.
16.10 On choosing between the theistic and naturalistic theories
These questions, and the present lack of consensual answers to them, do not
represent problems that can now be asserted to be insoluble within the New
Synthesis or any possible future extension thereof. The opponent who says to
supporters of a theory T
No reasonable extension of T, conforming to your broadly naturalistic
methodological constraints, will ever succeed in supplying an answer to
naturalistic question Q
is actually guilty either of appalling ignorance or of appalling intellectual hubris.
The opponent would be guilty of appalling ignorance if the answer to question
Q were already well known to the practitioners of theory T. Unfortunately, this
is often the case with creationists’ objections to the New Synthesis. Frequently
they just do not know enough about the Science they are undertaking to criticize.

The Argument from Design
243
But even in the case of a question that the practitioners of theory T agree does
not (yet) have a satisfactory answer, the objector who baldly asserts that no such
answer will ever be forthcoming is guilty of appalling intellectual hubris. For one
has to be a logically omniscient scientiﬁc genius in order to be able to grasp a
theory in its essential limitations. Who is to say that there will not be a broadly
naturalistic extension of theory T, based on some as-yet-unthought-of naturalistic
insight, which will provide a satisfying answer to question Q?
To make this point vivid: consider the proponents of ‘élan vital’, or
(irreducible) ‘living force’, who denied that there would ever be a naturalistic
explanation of Life itself. They were just plain wrong. (As was Emil du
Bois-Reymond, who had the Origin of Life on his list of seven insoluble ‘cosmic
riddles’ – see the discussion in §23.1.) They could not anticipate the discovery
of DNA, and our eventual understanding of the mechanism whereby genetic
information is transmitted from parents to their offspring. The theorists of ‘élan
vital’ proved to be simply hubristic. What made them think themselves so smart
that they could circumscribe in thought all the possibilities concerning what we
might one day discover and conjecture, and which would make the naturalistic
answer to the question clear? To tell someone else – indeed, the whole
scientiﬁc community, present and future – that they are just not smart enough
to ﬁgure out a naturalistic explanation is a form of overweening intellectual
arrogance.
All this said, we return to confront the Argument from Design with the
Darwinian alternative. Why postulate God when more modest postulations of
entirely natural things will do? Why continue to be dazzled by the complexity
and harmony of nature when there are intellectually satisfying explanations of
it? Why not embrace the world in a natural-scientiﬁc frame of mind, rather than
be hell-bent (if one might use the phrase) on maintaining a theistic one for the
purposes of explaining exactly what natural science sets out to explain, and explains so
well?
These are the challenges facing the person who accepts the Argument from
Design. He or she has to show the scientiﬁc objector that, qua scientiﬁc hypothesis,
the postulation of God is intellectually more satisfying than the postulation of
self-copying organic molecules with coding properties, and the blind, impersonal
force of natural selection. And the scientiﬁc objectors, for their part, might have
to ﬁnd other grounds or reasons for belief in God – if that is what they want to
believe.
Problems
1
What exactly is the fundamental schema of Darwinian evolutionary explana-
tion? Why is it naturalistic?
2
Explain the analogy between theoretical revolutions followed by periods
of normal science, and rapid evolutionary change followed by periods of
stasis.

244
The Existence of God
3
What are the various branches of Science that contribute to the so-called
New Synthesis in evolutionary biology?
4
How did Newton’s Argument from Design differ from Paley’s?
5
What is the Anthropic Principle?
6
What are the marks of simplicity on the part of scientiﬁc theories? (For your
answer, do not rely on this chapter’s material alone. Take a look at both
Quine (1963) and Sober (1975).)

17 The Argument from
Contemporary Creationism
17.1 Naturalism v. Creationism
Philip Johnson (b. 1940) is a born-again Christian and founder of the ‘Intelligent
Design’ movement, which attempts to set out an intellectually respectable
defense of Creationism. Consider the following argument, to be found in Johnson
(1995):
Scientiﬁc theories are based on naturalism.
Scientiﬁc theories have undermined our morals, etc.
That is a bad thing.
ergo, Naturalism is false.
It was David Hume, the great common-sense philosopher of the Scottish
Enlightenment, who ﬁrst alerted us to the fallaciousness of arguments whose
premises stated matters of fact but whose conclusions stated moral norms. Such
arguments commit the naturalistic fallacy. They try (mistakenly) to infer values
from facts. It is not being implied, however, that Johnson’s style of argument
here commits the naturalistic fallacy. Rather, it does something even worse. One
of its premises is a moral evaluation – indeed, a meta-moral evaluation – to the
effect that it is a bad thing that a particular, traditional moral code of precepts
and principles is on the wane. But the argument’s conclusion is about a great (and
purported) metaphysical fact of the matter: Naturalism is false.
Johnson is committing what might better be called the Ostrich Fallacy. Here
we trade on a common (mis)understanding. An ethological myth has it that
the ostrich sticks its head in the sand in order to ‘pretend to be a bush’, so
as to fool predators. Hence the metaphor, in English, of ‘putting one’s head
in the sand’ – that is, refusing to take a proper comprehending look at a
potentially dangerous situation. The author was told by a zoologist, however,
that the best explanation for the ostrich’s habit is that it is listening for
vibrations, below ground level, from the footfalls of potential predators – hence,
ironically, very much trying to comprehend what danger it may be in. By way of
possibly great injustice to the poor ostrich, however, we shall persevere with the
new label.

246
The Existence of God
The Ostrich Fallacy is exempliﬁed by the following argument-forms:
Virus V exists.
Virus V causes sickness S.
Sickness S is horrible.
ergo, We should not believe that virus V exists.
The Second Amendment literally says XYZ.
Citizens of the USA interpret XYZ as protecting their right to carry guns.
Exercising the right to carry guns results in many shooting deaths.
This is horrible.
ergo, We should not believe that the Second Amendment literally says XYZ.
More generally, the pattern of an Ostrich fallacy is:
It is a fact that P.
Its being the case that P tends to bring about condition C.
C is bad.
ergo, We should not believe that P.
The central form of argument in Johnson’s Reason in the Balance, which was
quoted above, commits the Ostrich fallacy. So too does a second, more elaborate
form of argument to be found in Johnson’s text:
Suppose that God indeed exists.
God is a moral Being with a concern for our moral welfare, and with
intentions as to how we ought to live our earthly lives.
So, it behooves us to live according to His moral law.
But naturalism, and/or the scientiﬁc theorizing based on it, induces us to
cease observing His moral law.
That is a bad thing.
ergo, We should not believe Naturalism.
Having a naturalistic outlook may, as a matter of empirical fact, change one’s
moral code. So what? Even if that change in one’s moral code is, objectively,
for the worse, so what? Having adopted a deﬁcient moral code, why should that
reﬂect any discredit on the truth of one’s scientiﬁc theories and/or – if one can
speak of truth and falsity here – of one’s naturalistic metaphysical outlook? In
ignoring the history of the fact/value distinction, Johnson has succeeded only
in commiting what the Oxford philosopher Peter Strawson (1919–2006) once
called a ‘non-sequitur of numbing grossness’. (Strawson was criticizing Kant with
this remark, so perhaps Johnson can claim to be in good company.)
The conclusion of Johnson’s ostrich-fallacious argument, note, is that
naturalism is false, not just that naturalism is – tsk, tsk – a morally bad or
unfortunate metaphysical outlook. One wants to ask: why shouldn’t a theist

The Argument from Contemporary Creationism
247
accept that naturalism is the correct metaphysical outlook to adopt for the
understanding of nature, but that one should not thereby allow oneself to lose
one’s basic moral norms? Why can’t we have the new recipe for our metaphysical
cake and still eat its old-fashioned moral frosting? Nothing in the logic of human
thought and experience prevents us from having both. Whatever our current (indeed:
perennial) moral failings, they do not show that naturalism is false.
There is another major ﬂaw in Johnson’s way of seeing things. He expresses
himself repeatedly in a way that shows that he thinks that naturalism (as a
metaphysical view) gives rise to, or entails our scientiﬁc theories. But it does
not. The metaphysical outlook of naturalism is, rather, one that arises, upon
intelligent reﬂection, from the explanatory and predictive successes of the various
natural sciences. Naturalism starts as a methodology for the discovery of good
scientiﬁc theories.
This methodology enjoins us to look for efﬁcient causes of the regularities
that we detect in observed phenomena. We should try, when framing our
explanations of these regularities, to eschew any appeal to spirits, or God’s will, or
predestination, or the work of the Devil. Instead, we should seek out those laws of
cause and effect, those patterns of statistical distribution and correlation, that the
phenomena might disclose. Then we should try to put forward logically unifying
conjectural theories that explain those regularities. These theories will explain
those regularities by appeal to mediating mechanisms and internal constitutions,
microscopic or macroscopic, which constitute in some sense the ultimate nature
of physical reality. When our theories are spectacularly successful – much more
successful than prayer or imprecation, than divination or animal sacriﬁce, than
reading tea leaves or Tarot cards, than burning incense or twirling rosary
beads – we get comforting support for a naturalist metaphysical outlook. When
our theories give us tremendous technological and therapeutic beneﬁts, we know
that we are onto something deep and important concerning how the natural
world works. It is the success of theories obtained on a naturalistic methodology
that gives rise to naturalism as a metaphysical outlook; not the other way round.
The reason why Johnson, like many a theist, ﬁnds it so hard to live with the
success of modern science is this: if adequate theories render God superﬂuous for
our scientiﬁc understanding of the world and of our place in it, what rational
reason remains for belief in God? That is why Johnson has to sally forth into
the ﬁelds of Big Bang cosmology, macroevolution and the fossil record, and
neurobiology, to lodge his shaky criticisms.
Instead of carving Nature at the joints, Johnson seeks to ﬁll alleged gaps in our
scientiﬁc understanding. There are important singularities for, and ‘thresholds’
in, the history of the cosmos, from the self-interested point of view of our own
species:
•
the origin of universe (caveat: this is a singularity, not an ‘event’);
•
the formation of galaxies, stars, planets;
•
the origin of the genetic code (i.e., of the ﬁrst self-replicating molecules);
•
the origin of ﬁrst unicellular organisms;

248
The Existence of God
•
the origin of ﬁrst eukaryotes;
•
the origin of multicellular organisms;
•
the origin of sexual reproduction;
•
the origin of organs of sense;
•
the emergence of mammals;
•
the emergence of open behavioral programs;
•
the emergence of sociality;
•
the emergence of consciousness;
•
the emergence of intelligence;
•
the emergence of Homo sapiens;
•
the emergence of tool use;
•
the emergence of religious practices;
•
the emergence of language;
•
the emergence of theories.
Of course, from this list it is the Big Bang, the origin of life, and the emergence
of Homo sapiens that the creationists most frequently cite as requiring the
hypothesis of divine intervention for their explanation. But such an hypothesis
is actually devoid of explanatory and predictive value. It is the last resort
of scientiﬁcally impoverished imaginations. To guard against this dogmatic
intellectual defeatism, one should adopt
The naturalist’s rule of thumb
Interpret
God has intervened in the natural order to make it the case that P
as saying no more than
Given our ignorance or misunderstanding of extant naturalistic the-
ories, and/or our inability to apply them and work out their logical
consequences, we (the theists) believe that there could not possibly be
any naturalistic explanation of its being the case that P.
The hypothesis of divine intervention at any or all of the junctures listed
above tells us nothing testable about the mechanisms at work in the divinely
effected event of creation or emergence; and it leaves us utterly in the dark as
to what one might expect next in the way of further supernatural hocus-pocus.
The creationists resorting to this hypothesis invariably ignore other, naturalistic
accounts that address the question of mechanisms (as in the case of the theory
of the genetic code) or treat judiciously of the singularities (as in the case
of cosmological models of the Big Bang). (For a detailed argument as to
why Big Bang cosmology lends no succour whatsoever to the creationist, see
Grünbaum (1995).) These naturalistic theories, moreover, fail to be predictive

The Argument from Contemporary Creationism
249
only because they deal with highly non-linear phenomena; but still manage to
give a satisfactory account, retrodictively, of the complexities of emergence.
Most important among the naturalistic theories that, on a proper understand-
ing, would be unsettling to a theist would be those on the following list. But
creationists are ignorant of them, or misunderstand them, or fail to appreciate
their explanatory reach:
1
general relativity, quantum gravity, and Big Bang cosmology (Einstein
(1915), Einstein (1916), and Einstein (1917); Penrose (2004); Hawking
(2001));
2
the molecular biological theory of the origins of the genetic code and of
unicellular life forms (Eigen and Schuster (1979));
3
the theory of the evolution of species by natural selection (Darwin (1859))
by virtue of particulate inheritance (Mendel (1866 and 1870); Schrödinger
(1946)) whose biochemical mechanism is DNA (Watson and Crick (1953))
with the focus of selective forces ultimately being the gene or allele (Williams
(1966); Dawkins (1976)), and with sporadic patterns of dramatic phase
transitions followed by periods of relative stasis (Prigogine and Stengers
(1984), for a theory of systems far from thermodynamic equilibrium; Eldredge
and Gould (1972), for a macro-evolutionary theory of punctuated equilibria);
4
the theory of the evolution of the hominid brain: emergence of perceptual
categories, causal thinking, tool use, language, sociality, self-consciousness
(Darwin (1871); Lorenz (1941); Piaget (1971); Riedl (1980); Premack
(1976));
5
the theory of the evolution of forms of social, co-operative behavior (Axelrod
and Hamilton (1981); Axelrod (1984)) and the moral codes that re-inforce it
(Campbell (1975));
6
the theory of the evolution of consciousness and rationality (Dennett (1981);
Jaynes (1976); Sober (1981));
7
the theory of the evolution of scientiﬁc concepts and theories themselves
(Toulmin (1972); Popper (1972); Tennant (1988); Plotkin (1994));
8
the theory of cultural evolution (Boyd and Richerson (1985); Cavalli-Sforza
and Feldman (1981));
9
the theory of complexity at the edge between order and chaos, of dissipative
structures and phase transitions (Kauffman (1993)).
Johnson omits even cursory coverage of any of the above theories, despite the
fact that they were all published well before he wrote Reason in the Balance. Yet
they are theories that can claim to ﬁll the important lacunae which, he alleges,
demonstrate the impossibility of a naturalistic account of our earthly life in this
universe. These theories render toothless Johnson’s main criticisms of naturalistic
science with regard to its explanatoriness.
Note that even if there are some explanatory gaps in the naturalistic theories
so far available, the best response to this would be ‘more of the same’. That
is, one should seek naturalistic extensions of those theories, so as to plug those

250
The Existence of God
gaps. If, instead, we throw up our hands in craven intellectual defeat and invoke
the words or works of God, we do not thereby obtain any predictive power
or any genuine improvement in our state of understanding. Indeed, such an
intellectually defeatist theistic attitude makes for very bad science. It makes
one give up too soon in one’s efforts to apply the scientiﬁc method. Science
is hard work. We should not provide too many excuses in advance for intellectual
malingering. If creationists were honest, they would concede that if God moves,
then He perforce moves only in mysterious ways. Absent the mysteries, and we
have naturalistic explanations. It would follow, then, that we should be more
willing to tolerate a temporary explanatory gap than to fall back on useless
stop-gaps.
But still, the over-ready diagnosis that there are indeed yawning explanatory
gaps is entered without any honest attempt, on the creationist’s part, to
come to terms with the many and varied facts about the biological realm that
are so satisfyingly brought within our comprehending grasp by neo-Darwinian
evolutionary theory. It is tedious in the extreme to read Creationist arguments
that proceed in ignorance of some or all of the basic features of contemporary
evolutionary theorizing.
Johnson attacks certain scientiﬁc theories, claiming that they are vitiated by
available evidence, or explanatorily deﬁcient. His attacks are ill-informed and
spurious. He misunderstands the theories he attacks, and wholly ignores whole
theories that would plug his alleged gaps. He is itching to get his God in, not just
as a God of the Gaps, but really as a God of the Last Gasp, and to ﬁnd enough
gaps in the picture provided by science to be able to join the dots and form a
ﬁgure in the shape of his Judaeo–Christian God. This ﬁgure will emerge, rooted
in the interstices of our alleged theoretical failings, as the Be-all and End-all,
the force that sustains the universe, who brought it into existence and even now
keeps it in existence. The last thinker in the Western tradition who thought that
God intervened pretty much continuously in this way to keep everything going
was Nicolas Malebranche (1638–1715). One is tempted, today, to decompose
this name into its component syllables, and regard the view as out on a limb, and
badly wrong.
From his odd perch Johnson crows over or cavils at what he thinks is
1
relativistic cosmology’s admission of a singularity in space-time (the so-called
Big Bang) that can be thought of as the event of creation, and that can be
construed only as the work of God;
2
modern science’s inability to account for the origin of life;
3
evolutionary theory’s inability to account for macroevolution: the emergence
of new phyla and species, with new body plans and with too little in the fossil
record to ﬁll in all the transitional stages that one would expect on a gradualist
Darwinian account; and
4
reductionist neuroscience’s inability to account, within the scheme of its own
categories and principles, for rationality, consciousness, intentionality, and
other aspects of our mental life.

The Argument from Contemporary Creationism
251
Johnson’s allegations (above) of theoretical Achilles heels or shortcomings
blithely disregard the resources of certain of the theories that are listed above.
His complaints can be countered, respectively, as follows:
1
The Big Bang cannot be regarded as having been caused by any agency, not
even a supernatural one. For it is not an event in time. Rather, it is a singularity
that bounds space-time. It marks the beginning of time without being at an
instant of time. Thus it violates no conservation laws of physics: for these laws
speak only of certain magnitudes being constant at all instants of time. There
was (or, timelessly if one wishes: is) no moment of creation, hence no event
of creation, hence no act of creation. Therefore God could not have caused
the universe to come into existence. (Here we are endebted to Grünbaum
[1995].)
2
Johnson neglects to mention or to examine the molecular theory of the
hypercycle. This theory accounts in great detail for the pre-biotic origin of
RNA and DNA. It is due to the Nobel Laureate Manfred Eigen.
3
In the modern synthesis of evolutionary biology, there is an abundance of
plausible suggestions as to the genetic and environmental factors that would
turn microevolution into macroevolution. Catastrophic events such as ﬂaring
sun-spots, impacts of comets and meteorites, melting of polar ice-caps, and
volcanic eruptions can both increase the rates of mutation in different gene
pools and give rise to tremendous forces of directed selection. Mutations at
single loci (of so-called ‘control’ genes) can result in catastrophic changes in
body plans, such as the production of whole new pairs of arms or legs. The
ﬁrst phyla were established in a planet-wide phase transition for life forms
known as the Cambrian era – beginning roughly 500 million years ago. We
know enough about epigenetic phenomena already to appreciate that there
are myriads of potentialities for body-plan innovation within a reasonably
large genome. We can acknowledge also that, once various phyla’s broad body
plans had been established, those phyla would have enjoyed a competitive
edge that severely impeded the emergence of yet more radically distinct
phyla. Moreover, the relative proportions of lethal and benign mutations
are absolutely beside the point: the whole point about natural selection is
that it does indeed winnow genotypes ferociously. Hence the survivors are
highly adapted; that is, they appear to have been designed for the niches that
they occupy. Johnson also commits the fundamental error of thinking that
adaptation by natural selection can occur only by dint of highly improbable
sequences of benign point mutations. He neglects altogether the theory of
genetic variability and of heritability in the population geneticist’s sense.
He does not see variability within a gene pool as always providing an as
yet untapped source of potential responsiveness to future environmental
challenges, which could thereby induce rapid evolutionary change, including
speciation and the emergence of new body plans.
4
On the topic of reductionism, Johnson pays scant attention to the fact
that many a naturalistically minded philosopher of science has already made

252
The Existence of God
intellectual room for the determination of higher-level phenomena (such as
mental phenomena) by lower-level physical processes, while yet retaining
descriptive and explanatory autonomy for the ‘higher-level’ theories such as
psychology (see the conclusions reached in this regard in §14.2). In fact, it
would be fair to say that the orthodox view among philosophers of science is
that at all neighboring levels one has ‘supervenience without reductionism’.
This includes the pairs physics–chemistry, molecular biology–organismic
biology, neuroscience–psychology, and individual psychology–sociology.
Emergent properties of complex wholes are as much a part of nature as are the
properties of their constituents. But the latter need not provide us with any
explanatory or descriptive purchase on the former. The fact of ‘emergence’,
nevertheless, does not speak for divine or creative intervention.
We do not need God to get the universe going. The universe just is. We do not
need God to get life going. Life simply arose from large molecules. We do not
need God to get life to diversify. Life simply diversiﬁed through evolution by
natural selection. We do not need God to get creatures to feel and think. They
became feeling and thinking creatures because suitably complicated brains and
nervous systems enhanced their inclusive genetic ﬁtness. Nor do we need God to
get them caring about one another. Perfectly good explanations of sociality and
prevalent forms of altruism are to be had from sociobiological theories based on
the genetic theory of kin-selection.
Problems
1
What epistemological weight should be accorded to ancient scriptures that
put forward creation stories at odds with modern scientiﬁc theorizing?
2
Does morality need a foundation in revealed religion? Can we both frame a
moral code and abide by it, with an intellectual commitment to a completely
secular account of cosmic and biological evolution?
3
Read any one of the scientiﬁc works cited in this chapter and assess whether
the claims made on its behalf are reasonable.
4
Do any of the internal theoretical disputes within the broadly Darwinian
camp (such as, say, the dispute between gene-selectionism and group-
selectionism) undermine the credibility of the neo-Darwinian synthesis as a
comprehensive naturalistic account of how living things came to be the way
they are?
5
Has any creationist thinker ever made an important and original contribution
to the advancement of science?

18 Pascal’s Wager
Having looked at ‘theoretical’ arguments for the existence of God, we turn
now to an argument of a different kind: Pascal’s Wager (see Pascal (1910)). In
order both to describe it and then to criticize it, we need to digress into the
general topic of rational action and deliberation, especially under conditions of
uncertainty.
18.1 Background: the theory of rational decision-making
18.1.1 Rational decision-making without uncertainty
First, to keep matters simple, we look at decision-making without uncertainty. By
this we mean decision-making in situations where one believes that there is only
one possible relevant outcome S of whatever action A one is considering. This
belief on the part of the rational agent X can be expressed as follows:
X believes that by performing action A, X will bring about situation S.
Examples:
•
I believe that by turning the ignition key, I will get the engine started.
•
You believe that by reading this, you will learn about Pascal’s Wager.
•
He believes that by having a good breakfast he will have more energy late in
the morning.
•
She believes that by betting $100 on such-and-such a horse, she will win a
large sum of money (because she believes the race has been rigged so that
this particular horse will deﬁnitely win).
What would make the agent decide to perform action A? Obviously, the desire
that the situation S should obtain, and the further belief that both the situation
S and all foreseeable consequences of the action A are morally and legally
permissible. (The rational agent will consider foreseeable consequences in order
to avoid possible lawsuits for culpable negligence, and to avoid any future pangs
of conscience, and to avoid harming anyone.) In the case of most actions within

254
The Existence of God
the course of normal daily events, we don’t think explicitly in these terms. I don’t
ﬁnd myself saying to myself:
I would like a coffee.
I believe that by going into my favorite local coffeehouse and offering $3
I shall get a coffee.
There is nothing morally wrong about doing this, and there is no legal
prohibition against it, and I don’t think that there are any foreseeable,
untoward consequences of doing this.
So, I shall go into the coffeehouse and offer them $3 for a coffee.
If I did deliberate explicitly in this way, I would be in bad shape, and would either
need that coffee or discover that I had been having way too much coffee of late.
In the normal course of events, the features
•
desire that S obtain
•
belief that by A-ing, one will make S the case
•
belief that both A and S are permissible
•
decision (formation of intention) to A
•
intentionally A-ing
hardly penetrate to the surface of consciousness. One dimly craves, and one
acts accordingly. Well-established habits are more reﬂexive and unthinking. The
grooves of daily conduct are morally and legally smooth, free of obstruction. One
simply goes with the ﬂow, of life, like-minded people, and coffee.
But in other cases of rational deliberation, these features can be very
explicitly foregrounded – indeed, ought to be. This happens at the more critical
junctures of one’s intellectual and emotional life. Think of major decisions,
such as:
•
choice of diet, i.e., what to eat on a regular daily basis
•
choice of college
•
choice of major in college degree
•
choice of romantic partner
•
choice of graduate education
•
choice of more permanent signiﬁcant other
•
choice of ﬁrst permanent, full-time job
•
decision to have children
•
decisions about investment of retirement assets
•
decisions about how to cast one’s vote in presidential elections.
As we shall shortly see, rational deliberation over these things is fraught
with uncertainty; and we are supposed, at this stage, to be considering only
decision-making in the absence of such uncertainty. Still, these examples serve a
useful purpose at this stage. A lot of people, sadly, do not deliberate much about

Pascal’s Wager
255
these things. They just fall into certain de facto options, without really taking
control of their lives, for themselves, at these critical junctures. They might give
in to parental pressure, or the unreasonable demands of a casual sexual partner, or
the blandishments of a recruiting ofﬁcer, or to a romantic mood on vacation, or to
some fast-talking con-man from a big brokerage house, or to some narrow-minded
ideological bandwagon roaring through their tightly-knit neighborhood.
One good reason to become self-conscious and reﬂective about rational
deliberation is to break the hold that these insidious inﬂuences can have on the
unwary, so as to equip yourself with the wherewithal to think things through for
yourself, with an independent and critical mind.
Let us go back, however, to the schematization
•
X desires that situation S obtain.
•
X believes that by A-ing, X will bring it about that S.
•
X believes that both A-ing and S are morally and legally permissible.
•
So, X (intentionally) As.
We have here the essential components of a rational explanation of an intentional
action by a rational agent, in situations unaffected by uncertainty: a certain desire;
a certain means-end belief; and a subsidiary belief that these means and this end
are permissible. A given action is made intelligible by attributing an appropriate
belief-desire pair to the agent. We rationalize the agent’s action locally. But we
should also have an eye to rendering the agent globally rational, by re-using
our attributions of those same beliefs and those same desires, but in different
combinations, to explain yet other actions on the agent’s part. In all projects of
so-called rational interpretation of people from a radically different culture, who
speak a radically different language, we think of them as possessed of the same
basic sorts of beliefs and desires as we have, and we try to work out from there
what various words might mean in their mouths. But we also have to allow for
the possibility that they have some very strange (to us, irrational) beliefs, as well
as some very strange desires. These will only be identiﬁable over the course of
time, as we try to make increasing sense of all that they do – both with their
words, and to one another, ourselves included.
18.1.2 Rational decision-making under conditions of uncertainty
Now we turn to the topic of decision-making in conditions of uncertainty.
Typically in such situations we are confroned with a range of alternative (and,
let us suppose, mutually exclusive) actions A1,..., An. By performing any one of
them we might make a partial causal contribution to how things subsequently will
work out. But exactly how they do work out is not entirely in our hands, or under
our control. We have to leave a lot (indeed, in some cases, everything) to fortune,
destiny, fate, Nature, or (less portentously) to circumstances beyond our control.
Typically, for each action Ak, there will be various ways W1,..., Wm in which
things could work out (perhaps as a result, partially, of our performing action

256
The Existence of God
Ak – but then again, perhaps not). At best we will be able to assign probabilities
(numbers lying between 0 and 1) to these possibilities W1,..., Wm. These m
probabilities will sum to unity.
To simplify matters, let us take m = k = 2. So we shall be considering two
alternative actions A1 and A2, and two different ways W1 and W2 that the world
might be, perhaps as a partial result of those actions, perhaps independently of
them.
This gives us four possibilities:
1
action A1 is undertaken; W1 turns out to be the case;
2
action A1 is undertaken; W2 turns out to be the case;
3
action A2 is undertaken; W1 turns out to be the case;
4
action A2 is undertaken; W2 turns out to be the case.
Example: in a two-horse race between Horse1 and Horse2:
1
bet that Horse1 will win; Horse1 wins;
2
bet that Horse1 will win; Horse2 wins;
3
bet that Horse2 will win; Horse1 wins;
4
bet that Horse2 will win; Horse2 wins.
Here is a case where the action (the placing of a particular bet) has no bearing
on the future outcome of the race. But in other decision-theoretic situations, the
particular action undertaken might foreclose existing, or create new, possibilities,
while still leaving several possibilities open, and with probabilities that are
themselves affected by whichever action has been undertaken.
The problem facing the agent is always: which of the available actions should
I perform? Let us assume that this problem is to be solved in an entirely
self-interested way. That is, the agent cares only about his or her own welfare,
and cares about the welfare of others only to the extent involved in avoiding
doing any legally or morally impermissible harm to anyone.
The rationally self-interested agent (also sometimes called a prudential agent)
has to ask:
•
What is the cost or beneﬁt to me, in each of the combinations [A,W]
consisting of my action A, and of the way W that things turn out to be?
(In the simpliﬁed case under discussion, there are four such combinations:
[A1,W1]; [A1,W2]; [A2,W1]; [A2,W2].)
•
What are the respective probabilities of those ways the world might be,
conditionally on the action I might perform? That is,
–
What is the probability of W1, conditional on my performing A1?
–
What is the probability of W2, conditional on my performing A1?
–
What is the probability of W1, conditional on my performing A2?
–
What is the probability of W2, conditional on my performing A2?

Pascal’s Wager
257
The payoff, or Utility, of way W when action A has been performed, is denoted
U(W,A). This quantity U(W,A) will be the result of adding together all the
various beneﬁts of having performed A when W turns out to be the case, and then
subtracting all the various costs associated with A.
The probability of W conditional on A is denoted prob(W|A). By prob(W) we
shall mean the absolute probability of W, independent of any condition such as A.
If A has no inﬂuence one way or the other on W, then prob(W|A) = prob(W).
The expected Utility of any action A (in our simpliﬁed case, where W1 and W2
are the only ways things can turn out) is
prob(W1|A).U(W1,A) + prob(W2|A).U(W2,A).
The downside of action A (in our simpliﬁed case) is the minimum value of
U(W,A) as W ranges over the various ways things might turn out to be. Note
that in the deﬁnition of downside there is no mention of probabilities. The
downside is simply the worst possible outcome, no matter how improbable. When
the downside is bad enough (e.g., death) the rationally ‘risk-averse’ hesitate to
‘weight’ it with probabilities.
The Utility, or net cost or beneﬁt of each outcome (consequent to the action
performed) and the various conditional probabilities all contribute importantly
to the rationality of the ﬁnal choice of action. Once the agent has answered the
earlier questions posed, there are two questions that usually guide decision-making
under uncertainty:
1
Which action will maximize my expected gain, – i.e., for which action A will
prob(W1|A).U(W1,A) + prob(W2|A).U(W2,A)
be maximized?
2
Which action will minimize any possible loss, i.e., for which action A will the
downside of A be minimized?
An ideal solution to a decision-making problem will be an action A serving as the
answer to both these questions. When there is no ideal solution, then one has to
examine more closely one’s levels of risk-tolerance for the worst-case scenarios.
Note that all the actions we have talked about have been doings or
undertakings – making a payment for services, laying a bet on a horse, making an
investment decision, etc.
What makes Pascal’s Wager rather singular is that the ‘action’ considered is
that of forming, or not forming, a certain belief – in this case, the belief that
God exists. The only way that Pascal’s Wager could convince one that one
ought to believe that God exists, is for one to be convinced that forming a
belief (or refraining from forming it) is something that we can do on prudential
grounds. Normally, rational agents avoid wishful thinking – that is, forming

258
The Existence of God
beliefs on the basis of what one would like to have be the case. Instead,
rational beliefs ought to be formed only on the basis of relevant evidence and
proper logical (or probabilistic) argumentation. Beliefs should force themselves
upon the rational intellect, once it is apprised of the appropriate theoretical
grounds for them. Beliefs should not be adopted simply because of prudential
self-interest. Many a novelist has decried the inauthenticity or self-deception
involved when a character adopts (or makes out that he or she has) particular
beliefs, when the apparent holding of such beliefs is really only designed to
promote the self-interest of that character, regardless of where the truth itself
might lie.
18.2 Exposition of Pascal’s Wager
That having been said by way of preparatory prophylactic, here is the structure of
Pascal’s Wager.
A1: Form the belief that God exists; and then live accordingly, by giving up
certain pleasures of the ﬂesh, making certain ﬁnancial sacriﬁces, putting up
with minor inconveniences (such as worship), etc.
A2: Do not form the belief that God exists; and then live accordingly, by
enjoying those pleasures of the ﬂesh, not making those ﬁnancial sacriﬁces,
and not having the inconveniences of worship, etc.
W1: God exists, and is just how the religious tradition describes Him:
wrathful and judgmental, ready to send both non-believers and the
non-repentant to Hell for eternity.
W2: God does not exist.
prob(W1|A1) = prob(W1|A2) = prob(W1) > 0.
prob(W2|A1) = prob(W2|A2) = prob(W2) = 1−prob(W1).
U(W1,A1) ≫0 (possibly even positively inﬁnite).
U(W2,A1) < 0.
U(W1,A2) ≪0 (possibly even negatively inﬁnite)
U(W2,A2) > 0.
By dint of the foregoing, we have the following.
Expected Utility of A1
= prob(W1|A1).U(W1,A1) + prob(W2|A1).U(W2,A1)
≫0.
Expected Utility of A2
= prob(W1|A2).U(W1,A2) + prob(W2|A2).U(W2,A2)
≪0.

Pascal’s Wager
259
On these grounds alone, it should be prudent to opt for A1 (belief in God,
and correspondingly becoming conduct). Here we are appealing to only the ﬁrst
principle, which tells one to maximize expected utility. Now, could the second
principle, which tells one to minimize the downside, counsel us the other way?
As it happens, no; the downside of A2 is U(W1,A2) ≪0; whereas the downside
of A1 is U(W2,A1) < 0. Thus for the rationally risk-averse, A1 would be by far
the safer bet than A2. So the two principles point to the same choice of A1
over A2.
Pascal’s Wager, then, counsels belief in God, and conducting oneself
in a God-fearing manner, as the best course of ‘action’ for the rationally
self-interested agent.
Now we have to ask: is this a rationally compelling argument for the existence
of God?
There are two main criticisms to be made of Pascal’s Wager.
18.3 The ﬁrst criticism of Pascal’s Wager
Pascal’s Wager makes the fundamental error of treating forming a belief as a kind
of action to which the theory of rational decision-making would be applicable.
The view that belief-formation is a kind of action, which can be freely chosen
after prudential deliberation, is mistaken on both italicized scores.
First, the rational agent does not freely choose when forming any belief.
Rather, the rational agent is compelled, by the weight of evidence, and logical
or probabilistic argumentation, to form the belief in question. And, when
the rational agent does not form the belief in question, this is because the
evidence and argumentation fall below whatever threshold is required for rational
conviction. We are prepared to exculpate a wrongdoer who is in the grip of an
addiction, and who is thereby compelled (by forces currently ‘beyond the agent’s
control’) to commit their wrongdoing. We do not regard the addict as capable
of the kind of free decision-making for which the addict could reasonably be
required to bear responsibility. So too, ironically, should it be in the case of
belief-formation. The rational agent ﬁnds him/herself rationally compelled (by
the evidence and the argumentation) to believe a certain proposition. The
resulting belief-state, when rational, is not a state of mind for which the agent
could ever be praised or reproached. The agent cannot take any credit for it. The
rational agent cannot be reproached for it. The rational agent is simply compelled
by the force of reason to adopt the belief in question.
Of course, the rational agent who forms a particular belief might be criticized
on other grounds, such as: there was not enough evidence available to justify
that belief; or there was a fallacy in the reasoning that lead to that belief; or ...
Here, the grounds for criticism are reasons for reproaching the rational agent qua
rational agent. They concern the manner in which the agent responded to what
was available, as putative grounds, for forming the belief. But when the response
is right – when all rational agents would agree that the available evidence and
argumentation really do establish a given conclusion – one’s forming the belief that

260
The Existence of God
the conclusion in question is true is not the kind of ‘action’ for which one bears any
kind of responsibility at all.
Rational compulsion closes off all avenues to praise or blame. The rational
agent is beyond all reproach; but not in the same way that the morally saintly
person is beyond all reproach. The moral saint is beyond reproach (in doing good
things) because what the moral saint freely does is morally good. The moral saint
really does choose. The rational agent is beyond reproach (in forming rational
beliefs) because what the rational agent is compelled to believe is rationally dictated
by the evidence and argumentation. The rational agent really has no choice.
Indeed, having no choice in the matter is what makes one a rational agent. By
contrast, the moral saint does have a choice. Indeed, having a choice in the
matter (and always making the right choice) is what makes one a moral saint.
Secondly, forming a belief on prudential grounds is the worst thing one can do,
as a rational agent. One’s own self-interest should be irrelevant when considering
matters of fact – which is what one’s beliefs aim to represent. It is a strong
criticism to accuse someone of wishful thinking. One is a wishful thinker if one
naïvely and over-optimisticallybelieves that something is the case simply because
one wishes it to be the case. The wishful thinker makes the fundamental mistake
of not attending to the available evidence; or not actively seeking it out and
only then reasoning with it, so as to form the correct belief about the matter.
Likewise, the prudential belief-former is letting self-interest cloud the issue of
fact. Instead of asking ‘What is it right to believe, on the basis of evidence and
argumentation?’, the prudential belief-former is asking ‘What is it in my best
interest to believe, regardless of evidence and argumentation based on it?’ To be
sure, Pascal’s Wager presents a kind of argumentation; but it does not present any
evidence, with the ensuing argumentation based on it. Instead, Pascal’s Wager
seeks to derive the conclusion that it would be in one’s best interests to believe that
God exists. But this is very different from an argument whose conclusion is that
God exists. Yet it is an argument of the latter kind that the rational agent really
needs in order to be rationally compelled to believe that God exists.
18.4 The second criticism of Pascal’s Wager
Even on its own terms, the prudential conclusion is arrived at too hastily.
When one makes decisions under conditions of uncertainty, the uncertainty
concerns which of a given range of ways the world might be (consequently upon,
or independently of, the decision made) is the way the world actually turns
out to be. The uncertainty is registered by assigning probability-values, lying
strictly between 0 and 1, to the various alternatives explicitly entertained. The
probabilities should sum to unity.
Clearly, the rational decision-maker deserves criticism if any important,
salient, relevant alternative is left out of consideration. That is, the range of
ways the world might be should be suitably exhaustive, given the background
constraints on the decision-making situation. There is no point in agonizing over
which horse to back in a race (the action here being: laying a bet on a particular

Pascal’s Wager
261
horse) if, in all one’s deliberations, one thinks only about some but not all of the
horses concerned.
The second criticism of Pascal’s Wager can be made metaphorically as follows:
Pascal was mistakenly backing one of what he took to be the only two horses in
the race. His horses were: Believe that God exists and Do not believe that God exists.
To be sure, to the unsuspecting mind this might seem exhaustive. For, surely,
these two alternatives divide up logical space. One of these two horses must win.
But now consider the alternatives: Horse1 will win or Horse2 will win. In the
context of a mishap-free two-horse race, these two choices are exclusive. They
divide up logical space. Another way of putting the alternatives in a two-horse
race would be: Horse1 will win or It is not the case that Horse1 will win. But what if
it’s not a two-horse race? What if Horse3 takes part?
Similarly, in Pascal’s Wager, we can ask: What if there is some other God to
think about, quite apart from the Judeo-Christian God that so occupied Pascal’s
thoughts? What about God*?
For those who do not know any theo*logy, let me tell you a little about the
super*natural, divine* Being* that is God*. God* created the Universe, with the
Big Bang, and so arranged the fundamental physical constants that everything
that happens in the Universe happens according to natural laws. God* is
so knowing and powerful that He* does not ever need to make any divine*
interventions in the natural course of things. He* saw to it that intelligent
observership would evolve, just the way it has, by putting all His* design-thought
into the choice of fundamental naturalistic laws at the outset. On the moral side,
however, God* is rather different from God. God* intends to send to Hell anyone
foolish enough to postulate His* existence, or foolish enough to be persuaded
by fallacious arguments like the Ontological Argument or the Cosmological
Argument, or the Argument from Design, for His* existence. God* intends to
reward with a blissful, eternal afterlife only the atheistic, naturalistically minded
thinkers who seek to use their God*-given intellects to work out the basic laws
of God*’s creation.
The challenge to one who thinks that the divine creator must be God,
rather than God*, is to produce a cogent argument for their conception of
the creator’s moral make-up. None of the arguments for God’s existence that
we have examined thus far contain the seeds of such a conception. The moral
aspects of a divine creator appear to be logically independent of the metaphysical
aspects with which those attempted proofs of existence are concerned. Just as no
geometer can establish Euclid’s axiom of parallels from the remaining axioms
of Euclidean geometry, so too no metaphysical considerations about a divine
creator secure any conclusions about the moral make-up of that creator. And
just as Science came to grips with the idea that relativistic space-time geometry
is actually non-Euclidean, so too the theologian should consider the possibility
that the moral make-up of a divine creator is that of God* rather than that usually
ascribed to the Judeo-Christian God.
Enough said about God*. God* complicates Pascal’s Wager in a way that
completely undermines its prudential recommendation. For, with God* to

262
The Existence of God
consider as a relevant possibility, belief in God no longer maximizes expected gain.
Indeed, belief in God brings with it a terrible downside, namely an eternity in
Hell. For those who like trinities, we have to realize that there is now a third
horse in the race. The three alternative ways the world might be are:
1
God exists (but God* does not).
2
God* exists (but God does not).
3
Neither God nor God* exists.
This is a genuine, tripartite division of logical space. It cannot be ignored
or wished away by the Pascalian posing his Wager. Faced with these three
alternatives, rather than his previous two, Pascal can no longer recommend
his original Wager ‘Believe that God exists, and act accordingly’. For the new
possibilities generated by consideration of God* overturn (or at least undermine)
the recommendation based on the previous calculations of expected utilities and
downsides.
The reader can easily check that there is no more ‘prudential reason’ (of the
kind that Pascal urges, and which we have already criticized on independent
grounds as suspect, anyway) for believing in God than there is for believing in
God*. Pascal’s Wager contains the seeds of its own discrediting, as it were. There
do not appear to be any conceptual reasons (as opposed to habits of theological
tradition) for thinking that it is only Pascal’s bipartite range of possibilities that
the Wager must address, rather than the tripartite one just suggested.
Problems
1
Explain the basics of decision-making under conditions of uncertainty.
2
Is it always wrong or irrational to form a belief solely because one wishes
it to be true? (See Williams (1973a) for further food for thought in this
connection.)
3
Examine carefully how the payoff matrix (with reference to the then
conventional conception of the Judeo-Christian God) is set out in Pascal’s
Wager. Do you have any disagreements with any of the entries?
4
Do you think that Pascal’s Wager is just a fancy formal exercise, masquerading
as some sort of intellectual argument, when its author should rather be simply
confessing to an overwhelming need to take certain things on faith?
5
Assess whether, even if the voluntarist can make a successful case for being
entitled to form certain beliefs on purely prudential grounds, Pascal’s Wager
will nevertheless succumb to a different objection.

19 The Problem of Evil
19.1 Exposition of the Problem of Evil
Thus far we have considered only arguments for the existence of God. The
criticisms leveled at these arguments have at best left us in the position of the
agnostic. That is, if the criticisms are sustained, then we have no good argument
so far for the existence of God.
Now we consider an argument against the existence of God. It takes the form
of a reductio ad absurdum. The claim being reduced to absurdity is the claim
that
G. God exists.
Of course, there are other ‘side assumptions’ on which the argument relies. First,
there are four conditional statements about God, whose consequents a theist
would regard as ‘obviously true’. The conditionals themselves might even be
acceptable to certain kinds of agnostic:
1
If God exists, then God created the Universe, including all sentient
creatures.
2
If God exists, then God is omniscient.
3
If God exists, then God is omnibenevolent.
4
If God exists, then God is omnipotent.
Secondly, there is the main premise that gives this argument its name:
5
There is evil in the world, and much misery and pain and suffering as a result,
on the part of sentient creatures.
Thirdly, there is a premise to the effect that
6
If God exists, then God is morally perfect: He does everything that He ought
to do.

264
The Existence of God
Here now is the Argument from the Problem of Evil:
Suppose (for reductio ad absurdum) that
G. God exists.
By (G) and (1), God is responsible for the existence of all sentient creatures.
By (5), many of these are in misery, pain and suffering.
By (G) and (2), God knows this, and indeed would have known this when
He created the Universe.
By (G) and (3), God would have intended otherwise for His sentient
creatures; He would have wished them not to have to suffer in this way.
By (G) and (4), God could have acted otherwise: He could have created a
Universe without that suffering.
By a universally accepted principle of morality, God therefore should have
acted otherwise. He should have created a Universe free of that suffering; yet
He did not.
But that, with (G), contradicts (6).
So we have a contradiction from (1)–(6) in conjunction with the assumption
(G) that God exists.
Holding on to (1)–(6), we conclude that
God does not exist.
19.2 Responses to the Argument from the Problem of Evil
Having set out the Argument from the Problem of Evil (for the atheist’s
conclusion that God does not exist), we now consider various critical responses to
that argument. We shall here manage only one more dialectical layer, by offering
the atheist’s rebuttal to each objection raised.
19.2.1 The ‘Polarity’ response
This response takes the following form.
Good could not exist without there being at least some evil with which it
could be contrasted. Thus the existence of evil is, as it were, a necessary evil,
if there are to be moral beings capable of pursuing the good.
Rebuttal by the atheist: Not so. An ordinary moral sensibility could be nurtured,
or acquired, without exposure to any instances of evil. Extrapolating from minor
instances of accidentally self-inﬂicted pain could give the imaginative moral

The Problem of Evil
265
agent a conception of what it would be intentionally to inﬂict pain and misery on
an innocent, sentient being. This was reportedly the young Buddha’s experience.
He was several years old when, for the ﬁrst time in his life, he witnessed the
suffering of a sentient creature: a bird overhead pierced by an archer’s arrow. He
was able to understand immediately the moral enormity of intentionally inﬂicting
suffering on an innocent, sentient being. One does not need actual exemplars of
a property F in order to be able to conceive what it would be to have property F.
Our counterfactual imaginations are vivid enough.
19.2.2 The Leibnizian response
This response takes the following form.
Unknown to the limited intellects who are moved by the Argument from
the Problem of Evil, this world, even with all the evil within it, happens to
be the best of all possible worlds that God could have created. Our intellects are
simply too limited to grasp the deeper wisdom behind God’s having created
the world the way it is.
Rebuttal by the atheist: Read Voltaire’s novel Candide.
19.2.3 The ‘Cosmic Justice’ response
This response takes the following form.
Sure, there is intentionally inﬂicted pain, misery, and suffering in this world.
But that doesn’t make it a case of incomprehensible or reprehensible evil on
a cosmic level. Rather, the individuals’ suffering is meet and right: for they
are being punished for their own past wrongdoings, in a cosmos in which
justice is always done.
Rebuttal by the atheist: So those innocent babies, pitchforked by SS thugs in
the concentration camps, were paying for ‘their’ own past sins? This is repulsively
counterintuitive. There is, however, a further problem with the ‘cosmic justice’
suggestion. If current sufferers are being punished for their supposed previous
evildoing, what about the victims of those evildoings? Were they in turn being
punished, at long last, for their own, yet earlier, evildoings? In order to sustain
this response consistently, one is driven to postulate that the chain of evildoings
whose victims are being punished stretches back inﬁnitely far into the past.
Otherwise, there will be some original, undeserved evildoing (from the point
of view of its hapless victim), and the Argument from Evil would once again gain
purchase. This enforced picture, however, is at odds with that urged by Aquinas’s
Cosmological Argument. Not that that matters much, since the Cosmological
Argument is invalid anyway – but at least we see that this theistic defense

266
The Existence of God
against the Argument from the Problem of Evil knocks out one of the positive
possibilities of argumentation for God’s existence.
19.2.4 The Libertarian response
This response takes the following form.
God’s greatest gift to humankind is the granting of free will. He had to ‘let go’
of His control over our actions in order to bestow genuine free will upon us.
He cannot be held responsible for the evil which we do. The moral deﬁcit
in this universe is to be laid at our door. We have no ground to reproach
God for having created a universe in which His creatures freely choose to
do evil.
Rebuttal by the atheist: This presupposes that we do have genuine free will;
and this is another deep metaphysical debate to be joined. But let us grant
free will for the sake of argument. God could still have given us free will, but
simply restricted the range of abominable possibilities open to us. He could,
for example, have ensured that we never developed the technologies of mass
torture and extermination used in Hitler’s concentration camps. God could have
ensured that, free though we were, we were always inclined to use our free will
so as to do the right thing. Is a moral saint any the less free for never doing
wrong? If not, then why couldn’t we all have been created moral saints? Tempted
at times, to be sure, but in the end always capable of resisting temptation
to do evil.
19.2.5 The ‘Reconceptualization’ response
This response takes the following form.
Having derived a contradiction from certain assumptions about God’s nature
(should He exist), why not simply give up some of those assumptions,
rather than conclude that He does not, after all, exist? Perhaps God is
not omnibenevolent, after all. Or perhaps He could not have foreseen
the abominable things that His creatures would do, once granted their
freedom of will. Or perhaps he is/was powerless to improve on His
creation.
Rebuttal by the atheist:
This is dramatic concession. It certainly detracts
from our usual idea of God as a being worth worshipping, and as the source of
our morality. It would also sabotage Anselm’s Ontological Argument, which
involved a conception of God as a being greater than which nothing could be
conceived. But Anselm’s argument was defective on other scores, so perhaps that
is not too disastrous for the theist. Now, pray tell, what kind of positive argument
can the theist provide for the existence of this somewhat diminished Deity?

The Problem of Evil
267
19.2.6 The ‘Incommensurability’ response
This response takes the following form.
You (the atheist) are employing a notion of moral commensurability of
alternative possibilities of creation. You think you are able to contemplate
this universe, with the evil in it, and compare it with yet another
(non-actual) universe with no (or less) evil in it, and then pronounce that
the latter universe is better – hence morally preferable – to the former. You
then conclude that God ought to have avoided creating the former, and
ought to have preferred, instead, to create the latter.
But isn’t this idea of commensurability broken-backed? One cannot compare
one whole universe with another whole universe when making moral
judgments. At best you can compare one act with another act within one
and the same universe, in order to determine which one is morally preferable.
Rebuttal by the atheist:
Whence, then, our moral intuition that we can
effect moral improvements in our lives and our societies? Idealistic reformers are
motivated by their conception of a better life, whether or not it is ever realized.
They can imagine possible futures for this world of ours, in which things seem
clearly better than they actually are (or probably turn out to be, despite the
reformers’ best efforts). There does not seem to be anything counterintuitive
here if we describe the idealistic reformer’s intuition as based on a comparison of
two whole worlds or universes: one of these is the actual universe, past, present
and future; the other is a universe that has the same history as the ﬁrst one up to
a certain point, after which it ‘diverges morally’ at the societal level, with greatly
reduced evil from that point on. It seems pretty clear that this moral comparison
can be made, and holds good, for the two worlds in question.
19.2.7 The ‘Deep Constraint’ response
This is a variation of the Leibnizian response, and is suggested here only because
of its novel ﬂavor. It takes the following form.
It is generally agreed that God is constrained by the limits of what is logically
and mathematically possible or necessary. For example, God could not have
made a universe in which 2 + 3 = 7. Nor could God have made a universe
in which a square had three sides. Nor could God have made a universe
in which 0 was the number of things identical to 0 ..., etc. Now, it has
recently been argued that the emergence of life (self-replicating systems of
organic molecules) is actually a ‘combinatorial’ necessity, once given enough
basic chemicals and a certain density of interactions among them. Far from
being a highly improbable ‘cosmic accident’, the emergence of Life, on
this view, is virtually guaranteed by the conditions found on Earth shortly
after its formation. Perhaps there are similar deep constraints, deriving from

268
The Existence of God
the mathematics of combinations, on the kind of behavior that God could
Himself constrain, on the part of complex organisms. Their evolutionary
origin and behavior is to be governed by the laws of nature, which God is
putting in place. But perhaps any laws of nature in accordance with which
life is at all possible are laws that must permit (and indeed make inevitable, at
least on occasion) those behaviors that we regard as evil. Perhaps God could
not even prevent creatures without free will from intentionally, on occasion,
doing things that inﬂict pain and misery on other sentient beings.
Rebuttal by the atheist: In all probability, this is the right picture. But, surely,
God can be removed from it? For what we have here, after all, is a description of
the world as the atheistic naturalist sees it, once it is stripped of the God-talk.
Problems
1
Regiment the Argument from Evil against the existence of God, so that it is
laid out as a formal proof (like the one that we proposed as a regimentation of
Anselm’s Ontological Argument for the existence of God).
2
Consider any one of the seven responses to the Argument from the Problems
of Evil, and develop it in as much detail as you can, by exploring the extensive
literature. You could begin with Mackie (1955); Plantinga (1977); and Adams
and Adams (1990).

Part IV
Mind, Body and External
World

Thispageintentionallyleftblank

20 The Pivotal Figure of Descartes:
Dualism and Skepticism
Three important ideas or schools of thought are named after the great rationalist
philosopher, scientist and mathematician René Descartes: Cartesian coordinates,
Cartesian dualism, and Cartesian skepticism.
20.1 Cartesian coordinates
To keep matters simple, consider a space of two dimensions – a plane. Every
high-school student is familiar with the way we can represent points in a plane
by means of an x-coordinate and a y-coordinate.
We choose two perpendicular axes in the plane (‘perpendicular’ here meaning
‘intersecting at a right angle’). (Interestingly, Descartes, in La Géométrie, did
not require that the axes be perpendicular to each other. He managed with
coordinates for points with respect to axes not meeting that condition.) We
label one of these axes the x-axis, and the other the y-axis. They each extend
to positive inﬁnity in one direction, and to negative inﬁnity in the other. So
each axis is a ‘copy’ of the real numbers. The axes’ point of intersection is called
the origin, and is described by the ordered pair ⟨0,0⟩.
Given any point P in the plane, we ﬁnd its ordered pair ⟨xP,yP⟩as follows. Draw
a line-segment from P to the x-axis, parallel to the y-axis. This line intersects the
x-axis at xP. Draw another line segment from P to the y-axis, parallel to the x-axis.
This line intersects the y-axis at yP. These two numbers xP and yP are called the
x-coordinate and the y-coordinate of P respectively.
In this way a geometric point P in a plane can be represented by, or
identiﬁed with, an ordered pair of real numbers ⟨xP,yP⟩. (If the point were in a
three-dimensional space, we would use instead an ordered triple of real numbers,
⟨xP,yP,zP⟩, availing ourselves of a third axis, the z-axis. Here we shall make do
with the two-dimensional case.)
Likewise, lines and curves in general (lying in the plane) can be described
as sets of geometric points. Many of them will be deﬁnable by means of algebraic
relationships among the coordinates x and y of their constitutive points. Thus for
example a circle with radius r and center ⟨a,b⟩is the set of points ⟨x,y⟩obeying the
algebraic relationship
r.r = [(x −a).(x −a)]+ [(y −b).(y −b)].

272
Mind, Body and External World
Another example: the straight line that passes through the y-axis at b and through
the x-axis at a is the set of all points ⟨x,y⟩such that
a.b = (b.x) + (a.y).
Cartesian coordinates provide a fruitful way of re-conceiving spatial ﬁgures as
algebraic interrelationships among numbers (that is, among the coordinates of
the points involved). This is called the algebraicization of geometry, and it was
a major breakthrough in mathematical thinking. What is essentially involved
are two different systems of representation: two different ways of thinking about
the same things. Given the system of Cartesian coordinatization, one can regard
spatial forms (one can ‘construe’ them, as philosophers sometimes say) as ‘no
more than’ sets of pairs (or triples) of numbers; and one can regard geometrical
properties as amounting to ‘no more than’ the algebraic relationships among
numerical coordinates.
The great irony is that Descartes conspicuously failed to do, or avoided doing,
the same thing with the phenomenon of mind. That is, he did not construe
mental phenomena as no more than physical states of the physical organism,
and mental processes as no more than physical relationships among the physical
realizations of mental states.
Instead, he left an intellectual legacy at the other extreme, quite at odds with
his pioneering insight about space and numbers.
20.2 Cartesian dualism
Cartesian dualism is the view that the mind is a radically different kind of entity
from the physical body to which it ‘belongs’. This is a dualism of substance, not just
a dualism of attributes. Descartes does not simply maintain that mental attributes
are special, and cannot be reduced to physical attributes; while, nevertheless,
both kinds of attributes are enjoyed by just one kind of thing, namely bodies.
Rather, he goes even further, by maintaining that minds are things quite different
from bodies (whence of course it will follow also that their attributes are not
physical attributes). Minds, said Descartes, exist in time but not in space: they are
not ‘extended’. They could also survive the destruction of the physical bodies to
which they seem to belong.
This extreme kind of dualism gives rise to the problem of mind–body interaction.
If minds are not in space, and are not themselves physical things, how then
do they interact with bodies? Conscious experience of the things we perceive
must involve some sort of causal process beginning in those things and ending
in our minds. Conversely, there are intentional actions that result in the
movement of physical bodies (our own bodies, and the things outside us that
we move around and manipulate). Surely this involves some sort of causal
process – desiring or deciding – that begins in our minds and ends in the world
of physical objects? If so, what sort of causation is this? Could there be a
science of this causation? Or would parts (or all) of it be inaccessible to the

The Pivotal Figure of Descartes
273
methods of science? What is the mechanism (or ‘mentalism’?) of mind–body
interaction?
20.3 Cartesian skepticism
We shall expound Descartes’s skepticism by quoting quite a few important
passages from the text of his Meditations on First Philosophy, and interpolating
both expository and critical comments as we proceed. The material we have to
deal with here is better suited to this form of engagement than to our earlier
procedure of setting a view out, and only thereafter raising criticisms.
In the order of presentation in Meditations, Descartes’s skepticism actually
preceded his dualism. His dualism was invoked by way of some sort of solution
to the prior skepticism that he had raised. We have chosen a different order
of exposition here in order to make the ironic contrast between Descartes’s
‘reductive’ numerical coordinatization of space (about which he says nothing in
his Meditations), and his extremely anti-reductive dualism about mind and body.
There are many varieties of skepticism. We touched on them brieﬂy in
Chapter 6. Cartesian skepticism concerns our empirical knowledge of the external
world. The common-sense view is that the external world consists of various
physical things ‘outside of’ ourselves (the perceiving subjects); and that we come
to know facts about these things by means of sensory perception (sight, hearing,
touch and proprioception, smell, and taste).
It is this common-sense view that Descartes directly challenges. Noting that
we are occasionally subjected to dreams and hallucinations, he generalizes the
worry that awareness of dreams and hallucinations induces. We know that
sometimes we are dreaming, and that the world is not at all the way it is
represented as being in the dream. But how can we be sure that we are not
dreaming all the time? Our senses sometimes deceive us: or at least, one sensory
channel does, and we have to correct it by recourse to other sensory channels.
(Think of how the senses of touch and proprioception reassure us that the stick
in the water is really straight, although it may look bent.) How can we be sure
that it is not the case that all our senses deceive us all the time?
Cartesian skepticism concerns our knowledge of the external world. The
Cartesian skeptic pursues the method of radical doubt about all our alleged
knowledge of the external world.
Why, one might ask, would anyone wish to pursue such skepticism? The
charitable answer would run as follows. The Cartesian skeptic earnestly wishes to
secure the foundations of empirical knowledge, or of natural science, against the
possibility of serious error. In order to do so, he invents the strongest challenge
he can think of. In defending empirical knowledge against such a challenge, we
would uncover our real reasons and justiﬁcations for holding the beliefs we do.
And that is the only way to conﬁrm these beliefs as genuine knowledge, not just
fanciful opinion, or prejudice, or over-credulous speculation.
The uncharitable answer would run differently. Some have alleged that
Descartes was a naturalistically inclined scientist who had developed his natural

274
Mind, Body and External World
scientiﬁc method, and pursued it, for a long time before he wrote the Meditations.
Nowhere in his earlier writings had there been any hint of radical doubt, or
skepticism. So why did these ideas suddenly appear later in the Meditations?
The answer is that Descartes had been chilled by the Inquisition’s treatment
of Galileo, who himself was following the naturalistic method of experimental
inquiry, and putting forward the Copernican view that the Sun, not the Earth,
was the center of the (then known) universe. So Descartes set about providing
a metaphysics that would be acceptable to the Church authorities, and cleverly
fashioning within this metaphysics a permissible space for the pursuit of empirical
and experimental inquiry. (In order to explore this interpretative possibility more
carefully, the interested reader can begin with Clarke (1982); Gaukroger (1995);
and Davies (2001).)
Whatever the correct explanation of Descartes’s motives, he has given
Western philosophy one of its most celebrated thought-experimental ﬁgures: that
of the evil demon. Descartes asks his reader to imagine that there is an all-powerful
evil demon who is constantly deceiving us, by making it seem to us as though
there is an external world of material objects.
This thought-experiment calls into question both the existence of physical
objects (including our own bodies), and our supposed knowledge of their
various properties and relations – color, shape, size, category or kind, internal
constitution, motion, etc. Descartes asks us to consider seriously the possibility
that all our supposed knowledge of these things is illusory, or false. Thus he
casts doubt on common-sense reports of observation. Examples: ‘The dog is
barking’; ‘The cat is on the mat’, etc. Also, naturally, he casts doubt on
higher-level generalizations and hypotheses that are logically connected with
such observation reports. Examples: ‘All metal bars, when heated, expand’;
‘Bread nourishes’; ‘Bodies attract each other with gravitational forces’; ‘All men
are mortal’, etc.
If all such beliefs of ours are false, then we must at least be able to entertain the
thoughts involved. That is,
Point 1:
We must still have a conceptual apparatus, and logical operations, for the
framing of our thoughts – even if the ones we choose to believe turn out to
be false.
Moreover, Cartesian skepticism is capitalizing on the appearance/reality dis-
tinction. The master thought is that appearances can and (perhaps always) do
deceive us (or, if we prefer to put it this way, it is through those appearances
that the evil demon succeeds in deceiving us). We are deceived as to the very
existence of the external world, or as to the true nature of the external world,
should it exist. But if appearances can thus deceive us, then: how the world
seems to us (how things appear to us) would not be how things really are. The
appearances, or seemings, would misrepresent how things are. And in order for
us to be deceived in this way,

The Pivotal Figure of Descartes
275
Point 2:
There is a fact of the matter as to how things appear to be (even if it is the
evil demon who is subjecting us to these appearances).
These two simple points yield certain signiﬁcant classes of thoughts or proposi-
tions that would remain unaffected by Cartesian doubt.
1
Phenomenological truths about current experience. If I sincerely claim There is
a red patch in my visual ﬁeld now, this is not the sort of claim that can be
made subject to Cartesian doubt. The evil demon’s malevolent ministrations
depend on the prior truth of claims of this kind.
2
Truths about the structure of phenomenological possibilities. I can still conﬁdently
claim that anything red is colored; and that nothing (not even an appearance)
could (seem to) be solidly red all over and solidly green all over at the same
time.
3
Logical truths. Whatever the evil demon does, he cannot make the logical Law
of Non-contradiction, not-(P and not-P), fail. He is supposed to be deceiving
us about, say, P by having us believe not-P, or vice versa. The evil demon’s
whole point is to make us adopt a consistent set of beliefs that are false. So in
fact the evil demon would want us to carry on believing all the laws of Logic,
since these help to structure the very thoughts that are going to be factually
mistaken.
4
Mathematical truths. Likewise for mathematical truths. If the evil demon makes
me think, falsely, that there are two pink elephants and three green ones in
the lecture theater, then he will happily allow me to believe that there are
ﬁve (pink-or-green) elephants in the lecture theater. The evil demon has no
interest in making me cease to believe that 2 + 3 = 5.
5
Conceptual truths. The evil demon will not interfere with my belief that, say,
all bachelors are unmarried men. This I know by virtue of the meanings of
the words alone; my (deluded) sense perception plays no role in justifying
this belief. Hence this belief, and others relevantly like it, are immune to
Cartesian skepticism.
6
Introspective truths. I have a stomach ache. I know I do. I know I feel this
way, even if the evil demon caused me to so to feel. This is an example of an
introspective truth to which I have authoritative, privileged, infallible access.
You ask me, in a world in which the evil demon may be at work, ‘Do you
have a stomach ache?’ I do not have to lay to rest doubts about empirical
knowledge, or convince myself that there is no evil demon, in order to be
able to answer you truthfully and with certitude.
Although these kinds of ‘invulnerable’ knowledge do not tell us much about
the external world, they provide at least a starting point for a line of defensive
argument against the possibility that we are constantly being deceived by an evil
demon. In the next chapter we shall examine Descartes’s complete response to
his own problem: a response that begins with his famous introspective dictum

276
Mind, Body and External World
‘Cogito ergo sum’ (‘I think, therefore I am’). For the rest of this chapter, we focus
on some of the more important claims in the ﬁrst two Meditations, leading up to
the famous Cogito.
20.4 The structure of the reasoning in the ﬁrst two Meditations
All quotations are taken from Bratman et al. (2009).
20.4.1 Meditation I: On what can be called into doubt
Descartes intends to call all his previous beliefs into doubt. This is what earns
his method the title ‘method of radical doubt’. But we shall have to ask ourselves
whether it isn’t philosophically unsettling enough to conﬁne the doubt to beliefs
about the external world, while leaving intact all our beliefs of a purely logical,
conceptual, or mathematical nature.
I would need to tear down everything and begin anew from the foundations
if I wanted to establish any ﬁrm and lasting knowledge. ... I can justify the
rejection of all my beliefs if I can ﬁnd some ground for doubt in each.
Is Descartes really justiﬁed in doubting the conclusions of mathematical proofs
that he has carefully worked through? What about mathematical axioms that he
formerly took, upon reﬂection, to be self-evident? And does it follow from the
fact that each belief, taken one at a time, is dubitable, that one can doubt all of
one’s beliefs simultaneously?
I have occasionally caught the senses deceiving me, and it would be prudent
for me never completely to trust those who have cheated me even once.
Note the moral analogy. Would the point be as persuasive if it read, instead, as
‘I have occasionally discovered that my senses have malfunctioned, and it would
be prudent for me never to rely wholly on senses that have malfunctioned even
once’? Probably not – because when one sense is malfunctioning, we can always
have recourse to other senses in order to make the necessary correction. Consider,
for example, how one would resort to the sense of touch in order to determine
that a stick is straight, even though it looks as if it is bent when put into water.
[T]here are no reliable signs by which I can distinguish sleeping from waking.
Is this really so? Might there not be some requirement of overall systematicity
and coherence of beliefs arrived at in a waking state, which is not met in the case
of ‘dream-beliefs’ that the dreamer ‘forms’ when dreaming?
[M]ightn’t I be deceived when I add two and three?

The Pivotal Figure of Descartes
277
You might be deceived, say, by your sense of vision when looking at the
page in the course of trying to follow a written proof of the claim that
2 + 3 = 5. But what about the purely intellectual process of running through
the proof in one’s mind, unaided by symbols or diagrams written or drawn on
paper?
Nothing I used to believe is beyond legitimate doubt ... because I have valid
and well-considered grounds for doubt. I must therefore withhold my assent
from my former beliefs as carefully as from obvious falsehoods, if I want to
arrive at something certain.
Nothing? What about conceptual, logical and mathematical truths that you have
already proved to your satisfaction?
[I]t will be good ... to allow [that I am] deceived, and to suppose that all my
previous beliefs are false and imaginary.
Once again, it may be that we can save conceptual, logical, and mathematical
truths from this skeptical doubt, while allowing the skepticism to apply only to
all beliefs (based on perception) about the external world.
I will suppose, then, ... that there is an evil demon, supremely powerful and
cunning, who works as hard as he can to deceive me.
Bear in mind that this is a supposition. Descartes is not claiming that such a
demon really exists. He is only saying that, for all we currently know (after calling
various beliefs into doubt), it is prima facie consistent to suppose that such an
evil demon exists. The task will be to discover considerations and reasoning that
would reduce this supposition to absurdity.
20.4.2 Meditation II: On the nature of the human mind, which is
better known than the body
We should bear in mind a distinction made later in philosophy, between
‘knowledge by acquaintance’ and ‘knowledge by description’. Perhaps Descartes
can claim only that we are better acquainted with our minds than we are with our
bodies. For mental introspection gives indubitable knowledge-by-acquaintance;
whereas we have knowledge (by acquaintance) of our bodies only through the
mind’s exercise of the senses.
I can hope for great things if I can even ﬁnd one small thing that is certain
and unshakable.

278
Mind, Body and External World
This is a display of typical rationalist optimism. One needs only to ﬁnd some
overarching principle from which one can generate an enormous stock of
knowledge.
Let [the evil demon] deceive me all he can, he will never make it the case
that I am nothing while I think that I am something. ... I must ﬁnally
conclude that the statement ‘I am, I exist’ must be true whenever I state
or mentally consider it.
Note that the stating or mental considering here is what is covered by the
Latin verb ‘cogito’. ‘I am, I exist’ abbreviates, in Latin, to ‘sum’. And Descartes
is inferring the truth of the latter from the truth of the former (whenever
it holds). Hence the usual Latin formulation ‘cogito, ergo sum’. Note the
reﬂective robustness of this insight. No matter how little one has in the way
of justiﬁed beliefs, the mere awareness of one’s own intellectual questionings
or doubtings or wonderings whether sufﬁces to make the claim ‘cogito’ (= ‘I
am thinking/cogitating’) true. For these intellectual attitudes are a species of
cogitation. One does not have to be thinking some proposition in a conﬁdent,
assertive frame of mind in order to be able to describe oneself as cogitating. It is
enough, for example, to be wondering whether one will ever arrive at a justiﬁed
belief. As soon as one is aware of that mental activity, one knows that one exists.
And the evil demon cannot take this away.
[I]t comes down to this: There is thinking, and thought alone cannot be
taken away from me. I am, I exist. That much is certain. ... I know that I
am a real, existing thing, but what kind of thing? As I have said, a thing that
thinks. ... I know that I exist, and I ask what the ‘I’ is that I know to exist.
It is obvious that the conception of myself that I arrive at in this way does
not depend on anything that I do not yet know to exist and, consequently,
that it does not depend on anything of which I can shape a mental
image.
Descartes is clearly embracing the possibility here that he might exist only as a
disembodied mind.
[Even if dreaming] it is still certain that I seem to see, to hear, and to feel.
Again, even the victim of the evil demon can cogitate; and, in doing so, be
certain of his/her/its own existence.
What point have we now reached? Descartes has, by the end of Meditation II,
responded to the specter of the evil demon with the single certitude ‘I think,
therefore I am’. It is still possible that he exists only as a mind, without any
physical body; and that what seems to him as perceptual experience ‘of’ external

The Pivotal Figure of Descartes
279
objects is no more than a train of hallucination visited upon him by the evil
demon. The problem still facing him is: How can he move from the cogito
to a newly justiﬁed and fully recovered system of belief about the external
world?
20.5 Descartes’s resort to the existence of God
Having adopted the method of radical doubt, and having invoked the possibility
that he is being deceived systematically by an evil demon, Descartes has attained,
in response thus far, only the reﬂective insight that he exists in so far as he thinks.
Moreover, he exists as a thinking thing, i.e., a mind. He does not yet have any
secure knowledge of his own body, or of any other external things. How is such
knowledge to be recovered?
The short answer is that he aims to prove that God exists – a God, moreover,
who would not deceive him, especially about matters that Descartes takes himself
to perceive clearly and distinctly.
In Meditation III, Descartes gives an argument for God’s existence that has a
form similar to that of Aquinas’s Cosmological Argument. Recall that Aquinas
considered the cause–effect relation among things and events, and maintained
that chains of causation could not stretch inﬁnitely far back into the past.
Aquinas concluded that there must be some ‘prime mover’, which was God.
Descartes likewise considers instead the chain of events terminating in his
having the idea of God with all His perfections. He argues that this chain,
extending back in time, must terminate in God himself; for from none other
than God, with His supreme perfections, could his (Descartes’s) idea of God have
derived.
I seem to be able to establish the general rule that whatever I clearly and
distinctly grasp is true.
Descartes makes this claim before proving that God exists. Moreover, he proceeds
to use this claim as a premise when proving that God exists. Later, however, he
appeals to the existence of God in order justify this claim (or, at least, one that
is plausibly equivalent to it). This is known as the Cartesian circle. (There is an
extensive literature on the Cartesian circle. See the anthology Doney (1987).)
Any interpretation that would save Descartes from the embarrassment of having
engaged in such circular argumentation is well worth considering.
[I]f [God] wants, He can make it the case that I err even about what I take
my mind’s eye to see most clearly. ... I ought to ask as soon as possible
whether there is a God and, if so, whether He can be a deceiver. For it seems
that, until I know these two things, I can never be completely certain of
anything else.

280
Mind, Body and External World
This is known as the ‘notorious’ fourth paragraph of Meditation III. Many a
commentator cannot understand why and how God could deceive the ‘mind’s
eye’ about purely conceptual and/or mathematical matters having nothing to do
with sense-perception.
[T]he central question is about the ideas that I view as derived from objects
existing outside me. What reason is there for thinking that these ideas
resemble the objects? I seem to have been taught this by nature. ... When I
say that nature teaches me something, I mean just that I have a spontaneous
impulse to believe it – not that the light of nature reveals the thing’s
truth to me. There is an important difference. When the light of nature
reveals something to me (such as that my thinking implies my existing)
that thing is completely beyond doubt, since there is nothing as reliable
as the light of nature by means of which I could learn that the thing is
not true.
The phrase ‘light of nature’ is being used here as an important philosophical
metaphor. Descartes does not literally mean that the physical phenomenon that
we now understand as a stream of photons is illuminating whatever it is that he
understands to be true. Instead, he is alluding to some sort of perfectly unimpeded
intellectual perspective, from which the truth of a proposition is crystal clear,
fully illuminated for the understanding. Still speaking metaphorically: one would
grasp all the boundaries, all the appropriate contrasts, all the textures and hues.
All salient features would shine with self-evidence; nothing relevant to the
determination of the truth of the proposition would be left shrouded in any
darkness or shadow or obscurity. It would yield the same kind of certainty of
recognitional judgment that one achieves when one sees a dear friend’s face
fully revealed by light ﬂooding from the appropriate angle. Descartes, however,
offers no clarifying taxonomy of the sorts of propositions whose truth can be
determined thus deﬁnitively by the light of nature. Do they include mathematical
propositions? observation statements, under ideal conditions of observation?
introspective reports of the contents of one’s own consciousness? fundamental
propositions about the nature of space, time, and causation? propositions about
the metaphysics of self? ... There is a great variety of candidates for illumination
by the light of nature. One would like to have a general account of our
epistemic access to them, and what the ‘throwing of light’ in each case would
consist in. Instead, Descartes tends simply to help himself, wherever needed,
to the claim that such-and-such proposition is revealed (as true) by the light
of nature.
[T]he light of nature has revealed that there is at least as much in the
complete efﬁcient cause as in its effect. ... It follows ... that what is more
perfect – or, in other words, has more reality in it – cannot come from what
is less perfect and has less reality.

The Pivotal Figure of Descartes
281
Perhaps Descartes is more sensitive to the light of nature than lesser mortals.
[E]ach idea contains one particular presentational reality which it must
get from a cause having at least as much formal reality as the idea has
presentational reality. ... Although one idea may arise from another, this
can’t go back to inﬁnity; it must eventually arrive at a primary idea
whose cause is an ‘archetype’ containing formally all that the idea contains
presentationally. Hence, the light of nature makes it clear to me that the
ideas in me are like images which may well fall short of the things from which
they derive, but which cannot contain anything greater or more perfect.
... [I]f the presentational reality of one of my ideas is so great that I can
be conﬁdent that the same degree of reality is not in me either formally
or eminently, I can conclude that I cannot be the cause of that idea, that
another thing must necessarily exist as its cause, and consequently that I am
not alone in the world.
Here is the foreshadowing of a form of Cosmological Argument for the existence
of God ...
[A]s to my ideas of physical objects, it seems that nothing in them is so great
that it couldn’t have come from me. ... All that is left to consider is whether
there may be something in my idea of God that couldn’t have come from me.
By ‘God’ I mean inﬁnite substance, independent, supremely intelligent, and
supremely powerful – the thing from which I and everything else that may
exist get our existence. The more I consider these attributes, the less it seems
that they could have come from me alone. And I must therefore conclude
that God necessarily exists.
... And here is its conclusion.
[I]t’s clear to me that there is more reality in an inﬁnite than in a ﬁnite
substance, and, hence, that my grasp of the inﬁnite must somehow be prior to
my grasp of the ﬁnite – my understanding of God prior to my understanding
of myself. For, how could I understand that I doubt and desire, that I am
deﬁcient and imperfect, if I don’t have the idea of something more perfect
to use as a standard of comparison? (Emphasis added)
The present author, for one, is not convinced by the ‘hence’ here.
It sufﬁces for me to understand that, being ﬁnite, I cannot fully comprehend
the inﬁnite and to judge that, if I grasp something clearly and distinctly and
know it to have some perfection, it is either formally or eminently present
in God.

282
Mind, Body and External World
What would be the argument that ﬁnite minds cannot comprehend the inﬁnite?
I ought to ask myself ... whether I have the power to ensure that I, who now
am, will exist a little while from now. Since I am nothing but a thinking
thing ... I would surely be aware of this power if it were in me. But I ﬁnd no
such power. And this very clearly shows that there is an entity distinct from
me, on whom I depend.
Note that Descartes is simply assuming here, without argument, that he would
be introspectively aware (as a mind) of every power of his mind. But can any one
mind be so fully aware of itself?
[S]ince I am a thinking thing with the idea of God in me, my cause – what-
ever it is – must be a thinking thing having in it the idea of every perfection
that I attribute to God. And I can go on to ask whether this thing gets
its existence from itself or from something else. But ... if my cause gets its
existence from itself, it must be God: having the power to exist in itself, it
must also have the power actually to to give itself every perfection of which
it has an idea – including every perfection that I conceive of in God. On
the other hand, if my cause gets its existence from some other thing, I can
go on to ask whether this other thing gets its existence from itself or from
something else. Eventually, I will come to the ultimate cause: God.
This is a restatement of the Cosmological Argument foreshadowed earlier.
... [My parents] do not preserve me. Insofar as I am a thinking thing, they
did not even take part in creating me. They simply formed the matter in
which I used to think that I resided. (By ‘I’ I mean my mind, which is all
that I now grasp of myself.) ... The fact that I exist and have an idea of God
as a perfect entity conclusively entails that God does in fact exist.
The purpose of Meditation III is now achieved. Descartes began this Meditation
with only himself in the picture. Now he has God as well.
The idea [of God] must ... be innate in me, like my idea of myself. ... [I]t’s
not at all surprising that in creating me God put this idea into me, impressing
it like a craftsman’s mark on His work.
Descartes is neglecting the possibility that the human mind has a wonderful
(but often misleading) capacity for over-generalization, over-extension and
over-extrapolation. Why can’t we simply say that we attain a conception of God
by thinking of certain extremes along certain dimensions of comparison – but
that our doing so affords us no guarantee that anything really answers to the
aggregate extremal conception thus formed?

The Pivotal Figure of Descartes
283
I know that I could not exist with my present nature (that is, that I could
not exist with the idea of God in me) unless there really were a God – the
very God of whom I have an idea, the thing having all the perfections
that I can’t fully comprehend but can somehow reach with thought, the
thing that clearly cannot be defective. From this, it is obvious that He can’t
deceive, for the natural light reveals that fraud and deception arise from
defect.
Descartes has ﬁnally made the epistemological application that he sought at the
outset, of the conclusion that God exists. Because God is perfect, He would not
deceive us. (The natural light reveals this.) Hence, what we clearly and distinctly
perceive to be the case must be the case.
Later, in Meditation V, Descartes writes:
[I]f I were ignorant of God, I might come to doubt [the] truth [of a
mathematical theorem that I have proved] as soon as my attention wandered
from its demonstration, even if I recall having mastered the demonstration
in the past: I could convince myself that I have been so constructed by nature
that I sometimes err about what I believe myself to grasp most plainly ... But
now I understand that God exists, ... and that He’s not a deceiver. From this
I infer that everything I clearly and distinctly grasp must be true. ... I can’t err
about what I clearly and distinctly understand. ... Thus ... the certainty of all
my knowledge derives from my knowledge of the true God.
Note that the emphasized principle is derived from the existence of God. If, for
Descartes, the following two principles are equivalent:
•
I clearly and distinctly grasp that p
•
the light of nature reveals to me that p
then we have a circular argument from Descartes. For recall the earlier point we
made about how Descartes relies on revelations of the light of nature in order to
prove that God exists.
Problems
1
Regiment clearly the pattern of logical dependencies among important claims
that critics regard as constituting the Cartesian circle.
2
How severe can skepticism about one’s erstwhile beliefs be, without incurring
a charge of logical or conceptual irrationality?
3
Why was Descartes concerned to establish the existence of God a priori, before
allaying his radical doubts?
4
Put yourself imaginatively into Descartes’s predicament of being beset with
radical doubt about at least all of your erstwhile empirical beliefs. Suppose, for

284
Mind, Body and External World
the sake of argument, that not only do you not believe that God exists, but
that you are, moreover, convinced that you will never be persuaded to believe
that God exists. In what way might you alleviate, mitigate, or overcome your
radical doubt about your erstwhile empirical beliefs?
5
Is it metaphysically possible for a disembodied Cartesian soul to so much as
form any purportedly empirical beliefs, even if only ones that are false?
6
Could a disembodied Cartesian soul entertain any geometrical thoughts about
the structure of two- or higher-dimensional space?

21 Problems about Mind
What must any solution to the mind–body problem account for?
The mental realm is generally agreed to consist of the goings-on inside a
person’s head: mainly, the brain and important parts of the central nervous
system. These goings-on are variously called events, states, processes, phenomena,
occurrences. There are also more enduring systemic conditions called dispositions.
These are tendencies to behave in certain ways when certain triggering
conditions are met.
We have purposely avoided using the word ‘mental’ in the previous paragraph,
except as its second word. Please re-read that paragraph now. Then consider this:
these goings-on could be physical goings-on; or they could be mental goings-on.
Indeed, the main thesis of philosophical materialism is that the same goings-on are
both mental and physical. Thus every mental event, state, process, phenomenon,
or occurrence is a physical event, state, process, phenomenon, or occurrence.
(This is the ‘is’ of identity, or of what is – sometimes a little misleadingly – called
‘numerical identity’.)
But the converse generalization need not hold. That is, it need not be the case
that every physical event, state, process, phenomenon, or occurrence is a mental
event, state, process, phenomenon, or occurrence. Indeed, it is rather obviously
not the case. Not even every physical event, state, process, phenomenon, or
occurrence within a human body is a mental event, state, process, phenomenon,
or occurrence. Think of perspiration, or excretion, or osteoporosis.
Moreover, the mental aspects of a physical system are ﬁxed by its physical
aspects: there can be no change in one’s mental states without some underlying
change in one’s physical states. Philosophers call this the supervenience of the
mental on the physical. We discussed it in §14.2. Supervenience does not mean
that determinism is true (i.e., that the future is determined by the past and the
present). Rather, it means that, at any given time, mental reality is determined
by how things are, physically, at that time.
Obviously there are going to be many physical goings-on even in one’s head that
would not count as mental goings-on. Accumulation of phlegm in one’s sinuses
is just one example of a physical going-on in one’s head that is highly unlikely to
be a mental going-on. (Although sometimes, given the sluggish nature of some
people’s thoughts, one wonders ...)

286
Mind, Body and External World
The philosophical materialist invites one to view the mental not as a thing,
namely a mind, interacting with the body (or brain); but rather as a system,
or functioning assemblage, of mental goings-on. These take place in the brain,
and indeed are physical goings-on. These physical goings-on, however, also
enjoy a mental aspect. Bodies, when animated, remain completely physical. Thus
the philosophical materialist replaces Descartes’s entity dualism with an entity
monism in combination with a dualism about aspects (or features, or qualities, or
properties, or attributes) of physical things.
When discussing the phenomenon of mind, we can start with our own
case – the human condition. Alternatively, we can try to think in much
more general terms. We can conceive of the possibility that features of human
mentality might be present (in varying forms) in other terrestrial species, even if
not all of them are co-present.
For example, a rodent might have visual impressions even if it has no reﬂective
self-awareness. A snake might be able to experience something like fear, even
if it could never be guilty of premeditated deceit. A beetle might have a
‘sense of balance’ (a proprioceptive sense), even if it never thinks about the
three-dimensionality of space. The ethologist Konrad Lorenz famously claimed
that the water-shrew has a somewhat deﬁcient conception of physical space. He
found that a water-shrew would never catch on to the fact that if it could get
from A to B and then from B to C, then there might be a shorter and more direct
way from A to C than going via B. Nevertheless, the water-shrew makes do with
whatever impoverished spatial conceptual scheme its little brain affords.
The suggestion is that we can ‘decompose’ mentality into separate compo-
nents. We can conceive of the possibility that different species might have just
some of them; or perhaps all of them, but to lesser degrees. They may even have
some of them to a much higher degree than we do – think of a dog’s sense of
smell, compared with ours, or the visual acuity of an eagle.
There is also the distinct possibility that other species have modes of awareness
that would be quite alien to us. As already noted in §4.3, the philosopher
Thomas Nagel advanced the thesis that there are objective facts about radically
different subjective modes of being. He invites us to consider the curious
sense of bat-sonar. This sensory modality of the bat is somewhat like seeing;
but also somewhat like hearing. The bat’s method of echo-location enables
it to map out the arrangement of solid objects (rocks, walls of the cave, tree
stumps, other bats, ﬂying insects ...) in its immediate environment. So it is like
human vision in giving that intellectual awareness of things being ‘out there’ in
three-dimensional space. But the bat does this with soundwaves bouncing back
to its very sensitive ears from those distant objects. So presumably it ‘hears’ their
presence out there. It is difﬁcult for us to form an imaginative conception of what
it might like to be a bat. What would it be like to enjoy sensory impressions
of the echo-locating kind? But, Nagel suggests, we must countenance the
possibility that, for all its inherent inaccessibility (to us human beings, who are
differently constituted), there is a metaphysical fact of the matter as to what it is like
to be a bat.

Problems about Mind
287
This is what the French Existentialist philosophers call être-pour-soi – being-for-
itself. Conscious existence can be a matter of mere primitive sentience, with very
little intellectual processing; or it can be highly self-reﬂective, like a Cartesian
mind engaged in the thought ‘Cogito, ergo sum’. The tiny paramecium, waving
its ﬂagella in swampy water in search of shoals with just the right alkalinity,
might be possessed of felt states with the sensory content ‘Too acidic here!’,
‘Too alkaline here!’, and ‘Just right here!’. Of course, the paramecium will not
have any chemical concept of acidity and alkalinity. Instead, it will have, we are
suggesting, something like a burning or a soothing sensation, that will induce it
to paddle along to get relief, or to stay put to enjoy being soothed. Of course,
we are the ones who deploy the scientiﬁc concepts in order to explain why they
behave the way they do, and what features of the water they are sensitive to.
No matter how primitive or advanced – no matter how low or high in the
phylogenetic tree of biological being – mental states will no doubt come paired
in two complementary kinds. There will be belief-like states; and there will be
desire-like states. Desires provide the motivation for action; beliefs guide one’s
action. To stop desiring something (which is often, itself, highly desirable) one
needs to be able to form the belief that the state of affairs obtains that would
satisfy that desire. As the philosopher John Searle puts it, belief involves a
mind-to-world ﬁt, and depends, crucially, on sensory perception; while desire
involves a world-to-mind ﬁt, prompting actions intended to change the world so
that it will better ﬁt the mind’s conception of how it would like the world to be.
Every species with a behavioral repertoire complicated enough to invite
mentalistic description will have some kind of sensory apparatus, coupled with
some kind of percept- or belief-forming mechanism. Likewise, it will have some
kind of appetitive structure. Desire for food, desire for sex, desire for social status,
etc., motivate individual creatures to ‘keep on the go’. The resulting behavior
will tend to improve each individual’s chances of reproductive success.
The sensory apparatus will give rise to perceptual representations of the way
the outside world is, in ways salient to the species’ concerns. The most important
things it needs to ‘register’, perceptually, are potential prey, potential mates,
kin, potential foes, potential predators, and inanimate environmental resources
or conditions important to its survival. One could expect early evolutionary
pressures for development of both perceptual and cognitive mechanisms. Those
creatures would ﬂourish who were best able to translate sensory stimuli (in the
various modalities the species possesses) into effective representations of the
salient objects, events, and causal processes in the creatures’ environment.
Likewise, as any species’ habitat becomes more complicated, one would expect
the motivational states to become more differentiated. One would expect the
capacity for different kinds of emotions to evolve. The different emotions like fear,
jealousy, rage, resentment, lust, affection, love, hate, sympathy, and pity all have
their place in a well-functioning, inner mental ecology. (‘Well-functioning’ is
used here from the evolutionary point of view. This stresses the constant struggle
to leave behind as many successful offspring as possible. Obviously this is not the
point of view of the Christian or Buddhist monk or nun who has taken a vow of

288
Mind, Body and External World
celibacy, and who seeks to purify his or her soul of all the ‘negative’ emotions just
listed.)
The fundamental constrast between belief and desire is marked, terminolog-
ically, in various other ways: cognitive/affective; representational/motivational
etc. There must be an evolutionary story to tell about each side of the divide
in question. Mind is Life’s evolved answer to the two questions ‘How do we
ﬁnd the world to be?’ and ‘How would we like the world to be?’. Even the most
cranial geek has to take a break to eat now and again; and even the most lustful
gourmand has to have an eye for the dish of the day. One cannot have beliefs
without having desires; and one cannot have desires without having beliefs. Call
this the Principle of Analytic Equilibrium for belief and desire.
In the dim theater of incipient perceptual awareness, our earliest ancestors
started to keep track of their surroundings. Primitive sensory channels became
more sophisticated as a result of aeons of natural selection. Evolutionists tell of
sixteen different lines of descent of a complex, functioning eye from a single
light-sensitive cell. When ‘parallel’ evolution happens like this, we know that
tremendous selective advantage must be conferred by the developing organ
in question. Perceptual representations become, under the pressure of natural
selection, richer, ﬁner-grained and more informative.
We human beings (and no doubt other species) have in this way come
to enjoy qualia. Philosophers also call these sense-data. Think of a quale
as a relatively atomic piece of sensory information about a small region
of some sensory ﬁeld. Examples: red-patch-here-now; tone-of-middle-C-now;
pin-prick-on-tip-of-right-index-ﬁnger-now. Somehow the mind/brain integrates
such qualia, holistically, into informative and life-preserving representations of
what things are doing what, and how, all around us.
Within social groups of creatures, brains have developed highly task-speciﬁc
capacities such as individual face-recognition, and memory for biographical
details. (Someone who has cheated you in the past is likely to cheat you again; so,
best to remember his face and what he did to you, so as not to be duped again in
the future.) It is in the context of social living that some of our most complicated
cerebral functioning in all likelihood arose. Examples:
•
the capacity to detect deception from observable behavior;
•
the ability to attribute states of belief and desire to conspeciﬁcs (so as to be
able to predict their future behavior);
•
the ability to bear lasting grudges, as well as lasting debts of gratitude.
Both cognitive and emotional differentiation and ﬁne-tuning would have
received an enormous boost from the exigencies of social life. Acute observers
ﬁnd evidence for this claim even in the behavior of rats and chimpanzees.
So we have, in some sort of ascending evolutionary order:
•
modality-speciﬁc sentience, both endogenous (e.g., nausea) and exogenous
(e.g., burning sensation all over);

Problems about Mind
289
•
more localized qualia (e.g., bright-red-patch-here-now; sickening-pong-just-
below-my-nose-right-now; stabbing-pain-in-my-right-hoof);
•
modality-integrating percepts, involving categorization of objects (offspring-
of-mine-at-my-knee-now; hairy-predator-in-tree-over-there-now);
•
singular causal beliefs about interactions of objects (lion-ate-mom; bee-
stung-hand; eating-caterpillar-made-me-feel-yuck);
•
low-level generalized beliefs about causal powers (beware-of-lions; stinky-
water-bad-to-drink; get-sex-more-easily-if-offer-fresh-kill);
•
high-level hypotheses (all bodies attract one another with a force propor-
tional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square
of the distance between them).
We see this last stage as involving quite a jump. In terms of evolutionary
development, however, it is but the tiniest step. (One small step for the primates,
one huge step for mankind?) Much more groundwork had to be laid at the
neurogenetic level in order to get any species to even the second-to-last stage
listed above.
Most importantly, thought had to acquire its mysterious property of ‘about-
ness’. Singular terms (like proper names, for example) have to refer to their
bearers. How does the mind direct its attention-in-thought to an object by means
of a symbol standing for it? This is known as the problem of intentionality. All the
stages except the last one involved examples of hyphenated representations. The
tacit suggestion was that these would be ‘internal tokenings’ on the creature’s
part, in some inner ‘language of thought’, along lines suggested by the philosopher
Jerry Fodor (b. 1935). (See Fodor (1975).) The problem of intentionality arises
already for the language of thought. How do tokenings-in-the-brain of symbols
in the language of thought manage to refer to things outside the head? Even if
we could supply a satisfactory answer to this question, there would still be some
way to go in order to handle the phenomenon of natural language. We would still
need to give an account of how an external code of public communication could have
evolved. How did human beings come to acquire their incredibly complicated
spoken languages, complete with recursive grammars that provide for inﬁnitely
many well-formed utterances that we have never heard before, but understand
with ease?
There are many naturalistic suggestions as to how this might have come to
pass, but to enter into any of them would be too much of a digression here.
The main point is: public languages presumably somehow ‘piggy-backed’ off
some already pretty sophisticated cognitive apparatus. This apparatus would
already be in place for representing, in private thought, how things were in
the world, and especially how one’s fellow creatures were geared to behave
towards one. A strong case can be made that public language could have
entered the evolutionary arena only in the hands or mouths of creatures able
to discern one another’s intentions from their observable behavior. To be able
to do that, they would already need a sophisticated perceptual and conceptual
apparatus.

290
Mind, Body and External World
All the aforementioned stages involve only the cognitive side. We must not
lose sight of the fact (according to our Principle of Analytic Equilibrium) that
the affective side would be developing as well. We have been assuming the
evolution of increasingly complex and (presumably) accurate representations
of the way the objective world happens to be. Each species will be in the
grip of its own enforced modes of subjectivity, arising from the peculiar
means they have of sensing their environment. Ecologically-minded theorists
talk of the ‘affordances’ enjoyed by creatures of a given kind, as they sense
the world after their own peculiar fashion – ordinary vision, infra-red vision,
ultraviolet-vision, echo-location, water-borne electromagnetic emanations, or
what have you. (See Gibson (1977).) But all individual organisms, of every
species, are striving, as it were, to track accurately what is actually going on
around them: the main players, and the main plays, on their little bit of turf in the
evolutionary arena.
Here, we want to say, the facts are objective and in principle knowable. They
do not depend on the ‘inner subjectivity’ of any species’ modes of sensing.
This is where the ability to categorize comes in. When categorizing objects, an
intelligent system will be integrating the sensory information it receives from
its various sensory channels, and forming a uniﬁed representation of whatever
is the current focus of its attention. In this way, the mind tries to break free
from, or transcend, its own modality-imposed subjectivity. This is the great
Kantian problem of how we move from the deliverances of our sensibility to
objective knowledge of an external world. Kant’s own suggestion was that we do so
by applying categories, or concepts of the understanding (speciﬁcally: the concepts
of substance and of causation) to the manifold of apperception – this being the
(English translation of) his fancy German term for something like ‘ﬁeld of
spatio-temporally organized sensations’.
What we have been sketching above is a sort of ‘naturalized’ version of Kant’s
account. (Kant of course was not himself a naturalist in the current philosophical
sense.) The main challenge to the naturalizer, however, is to explain why any
of these cognitive states – ranging from detection of acidity, say, through to
beliefs in causal regularities – need involve conscious awareness of any kind.
Why couldn’t the evolving systems simply be devoid of consciousness? Does
consciousness itself – hence, whatever physical substrates might give rise to
it – have any selective advantage for the creature possessed of it? What is the
function, if any, of consciousness? How and why do the ‘mentalistic aspects’ of our
brains’ inner workings intrude themselves upon the merely physical aspects? Why
(or to what end, if there is one) do we have consciousness at all? Is consciousness
just an inevitable metaphysical spin-off of a certain level of self-organizing
complexity within a neural network? Or does it contribute something to the
functioning of the system over and above the physical happenings that give
rise to consciousness? To those skeptics who think that consciousness cannot
add anything to the physical story, and that it must be ‘mere epiphenomenal
fog’, one can pose two pointed questions: Why is pain awful? Why is
orgasm fantastic? And the follow-up question: Would zombies be as good at

Problems about Mind
291
self-preservation and self-propagation as those who can experience both pain and
orgasm?
We sense the world in various ways. And there is something that it is like to
be a locus of consciousness capable of this sensing. We integrate our various
kinds of sensory information, to form stable, objective representations of things
in the world. These representations involve the use of concepts, both to classify
things and to track their causal interactions; and the use of referential devices
that latch thoughts onto the objects they are about. The more we can learn
about reliable regularities in the behavior of different kinds of things, the better
off we are.
An important class of things whose workings we need to track and understand
are our fellow human beings. We can ‘read off’ from their external behavior a
great deal as to what their mental states might be. But we also have a wonderful
instrument for ﬁne-tuning our attributions of mental states: we have language. We
can ask one another how we think and feel about things. Language can be used
to express belief, to manifest emotion, and to avow intentions: to inform or to
lie, to woo or to warn, to promise or to threaten. Language can also be used to
reason, to theorize, to hypothesize, to run ‘what if ...?’ thought-experiments. Its
sentences come equipped with a logic that tells one how one is permitted to infer
conclusions from premises, and what one ought to acknowledge as a consequence
of what one says. These notions of (logical) permission and obligation are
normative. And it is a great challenge for any naturalistic account to explain how
norms can arise from the workings of material things (such as the neurons in
our brains).
Beliefs and desires are called propositional attitudes. If I see wet ground, I form
the belief (i.e., the attitude of belief involving the present-tensed proposition) it
is raining. If I see cracked, parched earth, I form the desire (i.e., the attitude of
desire involving the future-tensed proposition) that it rain. Of course, I can’t do
much to bring it about that it rains. Long ago, I might have sacriﬁced a virgin,
but we have now come to accept that doing so doesn’t seem to have the desired
effect on barometric pressure. So let us try a different example.
I see the bare inside of my refrigerator, and I form the belief that I have no
food. I feel my stomach rumbling, I feel that light-headedness that comes from
a blood-sugar drop, and I form the desire that I have some food. (I am weird;
I don’t feel hunger-pangs. I just have my own ways of forming the desire that I
have food.) So I intentionally go out to get food. This new intention-state in
turn engages other beliefs and desires. I believe there is a supermarket around
the corner, open for business, and that I have my wallet with me. I guess I
also have the desire not to be incarcerated for simply making off with the food
without paying; so I tender cash at the register. Note also that other beliefs
and desires might well have been involved (however implicitly, habitually and
subconsciously) in my not stopping, on the way to the supermarket, to decapitate
and cannibalize the ﬁrst passer-by.
The point of all this is that we are guided, or driven, or led along, in
our daily routines by all manner of tacit beliefs and desires, with contents

292
Mind, Body and External World
ranging from the sensory through the perceptual to the conceptual and the
ethical. We are immensely complicated intentional systems. An intentional
system is one basically capable of beliefs and desires, in consequence of various
pairings of which there arise intentional actions. When we interpret someone’s
actions, seeking to make their behavior intelligible, we try to work out what
beliefs and desires can reasonably be imputed to them, on the basis of what
we might know about their own sources of perceptual evidence, testimony
of others, etc., and their own needs, addictions, deprivations, idiosyncratic
preferences, etc. We try to map out both their cognitive and their appetitive
structures, in an effort to explain, understand and predict their behavior as
intentional systems. Dennett (1989) describes this as taking the intentional
stance. Earlier, Wittgenstein had called it eine Einstellung zur Seele (roughly: the
attitude appropriate for dealing with a soul). Davidson (1973) called it radical
interpretation.
Human beings are not the only creatures deserving to be treated as intentional
systems. Many others have been so, with marked success: rats, chimpanzees,
baboons, dolphins, elephants, crows, to name but a few. The natural-
ist has no reason to be stingy with intentional attributions. (See Routley
(1981).) But at the same time we need to apply Occam’s Razor, and not
over-hypothesize mental states when the behavior of the creatures concerned
does not really call for it. We must also think carefully before adopting
the intentional stance towards thermostats; heat-seeking missiles; and ants.
But what about robots? And what about extra-terrestrial life forms? (But let
us not get too excited about the possibility of communicating with these:
see Tennant (1993).)
The tremendous efﬁcacy of intentional explanation, even if only of human
behavior, provokes the pressing question: What is the relationship between
intentional explanations of behavior and the non-intentional explanations that one
would be able to give within some completed physical science? It does not matter
that current physical science is not up to the task. We can still imagine future
developments of present science which might be. These future developments
would involve only explanations in terms of efﬁcient causation, and would reveal
the complex details of the internal mechanisms giving rise to the overall behavior
in question. If we but had such a neurophysiological explanation, say, of a given
stretch of human behavior, what would its relation be to the usual intentional
explanations of the same behavior?
There are various options in response to this question. Some, like Paul
and Patricia Churchland, say we should eliminate intentional explanations,
and make do just with scientiﬁc theorizing about the brain. (See Church-
land (1981).) Others, like Donald Davidson, say that intentional explana-
tion is irreducible to physical explanation, and hence sui generis and indis-
pensable. And yet others say that even if intentional explanation were
ultimately reducible to physical explanation, the reduction would be hope-
lessly complex,
and so intentional explanation is practically indispensable.
(See Tennant (1985).)

Problems about Mind
293
Problems
1
Why consciousness? How did it emerge? Does it supervene on some physical
substrate? If so, could there be a science that investigates how it does so?
2
Explain the cognitive/affective distinction; and the analytic equilibrium of
belief and desire.
3
Language is a means to communicate both about the external world and about
one’s own mental states. How might language have evolved?
4
Norms of reasoning have a problematic status in a material world. How and
why, do you think, have they arisen?
5
How does intentional explanation relate to physical explanation? Is inten-
tional explanation reducible to physical explanation? Is it indispensable?

22 Cartesian Dualism v. Logical
Behaviorism
22.1 Cartesian dualism
Descartes’s dualism is a dualism about entities: minds and bodies are distinct
kinds of entities. They form radically different, indeed disjoint, categories. This
metaphysical conclusion Descartes bases on an epistemological consideration, in
Meditation VI: ‘On the existence of material objects and the real distinction of
mind from body’:
I have a clear and distinct idea of myself insofar as I am just a thinking and
unextended thing ... I have a distinct idea of my body insofar as it is just an
extended and unthinking thing. It’s certain, then, that I am really distinct
from my body and can exist without it.
In Meditation IV: ‘On truth and falsity’, he had written:
The mind is just a thinking thing which isn’t extended in length, breadth or
depth and which doesn’t have anything in common with physical objects.
With mind and body thus radically separate, it is no surprise that the Cartesian
tradition offers up the prospects of two types of extreme (by way of philosophical
thought-experiment). First, there is the possibility of zombies: creatures (even
humanoid, if you like) that behave as though they have minds, but do not really
have minds. Zombies are supposed to be devoid of consciousness or awareness;
they have no qualitative experience. They might seem (to us human observers,
if we were to encounter them) to perceive things in their environment, and
act accordingly; but they will have no ‘internal phenomenology’, no conscious
mental states, no visual images, or auditory images, or tactile images, or
after-tastes, or what have you. No afterglow; no rock-butt from sitting for an
hour on a hard bench in a lecture theater. (Maybe this is one good thing about
being a zombie.)
At the other thought-experimental extreme is the disembodied Cartesian mind
(or soul). This is supposedly a locus of pure consciousness, endowed with reason,
but with no sensory access to the external world (if there is one) and with no

Cartesian Dualism v. Logical Behaviorism
295
way of effecting changes in such a world. All it can do is meditate, cogitate, draw
inferences; do mental arithmetic; play mental tic-tac-toe; think about what it
might be like to have a body. Like the zombie, the disembodied Cartesian mind
cannot see, hear, smell, taste, or feel; it has no qualitative sensory experiences.
Unlike the zombie, however, the disembodied Cartesian mind would be able to
think what it might be like to have such experiences.
These two extremes – zombies and disembodied Cartesian souls – invite
consideration as soon as one draws as radical a distinction as Descartes does
between minds and bodies.
Yet even Descartes the dualist conceded
I am very tightly bound to my body, and so ‘mixed up’ with it that we form
a single thing. ... a certain physical object, which I view as belonging to
me in a special way, is related to me more closely than any other. I can’t be
separated from it as I can from other physical objects.
Nevertheless, by way of reinforcing the distinct natures of minds and bodies, the
dualist (call him/her X) claims to know of X’s own mental life by introspection;
whereas X knows of X’s body by (i) internal sensation, (ii) observation and (iii)
conscious control of the course of ‘internal’ sensation and observation.
By way of contrast with this, consider X’s knowledge about any other person Y.
X knows of Y’s body only by observation; and X knows of Y’s mental life via the
Argument by Analogy.
What is the Argument by Analogy? Basically, it is a way of justifying claims
about the mental life of others besides oneself, offered as an answer to the Problem
of Other Minds. It has the overall form of an inference to the best explanation.
Here is how it proceeds.
X can do no better than make problematic inferences from the observed
behavior of Y’s body to Y’s supposed states of mind. These are the states of
mind which, by analogy with X’s own conduct, are supposed to be revealed, or
made manifest, by Y’s behavior. Those mental states will be the causal source of
Y’s behavior. In the ‘ﬁrst-person’ case, X knows of X’s own states of mind very
intimately – by introspection – as the cause of X’s behavior. X also knows some
of X’s states of mind to be caused by external stimuli. But in the ‘third-person’
case, where we are talking of X’s knowledge of the states of mind of some other
person Y, there is not the same ‘ﬁrst-person privileged access’ to the linkage
between mental states and bodily behavior. X can observe only Y’s (outward)
behavior. X has no direct knowledge, ﬁrst hand, of Y’s mental states. Nor has X
(in normal circumstances) any kind of perceptual access to micro-events in Y’s
brain and central nervous system. All that X can rely on (as evidence for Y’s
states of mind) is Y’s publicly observable bodily behavior: gestures, movements,
spoken words, etc. The Arguer by Analogy claims that this behavioral evidence
is enough; from it, X can reasonably and reliably infer to knowledge of Y’s
states of mind.

296
Mind, Body and External World
The Arguer by Analogy agrees that there is no such thing as telepathy. There
is no direct connection between what happens in one mind and what happens
in another. There is no ‘reading of minds’, unmediated by bodily interaction.
There is no way for one person genuinely to experience another person’s pain,
say – despite assurances by an American ex-President to the contrary. When
lovers gaze into each other’s eyes, and think their souls are mingling, they
are simply deluded. The phenomenology of ecstatic embrace is falsidical. The
lovers in mystical spiritual union are still, on this view, actually arguing by
analogy – albeit with the analogy on the brink of homology and the argument
no lover’s quarrel.
What about mind–body interaction?
According to the Cartesian,
these
interactions cannot be introspected. Nor can they be studied in the laboratory.
Why? First, when the mind introspects, it has access only to mental states;
it cannot penetrate beyond the boundary of putative mind–body interaction
so as to yield any knowledge of what is on the bodily side of that interface.
At all performances in the inner theater, the exit doors are closed. Secondly,
when the laboratory experimenter studies a physical system, all that is directly
observable are the physical events, states and processes. Although the Arguer by
Analogy might infer from some of these to the existence of mental states that
explain them, no experiment is going to reveal anything about the nature of
mind–body interaction. At best it can reveal something about the extent of the
physical-evidential basis from which the argument by analogy might proceed.
For the Cartesian, physical existents are in space and time; whereas mental
existents are in time but not in space. What has physical existence is composed of
matter, or is a function of matter; whereas what has mental existence consists of
consciousness or else is a function of consciousness. For the Cartesian, everything
in the mind is accessible to the introspecting gaze. The mind is self-transparent.
It cannot hide anything about itself from itself. It is utterly, and veridically,
reﬂexive.
This assumption or article of faith has been challenged by the school of
Freudian psychoanalysis. Freudians believe that the mind is compartmentalized,
with conscious access limited to a certain zone, while another zone – the
‘subconscious’, or ‘unconscious’ – is inaccessible to introspection. Freudian
theory holds that traumatic memories, or deviant desires that have been
punished, can be ‘repressed’ into the unconscious. They will become unknown
to the conscious, introspecting part of the mind; for it harbors them in
the unconscious, beyond the reach of introspection. These memories and
desires will affect the person’s behavior in perhaps pathological ways. The
person might become a neurotic or a psychotic, propelled by repressed mental
states of which (s)he has no knowledge, and over which (s)he has no
control. The purpose of psychoanalysis is to enable the patient, through
autobiographical monologue, to unearth the causes of such repression in the
distant past; and to bring the repressed mental states to consciousness, where

Cartesian Dualism v. Logical Behaviorism
297
they can be dealt with at long last. There may be catharsis, there may
be cure; there is great controversy over the efﬁcacy of psychoanalysis. (See
Grünbaum (1984).) But at the very least, the Freudians have mounted a strong
challenge to the Cartesian dogma that the mind is a full-length mirror unto
itself.
By the time of the Second World War, advances in science generally, and
especially in psychology and medicine, along with wider cultural acceptance
of Freudian vocabulary, had induced critical strain on the Cartesian concept
of mind. It was being eroded on all sides by discoveries about the material
basis of mental processes. Ryle’s great achievement, in his book The Concept
of Mind (Ryle (1949)), was to offer a re-conceptualization of mind itself. First,
he launched a scathing critique of Descartes’s dualism, which he called the
Ofﬁcial View. Secondly, he articulated an alternative view, which has come to
be known as Logical (or Analytical) Behaviorism. In §22.2 we look at Ryle’s critique
of Descartes. In §22.3 we look at Ryle’s Logical Behaviorism.
22.2 Ryle’s critique of Cartesian dualism
We began the last section with the claim
Descartes’s dualism is a dualism about entities: minds and bodies are distinct
kinds of entities. They form radically different categories.
While that is true,
these radically different categories are nevertheless
sub-categories of a yet wider category: that of entity with causal powers. In The
Concept of Mind, Ryle claims that this is Descartes’s crucial error. He calls it a
category mistake. According to Ryle, Descartes fundamentally misapprehends the
nature of mind by treating minds as entities that causally interact with bodies.
But, says Ryle, minds do not belong to the category of ‘causal agent’, or ‘entity
with causal powers’. Indeed, minds are not entities at all. We have to reconstrue
or reconceptualize the mental, so that we can arrive at a better understanding
of mental phenomena, mental states, mental events, mental processes, mental
faculties, etc.; and, hopefully, arrive at a theory about mind that is closer to the
truth than Cartesian dualism.
Before we can say what minds are, then, for Ryle, we need to explain his notion
of a category mistake.
22.2.1 Category mistakes
The best way to do this is to list Ryle’s own examples of such mistakes. In the
following table, each row represents a different category mistake. The mistake
consists in assimilating the item in the second column to those in the ﬁrst
column. The mistake lies in not appreciating how the items in the second column

298
Mind, Body and External World
are constituted by the items in the ﬁrst column, or are abstract constructions out
of them, or arise out of their organization or co-functioning.
Christ Church, Bodleian Library, Ashmolean Museum ...
The University of Oxford
Battalions, batteries, squadrons
The Division
Bowlers, batsmen, ﬁelders, umpires, scorers
Team spirit
Home Ofﬁce, Church of England, Ministry of Defence ...
The British Constitution
John Doe, Richard Roe ...
The Average Taxpayer
A left-hand glove, a right-hand glove
The pair of gloves
Armed now with the notion of a category mistake, we can understand
Ryle’s criticism of Descartes more fully: the Ofﬁcial Doctrine, says Ryle, is a
philosopher’s myth, the dogma of the Ghost in the Machine. It is generated by ‘a
family of radical category mistakes’.
Here is what Ryle says:
•
Descartes had mistaken the logic of his problem. Instead of asking by what
criteria intelligent [i.e., mind-driven] behavior is actually distinguished from
non-intelligent [mindless] behavior, he asked ‘Given that the principle of
mechanical causation does not tell us the difference, what other causal
principle will tell it us?’
•
The belief that there is a polar opposition between Mind and Matter is
the belief that they are terms of the same logical type. [By which one can
understand Ryle to mean something like ‘terms for entities that can causally
interact’ – NT.]
•
Both Idealism and Materialism are answers to an improper question. The
‘reduction’ of the material world to mental states and processes, as well as the
‘reduction’ of mental states and processes to physical states and processes,
presuppose the legitimacy of the disjunction ‘Either there exist minds or
there exist bodies (but not both)’.
•
It is perfectly proper to say, in one logical tone of voice, that there exist
minds and to say, in another logical tone of voice, that there exist bodies.
The origin of the category mistake in Descartes’s thinking is to be found in
two conﬂicting motives: to explain the workings of the mind; but to do so without
making the mental a variety of the mechanical. Ryle wrote:
The differences between the physical and the mental were ... represented as
differences inside the common framework of the categories of ‘thing’, ‘stuff’,
‘attribute’, ‘stage’, ‘process’, ‘change’, ‘cause’ and ‘effect’.... [T]he repudiators
of mechanism represented minds as extra centers of causal processes, rather
like machines but also considerably different from them. Their theory was
a paramechanical hypothesis. Minds are not bits of clockwork, they are just
bits of not-clockwork.

Cartesian Dualism v. Logical Behaviorism
299
According to Ryle, there are three ensuing difﬁculties for this view:
1
how to account for Freedom of the Will;
2
how to recognize the differences between rational and irrational utterances,
and between automatic and purposive behavior;
3
how to correlate overt behavior with mental powers and processes.
None of these difﬁculties can be overcome by Cartesian dualism; so, as Ryle was
one of the ﬁrst to argue, we need to fashion a different concept of mind.
22.2.2 Invoking supervenience
We have seen that Philosophical Materialism asserts the thesis of supervenience:
that the mental facts are ﬁxed by the physical facts. As it happens, the thesis
of supervenience was originally formulated in the context of moral philosophy,
ﬁnding its ﬁrst clear formulation in Moore (1922), at p. 261 (but without
using the word ‘supervenience’) and Hare (1952), at pp. 80–81 (using the word
‘supervenient’, which was in the air in Oxford at the time).
In his re-fashioning of the concept of mind, Ryle did not go so far as to
formulate supervenience explicitly as an underlying metaphysical principle. It
is reasonable to suppose, though, that if Ryle had been presented with the thesis
of supervenience for consideration, he would have assented to it.
In the twentieth century, two of the most inﬂuential forms of Philosophical
Materialism were Ryle’s Logical Behaviorism, and Putnam’s Functionalism. We
close this chapter with an explanation of how Logical Behaviorism sought to
construe the nature of mental states and processes; and with some criticisms of
Ryle’s own position. Chapter 24 is devoted to Functionalism.
22.3 Ryle’s Logical Behaviorism
22.3.1 Dispositional properties
A disposition is a tendency to behave in a certain way in speciﬁed circumstances.
For example, solubility (in water) is a dispositional property of sugar. Given any
piece of sugar X, one can say:
If X were to be placed in water, then (all other things being equal) X would
dissolve.
This kind of statement is called a subjunctive conditional. This is because it is
of conditional form, namely of the form ‘if P then Q’; and its antecedent P is
supposed to be unfulﬁlled at the time the statement is made.
The rider ‘(all other things being equal)’ is called a ceteris paribus clause
(because that is what the Latin words mean). The clause is put in to cover

300
Mind, Body and External World
oneself against the possibility of an interfering condition that may thwart one’s
expectation. For example, the lump of sugar should not have been covered
with a coat of varnish. Philosophers are good at thinking up all manner of
thwarting conditions, which are impossible to rule out explicitly when framing
the subjunctive conditional.
We could go even further, and strengthen the subjunctive conditional to a
counterfactual conditional, by saying:
If X had been placed in water (which it has not), then (once again, ceteris
paribus) X would have dissolved.
The solubility of X makes this counterfactual conditional true. The solubility of
X also makes the following explanatory exchange satisfactory:
Q: Why did X dissolve when I placed it in the water?
A: Because X was a lump of sugar, and sugar is soluble in water (that is, dissolving
in water is the characteristic behavior of sugar). And there were no thwarting
conditions to prevent the expected manifestation, in these conditions, of the
sugar’s solubility.
It is of course usually taken for granted that a further story needs to be told
about the micro-constitution of sugar, and how and why sugar molecules are
made to separate from one another by molecules of water. This is called
ﬁnding the categorical basis for the disposition in question. When in a given
‘higher-level special science’ like organic chemistry one speciﬁes a dispositional
property of something, one almost always has recourse to a ‘lower-level science’
like physics for the speciﬁcation of the categorical basis of that dispositional
property.
Science is full of dispositional talk. Having mass, being magnetic, having a cer-
tain modulus of elasticity, being a good conductor of heat or of electricity – these
are all dispositional properties. So are: having 20/20 vision; having high blood
pressure; being autistic; being a miser. As an exercise, you should think up what
the respective test conditions would be for each of these, and what the ensuing
‘manifesting behavior’ of the substance or individual in question would be.
So: a dispositional property of an object X is a property of X in virtue of which
under certain conditions C, the object X will behave in manner B. We call C the
test conditions, and we call B the manifesting behavior.
22.3.2 Dispositional analyses of mental states
How does this bear on the mind–body problem? In a nutshell: because the logical
behaviorist offers a dispositional analysis of what it is for a particular person (say X)

Cartesian Dualism v. Logical Behaviorism
301
to be in a particular mental state (say M). The general template for such an
analysis is:
X is in state of mind M
if and only if
in the various circumstances C1, C2, ..., Cn, ...,
X tends to behave
in the respective ways B1, B2, ..., Bn, ....
The idea is that attributing mental states to people is a matter of trying to say,
in some shorthand way, that they are disposed to behave in such-and-such ways
when placed in such-and-such circumstances.
All this makes being in a mental state look suspiciously like having the
property of solubility. You specify certain conditions, you specify the manifesting
behavior to be expected in those conditions, and the job is done.
22.4 Criticisms of Logical Behaviorism
But it’s not as simple as that; and, even though more complex, it makes an
extraordinarily simplifying claim about the metaphysical nature of mind.
First, on the matter of the dispositions in question not being simple: notice
that we have provided, in the case of a single mental state M, for a potentially
inﬁnite spectrum C1,C2,...,Cn,... of different kinds of test conditions, and for
a correspondingly potentially inﬁnite spectrum B1,B2,...,Bn,... of behavioral
manifestations. Why do we do this? Because a moment’s reﬂection convinces us
that a given mental state M can be ‘inﬁnitely various’ in the ways it can disclose
itself in human behavior. Being in a state of belief-that-P – for example, believing
that it is raining – is not a straightforward matter. There is no single dispositive
test of whether a person believes that P, the way there is for ﬁnding out whether a
lump of white stuff is soluble in water. In the latter case, we would simply immerse
the lump in water and wait a while to see whether it dissolved. If it did, we’d say
it was soluble; if not, we’d say it wasn’t soluble. And that would be dispositive.
But being in a mental state – even one as simple as believing that it is
raining – is not that straightforward. This is because so much depends on what
other mental states one is in at the time. John believes that it is raining. John is
quite a predictable fellow. If he goes outside (C1), he will take his umbrella (B1).
If he is asked ‘John, is it raining?’ (C2), he will answer ‘Yes’ (B2).
But now consider Jake, who is not quite a psychopath, but who has problems.
Jake too believes that it is raining. But he thinks, for whatever reason, that it will
seem ultra-cool to the girl on whom he has a crush if he ventures out without
his umbrella, and arrives bedraggled at his next class. He is also full of disdain for
naïve questioners, so, when asked ‘Jake, is it raining?’ he lies, and says ‘No, it’s
sunny outside’.
Now consider Jech, a recently arrived immigrant who is struggling with
English, and is too poor to afford an umbrella, and too proud to acknowledge

302
Mind, Body and External World
that getting wet discomﬁts him. Jech too believes it is raining. And Jech has to
go outside. So he simply walks, just as he would were it sunny instead. And, if
asked whether it is raining, he smiles politely and offers the only English sentence
he knows, with the use of which he was trained by a malicious immigration
ofﬁcial on arrival: ‘I am sorry, I do not have enough information at my disposal;
but I assure you that I take your question seriously.’ This utterance comes
out in a slightly labored, halting way, but is complicated enough to convince
listeners that he is reasonably ﬂuent in English, and it leaves them completely
befuddled.
So much for the ease with which we thought we could specify test conditions
and manifesting behavior, even in the case of a belief as simple as that it is raining.
Given the potentially inﬁnite variety of test-conditions C1,C2,...,Cn,...,
and the corresponding variety B1,B2,...,Bn,... of manifesting behaviors, the
dispositional theorist of mental states could follow the time-honored strategy, in
the special sciences, of plumping for the relatively few conditions that account
for most of the variance. That is what we did above, in focusing on the pairs
(C1,B1) and (C2,B2) with the normal fellow John. We naïvely think that having
beliefs amounts, roughly, to being disposed to behave in some canonically criterial,
non-linguistic way in some canonically criterial, non-linguistic condition, and to
being disposed also to behave in some canonically criterial, linguistic way to some
canonically criterial, linguistic condition. Respectively: taking one’s umbrella when
going outside; and answering afﬁrmatively when asked whether it is raining.
Our examples of John, Jake and Jech should, however, succeed in showing that
this is a pipe dream. There is no way to ‘nail down’, in an explicit ‘if and only if’
form, everything that ﬂows from one’s being in a given state of belief. We have
seen that the manifesting behavior depends too crucially on what other beliefs
one has, on what desires one has, and on what meanings one associates with what
strings of sounds.
This is known as the Problem of Holism, and it is fatal for any form of
dispositional analysis of the kind proposed by Ryle.
But it is worth reﬂecting for a moment on the metaphysical possibilities
that Ryle’s proposal opened up, which are still being pursued by contemporary
philosophers of mind.
1
‘The mind’ is not a thing. Having a mind, or being possessed-of-a-mind, is a
matter of being in many different kinds of mental state, each to be construed
as a complicated dispositional property.
2
If the dispositional analysis were to succeed, we would have, in principle, a
way of reducing talk of the mental to talk of the physical-behavioral.
3
Consciousness would be analyzed mainly in terms of dispositions to say
appropriate things and otherwise react in appropriate ways to various stimuli.
The importance of an intensely ﬁrst-person, phenomenological understanding
of consciousness would give way to a more third-person construal of the public
criteria by means of which we warrant our assertions that a given person or
creature is conscious.

Cartesian Dualism v. Logical Behaviorism
303
4
The ‘evolution of mind’ becomes a chapter of evolutionary ethology: acquiring
a mind is a matter, across evolutionary time, of coming to be able to behave
in increasingly ﬁne-tuned ways in response to challenging circumstances.
So we see that there is some progress toward answering some of the important
questions posed at the end of Chapter 21. Even if Logical Behaviorism does not
answer all of those questions satisfactorily, it at least gets one out of the Cartesian
‘mind-set’, and into a new way of conceptualizing mind itself. And that is no
mean achievement.
Problems
1
Explain the holism of the mental, and why it poses a problem for Logical
Behaviorism.
2
Mass in physics is deﬁned in terms of a body’s tendency to accelerate at a
certain rate when a force of a particular magnitude is applied to it. So mass
is a dispositional notion. Might every basic property postulated in Science
be dispositional? What, if so, makes a dispositional theory of mind at all
distinctive?
3
Might there be scientiﬁc strides to be made by abandoning a ﬁrst-person
perspective on the mind, which is based on introspection, and adopting
instead a third-person perspective that can investigate structures, states,
processes, and mechanisms that are inaccessible to the person whose mind
is being studied?
4
How did Freud’s theory of mind clash with Descartes’s theory?
5
How do emotions differ from thoughts? Could there be minds without
emotions?
6
How
does
Logical
Behaviorism
improve
(if
at
all)
upon
ordinary
‘folk-psychology’, in offering useful predictons about human behavior?

23 Materialism and Supervenience
23.1 The gradual emergence of Materialism about mind
The main divide among various philosophical attempts to solve the mind–body
problem is the one that has ﬁnally emerged between dualists and materialists.
Dualism was the default position for almost all thinkers in an age of widespread
religious convictions, well into the nineteenth century (which was why Ryle
was able to refer to it as the Ofﬁcial View). They were inclined to believe
that minds (or souls) were somehow supernatural, somehow beyond the reach of
natural science. Human beings were thought to be somehow special, and set apart
from the rest of the animal kingdom. That all changed with the publication of
Darwin (1859), as explained in §2.1. For the ﬁrst time a credible alternative and
naturalist account was on offer, as to how we human beings could be understood
to be part of the natural order. Darwinism made it possible for us to view our
own kind as just one more social-living species within the animal kingdom,
even if, admittedly, we are singularly and exceptionally well endowed in
certain respects (innate mastery of recursively structured languages not the least
of these).
Still, it took some time for the full philosophical implications of Darwin’s
theory of evolution to sink in. Educated lay persons did not become gung-ho
materialists overnight. Even in the 1870s, when the famous Ignorabimusstreit
broke out in continental Europe and across the Channel in England, some of
the most inﬂuential philosophically minded physiologists involved, such as Emil
du Bois-Reymond (1818–96) and Thomas Huxley (1825–95), were pessimistic
about the prospects of science revealing how consciousness might emerge from
the workings of mere matter. This was one of du Bois-Reymond’s famous (or
notorious) allegedly insoluble Welträthsel (cosmic riddles). His list of seven
riddles, and his Latin slogan Ignorabimus (We shall not know), set the agenda for
the late nineteenth-century debate about possible limits, in principle, to science
itself. (See du Bois-Reymond (1898).) The sea-change against dualism began
a little later, as we have already seen, with Ryle’s Logical Behaviorism. After
Ryle, the critical turning point for analytical philosophers of mind was the pair of
now-classic papers Place (1956) and Smart (1959), by the Australian materialists
Ullin Place (1924–2000) and Jack Smart (1920–2012).

Materialism and Supervenience
305
A materialist holds that every mental event, state or process is to be identiﬁed
(metaphysically) with some physical (or ‘material’) event, state or process in the
brain and/or central nervous system. So there is nothing more to having a mind,
and a mental life, than having a brain and central nervous system that operate in
a suitably complex way. For the materialist, a particular state of the brain and/or
central nervous system that is being identiﬁed with a given mental state has two
different aspects – a physical one, and a mental one. The physical aspects fall
under the purview of the appropriate branch of natural science – in this case,
neuroscience.
The mental aspects, too, may be studied scientiﬁcally, as happens with
cognitive and social psychology; but they also fall under the purview of our
common-sense ‘folk theory of mind’, which views human beings as intentional
(and rational) agents. An agent is a being who is capable of perceiving things and
events in its environment; who forms beliefs about the external world on the basis
of those perceptions; who has various desires to fulﬁll (many or most of them
related to the project of survival and reproduction); and who accordingly makes
choices and decisions and performs intentional actions on the basis of particular
beliefs and desires. When we commonsensically describe people as doing certain
things for certain reasons, we are taking the ‘folk psychological’ view of them as
intentional agents.
23.2 Supervenience as central to Materialism
Supervenience, which we have already broached in §14.2, is the central notion
for an understanding of materialist philosophies of mind. Materialist philosophers
of mind are entity monists. Unlike the Cartesian dualist, they deny that minds are
separate entities from bodies. But they are at least also committed to a dualism
about attributes. Certain events, states and processes have both mental attributes
and physical attributes. As already emphasized, however, materialists insist that
all mental events, states or processes are physical events, states or processes
respectively. All that there is, is physical; but some of it is also mental, in the
sense that it has mental attributes. (The ‘some’ here will be mainly hidebound,
and largely within heads of a certain complexity.)
The priority of the physical is stressed by the materialist’s supervenience thesis:
The mental supervenes on the physical.
That is, the physical facts (about all the individuals and stuffs in the universe)
ﬁx or determine whatever mental facts there may be, involving (some of) the
individuals in question. Put another way: there could be no change in the mental
state(s) of any individual without some corresponding change in its physical
state(s) (or in its physical environs).
We repeat the word of caution sounded in Chapter 21: do not confuse the
supervenience thesis with any thesis of determinism, to the effect that the future
states of the world are ﬁxed or determined by its present state. Determinism has

306
Mind, Body and External World
to do with causality ‘all at the physical level’, as it were. The present and future
states mentioned in the determinist’s claim can be thought of as exclusively
physical states. Moreover, deterministic causation involves the lapse of time: the
present state causes each later state to be what it is.
By contrast, the supervenience theorist’s ‘ﬁxing’ or ‘determining’ of the mental
by the physical is a simultaneous ﬁxing or determining. It has to do with
synchronic relations between two levels of reality; causation is not involved.
What the supervenience theorist is getting at with her talk of the physical facts
ﬁxing or determining the mental ones, is the synchronous metaphysical pinning
down of one level of factuality by another. This is compatible with saying that
some mental events can cause physical effects (murderous intentions can cause
ﬁngers to pull triggers), and that some physical events can cause mental effects
(photons striking your retinas can cause you to form perceptual beliefs). Those
sorts of claims would still be true, involving, as they do, the lapse of time. They
are, however, compatible with the supervenience theorist’s insistence that all
causation occurs at the physical level only.
Why is this so? Can causation really be ultimately conﬁned to just the physical
level? Another way of putting the question is this: Do we really have causal closure
of the physical? In order to pose the question more vividly, and appreciate the form
of the supervenience theorist’s answer, let us consider the following diagram,
displaying a snippet of the mental life of some individual. Time is understood to
lapse from left to right. At the ‘mental level’ of description or theorizing, we are
inclined to say that mental event m1 caused mental event m2 (as indicated by
the top arrow):
m1
p1
m2
ϕ - level
- level
p2
The arrows pointing straight up represent the synchronous ‘ﬁxing’ of the mental
by the physical, as claimed by the supervenience theorist. There are no arrows
pointing straight down. The supervenience theorist is a materialist because of this
order of determination chosen: it is the physical that ﬁxes or determines the
mental. (Had it been the other way round, we would have been dealing with an
idealist rather than a materialist. For the idealist metaphysician claims that the
fundamental level of reality is that of ideas, and that material objects are at best
constructions out of these. That is to say, for the idealist it is the mental that
would ﬁx or determine the physical.)
Arrows in the diagram that traverse any horizontal distance (and always from
left to right) represent possible relations (or instances) of causation. The top
arrow represents mental event m1 causing mental event m2. An example might

Materialism and Supervenience
307
be Macbeth’s being appeared to daggerishly causing his belief that there was a
dagger before him. (It matters not that in this instance the event m1 would be
hallucinatory, and the belief whose formation is event m2 would accordingly
be false.) The hallucinatory event m1 would supervene on some brain-state p1
of Macbeth; which, as represented by the bottom arrow, causes some further
brain-state p2 which, according to the supervenience theorist, is the formation of
the belief that there was a dagger before him.
There does not seem to be any need to make room for a mental event causing
a physical event (the downward-sloping arrow in the diagram), or for a physical
event causing a mental event (the upward-sloping arrow). If someone were to
suggest that we ought to allow for mental event m1 to cause physical event p2
(the downward-sloping arrow), the supervenience theorist can reply that mental
event m1 supervenes on physical event p1, and it is the latter which really causes
p2. Likewise, if someone were to suggest that we ought to allow for physical event
p1 to cause mental event m2 (the upward-sloping arrow), the supervenience
theorist can reply that mental m2 event supervenes on physical event p2, and
it is the latter which is really caused by p1. The whole causal story can then, as it
were, be conﬁned to the physical level.
This is compatible with conceding that causal stories almost always reﬂect our
human interests. We regard only certain things as salient, and when we interpret
human behavior we almost always prefer to tell a mental or intentional story,
invoking causal relations among mental events. Causal closure of the physical
is nevertheless compatible also with conceding to the ‘mentalist’ that we even
rely on such mental narratives to identify, theoretically, exactly what the physical
events p1 and p2 are (or conjecturally might be), upon which the mental events
m1 and m2 respectively supervene.
Philosophical materialism insists on an asymmetry between the mental and
the physical. This asymmetry is underscored in three ways:
1
Every mental event is a physical event. But the converse does not hold; some
physical events are not mental events.
2
The physical facts determine the mental facts (the supervenience thesis).
3
Evolutionarily, the physical preceded the mental. Once upon a time, there
were no minds; there was only matter. Now, there are minds; and their
behavior is determined by the matter of which they are made. Mentality
somehow evolved and arose out of the functioning of certain bits of matter
(i.e., brains and nervous systems).
23.3 The main Materialist accounts of mind
23.3.1 Logical Behaviorism
The physical aspects of our selves that are important for the ‘ﬁxing’ or
‘determining’ of our mental lives are our brains and central nervous systems,
along with the patterns of behavior in which we engage. The Logical Behaviorist

308
Mind, Body and External World
(such as Ryle) stresses only the behavioral patterns (or dispositions), and does
not inquire after neurological structure or functioning. The Logical Behaviorist
is content to treat the mind/brain as a ‘black box’ mediating between sensory
stimuli and overt behavior. The structure and micro-functioning of the ‘wiring’
inside the black box is seen as irrelevant for our possession of mental states. Or, if
not irrelevant, then: inconsequential. For it possesses relevance only in so far as
it creates and sustains the behavioral dispositions which themselves are deﬁnitive
or constitutive of our occupying whatever mental states we do.
23.3.2 Biological Essentialism
Once we move away from Logical Behaviorism, however, while remaining
philosophical materialists, that internal structure and micro-functioning of the
brain and central nervous system can assume new importance. For it can be
incorporated into the supervenience basis of those physical facts that serve to ﬁx
or determine what the mental facts happen to be. The possibility now arises that
mental states are enjoyed only by beings with a particular kind of ‘meatware’
(brains); and that, no matter how similar in behavioral dispositions a differently
constituted being (such as an android, or an alien silicon-based life form) might
be, it cannot, metaphysically, have mental states, because it is simply not made
of the right kind of meat. This view might be called Biological Essentialism: it is
essential, for mental life, to have a brain that is biologically broadly like ours.
As John Searle puts it, it is only the brain that can secrete consciousness. No
artiﬁcial gland could secrete the same. His case for biological essentialism can be
found in Searle (1992).
23.3.3 Functionalism
In between the Logical Behaviorist, who does not care at all about the structure
of the brain, and the Biological Essentialist, who might, arguably, care too much
about it, is a third position: that of the Functionalist. Functionalism is such a
widely held and thoroughly discussed position that we shall be devoting the rest
of our discussion of the mind–body problem in Part IV to its clariﬁcation, and to
the criticisms that it faces.
The Functionalist cares about the structure of the brain only insofar as it
needs to be able to harbor the various states in the program that, as far as the
Functionalist is concerned, constitutes the mind. The mind-as-program ‘runs on’
the brain-as-hardware. Different hardwares can run the same program. Running a
program is a matter of being able to make various transitions among ‘logical states’
within the program. These transitions will be triggered by sensory inputs, and will
produce behavioral outputs. Thus the Functionalist is moved to say of mind that it’s
not the meat, but the logical motions that matter. (I owe this saying to Kim Sterelny.)
The Functionalist, unlike the Biological Essentialist, will think of a human being
having the same kinds of mental states as an android or silicon-based alien,
provided only that they all ‘function’ the same way in producing like behavior

Materialism and Supervenience
309
in response to like sensory stimuli. If their programs are the same in each case,
then so are their minds: for, according to the Functionalist, the mind simply is
the program.
23.4 Identity theories
Despite their differences on matters of detail, the Logical Behaviorist, the
Functionalist and the Biological Essentialist are all agreed on the more
central materialist claim: that the mental supervenes on the physical. Their
disagreements arise over exactly how such supervenience obtains. Are token
mental events, states and processes associated with the underlying token physical
ones only in a non-rule-governed, chaotic way? Not surprisingly, those answering
afﬁrmatively to this question are known as ‘token-token’ identity theorists. Or are
there interesting regularities to be discovered, linking certain types of mental
events, states and processes with underlying physical types of the same? Not
surprisingly, those answering afﬁrmatively to this question are known as ‘type-type’
identity theorists. The most extreme form of the latter would be the full-blown
reductionist: the theorist who maintains that every mental event, state or process
is an explicitly deﬁnable physical event, state or process. It would then follow that
our ‘mental theorizing’ at the ‘higher level’ could, in principle, be replaced by
purely physical theorizing, and that the latter form of theorizing would be every
bit as adequate (in predicting and explaining human behavior) as theorizing at
the mental level.
The type-type identity theorist, then, sees a plethora of potentially dscoverable
bridge laws linking mental phenomena with happenings at the ‘lower’, physical,
level. For reductionism to be possible, there would have to be a very replete set
of such bridge laws. It is perfectly possible (and conceivable), however, for the
mental level and the physical level to be linked only by the occasional bridge
law, with the total set of such laws falling far short of what would be needed for
a thorough reduction of mental theorizing to physical theorizing.
We shall not dwell here on these early forms of materialism, except in so far as
these general points need to be made at this stage of our exposition of materialist
theories. The early materialists were overridingly concerned only with making
a case for the prima facie plausibility of a materialist account of mind of some
kind or other. They did not present anything like detailed accounts of the nature
of the possible connections between the mental and the physical. By the late
1950s, as would be evident to any reader of Feigl (1958), the battle lines had at
least been shifted far enough for it to be plausible (prescinding from any of the
empirical details) that there might be a considerable range of what Feigl called
‘ϕ-ψ correlations’ – systematic and discoverable links between kinds of physical
events, and kinds of mental events (between ϕ-events and ψ-events).
Before we embark on a detailed discussion of Functionalism, we need to
mention, in closing, that Functionalism is not the only materialist philosophy
of mind to have been put forward since the 1960s. It is worth mentioning
here at least two others – Davidson’s Anomalous Monism, and the Churchlands’

310
Mind, Body and External World
Eliminative Materialism – which help to round out a fuller picture of materialist
positions. They make one realize just how replete is the spectrum of possible
materialist positions.
23.4.1 Anomalous Monism
Anomalous Monism is a materialist position put forward by Davidson (1970).
Its distinguishing feature is its denial that there are any bridge laws at all
linking the mental to the physical. The anomalous monist is committed to the
Supervenience Thesis, and is therefore at least a token-token identity theorist.
Davidson’s main intent, however, was to secure complete autonomy for the mental
level of description and theoretical explanation of human action. Even though
he postulated the causal closure of the physical, he insisted that the mental level
of theorizing is absolutely indispensable, and the one that we naturally inhabit
when understanding both individual persons and social forces. The mental level
of description and explanation will never be, and could never be, replaced by
or reduced to a purely physical level of description and explanation. If we were
(per impossibile, according to Davidson) able somehow to make such a transition,
we would lose all grasp of what it means to be human; of what the wellsprings of
human action really are; and of what is involved in treating each other as persons.
Davidson’s anomalous monist respects the age-old divide between the
Geisteswissenschaften and the Naturwissenschaften, with a principled view as to
why the former could never be abandoned, replaced, usurped, or reduced to
the latter. Yet anomalous monism also embodies the fundamental metaphysical
concession that Materialism about mind is nevertheless true: the mental facts
supervene on the physical facts. The anomalous monist is a physicalist about
entities only; but is also an attribute dualist with a vengeance.
23.4.2 Eliminative Materialism
The Churchlandish eliminative materialist (whose most prominent statement
is Churchland (1981)) agrees on two important scores with the Davidsonian
anomalous monist: there are no bridge laws; and all causation is physical causation.
The eliminative materialist is,
however,
diametrically opposed to the
anomalous monist on one important matter. In fact, the eliminative materialist
is so far out on the left end (or would it be the right end?) of the spectrum of
materialist positions that one ought perhaps hesitate to say that she subscribes to
the supervenience thesis at all. This is because the supervenience thesis seems
at least to presuppose that the mental level of description is meaningful, useful,
and/or by-and-large true when it comes to describing the behavior of perceiving
and thinking beings like ourselves. For the eliminative materialist, however, this
is emphatically not the case. Rather, the mental level of description is claimed
to be fundamentally confused; at best, meaningful but radically false; at worst,
meaningless and useless in gaining true insight into, and understanding of, what
makes us tick. The eliminative materialist likens talk about beliefs and desires

Materialism and Supervenience
311
to earlier, misguided talk about phlogiston (in the early theory of combustion),
and about the ether (in the transition from Newtonian theory to the theory of
relativity); and to earlier misguided talk about witches. There is no phlogiston;
there is no ether; there are no (and never have been any) witches.
There is therefore nothing much to be gained, according to the eliminative
materialist, by talking about the physical facts ﬁxing the mental facts – because
there really aren’t any mental facts at all. An uncompromising search for the truth
about how we function would conﬁne itself to the ﬁndings of neuroscience, and
avail itself of such branches of mathematics as the computational theory of
neural networks (of the kind, say, in Rumelhart et al. (1986)). The supposedly
more accurate and predictively successful science that would emerge from
this might not even warrant the label ‘reductive’, since its categories and
revealed causal pathways might not correspond at all with what the pre-scientiﬁc
mentalistic theorizing incorrectly postulated. Why look for ‘reductions’ of false or
meaningless levels of theorizing? Why not learn, instead, to inhabit a new, and
better, level of scientiﬁc description, and simply outgrow the felt need to describe
human behavior mentalistically?
For the eliminative materialist, respect for the theoretical autonomy of the
Geisteswissenschaften, so precious to the anomalous monist, can be extended as
mere good-humored indulgence. The eliminative materialist would regard any
Geist-imbued account with the same difﬁdent (even if undisclosed) intellectual
attitude as one would bring to the observation of rain dances performed by
some pathetically drought-stricken tribe. The theorizing, like the dance, will
be impotent. It will only distract one from pursuing real causes by the scientiﬁc
method, and discovering the deeper truths that we need to grasp in order to put
things right, both in the physical world and among ourselves.
Problems
1
Read up on du Bois-Reymond’s list of seven cosmic riddles. Assess whether,
on the basis of scientiﬁc developments since the time he drew up his list,
we would be justiﬁed in keeping on that list the riddle of how consciousness
emerges from the workings of mere matter.
2
Construct a classiﬁcation scheme for all the different positions that we have
mentioned or discussed thus far on the nature of the mind–body relationship.
Use as few differentiae as you can in order to ‘pigeonhole’ each position
uniquely within your scheme.
3
Can you think of an evolutionary argument for the implausibility of
Eliminative Materialism?
4
What is meant by ‘causal closure of the physical’? Can it be denied by any
anti-dualist?
5
Is it the case that every reductionist account of the mental would have to take
the form of a type-type identity theory?
6
‘Anomalous Monism is case of trying to have your cake and eat it.’ Discuss.

24 Functionalism
Functionalism is perhaps the most dominant species of materialist philosophy of
mind today. It is due in its original variety, known as ‘machine functionalism’,
largely to the inﬂuential work of Hilary Putnam. The classic papers are Putnam
(1960) and Putnam (1967). (Putnam, however, has since disavowed his machine
functionalism. See Putnam (1988).) A metaphysically and logically sophisticated
variety of functionalism due to David Lewis is called ‘causal functionalism’. The
classic source for causal functionalism is Lewis (1972). We shall examine these
two forms of functionalism in turn. Then we shall cover various criticisms of
functionalism as a philosophy of mind.
24.1 Machine Functionalism
Chapter 10 explained the concept of a Turing machine. This chapter seeks
to explain its application in the Functionalist philosophy of mind. Our earlier
discussion accounted for how the concept of a computable function was
explicated in different but provably co-extensive ways. Here we expand on
that discussion, to provide the material necessary for a proper appreciation of
Functionalism in the philosophy of mind.
It is important to realize that a particular Turing machine computes exactly
one numerical function – that is, exactly one many-one mapping from natural
numbers to natural numbers. Thus any given Turing machine constitutes both
the hardware and the software for the computations of which it is capable. It is,
however, the program or software sense of ‘Turing machine’ that the Functionalist
philosopher of mind wishes to exploit. The nuts-and-bolts engineering aspects
of actual Turing-machine physical devices are completely irrelevant to the
Functionalist’s concerns.
Turing’s abstract model of computation is a far cry from mentation. How does
the process of computing a function by means of a ﬁnite-state machine connect
with human thinking, to the extent that the former can provide a theoretical
model of the latter?
The brief answer to be developed in this chapter is that it is possible, in
principle, to ‘encode’ the simultaneous stimulations of sensory nerve-endings at
any given time as a term (a ﬁnite string of symbols) composed out of symbols in

Functionalism
313
a very large but still ﬁnite ‘alphabet’; and likewise to ‘encode’ the simultaneous
efferent signals to the body’s motor system. Thus the brain can be thought of,
abstractly, as a computational device effecting the transitions between sensory
inputs and motor outputs. And on this conception, a state of mind would be
identiﬁed as one of the states involved in the speciﬁcation of the Turing-machine
program that ‘is’ that mind. Such a state of mind would be like a temporal
cross-section of everything that is going on in one’s mind: it would be made up of
raw feels, beliefs, desires, hopes, fears, regrets, repressed memories, introspective
convictions, etc. – in short, every kind of ‘mental state’ in the ordinary sense,
that one is occupying as of the given moment.
It all sounds beautifully simple and compelling. Now we must inquire after the
strengths and weaknesses of Functionalism as an account of our mental lives.
As a materialist, the Functionalist is committed to the supervenience thesis (see
Chapter 23). But the Functionalist’s intention is to be uncommitted to any thesis
of reducibility – indeed, to deny it. The Functionalist regards both ordinary and
theoretical talk about the mental as irreducible to talk about the physical. The
mentalistic level of description and explanation of human behavior is sui generis
and indispensable.
Functionalism can be understood as a natural development of Logical
Behaviorism, aimed at remedying the latter theory’s shortcomings. (See the
relevant discussion of the Problem of Holism towards the end of our account
of Ryle’s Logical Behaviorism.) To anticipate: for the Functionalist, to be in a
mental state is to occupy a certain ‘logical state’ in the execution of the ‘program’,
or ‘software’ that is running on the brain as ‘hardware’. The Functionalist does
not follow the Logical Behaviorist’s strategy of trying to describe, locally as it
were, the behavioral dispositions in which occupancy of such a state consists.
Instead, Functionalists content themselves with specifying the complicated
interconnections among such states, allowing them to interact in multifarious
ways in mediating between sensory input and motor output.
This raises another difference between Logical Behaviorism and Function-
alism. Logical Behaviorists are content to see the mind/brain as a black box,
whose internal structure – either physical or functional – is irrelevant to their
conception of what the occupancy of a mental state consists in. For the
Logical Behaviorist, it does not matter how the dispositions to behavior might
arise – only that they be in place. By contrast, the Functionalist needs to break
into the functional structure or organization of the mind/brain, in order to attain
a deeper characterization of mental states. Our ultimate understanding of that
functional structure or organization might well involve understanding exactly
how our gray matter works. That is, we might need to learn everything we can
about neurons, axons, dendrites, synaptic thresholds, neurochemicals, etc. But
we shall be doing this only with an eye to abstracting the crucial functional
structure and organization.
The Functionalist’s emphasis on abstraction here marks an important differ-
ence from the Biological Essentialist. For the Biological Essentialist, the human
brain ‘secretes consciousness’ because of its essential biological make-up. These

314
Mind, Body and External World
neurological structures, these neurochemical concentrations, these foldings and
ﬁssures of the cortex, etc., are, on this essentialist view, what give rise to
consciousness. The Biological Essentialist maintains that an artiﬁcial behavioral
duplicate of a human being – an android, say, like Sean Young’s character in the
movie Blade Runner, or like Arnold Schwarzenegger’s Terminator, or like Nanette
Newman’s character in The Stepford Wives, or like the Yul Brunner character in
Westworld – would lack consciousness, for want of the right kind of brain matter.
This is where the Functionalist begs to differ. As the label suggests, all that
should count is the function of the physical state one is in; not the physical nature
of that state. Thus the Functionalist would ascribe a mental make-up (even:
consciousness) to any behavioral duplicate of a human being, be it an artifact with
a ‘brain’ of silicon chips, or an extraterrestrial creature with a radically different
biology. The technical term used in this connection is multiple realizability. Just
as the same software can run on radically different kinds of hardware (think of
Word for the Mac v. Word for an IBM-clone PC), so too the same ‘mentality’
can be realized on radically different kinds of meatware or hardware.
Nor should too much emphasis be placed on exact duplication. There is no
reason, on the Functionalist’s view, to refrain from saying that chimpanzees are
conscious, or that extraterrestrials with radically different sensory modalities and
behavioral repertoires are conscious. Presumably these cases would transcend
some minimal ‘threshold’ of complication in internal organization to count as
conscious (or as having beliefs and desires, if we wish to stress the psychological
rather than the phenomenological).
The Functionalist conceives of one’s mind as a program. A program speciﬁes
how the system is to make transitions among different (logical) states, in response
to current monitored inputs; and also speciﬁes how it is to create outputs. In the
simplest case, these transitions will be deterministic, in that everything about one’s
immediate next state, in response to current input, will be exactly speciﬁed by the
program. In the more general case, the transitions will be probabilistic, allowing
for a range of possible successor states, each with a different probability of being
the state actually entered into. Unless the Functionalist opts for the probabilistic
model of ‘mind-as-program’, she will face difﬁculties with the problem of free will.
Before we examine the next variety of Functionalism, it is necessary to
clarify the implications of one authoritative statement about Functionalism’s
commitment to (some version of) Materialism. We have in mind here the
apparently bold assertion to the contrary in Levin (2013):
[S]ince descriptions that make explicit reference only to a state’s causal rela-
tions with stimulations, behavior, and one another are what have come to
be known as ‘topic-neutral’ (Smart (1959)) – that is, as imposing no logical
restrictions on the nature of the items that satisfy the descriptions – then
it’s also logically possible for non-physical states to play the relevant roles,
and thus realize mental states, in some systems as well. So functionalism is
compatible with the sort of dualism that takes mental states to cause, and be
caused by, physical states. (Emphasis added)

Functionalism
315
It should be emphasized, however, that taking ‘mental states to cause, and be
caused by, physical states’ can be construed as ‘taking certain physical states
that admit of description as mental states to cause, and be caused by, (other)
physical states’. But Levin seems to imply that genuinely ‘non-physical states’
can play the role that Functionalism assigns to what it calls mental states (but
which Functionalism wishes to identify, metaphysically, with certain physical
states).
The crucial question to ask is ‘What are the bearers or occupiers of these
“non-physical” states?’ It is difﬁcult to understand how Functionalism can have
its point if the bearers are postulated to be (possibly) non-physical entities (such
as Cartesian souls). Indeed, the main point about multiple realizability, which is
the hallmark of the functionalist’s position, is that the realizers are always physical
entities or structures. So the physical facts will ﬁx the emerging functional facts of
the realization in question. Supervenience of the mental on the physical holds,
according to the functionalist. Only physical entities and structures are eligible
to be bearers of mental states. Functionalism crafts an understanding of how
these physical entities or structures can nonetheless be regarded as occupying
‘non-physical, i.e., mental’ states while yet also admitting of yet other descriptions
in purely physical terms. That is, Functionalism can entertain attribute dualism,
but is rather obviously committed to rejecting entity dualism.
24.2 Causal Functionalism
Lewis’s Causal Functionalism arises from what he takes to be the best logical
account of how theoretical terms (such as psychological ones) are embedded
within a total theory based on certain kinds of evidence (observational and
behavioral). His aim is to allow for – indeed, to secure – the possibility that one
can make theoretical identiﬁcations of mental with, say, neural states. As Lewis
put it (see Lewis (1972), at p. 249):
[T]heoretical identiﬁcations in general are implied by the theories that make
them possible – not posited independently. This follows from a general
hypothesis about the meanings of theoretical terms: that they are deﬁnable
functionally, by reference to causal roles. (Boldface added)
Hence the name for his position: causal functionalism. As the ensuing account
will make clear, this is a ‘functionalism’ rather different in kind from that
of the Machine Functionalist. Different notions of function are involved in
these respective forms of Functionalism about mind. But, in the serendipitous
circumstance that a Lewisian theory had its theoretical terms playing the same
role as the terms denoting logical states of a Turing machine, the two kinds of
Functionalism would coincide in spirit, even if not in detailed predictions of
observable behavior.
Lewis dichotomizes scientiﬁc vocabulary into T-terms and O-terms, for
‘theoretical’ and ‘observational’ respectively. The observational predicates could

316
Mind, Body and External World
include color- and shape-predicates (‘x is tawny’, ‘x is round’), as well as
predicates describing episodes of observable behavior (‘x is chasing y’, ‘x is
snarling at y’). He writes (1972, p. 253):
Suppose we have a new theory, T, introducing the new terms T1,...Tn.
These are our T-terms. ... Every other term in our vocabulary, therefore, is
an O-term. The theory T is presented in a sentence called the postulate of T.
... It says of the entities – states, magnitudes, species, or whatever – named
by the T-terms that they occupy certain causal roles; that they stand in
speciﬁed causal (and other) relations to entities named by O-terms, and to
one another.
(We depart slightly from Lewis’s original text, by using upper-case letters
suggestive of predicate terms. Lewis used lower-case letters, conﬁning himself
to theoretical terms that were names. This was an unnecessary restriction. Our
exposition is intended to clarify and make more accessible Lewis’s own rather
terse presentation.)
The postulate of the theory therefore takes the form of a single sentence (no
doubt in the form of an immensely long conjunction):
θ(T1,...,Tn,O1,...,Om).
Then, in a move borrowed from Ramsey, Lewis invites us to consider the
sentence resulting by existentially quantifying into the places occupied by the
theoretical terms:
∃X1...∃Xn θ(X1,...,Xn,O1,...,Om).
The latter sentence is called the Ramsey sentence of the theory based on the
postulate θ. It is easy to see, as a matter second-order logic, that for any sentence
ϕ containing only observational terms,
∃X1...∃Xn θ(X1,...,Xn,O1,...,Om) ⊢ϕ
⇔
θ(T1,...,Tn,O1,...,Om) ⊢ϕ.
That is, the Ramsey sentence of the theory based on the postulate θ has the same
‘observational content’ as the postulate θ itself.
Lewis proceeds to assert more, concerning what the theorist is committing
herself to when postulating θ. According to Lewis (1972, p. 254),
[I]n presenting the postulate as if the T-terms ha[ve] been well-deﬁned
thereby, the theorist has implicitly asserted that [θ] is uniquely realized.
(Emphasis added)

Functionalism
317
So, as far as Lewis is concerned, we are entitled, when regimenting the theorist’s
own theoretical convictions, to use the modiﬁed Ramsey sentence that contains a
string of initial existence-and-uniqueness quantiﬁers:
∃1X1...∃1Xn θ(X1,...,Xn,O1,...,Om).
Lewis then suggests that the theory axiomatized by θ should really be understood
as consisting of the following set of conditionals. First, there would be the claim
that, if θ does have unique realizers, then these realizers are (denoted by) the
respective erstwhile theoretical terms T1,...,Tn:
∃1X1...∃1Xn θ(X1,...,Xn,O1,...,Om) →θ(T1,...,Tn,O1,...,Om).
Secondly, there would be the further claims, for each i from 1 to n, that the
theoretical entity or state or property Ti does not exist if unique realizability fails:
¬∃1X1...∃1Xn θ(X1,...,Xn,O1,...,Om) →¬∃XX = Ti.
Upon adopting these conditionals, Lewis claims:
The T-terms have been deﬁned as the occupants of the causal roles speciﬁed
by the theory [θ]; as the entities, whatever those may be, that bear certain
causal relations to one another and to the referents of the O-terms.
He goes on to claim (without explaining how this would be so) that if this
account of the content of a theory is correct, then T-terms are eliminable. The
elimination he regards as available (given the logical preconditions laid out
above) takes the form of a deﬁnite-description identiﬁer of the form
Ti = the entity Xi of the appropriate kind (object, state, property, relation or
whatever) such that θ(...Xi...).
Since, in this last occurrence of θ, bound (second-order) variables are introduced
in place of the theoretical terms T1,...,Tn, only observatonal vocabulary is left
therein; whence, Lewis thinks, each theoretical term Ti is eliminable in favor of
a complicated deﬁnite description within which only observational vocabulary
appears.
To this logician’s eye, this is the murkiest spot in Lewis’s account; for it is not
made at all clear how, in forming the deﬁnite descriptive phrase for any particular
theoretical term Ti, all the other theoretical terms somehow disappear. One can
only conjecture that something like the following happens. Let us focus on the
term T1. The deﬁnite description that is to do duty for T1 is perhaps the following
(with ι regimenting the deﬁnite article ‘the’):
ιX1∃X2...∃Xnθ(X1,X2,...,Xn,O1,...,Om).

318
Mind, Body and External World
It is not difﬁcult to see how this suggestion would generalize to the cases i =
2,...,n. Thus for each theoretical term Ti, its purely observatonal deﬁniens would
involve quantiﬁcation over all the other ‘theoretical roles’ to be occupied by their
own deﬁnientia. This is not to say that the treatment is viciously circular; but
it is to cast some light on the disconcerting fact that the causal functionalist
one can never quite get away from the overall mesh of (theoretical) causal roles
respectively ﬁlled by the terms he is seeking to eliminate in favor of the purely
observational.
Lewis, as already noted, did not cite any dispositive metalogical reason
for assuring his reader that his account of Causal Functionalism would afford
eliminations (in principle) of all theoretical terms. One is put in mind here
of the rather more agreeable account of explicit deﬁnability afforded by Beth’s
Deﬁnability Theorem, discussed in §14.2. Lewis appears to have shaped his
account of a causal-functional theory of mental and bodily behavior in such a way
that it would meet the requirement that the mental terms Ti be implicitly deﬁned
in terms of the O-terms (in the model-theorist’s sense of implicit deﬁnability
explained in §14.2.1). So this reader of Lewis, for one, would be happier simply to
invoke Beth’s Theorem in support of the contention that the causal-functional
theorist is entitled to regard his theoretical terms as eliminable. It is because,
courtesy of Beth’s Theorem, they are all deﬁnable using only the O-terms. What
is more, the deﬁnitions in question will all be at ﬁrst order (in ‘Grade A idiom’).
They will not need any of the second-order variable-binding that Lewis’s own
deﬁnientia involve.
24.3 Criticisms of Functionalism
As with any philosophical account of mind, Functionalism has its critics
(including its own originator).
24.3.1 The Disentanglement Problem
Their ﬁrst critical focus is Functionalism’s alleged analogy between mental states
of feeling, perceiving, thinking and acting subjects, on the one hand, and,
on the other hand, the logical states of a Turing-mechanical program that
would effect the same transitions between sensory inputs and motor outputs.
Normally we think of mental states as ‘compartmentalized’, despite their holistic
interdependencies. We distinguish beliefs from desires, and hopes from fears; and
each of these has its own speciﬁc propositional content. We distinguish sensory
awareness from idealistic imaginings. We can run through trains of factual
reasoning without any intrusion of felt desires. Likewise, we can fantasize about
indulging our wildest desires without any intrusions from beliefs concerning the
feasibility, local satisﬁability, or morality of those desires. We occupy different
‘mental modes’ at different times.
The challenge to the Functionalist would be: how do the postulated ‘logical
states’ in your program-description ‘of’ the functional structure of my mind

Functionalism
319
answer to these separable modes? Can you disentangle the belief-states from
the desire-states? When I explain an action, I attribute (at the very least) a
particular belief and a particular desire. These are understood to be two relatively
enduring states of the mind responsible for the action in question. Yet in the
running of your ‘program’ representing the structure of that mind, how could
such states co-determine the action in question? Isn’t it the case, by your own
admission on the Turing model of computation, that the running of the program
(corresponding to the unfolding of my mental life) proceeds serially, thereby not
affording us the means for discerning which state might be a belief-state, and
which state might be a desire-state?
Let us call this the Disentanglement Problem for the Functionalist’s logical
states, in so far as they are supposed to correspond to genuine mental states.
It is not offered as an insuperable problem for Functionalism. Rather, it serves
to put the Functionalist on notice that there are certain strong intuitions about
mental make-up and the temporal ﬂow of mental states. These intuitions act as
constraints on the formulation of any would-be Turing-mechanical simulation of
a genuine mind at work.
24.3.2 The Problem of Sensory Qualia
The second focus for criticism is Functionalism’s alleged inability to account for
sensory qualia. Qualia are the ‘atoms’ of subjective experience: small, subjectively
homogeneous regions of quality space. Typical examples of qualia are ‘red patch
here now’, ‘middle C on clarinet for a brief moment, ending now’. The idea is
that all our subjective sensory experience is a manifold that can, as it were, be
pixellated into a mosaic of such qualia.
The critic of Functionalism will lodge a complaint along the following lines
(due to Chalmers (1996)):
All that the Functionalist manages to do is give an account, from a
third-person point of view, of the connection between sensory stimuli and
bodily behavior. But such an account could hold true of a functional (hence
behavioral–dispositional) duplicate of me, who happens to be a zombie,
with no inner awareness, and no subjective experience. Yet I have inner
awareness and subjective experience! How come Functionalism pays no
attention to this central fact about my mental life?
(Of course, the critic herself could be a zombie, lodging this complaint; we shall
just have to take her at her word.)
This does indeed seem to reveal a gaping topical hole in the Functionalist
account of mind. Nor will it be enough for the Functionalist to retort as follows:
Sorry, zombies are metaphysically impossible. By some means that we could
never be in a position to explain, any system that instantiates a functional
program of the kind I envisage will have a mind, and will enjoy all the

320
Mind, Body and External World
usual conscious aspects of mental life. It just happens that way – you can’t
have these complicated co-functioning logical states realized on a system’s
hardware without the system thereby becoming conscious.
This retort by the Functionalist will not do, because of a famous problem of some
vintage: the Problem of the Inverted Spectrum. Let us allow for the sake of argument
that zombies are a metaphysical impossibility. Let us grant that any instantiation
of one’s own ‘mental program’ is going to have an inner, subjective, conscious
course of experience. Let us agree, then, that such systems will always ‘get a
[mental] life’. Now take yourself and any other system (call it S) instantiating
‘your’ functional program. Consider the following suggestion:
It is possible that what you see as ‘your’ red, S sees as ‘your’ green,
and vice versa. This spectral inversion will not be detectable no matter
how minutely we examine your respective nerve-stimulations and resulting
behavior, including linguistic behavior. For, when you learned language, you
learned to associate the word ‘red’ with what looked red to you; whereas the
system S learned to associate the word ‘red’ with what looked [your] green to
S. So you both call London buses, say, red, thinking you agree on their color;
while those buses nevertheless look [your] red to you but look [your] green to
system S.
Being undetectable by any considerations involving nerve-stimulations and
causal-functional roles of subsequent information-processing, these postulated
subjective differences between you and S cannot be accommodated by the
Functionalist. Indeed, it is questionable whether the Functionalist (if genuinely
committed to Functionalism) could even make sense of the suggested possibility
of spectral inversion.
24.3.3 The Knowledge Argument
There is another variation on this theme by the self-styled ‘qualia freak’ Frank
Jackson. The case he presents in Jackson (1982) has come to be known as the
knowledge argument. Consider, says Jackson, a brain-scientist called Mary, who
knows absolutely everything that neuroscience can tell us about the brain and
its functioning. Mary is not a zombie; she has an inner subjective life. She just
happens to be radically color-blind. She sees everything in black, white, and
various shades of gray. This color-blindness, it turns out, has a simple cure. An
operation can be performed, which will restore to the patient a normal range of
color-vision. Mary undergoes the operation. When she regains consciousness, she
is dazzled by the new colors she can see. At long last, she knows what red really
looks like. Before the operation, she knew, as a compleat brain-scientist, exactly
how other people’s brains would work in yielding them the visual sensation of
redness. But she didn’t know what that visual sensation would be like. The
post-operative Mary, however, does know. But she hasn’t learned any more brain

Functionalism
321
science. She has simply undergone a change in her optical and neural functioning
that allows her to know, in the only way possible – what it is like to be able to see
red. She has learned something that science couldn’t teach her. A fortiori, she has
learned something that escapes expression by a Functionalist theory of mind.
These three objections – the possibility of zombies; the problem of the inverted
spectrum; and what Mary didn’t know – all stress the ineffability of phenomenal
experience, of inner awareness, of what it feels like to be a conscious, perceiving
subject. All three objections stress the ﬁrst-person phenomenology of sensory
experience. This is the Achilles heel of Functionalism.
In suffering from these ‘phenomenalist’ objections, however, Functionalism
is not alone. These objections affect all materialist theories of mind. The one
possible exception here might be biological essentialism, which claims that
inner subjectivity will arise as a metaphysical inevitability from the complex
functioning of a biological brain and nervous system. But the biological
essentialist will still only be able to characterize inner subjectivity by relying on
the ﬁrst-person perspective of interlocutors. Subjectivity, like jazz, is something
that cannot be explained to anyone who has never experienced it.
24.3.4 The Problem of Semantic Qualia
So far we have covered the ‘phenomenalist’ objections to Functionalism. They
all alleged that Functionalism cannot be the whole story about subjective sensory
experience. We also mentioned the Disentanglement Problem.
An even more radical line of objection to Functionalism would maintain that it
actually fails where it is thought to be at its strongest and best. Usually, critics
focus on the phenomenal, agreeing (concessively) that Functionalism might still
be a workable model of what can be known about the mind from a third-person,
psychological point of view. But what if we refuse to make even this concession?
One intriguing line of possible objection would be that there are not only
sensory qualia; there are semantic qualia as well. Genuine communication, in
language, is accompanied by a kind of subjective experience that can loosely be
described as really knowing that you understand the words and grammar involved.
(This was remarked on by Moore (1953). More recent contributions sympathetic
to this idea are Strawson (1986), Strawson (1994), Siewert (1998) and Tennant
(2009).) When one hears or makes an assertion, there is a ‘subjectivity’ to the
experience; there is something that it is like to be trying to represent the world as
being this way rather than that. When you make an assertion, you know what it
is you are trying to do; and you can also imagine what it would be like to be at
the receiving end, and acquire (for the ﬁrst time) the information that you are
seeking to convey. This sort of subjective experience is very different indeed
from exerience made up of sensory qualia; but it is genuinely subjective, for
all that.
This semantic subjectivity would, however, arguably be absent from a mere
‘information-processing’ device like a computer, even if it instantiated the
program that the Functionalist says underlies our linguistic competence. The

322
Mind, Body and External World
suggestion here is that ‘semantic zombies’ might be easier to imagine than
‘sensory zombies’. And zombies of any kind are bad news for the Functionalist.
24.3.5 The Chinese-Room Argument
A related, though different, line of objection to Functionalism comes from
Searle (1980), and is called the Chinese-Room Argument. Searle attacks the
Functionalist’s claim even to have characterized linguistic understanding of a
‘non-qualitative’ kind, devoid of any ‘semantic qualia’.
The Chinese Room
Take a person who has absolutely no knowledge of, say, Chinese. Put him
in a room with an in-window and an out-window. Through the in-window,
feed him input in the form of stories written in Chinese ideography, followed
by questions (again, in Chinese) intended to test his understanding of
the stories. Let him be equipped with the functional program of the fully
competent speaker/reader/writer of Chinese. This takes the form of a manual
of instruction, written in English, for the manipulation of sequences of
Chinese ideograms into other sequences of Chinese ideograms. Require him
to deliver his answers to your questions through the out-window.
The Functionalist, note, insists that all there is to linguistic understanding is this
functionally describable ability to manipulate symbols (either sounds or written
marks). If the Functionalist’s claim is true, then Searle’s monoglot English-speaker
inside the ‘Chinese Room’ will be instantiating such a program, but – and this
is Searle’s main point – with absolutely no understanding of Chinese, qualitative
or otherwise. Yet his output, in the form of answers written in Chinese in
response to questions put to him in Chinese about the story told in Chinese,
would convince any Chinese-speaker that he understood Chinese. (He would,
of course, have to work very fast when implementing the instructions from the
manual he is given; but let us suppose he is somehow motivated to do that, and
succeeds at it.)
The conclusion, says Searle, is that linguistic understanding cannot be
captured by any Functionalist account. Whatever program is put forward as
embodying one’s competence in Chinese, it could be given to the monoglot
English-speaker in the room as a manual written in English, for the manipulation
of Chinese characters. And he could successfully manipulate these characters in
accordance with the program’s instructions, all the while being blissfully unaware
that his output was even interpretable as a response in any kind of language at all.
The Functionalist’s reply to Searle’s Chinese-Room argument is known as the
‘Systems Response’. In my imagined version, it runs as follows.
You, Searle, are focusing on the wrong ‘locus of understanding’ in your
set-up of the Chinese room. To be sure, the man inside the room knows
no Chinese. You get to legislate on that point – it is, after all, your

Functionalism
323
story. But you have misunderstood where we Functionalists would locate
the alleged linguistic understanding that is involved when Chinese-speakers
outside the room are impressed by the apparent ﬂuency in Chinese of the
‘system’ as a whole. Imagine that the room were inside the head of some
artiﬁcial android, and that the inputs were not only the written Chinese
characters of your story, but also perhaps other characters encoding sensory
information from sensory transducers with which the system is equipped.
And suppose further that the outputs were not only the written Chinese
responses to questions, but also motor-system commands being issued by the
Room (the system’s Brain) to its locomotive apparatus. Call the big system
Godzilla. Godzilla uses sensory information and written Chinese input to
determine his course of actions, which include not only the emission of
Chinese outputs but also locomotion, grasping of objects, consumption
of fuels, etc. Suppose, moreover, that the streams of input and output
could interlace, so that Godzilla could receive, say, a written instruction
in Chinese to raise his arm, and he would do so. Or he could receive an
invitation to a dinner party at the local gas station pump, and he would arrive
there, tank-cap unscrewed and fuel-bladders panting. Godzilla as a whole
really would understand (written) Chinese. You ask about the man inside
Godzilla’s head? He’s just a sub-personal cog inside Godzilla’s hardware,
running a bit of his own sub-personal software in his own head. We call
such bits of sub-routining software modules in computer science, and we
call such partial bits of system-hardware homunculi. No one ever requires a
homunculus to possess any properties that could only be emergent properties
of the system as a whole. So, the ignorance of Chinese on the part of the
homunculus (the man-in-the-room) within Godzilla’s head is irrelevant;
it’s Godzilla whom we are claiming to understand Chinese, not the
homunculus.
24.3.6 The Out-Gödelizing Argument
Functionalism is a form of mechanism about mind. It denies that the mind is a
creative spirit that transcends the capacities of any machine. Each particular
mind can be captured, in principle, by the action of a Turing machine. That is
what the Machine Functionalist believes.
This means, in turn, that the intellectual wherewithal of an individual mind
can be captured, in principle, by (or as) a Turing machine. In particular, the
ability of the individual in question to come to know, or to ‘see the truth’ of,
propositions about the natural numbers can be captured by a Turing machine.
The Machine Functionalist holds that each of us embodies some ‘axiomatization’
of number theory. Any person X is capable of seeing the truth of arithmetical
propositions only to the extent that those propositions are provable from the
axioms that are implicit in, and limited to, that part of the Machine M’s
operational capacity – where M is the Turing machine that ‘exhaustively captures
the mind’ of X.

324
Mind, Body and External World
Of course, the Machine Functionalist is not going so far, or making so bold,
as to claim that any of us would be able to work out for ourselves just which
machine M captures our own cognitive abilities. The Machine Functionalist is
maintaining only that each of us is no more than such a machine (as far as our
cognitive abilities are concerned), even if we might never, even in principle, be
able to ﬁnd out which machine that is. But that does not imply that others would
be incapable of working out which machine I ‘am’; or that others and I would be
incapable of working out which machine you ‘are’.
Now we face the problem that was raised by John Lucas (see §13.3): for any
sufﬁciently strong consistent system A of axioms for arithmetic (number theory),
there are true statements about numbers that cannot be decided by those axioms.
Among these statements is the ‘Gödel-sentence’ for the system A, which says
(something equivalent to) ‘I am not provable in the system A’. Lucas points out
that we, Gödel’s interlocutors, have a way of seeing that this Gödel-sentence is
true. Indeed, we can prove that it is true, admittedly by going ‘outside’ the system
A – but in a way that is intuitively compelling and rather obvious, namely by
adopting the further explicit assumption that the system A is consistent. So, says
Lucas, we can ‘out-Gödelize’ the Turing machine whose arithmetical capacity is
equated with the system A of axioms. Minds transcend machines, he concludes.
Lucas’s critics respond here with a ‘Not so fast!’. They point out that we
can out-Gödelize a machine’s arithmetical system only when we can identify
exactly which set A of axioms it involves. For the independent Gödel-sentence
is constructible only on the basis of detailed information about the axioms
available. Thus we could all form a population of closet Turing machines, each
of us unable to descry the axioms at work within any other. Yet each of us would
be able to work through Gödel’s famous proof of the incompleteness of ﬁrst-order
arithmetic, by virtue of being machines powerful enough to do at least that much.
(Gödel himself, despite his genius, would still have been a machine, by these
lights.)
Lucas’s opponent could actually afford to sail even closer to the wind here, and
make more concessions without conceding the main argument to Lucas. One
could concede that we form a hierarchical population of Turing machines, some
with the ability to work out the Turing-Mechanical basis of others’ particular
arithmetical abilities, but not necessarily capable of working out the similar basis
for their own. Almost all of us might be able to out-Gödelize certain others, but
not necessarily ourselves. (Also, in order to avoid inconsistency, one would
have to stipulate that no ‘loops’ are allowed in the relation ‘individual X can
out-Gödelize individual Y’.) In response to Lucas one can therefore say that each
human mind, qua machine, can be transcended by some other mind – but there is
no guarantee that the latter mind is not, itself, a machine. There is no mind that
can transcend all machines (on the assumption that every mind is a machine),
because no mind can transcend itself. Thus Mechanism about Mind would appear
to be intact.
We end this discussion by drawing attention to what would be a strange
irony, if the Lucasian argument for transcendence of mind over mechanism in

Functionalism
325
general were to prevail. We explained in Chapter 10 how Turing’s and Gödel’s
explications of the notion of computable function were provably coextensive.
Each of them had captured exactly the right class of functions, namely the
computable ones. Turing did so with his account of functions calculable by
Turing machines; and Gödel did so by means of a mathematician’s elegant
inductive deﬁnition of recursive functions, in terms of certain basic recursive
functions, and certain computability-preserving operations for creating yet more
recursive functions.
We point out, ﬁrst, that Putnam’s Machine Functionalism was inspired,
clearly, by the proposed analogy between our mental states and the logical states
in the execution of a Turing machine’s program. The resulting Philosophy of
Mind is a form of Mechanism. We point out, second, that the incompleteness
phenomena in arithmetic were discovered only by dint of Gödel’s method of
encoding ﬁnite syntactic objects such as sentences and proofs as natural numbers,
by means of recursive functions. This afforded an entering wedge for a form of
‘diagonal argument’ by means of which the incompleteness of arithmetic could
be established.
It would be bizarre if these two complementary and coextensive explications
of the notion of computable function could have given rise, by these two ensuing
routes, to a warrantedly assertable Thesis of Mechanism and a warrantedly
assertible Thesis of Anti-mechanism, respectively. One’s trust in the overarching
harmony of conceptual explication with metamathematical reasoning must
surely put a question mark over the Thesis of Anti-Mechanism, and Lucas’s
arguments for it. Otherwise one will be faced with a very deep incoherence
indeed, in the very foundations of Exact Philosophy.
Problems
1
What were Putnam’s own reasons for eventually abandoning the Machine
Functionalism that he originated?
2
What is the Disentanglement Problem?
3
Explain what the functionalist means by ‘multiple realizability’.
4
Suppose you agree with Nagel that there is something it is like to be a bat.
Does it follow that there is something it is like to be an android equipped
with a very sophisticated computer program running on the silicon chips in
its ‘brain’?
5
Suppose zombies are metaphysically possible, but not actual. Does it follow
that there could be no scientiﬁc explanation, in such worlds, of why organisms
that do feel pain when their bodies are injured, do so?
6
What, in your considered view, is the most serious problem facing Functional-
ism about mind? Is it not among those covered here? Or is it just insufﬁciently
developed above?

25 Free Will v. Determinism
As we have already stressed, there is a principle shared by all materialist
philosophies of mind: the supervenience thesis. Mental facts are said to
supervene on the physical facts. It follows that any kind of mind–brain (or
brain–mind) interaction is really a matter of one brain-state causing another
brain-state to arise. In other words, supervenience commits us to the causal closure
of the physical – even though some of the physical can be construed as being also
mental.
When we try to explain any sort of happening, we try to identify earlier
conditions that are causally responsible for making it happen. The ‘making’ is
supposed to be in accordance with hypothesized universal laws, be these laws of
physics or chemistry or biology. The happenings in question could range from
my dropping a pen to the ﬂoor, through the speciation of dinosaurs, to Tolstoy’s
composition of Anna Karenina.
What?! one might ask. How can you categorize something like Tolstoy’s
extended act of literary creation alongside the physical and biological examples
you gave? Were not all sorts of free and creative decisions involved in his putting
pen (repeatedly) to paper so as to produce that imaginative masterpiece? How
could this have been determined only by physical laws? How could this possibly
have been so determined, even by the totality of physical conditions obtaining
at the time, say, of the union of the sperm and egg cells that gave rise to
Tolstoy?
Good question. Reply: so are you withdrawing your allegiance to the
supervenience thesis? For, if not, then – though you may ﬁnd this surprising
or even appalling – you are committed to the following:
Let the totality of physical laws be L. Let the totality of physical facts at the
moment of Tolstoy’s biological conception be P. Let the writing of Anna
Karenina be A. Then: even if L and P together do not guarantee that A
would happen when it did, nevertheless there is nothing else besides L and P
that could have contributed to the bringing about of A.
The point is: any element of randomness in the sequence of events leading from P
to A or any measure of underdetermination of A by (L+P) is just that: randomness

Free Will v. Determinism
327
or underdetermination. It is emphatically not the basis of, or source for, the
causally efﬁcacious intrusion of free will.
Somewhat ironically perhaps, some accounts, by ﬁction-writers themselves, of
the phenomenon of literary inspiration play down the phenomenon of ‘feeling
as though one is doing something by exercising one’s free will’. Here is Virginia
Woolf describing her composition of Orlando:
Yesterday morning I was in despair ... I couldn’t screw a word from me; and
at last dropped my head in my hands: dipped my pen in the ink, and wrote
these words, as if automatically, on a clean sheet: Orlando: A Biography. No
sooner had I done this than my body was ﬂooded with rapture and my brain
with ideas. I wrote rapidly till 12 ... How extraordinarily unwilled by me but
potent in its own right ... Orlando was! as if it had shoved everything aside
to come into existence.
Is this not more like the phenomenology one would expect if the act of literary
creation resulted simply from the boiling-over of a mental cauldron of bubbling
ideas, with the writer herself merely acting as a selective ﬁlter for the resulting
linear stream?
Yet the countervailing phenomenological evidence for the exercise of free will
is compelling from other quarters. We have all had the experience of deliberating
hard and long over a difﬁcult decision in complex circumstances. It could be
anything from a choice of appetizer, to a long-term investment, or the choice
of a life-partner. We mull over the pros and cons, weighing this consideration
against that one. We try to recognize in ourselves sources of irrational feelings
or compulsions, so as to minimize their inﬂuence. We reﬂect on our desires,
and ask ourselves which of these we desire to have satisﬁed. (First-order desires
can be in conﬂict: for example, the desire for an ice cream and the desire to
look slim. And ﬁrst-order desires can be overridden by higher-order desires: for
example, the ﬁrst-order desire for sexual gratiﬁcation and the higher-order desire
not to be governed by passions of the ﬂesh.) We try to get the ‘big picture’ in full
view, without losing any of the details that we have thought through. We look
ahead to likely consequences, and ask ourselves how our decision might affect
other people. Eventually (if we are lucky) we ‘make up our minds’. We make a
decision, and form an intention. We choose how to act. In doing so, we are often
aware of making a moral effort (or of failing to make one). (The making of moral
effort is emphasized by Campbell (1957), an excellent discussion of free will and
determinism.)
If we stick to our decision, we act accordingly. If we falter, without reﬂectively
altering any of the considerations leading us to our earlier decision, then we suffer
from akrasia, or weakness of will.
It is this ﬁrst-person phenomenology of the exercise of free will that seems so
intuitively convincing to the libertarian, as the philosophical advocate of free will
is called. (Not to be confused with ‘libertarian’ in the political sense, namely
someone with the conviction that intrusion by government into the lives of

328
Mind, Body and External World
individual citizens should be kept to an absolute minimum.) The philosophical
libertarian claims we have free will; the determinist claims we do not.
The determinist, however, has a reply. What is being described here is simply
what it feels like for a conscious mind to be undergoing certain (admittedly very
complex) trains of mental events, i.e., brain events. But those brain events are
structured in a physico-causal sequence, for all that. And even if some of them
are not fully determined by their immediate antecedents, nevertheless there is
not any further force (a ghostly free will) helping to determine them either. This
is just what it is like to be a subject undergoing a process of deliberation. It is just a
more extended process than, say, an outraged reﬂex in instantaneous revenge for
a grievous harm inﬂicted upon one. More of the neo-cortex is involved when we
deliberate. And our introspective convictions about our own imagined exercise
of free will are just an illusory epiphenomenal concomitant of all that complex
neural processing.
Deprived of the ‘introspective phenomenology argument’ for free will, the
libertarian can try another tack. Our possession of free will, she claims, seems to
be an indispensable premise on which our moral and legal institutions of blame,
conviction and punishment are based. The very fabric of social life is based on
the express acknowledgement of free will. From the Nuremberg Tribunal down to
the parking warden, transgressions are treated as though committed by free agents
who could have done otherwise.
Now, why is it important that we say that the freely acting agent could have
done otherwise? Why, that is, do we subscribe to the principle
X acted freely in A-ing →X could have refrained from A-ing?
Just as no one would punish a grandfather clock for chiming every hour (since
that is how it is determined to behave, by its very structure and the laws of physics
governing its motions), so too no one would think it right to punish a creature for
behavior beyond its deliberative control. If the creature couldn’t help doing what
it did, it is not to blame. (This was the argument advanced by the Australian
eco-feminist Valerie Plumwood when she criticized the agents of government
who hunted down and killed the crocodile that had seriously mauled her.)
And is this not the intuition that inclines us to regard as mitigating or
exculpating such circumstances, on the part of a criminal defendant, as their
alcoholism or drug-addiction, or obsessive-compulsive disorders, or paranoid
schizophrenia, or any of a host of other conditions that render them less able
to have done otherwise? The thought seems to be that the normal person who is
free of such inner coercions and who is therefore genuinely able to do otherwise,
is fully responsible for the acts they perform, for these acts are free.
Again, the determinist has a reply. In the case of inner coercion, the causal
sequences are all too painfully obvious. The addict craves his ﬁx, steals the
TV and sells it, and makes off to the pusher. In the grip of his addiction, his
behavior is out of his control. He is not responsible. He is not free. However:
the same is true, in principle, of the healthy subject supposedly free of all inner

Free Will v. Determinism
329
coercions. It’s just that the way the deterministic course of events unfolds within
her healthy, educated, drug-free mind/brain is not as painfully obvious as it is in
the case of the addict. She has just arrived at an informed consumer choice of
the very TV that the addict stole, but she has done so after reading consumer
reports, studying their wiring diagrams, imagining their aesthetic appeal in the
corner of her boudoir, looking at their prices and studying her most recent bank
statement in combination with her current unpaid utility bills. And after all this,
and because of all this, she freely chose that TV. Wrong! says the determinist.
After all this, and because of all this, she chose the TV. That much is agreed.
But what was free about her doing so? That she could have done otherwise? How
so? How do you really know that she could have done otherwise? Perhaps, for
all you know, she was pre-determined to undergo exactly that course of pre-purchase
deliberations.
Is the intuitive conviction that we really do have free will able to withstand
the onslaught of considerations from a thoroughgoing philosophical materialism?
How might the determinist accommodate the concept of free will, and explain
our apparent possession of free will (from the ﬁrst-person perspective), while
yet maintaining that libertarianism is deeply, metaphysically, false?
Can
experimental ﬁndings in neuroscience (such as the famous experiment reported
in Libet (1985)) be brought to bear proﬁtably on the question whether our
phenomenological conviction that we possess free will is illusory?
Alternatively, how might the libertarian accommodate the causal closure of
the physical, and the supervenience of the mental upon the physical, and explain
away our apparent lack of free will (from the third-person perspective), while yet
maintaining that it is determinism that is deeply, metaphysically false?
Can the conﬂict between determinism and libertarianism be resolved, and
thereby be shown to be merely apparent? Is there a position that can do justice
to the strength of both the pre-theoretical, ﬁrst-personal intuitions which seem
to favor libertarianism, and the high-level, third-personal theoretical principles
which seem to favor determinism? Such a view would be called compatibilism.
25.1 A form of compatibilism that is more deterministic
than libertarian
We intend here to give an argument for our own view in the contentious free-will
debate.
Thesis: We do not have free will. We just think we do. And there are good
evolutionary reasons for maintaining this metaphysical illusion, and living
as though it were true.
Call this position, if you like, compatibilism with attitude. Here is how it goes, in
more detail.
The mental supervenes on the physical. The physical is causally closed.
Whatever can be explained can, under suitable physicalistic description, be

330
Mind, Body and External World
explained in physical terms. Whatever cannot be explained physically cannot
be explained at all, not even in mentalistic terms.
Note that this ‘deterministic’ view is not as extreme as that of Pierre Simon
Laplace (1749–1827), after whom Laplacean determinism is named.
We ought ... to regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its
anterior state and as the cause of the one which is to follow. Given for
one instant an intelligence which could comprehend all the forces by which
nature is animated and the respective situation of the beings who compose
it – an intelligence sufﬁciently vast to submit these data to analysis – it would
embrace in the same formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the
universe and those of the lightest atom; for it, nothing would be uncertain
and the future, as the past, would be present to its eyes. (Laplace (1820), p. 4)
Writing at a time when the successful application of Newton’s laws of motion,
and theory of gravitation, could inspire such intellectual optimism, Laplace’s
statement of determinism conﬂates the determining with the possibility of some
intelligence being able to track that determining. This it would do by making
accurate predictions about the position of every particle in the universe at any
instant of time in the future. It would, of course, need similar universe-wide
information regarding some past instant of time; but that assumption is granted
for the sake of argument (or for hyperbolic statement), so to speak.
In this regard, Laplacean determinism overstepped the mark. There is no
principled reason to believe that a universe whose evolution in the future is
actually (fully) determined by its present state would allow one to track this by
means of theory. The reality of determinism could, as it were, evade theoretical
capture. In order to capture it, we would need some statement L of laws, in an
appropriate scientiﬁc language, that would allow one to derive, by means of
deductive logic, from the correct description D1 of the state of the universe at
time t1, the correct description D2 of its state at any later time t2. We would
need, that is, for any such instants t1, t2,
L,D1 ⊢D2.
And there is no reason to think that this could be guaranteed, in general, even for
a fully deterministic universe. (For an extremely rigorous treatment of theories
that do succeed in expressing determinism in the world, see Montague (1974).)
To make matters worse: our contemporary scientiﬁc picture of the microcosm
is that it is (pace Laplace) indeterministic. There are random events in the small:
uncaused happenings, like decays of radioactive particles. Only ‘in the large’
do reasonably reliable statistical laws emerge – as, for example, when we say
that the half-life of radium is so-and-so. Still, whenever we are dealing with
caused happenings, we want to say: that much is physically deterministic. This
falls far short of what Laplace conﬁdently asserted; but it is enough to thwart the
libertarian.

Free Will v. Determinism
331
The unpredictability of human behavior furnishes no warrant for asserting
freedom of the will. This is because not even strict, classical, Laplacean
or Newtonian determinism implies the predictability of all events. There is
a non-trivial bound on how accurately any measurement of a real-valued
magnitude can be carried out. Hence we can never feed exact real numbers
into the ‘initial- and boundary-condition’ statements of Newtonian predictions.
In highly non-linear systems, these inaccuracies of initial values will ‘blow up’
super-exponentially, so that at any reasonably later time the predicted values of
the magnitudes we are interested in will be way off their actual values. The world,
we have learned, is (only roughly ordered) chaos. A lot of what happens is entirely
unpredictable: radio-active decay, genetic mutations, speciations, conceptions,
religious conversions, onset of schizophrenia, the lottery, the stock market, the
human condition one thousand years from now, and whether she will say ‘Yes’ if
the ring is CZ.
But it is physical chaos. It is not chaotic because of free will. And it is not
hospitable to free will just because it is chaotic. Free will does not get a look-in.
The best one can do is look for certain kinds of order-in-chaos, and ask why and
how we came to think in terms of free will, and why and how that helps us in a
chaotic world that doesn’t really allow free will a foothold.
We human beings are bits of order in this chaos. Our bodies, and the psyches
that operate within them, have to negotiate many other bodies, the most
important of these being human bodies. Our psyches, in order to cope with these
challenges, needed to have a workable model of what is reasonably reliable in
human behavior ‘wired in’. Evolution by natural selection has seen to that. (That
is a long story, and one into which we do not venture here.)
Whatever dispositional-behavioral properties individual human beings have,
these are of intense interest to other human beings who have to have dealings
with them. These properties are called character traits. One needs to be able
both to predict the behavior of one’s fellow human beings, and also inﬂuence it
in various ways, in order to make one’s own way in the world. Keeping track of
character traits maximizes one’s chances of doing so.
So it is that we are equipped with an innate grasp of folk-psychology, and are
ready to exercise it with varying degrees of discernment and maturity as we grow
older. We learn to detect good intentions, bad intentions, and indifference. We
learn to anticipate nastiness and avoid it. We learn to enjoy the pleasures of
civilized human company and to cultivate the beneﬁts of reciprocity. We take
stock and keep tabs. Why? Because the character traits that we detect represent
valuable information about likely future behavior of these probabilistic automata
called persons.
Being prepared to display justiﬁed or warranted anger or indignation, or
to issue a reasoned reproach or rebuke, can have deterrent effect on other
people’s otherwise untoward conduct. The con-artist is less likely to exploit
the wary. The slanderer is less likely to carry on defaming the angry and
indignant victim. The adulterer is less likely to go near the spouse of the enraged
cuckold.

332
Mind, Body and External World
So we have developed a whole repertoire of emotions, tailored as responses
to various kinds of social behavior. The appropriate exhibiting of these
emotions affects the probabilities of subsequent episodes of behavior on the
part of others that, generally, would adversely affect one’s own reproductive
ﬁtness.
The concomitant phenomenological states have to be highly motivating as
well. If revenge is ‘objectively’ needed in order to maximize one’s chances
of survival and reproduction, then it would be more effective if the vengeful
behavior were driven by a desire for retribution rather than by an intellectual
conviction that inﬂicting revenge in this way will in all likelihood lower the probability
of future actions on their part that might adversely affect one’s own chances of survival
and reproduction; i.e., will have a deterrent effect.
Now, who should be the best targets for retribution? Why, those who have
wilfully done us harm. What was wilful about it? Well, they used their complex
cranial circuitry to work out how to harm us. And if they’ve done it once, they’ll
do it again, unless we put an end to it. ... And so the cycle begins.
Note, ironically, how the fear for one’s future is premised on the likelihood
of repetition, which in turn lends support to the view that there is a
quasi-deterministic regularity here. Those guys over the hill, because of the way
they are wired, are probably going to do this to us again ... It’s like a deterministic
premise for the conclusion that we must now act (freely!) in our own self-defense.
But that is not how we represent matters to ourselves. We work ourselves to a
fever-pitch of retributive anger precisely by representing them (perhaps falsely?)
as having made a free choice to act against us. We blame them, and hold them
responsible, in order to feel justiﬁcation for what we are about to do to them in
return.
By treating them as free, we accord them the status of deviant deliberators, a
real challenge to contend with. That both keeps us on our toes, and stokes the
burning resentments within.
Another irony: when submitting to patriotic fervor and a supposed moral
imperative to take revenge, one feels that it would be unthinkable to do
otherwise. Yet at that point one is at one’s most free. The moral law can coerce
one onto a single course of action. But ﬁrst one has to submit oneself to the moral
law; and in doing so one is free.
Of course, from an evolutionary standpoint all this talk about the moral law is
a matter of yet more cranial machinery being bent to the service of a particular
pattern of reaction to other people’s behaviors perceived and experienced in a
certain morally loaded way. The underlying contention remains: the point of
our having a concept of free will is to make us (hopefully) better able to suffer
less harm and to act so as to enjoy better prospects of survival and reproduction.
Genes (i.e., alleles) that code for thinking of oneself (and others) as possessed
of free will should spread at the expense of those alleles (for the genetic loci
concerned) that do not.
That takes care of the phenomenology and psychology of free will. What about
free will as a premise for our institutions of punishment?

Free Will v. Determinism
333
Again, an evolutionary argument is powerful. Those societies ﬂourish that
have effective systems of criminal deterrence and imprisonment. We have
claimed already that a desire for retribution is a better motivator than any
intellectual conviction about the deterrent effect of what one intends to do.
Yet it is the deterrent effect that is contributing to the evolutionary emergence,
stability and selective value of institutions of punishment and imprisonment.
The value of imprisonment is another irony here: it is best explained or justiﬁed
in terms of the likelihood of recidivism, should the convicted offender not be
imprisoned. And this once again invokes a quasi-deterministic premise about the
criminal’s dispositions to anti-social behavior.
It seems to be no accident that the two most inﬂuential theories of punishment
are the retributive and deterrence theories. The desire for retribution is a highly
effective epiphenomenon of a system whose behavior is really being selected
because of the effects of deterrence (or because of the lack of opportunity to commit
crime, on the part of those criminals who have been incarcerated).
Because of the way we have been shaped by natural selection, we need to
think of ourselves and others as free. If we stopped thinking of ourselves as
free, and really followed through on that intellectual conviction, our behavior
would become socially maladaptive. So we have to continue with the illusion
that we are free. But, deep down, we are not. Deep down, it is just a matter
of matter moving in accordance with the laws of nature, where applicable. The
rest is randomness, leaving no room for genuine free will. But in the emerging
evolutionary order out of that chaos, self-organizing systems emerge that have to
think of themselves as free, in order to maintain that level of organization.
The illusion is a happy one, and its discovery should set us free.
Problems
1
Compare and contrast the compatibilism put forward in this chapter with
quasi-realism in metaethics, of the kind advocated by Blackburn (1993).
2
What do you think is the point of trying to decide between the doctrines of
libertarianism and determinism? Is it just an exploration in metaphysics? Why
would any settled answer be important to an individual thinker, or to society
at large?
3
How does the phenomenon of randomness in the physical world bear on the
debate over whether we have free will?
4
How does the impossibility of attaining absolute precision in our measurements of
magnitudes in the physical world bear on the debate over whether we have free
will?
5
Is the debate between determinism and free will an entirely a priori one, that
should, in principle, be able to be resolved without regard for any empirical
ﬁndings and theories in the natural sciences?
6
Does determinism imply predictability? Does predictability imply determin-
ism?

Thispageintentionallyleftblank

Part V
Representation, Inference
and the Elusive Inﬁnite

Thispageintentionallyleftblank

26 Representation and Evaluation
It is an orthodox view that sentences acquire their representational powers (their
contents) by having truth-conditions somehow associated with them; and that
those truth-conditions in turn determine what logical relations obtain among
the various sentences of one’s language. The slogan would be: truth-conditions
ﬁrst; inferential relations second.
I am of the converse persuasion. I am an inferentialist, not a repre-
sentationalist. I believe matters should be explained the other way round:
inferential relations ﬁrst; truth-conditions second. (Perhaps the best known recent
version of inferentialism is the ‘pragmatist’ version to be found in Brandom
(1985), Brandom (1994), and Brandom (2000). For an account of how the
author’s own brand of inferentialism differs from Brandom’s, see Tennant
(2014d).) Everything one does with language is tacitly governed by rules
of inference – even something as simple as hearing a sentence, looking at
a situation, and ‘telling’ whether the sentence is true, or false, in that
situation. Let us develop some illustrative details, to convey the deeper gist of
this view.
Imagine that you are observing a simple scene or situation. It consists of a
few individuals with salient properties and standing in salient relations to one
another. You might, for example, be observing a roomful of people. There
might be some chairs and tables. Some of the people might be seated, others
standing. Some might be talking to others. They might vary in height (making
it appropriate to use the relation ‘x is taller than y’). They might vary in girth
(making it appropriate to use the relation ‘x is fatter than y’).
Using the vocabulary appropriate for describing features of the situation, you
can consider various sentences, constructed in accordance with the rules of
grammar. By ‘appropriate vocabulary’ we mean:
•
the names that one might have at one’s disposal for referring to some of the
individuals involved (names such as ‘John’ and ‘Mary’); and
•
the primitive predicates that pick out salient features of the situation (such as
‘x is standing’; ‘x is sitting’; ‘x is next to y’; ‘x is taller than y’; ‘x is a person’;
‘x is a chair’; ‘x is a table’).

338
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Here are four examples of sentences in such a vocabulary:
1
John is fatter than Mary.
2
Mary is standing.
3
Someone is standing and talking to someone who is seated at a table.
4
Everyone who is standing is taller than someone who is sitting.
You can determine a truth-value (True or False) for each such sentence, in the
situation under consideration.
Before considering how we do this, note that there is an interesting difference
between the sentences (1) and (2), on the one hand, and the sentences (3) and
(4), on the other. Sentences (1) and (2) are called atomic sentences, because
such internal complexity as they enjoy arises from their being put together out of
names and primitive predicates. They do not contain any logical vocabulary – words
like ‘not’, ‘and’, ‘or’, ‘only if’, ‘some’ and ‘all’.
Sentences (3) and (4), by contrast, do contain items of logical vocabulary.
This is what makes them logically complex, rather than atomic.
Now consider how one determines the truth-value of a sentence against the
background of a given situation. We may presume that the situation is presented
‘at one remove’, so to speak, as a diagram. It will contain dots for the individuals,
labeled by their names, with Venn-Euler regions representing extensions of
one-place predicates, and with sundry arrows representing two-place relations,
etc. If the sentence in question is atomic, one simply ‘looks at the diagram’
for the presence or absence of the appropriate ‘simple fact of the matter’. Does
John love Mary? – here is how one decides: one locates the individual John;
locates the individual Mary; then one ‘looks to see’ whether he loves her (as
represented by, say, an arrow in the diagram). If the ‘arrow of loving’ is there,
the sentence receives the value True; otherwise, it receives the value False. We
might say that the truth-value of an atomic sentence can simply be ‘read off the
diagram’.
Here is how it works, in an utterly basic case. We shall consider a situation so
restricted that it contains only the two (distinct) individuals John and Mary. Call
the situation M. (The letter M is suggestive of model, the formal semanticist’s
standard term for an interpretation of this kind for a language with names,
predicates, quantifying phrases and identity predicate =)
M
j
m
As the saying goes, a picture is worth a thousand words. Here is how (some of)
the information ‘in’ the diagram for M can be rendered inferentially. On the left

Representation and Evaluation
339
are the inferential renderings; on the right are English sentences providing the
same information:
j = mM
⊥
John is distinct from Mary
LjjM
⊥
John does not love himself
M
Ljm
John loves Mary
LmjM
⊥
Mary does not love John
LmmM
⊥
Mary does not love herself.
Note how the distinctness of the two individuals is registered by the ‘M-relative’
rule of inference that tells us that from the sentence j = m one may infer
absurdity (⊥). One could also reckon to the stock of inferences expressing the
‘basic information’ about M the rule
m = jM
⊥
in which the names occur in the reverse order. But that would be to make the
stock of such inferences unnecessarily redundant. The identity predicate ‘=’ is
subject to two important logical rules that ﬁx its logical meaning; and by using
them we can derive this last rule from the one that expresses the distinctness
of John and Mary, in that order. The two logical rules governing identity are
Reﬂexivity and Substitutivity.
Reﬂexivity.
For any term t that denotes an individual:
t = t .
That is, one may infer t = t from ‘nothing’, i.e., from the empty set of premises.
Substitutivity.
For singular terms t and u: ϕ
t = u
ψ
,
where the result of replacing every occurrence of t in ϕ with an occurrence
of u is the same as the result of replacing every occurrence of t in ψ with
an occurrence of u. That is, one may replace any occurrence(s) of t in ϕ
(not necessarily all of them) by occurrences of u, and vice versa, in order to
obtain ψ.

340
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Now we are in a position to derive the rule
m = jM
⊥
from the rule
j = mM
⊥
.
The derivation, using both Reﬂexivity and Substitutivity of identity, is
j = j
m = j
j = mM′
⊥
Let us move now from the relation of identity to that of loving. The atomic
fact that John loves Mary is registered by the ‘zero-premise’ inference rule that
tells us that from ‘no assumptions at all’ one may directly infer the conclusion
L(j,m). (In our diagram, a two-place relation like loving will be represented by
arrows – a different style of arrow for each of the relations in question. In M, we
have only one two-place relation, so the arrows are of just one kind.)
Importantly, though, the inferential method of ‘saying how things are’ requires
separate speciﬁcation of the ‘negative’ facts. In the diagram, an absence of loving
is registered by having no arrow in the appropriate place. John loves Mary, but his
love is unrequited. The diagram explicitly reveals that John loves Mary, by means
of the ‘arrow for loving’ going from John to Mary. That Mary does not reciprocate
is tacitly revealed by the absence of any arrow in the converse direction. By
contrast, the inferentialist registers this unhappily asymmetric situation by means
of two separate M-relative rules. The ‘positive fact’ of John’s loving Mary is
registered by the zero-premise rule
M
Ljm .
The ‘negative fact’ that Mary does not reciprocate John’s love is registered by
another rule, a rule that allows one to infer absurdity from the assumption that
Mary does love John:
LmjM
⊥
.
We see, then, that the inferentialist can handle atomic sentences directly, by
consulting the list of atomic inferential rules for a verdict. This list is also called
the atomic diagram of the model or situation in question. It is subject to the

Representation and Evaluation
341
coherence condition that for no atomic sentence A does one have both the rule
M
A
and the rule
A M
⊥
.
The non-identities like the one just displayed do not serve to ‘ﬁx’ exactly
which individuals feature in the situation M. That John is not Mary does not
entail that John and Mary are all the individuals in M. The only way we can
express the latter fact inferentially is to allow two important further M-relative
rule-schemata.
The ﬁrst of these rules tells us that in order to verify a universal sentence ∀xϕx
it sufﬁces, since John and Mary are all the individuals there are, to verify just the
two instances ϕj and ϕm:
...
ϕj
...
ϕm
M
∀xϕx
Note that verifying a sentence is a matter of producing it as the conclusion of an
arrangement of subsentences, which arrangement we shall call a veriﬁcation of
that sentence (relative to M).
The second rule tells us that in order to falsify an existential sentence ∃xϕx it
likewise sufﬁces to falsify just the two instances ϕj and ϕm:
∃xϕx
(i)
ϕj
...
⊥
(i)
ϕm
...
⊥
(i)M
⊥
Note that falsifying a sentence is a matter of deriving ⊥as the conclusion of the
ﬁnal step of what we shall call a falsiﬁcation of that sentence (relative to M). The
sentence in question is the major premise of the ﬁnal step of the falsiﬁcation.
In the rule just stated, the overlinings of assumptions (marked with a numeral
i) indicates that the bottommost absurdity (⊥) no longer depends on them.
They are discharged by the application of the rule, likewise labeled with the same
numeral i.
With a logically complex sentence, one has to accomplish two kinds of task
in order to determine its truth-value. First, one has to have an eye to all the
‘basic facts’ in the diagram – or at least, to all those that might be relevant
to the determination of truth-value. Secondly (and very importantly) one has
to be able to marshall those facts in the right kind of way in order to work
out whether the complex sentence should receive the value True (i.e., be
derived as the conclusion of an M-relative veriﬁcation) or should instead receive
the value False (i.e., be the major premise of the ﬁnal step of an M-relative
falsiﬁcation). In this process, it is particularly important, when dealing with

342
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
the contribution of quantifying phrases like ‘everyone’ and ‘someone’, to know
who all the people are. In general, the quantiﬁers are read as ‘everything’ and
‘something’, and the domain is said to consist of individuals or objects. They
make up the so-called ‘range’ of these quantiﬁers. The two new rules we have
just discussed – the M-relative rules of Universal Veriﬁcation and of Existential
Falsiﬁcation – succeed in specifying exactly which individuals comprise the
domain of M. The individuals in question are the ones that the two rules say must
be taken into consideration when verifying universals or falsifying existentials,
relative to M.
Let us illustrate these ideas with a very simple example. Consider once more a
situation consisting of just the two distinct individuals, John and Mary. Suppose
further that the following ‘atomic facts’ obtain:
John loves Mary;
Mary loves John;
and that that is all the loving taking place. In the situation as described (call it M′),
there are the following further basic facts about the domain of individuals:
John is distinct from (i.e., not identical to) Mary;
Everyone is either identical to John or identical to Mary.
The diagram of the situation M′ that has just been described is as follows:
M′
j
m
26.1 Verifying a sentence in a situation
Consider now the logically complex sentence
Everyone loves someone else,
interpreted against the background of the situation M′. You may think that you
can ‘see in a ﬂash’ that this sentence is true. But in so thinking, you are probably
unaware of the several steps of logical inference that you must be performing
subconsciously in order to arrive at that determination. I want to suggest that
the process really does consist of several steps, and that they are as follows.
First, the sentence is built up in grammatical stages, as revealed by the
following constructional pedigree. It begins, at the top, with simplest possible
expressions, and successively introduces layers of logical complexity as one

Representation and Evaluation
343
proceeds downwards to the sentence being formed.
x is identical to y
x loves y
not(x is identical to y)
(preﬁxing with ‘not’)
[x loves y and not(x is identical to y)]
(joining with ‘and’)
someone y[x loves y and not(x is identical to y)]
(preﬁxing with ‘someone’)
i.e., x loves someone else
(abbreviating by using ‘else’, and
suppressing bindings of variables)
everyone x(x loves someone else)
(preﬁxing with ‘everyone’)
i.e., everyone loves someone else
(suppressing bindings of variables).
It is this constructional pedigree that makes for what we call the underlying logical
form of the sentence. The underlying logical form here is
Everyone x[someone y(x loves y and not(x is identical to y))].
We can re-do the foregoing construction tree more succinctly by using formal
logical symbolism as follows:
x = y
Lxy
¬x = y
(preﬁxing with ‘¬’)
[Lxy ∧¬x = y)]
(joining with ‘∧’)
∃yLxy ∧¬x = y
(preﬁxing with ‘∃y’)
∀x∃yLxy ∧¬x = y
(preﬁxing with ‘∀x’)
i.e., everyone loves someone else.
English grammar (like the grammar of any natural language) has ways of
‘smoothing out’ all the logical wrinkles displayed above so that one’s speech ﬂows
more easily. But ‘beneath’ that smooth ﬂow of words in ‘Everyone loves someone
else’ there is the foregoing underlying logical form that can be brought out by
being very pernickity about simplest constituents, their order of composition,
preﬁxings and compoundings, bracketings, and variable bindings. Arguably, this
more detailed structure is available to be processed in the mind/brain, the smooth
phonological contours of the English sentence notwithstanding.
Once we have the underlying logical form of the sentence, we can proceed
to work out its truth-value in the situation described above. Here is how that
determination would go.
John loves Mary (given).
John is distinct from Mary (given).
So, John loves Mary and John is distinct from Mary.
So, John loves someone else.
Mary loves John (given).
Again, John is distinct from Mary (given).
So, Mary loves John and John is distinct from Mary.

344
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
So, Mary loves someone else.
But everyone is either identical to John or identical to Mary (given).
So, everyone loves someone else.
What we have here is an informal ‘M′-relative’ proof of the conclusion ‘Everyone
loves someone else’ from basic (‘axiomatic’) information about the situation M′.
That is what makes the sentence True in M′ – it can be M′-relatively deduced
from the basic information about M′.
The following formal M′-relative veriﬁcation, using the logical forms intro-
duced above, ‘regiments’ the foregoing reasoning by means of which we
determined that the sentence is True in M′. In this veriﬁcation, we see that
the sentence is M′-relatively deduced as a conclusion, using as premises the basic
information about M′, expressed inferentially. M′-relativity is evident also in the
use of the M′-relative rule of ‘∀-Veriﬁcation’ at the ﬁnal step.
Deﬁnition 6. We write
M ⊩ϕ
to say that there exists an M-relative veriﬁcation of a sentence ϕ. One can read this as
‘M makes ϕ true’.
26.2 Falsifying a sentence in a situation
Similarly, but by way of interesting contrast, a sentence that has the truth-value
False can be refuted by appeal to the basic information that we have about the
situation in question. Consider now, for example, the sentence
Someone loves everyone.
Here is how we determine that it is false (in the same situation M′):
Suppose, for the sake of reductio ad absurdum, that someone loves everyone.
Now, everyone is identical to John or identical to Mary (given).
So, either John loves everyone or Mary loves everyone.
__ 
(1) 
j=j 
--(2) 
m=j 
j=m M1 
j=m M1 
M'__ 
-L 
(1) 
M'__ 
-L 
(2) 
Ljm 
-,j=m 
Lmj 
-,m=j 
LjmA~j=m 
LmjA,m=j 
_3-"Y,-( 
L-""j",-Y_A_,-""j~=~y 
)~_3 
__ 
Y(,-L_m 
___ Y~A_~_m_=--=--y). 
M' 
Vx3y(Lxy A, x = y) 
E=£yWyAU[E] 
E=£yWyAU[E] 
E=£yWyAU[E] 

Representation and Evaluation
345
Suppose, then, that the ﬁrst case holds: that John loves everyone.
It would follow that John loves John.
But John does not love John (given). Contradiction (in the ﬁrst case)
Suppose, then, that the second case holds: that Mary loves everyone.
It would follow that Mary loves Mary.
But Mary does not love Mary (given).
Contradiction (in the second case)
We have considered both possible cases; so, Contradiction! overall.
We have now reduced to absurdity the assumption that everyone loves
someone.
What we have here is an informal ‘M′-relative’ disproof of the assumption
‘Everyone loves someone’ modulo basic (‘axiomatic’) information about the
situation M′. That is what makes the sentence False in M′ – it can be M′-relatively
refuted modulo the basic information about M′.
The following formal M′-relative falsiﬁcation, using the logical forms intro-
duced above, ‘regiments’ the foregoing reasoning by means of which we
determined that the sentence is False in M′. In this falsiﬁcation, we see that
the sentence is M′-relatively refuted as an assumption, using for other premises
the basic information about M′, expressed inferentially. M′-relativity is evident
also in the uses of the M′-relative rule of ‘∃-Falsiﬁcation’.
Deﬁnition 7. We write
M,ϕ ⊩⊥
to say that there exists an M-relative falsiﬁcation of a sentence ϕ. One can read this as
‘M makes ϕ false’.
26.3 An example to motivate rules for the conditional connective
Logicians standardly regiment sentences of the form ‘All As are Bs’ by means of
the formal sentence ∀x(Ax →Bx). They are thereby treating
All As are Bs
as having the same content as
Everything is such that if it is an A, then it is a B.
---{" 
--(', 
(3) 
~M' 
(oI) 
Lmm M' 
("==-;-;= LmjALmm 
1.(1) (II) 
LmjALmm 
1.(2) 
v"(Lj,, A Lyj) 
.1 (3) 
VV(Lmll A £Vm) 
1.(4) 
3zVV(Wv A £V:t:).l 
.1 (5) M' 
Law
Law

346
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Here, the two-place connective →is the material conditional. Consider now
another little situation, M∗:
M*
j
m
and consider the English sentence ‘Anyone who loves themselves is loved by
someone else’. Intuitively, we can tell that this sentence is True in M∗. It
generalizes about people who loves themselves. The only such person is Mary.
And she is indeed loved by someone else, namely John.
How would this reasoning be regimented, though, when using the universal
quantiﬁer in combination with the conditional connective to formalize the
English sentence in question? The formal sentence to be evaluated is
∀x(Lxx →∃y(¬y = x ∧Lyx)).
For this universal sentence to be evaluated as True in M∗, both its ‘John-instance’
and its ‘Mary-instance’ need to be evaluated as True in M∗:
...
Ljj →∃y(¬y = j ∧Lyj)
...
Lmm →∃y(¬y = m∧Lym)
M∗
∀x(Lxx →∃y(¬y = x ∧Lyx))
.
The ‘John-instance’ is True by default, as it were – because its antecedent Ljj is
False. Intuitively, when evaluating the English sentence we simply ignored the
‘John-instance’ for this very reason, and focused solely on the ‘Mary-instance’.
But logical formalization keeps us honest; we are obliged to explain why we count
the ‘John-instance’ of this universal claim as True. The reason, to repeat, is that
it is a conditional whose antecedent is False.
Now consider the ‘Mary-instance’. Here, we have a conditional that is True
simply because its consequent is True.
We are now in a position to complete the sought veriﬁcation of the formal
sentence
∀x(Lxx →∃y(¬y = x ∧Lyx))

Representation and Evaluation
347
in the situation M∗:
26.4 What is the role of inference in understanding the
representational content of a sentence?
I am not suggesting that there is a Little Logician in one’s head constructing
tedious formal proofs and disproofs like this when one evaluates sentences as true
or false. For that would involve a regress – what about further Little Logicians in
her head? What I am suggesting rather is this. Just as the visual cortex of a person’s
mind/brain effortlessly and subconsciously processes an enormous amount of
structured information about their visual ﬁeld, so too does their ‘logico-linguistic
module’, when working out the truth-values of not-too-complex sentences
about not-too-complicated situations, process effortlessly and subconsciously
computational objects that can be regimented by shortish proofs and refutations
such as these.
It is easy to convince oneself that the correct execution of the procedures
involved becomes much more complex very rapidly, as the size and complexity
of the situation increases, and as the logical complexity of the sentence being
evaluated increases. It is in the more difﬁcult cases that one really comes to rely
on the above theoretical insights as to how to conduct the determination of
truth-value from the basic facts given.
I advance the following thesis.
The logical moves that are involved in the determination of truth-values
of complex sentences on the basis of atomic information are subsequently
employed also, in suitably generalized forms, for the deductive transitions
that we make from complex premises to complex conclusions, even when
we do not have enough information to tell whether the premises are
true.
Inferential logical moves are involved in recognizing what is true and what is
false, even in relatively simple situations and with sentences that are not simple,
but are not overly complex either.
So the possibility (indeed, necessity) of logical inference is involved at the
very beginnings of language. It is essential for logically complex propositional
representation itself. In looking at the world, and then reporting on it by means
--(2) 
j=mM * 
_~-L~_(2) 
--M' 
--(1) 
.j = m 
Ljm 
Ljj M' 
.j -mllLjm 
-L 
(1) 
3y(.y = m II Lym) 
Ljj -+ 3y(.y = j II Lyj) 
Lmm -+ 3y(.y - mil Lym) M' 
Vx(Lxx -+ 3y(.y = x II Lyx)) 
E=£yWyAU[E] 
Law

348
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
of complex sentences, we have to be able to make logical inferences, from basic
information to those complex reports. In hearing someone else’s complex reports
about the world, and in trying, ourselves, to construct a mental picture of how
things must stand if those reports are true, we also have to be able to make logical
inferences, so as to be able to adjust the mental picture to ﬁt the reports received.
Logic governs language from the very start. Even the most ordinary kind of
thinking – propositional representation of an observed scene – is impossible
without it.
26.4.1 Isomorphisms among models
Let us re-visit the ﬁrst simple model that we introduced above:
M
j
m
Consider another model, M , say, containing different individuals in its
domain (as indicated by using triangular dots in the following picture, instead
of round ones), and structured as follows:
M †
j
m
Note that there is no essential difference between M and M , qua models or
structures. They are said to be isomorphic. This is because they can be put into
a structure-preserving, one-one correspondence. If we map the domain of M to
that of M as follows, indicated by the dashed arrows:
M
M †
j
m
j
m

Representation and Evaluation
349
we see that the following holds:
1
the mapping is one-one from the domain of M onto the domain of M;
2
the individual named j in M is mapped to the individual named j in M;
3
the individual named m in M is mapped to the individual named m in M;
4
the extension of L in M , consisting of just the ordered pair
⟨denotation of j,denotation of m⟩,
is mapped to the corresponding extension of L in M.
The mapping represented by the dashed arrows is therefore said to be an
isomorphism from M to M; and obviously its converse is an isomorphism from
M to M . The two models M and M are said to be isomorphic; and in symbols we
write M ∼= M .
It is straightforward to generalize the deﬁnition of isomorphism that we have
just illustrated with our two-element models M and M . A one-one mapping
from the domain of any model M1 onto that of any model M2 (for the same
extralogical vocabulary) is an isomorphism just in case it ‘lifts’ the M1-extension
of each extralogical expression onto its M2-extension. And isomorphism, thus
deﬁned, is obviously an equivalence relation. For, ﬁrst, every model is isomorphic
to itself, under the identity mapping; secondly, if M1 ∼= M2, then M2 ∼=
M1 (by the converse mapping, as just remarked); and thirdly, if M1 ∼= M2
and M2 ∼= M3, then M1 ∼= M3 (by composition of the two isomorphisms
involved).
When we say that we have succeeded in describing a situation M ‘up to
isomorphism’ we mean that (i) M satisﬁes our description, and (ii) any situation
or model M′ that satisﬁes our description is isomorphic to M. (The description in
question will be a particular set of sentences using the extralogical vocabulary
appropriate for M.) In such circumstances we also say that we have given a
categorical description of the model M.
What we are concerned to emphasize here is a deep fact that makes ﬁnite
situations (abstract or concrete) very special indeed:
any ﬁnite model can be described up to isomorphism;
or, equivalently,
any ﬁnite model can be categorically described.

350
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Indeed, the categorical description is effected by a single sentence:
For every ﬁnite model M, there is, in the ﬁrst-order language apt for
describing M, a sentence ϕM such that:
1
M ⊩ϕM; and
2
for every model M′, if M′ ⊩ϕM, then M′ ∼= M.
Moreover:
3. for every sentence θ in the language of M:
if M ⊩θ, then ϕM ⊢θ; and
if M ̸⊩θ, then ϕM,θ ⊢⊥.
One ought also to add here that the deducibility relation ⊢used in the statement
of (3) is that of Core Logic, which will be described in §27.1.
The following paragraph to end this section is a little more technical, but will
repay careful study. It also serves to foreshadow the major theme of Chapter 29.
By contrast with ﬁnite models, no inﬁnite model can be described up to
isomorphism using a ﬁrst-order language. At best (and none too frequently)
one can describe an inﬁnite model M precisely enough to ensure that M is
the only model of its size, up to isomorphism, satisfying one’s description.
But in that case one’s description  of M is also satisﬁed by models larger
than M.
One might wonder how success on the part of a theory  in describing a model
up to isomorphism for a particular inﬁnite size (or ‘power’) relates to potential
such success for other inﬁnite sizes. A very deep result in model theory, due to
Michael Morley (b. 1930), is that the following three possibilities for ‘categoricity
in power’ are exhaustive:
1
 succeeds in this regard for all inﬁnite powers.
2
 succeeds in this regard for exactly the uncountable powers.
3
 succeeds in this regard for exactly the countable powers.
Most inﬁnite structures in which mathematicians are interested, however, fail
to be describable up to isomorphism even in just their own power. There are
other models of their size that are not isomorphic to them, but which satisfy their
complete descriptions.
26.5 The rules of veriﬁcation and falsiﬁcation
Now let us get back to basics. The rules for verifying and falsifying sentences
in models, as we have already seen from the examples dealt with above, are
‘intercalated’: more complex veriﬁcations can be constructed out of simpler

Representation and Evaluation
351
falsiﬁcations, and more complex falsiﬁcations can be constructed out of simpler
veriﬁcations. A veriﬁcation of ϕ has ϕ as its conclusion, and its last step will be an
application of a rule of veriﬁcation. A falsiﬁcation of ϕ has ⊥as its conclusion,
and has ϕ as the major premise of its ﬁnal step, which is an application of a
rule of falsiﬁcation. In a veriﬁcation, the only assumptions used are (positively or
negatively) ‘atomic’. Logicians call atoms and negations of atoms literals, and we
shall borrow this terminology here. So we can say that in a veriﬁcation, the only
assumptions used are literals. Likewise, in a falsiﬁcation, the only assumptions
used, apart from the main sentence for reductio (the major premise of the ﬁnal
step), are literals. The reader should re-visit the earlier worked examples to
conﬁrm the correctness of this general characterization.
26.5.1 Rules of veriﬁcation
In our examples above of veriﬁcations and falsiﬁcations, we used certain rules
without pausing to explain them – mainly because it is pretty obvious, on
inspection, why the rules are in order. But in this section we shall pull together
all the basic ‘evaluative’ considerations, in order to give a deﬁnitive list of the
rules that are permitted, and are put to work, when either verifying or falsifying
a sentence in a given situation.
The following rules of veriﬁcation, apart from the rule for verifying universals,
do not depend on the model in which the sentence is being evaluated.
The rule for verifying negations is
(¬V)
(i)
ϕ
...
⊥(i)
¬ϕ
The vertical dots indicate the presence of some falsiﬁcation of ϕ. Note that upon
applying this rule, the assumption ϕ in the subordinate falsiﬁcation is discharged.
The rule for verifying conjunctions is
(∧V)
...
ϕ
...
ψ
ϕ ∧ψ
The vertical dots indicate the presence of veriﬁcations of ϕ and of ψ.
The rule for verifying disjunctions comes in two halves:
(∨V)
...
ϕ
ϕ ∨ψ
...
ψ
ϕ ∨ψ

352
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
The vertical dots indicate the presence of some veriﬁcation of ϕ or of ψ,
respectively.
The rule for verifying conditionals likewise comes in two halves:
(→V)
(i)
ϕ
...
⊥
(i)
ϕ →ψ
...
ψ
ϕ →ψ
In the left half of the rule, the vertical dots indicate the presence of some
falsiﬁcation of ϕ. Note that upon applying this half of the rule, the assumption
ϕ in the subordinate falsiﬁcation is discharged. In the right half of the rule the
vertical dots indicate the presence of some veriﬁcation of ψ.
The rule for verifying existentials is
(∃V)
...
ψ(α)
∃xψ(x)
where α is an individual in the domain.
Let N be a ﬁnite model, and suppose its domain consists of exactly the
n individuals α1, ... , αn. Then the N-relative rule for the veriﬁcation of
universals is
(∀V)
ψ(α1) ... ψ(αn) N
∀xψ(x)
The restriction here to ﬁnite models is for ease of exposition only. The formal
theory of truthmakers and falsitymakers (veriﬁcations and falsiﬁcations) deals
also with inﬁnite domains. In such cases, the steps of ‘universal veriﬁcation’ and
of ‘existential falsiﬁcation’ involved give rise to inﬁnitary sideways-branching of
the trees in questions. But the trees are still of ﬁnite depth. It is straightforward to
show that for any sentence ϕ and model M interpreting its expressions (regardless
of the size of its domain), there is an M-relative veriﬁcation of ϕ just in case ϕ
is true-in-M in the sense of Tarski; and, likewise, that there is an M-relative
falsiﬁcation of ϕ just in case ϕ is false-in-M in the sense of Tarski. See Tennant
(2014e) for further details.
So much for veriﬁcations. It remains to specify the rules for falsifying sentences.
26.5.2 Rules of falsiﬁcation
The following rules of falsiﬁcation, apart from the rule for falsifying existentials,
do not depend on the model in which the sentence is being evaluated.

Representation and Evaluation
353
The rule for falsifying negations is
(¬F)
¬ϕ
...
ϕ
⊥
The vertical dots indicate the presence of some veriﬁcation of ϕ.
The rule for falsifying conjunctions comes in two halves:
(∧F)
ϕ ∧ψ
(i)
ϕ
...
⊥
(i)
⊥
ϕ ∧ψ
(i)
ψ
...
⊥
(i)
⊥
The vertical dots indicate the presence of a falsiﬁcation of ϕ, or of ψ,
respectively.
The rule for falsifying disjunctions is
(∨F)
ϕ ∨ψ
(i)
ϕ
...
⊥
(i)
ψ
...
⊥
(i)
⊥
The vertical dots indicate the presence of falsiﬁcations of ϕ and of ψ.
The rule for falsifying conditionals is
(→F)
ϕ →ψ
...
ϕ
(i)
ψ
...
⊥
(i)
⊥
Note that a falsiﬁcation of a conditional ϕ →ψ consists in a veriﬁcation of the
antecedent ϕ and a falsiﬁcation of the consequent ψ.
The rule for falsifying universals is
(∀F)
∀xψ(x)
(i)
ψ(α)
...
⊥
(i)
⊥

354
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
The vertical dots indicate the presence of some falsiﬁcation of some
instance ψ(α).
With N as before, the N-relative rule for falsifying existentials is
(∃F)
∃xψ(x)
(i)
ψ(α1)
...
⊥
...
(i)
ψ(αn)
...
⊥
(i) N
⊥
It is easy to establish that for every situation M and every sentence ϕ it is
impossible for ϕ to enjoy both a veriﬁcation and a falsiﬁcation relative to M.
26.5.3 The semantic upshot of the rules of veriﬁcation and falsiﬁcation
Let us conﬁne our attention to the connectives ¬, ∧, ∨and →. Consider the
table below, representing the four possibilities for determinate evaluation of ϕ
and of ψ, as either True or False.
Our task is to ﬁll in the empty cells.
It sufﬁces, for each connective @, to consult the rules (@V) and (@F). For
each of the four rows in the table just given we have, respectively, the following
information about the constituents ϕ and ψ:
1
There is a veriﬁcation of ϕ and there is a veriﬁcation of ψ.
2
There is a veriﬁcation of ϕ and there is a falsiﬁcation of ψ.
3
There is a falsiﬁcation of ϕ and there is a veriﬁcation of ψ.
4
There is a falsiﬁcation of ϕ and there is a falsiﬁcation of ψ.
The V- and F-rules are then able to generate, for each row, a veriﬁ-
cation or falsiﬁcation, as appropriate, for any sentence formed from these
constituents by applying the connective in question. The reader will easily
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T T
T
T
T
T
T T
T

Representation and Evaluation
355
conﬁrm that the resulting table of truth-values is the orthodox one, as
follows.
Thus our inferentialist account generates the standard truth-tabular semantics
for the connectives.
Problems
1
For each of the models whose diagrams appear above, work out for yourself a
ﬁrst-order sentence using the names j and m, and the two-place predicate L,
that describes the model in question up to isomorphism.
2
For each of the models whose diagrams appear above, provide a formal
veriﬁcation or falsiﬁcation of each of the following sentences:
∀x∀y(Lxy →Lyx)
∀x∃y(Lxy ∧Lyx)
∀x∃y(Lxy ∧¬Lyx)
∃x(¬Lxx ∧∀yLyx)
∃x(¬Lxx ∧∀yLxy)
∃x∀y(Lxy ∨Lyx).
3
Describe an important contrast, apart from size, between ﬁnite and inﬁnite
models of ﬁrst-order languages.
4
Explain how the rules of veriﬁcation and of falsiﬁcation for a connective
express its truth table.
5
Explore how, even with small models, veriﬁcations or falsiﬁcations of multiply
quantiﬁed sentences can be of considerable complexity.
6
‘The informal notion of the truth of a sentence ϕ in a situation M is
satisfactorily explicated in terms of the existence of an M-veriﬁcation of ϕ;
and likewise for falsity and the existence of a falsiﬁcation.’ Discuss.
T
T
T T
T T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T

27 From Evaluation to Deduction
27.1 From evaluation to deduction
We saw in Chapter 26 how there are two rules for each logical operator – a
V-rule and an F-rule – enabling one to evaluate as True or False any sentence ϕ
containing occurrences of those operators, in any situation providing extensions
for the primitive, non-logical expressions occurring in ϕ. We have stressed how
the assumptions relative to which veriﬁcations and falsiﬁcations are constructed
take the form of literals – atomic sentences in the positive case, negations of
atomic sentences in the negative case. Or, as the inferentialist would put it:
the atomic axiom
M
A
in the positive case, and the atomic rule A M
⊥
in the
negative case. Mindful of this restriction on veriﬁcations and falsiﬁcations, we
shall adopt the notational convention of using the uppercase Greek letter 
(Lambda) for (coherent) sets of such ‘literals’. We shall also use V to stand for
veriﬁcations, and F to stand for falsiﬁcations. (These letters , V, and F may
occur with or without subscripts.)
The V-rules and F-rules that were stated in Chapter 26 can now be written as
follows. (Note that we are now also allowing for the model M to have an inﬁnite
domain.)
 ,
(i)
ϕ
F
⊥(i)
¬ϕ
¬ϕ

V
ϕ
⊥

From Evaluation to Deduction
357
1
V1
ϕ
2
V2
ψ
ϕ ∧ψ
ϕ ∧ψ
 ,
(i)
ϕ
F
⊥
(i)
⊥
ϕ ∧ψ
 ,
(i)
ψ
F
⊥
(i)
⊥

V
ϕ
ϕ ∨ϕ

V
ψ
ϕ ∨ψ
ϕ ∨ψ
1 ,
(i)
ϕ
F1
⊥
2 ,
(i)
ψ
F2
⊥
(i)
⊥

V
ψ
ϕ →ψ
 ,
(i)
ϕ
F
⊥
(i)
ϕ →ψ
ϕ →ψ
1
T
ϕ
2 ,
(i)
ψ
F
⊥
(i)
⊥
1
V1
ψ(α1)
...
n
Vn
ψ(αn)
...
M
∀xψ(x)
where α1,...,αn ... are all
the individuals in the domain
∀xψ(x)
 ,
(i)
ψ(α)
F
⊥
(i)
⊥

V
ψ(α)
∃xψ(x)
∃xψ(x)
1 ,
(i)
ψ(α1)
F1
⊥
...
n ,
(i)
ψ(αn)
Fn
⊥
...
(i) M
⊥
where α1,...,αn ... are all
the individuals in the domain

358
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
So: veriﬁcations have possibly complex conclusions ϕ; while falsiﬁcations have
conclusions ⊥. Moreover, both kinds of construction use only literals. They are
used as the assumptions for a veriﬁcation of ϕ, and as the assumptions (other
than ϕ) for a falsiﬁcation of ϕ.
But what happens when one does not have full enough access to the basic
(atomic) facts about a situation? One cannot always be in a position to work
out for oneself the truth value of a given sentence in any situation in which one
ﬁnds oneself. Often one has the beneﬁt of some sincere assertions from fellow
speakers, in a situation of which one is not fully apprised. One needs, under such
circumstances, to be able to work out at least some of the major consequences
of what one has been told. That is, one needs to be able to deduce (possibly
complex) conclusions from complex premises in general, and not only from
literals (i.e., atomic sentences and negations of atomic sentences). How might
that be done?
We offer for consideration the following methodological suggestion. Let our
F-rules be formulated with general (possibly complex) conclusions θ in place of
⊥. (⊥will of course still be allowed as a special case of such θ.) And let the sets 
of literals, in both our V-rules and our F-rules, be replaced by sets  of possibly
complex premises in general. (Sets of literals will of course still be allowed as
special cases of such .)
We are retaining the overall form of our V- and F-rules, but allowing
particular symbols therein to admit of a more general interpretation. Under
the suggested modiﬁcation, the foregoing V-rules morph into what are known
as Introduction rules,
and the F-rules morph into Elimination rules.
An
Introduction rule tells one under what circumstances one can infer a conclusion
of a particular form. The corresponding Elimination rule tells one what can
be inferred from such a sentence, when it is used as the so-called major
premise.
Here, then, are the Introduction and Elimination rules that respectively
result from making the changes just suggested to the foregoing V- and
F-rules. Both veriﬁcations and falsiﬁcation now become proofs, for which
we shall use the symbol  (with or without subscripts). Note the following
points.
1
In the rules for negation (¬), there is no reason to substitute θ for ⊥.
2
In the case of disjunction (∨) there are three distinct patterns in which it
would
be
permissible
to
replace
⊥
by
θ.
We
retain
all
three
of them.
3
The second half of (→V) keeps its conclusion ⊥in its subordinate
proof, since it is only in erstwhile F-rules that we are substituting θ
for ⊥.

From Evaluation to Deduction
359
(¬-I)
 ,
(i)
ϕ

⊥(i)
¬ϕ
(¬-E)
¬ϕ


ϕ
⊥
(∧-I)
1
1
ϕ
2
2
ψ
ϕ ∧ψ
(∧-E)
ϕ ∧ψ
 ,
(i)
ϕ

θ
(i)
θ
ϕ ∧ψ
 ,
(i)
ψ

θ
(i)
θ
(∨-I)


ϕ
ϕ ∨ϕ


ψ
ϕ ∨ψ
(∨-E)
ϕ ∨ψ
1 ,
(i)
ϕ
1
θ
2 ,
(i)
ψ
2
⊥
(i)
θ
(∨-E)
ϕ ∨ψ
1 ,
(i)
ϕ
1
⊥
2 ,
(i)
ψ
2
θ
(i)
θ
(∨-E)
ϕ ∨ψ
1 ,
(i)
ϕ
1
θ
2 ,
(i)
ψ
2
θ
(i)
θ

360
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
(→-I)


ψ
ϕ →ψ
 ,
(i)
ϕ

ψ
ϕ →ψ
 ,
(i)
ϕ

⊥
(i)
ϕ →ψ
(→-E)
ϕ →ψ
1
T
ϕ
2 ,
(i)
ψ

θ
(i)
θ
There is a subtle and important story to be told, about how the Introduction
rule for →achieves the tripartite form just given – in particular, its second part.
(The ﬁrst and third parts are already covered by our methodological suggestion
above.) The reader is asked to accept the assurance that this story, too long to be
included here, is fully in keeping with the spirit of the intended generalization
from evaluation to deduction-in-general.
All the Introduction and Elimination rules, where they indicate discharge
of assumptions (by means of overlining with discharge strokes, labeled with
a numeral i), involve the presupposed requirement that assumptions of the
indicated form really have been used, and are accordingly available for discharge.
Moreover, all the Elimination rules are stated on the presupposed requirement
that their major premises stand proud, with no proof-work above them. These
features are inherited directly from the evaluation rules that we called the V- and
F-rules. They are crucial in ensuring that the resulting deductive logic guarantees
that in any proof the premises (i.e., undischarged assumptions) are relevant to its
conclusion.
The foregoing rules constitute (propositional) Core Logic. The same method
succeeds in generalizing the quantiﬁer rules from the evaluation setting to
the deductive setting. There is, however, a slight complication in the case
of the quantiﬁers, which we did not have to deal with in the case of the
connectives.
Two of the quantiﬁer rules make the transition smoothly from the case of
evaluation to the more general case of deduction. The rule (∃V) becomes the
rule of ∃-Introduction:
(∃-I)


ψ(α)
∃xψ(x)

From Evaluation to Deduction
361
And the rule (∀F) becomes the rule of ∀-Elimination:
(∀-E)
∀xψ(x)
 ,
(i)
ψ(α)

θ
(i)
θ
In the transition from evaluation rules to rules of deduction-in-general, how-
ever, further changes have to be made in the case of our two ‘M-relative’
quantiﬁer rules. When evaluating sentences in a model M, we required
instance-by-instance veriﬁcations, or falsiﬁcations, depending on whether the
rule being applied was (∀V) or (∃F) respectively. But deductive reasoning does
not concern any situation M in particular; rather, it is concerned with preserving
truth-in-M, whatever the model M may be. We therefore replace all those
‘instance’ proofs (and disproofs) for α1, ..., αn ... with a single proof-template,
involving a parameter a in place of the various αi. Thus the M-relative
rule (∀V) –
1
V1
ψ(α1)
...
n
Vn
ψ(αn)
...
M
∀xψ(x)
where α1,...,αn ... are all the
individuals in the domain of M –
becomes the rule of ∀-Introduction:
(∀-I)


ψ(a)
∀xψ(x)
where a does not occur in any sentence in  or in ∀xψ(x).
The subproof  is the proof-template just mentioned; it takes over from all the
various Vi of the veriﬁcation rule.

362
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Likewise, the rule (∃F) –
∃xψ(x)
1 ,
(i)
ψ(α1)
F1
⊥
...
n ,
(i)
ψ(αn)
Fn
⊥
...
(i)
⊥
where α1,...,αn ... are all
the individuals in the domain –
becomes the rule of ∃-Elimination:
(∃-E)
∃xψ(x)
 ,
(i)
ψ(a)

θ
(i)
θ
where a does not occur in any sentence in  or in ∃xψ(x) or in θ.
Once again, the proof-template , with its parameter a, takes over from the
various falsiﬁcations Fi of the falsiﬁcation rule.
We now have in place all the rules of ﬁrst-order Core Logic – for which, see
Tennant (2012a) and Tennant (2014c).
27.2 An evolutionary perspective: how could language have
acquired its logic?
It is useful to consider thought and language in an evolutionary perspective.
It is reasonable to assume that our evolutionary ancestors could see and hear
and ‘grasp mentally’ some of the rudimentary things and events around them.
Moreover, they could probably do this well before they ever acquired as
complicated a language as we speak now. ‘The ape who could not see the branch
of the tree to grasp it was very quickly a dead ape’ (Huxley).
The visual cortex and auditory cortex, as well as the other parts of the brain
for smell, touch and taste would have been well developed in pre-linguistic
hominids. They would have been able to perceive what they would correctly
take to be stable and enduring objects, from ﬂeeting impressions, both visual
and auditory. They would have been able to categorize them in rudimentary
but survival-relevant ways. Various predator- and prey-species would be obvious
candidates for prompt recognition and memory. So too would different types
of food, and useful natural implements, such as reeds, sticks and stones; and
different kinds of shelter, such as shade trees and caves.

From Evaluation to Deduction
363
Assuming that there are regularities in the natural environment, it is to one’s
advantage to be able to grasp them. This one does by means of appropriate
categorizing concepts, and by understanding which kinds of events involving
various objects cause what other kinds of events. Our most basic recognitional
concepts are designed to ‘track the stable order’ of things. From enough
cat-glimpses and overheard meows, one posits an enduring cat, which one can
then expect to be a continuing source of such sensory stimulations, from different
angles and distances. For ‘cat’ here one can substitute any of a great number of
predator- and prey-concepts; the point holds quite generally.
Let us assume, then, that our hominid ancestors would have had reasonably
well-developed conceptual schemes by means of which they could form mental
representations of situations around them. Individual observers and thinkers who,
because they perceive well, and remember important perceived facts, and recall
those memories later when they are salient, tend to make better decisions
affecting their chances of survival and reproduction than do observers and
thinkers who cannot perceive well, or who do not learn from experience, or
who cannot apply what they have learned on later occasions. So, well before
the advent of language (whether gestural or spoken), one can expect natural
selection to have honed our hominid ancestors’ ability to register, remember and
recall. They would have been able to form and hold ‘proto-beliefs’ about the
external world. These would then have informed their decision-making and the
actions they would undertake in order to satisfy their desires.
The solitary case. In a well-functioning observer and thinker, the causal chain
would be:
Past or present situation →perception →mental representation (in observer/
thinker) →memory →recall →same mental representation (in observer/thinker)
→suitable decisions and actions in future situations.
27.3 Communication
In any social-living species, the ability to communicate survival-relevant infor-
mation would have been favored by strong selective forces. Genes that made
brains that could support linguistic behavior would have been favored by natural
selection. The most basic speech act would have been assertion: the transmission
of the information in a ‘proto-belief’, often acquired from the speaker’s own
hard-won experience, and which would have been to the great beneﬁt of the
listeners present. The beneﬁt would derive from being apprised of what they were
being told, without having to take the risks, themselves, of learning the hard way.
Think how valuable it would be to be able to learn, simply by being told, that
there is a leopard in that cave, without having to go peering into the cave oneself.
Likewise with being told where to ﬁnd clean water; where to ﬁnd various sources
of food; and so on.
We know that vervet monkeys have distinctive screeches to warn other
members of the troop about the presence of (particular kinds of) eagle, leopard

364
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
and snake. The listeners’ reactions are tailored to the speciﬁc kind of threat
posed. One gets out from under trees or rocky outcrops whenever one hears the
leopard-warning, looking up to see the danger; one gets away from long grass
whenever one hears the snake-warning, looking down at the ground to see the
danger; and one ducks under cover when one hears the eagle-warning, looking
up at the sky to see the danger.
The different kinds of warning screeches could well be ‘hard-wired’ into the
vervet monkeys’ brains by now, both for production and for processing. As soon
as the would-be warner’s brain forms a mental representation, from perceptual
impressions, of an impending threat, a warning cry would be emitted. As soon as
a listener receives such a cry, a cascade of appropriate reactions would be triggered.
When urgent action is called for, it may well be that the brain of the listener
short-circuits the formation of a mental representation of the danger at hand,
and simply sets the avoidance behavior in train. But sometimes survival-relevant
information of great value is obtained at high cost to the speaker, and shared in
low-cost fashion with listeners in situations in which no urgent action is called
for. The listener can store away the information at leisure, and have recourse
to it only later, as and when needed. With communicative interactions such
as these, it would be reasonable to suppose that the result, in the listener, is a
mental representation serving roughly (or exactly) the same functions as does the
mental representation already borne by the speaker. The mental representation
in question functions like any (proto-) belief: it can couple with various desires to
produce various intentional actions. The more (correct) beliefs one has, the better
one is equipped to choose the best actions in order to satisfy one’s desires.
Learning by testimony is a wonderful proxy for learning the hard way. The
foregoing account is roughly that of the British empiricist John Locke, laced
with some modernizing ideas from neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory. With the
advent of communication by means of language, there is a new kind of causal
chain in nature:
The communicative case. Past or present situation →perception →mental
representation (in observer/speaker) →asserting →hearing →mental represen-
tation (in listener) →suitable decisions and actions in future situations.
Note how the causal chain originates with one organism’s perception of the
environment, and terminates with other organisms’ actions within it. In the
communicative case, the genes shared by speaker and listeners are bound to
spread more effectively than in the solitary case.
27.4 Harmony and truth-telling
As soon as a channel of communication evolves in a social-living species, some
will try to exploit it to their selﬁsh advantage by lying, or misrepresenting. In
response, there will be selection for any increased ability on the part of others

From Evaluation to Deduction
365
to detect such lying and misrepresentation. The quality of information will be
as jealously guarded as the quality of mates and other resources. The forces of
selection will ensure a balance between (i) the justiﬁcation that a listener can
expect a speaker to have for a sincere assertion, and (ii) the implications that
the listener can draw from the assertion. Do not, as a speaker, make frivolous or
unwarranted assertions on matters of great importance for survival; and do not, as
a listener, jump to unwarranted conclusions on the basis of what the speaker has
asserted. The listener should be able to extract from an assertion only what must
have been able to go into it. The speaker should put into an assertion (by way of
evidence-checking, etc.) as much as a listener can be expected to feel entitled to
extract from it.
This fundamental principle of harmony between the speaker’s obligations
and listeners’ entitlements is what underlies all our moral norms concerning
truth-telling. The philosopher who gave us this notion of harmony and
underscored its importance for the primitive rules governing logical operators was
Michael Dummett (1925–2011). See, for example, Dummett (1973). (We are
venturing to supply the evolutionary suggestions in connection with harmony,
having ﬁrst put them forward in von Schilcher and Tennant (1984) and Tennant
(1984).)
Speakers, as we have seen, are responsible for the conclusions they assert,
because their listeners are entitled to infer certain things from those assertions.
Now, conclusions are typically drawn by means of introduction rules, if the speaker
wishes to be justiﬁed in asserting them. And listeners can use those assertions as
the major premises of the corresponding elimination rules. A quick example will
make this clear.
Suppose the speaker asserts A ∧B sincerely and with justiﬁcation. Then she
must have established that A is the case, and established that B is the case, before
applying ∧-Introduction to infer A ∧B:
...
A
...
B
(∧-I)
A ∧B
Note that the conjunction A ∧B features here below the inference stroke, as the
conclusion of the elimination.
The speaker is obliged to have furnished for herself a justiﬁcation for asserting A
(as indicated by the vertical dots above A), and a similar justiﬁcation for asserting
B, if she is then to make so bold as to assert (sincerely), to a trusting audience,
the conjunction A ∧B. Her listener is entitled, upon hearing such a conjunctive
assertion, to assume that the speaker has discharged those obligations. So he can
infer, from the conjunction, that A is the case; and he can also infer that B is the
case. That is, he may apply either or both of the following two elimination rules:
(∧-E)
A ∧B
A
A ∧B
B
.

366
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Note that the conjunction A ∧B features here above the inference stroke, as the
major premise of the elimination rule(s).
It is clear that the introduction rule for ∧is in harmony with its elimination
rule. The listener is able to wring from the asserted conclusion as much, but no
more, than the speaker had to put into it in order to be justiﬁed in asserting it. If
the two rules were not balanced in this way – if they were disharmonious – then
one or other of two bad things would happen. First, speakers might get away with
needing to establish too little, while yet their listeners feel themselves entitled to
infer too much, from what the speakers assert. That could result in overly rash
actions on the listeners’ parts, on the basis of beliefs that they have inferred from
what they have been told, but without any genuine justiﬁcation. Secondly, at
the other extreme so to speak, listeners might be chronically under-equipped
to enjoy the full beneﬁt of the information conveyed to them in a complex
assertion, because the elimination rule they are using is unable to extract from
the speaker’s assertion all that the speaker had to put into it. There could then
be much wasted altruistic breath on the speaker’s part, as she offers her audience
more than they take themselves to be entitled to rely upon. (Florian Steinberger
handily labels these two kinds of situation respectively as cases of E-strong and
E-weak disharmony. See Steinberger (2011).)
Either way, disharmony (or disequilibrium) between introduction and elim-
ination rules makes them ill-suited for sustainable exchanges within dangerous
environments where information is at a premium. People who use mismatched
introduction and elimination rules for a would-be logical operator are going to
write themselves out of the evolutionary competition. And, as they go, so too
goes their language, defective rules for logical operators and all.
27.5 Inference and truth-preservation
We venture now the following hypothesis. It lies,
somewhat unusually,
somewhere between science and philosophy.
Introduction and elimination rules for any logico-linguistic operator need to
be in harmony in order to be selected for as the language evolves.
Put another, more impressive-sounding way: harmony between introduction and
elimination rules for a logico-linguistic operator is a necessary precondition for the
very possibility of continued communication. It has a Kantian ring. It is meant to.
It is almost a priori in its obviousness; and it strikes one as the closest thing
the naturalist can get to an explanation of the ‘hardness of the logical must’.
The reciprocal patterns of obligation and entitlement that bind parties to a
discourse have a moral quality to them. Communicating really does involve a
social contract – a ‘meeting of minds’ as to what we shall take our words to mean.
That is why we can ‘police’ one another’s use of logical words, and ‘keep people
honest’ when they stray from the inferential norms that are in place. If those
norms were not in place, then our logical words would not – could not – mean

From Evaluation to Deduction
367
what they do. Even the most self-interested persons, if they are to be able to
exploit social conventions – including language – to their greatest advantage,
must at least abide by the meanings of words. And an absolutely central feature of
so abiding is to respect the meanings of the logical words in use. Perhaps it is for
this reason that Otto Weininger (1880–1903) once wrote the following passage
(Weininger (1903), p. 207) by which Wittgenstein was much impressed:
[L]ogic and ethics are at bottom the same, they are no more than duty to
oneself ... all ethics is possible only in accordance with the laws of logic, all
logic is at the same time ethical law.
Logik und Ethik aber since im Grunde nur eines und dasselbe – Pﬂicht gegen sich
selbst ... Alle Ethik ist nur nach den Gesetzen der Logik möglich, alle Logik ist
zugleich ethisches Gesetz.
As language becomes more complex, so the trains of reasoning, or inference,
that it can support become longer. Thus our concern for truth-telling broadens
so as to include also truth-preservation from the starting points of one’s reasoning
(the premises) to its end-point (the conclusion). If one has learned, or has
been sincerely told, Premise1, ..., Premisen, one may be able to infer a certain
Conclusion. One will do this, in general, by taking several steps of inference. These
steps are of forms that enable one to extract various aspects of the information
encoded in Premise1, ..., Premisen, and to re-arrange them so as to form the
sought Conclusion.
Naturally, the selective forces governing the utility of language will tend to
ensure that the characteristic steps of inference that we are wont to make will
be of forms that ensure that they are truth-preserving. In the worst case, these
steps of inference ought to be reliably truth-preserving within the domains that
are the subject matter of the premises and the conclusion (usually, matters
of survival-relevance in the external world). In the best case, these steps of
inference will be absolutely guaranteed to preserve truth. Put another way: in the
worst case, the steps of inference that we make should be inductively valid; in the
best case, they will be deductively valid.
One might object to the foregoing hypothesis that only harmonious pairs of
introduction and elimination rules can be favored by natural selection. The
objector’s thought would be: is it not both rather strange and almost certainly
false that a language would have acquired its logical operators in this fashion? For,
with any trait – even that of being inclined to reason classically – it would appear
that one could devise (thought experimentally, at least) some environment that
would select for that trait. (The author is grateful to a referee for raising this
possible objection, occasioning the rejoinder that follows.)
The rejoinder to such an objection is as follows. Such thought-experimentally
devised environments would be statistically rare. The actual environment of
evolutionary adaptation would have favored only those behavioral strategies that
prove to be evolutionarily stable in the long run, across reliably recurring situations.

368
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
A similar point holds for the rule of conduct, among social-living creatures,
known as Tit-for-Tat. Famously, it beats any other strategy in computational
game-theoretic modeling of evolutionary trends generated by interactions which
are in accordance with these strategies, and from which the interacting organisms
gain or lose in a ﬁtness-affecting way.
Problems
1
Investigate the notion of harmony between introduction and elimination
rules for the logical operators, by conducting your own research using sources
beyond those cited in this chapter.
2
Use the rules of Core Logic to prove the following arguments:
¬(A ∨B)
¬A ∧¬B
A ∧¬B
¬(A →B)
∀x(Fx ∧Gx)
∀xFx ∧∀yGy
∃x∀yRxy
∀y∃xRxy
∀x(Ax →Bx)
∀x(Bx →Cx)
∀x(Ax →Cx)
∀x(Ax →Bx)
¬∃x(Bx ∧Cx)
¬∃x(Ax ∧Cx)

28 Paradoxes
A paradox is something ‘above and beyond belief’: more precisely, an apparent
contradiction generated by deep, important principles that we believe to be true.
That belief turns out to be insufﬁciently reﬂective: for with a paradox we are
confronted with an argument that brings out that there is a contradiction, or
incoherence, or confusion implicit in the concepts or principles to which we
were committed.
Paradoxes are worth studying for a number of reasons. First, they are
deeply puzzling, and often inspire young thinkers to pursue Philosophy more
seriously. Secondly, they provide a fount of wisdom about how not to proceed
in formulating the basic principles of very ambitious or fundamental theories.
Thirdly, paradoxes make us aware of the dangers of what might be called
conceptual overreach. They reveal the strains that will arise as one pushes one’s
concepts to the very limits of their ranges of applicability. The present author
was drawn into Philosophy upon encountering various paradoxes among those
covered brieﬂy here; so it is appropriate, for my beginner reader, to make this
almost valedictory chapter an echo of inspiration past.
There are different kinds of paradox, and some examples of these different
kinds will follow.
28.1 Inductive paradoxes
28.1.1 Hempel’s Paradox
All the paradoxes in later sections involve deductive reasoning. There are,
however, some paradoxes peculiar to inductive reasoning. We consider ﬁrst
the Paradox of the Ravens, due to Hempel (1945). Here are some reasonable
assumptions:
1
Any generalization of the form ‘All As are Bs’ is conﬁrmed by ﬁnding A-type
things that are also B.
2
If evidence E supports an hypothesis H, then E supports (to the same degree)
any statement H′ (deductively) logically equivalent to H.

370
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Now consider: the hypothesis
(H) All ravens are black
is (deductively) logically equivalent to the statement that
(H′) All non-black things are non-ravens.
Hence any evidence supporting (H′) must support (H) to the same degree. But
the observation of a white tennis-shoe supports (H′). Hence it supports (H) to
the same degree. But what has a white tennis-shoe got to do with ravens being
black?
28.1.2 Goodman’s Paradox; or, the ‘New Riddle’ of Induction
The strange predicate ‘grue’
In the list of examples in §8.4 of logically unjustiﬁable inductions, we mentioned
a strange expectation: that the next emerald we examine will turn out to be grue.
It is time now to explain this concept.
As one might expect, it is an amalgam of green and of blue. We are going to
describe how to make this amalgam with respect to what is known as a cut-off
predicate T(x). Let T(x) be a predicate that holds of everything mentioned in the
evidence so far. An example might be ‘x is examined before the year 2020’; but it
is not essential for the notion of examination to play any role. All that matters is
that every emerald thus far examined should satisfy T(x). Thus another possibility
for T(x) is ‘x is located within 10,000 kilometers of the centre of mass of the
earth’ – assuming, of course, that all emeralds that have ever been examined
have never been more than 10,000 kilometers away from the centre of mass of
the earth. Another, simple possibility for T(x) is that it be a statement T (rather
than a predicate) that actually makes no mention of x. An example would be ‘it is
before the year 2020’. We shall choose this simple alternative for the exposition
that follows.
The predicate grue(x) is to be thought of as an amalgam (less elliptically,
(green(x),blue(x),T)) deﬁned as follows:
(T and green(x)) or (not-T and blue(x)).
Thus x is grue if and only if either it is before 2020 and x is green or it is 2020 or
later and x is blue.
We can deﬁne bleen(x) similarly:
bleen(x) ≡df (blue(x),green(x),T)
≡df (T and blue(x)) or (not-T and green(x)).

Paradoxes
371
Now it might appear as though the concepts grue and bleen are curiously complex,
having as they do the forms
(green(x),blue(x),T)
and
(blue(x),green(x),T)
respectively. But they have this appearance of unnatural complexity only because
we think that green and blue themselves are simple and natural concepts.
Try to see it from the point of view of the gruester – an imaginary being who
actually works with the concepts grue and bleen as simple and natural. From the
gruester’s point of view, it is the concepts green and blue that are unnaturally
complex. For they have the forms, respectively,
(grue(x),bleen(x),T)
and
(bleen(x),grue(x),T).
Where is all this taking us? We want now to make a simple and devastating
observation – devastating, that is, for the person who takes the concepts green
and blue for granted and thinks that they can be used in valid inductive inferences
about emeralds, saphires and the like.
Making predictions using ‘grue’
Consider the past evidence concerning those emeralds e1,...,en that we have so
far managed to lay eyes on: green(e1), ..., green(en). All those observations took
place while it was before the year 2020. Therefore the evidence could just as well
be expressed as grue(e1), ..., grue(en).
Now the normal inductivist makes the inductive leap to
for every emerald e, green(e).
In like fashion the gruester will make the inductive leap to
for every emerald e, grue(e).
For does not the gruester’s evidence support her hypothesis just as well as the
normal inductivist’s evidence supports his hypothesis?
The crucial point to make now is that the gruester and the normal cannot
both be correct. (Of course, it is logically possible that neither is correct. The next

372
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
emerald we examine may turn out to be red.) All we need to grasp here is the
simple point that the gruester and the normal disagree in their predictions.
To see that this is so, consider the case of an emerald ‘for which’ T fails. An
example would be the ﬁrst hitherto unexamined emerald that is examined after
the year 2020. Concerning this emerald e we have the following predictions:
Gruester: Emerald e is grue.
Normal: No, emerald e is green.
If the emerald turns out to be green (which you, as a normal, no doubt think
likely), the normal is right and the gruester is wrong. If, however, it turns out to
be blue (which you, as a normal, no doubt think unlikely) then it is the gruester
who will be right, and the normal who will have been proved wrong. Either way,
we see that they disagree in their predictions. They cannot both be right.
But who is to say, before the cut-off predicate T ceases to hold, just which
one will be vindicated by the evidence ‘beyond the cut-off point’? Do we have
no more than brute intuition and bias to rely on? Or can we give a principled
argument for preferring the concept green and eschewing the concept grue? – and,
correlatively, preferring the inductive generalization ‘all emeralds are green’ to the
apparently deviant one ‘all emeralds are grue’?
This is the ‘new riddle of induction’, posed by Nelson Goodman (1906–98) in
Goodman (1955). The literature on this problem is enormous, and the problem
survives as a deep and bafﬂing one. No one, in the author’s humble estimation,
has given a satisfactory solution. Failures to do so can usually be attributed to a
basic failure to appreciate how, from the gruester’s point of view, all the argu-
ments marshaled against her by the normal apply, mutatis mutandis, against the
normal.
Possible objections to the use of ‘grue’
The discontinuity objection
The ﬁrst example of this sort of failure is as follows.
Scientists prefer so-called ‘no-change’ hypotheses to ‘change’ hypotheses. It
is but one example of a preference for simpler theories. (For the various aspects
of simplicity, and an interesting attempt to give a uniﬁed theoretical account
of them, see Sober (1975).) Smoothness is preferable to discontinuity; and
constancy is preferable to change. This preference gives rise to the ‘discontinuity
objection’ to the gruester.
Consider the normal’s complaint:
You, the gruester, are putting forward an hypothesis that postulates change in
emeralds. You are saying that at the cut-off point emeralds change color from
green to blue. But I, the normal, am putting forward a no-change hypothesis.
I am saying that emeralds will have the same color, regardless of the cut-off

Paradoxes
373
point. A no-change hypothesis is simpler than a change hypothesis; so my
hypothesis is preferable to yours.
To this the gruester simply replies:
You, the normal, are the one who is putting forward an hypothesis that
postulates change in emeralds. You are saying that at the cut-off point
emeralds change grulor from grue to bleen. But I, the gruester, am putting
forward a no-change hypothesis. I am saying that emeralds will have the same
grulor, regardless of the cut-off point. A no-change hypothesis is simpler than
a change hypothesis; so my hypothesis is preferable to yours.
Stalemate. Neither side, it appears, can win. It all has to do with what we take to
be basic, natural, simple or primitive in our conceptual scheme. The normal takes
green and blue. The gruester takes grue and bleen. The disagreement is irresoluble.
The complexity objection
You, the greenster, may complain that grulors (like grue and bleen) are
‘unnatural’ or ‘complicated’ or ‘overly complex’, because of the way they have
been deﬁned above. Alright then, the gruester replies: we shall deﬁne your color
concepts in a way that shows that they are highly unnatural (since of course it’s
my grulor concepts that are really natural). So here we go. Deﬁne ‘x is green’ as
follows:
x is examined before 2020 and is found to be grue – or x is not so examined,
and is bleen.
And deﬁne ‘x is blue’ as follows:
x is examined before 2020 and is found to be bleen – or x is not so examined,
and is grue.
The integration-with-science objection
We require science to be continuous with common sense. The scientiﬁc image
must mesh with the manifest image. Science must explain the way the world
appears to us. In this regard, says the greenster, he is ahead of the gruester. He
explains his theoretical superiority as follows.
Greensters (such as I) have a deep scientiﬁc explanation of why it is
that emeralds appear to us to be green. It is because, owing to their
particular chemical composition and crystalline structure, they emit light
of such-and-such wavelength. All objects that emit light of this wavelength
appear to us to be green.

374
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Not to be outdone, the gruester replies as follows.
Gruesters (such as I) have a deep scientiﬁc explanation of why it is
that emeralds appear to us to be grue. It is because, owing to their
particular chemical composition and crystalline structure, they emit light
of such-and-such lavewength. All objects that emit light of this lavewength
appear to us to be grue.
Now, of course, the gruester owes us a deﬁnition of ‘lavewength’, but you are sure
to be able to see how it will go.
We see, then, that there is a thoroughgoing symmetry between the greenster
(i.e., you) and the gruester (i.e., me). Your complaint against me can be
turned into my complaint against you. There is no independent position from
which this conceptual dispute can be arbitrated. That would appear to be the
unsettling lesson of Goodman’s Paradox. The riddle is called ‘new’ because it
takes induction itself for granted, and shows how shakily it depends on a particular
choice of concepts in order to get matters inductively right. The challenge is, in
effect, to justify the choice of the concepts that we actually use when we apply
the inductive method.
An unsettling consequence of Goodman’s Paradox
The following possibility rears its ugly head: there may be hidden gruesters among us.
The very symmetry of considerations buttressing the normal against the gruester,
and vice versa, leads one to ask: might not someone out there be speaking what
appears to be normal English, but actually meaning grue by the word ‘green’ and
meaning bleen by the word ‘blue’?
Because we have not yet reached the cut-off point, we are unable to winkle
such a person out as the linguistic deviant she must be. Since it is not yet 2020,
nothing in the hidden gruester’s sensory experience or conversation with other
‘English’ speakers will alert anyone – normal, or hidden gruester – to the fact
that she is indeed a (hidden) gruester. That fact about her will emerge only when
(if the normals are right) she suffers ‘world shock’ on the morning of January 1,
2020. It will only be when this cut-off point is upon us that we might suddenly
discover that she no longer agrees that new grass is green (like the old grass
before the cut-off point). She might go berserk, rushing around complaining that
the grass is ‘blue’, when it appears green to us (as did grass before). Of course,
it is still appearing green to her; it’s just that that’s what makes it bleen for her,
which is why (by our assumption that she means bleen by ‘blue’) she now calls
it ‘blue’.
Goodman’s paradox thus cautions us that our concepts, as expressed in
our everyday language, might be worryingly indeterminate. The problem with
induction is now not only that we cannot get a determinate grip on the future
on the basis of the past; it is also that we may not have a determinate grip on any
portion of it, past or future.

Paradoxes
375
If there are any hidden gruesters among us, they (and we) are in for a nasty
shock sometime, after chugging along in communal harmony so nicely. But
when? 2020? 2030? ... Perhaps quietism about induction is the only refuge, if
not for the sane, then at least for those who wish to remain so.
28.2 The Sorites Paradox
This one earns a section all to itself; the literature it has generated, especially
recently, is enormous. A good place for the interested student to start would be
Keefe and Smith (1996).
The Sorites Paradox (also known as the Paradox of the Heap) makes one
wonder whether the use of vague concepts, or of linguistic predicates that can
have ‘borderline cases’, is at heart inconsistent. It can be laid out as follows (in
one of its many variant forms).
If one has a heap of sand, it will still be a heap after the removal of one grain
of sand. So, begin with a heap. Remove one grain. What is left is still a heap.
Remove another grain. What is left is still a heap. ... Eventually, what is
left is not a heap at all. For there are only ﬁnitely many grains of sand in any
given heap, and by removing them one by one they will, eventually, all be
gone. But your governing principle tells you that you will still have a heap.
Contradiction.
The same ﬂavor of paradox applies in the case of a sufﬁciently long chain of
(neighboring pair)-wise color-indiscriminable patches, beginning, say, with a
patch that is obviously red, and ending, say, with one that is obviously orange.
At no point in the chain does the observer notice any color difference between
adjacent patches. So, by the transitivity of the relation ‘x is apparently of the
same color as y’, the observer ought not to notice any color-difference between
the red and orange patches at each end of the chain. But of course she does.
Paradox.
Finally, there is an arithmetical version of this paradox, due to Hao Wang
(1921–95). The natural number 0 is small. If the natural number n is small, then
so is the successor of n. Hence, by Mathematical Induction, every natural number
is small.
28.3 Logical or semantical paradoxes
Logical or semantical paradoxes arise when language is used to describe the
relationship between itself and its subject matter. Instead of simply sticking to
the ‘object-level’ subject matter, and expressing straighforward truths about it,
the language (or its user) ventures now to express thoughts – and therefore
truths – about its own relationship to the subject matter (which has now been
expanded so as to include the language itself).

376
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Two kinds of expressive power generate these paradoxes:
(1) singular terms that refer to linguistic expressions, and
(2) semantic predicates such as ‘... is true’ and ‘... is false’, or ‘... holds of – ’,
or ‘... deﬁnes – ’.
Languages containing such terms and predicates are called semantically closed.
28.3.1 The Liar Paradox
The most famous, and perhaps simplest, of the logico-semantic paradoxes for
semantically closed languages is the Liar Paradox:
This sentence is false.
The embedded singular term ‘This sentence’ refers to the very sentence in which
it is embedded. Moreover, the predicate ‘... is false’ is best understood as the
negation of the predicate ‘... is true’. So the Liar could be re-expressed as
This sentence is not true.
The Liar therefore combines features (1) and (2) with a vengeance. The paradox
arises because we cannot stably assign a truth-value to the Liar sentence. For,
suppose the Liar is true. Then, since it says that it is false, it must be false.
Suppose, then, that it is false. Then, since it says of itself that it is false, it is
true. So: if the Liar is true, then it is false; and if it is false, then it is true. It
cannot be ‘stably true’; and it cannot be ‘stably false’. Its truth-value seems to
ﬂip-ﬂop.
Here are the main possible reactions to the Liar:
1
The Liar is meaningless.
2
The Liar is meaningful, but the question of its truth or falsity cannot arise,
since it does not ‘engage with’ any language-independent subject matter in a
suitably ‘grounded’ way.
3
The Liar is meaningful, but is neither true nor false.
4
The Liar is meaningful, but is both true and false.
5
We should not use a language in which the Liar can be expressed; for such a
language is incoherent.
6
We can and should use a language in which the Liar can be expressed; the
alleged incoherence arising from the paradox is neither here nor there, and
cannot threaten any serious scientiﬁc purposes.
It is left to the reader to ponder which response is the best. Again, the literature
is huge. A very good recent guide to all extant attempts to deal with the
logico-semantical paradoxes can be found in Scharp (2013).

Paradoxes
377
28.3.2 The Postcard Paradox
Note that paradox can arise without the self-reference that is involved in the
Liar. Here is the so-called Postcard Paradox:
1
Sentence (2) is true.
2
Sentence (1) is false.
Neither sentence contains any term referring to that same sentence. But still the
result is paradoxical. For, suppose that (1) is true. Then (2) is true; that is, (1) is
false. Now suppose that (1) is false. Then (2) is not true, i.e., (2) is false. So (1)
is true. Once again, we have unstable assignments of truth and falsity to either of
the two sentences involved. Any assumed deﬁnite truth-value for one of them is
upset by straightforward reasoning that exploits basic properties of truth and the
(apparently clear) meanings of the two sentences.
28.3.3 Grelling’s Paradox
Grelling’s Paradox is constructed by exploiting the idea that some words or phrases
apply to themselves, while others do not. For example, the word ‘short’ is indeed
short; whereas the word ‘long’ is not long. The phrase ‘begins with the letter “b”’
applies to itself; whereas ‘written in German’ does not. When an expression E
applies to itself, we say that E is autological. When E does not apply to itself, we say
that E is heterological. Now we can ask: Is the word ‘heterological’ heterological?
Suppose it is. Then it doesn’t apply to itself; i.e., it is not heterological. So
now suppose that it is not heterological. So it doesn’t apply to itself. Hence it
is heterological. If it is, then it isn’t; and if it isn’t, then it is – we have here the
same ﬂip-ﬂopping as we had in the case of the Liar.
28.4 Mathematical Paradoxes
Mathematical Paradoxes have long been a stimulus to deeper understanding of the
abstract quantities, structures and entities studied by mathematicians. They arise
because of our attempt to deal both with inﬁnity and with extreme generality.
It was Frank Ramsey who ﬁrst made a principled distinction between the
logico-semantical paradoxes and the mathematical ones. It was very prescient
of him to do so; for the mathematical paradoxes have turned out, one and
all, to be resoluble; whereas great controversy continues to rage over whether,
and, if so, how, one can either avoid, or learn to live with, paradoxes of the
logico-semantical kind.
Here now are just a few examples of famous mathematical paradoxes.
28.4.1 Zeno’s Paradox
Zeno’s Paradox is very ancient, and is actually no longer considered paradoxical.
It is now regarded as arising from a deﬁcient understanding of the process of

378
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
summing an inﬁnite series. Zeno ‘proves’ that an arrow cannot hit its target as
follows.
The distance to be traversed from the bow to the target is D, say, as the
arrow ﬂies. Before it reaches the target, the arrow will have to reach the
midpoint of the trajectory, which is a ﬁnite distance D/2 away. So the arrow
will take some ﬁnite time to reach the mid-point. Once it has reached the
mid-point, it will have to reach the mid-point of the remaining part of the
trajectory, at point 3D/4; and this will take some ﬁnite amount of time.
Iterate these considerations, and you end up with an inﬁnite number of ﬁnite
times having to be added together. That’s how long the arrow will take – and
Zeno (mistakenly) thought that this temporal sum would have to be inﬁnite.
So, he concluded, the arrow would never reach its target.
We can see today exactly how Zeno’s reasoning was mistaken. It is possible for an
inﬁnite series of ﬁnite numbers (such as 1
2, 1
4, 1
8, ...) to have a ﬁnite sum. Zeno
did not realize that. Paradox dissolved.
28.4.2 Richard’s Paradox
Richard’s Paradox exploits the axiomatic principle that if there is a natural number
with a given property P, then there is a least natural number with property P.
Consider the property of being a natural number not nameable in fewer than
nineteen syllables. Since there are only ﬁnitely many syllables, there are only
ﬁnitely many strings of fewer than nineteen syllables. The ‘namings’ would have
to be effected by these ﬁnitely many strings. So only ﬁnitely many numbers get
named in this way. Hence there is some number that does not get named in this
way. Now take the least such number, i.e., the least number not nameable in
fewer than nineteen syllables. We have just named it in fewer than nineteen
syllables. Contradiction.
Richard’s Paradox involves a curious blend of semantical and mathemat-
ical features. Naming, and nameability, are semantical notions; while the
least-number principle is taken from mathematics. The most straightforward
resolution of this paradox would involve prohibiting instantiations of the
least-number principle that involve properties in which semantical notions are
embedded. Mathematics, after all, aims to deal with mathematical objects (such
as the natural numbers) and their mathematical properties and relations (such as
being prime, or being less than).
28.4.3 Russell’s Paradox
Russell’s Paradox is perhaps the most famous and vexing of all mathematical
paradoxes. It gave rise to the ‘crisis in foundations’ in the early twentieth century.
It bedevils any attempt to give an absolutely general notion of class or set. Some
logician-philosophers thought that all mathematics could be reduced to, or coded

Paradoxes
379
as, talk about sets. For example, the number 0 might be identiﬁed with the
empty set (the set that has no members); the number 1 with the set of all
one-membered sets; the number 2 with the set of all two-membered sets; and so
on. This led to a search for deep underlying principles governing set-existence.
The principle displayed below, now called Naïve Abstraction, was in effect
proposed in Frege (1893; reprinted 1962). We say ‘in effect’, because it is a quick
consequence of Frege’s Basic Law V, which was the actual principle he proposed.
Basic Law V says
{x|Fx}={x|Gx} ↔∀x(Fx ↔Gx).
That is to say, the set of all Fs is identical to the set of all Gs just in case the Fs
are exactly the Gs.
Here now is the Principle of Naïve Abstraction:
For every property F there exists the set of all things with property F. In
symbols:
∀F∃!{x|F(x)}.
The reader is reminded here of the notation ‘∃!t’, for singular terms t, that was
introduced and explained in §7.3.3. Note that set-abstracts, namely terms of the
form {x|F(x)}, are singular terms.
Naïve Abstraction is easy to illustrate. There is the set of all people; the set of
all hydrogen atoms; the set of all natural numbers; the set of all dinosaurs; and so
on. Sets are simply extensions of properties, and are to be treated as things that
can have further properties.
Now, properties can be speciﬁed by using two-place relations. For example,
from the relation ‘x hates y’ one can obtain the property ‘x hates x’ (i.e., x is a
self-hater) by making x occur in both places. From ‘x killed y’ one can likewise
obtain ‘x killed x’ (i.e., x committed suicide). One can also append a negation
sign: ‘not(x loves x)’ would mean that x does not love himself. And ‘not(x is a
member of x)’ would mean that x is not self-membered.
Russell’s devastatingly clever idea was to consider the property of not being a
member of oneself. By Naïve Abstraction, there is a set (let us call it R, for ‘the
Russell set’) of all and only those things that are not self-membered. (In symbols:
{x|¬x∈x}.) So now we can ask: Is R a member of R? In search for an answer, we
reason as follows.
Suppose R is a member of R. Then R must possess the property that deﬁnes
membership in R – that is, R must not be a member of R. So, it must
after all be the case that R is not a member of R. But then R possesses the
deﬁning property for membership in R; whence R is a member of R, after all.
Contradiction.

380
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
The now orthodox reaction to Russell’s Paradox is to recognize that Naïve
Abstraction is far too ambitious an abstract existential principle. It postulates
‘too many’ abstract existents, some of which are too large to be sets. This
leads to inconsistency. A more measured approach, now codiﬁed in so-called
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, is to postulate the existence of certain unproblem-
atic sets, and then to postulate that various other, more complicated, sets can be
built up out of them by iterable operations (such as pairing, union, taking the
set of all subsets of a given set, etc.). One still obtains in this way enough sets
to ‘do’ mathematics; but sets are no longer regarded as logical objects answering
to a single, powerful abstraction principle. (Indeed, one obtains much more than
enough in the way of sets. A relatively small initial segment of the cumulative
hierarchy V of sets – namely, the segment Vω+ω – contains surrogates for all the
objects talked about in all the different branches of classical mathematics. See
Friedman (1971).)
The modern set-theorist uses as primitive the notation ‘{x|F(x)}’ (for ‘the set
of all and only those x such that F(x)’). Russell’s Paradox teaches us that one of
these ‘set-abstraction terms’ – namely, {x|¬x ∈x} – fails to denote. This means
that the underlying logic itself needs to be revised, in order to accommodate
the presence of non-denoting singular terms in the language. But this, fortunately,
can be done (as already observed in §7.3.3). Not only have we had to surrender
Frege’s naïve principle of set-abstraction; we have also had to abandon his ideal of
a ‘logically perfect language’ in which every singular term denotes. The result is a
so-called free logic – free, that is, of the otherwise crippling assumption that every
singular term denotes. (For a detailed account of free logic, see Tennant (1978),
Chapter 7.) The tacit adoption of free logic was in fact the quiet revolution in
logic that was the real and lasting legacy of Russell’s Paradox. It is rather peculiar
that philosophers of logic still acquiesce in Frege’s description of a ‘logically
perfect’ language as one in which all singular terms denote. The lesson of Russell’s
Paradox (and of the Burali–Forti Paradox, to be discussed in §28.4.4) is that the
assumption that all singular terms denote is a great logical imperfection.
Russell’s Paradox, in modern set theory developed with free logic, is now a
mere negative existential theorem: there is no set that has as members all and only
those sets that are not members of themselves. This should not really be any
great surprise. Pure logic tells us also that there is no barber who shaves all
and only those barbers who do not shave themselves. Exactly the same logical
considerations apply in each case. Paradox dissolved (though only after a great
deal of logical headache, and the administration of some very powerful logical
analgesics).
28.4.4 The Burali–Forti Paradox
Georg Cantor (1845–1918) pioneered informal set theory, which was only later
fully formalized through the efforts of Ernst Zermelo (1871–1953) and Abraham
Fraenkel (1891–1965). One of the most important concepts in set theory is that
of a well-ordering. We shall investigate here how it gave rise to the Burali–Forti

Paradoxes
381
Paradox of the ordinal of the class of all ordinals (equivalently: the well-order
type of the class of all well-order types).
Some words of advice at the outset. Our discussion of this particular
paradox will make greater than usual demands on the reader’s concentration,
and willingness to engage with material at a high level of abstraction. It is,
in fact, a difﬁcult paradox to set out properly, without distorting where the
emphases are to be placed, and without entering considerations that could
strike the reader with a critical eye as potentially fallacious. The reader
who is not ‘symbolically minded’ or who is averse to technical material may
therefore be satisﬁed with skimming the formal treatment, and just reading the
prose for the main message about the Burali–Forti Paradox. End of words of
advice.
It is important to stress, at the outset, that this paradox afﬂicts our informal
mathematical thinking about well-orderings and their order types, and does not
arise solely within the context of formal set theory. It is to be expected, of course,
that if formal set theory too slavishly regiments the deductive development
of that informal theorizing, without any reforming of naïve intuitions, then
something like the Burali–Forti Paradox lies close at hand.
Background to the Burali–Forti Paradox: the theory of well-orderings,
and of their order types
Limitations of space, and the formidable mathematical details involved in
establishing the following theorems, force this discussion to conﬁne itself just
to the statement of necessary results, and to deﬁnitions of the notions involved,
that enable one to explain the Burali–Forti Paradox. Readers whose interest is
piqued by the following theorems about well-orderings, and in particular about
the well-ordering of well-order types, are encouraged to try to devise their own
proofs.
Deﬁnition 8. [Well-ordering] A binary relation < is said to be a well-ordering of a
non-empty set X if and only if it satisﬁes the following conditions (where the quantiﬁers
range over X):
1
Transitivity: ∀x∀y∀z((x<y ∧y<z) →x<z)
2
Anti-symmetry: ∀x∀y(x<y →¬y<x)
3
Totality: ∀x∀y(x<y ∨x = y ∨y<x)
4
Least elements: Suppose  is a property possessed by at least one element. Then
there is a unique element x with the following property:
(x) and for every element y, if y < x then ¬(y).
A helpful picture is as follows, where the ordering of X goes from left to
right, and matters are idealized by having a line to represent X, rather than
some pattern of discrete dots (which would be more faithful to the notion of

382
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
a well-ordering, but which cannot be represented, pictorially, with the necessary
degree of generality):
y   <   x
Φ
X
We shall call X< the well-ordering (it is the ‘structure’, or ‘model’); and we shall
call X its domain.
As with any kind of structures, there can be isomorphisms between distinct
well-orderings.
Deﬁnition 9. [Isomorphism] Let A< and B< be well-orderings. A one-one function
φ from A onto B is called an isomorphism of A< to B< if and only if
for all a, a′ in A, (a < a′ (in A<) ⇔φ(a) < φ(a′) (in B<)).
Deﬁnition 10. [Initial segment] An initial segment of a well-ordering A< is a
well-ordering of the form {x ∈A|x < a}<, where a ∈A.
With considerable ingenuity and careful compilation of auxiliary concepts,
one can establish the following result.
Theorem 2. For any two well-orderings A< and B<, either A< is isomorphic to B<,
or A< is isomorphic to an initial segment of B<, or B< is isomorphic to an initial
segment of A<.
Cantor included in his informal set theory an informal theory of well-order
types, or ordinals. (He called them Zahlen.) Well-order types were, at the time of
their introduction, new mathematical objects.
The new entities were governed by the following fundamental (but, as the
Burali–Forti Paradox will reveal, somewhat naïve) principle:
Principle 1. Every well-ordering R of a domain D has a unique well-order type, which
is also the well-order type of any well-ordering isomorphic to R.
We shall assume, as Cantor did, that well-order types, as mathematical objects
sui generis, exist in abundance, and that we can state and prove various general
results about them. To that end, we shall use the sortal variables α,β,γ for
well-order types.

Paradoxes
383
We now deﬁne a relation ≺on well-order types as follows.
Deﬁnition 11. [Ordering of well-order types] α ≺β if and only if some
well-ordering of well-order type α is isomorphic to an initial segment of some
well-ordering of well-order type β.
Theorem 3. ≺is a well-ordering of well-order types.
Proof. One can prove each of the following, where the quantiﬁers range over
well-order types:
1
Transitivity of ≺: ∀α∀β∀γ ((α ≺β ∧β ≺γ ) →α ≺γ )
2
Anti-symmetry of ≺: ∀α∀β(α ≺β →¬β ≺α)
3
Totality of ≺: ∀α∀β(α ≺β ∨α = β ∨β ≺α)
4
Least elements of ≺: Suppose  is a property possessed by at least one
well-order type. Then there is a unique well-order type α with the following
property:
(α) and for every well-order type β ≺α, ¬(β).
The proof of Totality of ≺makes crucial use of Theorem 2.
Theorem 4. Every well-order type α is the well-order type of the well-ordering by ≺
of all the well-order types ≺α.
Now for the Burali–Forti Paradox itself ...
By Principle 1, the well-ordering by ≺of all order-types has its own unique
well-order type. Call this well-order type .
It follows, as a particular instance of Theorem 4, that
 is the well-order type of the well-ordering by ≺of all order-types ≺.
Now let ≺∗be the well-ordering that properly extends ≺as follows:
for all α ≺ and β ≺, α ≺∗β just in case α ≺β; and
for all α ≺, α ≺∗.
By Principle 1, the well-ordering ≺∗(of all well-order types ≺ along with the
well-order type  itself) has its own unique well-order type. Call this well-order
type ∗.
Note that the identity mapping on all well-order types ≺ is an isomorphism
onto an initial segment of the well-ordering ≺∗(of well-order types ≺ and the

384
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
well-order type  itself). It follows that
 ≺∗
(28.1)
But since  is the well-order type of the well-ordering by ≺of all well-order
types, and ∗is a well-order type, we have
∗≺
(28.2)
(28.1) and (28.2) contradict Anti-symmetry of ≺.
Resolving the Burali–Forti Paradox
As with Russell’s Paradox, the underlying problem giving rise to the Burali–Forti
Paradox is the naïve willingness to postulate the existence of an abstract ‘object’
that is ‘too big’ to exist as a completed entity. The class of all well-order types
is simply too big to be a domain for which a well-ordering, however natural, can
be expected to ‘produce’, or have associated with it, its very own well-order type.
The way to resolve the Burali–Forti Paradox is to restrict the unbridled generality
of Principle 1. This is difﬁcult to do in the informal setting within which Cantor
originally developed his ideas about well-orderings and their well-order types. But
in formal set theory we are much more careful about postulating the existence
of certain sets that the by now familiar paradoxes reveal to be ‘too large’ to
exist as completed totalities. The lesson of the Burali–Forti Paradox is that
the property of being an ordinal number (the set-theoretic surrogate for being a
well-order type) has too large an extension to admit of set-abstraction. There is
no such thing as the set of all ordinal numbers. Zermelo’s Axiom of Inﬁnity, to
be sure, permits one to assert the existence of the set of all ﬁnite ordinal numbers.
But no consistent extension of Zermelo’s axioms can permit one to assert the
existence of the set of all ordinal numbers, ﬁnite and inﬁnite.
28.4.5 Skolem’s Paradox
A set y is said to be a subset of a set x (in symbols: y ⊆x) just in case every member
of y is a member of x (in symbols: ∀z(z ∈y →z ∈x)).
We shall now state and prove a result of absolutely stunning simplicity and
beauty, which has far-reaching implications for the universe of sets. It is an
intellectual object of such fascination that it is included here as much for
aesthetic reasons as for theoretical ones.
Theorem 5 (Cantor). For no set is there a function mapping its members onto all its
subsets.
Proof. Let X be any set. Suppose, for reductio ad absurdum, that f is a function
mapping the members of X onto all the subsets of X.

Paradoxes
385
Consider the ‘diagonal set’ {x∈X|x ̸∈f(x)}. By Separation, this set exists, and
it is a subset of X. Since f is onto all subsets of X, there is some d∈X such that
f(d) = {x∈X|x ̸∈f(x)}.
Suppose for subsidiary reductio that d∈{x∈X|x ̸∈f(x)}. Then d ̸∈f(d), i.e., d ̸∈{x∈
X|x ̸∈f(x)}. Contradiction. This ends the subsidiary reductio. We conclude that
d ̸∈{x∈X|x ̸∈f(x)},
i.e., d ̸∈f(d). But now, since d∈X, we have
d∈{x∈X|x ̸∈f(x)}.
Contradiction. So there is no such function f.
Note that the only set-theoretic existence-axiom used in the proof of Cantor’s
Theorem is an instance of the Axiom Scheme of Separation. This is a very
innocuous conditional existence principle. It says the following.
Suppose one is given a set X. So X’s existence is not in question. X exists
along with its members. It seems, on this supposition, intuitively compelling
to claim that, for any property , one can cull from the set X that subset (call
it X) of X whose members are all and only those members of X that satisfy
. That is, X exists. (Why not? – it is, as it were, no bigger than X.)
This, then, is the so-called principle of Separation. Expressed as a formal rule:
t = X
∃!{x|x∈X ∧(x)}
.
The picture for Separation is as follows. Within the set X:
X
X Φ
X Φ = {x|x ∈X ∧ Φ (x)}
some members (i.e., some bullets in the diagram) may have a certain property .
We can separate out the set of all members of X that have property . Obviously,
this set X exists if X does.
The power set ℘(x) of a set x is the set of all subsets of x:
℘(x) =df {y|y ⊆x}, i.e., {y|∀z(z ∈y →z ∈x)}.

386
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Another conditional existence axiom of set theory is the Power Set Axiom:
Given any set x, ℘(x) exists.
By contrast with Separation, this is a very powerful principle, allowing one
to generate more and more sets of ‘higher rank’. But it is also an intuitively
compelling principle. It invites one to imagine all the various possible ways that
one might cull subsets of a given set X (applying Separation, as it were, over and
over again); and then gathering all the results together into a completed set – the
power set of X. Interestingly, in the presence of Separation, the existence of
anything guarantees the existence of a very special set: the empty set. This is the set
{x|¬x=x}, usually abbreviated as ∅. Given any thing at all – call it a – Separation
tells us that we can separate out the set consisting of all and only those members
of a that are not identical to themselves. But of course there are no such things. So
the empty set exists, courtesy of this instance of Separation.
Thus far, we have mentioned only conditional set-existence principles; and
have not yet encountered what one might call an outright set-existence principle.
But there is a very important one on which all reasonable set theories agree: the
set of all natural numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, ... exists. This is usually stated in set-theoretic
terms as follows.
Consider the ﬁnite ordinals
∅,
{∅},
{∅,{∅}},
{∅,{∅},{∅,{∅}}},
...
where each one is the set of all those preceding it. The set of all these ﬁnite
ordinals exists. We call it ω.
This is the Axiom of Inﬁnity of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. Stated as a single
sentence in abbreviated form, it would read
∃!{x|x is a ﬁnite von Neumann ordinal},
where the predicate ‘x is a ﬁnite von Neumann ordinal’ can be spelled out
explicitly in terms of ∅and ∈. (The deﬁnitional details need not detain us.)
With its existence secured by outright postulation, ω (the set of all ﬁnite von
Neumann ordinals), becomes the gold-standard for countability. An inﬁnite set
is said to be countably inﬁnite just in case its members can be put into one-one
correspondence with the members of ω.
All modern systems of set theory, such as Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with
Choice (so-called ZFC) – are committed to the existence of ω and to the

Paradoxes
387
existence of power sets. Hence, by Cantor’s Theorem, they are committed to
the existence also of:
the uncountable set ℘(ω);
the even more uncountable set ℘(℘(ω));
...
and so on, ad inﬁnitum.
This is what the great mathematician and foundationalist David Hilbert called
‘Cantor’s paradise’. We precipitate the existence of inﬁnitely many ever-greater
inﬁnities, as soon as we postulate the existence of the comparatively humble,
countably inﬁnite set ω.
Aristotle refused ever to acknowledge the existence of any ‘completed’ inﬁnity,
construed as a single totality. Rather, he insisted, inﬁnity is at best potential
inﬁnity. Modern set theory both vindicates Aristotle and ignores him. It
vindicates him in so far as he would be able to point out just how committal it
proves to be to postulate even the very ﬁrst completed inﬁnity, namely ω. But set
theory scorns his fear of completed inﬁnities in general by incurring commitment
to all of these inﬁnities ‘in one go’, as a consequence of the Power Set Axiom.
The set-theoretic universe needs no further stage-by-stage postulation, in order to
create each of its inﬁnitely many ever-greater inﬁnities. Rather, they all coexist,
as soon as one asserts both the existence of ω and that of power sets.
But modern set theory (ZFC, for the sake of deﬁniteness) is a ﬁrst-order
theory, formulated in a countable ﬁrst-order language. Let us assume that ZFC
is consistent. That is, there is no proof of absurdity from any of the axioms of
ZFC. Then it follows, by an important result in mathematical logic known as the
Countable Models Theorem (due to Löwenheim and Skolem – see especially
Skolem (1919)), that ZFC has a countable model. Such a model consists in a
countably inﬁnite domain of individuals, the sets, furnished with an extension
for the binary relation ‘∈’ (which one may read as ‘...is a member of ...’).
This is seemingly paradoxical; it has earned the name ‘Skolem’s Paradox’. Set
theory is, par excellence, our way of committing ourselves to the inﬁnite, especially
the uncountably inﬁnite. It explicates the precise sense in which certain sets might
be uncountably inﬁnite. It even proves the existence of an uncountably inﬁnite
set, namely ℘(ω). Yet, because set theory has a countable model, it appears to be
unable to ensure that ℘(ω) really is uncountably inﬁnite.
How can this be?
Resolving Skolem’s Paradox
Like the other mathematical paradoxes, Skolem’s Paradox can be resolved. We
need to draw a distinction between seeing things from ‘within’ a model, and
seeing them from ‘outside’ it.

388
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Any model of ZFC must have an individual in its domain serving as the
supposedly uncountable set ℘(ω). But in any countable model M this set will be
represented as having at most countably inﬁnitely many members! From ‘inside’
the model M, one cannot ‘see’ that the individual serving as ℘(ω) is ‘really’
countable. This is because, in accordance with Cantor’s Theorem, there is no
element in the model M counting as (no pun intended) a one-one mapping from
ω onto (the individual which, in M, counts as) ℘(ω). And this is so even though
℘(ω) is ‘really’ countable. That is, it is borne the ∈-relation by only countably
many individuals in the domain of M.
This latter fact can be appreciated only by viewing the model M from ‘outside’,
and supplying in one’s mathematical imagination the one-one mapping that
is ‘missing’ from M. This shift of perspective involves semantic ascent from
the original theory to a more powerful metatheory. But now that very same
metatheory, if consistent, has a countable model; ... and one launches on an
inﬁnite regress. As Skolem concluded, the notion of uncountability is relative,
not absolute. Indeed, one might even say: it is ineffable – at least, at ﬁrst order.
Problems
1
There are many suggested solutions to the Paradox of the Ravens. Explore
them and try to decide whether any of them is succesful.
2
Given the deﬁnitions in the text of x is grue and of x is bleen, show that x is
green and x is blue may be deﬁned, respectively, as
(T and grue(x)) or (not-T and bleen(x)).
and
(T and bleen(x)) or (not-T and grue(x)).
3
Regiment the reasoning behind the Liar Paradox as a proof in Core Logic
supplemented with simple inferential principles (which you will have to
formulate) governing the predicate ‘... is true’.
4
Regiment the reasoning behind Russell’s Paradox as a proof that there is no
such set as the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. Make it a
proof in Core Logic supplemented with simple inferential principles (which
you will have to formulate) governing the notions of set-abstraction and
membership.
5
Explain why set theory cannot just ‘stop’ with the inﬁnity of natural numbers,
and refuse to countenance the existence of any greater inﬁnity.
6
Explore the implications of the Countable Models Theorem for ﬁrst-order real
number theory. Does it mean that there cannot really be uncountably many
real numbers?

29 Description v. Deduction: The
Clash of Ideals
We saw in Chapter 26 and Chapter 27 how our canons of deductive inference,
governing truth-preservation across situations in general, can be obtained by
smooth generalization from the rules of veriﬁcation and of falsiﬁcation that
govern the evaluation of sentences as True or False in particular situations.
One might therefore expect a larger-scale ‘harmony’ to assert itself, between
our powers of representation or description, and our powers to deduce all logical
consequences of our representations or descriptions.
The purpose of this chapter, however, is to reveal an absolutely ineluctable
conﬂict between those two would-be powers. They cannot be maximized together. It
is ironic indeed that this irresoluble tension should arise between any attempted
maximization of our powers of description and any (simultaneously) attempted
maximization of our powers of deduction. For should not the two powers go hand
in hand? – the latter feeding off, because rooted in, the former?
29.1 The Noncompossibility Theorem
The profoundly disquieting answer is negative, in the form of the Noncom-
possibility Theorem below. (This theorem was ﬁrst proved in this completely
general form in Tennant (2000).) The reader is reminded here of the notion
of a categorical description of a given model or structure, which was explained
in §26.4.1. If you aspire to describe certain mathematical structures categorically,
pinning down precisely how many things are in them, and how those things are
related to each other, then you had better abandon (because it is irreconcilable
with that ‘expressivist’ aspiration) any hope you might entertain of being able to
deduce from your description everything that actually follows from it (in the sense
of being logically implied by it, regardless whether one can actually deduce it by
means of ﬁnite proof). Likewise, if you aspire to be able always to deduce from your
description of a particular mathematical structure everything that actually follows
from your description, then you had better abandon (because it is irreconcilable
with that ‘deductivist’ aspiration) any hope you might entertain of being able to
describe precisely how many things are in that mathematical structure, and how
those things are related to each other.

390
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
This result bedevils all discourse, no matter what the language. The expressivist
or descriptivist aspiration is incompatible with the deductivist aspiration. The
problem is rooted in the fact that we state and prove matters of fact in a perforce
ﬁnitary fashion; whereas some of those matters of fact have to do with inﬁnite
domains, especially in Mathematics.
The Noncompossibility Theorem requires remarkably little for its proof. There
are only two concepts that need to be reviviﬁed for the reader at this stage.
First, there is the concept of soundness of proof. Proofs are sound (and so is the
system of proof that generates them) when the truth of their respective premises
guarantees the truth of their respective conclusions. Thus: if  is a proof of
conclusion Q from premises P1,...,Pn, then: any interpretation of (or model for)
the extralogical vocabulary in the sentences involved that makes P1,...,Pn true
makes Q true also.
Secondly, there is the concept of isomorphism of models, which we have already
encountered in §26.4.1 and in §28.4.4. Two models dealing with the same
extralogical vocabulary (names, functions signs, and predicates) are said to be
isomorphic to each other just in case there is a one-one correspondence between
their domains, under which their respective denotations for names, mappings for
function signs, and extensions for predicates correspond exactly. For example, if
φ maps the domain of M one-one onto the domain of M′, and P, say, is an n-place
predicate of the language being interpreted by both M and M′, then we have
∀α1,...,αn in the domain of M,
⟨α1,...,αn⟩∈M(P) ⇔⟨φ(α1),...,φ(αn)⟩∈M′(P).
Likewise, if a is a name being assigned a denotation by both M and M′, then we
have
φ(M(a)) = M′(a).
Finally, if f is an n-place function sign being assigned a mapping as its denotation
by both M and M′, then we have
M(f)(α1,...,αn) = β ⇔M′(f)(φ(α1),...,φ(αn)) = φ(β).
For models, being isomorphic means having exactly the same structure.
Isomorphism is, in fact, the logician’s and mathematician’s criterion for
sameness of structure. When a mathematician seeks to describe a particular
mathematical structure exactly, the most she can hope for is to describe it
‘up to isomorphism’. That would involve saying so much about ‘the’ model she
has in mind, and saying it so precisely, that any model making true what
she says is isomorphic to the model she has in mind. Mathematicians freely
speak of ‘intended’ models, and they experience no intellectual discomfort
or embarrassment in invoking what might strike the uninitiated listener as
surprisingly psychologistic discourse. Moreover, if they wish to avoid the charge

Description v. Deduction
391
of psychologism altogether, they speak instead of ‘the standard’ model, rather
than ‘the intended’ model. But this does not obscure the fact that they have
a particular model in mind – the standard one. And they are trying to convey a
grasp of that model to other minds. This is what happens, for example, when a
mathematician tries to get a learner to understand what is meant by the structure
of natural numbers. They call it N, or N, or something similarly portentous.
Then they emphasize that its domain contains exactly the ‘standard’ natural
numbers 0, 1, 2, ... and no other individuals at all. That done, the learner’s grasp
of the (extension of) the successor function, the addition function, and the
multiplication function is supposed to fall effortlessly into place. Any model that
the learner ‘thinks up’ in response to this course of instruction is going to be
isomorphic to the model that her teachers had in mind.
Deﬁnition 12. Let L be any language with identity. Let a be a name not in L. We
deﬁne La
̸= to be the set of non-identities
{¬a=t | t is a term in L}.
We deﬁne La to be the set La
̸= ∪{∃!a}.
Here is one way in which complete expressive power of a language L would have
to be able to manifest itself: that there be some model M of particular interest to
the user of L, such that
1
 is a set of sentences in L;
2
M is an inﬁnite L-model of ;
3
every element of M is the denotation of some term in L; and
4
every L-model of  is isomorphic to M.
When these conditions obtain, the L-theory  can be said to categorically describe
the structure of the model M.
Here is one way in which complete deductive power of a language L would
have to be able to manifest itself: that it be furnished with
1
a sound proof-system S for its logical operators, such that
2
for any set  of L-sentences that has no model, there is an S-proof of ⊥
from .
We now carry forward the notational convention just established. The con-
ditions in italics below seek to maximize expressive power. The conditions
in boldface seek to maximize deductive power. (Note how (7) here is but
a special case of the earlier ‘boldface’ condition (2) for complete deductive
power.)

392
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Theorem 6. [Noncompossibility]
It is impossible that the following hold:
1
L is a language
2
 is a set of sentences in L
3
M is an inﬁnite L-model of 
4
every element of M is the denotation of some term in L
5
every L-model of  is isomorphic to M
6
S is a sound proof-system for the logical operators in L
7
for any name a not in L, if ∪La has no model, then there is an S-proof of
⊥from  ∪La.
Proof. Suppose (1)–(7) hold. We shall derive a contradiction. We shall do so
with diagrams copiously provided for intuitive guidance. The non-technically
minded reader is encouraged to persevere, and to let the chain of reasoning unfold
step by utterly basic step.
Extend L by adding a new name a. Suppose, for a subsidiary reductio ad
absurdum, that ∪La has a model. Call this model N. The model N must provide
a denotation for the new name a. Call that denotation α:
α
Δ ∪ L a
N
N
a
Let NL be the restriction of N to the language L:
NL
Δ
NL
α
NL is a model of . Hence by (5), NL is isomorphic to M. That is, there is a 1-1,
structure-preserving mapping from NL onto M. Call the mapping φ:
M
NL
α
φ (α)
φ

Description v. Deduction
393
By (4), the individual φ(α) is denoted in M by some L-term t:
M
NL
α
t
φ (α)
φ
Hence by the isomorphism φ between NL and M, the individual α is denoted in
NL, hence also in N, by that same term t:
M
N
a
α
t
t
φ (α)
φ
So N makes the identity a=t true. But N is a model of La
̸=. Hence N makes ¬a=t
true. Contradiction. It therefore follows that  ∪La has no model. (This ends
the subsidiary reductio ad absurdum.)
It now follows by (7) that there is an S-proof of ⊥from  ∪La. Let  be the
proof of ⊥in question.  has the form
,

⊥
where the undischarged assumptions of  form a ﬁnite set  ∪, with
∅⊆ ⊆ and ∅̸=  ⊆La.
 is ﬁnite and non-empty. Note that  ∪{∃!a} has a model (let the name
a denote any individual in M). So by (6) there is no S-proof of ⊥from
 ∪{∃!a}. Hence  contains at least one member of La
̸=. So  has the form
{¬a=t1,...,¬a=tk}.

394
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Let the respective denotations of the terms t1,...,tk in the domain of M be
α1,...,αk:
M
t1
tk
α1
αk
Since M is inﬁnite (by (3)), there is an individual in the domain of M that is not
denoted by any of the terms t1,...,tk. Let β be such an individual:
M
t1
tk
β
αk
α1
Extend the model M of  by making the name a denote β. Call the extended
model Mβ
a :
Ma
a
t1
tk
β
β
αk
α1
Since  ⊆, M is a model of . Moreover, Mβ
a interprets L exactly the way M
does. So Mβ
a is a model of :
Ma
a
t1
tk
β
β
Θ
αk
α1

Description v. Deduction
395
By choice of β, each of the non-identities ¬a=t1,...,¬a=tk is true in Mβ
a . So
too is ∃!a. Hence Mβ
a is a model of  as well:
Ma
a
t1
tk
β
β
Θ ∪ Ξ
αk
α1
So Mβ
a makes true the premises of the proof :
,

⊥
By (6), the proof  is sound. Hence the conclusion of  is true in Mβ
a . But the
conclusion of  is ⊥, which is false in every model. Contradiction.
We have reduced (1)–(7) to absurdity.
29.2 The foundational consequences of noncompossibility
It is worth stressing that this impossibility result is utterly general.
L can be any language at all. It could contain higher-order quantiﬁers, or
branching quantiﬁers; it could enable plural quantiﬁcation; it could contain
unusual ﬁrst-order quantiﬁers, such as the plurality quantiﬁers (few, several,
many, most, almost all, domain-many, etc.), or even inﬁnitary quantiﬁers (there
are inﬁnitely many, there are uncountably many); it could contain modal operators.
None of these expressive stengthenings will enable one to elude the impossibility
just established. For its proof relies on only the most banal and basic logical
properties of the identity predicate, and negation.
The fundamental tension that Theorem 6 exposes between descriptive and
deductive aspirations arises (as already intimated above) from the facts that
(i) proof has to be ﬁnite, whereas (ii) some of the important structures that we
wish to characterize ‘up to isomorphism’ are inﬁnite. What has been uncovered
here is a completely general form of the ineffability of the inﬁnite.
The important structures that mathematicians wish to describe up to
isomorphism include the natural numbers; the (positive and negative) rational
numbers; and the hereditarily ﬁnite pure sets. The ﬁrst two kinds of mathematical
object will be familiar. But in case the reader needs reminding: the natural
numbers are the ﬁnite counting numbers 0, 1, 2, ... ad inﬁnitum; and the rational
numbers take the form p
q or −p
q, where p and q are natural numbers within
no common factor > 1. The third kind of mathematical object is perhaps less
−
−

396
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
familiar. A hereditarily ﬁnite pure set is simply one that can be built up from the
empty set ∅by forming ﬁnite sets ﬁnitely many times.
The crucial feature that these three structures have in common is that
they contain only individuals that are denoted by some term of the language.
That is, there are no ‘anonymous’ individuals in their domains. This makes
every individual uniquely identiﬁable; there are no multiplicities of distinct but
mutually indiscernible individuals lurking within the domains in question.
It is rather ironic: for these models M, even with (indeed: because of) their
exhaustive ‘guest lists’, if the language L has a complete proof system, then any
description  of M that one attempts to give in L cannot exclude from the
intended model gatecrashers with unauthorized IDs. (This remains true even if
we could somehow ‘get our hands on’ the complete theory Th(N) of ﬁrst-order
arithmetic. For Th(N), see Chapter 30, Deﬁnition 18. In Chapter 30 we shall
learn that we cannot actually ‘get our hands on’ Th(N). It is unaxiomatizable.)
On the other hand, if one manages, by means of some highly expressive
language L, to provide a description  that excludes the gatecrashers and
captures M as intended ... then it turns out that L is bereft of a complete proof
system. So there will be logical consequences, within L, of one’s description 
that one will not be able to deduce from  – despite the fact that of course all such
consequences are true in M.
Such is our predicament with ﬁrst- and second-order languages vying to codify
arithmetical truth. On the one hand, if we adopt a ﬁrst-order arithmetical
language in order to describe the intended model N of natural numbers, then,
no matter what we assert about N, we shall not be able to rule out non-standard
models – models that contain N as a submodel, but which also contain inﬁnitely
many non-standard intruders within their domains. On the other hand, if we
adopt a second-order arithmetical language in order to describe N exactly as
intended (‘categorically’), then we shall succeed – but only at the unavoidable
cost of having to live with the deductive incompleteness of second-order logic.

30 The Incompleteness of Arithmetic
Arithmetical truth is unaxiomatizable. This profound limitative result is due
to Gödel (1931). It is perhaps the most important foundational result ever
established, a beautiful triumph of the ﬂowering of rigorous thinking in its ﬁrst
three decades of the twentieth century. Much has been made of Gödel’s result,
as we have already seen in §24.3.6. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for
the philosophical beginner the most succinct and accessible proof possible of the
unaxiomatizability of arithmetical truth. It is not Gödel’s original proof that we
are presenting here, for that would be ﬁendishly difﬁcult for the beginner. Rather,
we are presenting a much more succinct and accessible proof by
(i)
appealing to the Turing–Church Thesis (see §10.3.4),
(ii)
making prominent use, yet again, of the beautiful technique of diagonal
argument, and
(iii)
setting things out in inferentialist fashion to the greatest extent possible.
Because of the compression and distillation of essentials, we believe that the
reasoning set out below is within the grasp of the keen and inquiring beginner.
We encourage a slow and careful reading. The resulting experience should be not
just intellectual, but also aesthetic.
We use  for sets of sentences; ϕ and θ for sentences; and ψ for formulae with
one free variable. The free variable is conventionally taken to be x. Recall that
⊥is the symbol for absurdity, and that  ⊢ϕ means that there is a proof whose
conclusion is ϕ and whose premises are drawn from . When ,θ ⊢ϕ, we shall
say ‘the inference from θ to ϕ holds modulo ’. (It is understood, of course, that
θ is not in .)
Because we are working with a ﬁrst-order language, the relation ⊢of
deducibility coincides with the relation | of logical consequence. So the phrase
‘follows (logically) from’ can be used freely without having to specify which of
these two senses it has. It should be pointed out, again with the proper measure
of admiration, that this particular result – the completeness of ﬁrst-order logic – is
also due to Gödel. (He proved it in his Doktorarbeit at the University of Vienna
[Gödel (1930)]. It was in his later dissertation at Vienna, the Habilitationsschrift,
that he proved the incompleteness of arithmetic.)

398
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Deﬁnition 13. Suppose  is a set of sentences. Then  is consistent if and only if
 ̸⊢⊥.
Observation 1. For any consistent set , we can employ the inference rule
 ⊢⊥
⊥
.
Note that the upper occurrence of ⊥is the absurdity sign in the object language,
that is, the ﬁrst-order language of arithmetic; while the lower occurrence of ⊥is
the absurdity sign of the metalanguage, in which we are reasoning about the object
language. So the inference rule in question is a metalinguistic one.
Deﬁnition 14. Suppose  is a set of sentences in some language L. Then  is
complete if and only if for every sentence ϕ in L, either  ⊢ϕ or ,ϕ ⊢⊥.
Deﬁnition 15. Let M be any model for a language L. Th(M) is the set of all sentences
in L that M makes true. In symbols:
Th(M) = {ϕ ∈L|M ⊩ϕ}.
Observation 2. For any model M of a language L, Th(M) is consistent and
complete.
Deﬁnition 16. The ﬁrst-order language L of arithmetic is the ﬁrst-order language with
the identity predicate =, whose extralogical vocabulary consists of the name 0, the
successor-function symbol s, and the binary function symbols + and ×.
Throughout this chapter, all terms, formulae and sentences are understood to
be in the ﬁrst-order language of arithmetic. For present purposes, one particular
model will hold our attention: the so-called standard model for arithmetic.
Deﬁnition 17. The standard model for arithmetic, denoted N, has for its domain
exactly the natural numbers, and interprets the name (constant) 0, the successor symbol
s, the addition function symbol +, and the multiplication function symbol × in the
obviously correct way.
Deﬁnition 18. As a special case of Deﬁnition 15: Th(N)= {ϕ ∈L|N ⊩ϕ}.
Recall Gödel’s deﬁnition of general recursive function, which we discussed in
§10.3.1. Like Turing’s deﬁnition of functions computable by Turing machines,
it provided a precise formal explication of the informal notion of computable
function. We remarked in §10.3.1 on how Gödel’s deﬁnition affords a method
of proof by mathematical induction of general results about recursive functions.
Theorem 7 below is one of the most important such results. The philosophical

The Incompleteness of Arithmetic
399
reader is asked to take it on trust, as a straightforward theorem of mathematics.
Its proof is absolutely straighforward – it is a proof by mathematical induction.
Being ‘merely technical’, and rather too long to include here, it can safely
be omitted for the philosophical reader. (The interested reader will ﬁnd a
fully detailed proof of Theorem 7 in Tennant (1978).) We wish instead,
in this chapter, to keep our attention focused on philosophically important
consequences of this theorem, and, in particular, to see how, yet again,
the method of ‘diagonal argument’ produces a remarkable result for the
foundationalist.
Deﬁnition 19. The following set of axioms deﬁnes the theory of arithmetic known
as Q:
1
∀x¬sx=0
2
∀x∀y(sx = sy →x=y)
3
∀x(x=0 ∨∃yx=sy)
4
∀x∀yx+sy=s(x+y)
5
∀xx+0=x
6
∀xx×0=0
7
∀x∀yx×sy=(x×y)+x
Q is due to Raphael Robinson (1911–95). (See Tarski et al. (1953).)
Observation 3. Q ⊆Th(N).
Deﬁnition 20. For any natural number n, the numeral for n is the term
s...s0,
with n occurrences of the successor-function symbol s. We abbreviate the numeral
for n as
n.
Theorem 7. [Representability of recursive functions in Q]
For every recursive function f(x1,...,xn) there is a formula ϕ(x1,...,xn,y) in L such
that for all k1,...,kn the following two inferences hold modulo Q:
ϕ(k1,...,kn,a)
a = f(k1,...,kn) , and its converse a = f(k1,...,kn)
ϕ(k1,...,kn,a) ,
where the parameter a is chosen so as to occur only in the two positions displayed.

400
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
Deﬁnition 21. Suppose P is a (monadic) property of natural numbers. Then the
characteristic function of P, called cP, is deﬁned by the following inference rules:
P(n)
cP(n) = 1
¬P(n)
cP(n) = 0 .
Deﬁnition 22. Suppose that μ is an effective function deﬁned on all (metalinguistic)
sentences of the form P(n) (where n is a natural number), and that the range of μ
is {0,1}. Then μ is an effective method for deciding, of any given natural number n,
whether P(n), if and only if for every n the following inferences hold:
P(n)
μ(P(n)) = 1
¬P(n)
μ(P(n)) = 0 .
Deﬁnition 23. A property P of natural numbers is decidable if and only if there is an
effective method for deciding, of any given natural number n, whether P(n).
Deﬁnition 24. Suppose f is a function with domain D and range {0,1}. Then ˜f is the
function with domain D and range {0,1} deﬁned by the following inference rules (for
each d ∈D):
f(d) = 1
˜f(d) = 0
f(d) = 0
˜f(d) = 1 .
Lemma 1. If P is a decidable property of natural numbers, then so is ¬P.
Proof. Let μ be an effective method for deciding, of any given natural number n,
whether P(n). Then ˜μ is an effective method for deciding, of any given natural
number n, whether ¬P(n).
Deﬁnition 25.  is representing if and only if for every decidable property P of natural
numbers there is some unary formula ψ(x) such that for every natural number n, the
following inferences hold:
P(n)
 ⊢ψ(n) , and its converse  ⊢ψ(n)
P(n)
.
Lemma 2. Suppose  is representing. Then  is (classically) consistent.
Proof. Suppose for reductio that  ⊢⊥, where ⊢represents deducibility in
classical logic. By the rule Ex Falso Quodlibet we have  ⊢ϕ, for every sentence ϕ.
So for any ψ and any n we have  ⊢ψ(n). It follows from the main supposition
that for any decidable property P of natural numbers, and for any n, we have P(n).

The Incompleteness of Arithmetic
401
But this is absurd. The property of primality, for example, is decidable, but the
number 4 is not prime.
Deﬁnition 26.  is strongly strongly representing if and only if for every decidable
property P of natural numbers there is some unary formula ψ(x) such that for all
natural numbers n, the following inferences hold:
P(n)
 ⊢ψ(n)
¬P(n)
,ψ(n) ⊢⊥.
Observation 4. Suppose  is strongly representing and  ⊆′. Then ′ is strongly
representing.
Lemma 3. Suppose  is consistent. Suppose  is strongly representing. Then  is
representing.
Proof. Since  is strongly representing, we already have the inference
P(n)
 ⊢ψ(n)
The following proof establishes the converse inference, using only logical rules
of inference and rules of inference justiﬁed by the main suppositions:
 ⊢ψ(n)
(1)
¬P(n)
,ψ(n) ⊢⊥cut
 ⊢⊥
⊥
(1)
P(n)
Note that the ﬁnal step, which is formally one of classical reductio ad absurdum,
is constructively acceptable, since the sentence P(n) is, by hypothesis, decidable.
Deﬁnition 27.  is axiomatizable if and only if there is an effective enumeration of
all and only the sentences that follow from .
Deﬁnition 28.  is decidable if and only if there is an effective method for deciding,
of any sentence ϕ in the language of arithmetic, whether  ⊢ϕ.
Theorem 8. Every decidable theory is axiomatizable.
Proof. Suppose  is a decidable theory. One can effectively enumerate its
theorems by listing them as follows. First, effectively enumerate all sentences

402
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
ϕ0,ϕ1,... of the language. Then generate the sought (sub-)list consisting of
exactly the theorems of  as follows. Take each sentence ϕi in turn. Effectively
decide whether ϕi is in . If so, append ϕi to the list of theorems, and advance to
ϕi+1; if not, simply advance to ϕi+1.
Theorem 9. [Janiczak] Suppose  is consistent. Suppose  is complete. Suppose 
is axiomatizable. Then  is decidable.
(This result was ﬁrst proved in Janiczak (1950).)
Proof. We seek to reveal an effective method for answering the question ‘Does ϕ
follow from ?’, concerning any given sentence ϕ of the language of arithmetic.
The axiomatizability of  guarantees that the sentences that follow from
 can be effectively enumerated as ϕ0,ϕ1,... . Given any sentence ϕ in the
language of arithmetic, the completeness of  guarantees that either ϕ occurs as
some ϕn, or that ¬ϕ does. If ϕ so occurs, then we are done: we answer Yes to the
question ‘Does ϕ follow from ?’. But if ¬ϕ so occurs, then the consistency of
 guarantees that ϕ does not so occur. So once again we are done: we answer
No. Thus we can effectively determine, of any given ϕ, whether ϕ follows
from .
Theorem 10. No set  is both representing and decidable.
Proof. Suppose  is representing and decidable. Let ψ0,ψ1,... be an effective
enumeration of all unary formulae. (There is such an enumeration.) Consider
the following property of natural numbers n:
 ̸⊢ψn(n).
This property is decidable. For, given any natural number n, we can decide
whether  ̸⊢ψn(n) as follows.
Effectively ﬁnd the unary formula ψn. Effectively substitute the numeral n for
every free occurrence of the free variable in ψn. The result is ψn(n). Since 
is decidable, there is an effective method (say μ) for deciding, of any given
natural number m, whether  ⊢ψm(m). It follows that ˜μ is an effective
method for deciding, of any given natural number m, whether  ̸⊢ψm(m).
Now apply ˜μ to decide whether  ̸⊢ψn(n).
Since  is representing, there is, for this effectively decidable property  ̸⊢ψn(n)
of natural numbers, some unary formula ψ such that for every natural number n
we can employ the rules of inference
 ̸⊢ψn(n)
 ⊢ψ(n)
and its converse
 ⊢ψ(n)
 ̸⊢ψn(n) .

The Incompleteness of Arithmetic
403
But the unary formulae ψ occurs in the effective enumeration of all unary
formulae as ψk, for some k. Thus the rules of inference that we may employ,
for any natural number n, become (for this ﬁxed choice of k, and for any n)
 ̸⊢ψn(n)
 ⊢ψk(n)
and
 ⊢ψk(n)
 ̸⊢ψn(n) .
Now take as an instance of n the number k. Then we may employ the rules
 ̸⊢ψk(k)
 ⊢ψk(k)
and
 ⊢ψk(k)
 ̸⊢ψk(k) .
But these rules establish the equivalence of the statement  ⊢ψk(k) with its own
negation. Contradiction.
Note that this is yet another beautiful application, to devastating effect, of the
diagonal method of argument. The denouement, however, is but a couple of steps
away.
Theorem 11. No set  is consistent,
complete,
strongly representing and
axiomatizable.
Proof.
Δ consistent, Δ strongly representing
Δ consistent, Δ complete, Δ axiomatizable
(Theorem 9)
(Theorem 10)
,
Δ representing
(Lemma 3)
Δ decidable
Theorem 12. Q is strongly representing.
Proof. Suppose P is a decidable property of natural numbers. Then its charac-
teristic function cP is computable. By the Turing–Church Thesis, cP is recursive.
By Theorem 7 there is a formula ϕ(x,y) such that for all n the following two
inferences hold modulo Q, with a parametric:
(I)
ϕ(n,a)
a = cP(n)
(II) a = cP(n)
ϕ(n,a)
.
We now show that the formula ϕ(x,1) strongly represents P, by establishing the
two inferences
(i)
P(n)
Q ⊢ϕ(n,1)

404
Representation, Inference and the Elusive Inﬁnite
and
(ii)
¬P(n)
Q,ϕ(n,1) ⊢⊥.
Ad (i): Suppose P(n). Then cP(n) = 1. Substituting 1 for cP(n) in (II) above, we
have that the following inference holds modulo Q, with a parametric :
a = 1
ϕ(n,a) .
Putting now 1 in place of the parameter a, we obtain, modulo Q, the inference
1 = 1
ϕ(n,1) .
But the premise is a logical theorem. Thus Q ⊢ϕ(n,1).
Ad (ii): Suppose ¬P(n). Then cP(n) = 0. Substituting 0 for cP(n) in (I) above, we
have that the following inference holds modulo Q, with a parametric:
ϕ(n,a)
a = 0
Putting now 1 in place of the parameter a, we obtain, modulo Q,
ϕ(n,1)
1 = 0
But Q,1 = 0 ⊢⊥. Hence Q,ϕ(n,1) ⊢⊥.
Corollary 1. Th(N) is strongly representing.
Proof. By Theorem 12, Q is strongly representing. Recall Observation 3:
Q ⊆Th(N). By Observation 4, Th(N) is strongly representing.
Theorem 13. Th(N) is not axiomatizable.
Proof. By deﬁnition, Th(N) is consistent and complete. By Corollary 1, Th(N)
is strongly representing. Hence, by Theorem 11, Th(N) is not axiomatizable.

APPENDIX A
The History of Western Philosophy
Ancient Philosophy
Presocratics
6th, 5th century BC
fragments
Thales
c.625–545 BC
All things are full of gods. Water is
the ﬁrst principle of everything.
Anaximander
c.610–546 BC
On Nature
Anaximenes
585–528 BC
fragments
Pythagoras
c.570–c.495 BC
fragments
Xenophanes
c.570–c.470 BC
fragments
Heraclitus
c.535–c.475 BC
substantial fragments
Parmenides
c.515/540 BC, ﬂ. early
5th century BC
120 lines of a philosophical poem
Zeno
c.490–c.430 BC
fragments
Empedocles
c.490–430 BC
On Nature (a poem, of which
about 400 lines exist)
Anaxagoras
c.500–428 BC
fragments
Leucippus
5th century BC
attributions by Democritus
Protagoras
c.490–420 BC
attributions by Plato
Democritus
c.460–c.370 BC
large collection of fragments
Gorgias
485–c.380 BC
On What Is Not
Thrasymachus
c.459–400 BC
attributions by Plato (in The
Republic)
Socrates
c.469–399 BC
attributions by Plato, in his
dialogues
Plato
424/3–348/7 BC
Socratic dialogues, most notably
The Republic
Aristotle
384–322 BC
Metaphysics; Prior Analytics; De
Anima; Nichomachean Ethics

406
Appendix A
Epicurus
341–270 BC
Letter to Herodotus; Letter to
Menoeceus; Letter to Pythocles
Chrysippus
279 BC–206
BC
fragments
Lucretius
99–55 BC
On the Nature of Things
Sextus
160–210
Outlines of Pyrrhonism; Against the
Mathematicians
Plotinus
204/5–270
Enneads
Porphyry
234–c. 305
Isagoge (introduction to logic and
philosophy)
Augustine
354–430
Contra Academicos; De Libero
Arbitrio
Medieval Philosophy
Boethius
480–524/5
Consolation of Philosophy
Anselm
1033–1109
De Veritate; Proslogion
Abelard
1079–1142
Logica ‘ingredientibus’; Theologia
Christiana; Ethica
Aquinas
1225–74
Summa Theologica; Summa Contra
Gentiles
Duns Scotus
1265/6–1308
Ordinatio; De Primo Principio
Ockham
1287–1347
Summa Logicae
Early Modern Philosophy
Bacon
1561–1626
The Advancement of Learning;
Novum Organum Scientiarum
Hobbes
1588–1679
Elements of Philosophy; Leviathan
Descartes
1596–1650
Discourse on the Method; Meditations
on First Philosophy; Principles of
Philosophy
Arnauld
1612–94
L’Art de penser, with Pierre Nicole;
a.k.a. the ‘Port-Royal Logic’

The History of Western Philosophy
407
Modern Philosophy in the Age of Enlightenment, approx. 1650–1800
Spinoza
1632–77
Ethics; Tractatus Theologico-Politicus
Locke
1632–1704
An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding; The Two Treatises of
Government
Malebranche
1638–1715
Search after Truth; Dialogues on
Metaphysics and Religion
Leibniz
1646–1716
New Essays on Human Understanding;
Theodicy; Monadology
Berkeley
1685–1753
Treatise concerning the Principles of Human
Knowledge; Three Dialogues between
Hylas and Philonous
Reid
1710–96
An Inquiry Into the Human Mind on the
Principles of Common Sense
Hume
1711–76
A Treatise of Human Nature; Enquiries
concerning Human Understanding and
concerning the Principles of Morals;
Dialogues concerning Natural Religion
Rousseau
1712–78
Emile, or On Education; The Social
Contract
Post-Enlightenment Philosophy, approx. 1790–1900
Kant
1724–1804
Critique of Pure Reason; Prolegomena to
Any Future Metaphysics; Groundwork of
the Metaphysics of Morals; Metaphysical
Foundations of Natural Science; Critique
of Practical Reason; Critique of the
Power of Judgment
Bentham
1748–1832
The Principles of Morals and Legislation
Hegel
1770–1831
Phenomenology of Spirit; Science of Logic;
Philosophy of Right
Bolzano
1781–1848
Theory of Science
Schopenhauer
1788–1860
The World as Will and Representation; The
Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics

408
Appendix A
Mill
1806–73
System of Logic; On Liberty; Utilitarianism;
Considerations on Representative
Government; The Subjection of Women
Kierkegaard
1813–55
Either-Or
Marx
1818–83
Das Kapital
Brentano
1838–1917
Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint;
The Origin of the Knowledge of Right and
Wrong
Nietzsche
1844–1900
The Birth of Tragedy; Human,
All-Too-Human; The Gay Science; Thus
Spoke Zarathustra; Beyond Good and
Evil; On the Genealogy of Morals
Twentieth-Century Philosophy
Peirce
1839–1914
Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of
Right Thinking
Frege
1848–1925
Begriffsschrift; The Foundations of
Arithmetic; Grundgesetze der Arithmetik
Husserl
1859–1938
Logical Investigations; Ideas Pertaining to a
Pure Phenomenology and to a
Phenomenological Philosophy; Cartesian
Meditations
Russell
1872–1970
The Principles of Mathematics; Principia
Mathematica (with A. N. Whitehead);
The Problems of Philosophy; Our
Knowledge of the External World;
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy;
The Analysis of Mind; An Inquiry into
Meaning and Truth; Human Knowledge:
Its Scope and Limits
Moore
1873–1958
Principia Ethica
Wittgenstein
1889–1951
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus;
Philosophical Investigations; Remarks on
the Foundations of Mathematics
Heidegger
1889–1976
Being and Time
Carnap
1891–1970
The Logical Structure of the World; Logical
Syntax of Language

The History of Western Philosophy
409
Popper
1902–94
The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery; The
Open Society and its Enemies
Sartre
1905–80
Being and Nothingness; Existentialism
is a Humanism
Goodman
1906–98
Fact, Fiction, and Forecast;
Languages of Art; Ways of
Worldmaking
Quine
1908–2000
Word and Object; Roots of Reference;
Pursuit of Truth; From Stimulus to
Science
Sellars
1912–89
Empiricism and the Philosophy of
Mind; Science, Perception and
Reality
Davidson
1917–2003
Essays on Actions and Events;
Inquiries into Truth and
Interpretation; Subjective,
Intersubjective, Objective; Truth
and Predication
Anscombe
1919–2001
Intention
Strawson
1919–2006
Individuals; The Bounds of Sense;
Skepticism and Naturalism: Some
Varieties
Rawls
1921–2002
A Theory of Justice
Dummett
1925–2001
Frege: Philosophy of Language; Truth
and Other Enigmas; The Logical
Basis of Metaphysics
Foucault
1926–84
The Archaeology of Knowledge; The
Order of Things
Williams
1929–2003
Problems of the Self; Moral Luck;
Making Sense of Humanity
Nozick
1938–2002
Anarchy, State and Utopia;
Philosophical Explanations
Kripke
1940–
Naming and Necessity; Wittgenstein
on Rules and Private Language
Lewis
1941–2001
Convention; Counterfactuals; On the
Plurality of Worlds

APPENDIX B
Formal Results in the Theory of Probability
Axioms (1)–(3) hold for all propositions A. Axiom (4) holds for all proposi-
tions A and all propositions B.
1
0 ≤p(A) ≤1.
2
If ⊢A (i.e., A is logically true), then p(A) = 1.
3
If A ⊢⊥(i.e., A is logically false), then p(A) = 0.
4
If A ⊢B (i.e., A logically implies B), then p(A) ≤p(B).
We now proceed to prove some interesting results from these four axioms,
culminating in the proof of Theorem 1 of §8.6.3.
The results are arranged, in the usual style of a mathematics textbook,
as Lemmas, Theorems and Corollaries. These are convenient psychological
classiﬁcations employed by mathematicians so as to indicate the relative depth or
importance or usefulness of the various results. Lemmas ﬁnd frequent application
in the proofs of different theorems. Theorems are the ‘main’ statements one
is interested in proving. They tend to be general, deep and elegant, and to
have applications. Corollaries are usually special, interesting cases of previously
proved theorems. Strictly speaking, there is no logical difference among lemmas,
theorems and corollaries. From a logical point of view, they are all simply
consequences that have been deduced from the axioms.
It is wise to try not to seek ‘physical interpretations’ of each and every stage of
each formal proof to follow. Mathematical reasoning is perforce abstract, and it
is better to seek to understand how each step works simply as a matter of formal
inference. It is only when we reach a suitable theorem that we shall look for
any kind of non-mathematical interpretation of the result. The interest of these
investigations lies in how much one can squeeze out of the very little with which
we have provided ourselves in Axioms (1)–(4).
Lemma 4. If A ⊢B and B ⊢A then p(A) = p(B).
Proof. By Axiom (4) the hypotheses of the Lemma imply p(A) ≤p(B) and
p(B) ≤p(A). Hence by anti-symmetry of ≤, we have p(A) = p(B).

Formal Results in the Theory of Probability
411
Thus far we have introduced only the notion of absolute probability. There is a
companion notion of conditional probability, p(A|B), to be read as ‘the probability
of A, given B’. The latter notion is deﬁned as follows. Note that it is admissible
only when 0 < p(B).
Deﬁnition 29. If 0 < p(B) then
p(A|B) =df
p(A∧B)
p(B)
.
Theorem 14. [Bayes]
If 0 < p(A) and 0 < p(B), then
p(A|B) = p(B|A).p(A)
p(B)
.
Proof. Under the hypotheses of the theorem we have, by deﬁnition,
p(A∧B) = p(A|B).p(B)
and
p(B∧A) = p(B|A).p(A) .
By Lemma 4,
p(A∧B) = p(B∧A).
Hence
p(A|B).p(B) = p(B|A).p(A).
Dividing both sides by p(B), the result follows.
Lemma 5. If 0 < p(B) and B ⊢A then 0 < p(A).
Proof. Suppose B ⊢A. By Axiom (4), p(B) ≤p(A). Now suppose 0 < p(B). It
follows that 0 < p(A).
Theorem 15. Suppose 0 < p(C∧B) and 0 < p(A∧B). Then
p(A|C∧B).p(C|B) = p(C|A∧B).p(A|B).

412
Appendix B
Proof. Suppose 0 < p(C∧B). Note that C∧B ⊢B. It follows from Lemma 5 that
0 < p(B). By Lemma 4,
p(A∧(C∧B)) = p(C∧(A∧B)).
Hence
p(A∧(C∧B))
p(B)
= p(C∧(A∧B))
p(B)
.
It now follows that
p(A ∧(C ∧B))
p(C ∧B)
.p(C ∧B)
p(B)
= p(C ∧(A ∧B))
p(A ∧B)
.p(A ∧B)
p(B)
.
Applying the deﬁnitions of conditional probability to each of these four factors,
the desired result follows.
Lemma 6. If B ⊢A and 0 < p(B) then p(A|B) = 1.
Proof. From the deducibility hypothesis it follows that B is interdeducible with
A ∧B. So by Lemma 4 we have p(B) = p(A ∧B). The inequality hypothesis
ensures that
p(A|B) = p(A ∧B)
p(B)
.
Using the previous identity to substitute for the numerator of the right-hand side,
we obtain
p(A|B) = p(B)
p(B) = 1
as required.
Lemma 7. If A,B ⊢C and 0 < p(A ∧B) then p(C|A ∧B) = 1.
Proof. Suppose A,B ⊢C. Then by ∧I, we have A∧B ⊢C∧(A∧B). Conversely,
by ∧E, we have C ∧(A ∧B) ⊢A ∧B. Hence by Lemma 4 it follows that
p(C ∧(A ∧B)) = p(A ∧B).
Now consider the following instance of the deﬁnitions of conditional probability:
p(C|A ∧B) = p(C ∧(A ∧B))
p(A ∧B)
.

Formal Results in the Theory of Probability
413
Using the previous identity to substitute for the numerator of the right-hand side,
we obtain
p(C|A∧B) = p(A∧B)
p(A∧B) = 1
as required.
Corollary 2. Suppose A,B ⊢C, 0 < p(C∧B) and 0 < p(A∧B). Then
p(A|C∧B).p(C|B) = p(A|B).
Proof. The two inequalities in the hypotheses mean that Theorem 15 applies, so
we have
p(A|C∧B).p(C|B) = p(C|A∧B).p(A|B).
But now the deducibility hypothesis means that the factor p(C|A∧B) can, by
Lemma 7, be set to unity.
Theorem 16. Suppose that 0 < p(H∧K); that H,K ⊢E; and that p(E|K) < 1. Then
p(H|E∧K) > p(H|K).
Proof. From the assumption that 0 < p(H∧K) it follows that p(E|H∧K) exists.
Given the further assumption that H,K ⊢E, Lemma 7 tells us that p(E|H∧K) is
indeed equal to 1.
From the assumption H,K ⊢E, it also follows that H∧K ⊢E∧K. By Axiom (4),
p(H∧K) ≤p(E∧K). But we are assuming that 0 < p(H∧K); hence 0 < p(E∧K).
These last two inequalities ensure that Theorem 15 applies, so that we have
p(H|E∧K).p(E|K) = p(E|H∧K).p(H|K);
whence, upon substitution of 1 for p(E|H∧K) in this equation, we obtain
p(H|E∧K).p(E|K) = p(H|K).
But now by the assumption that p(E|K) < 1, we have p(H|E∧K) > p(H|K), as
required.
It is worth pausing to reﬂect on the logical relations involved among H, K
and E under the hypotheses of Theorem 16. The condition 0 < p(H∧K) ensures
(by Axiom (3)) that H is consistent with K. The condition p(E|K) < 1 ensures
(by Lemma 3) that K does not logically imply E. Yet together H and K logically
imply E.
This sort of situation arises when K is some body of background knowledge,
and E is some empirical conjecture not implied by K, but implied (by way of
a prediction) by the combination of K with some hypothesis H consistently

414
Appendix B
extending K. What Theorem 16 tells us is that if E turns out to be the case (as
predicted by H), then the probability of H given this new evidence E (conjoined
with K) is higher than the probability of H when only the ‘old evidence’ K was
given. That is, successful predictions raise the probability of a bold hypothesis
that is consistent with, but logically extends beyond, what is already known.
We have just seen a Bayesian vindication of our tendency to increase our
conﬁdence in an hypothesis when it is involved in successful applications of
the hypothetico-deductive method. This vindication draws on only minimal
materials concerning absolute and conditional probabilities. We have used only
Axiom (4).
Consider the following substitutions:
A →H
B →S∧K
C →E
in Corollary 2, yielding the following instance: Suppose H,S∧K ⊢E, 0 < p(E∧
(S∧K)) and 0 < p(H∧(S∧K)). Then
p(H|E∧(S∧K)) = p(H|S∧K)
p(E|S∧K) .
We are now in a position to prove Theorem 1 of §8.6.3. We re-state it here for
convenience. Suppose
1
H,S,K ⊢E;
2
0 < p(H∧(S∧K));
3
p(H|S∧K) = p(H|K); and
4
p(E|S∧K) < 1.
Then
p(H|E∧(S∧K)) > p(H|K).
Proof. By assumption (1), H∧(S∧K) is interdeducible with E∧(H∧(S∧K))).
Hence by Axiom (4) we have
p(H∧(S∧K)) = p(E∧(H∧(S∧K))).
Since also
E∧(H∧(S∧K)) ⊢E∧(S∧K),
we have by Axiom (4) once more that
p(E∧(H∧(S∧K))) ≤p(E∧(S∧K)).

Formal Results in the Theory of Probability
415
Now we may conclude overall that
0 < p(H∧(S∧K)) = p(E∧(H∧(S∧K))) ≤p(E∧(S∧K)),
whence of course
0 < p(E∧(S∧K)).
This result, along with assumptions (1) and (2), ensure that the last-mentioned
instance of Corollary 2 applies. Hence we have
p(H|E∧(S∧K)).p(E|S∧K) = p(H|S∧K).
Using assumption (3) to substitute for the right-hand side, we obtain
p(H|E∧(S∧K)).p(E|S∧K) = p(H|K).
Given assumption (4), we conclude
p(H|E∧(S∧K)) > p(H|K).

Bibliography
Robert Merrihew Adams and Marilyn McCord Adams, editors. The Problem of Evil.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1990.
Alan Ross Anderson, editor. Minds and Machines, Prentice-Hall Contemporary Perspec-
tives in Philosophy Series. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1964.
Alan Ross Anderson and Nuel D. Belnap. Entailment: The Logic of Relevance and Necessity,
Vol. I. Princeton University Press, 1975.
Saint Anselm of Canterbury. Anselmus Cantuariensis Proslogion. The Latin Library,
www.thelatinlibrary.com/anselmproslogron.html, 1078.
Robert Axelrod. The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, New York, 1984.
Robert Axelrod and William D. Hamilton. The evolution of cooperation. Science,
211:1390–1396, 1981.
A. J. Ayer. Can there be a private language? Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
Supplementary Volume, 28:63–76, 1954.
Alfred J. Ayer. Language, Truth and Logic, 2nd edn. Gollancz, London, 1946.
Alfred J. Ayer. Philosophical Essays. St. Martin’s Press, New York, 1963.
Jon Barwise and John Perry. Situations and Attitudes. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1984.
George Bealer. An inconsistency in functionalism. Synthese, 38(3):333–372, 1978.
Eugenio Beltrami. Saggio di interpretazione della geometria non-euclidea. Giornale di
Matematiche, 6:284–312, 1868.
Evert Beth. On Padoa’s method in the theory of deﬁnition. Koninklijke Nederlandse
Akademie van Wetenschappen Proceedings Series A, 56:330–339, 1953.
Simon Blackburn. Essays in Quasi-realism. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993.
Ned Block. Troubles with functionalism. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
9:261–325, 1978.
Ned Block. Are absent qualia impossible? Philosophical Review, 89:257–274, 1980.
Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1985.
Robert B. Brandom. Varieties of understanding. In Nicholas Rescher, editor, Reason and
Rationality in Natural Science, pages 27–51. University Press of America, Lanham, MD,
1985.
Robert B. Brandom. Making It Explicit: Reasoning, Representing, and Discursive Commit-
ment. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994.
Robert B. Brandom. Articulating Reasons: An Introduction to Inferentialism. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2000.

Bibliography
417
Michael Bratman, John Perry, and John Martin Fischer. Introduction to Philosophy:
Classical and Contemporary Readings, 5th edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2009.
C. A. Campbell. Has the self ‘free will’? In On Selfhood and Godhood: The Gifford Lectures
Delivered at the University of St. Andrews 1953–54 and 1954–55, Revised and Expanded,
pages 158–179. George Allen & Unwin, London, 1957.
Donald T. Campbell. Downward causation in hierarchically organised biological sys-
tems. In Francisco José Ayala and Theodosius Dobzhansky, editors, Studies in the
Philosophy of Biology: Reduction and Related Problems, pages 179–186. Macmillan,
London/Basingstoke, 1974.
Donald T. Campbell. On the conﬂicts between biological and social evolution and
between psychology and moral tradition. American Psychologist, 30:1103–1126, 1975.
Keith Campbell. Body and Mind. Macmillan, London, 1970.
Rudolf Carnap. Der Raum: ein Beitrag zur Wissenschaftslehre. Kant-Studien Ergänzungsheft,
56:1–87, 1922.
Rudolf Carnap. Probability as a guide in life. Journal of Philosophy, 44(6):141–148, 1947.
Rudolf Carnap. Logical Foundations of Probability. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1950.
Rudolf Carnap. The methodological character of theoretical concepts. In H. Feigl and
M. Scriven, editors, The Foundations of Science and the Concepts of Psychology and
Psychoanalysis, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 1, pages 38–76.
University of Minnesota Press, 1956.
Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza and Marcus W. Feldman. Cultural Transmission and Evolution:
A Quantitative Approach. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1981.
David J. Chalmers. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford
University Press, New York, Oxford, 1996.
Noam Chomsky. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1965.
Alonzo Church. A note on the Entscheidungsproblem. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1:40–41,
1936a.
Alonzo Church. Correction. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1:101–102, 1936b.
Alonzo Church. Review of Language, Truth and Logic, by Alfred Jules Ayer. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 14(1):52–53, 1949.
Paul M. Churchland. Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes. Journal of
Philosophy, 78:67–90, 1981.
Desmond M. Clarke. Descartes’ Philosophy of Science. Manchester University Press,
Manchester, 1982.
Paul J. Cohen. The independence of the continuum hypothesis. I. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 50:1143–1148, 1963.
Paul J. Cohen. The independence of the continuum hypothesis. II. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 51:105–110, 1964.
Irving Copi, Carl Cohen, and Kenneth McMahon. Introduction to Logic, 14th edn.
Macmillan, New York, 2010.
Charles Darwin. The Origin of Species. John Murray, London, 1859.
Charles Darwin. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. John Murray, London,
1871.
Donald Davidson. Mental events. In Lawrence Foster and J. W. Swanson, editors,
Experience and Theory, pages 79–100. University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, MA,
1970.
Donald Davidson. Radical interpretation. Dialectica, 27:314–324, 1973.

418
Bibliography
Donald Davidson. Knowing one’s own mind. Proceedings and Addresses of the American
Philosophical Association, 60:441–458, 1987.
Richard Davies. Descartes: Belief, Scepticism and Virtue. Routledge, London and New York,
2001.
Richard Dawkins. The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1976.
Daniel C. Dennett. The Intentional Stance. MIT Press, New York, 1989.
Daniel C. Dennett. Consciousness Explained. Little, Brown and Co., Boston, New York,
and London, 1981.
René Descartes. Meditationes de Prima Philosophia. Michael Soly, Paris, 1641a.
René Descartes. Meditations on First Philosophy, trans. John Cottingham. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1641b.
Willis Doney, editor. Eternal Truths and the Cartesian Circle. Garland Publishing, New
York, 1987.
Emil du Bois-Reymond. Über die Grenzen des Naturerkennens. Die sieben Welträthsel. Zwei
Vorträge von Emil du Bois-Reymond. Des ersten Vortrages achte, der zwei Vorträge vierte
Auﬂage. Verlag von Veit & Comp., Leipzig, 1898.
Michael Dummett. Frege: Philosophy of Language. Duckworth, London, 1973.
Manfred Eigen and Peter Schuster. The Hypercycle: A Principle of Natural Self-Organization.
Springer, Berlin and New York, 1979.
Albert Einstein. Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation. Königlich Preußische Akademie der
Wissenschaften (Berlin). Sitzungsberichte, pages 844–847, 1915.
Albert Einstein. Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Annalen der Physik,
354(7):769–822, 1916.
Albert Einstein. Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie.
Königlich Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin).
Sitzungsberichte,
pages
142–152, 1917.
Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould. Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to phyletic
gradualism. In T. J. M. Schopf, editor, Models in Paleobiology, pages 82–115. Freeman
Cooper, San Francisco, 1972.
Herbert Feigl. The “Mental” and the “Physical”. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapo-
lis, 1958.
Hartry Field. Science without Numbers: A Defence of Nominalism. Basil Blackwell, Oxford,
1980.
Jerry A. Fodor. The Language of Thought. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1975.
Philippa Foot. The problem of abortion and the doctrine of double effect. Oxford Review,
5(Trinity Term):5–15, 1967.
Gottlob Frege. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: eine logisch mathematische Untersuchung uber
den Begriff der Zahl. Georg Olms Verlagsbuchhandlung, Hildesheim, 1884; reprinted
1961.
Gottlob Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik. I. Band. Georg Olms Verlagsbuchhandlung,
Hildesheim, 1893; reprinted 1962.
Gottlob Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik. II. Band. Georg Olms Verlagsbuchhandlung,
Hildesheim, 1903; reprinted 1962.
Harvey M. Friedman. Higher set theory and mathematical practice. Annals of Mathematical
Logic, 2(3):325–357, 1971.
Stephen Gaukroger. Descartes: An Intellectual Biography. Oxford University Press, New
York, 1995.
Tamar Szabo Gendler. Thought Experiment: On the Powers and Limits of Imaginary Cases.
Routledge, New York, 2000.

Bibliography
419
Edmund Gettier. Is justiﬁed true belief knowledge? Analysis, 23:121–123, 1963.
J. J. Gibson. The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw and J. Bransford, editors, Perceiving,
Acting, and Knowing: Toward an Ecological Psychology, pages 67–82. Erlbaum, Hillsdale,
NJ, 1977.
Joshua Gilder and Anne-Lee Gilder, editors. Heavenly Intrigue: Johannes Kepler, Tycho
Brahe, and the Murder behind One of History’s Greatest Scientiﬁc Discoveries. Doubleday,
New York, 2004.
Kurt Gödel. Die Vollständigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalküls. Monat-
shefte für Mathematik under Physik, 37:349–360, 1930.
Kurt Gödel. Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter
Systeme I. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik, 37:173–198, 1931.
Kurt Gödel. The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Continuum
Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory, Annals of Mathematics Studies, 3. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1940.
Kurt Gödel. On undecidable propositions of formal mathematical systems (The Princeton
lectures of 1934). In Solomon Feferman, John W. Dawson, Jr., Stephen C. Kleene,
Gregory H. Moore, Robert M. Solovay, and Jean van Heijenoort, editors, Kurt Gödel:
Collected Works, vol. I, Publications 1929–1936, pages 346–371. Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1986.
Kurt Gödel. Ontological proof. In Solomon Feferman, John W. Dawson, Jr., Warren
Goldfarb, Charles Parsons, and Robert M. Solovay, editors, Kurt Gödel: Collected Works,
vol. III, Unpublished Essays and Lectures, pages 346–371. Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1995.
Nelson Goodman. Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
1955.
H. P. Grice. Meaning. Philosophical Review, 66(3):377–388, 1957.
H. P. Grice. Utterer’s meaning and intention. Philosophical Review, 78(2):147–177, 1969.
Adolf Grünbaum. The Foundations of Psychoanalysis: A Philosophical Critique. University of
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1984.
Adolf Grünbaum. Origin versus creation in physical cosmology. In L. Krüger and
B. Falkenburg, editors, Physik, Philosophie, und die Einheit der Wissenschaften, pages
221–254. Spektrum Akademischer Verlag, 1995.
Ian Hacking. The identity of indiscernibles. Journal of Philosophy, 72(9):249–256, 1975.
Ian Hacking. An Introduction to Probability and Inductive Logic. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2001.
Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns, editors. The Collected Dialogues of Plato, including
the Letters. Bollingen Series LXXI. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1989.
Richard M. Hare. The Language of Morals. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1952.
Stephen Hawking. The Universe in a Nutshell. Bantam Books, New York, 2001.
Geoffrey Hellman and F. Thompson. Ontology, determination, and reduction. Journal of
Philosophy, 72:551–564, 1975.
Carl G. Hempel. Studies in the logic of conﬁrmation I, II. Mind, 54:1–26, 97–121, 1945.
Carl G. Hempel. Problems and changes in the empiricist criterion of meaning. Revue
Internationale de Philosophie, 4:41–63, 1950.
Reuben Hersh and Philip J. Davis. The Mathematical Experience. Burkhäuser, Boston, 1981.
Douglas R. Hofstadter and Daniel Dennett. The Mind’s I: Fantasies and Reﬂections On Self
and Soul. Basic Books, New York, 1981.
Jasper Hopkins and Herbert Richardson. Complete Philosophical and Theological Treatises of
Anselm of Canterbury. The Arthur J. Banning Press, Minneapolis, 2000.

420
Bibliography
David Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature: Being An Attempt to introduce the experimental
Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects. John Noon, London, 1738.
Frank Jackson. Epiphenomenal qualia. Philosophical Quarterly, 32:127–136, 1982.
Antoni Janiczak. A remark concerning decidability of complete theories. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 15(4):277–279, 1950.
Julian Jaynes. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind.
Houghton Mifﬂin, New York, 1976.
Philip E. Johnson. Reason in the Balance: The Case against Naturalism in Science, Law and
Education. InterVarsity Press, Downers Grove, IL, 1995.
V. Kagan. N. Lobachevsky and his Contribution to Science. Foreign Languages Publishing
House, Moscow, 1957.
Robert Kanigel. The Man Who Knew Inﬁnity: A Life of the Genius Ramanujan. Charles
Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1991.
Immanuel Kant. Kritik der Reinen Vernunft. Johann Friedrich Hartnoch, Riga, 1781.
Stuart A. Kauffman. The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993.
Rosanna Keefe. Theories of Vagueness. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.
Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith, editors. Vagueness: A Reader. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1996.
Anthony Kenny. Ancient Philosophy: A New History. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2004.
Robert Kirk. Rationality without language. Mind, 76:369–386, 1967.
Robert Kirk. Zombies v. materialists. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary
Volume, 48:135–152, 1974.
Robert Kirk. Zombies and Consciousness. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2005.
Robert Kirk. The inconceivability of zombies. Philosophical Studies, 139:73–89, 2008.
Carolyn Korsmeyer, editor. Aesthetics: The Big Questions. Blackwell, Oxford, 1998.
Saul A. Kripke. Naming and Necessity. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1980.
Saul A. Kripke. Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Blackwell, Oxford, 1982.
Saul A. Kripke. Semantical considerations on modal logic. Acta Philosophica Fennica, 16:
83–94, 1963.
Thomas S. Kuhn. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1970.
Pierre Simon Laplace. Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités. The English translation of the
sixth French edition is by Frederick Wilson Truscott and Frederick Lincoln Emory, titled A
Philosophical Essay on Probabilities, published by John Wiley & Sons, New York, in 1902.
It was re-issued by Dover in 1951. The original was published by V. Courcier, in Paris,
1820.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Meditations on knowledge, truth and ideas (1684). In
Leroy E. Loemker, editor, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Philosophical Papers and Letters, 2nd
edn, pages 291–295. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1969a.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Discourse on metaphysics (1686). In Leroy E. Loemker,
editor, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Philosophical Papers and Letters, 2nd edn, pages
303–330. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1969b.
Janet
Levin.
Functionalism.
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/entries/
functionalism/. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall
edition, 2013.
David Lewis. Convention: A Philosophical Study. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1969.

Bibliography
421
David Lewis. Psychophysical and theoretical identiﬁcations. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 50(3):249–258, 1972.
Benjamin Libet. Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in
voluntary action. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8:529–566, 1985.
Leonard Linsky, editor. Reference and Modality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1971.
John Locke. An Essay Concerning Human[e] Understanding. Tho. Baffet, London, 1689.
Konrad Lorenz. KantÃ ¸Ts Lehre vom Apriorischen im Lichte gegenwärtiger Biologie.
Blätter für Deutsche Philosophie, 15:94–125, 1941.
Storrs McCall. Can a Turing machine know that the Gödel sentence is true? Journal of
Philosophy, 96:525–532, 1999.
J. L. Mackie. Evil and omnipotence. Mind, 64:200–212, 1955.
J. L. Mackie. The Cement of the Universe: A Study of Causation. Clarendon Library of Logic
and Philosophy, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1974.
Gerald Massey. Indeterminacy, Inscrutability, and Ontological Relativity. Studies in
Ontology, American Philosophical Quarterly Monograph series, 12:43–55, 1978.
D. H. Mellor. God and probability. Religious Studies, 5(2):223–234, 1969.
Gregor Mendel. Versuche über Pﬂanzenhybriden. Zwei Abhandlungen. Wilhelm Engelmann,
Leipzig, 1866 and 1870.
Richard Montague. Deterministic theories (1962). In Richmond H. Thomason, editor,
Formal Philosophy: Selected Papers of Richard Montague, pages 303–359. Yale University
Press, New Haven and London, 1974.
G. E. Moore. The conception of intrinsic value. In G. E. Moore, Philosophical Studies, pages
253–275. Harcourt, Brace, and Co., New York, 1922.
George Edward Moore. Principia Ethica. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1903.
George Edward Moore. Propositions. In George Edward Moore, Some Main Problems of
Philosophy. Allen and Unwin Ltd, London, 1953.
Ernest Nagel. The Structure of Science: Problems in the Logic of Scientiﬁc Explanation.
Harcourt, Brace, and World, New York, 1961.
Isaac Newton. General Scholium, from the 3rd edn of the Principia. William & John
Innys, London, 1726.
Robert Nozick. Philosophical Explanations. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
1981.
Graham Oppy. Ontological arguments. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/ontological-arguments/. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall edition, 2011.
William Paley. Natural Theology: Or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity
Collected from the Appearances of Nature. Gould and Lincoln, Boston, 1867.
Blaise Pascal. Pensées (1670) trans. W. F. Trotter. Dent, London, 1910.
Christopher Peacocke. Deviant causal chains. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 4(1):123–155,
1979.
Roger Penrose. The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of
Physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1989.
Roger Penrose. The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe. Jonathan
Cape, Random House Group Ltd, London, 2004.
Jean Piaget. Biology and Knowledge. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1971.
U. T. Place. Is consciousness a brain process? British Journal of Psychology, 47:44–50, 1956.
Alvin Plantinga. God, Freedom, and Evil. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI, 1977.
Henry Plotkin. Darwin Machines and the Nature of Knowledge: Concerning Adaptations,
Instinct and the Evolution of Intelligence. Penguin Books, London, 1994.

422
Bibliography
Plutarch. Life of Theseus (ad75). In Plutarch, Lives, trans. Bernadotte Rerrin, pages 1–88.
Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1914.
Henri Poincaré. Science and Method, trans. George Bruce Halsted, as part of The
Foundations of Science. The Science Press, Garrison, NY, 1913.
Richard H. Popkin, editor. The Philosophy of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries.
Routledge, New York, 1966.
Karl R. Popper and John C. Eccles. The Self and Its Brain: An Argument for Interactionism.
Springer, Heidelberg, London, New York, 1977.
Karl R. Popper. Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach. Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1972.
David Premack. Intelligence in Ape and Man. Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1976.
Graham Priest. Two dogmas of Quineanism. Philosophical Quarterly, 29:289–301, 1979.
Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers. Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with Nature.
Bantam Books, New York, 1984.
Hilary Putnam. Minds and machines. In Sidney Hook, editor, Dimensions of Mind, pages
57–80. New York University Press, New York, 1960.
Hilary Putnam. Psychological predicates. In W. H. Capitan and D. D. Merrill, editors,
Art, Mind and Religion, pages 37–48. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh,
1967.
Hilary Putnam. Meaning and reference. Journal of Philosophy, 70(19):699–711, 1973.
Hilary Putnam. Reason, Truth and History. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981.
Hilary Putnam. ‘Two dogmas’ revisited. In Realism and Reason, Philosophical Papers Vol. 3,
pages 87–97. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983.
Hilary Putnam. Representation and Reality. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1988.
Willard Van Orman Quine and J. S. Ullian. The Web of Belief, 2nd edn. Random House,
New York, 1970.
Willard Van Orman Quine. Two dogmas of empiricism. Philosophical Review, 60:20–43,
1951.
Willard Van Orman Quine. The Ways of Paradox. Random House, New York, 1966.
Willard Van Orman Quine. Two dogmas in retrospect. Canadian Journal of Philosophy,
21(3):265–274, 1991.
Willard Van Orman Quine.
On simple theories of a complex world.
Synthese,
15(1):103–106, 1963.
Martin Rees. Just Six Numbers: The Deep Forces That Shape the Universe. Weidenfeld and
Nicolson, London, 1999.
Rupert Riedl. Biology of Knowledge: The Evolutionary Basis of Reason. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1980.
Abraham Robinson. A result on consistency and its application to the theory of deﬁnition.
Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Proceedings, Series A, Mathematics,
59:47–58, 1956.
Hartley Rogers. Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Computability. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1967.
Richard Routley. Alleged problems in attributing beliefs, and intentionality, to animals.
Inquiry, 24(4):385–417, 1981.
David E. Rumelhart, James L. McClelland, and PDP Research Group. Parallel Distributed
Processing, vol. 1, Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition: Foundations. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1986.
Bertrand Russell. On denoting. Analysis, 14(56):479–493, 1905.

Bibliography
423
Bertrand Russell. Knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description. Proceedings
of the Aristotelian Society, 11:108–128, 1910.
Bertrand Russell. The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 1872–1914. George Allen and
Unwin Ltd, 1967.
Gilbert Ryle. The Concept of Mind. Hutchinson, London, 1949.
R. M. Sainsbury. Paradoxes. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987.
Kevin Scharp. Replacing Truth. Oxford University Press, New York, 2013.
Moritz Schlick. Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre. Springer, Berlin, 1918.
Erwin Schrödinger. What is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1946.
John R. Searle. Minds, brains and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3(3):417–457,
1980.
John R. Searle. The Rediscovery of the Mind. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.
Stewart Shapiro. An ‘i’ for an i: singular terms, uniqueness, and reference. Review of
Symbolic Logic, 5:380–415, 2012.
Charles Siewert. The Signiﬁcance of Consciousness. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, 1998.
Th. Skolem. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen über die Erfüllbarkeit und
Beweisbarkeit mathematischen Sätze nebst einem Theoreme über dichte Mengen.
Videnskabsakademiet i Kristiania, Skrifter, 1(4):1–36, 1919.
J. J. C. Smart. Sensations and brain processes. Philosophical Review, 68:141–156, 1959.
Jordan Howard Sobel. Logic and Theism. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2004.
Elliott Sober. Simplicity. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1975.
Elliott Sober. The evolution of rationality. Synthese, 46:95–120, 1981.
Roy A. Sorensen. Thought Experiments. Oxford University Press, New York, 1992.
Florian Steinberger. What harmony could and could not be. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 89(4):617–639, 2011.
Galen Strawson. Freedom and Belief. Oxford University Press, 1986.
Galen Strawson. Mental Reality. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994.
Alfred Tarski, Andrzej Mostowski, and Raphael M. Robinson. Undecidable Theories. North
Holland, Amsterdam, 1953.
Neil Tennant. Natural Logic. Edinburgh University Press, 1978; (2nd rev. edn 1991).
Neil Tennant. Intentionality, syntactic structure and the evolution of language. In
Christopher Hookway, editor, Minds, Machines and Evolution, pages 73–103. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1984.
Neil Tennant.
Beth’s theorem and reductionism.
Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly,
66:342–354, 1985.
Neil Tennant. Anti-realism and Logic: Truth as Eternal. Clarendon Library of Logic and
Philosophy, Oxford University Press Oxford, 1987.
Neil Tennant. Theories, concepts and rationality in an evolutionary account of science.
Biology and Philosophy, 3:224–231, 1988.
Neil Tennant. The decoding problem: do we need to search for extra terrestrial
intelligence to search for extraterrestrial intelligence? In Stuart Kingsley, editor, SPIE
Proceedings Volume 1867. Reprinted in Brie Gertler and Lawrence Shapiro, editors,
Arguing about the mind, pages 583–597, Routledge, Abingdon, 2007, 1993.
Neil Tennant. The Taming of the True. Oxford University Press, 1997.
Neil Tennant. Deductive versus expressive power: a pre-Gödelian predicament. Journal of
Philosophy, 97(5):257–277, 2000.

424
Bibliography
Neil Tennant. On Turing machines knowing their own Gödel-sentences. Philosophia
Mathematica, 9:72–79, 2001.
Neil Tennant. Relevance in reasoning. In Stewart Shapiro, editor, The Oxford Handbook
of Philosophy of Mathematics and Logic, pages 696–726. Oxford University Press, New
York, 2005.
Neil Tennant. Mind, mathematics and the Ignorabimusstreit. British Journal for the History
of Philosophy, 15(4):745–773, 2007.
Neil Tennant. Cognitive phenomenology, semantic qualia and luminous knowledge. In
Patrick Greenough and Duncan Pritchard, editors, Williamson on Knowledge, pages
238–256. Oxford University Press, 2009.
Neil Tennant. The logical structure of scientiﬁc explanation and prediction: planetary
orbits in a sun’s gravitational ﬁeld. Studia Logica, 95:207–232, 2010.
Neil Tennant. Cut for core logic. Review of Symbolic Logic, 5(3):450–479, 2012a.
Neil Tennant. Changes in Mind: An Essay on Rational Belief Revision. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2012b.
Neil Tennant. Aristotle’s syllogistic and core logic. History and Philosophy of Logic,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01445340.2013.867144, 2014a.
Neil Tennant.
The logical structure of evolutionary explanation and prediction:
Darwinism’s fundamental schema. Biology and Philosophy, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10539-014-9444-0, 2014b.
Neil Tennant. Cut for classical core logic. Review of Symbolic Logic, forthcoming, 2014c.
Neil Tennant. Inferentialism, logicism, harmony, and a counterpoint (downloadable
from http://people.cohums.ohio-state.edu/tennant9/). In Alex Miller, editor, Essays for
Crispin Wright: Logic, Language and Mathematics. Volume 2 of a two-volume Festschrift
for Crispin Wright, co-edited with Annalisa Coliva. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2014d.
Neil Tennant. A logical theory of truthmakers and falsitymakers (downloadable from
http://people.cohums.ohio-state.edu/tennant9/). In Michael Glanzberg, editor, The
Oxford Handbook of Truth. Oxford University Press, New York, 2014e.
Stephen Toulmin. Human Understanding: The Collective Use and Evolution of Concepts.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1972.
Alan Turing. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem.
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society s2, 42(1):230–265, 1937.
Alan Turing. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem. a
correction. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society s2, 43(1):544–546, 1938.
Florian von Schilcher and Neil Tennant. Philosophy, Evolutions and Human Nature.
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1984.
J. D. Watson and F. H. Crick. Molecular structure of nucleic acids: a structure for
deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature, 171(4356):737–738, 1953.
Otto Weininger. Geschlecht und Charakter: Eine prinzipielle Untersuching. Friedrich Jasper,
Vienna, 1903.
J. A. Wheeler. Law without law. In J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek, editors, Quantum
Theory and Measurement, pages 182–213. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
1983.
Alfred North Whitehead. Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1929.
Eugene P. Wigner. The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences.
Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics, 13(1):1–14, 1960.
Bernard Williams. The self and the future. Philosophical Review, 79(2):161–180, 1970.

Bibliography
425
Bernard Williams. Deciding to believe (1970). In Bernard Williams, Problems of the Self:
Philosophical Papers 1956–1972, pages 136–151. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1973a.
Bernard Williams. The Makropulos case: reﬂections on the tedium of immortality. In
Problems of the Self, pages 82–100. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1973b.
George C. Williams. Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, 1966.
Crispin Wright. Scientiﬁc realism, observation and the veriﬁcation principle. In
G. Macdonald and C. Wright, editors, Fact, Science and Morality, pages 247–274.
Blackwell, Oxford, 1986.

Index
2, 48, 52, 104
3, 33, 52
ϕ-ψ correlations, 309
a priori/a posteriori distinction, 3, 63
abstract/concrete distinction, 46
accidentalism, 87
Aesthetics, xv, 4, 5, 13, 22
agnostic, 29, 30, 221, 263
Altham, Jimmy, xx
ambiguity, 101
American pragmatists, 21
ampliative inference, 55
analytic/synthetic distinction, 65
Anscombe, Elizabeth, xx, 409
Anselm of Canterbury, 18, 213, 406
Ontological Argument, 29, 213–26,
266
Anthropic Principle, 206, 233
anti-foundationalism, 81
anti-realism, 28, 74
about truth, 74
appearance/reality distinction, 41, 42, 274
Appiah, Kwame Anthony, xv
Applied Ethics, 23
Aquinas, 18, 34, 406
Cosmological Argument, 213, 227–29,
265, 279
Argument by Analogy, 295
Argument from Design, 29, 194, 195,
213, 231–34, 239, 243, 261
Argument from the Problem of Evil, 264
Aristotle, 5, 8, 10, 17, 40, 106, 387, 405
atheism, 19, 20, 79, 80
Austin, J. L., 66
Australian materialists, 304
Axiom of Choice, 26, 184–86
Axiom of Inﬁnity, 384, 386
axiomatizability, 402
axioms of
arithmetic, 60
Dedekind–Peano for arithmetic, 61
Euclidean geometry, 26
geometry, 81
probability, 121
set theory, 26
Ayer, Alfred J., 150, 158
Bacon, Francis, 18, 406
Baldwin, Thomas, xx
Bambrough, Renford, xx
Basic Law V, 379
behaviorism, 86
being-for-itself, 46, 287
belief revision, 30, 173
Berkeley
general triangle, 166
Berkeley, George, 19, 163, 407
Bernouilli, Jacob, 123, 124
Beth’s Deﬁnability Theorem, 83, 199,
200, 202, 203, 318
Big Bang, 23, 195, 205, 206, 229, 248,
250, 251, 261
binary quantiﬁer, 131
Biological Essentialism, 308
Bohr, Niels, 163
Bolzano, Bernard, 130, 407
Borges, Jorge Luis, 15
bound occurrences of variables, 93
Brahe, Tycho, 188
Bratman, Michael, xv
Brentano, Franz, 46, 408
Broad, C. D., 110, 115
Burali–Forti Paradox, 380, 381, 383
Burge, Tyler, 204
cannibalization by the special sciences, 22
Cantor, Georg, xvii, 380, 382

Index
427
Cantor’s Continuum Hypothesis, 26
Cantor’s paradise, 387
Cantor’s Theorem, 182, 187, 385, 387,
388
cardinality of the continuum, 186,
187
Carnap, Rudolf, xviii, 21, 46, 68, 149,
163, 408
categorical basis, 300
categorical description, 349, 350, 389
categoricity in power, 350
category mistake, 297, 298
causal closure of the physical, 306, 307,
310, 326
causal functionalism, 312, 315, 318
characteristic function, 144, 145, 400
Chomsky, Noam, 86, 89
Chrysippus, 77, 406
Church, Alonzo, 144
cognitive signiﬁcance, xvii, 150, 173,
174, 191
cognitivism, 45, 79
Cohen, Paul, 186, 187
coherentism, 81
collapse proof, 150
communication, 90, 95, 155, 161, 172,
206, 289, 321, 363, 364, 366
communitarianism about meaning, 87
compatibilism, 81, 329
completeness
of ﬁrst-order logic, 397
of a system of proof, 9, 10, 100
of a theory, 398, 402
computable function, 139, 140, 142–44,
146, 148, 149, 312, 325, 398
conceptual analysis, 20, 125–27
conceptual explication, 139, 325
conceptual possibility, 43, 44, 155
constructible universe, 186, 187
Continuum Hypothesis, 184, 186
contraries, 179
Conway, John, xx
Copernican revolution, 18
Core Logic, 350, 360, 362, 368, 388
cosmic riddles, 304
Countable Models Theorem, 387
counterexample to an invalid argument,
98
counterfactual conditional, 300
Craig, Edward, xx
Creationism, 245
Crick, Francis, 241
crisis in foundations, 378
Curie, Marie, 5
Cuvier, Georges, 241
Darwin, Charles, 19, 20, 214, 232, 237,
239–41
Darwinian theory, 239
Davidson, Donald, 126, 292, 310, 409
anomalous monism, 309, 310
Dawkins, Richard, 19
de Beauvoir, Simone, 46
de Moivre, Abraham, 123
decidable theory, 401
Dedekind, Richard, 60, 61
deducibility, 107, 108, 121, 350, 397, 400
deductive validity, 97
deﬁnite descriptions, 100, 101, 130
deﬂationism, 75
deontic operator O, 48
Descartes, René, 18, 21, 88, 163, 271–74,
406
Cartesian circle, 279
Cartesian coordinates, 271
dualism, 82, 271, 272, 278, 286, 294,
295, 297, 298
evil demon, 156, 274, 275, 277–79
on existence of God, 279, 282, 283
method of radical doubt, 273, 274, 279
skepticism, 88, 271, 273, 274
descriptive/normative distinction, 48, 49
descriptivism, 76, 79
determination constraint, 201
determinism, 80, 285, 305, 327, 329–31
diagonal argument, xvi, xvii, 140–42,
149, 151, 325, 397, 399
diagonal function, 140, 141, 143
dialectic, 174
dialectical depth, 175
differential reproduction, 240
disembodied Cartesian soul, 44, 295
dispositional analyses of mental states,
300
dispositional properties, 300
doxastic logic, 106
du Bois-Reymond, Emil, 243, 304
dualism, 82
Dummett, Michael, 365, 409
Early Carnap’s Boxes, 68
Early Modern Philosophy, 18
effective method, 162, 221, 400–02
Einstein, Albert, 67, 163, 190, 235
electromagnetism, 150, 190, 238
eliminativism, 75
emergentism, 204

428
Index
emotivism, 45, 74, 79
empirical realism, 19
empirical/rational distinction, 49
Empiricism, 18, 19, 81
epiphenomenalism, 204
epistemic logic, 106
Epistemology, xvi, 4, 7, 22, 45
Esher, M. C., 54
essentialism, 86
Ethics, xv, 4, 11, 12, 22, 45
Euclid, 17, 81, 164, 168, 172, 180, 186,
261
evaluation of sentences, 354
evolutionism, 88
existential presuppositions, 101
existential quantiﬁer, 93
experimental philosophy, 3
experimental testing, 122
explicandum, 139, 144
explicans, 139, 144
explicit deﬁnition, 202
external negation, 131
extralogical expressions, 10
fact/value distinction, 49
factive operators, 48
fallacies, rhetorical, 37
fallacy of
afﬁrming the consequent, 34
arguing against a straw person, 37
Argumentum ad baculam, 37
Argumentum ad hominem, 38
composition, 33
denying the antecedent, 35
equivocation, 33
is–ought, 12, 49
the ostrich, 245, 246
over-hasty generalization, 35
post hoc, ergo propter hoc, 36
quantiﬁer-switch, 34, 228
false/impossible distinction, 52
family resemblances, 13
Fermat’s Last Theorem, 181, 182
ﬁnite ordinals, 386
ﬁrst philosophy, 21, 87
ﬁrst-person perspective, 321, 329
Fischer, John, xv
folk theory of mind, 305
formalized languages, 11
foundationalism, 81
Fraenkel, Abraham, 380
free logic, 380
free occurrences of variables, 93
free will, xvii, 6, 14, 17, 30, 31, 80, 206,
266, 268, 314, 326–29, 331–33
Frege, Gottlob, 11, 20, 40, 66–68, 101,
130, 133, 163, 168, 169, 172, 219,
379, 380, 408
Frege’s analysis of number, 133
Frege’s Boxes, 67
Freudian psychoanalysis, 296
Friedman, Harvey, 167
fruitfulness of deduction, 181, 182
fundamental tension between descriptive
and deductive aspirations, 395
Gödel, Kurt, xvii, 24, 144–46, 149, 183,
184, 186, 195, 230, 324, 397
completeness of ﬁrst-order logic, 397
constructible universe of sets, 187
general recursive functions, 144, 145,
325, 398
incompleteness of arithmetic, 69, 149,
183, 324, 397
method of coding, 183, 184
Ontological Argument, 230
Second Incompleteness Theorem, 144,
183
Gödel’s Boxes, 69
Galileo Galilei, 168
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 167
Geisteswissenschaften, 310, 311
Gentzen, Gerhard, 130
geometry
applied, 68
Euclidean, 17, 26, 66, 77, 81, 164, 172,
180, 181
non-Euclidean, 163, 186, 238, 261
of physical space, 68
pure, 67
Gettier counterexamples, 128
Gettier, Edmund, 128
global illusion, 42
Goldbach, Christian, 26
Goldbach’s Conjecture, 26, 181, 183
Goodman, Nelson, 372, 409
Goodman’s Paradox, 370, 374
Governing Assumption, 142
Grade A idiom, 200, 318
Grelling’s Paradox, 377
Grice’s analysis of meaning, 132
Hacking, Ian, xx
Haeckel, Ernst, 241
harmony of rules for operators, 364–66
Havisham Cake model, 208
Heidegger, Martin, 46, 408

Index
429
Heisenberg, Werner, 163
Hempel, Carl, xviii
Hempel’s Paradox, 369
hereditarily ﬁnite pure sets, 395
heritability, 239, 240, 251
hermeneutic circle, 206
Hersh, Reuben, 155
hidden gruesters, 374, 375
Hilbert, David, 66, 172, 180, 183, 387
Hilbert’s Problems, 187
Hilbert Program, 183
Hobbes, Thomas, 19, 406
Hume, David, 19, 49, 124, 163, 407
naturalistic fallacy, 49, 245
problem of induction, 112, 114, 124,
190
projectivism, 76
Husserl, Edmund, 46, 408
Huxley, Thomas, 304
hypothetico-deductive method, xviii,
238, 414
ideal science, 171
identity theory, 309
token-token, 47, 309, 310
type-type, 47, 309
Ignorabimusstreit, 304
implicit deﬁnition, , 202
incompleteness, 24, 100, 144, 149, 324,
325
of arithmetic, 69
claimed philosophical implications,
183
effect on Hilbert’s Program, 183
individualism about meaning, 87
individually necessary and jointly
sufﬁcient conditions, xviii, 130, 139
induction
different from deduction, 114
enumerative, 113
minimal adequacy condition, 115, 117
new riddle, 372, 374
no canon of, 97
old riddle of, 114, 115
problem of, xvii, 191
quietism about, 124, 375
scandal of philosophy, 110, 115
inductive validity, 97, 109, 177
ineffability of the inﬁnite, 395
inference to the best explanation, xviii,
241, 295
inferentialist, 337, 340, 355, 356, 397
inﬁnite regress, 135, 152, 388
inﬁnity
completed, 387
of natural numbers, 186
potential, 387
of real numbers, 186
innatism, 85
instrumentalism, 75
intensional circle, 132
inter-individual variation, 240
internal negation, 131
intuitions, 3, 4, 19, 62, 107, 110, 125,
174–76, 319, 329, 381
irrealism, 42, 74
irrealists, 48, 49
isomorphism among models, 348–50, 382,
390, 395
Jaynes, Julian, 89
Johnson, Philip, 80, 245
Kant, Immanuel, 6, 7, 19, 20, 40–42, 57,
63, 65–67, 76, 77, 87, 163, 219, 246,
290
Kantian synthesis, 19
Kepler, Johannes, 188
Laws of Planetary Motion, 188–90
Kleene, Stephen, 144, 148
Kolmogorov, Andrey, 45
Kripke, Saul, 52, 54, 86, 158, 167, 409
Kuhn, Thomas, 236, 237
Lacan, Jacques, 46
Laplace, Pierre Simon, 330
Laplacean determinism, 330
Law of Large Numbers, 123
Law of Non-Contradiction, 49, 275
Leakey, Richard, 241
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, 18, 163,
407
Calculemus, 162
Identity of Indiscernibles, 158
possible worlds, 52
response to Argument from Evil, 265
Leitmotif, 110
contrasting deductive directions, xvi,
110
method of diagonal argument, xvi
levels of reality, 196
Lewis’s analysis of conventions, 134
Lewis’s First Paradox, 107
Lewy, Casimir, xx
Liar Paradox, 184, 376
libertarianism, 80, 329
linguistic turn, 20

430
Index
linguisticism, 90
Littlewood, John, 156
Locke, John, 19, 45, 157, 364, 407
primary and secondary qualities, 45
problem of inverted spectrum, 157
Logic, xiv, xvi, xviii, 4, 8, 10, 11, 22, 36,
50, 51, 93, 170, 177, 182, 187, 208,
348
logical expressions, 10
logical implication, 9, 56
logical operators, 106
Logical Positivism, 20, 66, 68, 69, 150,
174
logician’s English, 59, 93, 215
Logicism, 168
Lorenz, Konrad, 286
Lucas, John R., 183, 324, 325
Lucretius, 18, 406
Lyell, Charles, 241
machine functionalism, 312, 325
Mackie’s analysis of causation, 132
Malebranche, Nicolas, 250, 407
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 163
Mathematical Induction, 35, 61, 62, 375
mathematical questions, 25, 27, 28
Mathias, Adrian, xx
Maxwell–Faraday laws, 150
McGinn, Colin, 89
medieval philosophy, 18
Mellor, Hugh, xx
Mendel, Gregor, 241
mentalism, 90
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 46
Metaphilosophy, 5
metaphysical possibility, 53
Metaphysics, xvi, 4–6, 22, 45
method of thought-experiment, 152
Michelson–Morley experiment, 190
mind–body problem, xvii, xxi, 44, 285,
300, 304, 308
mind/body distinction, 43
modal logic, 52
Modus Morons, 78
Modus Ponens, 78
monism, 82
Morley, Michael, 350
Müller-Lyer illusion, 41
multiple realizability, 315
Naïve Comprehension, 168, 169
Nagel, Ernest, 198
Nagel, Thomas, xv, 46, 286, 325
natural kind, 86, 96, 97, 113, 117, 119,
120, 177, 187
naturalistic fallacy, 49, 245
naturalist’s rule of thumb, 248
Naturwissenschaften, 310
necessary/true distinction, 52
New Riddle of Induction, 370
New Synthesis, 241, 242
Newton, Isaac, 18, 231
Argument from Design, 213, 231
explanation of Kepler’s Laws, 188–90
Law of Gravitation, 150
Laws of Motion, 188, 330
Nominalism, 74
nomological possibility, 53, 54
non-cognitivists, 48
non-standard model for arithmetic, 62,
396
Noncompossibility Theorem, 389, 390,
392
Nozick, Robert, 409
numeral, 134, 399
objective/subjective distinction, 44
Occam’s Razor, 62, 194, 235, 292
ontological parsimony, 234, 235
ontology, 64
open sentences, 94
out-Gödelizing, 323
Paley, William, 213, 214, 232
paradox, 369
Burali–Forti, 380
Goodman, 370
Hempel, 369
inductive, 369
irrelevance, 107
Liar, 101
mathematical, 377
Richard, 378
Russell, 168, 378
semantic, 101, 375
Skolem, 384
Sorites, 102, 375
Zeno, 377
Paradox of Analysis, 129
Parallels Postulate, 26, 186
part/whole relation, 196
Peano Arithmetic, 61
Peano, Giuseppe, 60
Peirce, Charles Sanders, xviii, 408
Perry, John, xv
Phenomenology, 45, 46
philosophical questions, 27–30

Index
431
Philosophy of Language, xvi
Philosophy of Mind, xvi, 159, 325
Place, Ullin, 304
Planck, Max, 163
Plato, 17, 18, 75, 127–29, 163, 174, 405
Platonic dialogues, 174
Platonism, 69, 73, 74
Poincaré, Henri, 167
Popper, Karl, xviii, 195, 206, 409
Popperianism, 191
positivism, 77
possible world, 52
Post, Emil, 144, 148
Post-Enlightenment Philosophy, 407
Postcard Paradox, 377
Postulate of Parallels, 26, 186
poverty of stimulus argument, 86
Power Set Axiom, 182, 386, 387
pragmatism, 173
Pre-Socratics, 17
precession of the perihelion of Mercury,
190
predictive power, 117, 118, 161, 250
primary qualities, 45
Principle of Analytic Equilibrium, 288, 290
Principle of Identity of Indiscernibles, 158
Principle of Substitutivity of Identicals,
102
Principle of Veriﬁability, xvii
probability
absolute, 122, 257
conditional, 122
probability function, 121
Problem of Evil, 263
responses, 264
Problem of Holism, 302
Problem of Other Minds, 295
Problem of Universals, 15
projectivism, 45, 74, 76
proof, xvi, 7, 9, 10, 25–27, 29, 51, 60, 75,
81, 98, 106, 107, 110–12, 161, 162,
164, 167, 170, 171, 177–82, 189,
191, 192, 213, 226
Pythagoras’s Theorem, 170, 180, 182
Q, 399
represents recursive functions, 399
strongly representing, 403
quantum mechanics, 20, 23, 54, 68, 163,
190
quantum physics, 5
quasi-realists, 48
quietism, 88
Quine’s Bolus, 70
Quine, Willard Van Ormand, 19, 21, 70,
71, 126, 163, 200, 207, 208, 222, 409
Quine–Duhem problem, 193
Ramanujan, Srinivasa, 167
Ramsey, Frank, 75, 130, 316, 377
Ramsey sentence, 316
rational reﬂection, 30
Rationalism, 18, 19, 81
re-transmission of falsity, 177
realism, 28, 45, 73, 74
about entities, 74
about mathematical entities, 74
about truth, 74
recursion equations, 60
reductio ad absurdum, 32, 94, 99, 140,
169, 179, 220, 221, 263, 401
classical, 221
reductionism, 83–85, 196, 198, 199, 202,
207
Redundancy Theory of Truth, 75
referential opacity, 102
reﬂective equilibrium, xv, 25, 107
regimentation, xvii, 216, 221, 223, 225,
226, 229, 268
Reichenbach’s straight rule, 118, 119
relativity theory, 20, 26
relevance
paradoxes of, 106, 107
Renaissance man (or woman), 20
representability of recursive functions,
399
representation
different systems of, 272
perceptual, 287–91
representationalist, 337
representing set of sentences, 400
Richard’s Paradox, 378
Robinson, Raphael, 399
rule for eliminating
conditionals (→-E), 360
conjunctions (∧-E), 359
disjunctions (∨-E), 359
existentials (∃-E), 362
negations (¬-E), 359
universals (∀-E), 361
rule for falsifying
conditionals (→V), 353
conjunctions (∧V), 353
disjunctions (∨V), 353
existentials (∃V), 354
negations (¬V), 353
universals (∀V), 353

432
Index
rule for introducing
conditionals (→-I), 360
conjunctions (∧-I), 359
disjunctions (∨-I), 359
existentials (∃-I), 360
negations (¬-I), 359
universals (∀-I), 361
rule for verifying
conditionals (→V), 352
conjunctions (∧V), 351
disjunctions (∨V), 351
existentials (∃V), 352
negations (¬V), 351
universals (∀V), 352
rules of inference, 9, 50, 170, 337,
401–403
Russell, Bertrand, xvii, 46
Russell’s Paradox, 168, 169, 172, 378,
380, 384, 388
saltationism, 89
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 46, 409
Schema N, 134
Schlick’s Boxes, 68
Schlick, Moritz, 66–68
Schrödinger, Erwin, 163
scientiﬁc discovery, 112, 161, 171
scientiﬁc question, 25–28
existential, 26, 27
universal, 26, 27
scientiﬁc testing, 112, 116
secondary qualities, 45
semantic closure, 101
Separation, 182, 385, 386
set-existence principles, 386
Sextus Empiricus, 19
simplicity
mathematical, xvii, 384
scientiﬁc, 116, 117, 175, 176, 231, 234,
235, 372
single turnstile, 10
skepticism, 88
Skolem’s Paradox, 384, 387
Smart, Jack, 304
Smiley, Timothy, xx
solipsism, 74
Sorites Paradox, 375
soundness
of proof, 390
of a system of proof, 9, 10
Spinoza, Baruch, 18, 407
standard model for arithmetic,
398
Steinberger, Florian, 366
Sterelny, Kim, 308
Strawson, Peter, 246
stream of consciousness, 44
strongly representing set of sentences,
401
subjunctive conditional, 300
substantialism, 75
supervenience, 83–85, 199–202, 204
without reductionism, 207
syllogisms, 8, 9
syllogistic, 8, 40
Tarski, Alfred, xvii, 130, 352
Tebbit, Norman, 33
Th(M), 398
Th(N), 398, 404
not axiomatizable, 404
theism, 79
theoretical autonomy, 311
theoretical entities, 7, 74
theory dynamics, 173
theory/evidence distinction, 55
Thesis of Anti-Mechanism, 325
Thesis of Mechanism, 325
things in themselves, 43
third-person perspective, 329
Thom, René, 163
thought-experiment, 152–54, 156–58
token-reﬂexiveness, 100
transcendental idealism, 19
transcendental philosophy, 6
transcendental precondition, 68
transcendentalism, 76
transmission of truth, 32, 177, 178
truthmakers, 75, 352
truths
analytic, 4
a posteriori, 4, 54
a priori, 3, 54, 64
synthetic, 4
accidental, 6, 7, 177
arithmetical, 57, 62
law-like, 177
logical and conceptual, 65
mathematical, 65
necessary, 54
synthetic a priori, 65, 69, 77
Turing, Alan, xvii, 144
Turing machine, 146–49, 312, 315,
323–25, 398
Turing–Church Thesis, 148, 149, 397,
403

Index
433
unaxiomatizability
of arithmetical truth, 397
undecidability
of ﬁrst-order logic, 162
underdetermination
causal, 326, 327
of theory by evidence, 115
universal quantiﬁer, 93
Utilitarianism, 81
vacuous terms, 101
vagueness, 101
validity of
argument, xvi, 14, 96–98, 130, 179
rule, 50, 51, 98, 106, 152
variability, 251
variable-binding term-forming operator,
131
Vienna Circle, 20, 66, 198
Voltaire, 265
Walsh, W. H., xix
Wang, Hao, 375
Watson, James, 241
Weininger, Otto, 367
well-formed formula, 94
well-order types, 381–84
Welträthsel, 304
Wheeler, John Archibald, 206
Whitehead, Alfred North, 18, 66, 408
Wigner, Eugene, 51
Wiles, Andrew, 181
Williams, Bernard, xx, 409
Wittgenstein, Ludwig , 13, 162, 163, 218,
292, 367, 408
Woolf, Virginia, 327
Zeno’s Paradox, 377
Zermelo, Ernst, 380
ZF, 186
ZFC, 186, 187, 386–88
zombies, 43, 44, 159, 290, 294, 295,
319–22

from Taylor Ii< Francis 
Helping you to choose the right eBooks for your library 
Add to your library's digital 
collection today with 
Taylor &: Francis eBooks. 
We have over 50,000 eBooks 
in the Humanities, Social 
Sciences, Behavioural Sciences, 
Built Environment and Law, 
from leading imprints, including 
Routledge, Focal Press and 
Psychology Press. 
Free Trials 
Available 
We oHer free trials to qualifying acado!mic, 
corporate and government customer'!. 
eCollections 
Choose from 20 different subject 
eColiecuons, including: 
Choose from a range of subject 
packages or create your own! 
Benefits for you 
• 
Free MARC records 
• 
COUNTER-compliant u~ge 
statistio 
• 
FleJlible purchase and pricing options 
• 
70% approx of our eBooks are now 
DRM-free. 
Benefits for your user 
• 
Off-site, anytime access via Athens 
or referring URL 
• 
Print or copy pages or chapters 
• 
Full content search 
• 
Bookmark, highlight and annotate 
ted 
• 
Access to thousands of pages of 
quality research at the dick of a 
button. 
eFocus 
We have 16 cutting-edge interdisciplinary 
colle<:tiom, including: 
For more information, pricing enquiries or to order a free Ilial, 
please contact your local sales team: 
UK/Rest of World: onUne.sales®tandf.co.uk 
USNCanada/latin America: e_reference@taylorandfrancls.com 
EastJSoutheast Asia: martln.Jack®tandf.com . .Ig 
India: Journal~alel@tandflndia.com 
www.tandfebookS.com 
martln.Jack®tandf.com 
statistio 
Taylor &
Taylor &
Taylor &
ORDER YOUR
ORDER YOUR
ORDER YOUR
ORDER YOUR
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Asian Studies
Law
Law
Law
eBooks

