
 
 
Contents 
I
MEDICAL RADIOLOGY
Diagnostic Imaging
Editors:
A. L. Baert, Leuven
M. Knauth, Göttingen
K. Sartor, Heidelberg

 
 
Contents 
III
M. Forsting · I. Wanke  (Eds.)
Intracranial 
Vascular Malformations
and Aneurysms
From Diagnostic Work-Up to Endovascular Therapy
2nd Revised Edition
With Contributions by 
C. Cognard · A. Dörﬂ er · M. Forsting · W. Küker · L. Pierot · L. Spelle · I. Szikora
I. Wanke
Foreword by 
M. Knauth
With 189 Figures in 682 Separate Illustrations, 20 in Color and 9 Tables
123

IV 
Contents
Michael Forsting, MD, PhD
Director, Institute of Radiology and Neuroradiology
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional
Radiology and Neuroradiology
University of Essen
Hufelandstraße 55
45122 Essen
Germany
Isabel Wanke, MD, PhD
Director, Interventional Neuroradiology
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional
Radiology and Neuroradiology
University of Essen
Hufelandstraße 55
45122 Essen
Germany
Medical Radiology · Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology
Series Editors: 
A. L. Baert · L. W. Brady · H.-P. Heilmann · M. Knauth · M. Molls · C. Nieder · K. Sartor
Continuation of Handbuch der medizinischen Radiologie
 
 
Encyclopedia of Medical Radiology
ISBN 978-3-540-32919-0      e-ISBN 978-3-540-32920-6
DOI 10.1007 / 978-3-540-32920-6
Medical Radiology · Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007942886
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, 
 speciﬁ cally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitations, broadcasting, reproduction on 
microﬁ lm or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permit-
ted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965, in its current version, and permis-
sion for use must always be obtained from Springer-Verlag. Violations are liable for prosecution under the German 
Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a 
speciﬁ c statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free 
for general use.
Product liability: The publishers cannot guarantee the accuracy of any information about dosage and application 
contained in this book. In every individual case the user must check such information by consulting the relevant 
literature.
Cover-Design and Layout: Verlagsservice Teichmann, 69256 Mauer
Printed on acid-free paper – 21/3180xq
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 
springer.com

 
 
Contents 
V
Foreword
Neuroradiology goes therapeutic. 
By using the vascular system as an access route to intracranial vascular pathologies, 
many vascular diseases can be treated nowadays “from the inside” with only minimal 
invasiveness.
Neuroradiology has long ceased to be a purely diagnostic discipline. The need for 
a second edition of the book – edited, and to a signiﬁ cant degree written, by Prof. 
 Forsting and Prof. Wanke – relatively soon after the ﬁ rst edition underlines the impor-
tance of and growing interest in Interventional Neuroradiology.
The editors focus on intracranial vascular malformations and aneurysms which, 
together, comprise a major proportion of the bread earned by the neurointerventional-
ist. The book not only deals excellently with interventional procedures, but also illumi-
nates underlying pathological changes, different classiﬁ cation schemes, indications for 
endovascular therapy and relevant studies that have been conducted in this ﬁ eld.
Prof. Forsting and Prof. Wanke have been working in Interventional Neuroradiology 
for many years and have succeeded in recruiting a team of internationally renowned 
authors. Their volume on Intracranial Vascular Malformations and Aneurysms is not 
only of great interest to neuroradiologists, but also to colleagues working in the neigh-
boring disciplines of Radiology, Neurology and Neurosurgery.
I am convinced that the second edition of Intracranial Vascular Malformations and 
Aneurysms will be at least as successful as the ﬁ rst one.
Göttingen 
 
Michael Knauth

 
 
Contents 
VII
Preface
Four years after its ﬁ rst edition, we are happy to present the second edition of our book 
on diagnostic imaging and endovascular therapy of vascular malformations.
The need for a second edition within a relatively short period of time indicates that 
interventional neuroradiology and knowledge about vascular malformations is still a 
fast growing ﬁ eld. It is a 2nd edition with new images and major text changes, as well 
as the corresponding literature update. Also new about the book is that it now has two 
editors. Isabel Wanke and myself  hope that this new edition will be as successful as 
the ﬁ rst and that it will also help many colleagues to improve their knowledge of non-
atherosclerotic vascular problems of the brain.
Essen 
Michael Forsting
Isabel Wanke

 
 
Contents 
IX
Contents
1 
Developmental Venous Anomalies
 
Michael Forsting and Isabel Wanke  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
1.1 
Pathology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
1.2 
Clinical Presentation    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4
1.3 
Imaging.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   11
1.4 
Therapy.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   14
 
References  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  16
2 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias
 
Wilhelm Küker and Michael Forsting.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   19
2.1 
Cavernomas  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   19
2.2 
Capillary Telangiectasia  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   41
 
References  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   47
3 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations
 
Christophe Cognard, Laurent Spelle, and Laurent Pierot  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   51
3.1 
Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   52
3.2 
Pathology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   53
3.3 
Clinical Presentation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   56
3.4 
Diagnostic Imaging .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   62
3.5 
Therapy.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   74
 
References  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 112 
4 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations
 
István Szikora  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 121
4.1 
Pathology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 122 
4.2 
Clinical Presentation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 127 
4.3 
Diagnostic Imaging .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 141 
4.4 
Therapy.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 149
References .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 162 
5 
Intracranial Aneurysms
 
Isabel Wanke, Arnd Dörﬂ er, and Michael Forsting   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 167
5.1 
Pathology.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 168
5.2 
Clinical Presentation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 177
5.3 
Imaging.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 189
5.4 
Therapy.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 205
 
Refernces .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 270
Subject Index.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 285
List of Contributors  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 293

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
1
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
1
Michael Forsting and Isabel Wanke
C O N T E N T S
1.1 
Pathology 2
1.2 
Clinical Presentation 4
1.3 
Imaging 11
1.4 
Therapy 14
 
References 16
M. Forsting; MD, PhD, Professor
I. Wanke; MD, PhD, Professor
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology and 
Neuroradiology, University of Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 
45122 Essen, Germany
In a typical neurovascular working day, develop-
mental venous anomalies (DVAs) cause a lot of con-
fusion. In part, this confusion is related to the term 
“venous angioma”, which is used in many institu-
tions as a synonym for DVAs! But “venous angioma” 
is clearly a misnomer, because the term “angioma” 
usually suggests a severe disease with a substantial 
risk of bleeding. In contrast, DVAs must be con-
sidered as unusual, but nonpathological, venous 
drainage and an embryological determined variant 
of venous drainage. On the other hand, DVAs are 
considered to be the most common form of cere-
bral vascular malformations, occurring in up to 4% 
of the population (Garner et al. 1991; Ostertun 
and Solymosi 1993; Truwit 1992). This high inci-
dence is a good reason to familiarize oneself with 
these lesions and keep abreast of new ﬁ ndings in 
this area.
Another factor contributing to the DVA-related 
confusion is that many radiologists and clinicians 
just see abnormal vessels on magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) scans, immediately tell the patient 
something about a vascular malformation, and re-
fer the patient for neurosurgical extirpation of the 
lesion.
To avoid too much irritation, speciﬁ cally within 
the group of referring doctors, the term “venous an-
gioma” should be avoided and DVA should be used. 
However, if you are reporting about DVA, it is usu-
ally necessary to explain what this is. And this is a 
good reason to read the upcoming chapter.
K E Y  P O I N T S
Developmental venous anomalies (DVAs) rep-
resent the most common vascular variant
DVAs consist typical of medullary veins form-
ing a caput medusae draining into a trans-
cerebral collector vein which empties into a 
dural, subependymal or cortical vein
DVAs are low-ﬂ ow, low-resistance abnormali-
ties draining normal brain parenchyma!
DVAs have been associated with vague neuro-
logical symptoms, such as nonspeciﬁ c head-
aches and dizziness, or with seizures. In most 
cases it is an incidental ﬁ nding
Up to one third of DVAs is associated with 
cavernomas; therefore susceptibility weighted 
MRI-sequences should be included into the 
imaging protocol, especially if a seizure was 
the indication for the examination. Therapy 
should be focussed on the cavernoma
Rarely, congenital abnormalities (e.g. hetero-
topia) might also be associated with DVAs
Venous thrombosis in DVAs might occur but 
no more often than in any other intracranial 
vein
Surgical resection or radiation therapy of 
DVAs should be avoided
Endovascular therapy of DVAs is also not an 
option










2 
M. Forsting and I. Wanke
 1.1 
Pathology
The pathogenesis of a DVA is still unknown. Saito 
and Kobayashi et al. (1981) hypothesized that an 
intrauterine event during formation of the med-
ullary veins or tributaries induces the formation 
of the collateral venous drainage pathways. This 
hypothesis is supported by the absence of normal 
draining veins in the region of the large draining 
collector vein.
Another assumption is that an in-utero acquired 
venous occlusion maintains the intrinsic venous 
anastomoses within the white matter. The DVA then 
expresses an early collateral adaptation, but devel-
ops on a pre-existing venous system that has been 
transformed. However, the majority of DVAs are not 
associated with any sort of neural tissue damage or 
dysfunction. Lasjaunias (1997) commented on this 
theory to the effect that it can hardly be imagined 
that a signiﬁ cant venous disorder (such as throm-
bosis) at an early stage of development would not be 
associated with some tissue abnormality. Further-
more, the fact that DVAs do not exist in the dien-
cephalons, brain stem, or spinal cord and are only 
encountered where tectum derivates exist, excludes 
DVAs from the group of pathological malformations 
(Lasjaunias 1997).
The association of venous malformations with 
other vascular malformations gave further room for 
speculation. Mullan et al. (1996) hypothesized that 
true arteriovenous (AV) malformations may be ﬁ stu-
lized venous malformations and that both vascular 
anomalies may be related to a developmental failure 
of the cortical venous system. However, these are 
nice theories, but do not have any impact on diag-
nostic work-up or patient management, nor are they 
supported by any study. Kilic et al. (2000) looked 
for expression of structural proteins and angiogenic 
factors in cerebrovascular anomalies. Whereas AVM 
and cavernomas had expression of vascular endo-
thelial growth factor, DVAs did not express any of 
the studied growth factors and mainly consisted of 
structural proteins of angiogenically mature tissue. 
This ﬁ nding strongly supports the idea of a simple 
variation of the venous drainage instead of being a 
true vascular malformation.
In contrast, the relationship of DVAs with cav-
ernous hemangiomas has been well documented 
(Abe et al. 1990; Comey at al. 1997; Goulao et al. 
1990; Rigamonti and Spetzler 1988; Wilms et al. 
1994). There are also reports about de novo forma-
tion of cavernous hemangiomas in the vicinity of 
DVAs (Ciricillo et al. 1994; Campeau and Lane 
2005). The close relationship of mixed malforma-
tions may be related to venous hypertension within 
the regional microenvironment with erythrocyte 
diapedesis and angiogenic growth factor release 
(Cirillo et al. 1994; Robinson et al. 1995). Another 
interesting ﬁ nding is that in families affected with 
cavernomas – an autosomal dominant inheritance 
has been established in these families – none of the 
patients described to date with the combination of 
cavernoma and DVA has a positive familiar history, 
nor has any genotypic classiﬁ cation been found. 
However, we have to accept the coincidence between 
DVA and cavernomas, but have to admit that we do 
not have any substantial hypothesis as to what the 
pathogenetic origin of this coincidence is.
The histologic examination does not reveal any 
vessel abnormality. The vessel wall is completely 
normal in DVAs. The abnormality in DVAs is the 
course of the draining vein (Figs. 1.1–1.3). There is 
no arterial component in this entity. Intervening 
brain tissue is present between the veins compro-
mising the lesion, and this brain tissue is usually 
of normal signal without evidence of hemosiderin 
staining or gliosis. On MRI there is sometimes a 
high T2-signal between visible around the drain-
ing vein. However, this should not be interpreted 
as gliosis, but can be explained by dilated perivas-
cular and cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF)-containing 
space (Fig. 1.4). In up to 30%, locoregional brain 
atrophy could be detected adjacent to the DVA 
(San  Millán Ruíz et al. 2007).
Developmental venous anomalies represent the 
most common vascular variant, accounting for 63% 
of intracranial vascular malformations in one large 
autopsy study, with an overall incidence of 2%–4% 
(Sarwa and McCormick 1978). The lesion consists 
of a tuft of abnormal enlarged medullary venous 
channels that are radially arranged, and drain into 
a central venous trunk. The common trunk drains 
intracerebrally into the deep of superﬁ cial venous 
system (Lasjaunias 1997). It is important to bear 
in mind that the vein’s course is not normal; how-
ever, it does drain normal functioning brain tissue. 
This should be of particular interest when surgery 
has to be performed around the draining vein, e.g. 
if the DVA is associated with a cavernoma. In these 
patients it is of the utmost importance to preserve 
the draining vein and to remove the cavernoma 
(Fig. 1.5).

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
3
Fig. 1.1a,b. Contrast-
enhanced CT shows the 
typical appearance of a 
developmental venous 
anomaly with medullary 
veins (a) draining into 
a collector vein with a 
transcerebral course (b)
a
b
Fig. 1.2a,b. Axial (a) 
and sagittal (b) contrast-
enhanced T1-weighted 
magnetic resonance 
imaging with a typical 
right frontal develop-
mental venous anomaly. 
Conspicuous on both 
views is the transce-
rebral draining vein. 
A second look reveals 
the “Medusa head”, 
small venules radially 
arranged around and 
draining into the trans-
cerebral collector vein
a
b
Fig. 1.3a,b. Axial 
contrast-enhanced 
T1-weighted magnetic 
resonance imaging with 
a developmental venous 
anomaly located in the 
left cerebellar hemi-
sphere. Again, the trans-
parenchymal draining 
vein is the most striking 
sign. In (b), the Medusa 
head is clearly visible. 
There is no need for an 
additional digital sub-
traction angiography
a
b

4 
M. Forsting and I. Wanke
 1.2 
Clinical Presentation
Hemodynamically, DVAs represent low-ﬂ ow, low-re-
sistance lesions that are less likely to bleed. Garner 
et al. (1991) calculated the hemorrhage rate to be 
0.22% per year; McLaughlin et al. (1998) found 
a symptomatic hemorrhage rate of 0.34% per year. 
This range of hemorrhage risk is within the range we 
expect from cavernous hemangiomas alone. Based 
on these data and on hemodynamics, one might al-
ready conclude that hemorrhages in the presence of 
a DVA are not related to the DVA itself, but in nearly 
all patients related to an associated cavernous an-
gioma! Our opinion is that the risk of hemorrhage in 
a pure DVA is around zero! There exists not a single 
case report with a well documented intracerebral 
hemorrhage (ICH) due to a pure DVA. However, this 
is not evidence-based, just a simple clinical impres-
sion gained over the years. In all cases mentioning 
a pure DVA as the cause of an ICH, imaging was 
not optimal and did not rule out the more common 
constellation with an associated cavernoma.
The coincidence of DVAs and cavernomas, how-
ever, is evidence-based and therefore has to be taken 
into consideration whenever facing a cavernoma or 
a DVA. Up to one third of DVAs are associated with 
cavernomas (Figs. 1.5–1.9).
A major problem of most studies reporting hem-
orrhages due to a DVA is how they ruled out an asso-
ciated cavernoma. It is clearly not enough just to ob-
tain T2-weighted images in patients with DVAs. All 
Fig. 1.4a–d. Axial 
T2-weighted (a) and 
contrast-enhanced T1-
weighted (b) magnetic 
resonance imaging re-
veal a large transcerebral 
draining vein. Note the 
enlarged perivascular 
space around the vein 
on T2 image (a) and the 
coronal T1 image with-
out contrast enhance-
ment (d). The Medusa 
head is visible with star-
like conﬁ gured small 
draining venoles (c)
a
b
c
d

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
5
these patients need an imaging work-up with T2*-
weighted MRI sequences to exclude or to visualize 
associated cavernomas with the highest sensitivity.
Beside the risk and discussion of hemorrhagic 
complications, DVAs have been associated with 
vague neurological symptoms, such as nonspeciﬁ c 
headaches and dizziness, or with more speciﬁ c 
symptoms and/or signs like seizures ( McLaughlin 
et al. 1998).
However, having in mind the association of cav-
ernoma and DVA, all these ﬁ ndings have to be criti-
cally reviewed. In 1998, McLaughlin and colleagues 
published their series on 80 patients with DVAs fo-
cused on the prospective natural history of cerebral 
developmental venous malformations. According 
to their interpretation, 22/80 DVAs were symptom-
atic: 9 patients had headaches related to the DVA, 4 
presented with DVA-related seizures. Three patients 
had sensory symptoms, three other patients motor 
deﬁ cits. Two patients presented with trigeminal neu-
ralgia and a single patient with an extrapyramidal 
movement disorder. Korinth et al. (2002) described 
another patient with trigeminal neuralgia due to a 
DVA in the cerebellopontine angle. After microvas-
cular decompression, the typical symptoms of the 
neuralgia disappeared completely. At the time of 
a
b
c
d
Fig. 1.5. a Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted image re-
veals the typical transcerebellar draining vein. The patient 
had a history of transient cerebellar symptoms with ataxia. 
b,c Again, careful additional imaging [coronal T2 (b) and 
axial T2* (c)] clearly shows the associated cavernoma. Notice 
the increased visibility of the cavernoma on the T2* image (c) 
compared to the standard T2 (b). d Magnetic resonance imag-
ing after surgical removal of the cavernoma reveals the pres-
ervation of the developmental venous anomaly not to affect 
the normal venous drainage of the cerebellar hemisphere

6 
M. Forsting and I. Wanke
registration, 16/18 patients in the McLaughlin series 
had sustained previous intracranial hemorrhage in 
the region of the venous malformation and 2 of them 
suffered subsequent hemorrhage during the prospec-
tive follow-up period. Most of the venous malforma-
tions were located in the posterior fossa (36/80). In 3 
patients, there was an association of the DVA with a 
cavernous hemangioma.  McLaughlin and colleagues 
did excellent work while collecting one of the most 
important papers dealing with DVAs.
However, it is questionable whether the symptoms 
of the patients were really related to the DVA. It is not 
surprising that a substantial proportion of patients 
with these lesions reaching neurosurgical centers had 
some history of associated neurological events. Such 
selection is not unusual and is likely to overestimate 
the risk of any associated neurological manifestation. 
Symptoms like headache and sensory symptoms are 
difﬁ cult to dissociate from the lesion, but it is also of-
ten impossible to attribute the symptoms causally to 
the DVA. Another problem of the study is that imag-
ing was not optimized to get maximal sensitivity for 
cavernomas. Symptoms like bleeding, seizures, and 
headache are known to be associated with caverno-
mas. Therefore, T2*-weighted MRI sequences should 
be standard for all DVA imaging protocols. However, 
some patients really might have local symptoms due 
to the large calibre of the DVA in the cerebellopontine 
angle. Abdulrauf et al. (1999) found a coincidence of 
cavernous malformation and DVA in 24% of patients 
referred for surgical removal of a cavernous malfor-
mation. They additionally deduced that, speciﬁ cally 
in the posterior fossa, the likelihood of an associa-
tion of both entities increases signiﬁ cantly. Another 
interesting hypothesis of them is that association of 
a cavernoma and a DVA may increase the probability 
a
b
c
Fig. 1.6. a Axial contrast-enhanced T1-
weighted image with a small developmental 
venous anomaly (DVA) in the left hemisphere. 
The typical transcerebral draining vein is di-
agnostic. However, the epileptic seizures of 
the patient are not associated with the DVA. 
b,c T2-weighted (b) and inversion recovery 
sequence (c) nicely reveal the nodular subep-
endymal heterotopic gray matter in the wall 
of the left ventricle. This cellular migration 
disorder is the cause of the seizures

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
7
of a cavernoma-related hemorrhage. In their study 
population, 38% of patients with cavernoma alone 
presented with hemorrhage, but 62% of patients with 
cavernoma and DVA. Additionally, the incidence of 
repeated symptomatic hemorrhage was increased in 
the group with combined malformations (23%) com-
pared to the pure cavernoma patients (9.5%). Comey 
et al. (1997) described similar cases with parenchymal 
enhancement around the DVA, and speculated that 
this ﬁ nding might be secondary to local venous hy-
pertension. Other surgeons (Little et al. 1990) found 
an anatomical and physiological communication be-
tween cavernomas and associated DVAs. Therefore, 
it might indeed be possible that venous hypertension 
in association with DVA can predispose a cavernoma 
to bleed. Another explanation for this ﬁ nding may be 
that the majority of cavernomas were located in the 
supratentorial compartment, but the majority of cav-
ernomas plus DVA were located in the infratentorial 
compartment. Because of their eloquent location, it is 
likely that smaller hemorrhages in the posterior fossa 
manifest overt symptoms and may hence be detected 
clinically.
Töpper et al. (1999) reported 67 patients with 
the MRI-based diagnosis of DVA. In 12 patients, an 
associated cavernoma was found. And again: there 
was no hemorrhage in a patient with a pure DVA. All 
hemorrhages were due to an associated cavernoma.
The ﬁ rst thing to remember in clinical presentation 
of DVA is that there is no or at least an extremely low 
risk of hemorrhage due to a DVA. All hemorrhages 
are probably related to an associated cavernoma. You 
just have to ﬁ nd the cavernoma or urge a radiologist 
to do so. In acute hemorrhage it could be difﬁ cult to 
deﬁ ne a cavernoma on CT or MRI as a source for the 
bleeding since calciﬁ cations might be invisible on CT 
Fig. 1.7. a,b Axial contrast-en-
hanced T1-weighted magnetic 
resonance imaging with a large 
developmental venous anomaly 
(DVA) located in the right tem-
poral lobe. The patient was re-
ferred with the diagnosis of an 
arteriovenous malformation as 
causative for his temporal lobe 
epilepsy. c,d Coronal FLAIR (c) 
and T2-weighted (d) images re-
vealed a typical cavernoma as-
sociated with the DVA
a
c
b
d

8 
M. Forsting and I. Wanke
Fig. 1.9a–c. Patient with two developmental venous 
anomalies, one below (a) and one above (b) a cer-
ebellar cavernoma (c)
a
c
b
a
b
c
Fig. 1.8. a,b Patient with two interconnected developmental venous anomalies (DVAs) periinsular and frontal on the left 
side (contrast-enhanced T1-images). c T2-image reveals additional intracerebral cavernomas

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
9
and the popcorn like shape is not as obvious on MRI 
in the acute phase. But in association with a DVA a 
cavernoma should be considered (Fig. 1.10a–g).
In Töpper’s study, the main reason for referring 
the patient to the MRI suite included seizures and 
headaches. In contrast to McLaughlin, these authors 
did not ﬁ nd any association between the complaints 
that led to MRI and the location or diagnosis of a 
DVA. In both groups there were a lot of patients with 
headaches and epilepsy; in fact, these two groups 
represent the main referral reason in both groups. 
Whereas McLaughlin classiﬁ ed many DVAs as symp-
tomatic, because the patients suffered from head-
aches, Töpper and colleagues never found an asso-
ciation between headache and a DVA. And we agree: 
we do not think that there is an association between 
DVA and headache. Remember, DVAs do not cause 
any steal effect (like true AVMs), and it is more than 
difﬁ cult to explain how the pathomechanism for 
headache could be. In general, there are two expla-
nations for the coincidence of headaches and DVAs 
in the same patient. First, both ﬁ ndings are common 
and there is no causal relationship at all. Second, a 
small subgroup of patients with DVA and headache 
might have an additional cavernoma located near 
the surface of the brain. Some of these patients suffer 
from headache due to subarachnoid microhemor-
rhages. And then again, the cavernoma is responsible 
for the clinical picture and not the DVA.
Another reason for patient’s referral to a MRI unit 
is seizures (Gümüs et al. 2007). There might be an as-
sociation between DVA and epilepsy, even if the EEG 
focus is not congruent with the location of the DVA. 
If this is true, one should take a careful look for an 
associated cavernoma, cavernomas being known to 
cause different types of epilepsy, mainly due to their 
content of hemosiderin.
And if you do not ﬁ nd a cavernoma as a source 
for the ictus, there is little evidence that the devel-
opment of a DVA during embryology might be as-
sociated with some more severe developmental 
problems like small-scale deﬁ cits (Barkovich 1988; 
 Watanabe et al. 1990). Lasjaunias (1997) pointed 
out that the DVA is clearly not responsible for the 
cortical changes. However, the coincidence of both 
ﬁ ndings illustrates the close relation in topography 
and time between the venous maturation process 
(from the striatal veins and transhemispheric bal-
ance setup) and the cell migration from the germi-
nal matrix.
In conclusion, seizures and DVAs are a complex 
combination (see Figs. 1.6 and 1.7). It is clearly in-
correct and too simple to decline any association be-
tween the clinical problem and the imaging ﬁ ndings 
on the one hand, or to identify the DVA as the epi-
leptogenic foci in all patients on the other. However, 
any DVA in a patient with seizures should guide us 
to look careful for cavernomas (associated with the 
DVA or at any other location within the brain) or any 
neuromigrational anomalies (e.g. polymicrogyria, 
heterotopia) (Riel-Romero and Mattingly 2005).
There was another interesting topic in the study 
of Töpper et al. (1999). Among those patients re-
ferred to a private practice group, the incidence of 
DVA was 0.14%; among those referred to a univer-
sity department of neuroradiology, the incidence 
was 0.7%. The authors ﬁ gured out that this differ-
ence can be explained by the different numbers of 
patients who undergo a contrast-enhanced MRI in 
a private practice compared to a university depart-
ment. Contrast-enhanced MRI studies increase the 
sensitivity of MRI for DVA signiﬁ cantly.
To come back to the discussion of hemorrhage 
in patients with DVA, a rare reason for hemorrhage 
around the collecting vein in DVA may be a throm-
bosis of the draining vein (Bouchacourt et al. 
1986; Masson et al. 2000). There are only a few case 
reports in the literature about this speciﬁ c problem 
and there is no evidence that the risk of venous oc-
clusion is increased in DVA. Thrombosis of the col-
lector vein might occur also without hemorrhage and 
cause venous infarction (Konan et al. 1999). But, of 
course, the transcerebral draining vein might have a 
risk of thrombosis like all other intracranial veins. It 
seems to be true that thrombosis of the main drain-
ing vein does cause more severe clinical problems if 
located in the posterior fossa. Bouchacourt et al. 
(1986) reported a well-documented case of throm-
bosis of a DVA that led to an extensive hemispheric 
venous infarction. Usually, the outcome is pretty 
good, with and without anticoagulation. Rarely, 
DVAs have been reported to cause hydrocephalus or 
trigeminal neuralgia (Blackmore and  Mamourian 
1996;  Numaguchi et al. 1982; Yagmurlu et al. 2005) 
due to local compression of the aqueduct or the ﬁ fth 
cranial nerve. There is a single case report describ-
ing the juxtaposition of capillary telangiectasia, 
cavernous malformation, and DVA in the brainstem 
(Clatterbuck et al. 2001). The authors’ hypothesis 
is that a developmental event may disrupt local cap-
illary-venous pattern formation.
Jung et al. (1997) described a patient with a DVA 
and an acute demyelination around the draining 
vein. However, there is no evidence that DVA may 

10 
M. Forsting and I. Wanke
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Fig. 1.10a–g. Non enhanced CT showed a cer-
ebellar hematoma in a 30-year-old male (a), 
after contrast injection (b) vascular structures 
were seen adjacent to the bleeding. Contrast 
enhanced T1 weighted images (c,d,e) showed 
clearly a DVA, on T2 (f) an associated caver-
noma could be suggested which was proved 
after extirpation, DSA (g) showed a large DVA 
in the cerebellar hemisphere and revealed no 
other vascular pathology

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
11
lead to any other central nervous system (CNS) dis-
ease and cases like this merely represent an occa-
sional coincidence.
Under rare circumstances, DVA can also be as-
sociated with tumoral masses (Beers et al. 1984; 
Handa et al. 1984). Handa et al. (1984) reported a 
patient with a deep DVA combined with an intrac-
ranial varix.
Most of the DVAs are solitary, although multiple 
lesions might occur in the blue rubber bleb naevus 
syndrome, characterized by bluish discolored skin 
and mucocutaneous lesions. However, there are 
multiple DVAs in patients that do not have any syn-
dromes or any genetic defect (Figs. 1.8 and 1.9), but 
the likelihood of a coincident cavernoma seems to 
be increased in these patients.
 1.3 
Imaging
Computed tomography (CT), MRI, and angiography 
delineate the typical curvilinear vascular channels 
receiving drainage from a “Medusa head” – the typi-
cal radial pattern of small venules. The larger, cen-
tral draining “collector” vein empties into a large 
cortical, a dural, or a subependymal vein.
The typical contrast-enhanced CT or MRI reveals 
the draining vein as an enhancing “dot” within the 
white matter of the supratentorial hemispheres or 
the cerebellar hemispheres.
Going up or down slice by slice, this enhancing 
dot is visible within a couple of slices. It depends 
mainly on slice thickness and on contrast resolution 
whether the Medusa head is visible or not. Due to the 
improved contrast resolution, the draining vein is 
usually better delineated on MRI than on CT. DVAs 
may be overlooked on unenhanced MRI scans, but 
usually the large central vein can be seen due to its 
linear ﬂ ow void. Sometimes the draining vein has 
a high signal on Tl-weighted images due to slow 
ﬂ ow rephasing phenomena. This is important to 
know, because otherwise some radiologists and/or 
clinicians misinterpret this high signal as a sign of 
thrombosis! There is nearly always some CSF signal 
around the vein. As mentioned above, this should 
not be interpreted as a gliotic reaction of the brain, 
but simply as dilated perivascular spaces.
Intravenous contrast application usually visual-
izes not only the draining vein, but also the Medusa 
head to an extent where the diagnosis can be con-
ﬁ rmed by MRI or CT. Angiography is usually un-
necessary.
However, ﬁ nding a DVA on MRI should always 
initiate a modiﬁ cation of the scanning protocol. This 
is particularly important in those patients referred 
because of seizures. As mentioned above, DVA can 
be associated with other cortical abnormalities. The 
theory of increased cortical disorders came up with 
the hypothesis that DVA might have a pathogenetic 
origin in a speciﬁ c intrauterine phase with occlusion 
of one of the major venous sinus. To obtain venous 
drainage, one of the transmedullary draining veins 
is kept open, and during this vulnerable phase, other 
developmental problems might occur that ﬁ nally 
cause seizures. In conclusion, if you do not ﬁ nd a cav-
ernoma in seizure patients, look for heterotopia, best 
visualized with inversion recovery sequences.
In the majority of patients with DVA and seizures, 
we have to look for associated cavernomas. This as-
sociation is evident; however, nobody really knows 
the pathogenetic background behind it. But it is also 
evident that we do not see all cavernomas on regular 
T2-weighted images, e.g., not the small ones. There-
fore, in all patients with DVA (and speciﬁ cally in 
those with seizures), a T2* gradient echo sequence 
has to be added to the usual protocol to be sure that 
there is no associated cavernoma. It is pretty sure 
that, in the majority of patients published in the 
literature as having an epileptic focus in the prox-
imity of the visible DVA (and consequently the DVA 
was thought to be responsible for the seizures), the 
diagnostic work-up was not speciﬁ cally designed 
to rule out a cavernoma with sufﬁ cient sensitivity. 
Additionally, T2* sequences sometimes visualize 
the DVA itself pretty well with a marked hypointen-
sity reﬂ ecting the paramagnetic deoxyhemoglobin 
within the venous blood. Maybe MRI at 7T may fa-
cilitate diagnosis and comprehension of the under-
lying pathophysiology. First experience using 7T is 
promising in delineating this abnormality (Figs. 1.11 
and 1.12).
There is still a debate about the usefulness of 
MRA in DVA. The transcerebral vein is usually vis-
ible, but MRA is clearly not necessary to conﬁ rm the 
diagnosis. To sum up the imaging ﬁ ndings, DVA is 
most often an incidental ﬁ nding on cross-sectional 
imaging. On FLAIR or T2 weighted sequences the 
abnormality is sometimes seen as very vague, on 
CISS sequences it presents as isointense to venous 
sinuses, and diagnosis is much facilitated after con-
trast injection (Figs. 1.13 and 1.14). If the patient is 

12 
M. Forsting and I. Wanke
Fig. 1.12. Bithalamic DVA on gradient echo se-
quence at 7 Tesla; note the obvious delineation of 
the medullary vessels
Fig. 1.11. Right frontal DVA on SWI sequence at 7 Tesla
Fig. 1.13a,b. FLAIR sequence (a) with a faint tubular signal abnormality left frontal; on T1 with contrast (b) a DVA was 
clearly diagnosed
a
b

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
13
referred for symptoms like seizures or headache, the 
imaging protocol should include a T2*-weighted se-
quence to exclude an associated cavernoma.
In a nonenhanced CT scan, the transcerebral 
draining vein can rarely be seen as a slight hyper-
dense dot or band within the white matter. In en-
hanced scans or in source images of CT angiography 
(Fig. 1.1), the vein is clearly visible – like in contrast-
enhanced MRI (Peebles and Vieco 1997) (Fig. 1.15). 
However, if the diagnosis is based on typical MRI 
ﬁ ndings, it is not necessary to perform an additional 
CT scan or a CT angiography.
Angiographic characteristics include normal ar-
terial and capillary phases, with opaciﬁ cation of the 
DVA exclusively during the venous phase which re-
main opaciﬁ ed through the late venous phase. The 
only abnormal ﬁ nding is the Medusa head and the 
abnormal transcerebral course of the collecting vein 
(Figs. 1.10g and 1.16).
In general, we do not need angiography in pa-
tients with DVA. At our institution, we do perform 
angiography in those cases with an “atypical ap-
pearance” of the DVA, previous hemorrhage, or in 
the setting of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia 
(with a high prevalence of true AV malformations, 
as well as venous anomalies).
Fig. 1.14a,b. Patient examined for tinnitus. CISS sequence showed tubular structure with the same signal intensity as the 
sigmoid sinus. Again, after contrast injection diagnosis of a DVA is obvious
a
b
Discussing the need for angiography in DVA, there 
is always somebody around putting the question of 
whether or not to rule out an AVM. This question 
clearly is not an indication for angiography in the 
vast majority of patients. Reports in the literature 
on the coincidence of DVA and true AV malforma-
tions are rare. Komiyama et al. (1999) ﬁ gured out 
that there are 31 patients in the literature that had a 
DVA with an arteriovenous shunt. They themselves 
saw three patients, but they did not publish any MR 
images.
And if you read the reports carefully and look at 
the illustrations, you hardly ever ﬁ nd a typical DVA 
illustration on a cross sectional image. They are 
always atypical: large venous convolutes not just a 
single transcerebral vein and often already dilated 
arteries. So, the general recommendation to perform 
a DSA in those DVAs that have an atypical presenta-
tion on MRI can be justiﬁ ed (Seiz et al. 2007); this 
will lead to some AVMs that on a quick view look like 
a DVA on cross-sectional imaging. The chance, how-
ever, of missing an AVM in a patient with a typical 
DVA on MRI is really low and probably much lower 
than the risk of performing a DSA. Aksoy and col-
leagues (2000) raised the question of whether MRA 
should be part of the diagnostic work-up of these pa-

14 
M. Forsting and I. Wanke
tients. Again, it is not necessary in a typical DVA and 
it can be helpful in an atypical one.
Boukobza et al. (1996) found a speciﬁ c pattern of 
DVAs in patients with extensive venous malforma-
tions of the head and neck. The draining veins were 
more tortuous and dilated and more often drain-
ing into the deep venous system. Additionally, the 
incidence of DVA seems to be increased in patients 
with slow-ﬂ ow vascular malformations of the head 
and neck. In their series of 40 patients with head 
and neck venous malformations, 8 had intracranial 
DVAs and 5 multiple DVAs. In the literature, mul-
tiple DVAs have been reported to occur in around 
25% of cases, sometimes related to other congenital 
disorders and syndromes (Rigamonti et al. 1987; 
Rigamonti and Spetzler 1988).
In conclusion, patients with head and neck venous 
malformations obviously have an increased prob-
ability of having a DVA and an increased chance of 
having multiple DVAs. There are no data on whether 
the risk of having cavernomas is also increased in 
this patient subgroup.
However, multiple DVAs are associated with at 
least one, sometimes even more than one, caver-
noma (Figs. 1.8 and 1.9).
 1.4 
Therapy
In earlier literature (Cabanes et al. 1979; Handa et al. 
1984; Lobato et al. 1988; Lupret et al. 1993;  Malik 
et al. 1988; McCormick et al. 1968;  Moritake et al. 
1980; Sadeh et al. 1982; Sarwar and  McCormick 
1978), you will ﬁ nd authors recommending surgical 
resection of DVAs, assuming the lesion is accessible 
and symptomatic, e.g., presenting with hemorrhage. 
According to more recent literature (and what you 
read on the previous pages), the DVA is a functional 
Fig. 1.16. Digital subtraction angiography (lateral view) of a 
developmental venous anomaly located in the right temporal 
lobe. Note the typical upside-down umbrella shaped trans-
cerebral draining vein
Fig. 1.15a–c. Contrast enhanced CT showed two parallel transcerebral veins, the medullary veins were not seen on 10-mm 
slices, T1 weighted with contrast delineate the typical structure of a DVA
a
c
b

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
15
venous channel draining normal parenchyma and 
the risk for venous infarction after surgery or ra-
diosurgery is high (Fig. 1.17). In fact, resection of 
the vein is associated with unacceptable morbid-
ity and mortality (Biller et al. 1985; Meyer et al. 
1995; Pak et al. 1980; Sadeh et al. 1982; Senegor et 
al. 1983). Martin et al. (1984) reported an episode 
of severe cerebellar swelling even with only tem-
porary occlusion of the visualized draining veins 
requiring abortion of the operation. Similarly, ra-
diosurgery of DVAs has a 30% complication rate, 
can lead to venous infarction, and nearly never leads 
to total venous obliteration. With the knowledge of 
the indolent and benign natural history of DVAs in 
general, McLaughlin and colleagues recommended 
observation as the primary mode of strategy. In the 
case of hemorrhage – assuming that the bleeding is 
caused by an associated cavernoma – they recom-
mend simple clot removal with preservation of the 
vein (Fig. 1.5). The surgeon should be alert to ﬁ nding 
a cavernoma associated with the DVA, but the DVA 
itself is a “leave-me-alone” lesion.
We are not really convinced by the recommen-
dations of McLaughlin and colleagues regarding 
pure DVA and the need for observation. If there 
is an adequate MRI examination, excluding a cav-
ernoma with the highest possible probability, We 
would not (and in fact we don’t) recommend any 
follow-up or observation of a patient with just a 
DVA. It’s hard to explain that it is just a variant 
– and not a disease – but needs observation over 
time. Our recommendation and explanation to the 
patient and/or the referring doctor is that it usu-
ally needs no observation, the bleeding risk is not 
increased, and the problem for referral is not re-
lated to the DVA.
However, if the DVA is associated with a caver-
noma, the therapeutic implications are related to the 
cavernoma. The difference is the surgical approach: 
in a pure cavernoma, the goal is to remove the whole 
cavernoma including the hemosiderin rim. If asso-
ciated with a DVA, the draining vein has to be pre-
served and, therefore, sometimes the cavernoma 
cannot be removed totally.
A ﬁ nal remark to those patients with an inciden-
tal ﬁ nding of a DVA: patients are not restricted in 
any way from normal daily activities or from preg-
nancy!
Fig. 1.17. a Digital subtraction angiography of an unusual large developmental venous anomaly of the right 
hemisphere. Note the doubled upside-down umbrella with two Medusa heads and a single transcerebral 
draining vein. For unknown reasons, the patient received stereotactic radiation therapy and came back to 
the hospital 9 months later. b The magnetic resonance image at that time revealed a massive hemispheric 
swelling due to a large venous infarction after radiation-induced thrombosis of the collector vein
a
b

16 
M. Forsting and I. Wanke
References
Abdulrauf SI, Kaynar MY, Awad IA (1999) A comparison of 
the clinical proﬁ le of cavernous malformations with and 
without associated venous malformations. Neurosurgery 
44:41–46, discussion 46–47
Abe M, Asfora WT, DeSalles AA, Kjellberg RN (1990) Cere-
bellar venous angioma associated with angiographically 
occult brain stem vascular malformation. Report of two 
cases. Surg Neurol 33:400–403
Aksoy FG, Gomori JM, Tuchner Z (2000) Association of 
intracerebral venous angioma and true arteriovenous 
malformation: a rare, distinct entity. Neuroradiology 
42:455–457
Barkovich AJ (1988) Abnormal vascular drainage in ano-
malies of neuronal migration. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
9:939–942
Beers GJ, Carter AP, Ordia JI, Shapiro M (1984) Sinus peri-
cranii with dural venous lakes. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
5:629–631
Biller J, Toffol GJ, Shea JF, Fine M, Azar-Kia B (1985) Cerebel-
lar venous angiomas. Arch Neurol 42:367–370
Blackmore CC, Mamourian AC (1996) Aqueduct compres-
sion from venous angioma: MR ﬁ ndings. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 17:458–460
Bouchacourt E, Carpena JP, Bories J, Koussa A, Chiras J 
(1986) Ischemic accident caused by thrombosis of a ve-
nous angioma. Apropos of a case. J Radiol 67:631–635
Boukobza M, Enjolras O, Guichard JP, Gelbert F, Herbreteau 
D, Reizine D, Merland JJ (1996) Cerebral developmental 
venous anomalies associated with head and neck venous 
malformations. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 17:987–994
Cabanes J, Blasco R, Garcia M, Tamarit L (1979) Cerebral 
venous angioma. Surg Neurol 11:385–389
Campeau NG, Lane JI (2005) De novo development of a lesion 
with the appearance of a cavernous malformation adja-
cent to an existing developmental venous anomaly. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 26:156–159
Ciricillo SF, Dillon WP, Fink ME, Edwards MS (1994) Pro-
gression of multiple cryptic vascular malformations as-
sociated with anomalous venous drainage. Case report. J 
Neurosurg 81:477–481
Clatterbuck RE, Elmaci I, Rigamonti D (2001) The juxta-
position of a capillary teleangiectasia, cavernous mal-
formation, and developmental venous anomaly in the 
brainstem of a single patient: case report. Neurosurgery 
49:1246–1250
Comey CH, Kondziolka D, Yonas H (1997) Regional par-
enchymal enhancement with mixed cavernous/venous 
malformations of the brain: case report. J Neurosurg 
86:155–158
Garner TB, Del Curling O Jr, Kelly DL Jr, Laster DW (1991) 
The natural history of intracranial venous angiomas. 
J Neurosurg 75:715–722
Goulao A, Alvarez H, Garcia Monaco R, Pruvost P, Lasjau-
nias P (1990) Venous anomalies and abnormalities of the 
posterior fossa. Neuroradiology 31:476–482
Gümüs A, Yildirim SV, Kizilkiliç O, Cengiz N, Cemil T (2007) 
Case report: seizures in a child caused by a large venous 
angioma. J Child Neurol 22(6):787–789
Handa J, Suda K, Sato M (1984) Cerebral venous angioma 
associated with varix. Surg Neurol 21:436–440
Jung G, Schroder R, Lanfermann H, Jacobs A, Szelies B, 
Schroder R (1997) Evidence of acute demuelination 
around a develpomental venous anomaly: magnetic re-
sonance imaging ﬁ ndings. Invest Radiol 32:575–577
Kilic T, Pamir MN, Kullu S, Eren F, Ozek MM, Black PM 
(2000) Expression of structural proteins and angioge-
nic factors in cerebrovascular anomalies. Neurosurgery 
46:1179–1191, discussion 1191–1192
Komiyama M, Yamanaka K, Iwai Y, Yasui T (1999) Venous 
angiomas with arteriovenous shunts: report of three cases 
and review of the literature. Neurosurgery 44:1328–1334, 
discussion 1334–1335
Konan AV, Raymond J, Bourgouin P, Laseage J, Milot G, 
Roy D (1999) Cerebellar infarct caused by spontaneous 
thrombosis of a developmental venous anomaly of the 
posterior fossa. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 20:256–258
Korinth MC, Moller-Hartmann W, Gilsbach JM (2002) Mi-
crovascular decompression of a developmental venous 
anomaly in the cerebellopontine angle causing trigemi-
nal neuralgia. Br J Neurosurg 16:52–55
Lasjaunias P (1997) Vascular diseases in neonates, infants 
and children. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York
Little JR, Awad IA, Jones SC, Ebrahim ZY (1990) Vascular 
pressures and cortical blood ﬂ ow in cavernous angioma 
of the brain. J Neurosurg 73:555–559
Lobato RD, Perez C, Rivas JJ, Cordobes F (1988) Clinical, 
radiological, and pathological spectrum of angiographi-
cally occult intracranial vascular malformations: analy-
sis of 21 cases and review of the literature. J Neurosurg 
68:518–531
Lupret V.Negovetic L, Smiljanic D, Klanfar Z, Lambasa S 
(1993) Cerebral venous angiomas: surgery as a mode 
of treatment for selected cases. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 
120:33–39
Malik GM, Morgan JK, Boulos RS, Ausmann J (1988) Venous 
angiomas: an underestimated cause of intracranial he-
morrhage. Surg Neurol 30:350–358
Martin NA, Wilson CB, Stein BM (1984) Venous and ca-
vernous malformations. In: Wilson CV, Stein BM (eds) 
Intracranial arteriovenous malformations. Williams and 
Wilkins, Baltimore, pp 234–235
Masson C, Godefroy O, Leclerc X, Colombani JM, Leys D 
(2000) Cerebral venous infarction following thrombosis 
of the draining vein of a venous angioma (developmental 
abnormality). Cerebrovasc Dis 10:235–238
McCormick WF, Hardman JM, Boulter TR (1968) Vascular 
malformations (“angiomas”) of the brain, with special 
reference to those occuring in the posterior fossa. J Neu-
rosurg 24:241–251
McLaughlin MR, Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC, Lunsford S, 
Lunsford LD (1998) The prospective natural history of ce-
rebral venous malformations. Neurosurgery 43:195–200, 
discusssion 200–201
Meyer B, Stangl AP, Schramm J (1995) Association of ve-
nous and true arteriovenous malformation: a rare en-
tity among mixed vascular malformations of the brain. 
J Neurosurg 83:141–144
Moritake K, Handa H, Mori K, Ishikawa M, Morimoto M, 
Takebe Y (1980) Venous angiomas of the brain. Surg Neu-
rol 14:95–105
Mullan S, Mojtahedi S, Johnson DL, Macdonald RL (1996) 
Cerebral venous malformation-arteriovenous malforma-
tion transition forms. J Neurosurg 85:9–13

 
 
Developmental Venous Anomalies 
17
Numaguchi Y, Kitamura K, Fukui M, Ikeda J, Hasuo K, Ki-
shikawa T, Okudera T, Uemura K, Matsuura K (1982) In-
tracranial venous angiomas. Surg Neurol 18:193–202
Ostertun B, Solymosi L (1993) Magnetic resonance angiogra-
phy of cerebral developmental venous anomalies: its role 
in differential diagnosis. Neuroradiology 35:97–104
Pak H, Patel SC, Malik GM, Ausmann JI (1980) Successful 
evacuation of a pontine hematoma secondary to rupture 
of a venous angioma. Surg Neurol 15:164–167
Peebles TR, Vieco PT (1997) Intracranial developmental ve-
nous anomalies: diagnosis using CT angiography. J Com-
put Assist Tomogr 21:582–586
Riel-Romero RM, Mattingly M (2005) Developmental venous 
anomaly in association with neuromigrational anoma-
lies. Pediatr Neurol. 32(1):53–55
Rigamonti D, Spetzler RF (1988) The association of venous 
and cavernous malformations: report of four cases and 
discussion of the pathophysiological, diagnostic, and 
therapeutic implications. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 92:100–
105
Rigamonti D, Drayer BP, Johnson PC, Hadley MN, Zabramski 
J, Spetzler RF (1987) The MRI appearance of cavernous 
malformations (angiomas). J Neurosurg 67:518–524
Robinson JR, Brown AP, Spetzler RF (1995) Occult malfor-
mation with anomalous venous drainage. J Neurosurg 
82:311–312
Sadeh M, Shacked I, Rappaport ZH, Tadmor R (1982) Surgical 
extirpation of a venous angioma of the medulla oblongata 
simulating multiple sclerosis. Surg Neurol 17:334–337
San Millán Ruíz D, Delavelle J, Yilmaz H, Gailloud P, Piovan 
E, Bertramello A, Pizzini F, Rüfenacht DA (2007) Paren-
chymal abnormalities associated with developmental ve-
nous anomalies. Neuroradiology 49(12):987–995
Saito Y, Kobayashi N (1981) Cerebral venous angiomas: clini-
cal evaluation and possible etiology. Radiology 139:87–
94
Sarwar M, McCormick WF (1978) Intracerebral venous an-
gioma. Case report and review. Arch Neurol 35:323–325
Seiz M, Brockmann MA, Schneider UC, Woitzik J, Scharf 
J (2007) Combination of a supratentorial venous anom-
aly and infratentorial developmental venous anomalies 
mimicking AV-malformation: a case report. Zentralbl 
Neurochir.68(4):217–219
Senegor M, Dohrmann GJ, Wollmann RL (1983) Venous 
angiomas of the posterior fossa should be considered as 
anomalous venous drainage. Surg Neurol 19:26–32
Topper R, Jurgens E, Reul J, Thron A (1999) Clinical signiﬁ -
cance of intracranial developmental venous anomalies. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 67:234–238
Truwit CL (1992) Venous angioma of the brain: history, sig-
niﬁ cance and imaging ﬁ ndings. AJR Am J Roentgenol 
159:1299–1307
Watanabe M, Tanaka R, Takeda N, Ikuta F, Oyanagi K (1990) 
Focal pachygyria with unusual vascular anomaly. Neuro-
radiology 32:237–240
Wilms G, Bleus E, Demaerel P, Marchal G, Plets C, Gofﬁ n J, 
Baert AL (1994) Simultaneous occurrence of developmen-
tal venous anomalies and cavernous angiomas. AJNR Am 
J Neuroradiol 15:1247–1954, discussion 1255–1257
Yagmurlu B, Fitoz S, Atasoy C, Erden I, Deda G, Unal O (2005) 
An unusual cause of hydrocephalus: aqueductal develop-
mental venous anomaly. Eur Radiol 15(6):1159–1162

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
19
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
2
Wilhelm Küker and Michael Forsting
C O N T E N T S
2.1 
Cavernomas 19
2.1.1 
Pathology 20
2.1.2 
Clinical Presentation 22
2.1.3 
Diagnostic Imaging 25
2.1.4 
Therapy 35
2.2 
Capillary Telangiectasia 41
2.2.1 
Pathology 41
2.2.2 
Clinical Presentation 42
2.2.3 
Diagnostic Imaging 42
2.2.4 
Therapy 47
 
References 47
W. Küker, MD, PhD
The Radcliff Inﬁ rmary, Department of Neuroradiology, 
Woodstock Road, Oxford, OX2 6 HE, UK
M. Forsting, MD, PhD
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology and 
Neuroradiology, University of Essen, Hufelandstraße 55, 
45122 Essen, Germany
 2.1 
Cavernomas
Crawford and Russell (1956) ﬁ rst coined the 
term “cryptic” vascular malformation in reference 
to small, clinically “latent vascular lesions”, that re-
sulted in either apoplectic cerebral hemorrhage or 
signs of growing mass lesion. Most of these vascular 
malformations were angiographically occult.
Voigt and Yasargil (1976) gave a ﬁ rst overview 
of the entity of intracerebral cavernomas. At that 
time, these malformations were thought to be rare. 
Since then, diagnostic modalities have changed dra-
matically: not only has computer tomography (CT) 
become available, but magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) has proved to be the most sensitive diagnos-
tic tool for cavernomas. And thanks to MRI, our 
knowledge about cavernomas has increased since 
1976; there remain, however, several question marks 
associated with these malformations. During the 
last years research has in fact caused some more 
confusion: an increasing number of authors believe 
K E Y  P O I N T S
Cavernomas are endothelium lined sinusoi-
dal blood cavities without other features of 
normal blood vessels like muscular or ad-
ventitial layers. No brain tissue is present be-
tween the blood cavities
Cavernomas may occur sporadically, after 
radiation, or hereditarily following an auto-
somal dominant trait
The majority of cavernomas present with sei-
zures
Annual bleeding rate of cavernomas ranges 
between 0.25% and 0.7% per year
During follow-up of cavernomas, progression 
in size can occur which is related to osmotic 
changes
Cavernomas may be calciﬁ ed and have a typi-
cally pop-corn like appearance on MRI
Surgical resection is recommended for cav-
ernomas presenting with symptomatic hem-
orrhage in accessible and non-eloquent loca-
tions
Capillary telangiectasias are composed of 
multiple thin-walled vascular channels be-
tween normal brain parenchyma
Diagnosis of capillary telangiectasias is made 
with MRI. Non-speciﬁ c symptoms may be as-
sociated, tinnitus being more common
Therapy and follow-up of capillary telangiec-
tasias is not necessary











20 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
that cavernomas are an acquired lesion instead of 
congenital and that at least changes any calculation 
of bleeding risk (Campeau and Lane 2005; Sure et 
al. 2005).
2.1.1 
Pathology
Vascular malformations of the brain are usually di-
vided into arteriovenous malformations, capillary 
telangiectasias, venous malformations, and cavern-
ous malformations. However, for a long time, the 
term “angiographically occult vascular malforma-
tion” or “cryptic” (Cohen et al. 1982; Dillon 1997; 
Wilson 1992) has been used to describe those vas-
cular malformations that could not be visualized 
angiographically, but obviously were able to cause 
intracerebral hemorrhage.
Cavernomas, also called cerebral cavernous mal-
formations or cavernous hemangiomas, are char-
acterized by endothelium lined, sinusoidal blood 
cavities without other features of normal blood 
vessels like muscular or adventitial layers (Fig. 2.1) 
( McCormick et al. 1968).
The diameter of the blood vessels lies within the 
range 30–50 μm. No brain tissue is present between 
the blood cavities, which are embedded into connec-
tive tissue. This is from a histopathological point of 
view the major difference between cavernomas and 
capillary telangiectasias. In the latter, there is in-
tervening brain parenchyma between the vascular 
channels. However, since Rigamonti et al. (1987, 
1988) found more than 30% incidence of intervening 
brain parenchyma in more or less typical caverno-
mas, there is an ongoing debate whether caverno-
mas and capillary telangiectasias simply represent 
two pathological extremes within the same vascular 
malformation category. The suggestion is to group 
them in an entity called “cerebral capillary malfor-
mation”. This new way of looking at cavernomas and 
capillary telangiectasias is clearly of interest from 
an academic point of view. From a clinical point of 
view, it still seems reasonable to us to maintain the 
established classiﬁ cation.
Cavernomas are not encapsulated, but well sepa-
rable from brain parenchyma. However, the sur-
rounding brain usually exhibits evidence of prior 
microhemorrhage, hemosiderin, discoloration, and 
hemosiderin-ﬁ lled macrophages (Maraire and 
Awad 1995; Russel and Rubinstein 1989). This in-
dicates recurrent microbleedings or leakage of red 
blood cells. Thrombi of varying age are characteris-
tic and are present within many of the vessels. Calci-
ﬁ cation (Fig. 2.2) and surrounding gliosis typify the 
margins of the lesion.
During follow-up, expansion of cavernomas can 
occur, but this is mainly related to osmotic changes 
or differences (as in chronic subdural hematoma).
Regarding the problem of active growth, there 
has been a lot of discussion during the last few years 
(Rivera et al. 2003). Initially, all cavernomas were 
thought to be congenital. There is now evidence 
that cavernoma can arise de novo. Known factors 
promoting de novo formation are previous irradia-
tion ( Nimjee et al. 2006), genetics in familial cases, 
viruses, hormonal inﬂ uences in pregnancy and lo-
cal seeding along a biopsy tract. In a recent paper 
(Lehnhardt et al. 2005), de novo cavernomas in 
serial MRIs in patients with familial cavernomas 
were conﬁ rmed. Repeated intralesional microhe-
morrhages and their breakdown products can also 
initiate a series of responses such as cellular prolif-
eration and ﬁ brosis that promote new vessel forma-
tion and hemorrhagic angiogenic proliferation. Ra-
diation-induced cavernous hemangiomas (RICH) 
are rare complications of cerebral irradiation. The 
mechanism underlying the induction of cerebral 
cavernous malformations by cerebral irradiation 
(CI) is not clear. RICH appear to be more prevalent 
among females (Gaensler et al. 1994; Larson et al. 
1998). The interval between radiotherapy and the 
diagnosis ranges between 2 and 23 years and there 
appears to be a dose-response relationship in the 
few reported cases (Ciricillo et al. 1993; Novelli 
et al. 1997; Wilson 1992). With the improvement 
in survival for cancer patients, RICH are increas-
Fig. 2.1. Histology of a typical cavernoma with endothelium-
lined, sinusoidal cavities without other features of normal 
blood vessels, such as muscular or adventitial layer

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
21
ingly diagnosed as an incidental ﬁ nding on control 
MRI. Because the hemorrhagic potential of RICH is 
not documented, no guidelines exist regarding the 
treatment of such an occurrence (Poussaint et al. 
1995). Duhem et al. (2005) published a series with 
nine patients developing a cranial cavernoma after 
irradiation and found that among the nine cases 
bleeding was documented in ﬁ ve cases and was sig-
niﬁ cant enough to warrant surgical evacuation in 
three. This 55.6% bleeding rate suggests that RICH 
might be more hemorrhage-prone than spontane-
ously occurring cavernomas (Robinson et al. 1991). 
The pathogenesis of RICH is unclear, and two hy-
potheses have been proposed: the ﬁ rst surmises that 
the cavernoma was present, but radiographically 
occult, before irradiation, and that irradiation in-
duces its growth. The second model proposes that 
the cavernoma developed de novo in response to ra-
diotherapy (Duhem et al. 2005; Larson et al. 1998). 
Radiation-induced vascular changes include dilata-
tion and proliferation of the endothelium, with ﬁ bri-
noid necrosis and hyalinization of vessel walls and 
formation of telangiectasia (Gaensler et al. 1994). 
Radiation-induced vascular changes could cause 
repeated hemorrhage and thrombosis, leading to a 
cascade of events that includes cellular prolifera-
tion, angiogenesis, and ﬁ brosis.
Another more recent paper dealing with the 
development of cavernous hemangiomas of the 
brain following radiation therapy was written by 
Baumgartner et al. (2003). What they found is that 
patients treated with lower doses of whole-brain 
radiation therapy developed symptomatic cavern-
ous hemangioma later than did those treated with 
higher doses of whole-brain radiation therapy. In 
their study, the patient who received radiation ther-
apy at the youngest age developed more lesions than 
did the other two patients. Their hypothesis is that 
the younger brain is more susceptible to the devel-
opment of multiple radiation-induced cavernomas. 
Anderson suggests a 4.8% incidence rate of caver-
noma development, appearing a mean of 5.5 years 
after radiation therapy. They ﬁ nally conclude that 
radiation-induced cavernomas appear 7–19 years 
after radiation therapy, slowly enlarge, and become 
symptomatic 9–19 years after radiation therapy. 
Pathologically, radiation-induced cavernomas are 
identical to sporadic and familial cavernomas.
Most of the de novo cavernoma reported belong 
to the familial form of the disease, with an incidence 
of 0.2–0.4 lesions/patient-year (Brunereau et al. 
2000a,b). The question still is whether these new 
lesions are simply previously undetected radiologi-
cally, or do they represent a true pathologic angio-
genesis. (Desal et al. 2005).
The sinusoidal walls may be locally thickened or 
hyalinized with spots of calciﬁ cation. The structure 
of the sinusoidal walls is a unique feature of caver-
nomas.
The cavity of the dilated vessels may contain clot-
ted blood in different stages of degradation. Ultra-
structural examinations have disclosed a lack of 
tight junctions in the wall of cavernomas (Wong 
et al. 2000). The known propensity for growth and 
bleeding of cavernomas has been attributed to this 
rarity of tight junctions, as well as to the lack of sig-
niﬁ cant subendothelial support. However, the pre-
cise reason for a macroscopic hemorrhage in these 
low-ﬂ ow malformations without any elevated intra-
lesional blood pressure is unclear. Recently, Tu et 
al. (2005) demonstrated that the vascular walls of 
cavernomas do not have basement membranes and 
astrocytic foot processes.
The macroscopic appearance of cavernomas can 
be described as mulberry-, grape-, or popcorn-like 
with a diameter up to several centimeters.
Cavernomas may occur sporadically (Kuper-
smith et al. 2001), after radiation therapy (Amir-
jamshidi and Abbassioun 2000; Olivero et al. 
2000), and hereditarily (Labauge et al. 1998) fol-
lowing an autosomal dominant trait. Recently, genes 
causing cavernomas were mapped on chromosomes 
7q, 7p, and 3q in a group of families. The CCM1 lo-
cus on chromosome 7q21–22 harbors the Kritl gene, 
which probably encodes a tumor suppresser protein 
(Zhang et al. 2000; Davenport et al. 2001). The oc-
currence of sporadic cavernomas may be due to the 
functional loss of the CCM1 gene in heterozygous 
individuals. Further disease loci (CCM2 on chromo-
some 7pl3–15 and CCM3 on chromosome 3q25.2–27) 
have been found in other families; however, the genes 
have not yet been identiﬁ ed. Although genetic causes 
have been detected in familial forms of the disease, 
for the majority of sporadic cases the genetic contri-
bution remains to be determined. However, because 
all ﬁ rst-degree relatives of patients with cavernomas 
may not be screened radiographically, the ratio of 
true sporadic to familial cases may be underesti-
mated. Beside the autosomal transmission, the hall-
mark of the familial form is multiplicity of caverno-
mas within the brain (Brunereau et al. 2000a,b).
The incidence of the familial form seems to be 
particularly high in individuals of hispanic descent 
(Rigamonti et al. 1988; Zabramski et al. 1994).

22 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Causal mutations have been demonstrated in 
three genes, KRIT1, MGC4607, and PDCD10, but 
additional genes are likely to be discovered. These 
genes are therefore thought to play a role in angio-
genesis. Their speciﬁ c modes of actions, their contri-
bution to and their likely penetrance in the genesis 
of CCM are the subject of current investigations. Ge-
netic counselling is strongly advisable for patients 
with a positive family history and for seemingly 
sporadic cases with multiple lesions, and genetic 
testing should be considered on an individual basis. 
The identiﬁ cation of a mutation enables precise ge-
netic testing of relatives. Given the 50% a priori risk 
of autosomal dominant inheritance, the beneﬁ ts of 
genetic testing are twofold: a positive test result in 
a presymptomatic carrier permits close neuroradio-
logical surveillance and timely neurosurgical inter-
vention; a negative test result relieves the proband 
of unwarranted anxiety and unnecessary medical 
supervision (Felbor 2006).
The question as to why cavernomas predomi-
nantly occur in the central nervous system (CNS), 
as well as in the spinal cord, skin, and eyes (Sarraf 
et al. 2000), is still unresolved. Other, rare locations 
include the cerebral ventricles (Reyns et al. 1999), 
cranial nerves (Ferrante et al. 1998), the cavernous 
sinus (Bristot et al. 1997), or subarachnoid space 
(Kim M et al. 1997). There are also reports on an ex-
tradural location (Porter et al. 1999).
Cavernomas are frequently accompanied by de-
velopmental venous anomalies (see Fig. 2.13) (see 
Chap. 1). According to some reports, brainstem cav-
ernomas are often associated with a venous abnor-
mality (Porter et al. 1999). This has led to specu-
lation that an impaired venous drainage may have 
caused the dilatation of capillary channels. This the-
ory is supported by another rare ﬁ nding: some au-
thors found recurrence after surgical removal on a 
cavernoma just in those patients in which the associ-
ated DVA was not touched! (Wurm et al. 2003). They 
suggested occluding at least small venoles around 
the cavernoma in order to prevent recurrence of the 
cavernoma. Up to now this is the opinion of a minor-
ity. However, it is true what Mark Twain said: “The 
man with a new idea is a crank until the idea suc-
ceeds”.
Finally, the pathologic descriptions of all cryptic 
vascular malformations have been and are still con-
fusing. Mixtures of two and more vascular malfor-
mations within the same histologic specimen have 
been identiﬁ ed by a few authors (Awad et al. 1993; 
Chang et al. 1997; Herata et al. 1986). Wilson 
(1992) reported on 73 cryptic vascular malforma-
tions and classiﬁ ed them into cavernous angiomas, 
cryptic vascular malformations with arterial com-
ponents, or cryptic or thrombosed arteriovenous 
malformations (AVMs). In addition, 40% of all 
cryptic vascular malformations were characterized 
as thrombosed AVMs. From a radiological point of 
view, true AVMs have an extremely low tendency 
towards spontaneous thrombosis, so this entity is a 
rare ﬁ nding.
In summary, there are many conﬂ icting reports 
and interpretations in the literature regarding path-
ological classiﬁ cation of these “cryptic malforma-
tions”. It is our opinion that classiﬁ cation of vascular 
malformations in the majority of patients should be 
done on the basis of radiological ﬁ ndings. Patholo-
gists usually receive incomplete fragments of tissue, 
do not know the hemodynamics within the lesion, 
and mostly are unaware of the radiologic ﬁ ndings. 
This is the major reason for the inconsistency that 
characterizes pathologic reports of cryptic malfor-
mations.
2.1.2 
Clinical Presentation
There is no reliable study giving us an exact idea of 
the incidence and prevalence of cavernomas; never-
theless, to get some knowledge about the available 
data, the prevalence has been estimated on the basis 
of autopsy or MR imaging to be 0.5%–0.7% (Del 
Curling et al. 1991; Robinson et al. 1991). The in-
cidence of cavernomas has been estimated to be in 
the range between 0.4% and 0.9%; cavernomas ac-
count for 8%–15% of all intracranial vascular mal-
formations (Porter et al. 1999; McCormick and 
Nofzinger 1966; Del Curling et al. 1991; Kim DG 
et al. 1997). Over the last two decades, incidence 
data have been conﬁ rmed by MRI-based retrospec-
tive studies (Robinson et al. 1991; Del Curling et 
al. 1991). There is no male or female preponderance 
and up to 25% of all cavernomas are found in the 
pediatric population. As much as 60% of lesions 
are superﬁ cial, 30% are deep (brainstem, cerebellar 
nuclei, basal ganglia, thalamus), and 3% are within 
the spinal cord.
Multiple cavernomas occur in up to 90% of fa-
milial cases and in around 25% of sporadic cases 
(Clatterbuck et al. 2000; Labauge et al. 2000). 
Therefore, whenever a single cavernoma is detected 
on MRI, one has to look for multiple lesions.

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
23
On average, 20% of cavernomas occur in the 
posterior fossa and 80% are seen supratentorially. 
However, the range given for brainstem cavernomas 
is 9%–35% (Porter et al. 1999; Kupersmith et al. 
2001). Spinal cord and extra-axial cavernomas are 
relatively rare and account for around 5% of all le-
sions (Clatterbuck et al. 2000). There is a single 
case report about multiple spinal cavernomas after 
irradiation to the chest and abdomen for a Wilm’s 
tumor during childhood (Jabbour et al. 2004). 
However, spinal cavernomas do occur more often 
in the familial form than sporadic and about 50% 
of patients with spinal cavernomas do have at least 
one additional lesion in the brain (Cohen-Gadol 
et al. 2006). These ﬁ ndings support the need for 
complete neuraxis imaging in patients with a diag-
nosis of spinal cavernomas, irrespective of family 
history, to exclude the presence of a similar intrac-
ranial  lesion.
The average size of cavernomas is between 15 and 
19 mm (Kim DG et al. 1997; Robinson et al. 1991). 
However, only 10% of lesions remain stable over 
time: 35% increase and 55% decrease during a mean 
follow-up of 2 years (Clatterbuck et al. 2000). This 
dynamic behavior is on the one hand related to re-
current bleedings and resorption of blood products, 
while on the other hand related to osmotic changes 
(Zabramski et al. 1994). However, according to re-
cent reports there is a small subgroup with de novo 
development of cavernomas.
Patients with cavernomas present with a variety 
of symptoms. Seizures are reported as the most com-
mon symptom, accounting for 38%–55% of patient’s 
complaint (Del Curling et al. 1991;  Robinson et al. 
1991; Simard et al. 1986; Brunereau et al. 2000a,b). 
Other symptoms include focal neurologic deﬁ cits 
in 12%–45% of patients, recurrent hemorrhage in 
4%–32%, and chronic headaches in 5%–52%. Brain-
stem cavernomas (see Figs. 2.3, 2.4, 2.7, 2.15 and 
2.16) nearly never cause seizures! Most of these pa-
tients do have typical brainstem symptoms like dip-
lopia, face or body sensory disturbances, or ataxia. 
Without imaging, this subgroup of patients with in-
fratentorially located cavernomas can closely mimic 
the clinical picture of multiple sclerosis.
The majority of patients become symptomatic 
between the third and ﬁ fth decade, and there is no 
deﬁ nite association between symptoms and gen-
der. The frequency of asymptomatic cavernomas is 
not precisely known, but according to the reports 
of Zabramski et al. (1994) and Brunereau et al. 
(2000a,b) it seems to be as high as 40%.
2.1.2.1 
Hemorrhage
The central clinical and therapeutic problem in 
patients with cavernomas is the question of hem-
orrhage. On a ﬁ rst view, this should be a simple 
question with a simple answer. However, both as-
sumptions are wrong. The problem starts with the 
deﬁ nition of a hemorrhage and ends with individual 
answers for each patient.
On one side, hemorrhage can be deﬁ ned clini-
cally: ﬁ rst or sudden onset of new neurologic symp-
toms in a patient with a cavernoma is usually related 
to a new or ﬁ rst hemorrhagic event. But looking into 
the literature, you will ﬁ nd an amazing number of 
different descriptions and terms to describe cav-
ernoma-related hemorrhages: overt hemorrhage, 
symptomatic hemorrhage, gross hemorrhage, mi-
crohemorrhage, intralesional or perilesional ooze or 
diapedesis, clinically signiﬁ cant hemorrhage, sub-
clinical hemorrhage, and others (Aiba et al. 1995; 
Kondziolka et al. 1995b; Robinson et al. 1991; 
Karlsson et al. 1998). The reason for this variety 
of descriptions is the fact that on one hand clinical 
events alone were used to deﬁ ne hemorrhage and on 
the other hand different imaging modalities (mainly 
MRI) had a major impact on the deﬁ nition of hem-
orrhage. In Section 2.1.3, we recommend the use of 
the established Zabramski classiﬁ cation in order to 
allow comparison of different patient groups and 
studies. However, the problem in deﬁ ning a hemor-
rhage is a major reason for the still ongoing debate 
about the risk of hemorrhage and bleeding rates in 
patients with cavernomas. Most estimations assume 
that cavernomas are present from birth and risk of 
hemorrhage and bleeding rates are mainly based 
on that assumption. Del Curling et al. (1991) and 
 Robinson et al. (1991) were the ﬁ rst to calculate 
the annual hemorrhage rate and ﬁ gured out that 
it ranges between 0.25% and 0.7% per patient per 
year. Aiba et al. (1995) analyzed their group on the 
basis of the initial ﬁ nding: if bleeding was the ini-
tial symptom, the annualized hemorrhage rate was 
22.9%; if seizures were the ﬁ rst symptom, the bleed-
ing rate was calculated to be 0.39% per patient per 
year.  Kondziolka et al. (1995b) also stratiﬁ ed their 
patient group into those who had previously experi-
enced a hemorrhage and those who had not. Patients 
with one previous hemorrhage had an annual 4.5% 
risk of hemorrhage, whereas those without a previ-
ous hemorrhage had a 0.6% annual risk. An analy-
sis of the symptomatic bleeding risk in untreated 

24 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
patients who had already experienced two or more 
hemorrhages found the rate to be approximately 
30% per year (Kondziolka et al. 1995a). Other au-
thors, usually not differentiating between initial 
symptoms, published hemorrhage rates between 
1.1% and 3.1% (Zambramski et al. 1994; Moriar-
ity et al. 1999). Porter et al. (1999) reported that 
brainstem cavernomas might have a signiﬁ cant in-
creased risk of hemorrhage and calculated it with 5% 
per person per year. In contrast, Kupersmith et al. 
(2001) found a bleeding rate of 2.46% in brainstem 
cavernomas. However, the rebleeding rate – and this 
is quite well supported by other data – seems to be 
beyond 5% in brainstem cavernomas. All studies 
suggest that the occurrence of a rebleeding is an in-
dication of a higher bleeding probability of a given 
cavernoma. The risk of a symptomatic rebleed at 
least doubles in comparison to asymptomatic cav-
ernomas (Kupersmith et al. 2001). These ﬁ ndings 
clearly should have an impact on therapeutic deci-
sions. The bleeding incidence is higher in patients 
with the inherited form of cavernomatosis – not for 
a single given cavernoma, however, but in terms of 
patient years (Labauge et al. 2000).
Patients younger than 35 years of age experienced 
more bleeding episodes and the same was true for 
those with cavernomas of at least 10 mm. A num-
ber of studies addressed the increased bleeding risk 
among women (Robinson et al. 1991; Aiba et al. 
1995; Moriarity et al. 1999); the majority of stud-
ies, however, did not ﬁ nd any gender difference in 
bleeding risks. Other authors ﬁ gured out that the 
most signiﬁ cant predictor of clinical events is lesion 
location. The annual event rates are 6.5% for in-
fratentorial and 0.7% for supratentorial lesions. Fol-
lowing another classiﬁ cation (deep vs superﬁ cial) 
deep lesions do have a signiﬁ cant higher bleeding 
incidence. Intuitively, the most plausible explana-
tion for that is that the eloquence of deep structures 
will lead to clinical symptoms even with a small 
change in size of the lesion. Differences in venous 
pressures between deep and superﬁ cial neural tis-
sue might be another reason for the higher hemor-
rhage rate in deep lesions. On the basis of the for-
mer theory, the functionally important and closely 
packed pathways of the spinal cord most likely al-
low manifestation of clinical event with smaller 
cavernoma hemorrhages. However, Cohen-Gadol 
et al. (2006) found an event rate of 1.6% per patient 
per year, which is more similar to the rates for ce-
rebral cavernoma than for brainstem cavernoma, 
despite the analogous eloquence of the spinal cord 
and brainstem. This difference may be explained by 
structural or venous drainage variations (that is a 
lack of clear association with DVA) that prevent le-
sional rehemorrhage in the spinal cord.
The main problem in all these studies is a substan-
tial selection bias and the deﬁ nition of hemorrhage. 
Another, but probably more important, aspect for 
patients when discussing bleeding risks is the clini-
cal signiﬁ cance of hemorrhage and the probability 
of a good recovery. The probability of a fatal hemor-
rhage is low and many patients do show a complete 
or nearly complete recovery after the initial bleed-
ing. The initial bleed causes an only transient deﬁ cit 
in 80% of the patients. However, with each subse-
quent hemorrhage there is an increased chance of 
the patient ending up with a relevant deﬁ cit. Usually, 
patients with more than two hemorrhages from the 
same lesion will have a persistent neurologic deﬁ cit. 
Deep lesions have a lower probability of full recov-
ery after bleeding than do superﬁ cial lesions. In gen-
eral, bleeding rates given by surgical groups tend to 
be higher than those observed by others.
Finally, with regard to the risk of a cavernoma 
to the patient, the majority of data in the literature 
calculate an annual risk of 0.5%–1% of symptom-
atic hemorrhage (which is much lower than in true 
AVMs) and a low risk of fatal hemorrhage (Moran 
et al. 1999). In the majority of patients, particularly 
those over 35 years of age, suffering from a single 
cavernoma below 10 mm in size and with seizures as 
the initial symptom, a wait-and-see strategy seems 
to be reasonable. In patients presenting with an ini-
tial hemorrhage, the repeat hemorrhage risk seems 
to be much higher, particularly if more than one 
bleeding event has already occurred.
2.1.2.2 
Seizures
As mentioned above, the majority of patients with 
cavernomas present with seizures as initial symp-
tom (Moran et al. 1999). It is important to know that 
in the vast majority of patients these seizures are 
not related to acute bleeding events, but to hemosid-
erin deposition adjacent to neurons. Hemosiderin 
or ferritin is a well-known epileptogenic agent (at 
least in animal experiments). Being aware of the 
relation between seizures and hemosiderin deposi-
tion is of particular importance if surgical removal 
of the cavernoma is considered due to conservative 
untreatable seizures. It is of utmost importance not 
only to remove those parts of the cavernoma with 

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
25
obvious cavernoma, but also to remove the hemo-
siderin deposits around the cavernoma within the 
adjacent brain tissue (Baumann et al. 2006). This 
part of the malformation is probably responsible for 
the seizure (see Figs. 2.8 and 2.17).
However, this hemosiderin-removal dogma is 
under discussion. Experience shows that 30%–50% 
of patients with a cavernoma having seizures can 
become seizure-free after radiation therapy, so he-
mosiderin as the only causative seizure agent has 
to be re-discussed (Hsu et al. 2007; Liu et al. 2005). 
Pure lesionectomy without removal of surrounding 
hemosiderin deposits have also been shown to re-
duce seizures effectively (Ferroli et al. 2006). Sev-
eral groups ﬁ gured out that early medical therapy 
after onset of seizures is more important than the 
resection procedure per se. In patients with a short 
seizure history or few pre-op seizures, lesionec-
tomy alone may be enough. A longer history on the 
other hand might require a more extensive resection 
(Hammen et al. 2007).
2.1.2.3 
Headache
Headache is a frequent reason for submitting a pa-
tient to imaging. Therefore, there are always discus-
sions whether an incidental ﬁ nding like an arach-
noid cyst, a small meningioma or – more relevant 
for this chapter – a cavernoma might be the cause 
of the patient’s headache. However, the ﬁ rst and 
most important question is: What type of headache 
does the patient have? If this is a clinically typical 
migraine, a typical tension headache, or any other 
easy-to-deﬁ ne type, the headache is usually not re-
lated to the cavernoma. In our personal experience, 
there are some patients, suffering from recurrent at-
tacks of a severe, subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH)-
like headache with cavernomas at the surface of the 
brain. Since these cavernomas may have contact to 
the subarachnoid space, micro-bleeds might cause 
headache attacks like in a SAH (warning-leak head-
ache). Postural intermittent headache might be the 
initial symptom if the cavernoma is located in the 
third ventricle, although a very rare location for a 
cavernoma.
2.1.2.4 
Focal Neurologic Defi cits
Focal neurologic deﬁ cits like transient speech ar-
rests, sensomotoric deﬁ cits, ataxia, visual distur-
bances, or eye movement disorders are nearly always 
related to the location of the cavernoma and hemor-
rhages. There are no steal mechanisms in caverno-
mas (this is different in AVMs), nor are there any 
venous overload problems.
2.1.3 
Diagnostic Imaging
Due to the slow blood ﬂ ow, usually cavernomas are 
angiographically occult vascular malformations. If 
the lesion has hemorrhaged, an avascular area with 
moderate mass effect can sometimes be identiﬁ ed. 
Occasionally – in less than 10% of cases – a faint 
blush on the late capillary or early venous phase of 
high resolution angiograms can be seen (Savoiardo 
et al. 1983). Angiography is rarely necessary in typi-
cal cavernomas. If associated with a DVA, presurgi-
cal digital subtraction angiography (DSA) may be 
indicated to analyze the venous drainage pattern. 
The same is true for those cavernomas which do not 
have the typical MR appearance. In some of these, 
DSA can increase the diagnostic conﬁ dence.
On CT, and even more so on MRI, features are 
more or less pathognomonic. Whereas large cavern-
ous hemangiomas can be visible on CT, small lesions 
are only visible on MRI.
Fig. 2.2. CT of a typical, partially calciﬁ ed cavernoma adja-
cent to the left ventricle. The missing mass effect (no com-
pression of the ventricle, normal width of the external cere-
brospinal-ﬂ uid space) is a striking argument against a true 
tumor (like oligodendroglioma)

26 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Fig. 2.4a–c. CT (a) and sagittal T1-weighted magnetic reso-
nance (MR) (b) scan of another brain-stem cavernoma. Due 
to its calciﬁ cation, it is easy to see even on the CT scan. The 
MR nicely reveals the typical cavernoma pattern with the 
dark rim of hemosiderin. Note that the acute hemorrhage 
occurred at the dorsal aspect of the cavernoma and now fa-
cilitates easy surgical removal. A view through the micro-
scope while removing the cavernoma (c). Note the typical 
mulberry aspect of the malformation
a
b
c
The CT appearance of a cavernoma depends on 
the amount of internal thrombosis, hemorrhage, and 
calciﬁ cation. Examples are shown in Figures 2.2, 
2.4a, 2.7a, 2.8a, 2.10a, 2.12a, and 2.13a,b. The lesions 
appear hyperdense compared to adjacent brain pa-
renchyma, but can have variable attenuation val-
ues. Because the density of blood on CT depends 
on clot formation, the attenuation of a thrombosed 
cavernoma changes with time. Calciﬁ cations do not 
change that much; however, cavernomas tend to 
calcify only partially (see Figs. 2.12 and 2.13). In pa-
tients with a recent hemorrhage, the cavernoma may 
be suspected on CT mainly by taking into account 
Fig. 2.3. T1-weighted magnetic resonance scan of a typical brain-
stem cavernoma, bulging into the fourth ventricle

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
27
Fig. 2.5a,b. T2-weighted 
(a) and T1-weighted (b) 
magnetic resonance scan 
of a typical cavernoma. 
Note that the dark rim 
of hemosiderin is much 
more visible on the T2-
weighted images. The 
typical mixed popcorn 
pattern is pathognomon-
ic and there is no doubt 
about the diagnosis, 
even without pathologi-
cal conﬁ rmation
a
b
the site of  hemorrhage and the patient’s history, 
thus excluding other typical causes for intracerebral 
bleeding. Differential diagnosis must cover calciﬁ ed 
brain tumor, mainly oligodendroglioma, which have 
a high tendency of intratumoral bleeding. Contrast 
enhancement can be observed on CT, but usually 
requires a substantial delay between contrast agent 
injection and scanning. But even with a standard-
ized 10–15 min delay between contrast agent injec-
tion and scanning, the enhancement of a cavernoma 
varies from nonexistent or minimal to striking!
The imaging modality of choice is MRI. Typi-
cally, cavernomas have a popcorn-like appearance 
with a well-delineated complex reticulated core of 
mixed signal intensities representing hemorrhage 
in different stages of evolution and/or different ve-
locities of blood ﬂ ow. Typical is a low signal hemo-
siderin rim which typical completely surrounds the 
lesion (Figs. 2.5, 2.6, 2.11 and 2.14). The dark signal 
“blooms” on T2-weighted images, and is best visible 
on gradient-echo T2*-weighted studies ( Brunereau 
et al. 2000a,b). Brunereau and colleagues studied the 
sensitivity of T2-weighted vs gradient-echo (GRE) 
sequences in patients with the familial form of cav-
ernomas. The mean number of lesions detected on 
spin-echo (SE) images vs the mean number detected 
Fig. 2.6a,b. T2-weighted 
images of a patient who 
presented with recurrent 
attacks of severe head-
ache. The referring clini-
cian thought the patient 
had suffered from a 
subarachnoid hemor-
rhage. Magnetic reso-
nance imaging revealed 
two mirror-like caver-
nomas, both located at 
the surface of the brain. 
The headache attacks 
were probably caused by 
repetitive microbleeds 
into the subarachnoid 
space and stopped after 
removal of the malfor-
mations
b
a

28 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Fig. 2.7a–f. Giant, partially exophytic brain-stem cavernoma. a Computed tomography at the time of admis-
sion with a hyperdense lesion at the pontomedullary junction. MRI was performed at 1.5 T. b Transverse T2-
weighted turbo spin-echo image at the level of the internal auditory canal. Most of the exophytic lesion is hy-
perintense, the dorsal part also has hypointense areas. The edema of the adjacent brain parenchyma is probably 
pressure-related. No blood can be seen within the brainstem itself. c T2*-weighted image at the same level. The 
marked hypointensity within the lesion represents blood degradation products. d T1-weighted image before 
contrast agent administration. The lesion is hypointense compared to brain tissue. e At 5 min after injection 
of gadolinium (0.1 mmol/kg), there is enhancement in some small areas of the mass lesion. f At 60 min after 
contrast injection, the lesion shows an extensive enhancement (pooling)
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
29
on GRE images was signiﬁ cantly different (7.2 vs 
20.2 in symptomatic subjects). Owing to the blood 
stagnation phenomenon, or to true chronic micro-
hemorrhages, cavernoma contain deoxyhemoglobin 
or hemosiderin, which generate susceptibility effects 
and cause a decrease in signal intensity. This loss of 
signal intensity is more obvious on T2*-weighted 
GRE sequences (Fig. 2.9).This feature is even more 
pronounced on high ﬁ eld magnets (Fig. 2.17 and 
2.18). This sequence should be part of the imaging 
protocol in all patients with a positive family his-
tory of cavernoma, all patients with a suspicion of 
focal or generalized seizures, and in all patients with 
DVA (there is a signiﬁ cant coincidence between oc-
currence of DVA and cavernoma). Due to this high 
sensitivity of susceptibility-weighted sequences, 
3-Tesla MR machines and moreover 7-Tesla tech-
nology might be able to detect more subtle caver-
nomas of the brain and thus enable us to get more 
insights into the pathogenesis and bleeding risk of 
these malformations (Novak et al. 2003). However, 
turbo spin-echo sequences using a long echo train, 
i.e. all FLAIR sequences, are very insensitive to this 
susceptibility effect. Furthermore, as shown in Fig-
ures 2.11 and 2.12, even large lesions may not have 
a visible hemosiderin ring, if there were no relevant 
associated bleeding episodes.
Even though T2* sequences are most sensitive for 
hemosiderin, one should know the imaging charac-
teristics in the remaining standard sequences. On 
T1-weighted images, the core of the cavernoma can 
be hyperintense or slightly hypointense compared 
to normal brain tissue, depending on the veloc-
ity of blood ﬂ ow and different stages of thrombus 
degradation. The high signal within a cavernoma 
on T1-weighted sequences can cause consider-
able confusion if the lesion is adjacent to an artery. 
Time-of-ﬂ ight MRA sequences are usually heavily 
T1-weighted. Therefore, a cavernoma can mimic 
an aneurysm on these images (Fig. 2.8). Most of the 
clinically used DWI sequences are T2*-weighted 
and, thus, should detect cavernomas with an in-
creased sensitivity (see Fig. 2.11).
Zabramski et al. (1994) suggested establishing 
an MR classiﬁ cation of cavernomas, which in part 
could overcome the confusing individualized de-
scriptions of cavernomas in the literature and the 
problem of deﬁ ning hemorrhages (Table 2.1). The 
problem of this classiﬁ cation is the type-4 lesion. The 
pathologic deﬁ nition of this type is totally unclear 
and for us it is questionable whether these lesions re-
ally represent capillary telangiectasias.  Brunereau 
et al. (2000a,b) found a close relationship between 
type-4 lesions and the familial form of cavernomas. 
Table 2.1. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging classiﬁ cation of cavernous angioma (Zabramski et al. 1994)
Classiﬁ cation and 
MR sequence
MR imaging features
Histopathologic features
Type 1
T1-weighted SE
Hyperintense core
Subacute hemorrhage
T2-weighted SE
Hyper- or hypointense core
Subacute hemorrhage
Type 2
T1-weighted SE
Reticulated mixed core signal
Lesions with hemorrhages and thromboses of different age
T2-weighted SE
Mixed core, dark rim
Type 3
T1-weighted SE
Iso- or hypointense
Chronic hemorrhage with hemosiderin staining in and 
around lesion
T2-weighted SE
Hypointense lesion with dark rim
Type 4
T1-weighted SE
Not visible
Tiny lesion or telangiectasia
T2-weighted SE
Not visible
Tiny lesion or telangiectasia
GRE images
Punctate hypointense lesion
Tiny lesion or telangiectasia
SE, spin echo; GRE, gradient echo

30 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
31
Nevertheless, despite these disadvantages, it does 
make sense to use an MR-based classiﬁ cation to de-
scribe a cavernoma and, thus, give somebody in the 
future the opportunity to compare the results of dif-
ferent authors.
Contrast enhancement has not been described 
as a characteristic feature of cavernomas of the 
CNS in the CT era. Because of the improved con-
trast resolution of MRI (compared to CT), con-
trast enhancement is much more visible. How-
ever, MRI does not overcome the problem created 
by the slow blood exchange between the normal 
blood and the dilated cavernous vessels. Specifi-
cally with fast T1-weighted sequences it is neces-
sary to delay the interval between contrast agent 
injection and the start of the scanning procedure. 
However, contrast injection is usually not neces-
sary (T2 and T2* are diagnostic in the majority of 
patients).
Whereas a typical cavernoma can usually be iden-
tiﬁ ed using MRI, it may be problematic to identify it 
within an acute hematoma. Our recommendation 
is: If there is suspicion of an underlying cavernoma 
in an acute intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), MR 
should be performed as early as possible. If the early 
MR reveals any hemosiderin, former bleeding epi-
sodes are evident and the probability of an underly-
ing cavernoma is high (Fig. 2.10). In patients with a 
suspicion of a cavernoma but a non-pathognomonic 
image, follow-up imaging is of value if immediate 
surgical intervention is not warranted. Differen-
tial diagnosis includes neoplasms, infectious and 
Fig. 2.8a–f. Cavernoma mimicking an arterial aneurysm on magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). a The non-enhanced 
computed tomography (CT) scan reveals a hyperdense lesion in the straight gyrus adjacent to the optic nerve and right ante-
rior cerebral artery. b T1-weighted MR image without contrast enhancement reveals a hyperintense and well circumscribed 
lesion. There was no contrast enhancement after injection of gadolinium (not shown). c Axial T2-weighted image reveals a 
dark lesion with an extensive hypointense area. This dark area represents hemosiderin deposition resulting from old hemor-
rhage. Note that the hemosiderin is within the white matter, but not on the surface of the brain. There is no communication be-
tween the anterior cerebral arteries in the interhemispheric ﬁ ssure and the lesion in the straight gyrus. d Coronal T2-weighted 
image also demonstrates the hemosiderin deposition within the white matter and not on the surface of the brain. e This 
maximum-intensity projection of a time-of-ﬂ ight MRA shows a structure adjacent to the anterior cerebral arteries. This is 
due to the high T1 signal of the cavernoma, indistinguishable from the ﬂ ow signal in a T1-weighted FISP-MRA sequence. This 
phenomenon can be misinterpreted as an aneurysm. f Intraarterial digital subtraction angiography to rule out an aneurysm. 
The wall of the anterior cerebral artery is smooth and without any hint of an aneurysm, patent or thrombosed
Fig. 2.9a,b. Multiple cavernomas. T2*-weighted gradient echo sequence. There are multiple cavernomas in 
both cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum. The T2* sequence is particularly sensitive to hemosiderin 
depositions indicative of cavernomas
a
b

32 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Fig. 2.10a–e. Cavernoma with signs of recent hemorrhage 
in a 9-year-old child. a Computed tomography scan reveals 
a hyperdense lesion in the right occipital lobe with perifocal 
edema. The lesion has a heterogeneous density with a very 
dense core and reduced attenuation values at the peripheral 
zone. b T2*-weighted gradient-echo image displays the le-
sion as a dark spot. c The T2-weighted turbo spin-echo im-
age shows a dark center with a bright rim of edema. d This 
ﬂ ow-sensitive gradient-echo sequence demonstrates a bright 
core with a pseudocapsule. A maximum-intensity projection 
of this sequence will display arterial vessels and the bright 
hemorrhage, giving rise to a misinterpretation of the caver-
noma as an aneurysm. e T1-weighted spin-echo image shows 
the cavernoma core with surrounding subacute hemorrhage 
located in the cuneus adjacent to the calcarine ﬁ ssure
a
b
c
d
e

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
33
Fig. 2.11a–f. Synoptical presenta-
tion of a cavernoma in standard 
magnetic resonance sequences 
at 1.5 T. a T2-weighted FLAIR 
sequence. There has been no 
scientiﬁ c evaluation of FLAIR 
for cavernomas to date. In our 
experience, a hyperintense center 
is well depicted; however, due to 
the long echo train lengths, the 
hemosiderin wall is usually not 
well depicted. b In T1-weighted 
spin-echo sequences the caver-
noma may have the same signal 
intensity as the adjacent brain 
parenchyma. In particular, small 
cavernomas can easily be missed. 
c T2*-weighted gradient echo 
sequences are the gold standard 
for cavernoma depiction, due to 
the susceptibility effect of the 
hemosiderin rim. Because the 
hemosiderin rim may be much 
larger than the cavernoma core, 
gradient-echo images should 
always be applied in doubtful 
cases and to look for additional 
cavernomas. d Diffusion-weight-
ed echo planar imaging (EPI) 
sequence. Diffusion imaging is 
not routinely used for the evalu-
ation of cavernomas. However, 
these sequences are mostly T2*-
weighted and the contrast should 
be like in the T2*-weighted non-
EPI gradient echo images. Due to 
the matrix size, the spatial reso-
lution of DWI is usually lower. 
e T2-weighted turbo spin-echo 
image. The bright core is well 
depicted as is the dark rim, less 
apparent in the FLAIR sequence 
(compare to a). A problem may 
arise, if the cavernoma is close 
to the cerebrospinal-ﬂ uid space. 
f T1-weighted image after con-
trast administration (0.1 mmol 
Gd-DTPA/kg). Even on this scan 
performed 10 min after contrast 
injection, there is very little con-
trast enhancement visible. High-
er doses or delayed scanning for 
the demonstration of “pooling” 
may be necessary
a
c
e
b
d
f

34 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Fig. 2.12a–f. Supratentorial 
giant cavernoma as an inci-
dental ﬁ nding. a Computer 
tomography scan without 
intravenous contrast. The 
large, hyperdense lesion in 
the white matter adjacent to 
the lateral ventricle is not 
surrounded by edema, nor is 
there any blood in the ven-
tricle itself. b In this window 
setting, calciﬁ ed areas of the 
wall and parts of the inner 
structures are clearly visible. 
c The T2-weighted FLAIR 
sequence shows a dark mass 
lesion protruding into the 
ventricle. There is no perifo-
cal edema. d T1-weighted 
spin-echo sequence without 
contrast reveals the lesion as 
hyperintense. e T2-weighted 
image in the coronal plain 
reveals a mostly hypoin-
tense, sharply demarcated 
lesion in the right cingulate 
gyrus, protruding into 
the interhemispheric ﬁ s-
sure. There is no dark rim, 
edema, or any other signs of 
recent or older extralesional 
hemorrhage. f The caver-
noma is mostly hyperintense 
on this T1-weighted image 
after contrast administra-
tion (Gd-DTPA 0.1 mmol/
kg). Contrast enhancement 
could not be demonstrated
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
35
inﬂ ammatory masses, partially thrombosed aneu-
rysms, hemorrhagic emboli and hematomas.
There are pitfalls in the interpretation of post-
operative MR imaging of cavernomas. The postop 
MR imaging can appear similar to the preop image 
despite complete removal. The most plausible expla-
nation is that the excision cavity is ﬁ lled with orga-
nized blood products.
If MRI is performed as a presurgical planning 
procedure, it is of utmost importance to scan with 
thin slices in order to demonstrate the relationship 
of the cavernoma to the surface of the brain. Partic-
ularly in brain stem cavernomas, this relationship is 
crucial for balancing the risk of the disease against 
the risk of surgical removal.
2.1.4 
Therapy
Treatment indication in cavernomas depends mainly 
on the natural course of the lesion, as well as its loca-
tion and surgical accessibility. The latter depends on 
the skill of the surgeon and the position of the lesion 
relative to eloquent areas of the brain. In general, 
therapeutic strategies include: 
Observation of patients with asymptomatic or 
inaccessible lesions
Surgical excision of symptomatic and accessible 
lesions
Radiosurgery for progressively symptomatic but 
surgically inaccessible lesions



Fig. 2.13a–d. Non-
enhanced CT revealed 
a calciﬁ ed lesion close 
to the foramen Monroi 
(a), T2 delineated a 
pop-corn like structure 
typical for a caverno-
ma (b). After contrast 
injection (c) an associ-
ated developmental 
venous anomaly was 
seen in close vicinity. 
Gradient echo at 1.5 T 
sequence clariﬁ es the 
large extent of the he-
mosiderin deposition 
of the cavernoma (d)
a
c
b
d

36 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Fig. 2.14a–n. Familial cavernomatosis: a,b Computed tomography (CT) scans at different levels. Multiple lesions of high 
density are visible in the cerebral parenchyma. The lesions are of inhomogeneous density. There is no perifocal edema. c,d 
The T2*-weighted gradient-echo sequence (FLASH) clearly shows the large cavernomas, mostly hypointense with bright foci. 
However, there are many more dark areas in both hemispheres which were not visible on the CT scan. These lesions are also 
cavernomas. The T2*-gradient-echo sequence is most sensitive to susceptibility effects of hemosiderin deposits and therefore 
g
h
a
c
e
b
d
f
i

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
37
a screening sequence for small cavernomas. It should always be added to the imaging protocol. e,f T1-weighted spin-echo im-
ages. Cavernomas are of inhomogeneous signal intensity. There are some areas of high signal intensity in this sequence, but 
large parts of the cavernomas are isointense to the adjacent brain. The small cavernomas are not visible with this sequence. 
g,h T2-weighted turbo spin-echo sequence. The large cavernomas are mainly hyperintense with a small dark rim due to 
hemosiderin deposits. The small lesions, which were clearly visible in the T2*-weighted images, are not apparent on these 
slices. There is no perifocal edema. This sequence demonstrates the relation to 
the brain surface. The cortex over the cavernoma is slightly displaced and con-
tains hemosiderin. Therefore, the location of the cavernoma will be visible intra-
operatively. i,j T1-weighted spin-echo image 3 min after administration of gado-
linium (0.1 mmol/kg). The increase in signal intensity is very subtle compared 
to the images prior to contrast injection. The enhancement is inhomogeneous. 
k T2-weighted turbo spin-echo image in a coronal view. Large cavernomas are 
visible in the basal ganglia on both sides with an inhomogeneous signal pattern. 
There is a peripheral zone of hypointensity due to hemosiderin. The absence of 
a perifocal edema is a hint at recent enlargement or bleeding. The displacement 
of adjacent structures is small for the size of the lesions. l T1-weighted image 
15 min after administration of contrast. The signal appears higher than in (i) 
and (j). m This T2-weighted coronal view shows a large cavernoma in the basal 
ganglia with moderate mass effect and slight compression of the internal capsule. 
The patient had no neurological symptoms. n T1-weighted image 15 min after 
administration of contrast. The lesion also displays a delayed enhancement of 
a typical pattern. The cavernoma extends from the brain surface in the Sylvian 
ﬁ ssure to the lateral ventricle
k
m
j
l
n

38 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Fig. 2.15a,b. On gradient echo sequence at 1.5 T (a) the brain stem cavernoma is hardly visible (arrow) but very obvious 
using high ﬁ eld MRI at 7 T (b). At 7 T additional vessels curving through the brain stem are detected
a
b
Fig. 2.16a,b. Mid brain cavernoma on GRE sequence at 1.5 T (a), GRE sequence at 7 T acquired at the same day showed 
more clearly the extent of the lesion with inhomogeneity within it; very pronounced venous vessels were seen close to the 
lesion (b) eventually representing venous drainage abnormality
a
b

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
39
Fig. 2.17a,b. Comparison of a frontoparietal cavernoma at 1.5 T (a) and 7 T (b) gives a clear impression of 
improved delineation of susceptibility prone hemosiderin around the lesion not visible on 1.5 T image
a
b
To start with, the recommendations for the man-
agement of patients with cavernomas have varied 
throughout the years and are still not homoge-
neous.
Patients presenting without gross hemorrhage, 
seizures controlled with pharmaceutical therapy, 
or other speciﬁ c symptoms are clear candidates 
for clinical observation. For us, it is questionable 
whether this patient group does need repeat imag-
ing if the clinical condition remains unchanged. 
However, location of the cavernoma should be taken 
into account. Deep or infratentorial located lesions 
do have an increased risk of bleeding; however, they 
usually also have an increased surgical risk com-
pared to superﬁ cial location.
Surgical resection is recommended for caverno-
mas presenting with symptomatic (or repeat symp-
tomatic) hemorrhage and located in an accessible 
and noneloquent area of the brain. If the lesion is 
surgically inaccessible or does not present with 
bleeding episodes, the treatment options are less 
clear. Moran et al. (1999) analyzed the results after 
surgical removal of cavernomas causing seizures. 
After removal of the cavernoma, 84% of the patients 
were seizure-free and 8% were improved. A total of 
6% of the patients did not have any change of their 
status, and only 2% of patients deteriorated.
In cases of medically intractable seizures in which 
surgery is technically feasible and the seizures can 
be localized to the region of the cavernoma, surgery 
is a reasonable option. It is plausible that a longer 
duration of epilepsy prejudices the outcome of any 
surgery ultimately performed. Kindling effects may 
play a role in increasing intractability and this may 
be a theoretical basis for early surgery. As stated 
before, early surgery after onset of seizures may 
require pure lesionectomy while surgery late after 
seizure onset requires extended removal of the cav-
ernoma plus perifocal hemosiderin.
Many surgical groups recommend surgical re-
moval of a cavernoma if it is located in a noneloquent 
brain area and easily accessible to prevent hemor-
rhage. However, as mentioned above, it is quite dif-
ﬁ cult to predict the natural course of an individual 
cavernoma and, therefore, it is very difﬁ cult to bal-
ance the individual bleeding risk of the individual 
patient against the morbidity and mortality of a sur-
gical procedure. It seems to be more appropriate to 
limit surgical excision to those patients with at least 
one hemorrhagic episode – based on imaging and 
clinical ﬁ ndings and never on MR alone – or those 
with intractable seizures.
Brainstem cavernomas are clearly a speciﬁ c sub-
group. Over the years, neurosurgical techniques 

40 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
and knowledge about different approaches to the 
brainstem increased, enabling the excision of many 
lesions without signiﬁ cant morbidity and mortal-
ity. The necessity for removal of brainstem caver-
nomas is mainly based on reports suggesting that 
the bleeding rates in brainstem cavernomas are sig-
niﬁ cantly higher than in those located supratentori-
ally ( Porter et al. 1999). In contrast, Kupersmith 
recommended a more conservative approach, be-
cause he found that brainstem cavernomas do not 
have a relevant elevated risk of hemorrhage. Finally, 
there is no deﬁ nite answer to the question of how 
to  handle brainstem cavernomas! In experienced 
hands it seems to be reasonable to remove them, but 
it is also not a mistake to wait and just observe the 
patient.
Recently, Hasegawa et al. (2002) reported their 
results after stereotactic radiosurgery of caverno-
mas. The authors found that, before radiosurgery, 
the annual rehemorrhage rate was 33.9% whereas, 
after radiosurgery, the rehemorrhage rates were 
12.3% for the ﬁ rst 2 years and 0.76% for years 2–12 
after radiosurgery. More than 50% of the caverno-
mas decreased in size after radiosurgery. The theory 
behind this therapeutic option is that radiosurgery 
even in cavernomas leads to progressive hyaliniza-
tion with thickening of the endothelium-lined ves-
sels and eventual closure of the lumen. These results 
seem striking and lead the authors to conclude that 
radiosurgery offers a dramatic reduction in the risk 
of rehemorrhage in high-risk patients. Treatment 
morbidity was 13%. The major drawback of this 
study, however, is that there is no control group and 
therefore it was not possible to perform a true risk-
to-beneﬁ t analysis. Nevertheless, if the lesion is re-
ally not surgically removable and the patient is at 
high risk of rehemorrhage (more than two previous 
bleeding episodes), radiosurgery can be a treatment 
option. Another indication for the effectiveness of 
radiation therapy in cavernoma might be the ﬁ nd-
ing of signiﬁ cant reduction of seizures (Liscak et 
al. 2005; Kim et al. 2005). Speciﬁ cally in cavernomas 
with a deep brain location, radiation therapy should 
be considered as a therapeutic option.
Nyary et al. (2005) report on a patient with a sur-
gically resected thalamic cavernous hemangioma 
1 year after irradiation therapy. The histopathologi-
cal ﬁ ndings in this specimen were similar to those 
described in arteriovenous malformations after 
gamma knife surgery. The results of light micro-
scopic investigations suggest that the ionizing effect 
of radiation energy evokes vascular and connective 
tissue stroma changes in cavernous hemangioma as 
well.
There is another more recent aspect of surgi-
cal considerations in cavernous malformations 
associated with venous anomalies. It seems to be 
consensus in the pertinent literature that venous 
anomalies are associated with cavernomas should 
not be treated surgically and that they have to be 
preserved in the case of surgery of the associated 
cavernous malformation (Abe et al. 1998; Awad 
et al. 1993;  Bertalanffy et al. 1991; Buhl et al. 
2002;  Ciricillo et al. 1994; Crivelli et al. 2002; 
Dorsch and  McMahon 1998; Giulioni et al. 
1995;  McLaughlin et al. 1998; Naff et al. 1998; 
 Porter et al. 1999;  Pozzati et al. 1996a,b; Pryor 
et al. 1999;  Rigamonti et al. 1988; Sasaki et al. 
1991;  Zimmerman et al. 1991). Most authors fear 
cerebral infarction from impaired venous drainage 
when thinking about surgical strategies for treat-
ment of these DVAs. Nevertheless, there are also 
reﬂ ections in the literature on the possible trigger-
ing effect of DVAs for thrombotic or hemorrhagic 
events and for development of associated malfor-
mations ( Ciricillo et al. 1994; Kim et al. 1996; 
Konan et al. 1999; Merten et al. 1998; Nussbaum 
et al. 1998). Thus, a few authors suggest surgical 
removal or obliteration in the case of a life-threat-
ening hemorrhage. Wurm et al. (2005) observed, 
after surgical lesionectomy of a cavernous malfor-
mation, recurrence and de novo appearance of vas-
cular malformations in one third of their patients. 
All of these experienced symptomatic rebleeding 
from these new lesions. Their experience sup-
ports the theory that the abnormal draining vein 
might be the actual pathological lesion that causes 
blood ﬂ ow disturbances with recurrent and newly 
developing malformation. Therefore, they recom-
mend coagulation of the large transcerebral drain-
ing vein because it did not lead to any ischemic or 
hemorrhagic infarction or any other complication 
in their series. However, they did not try to excise 
the caput medusae, which lies within normal brain, 
but rather only coagulated and dissected the large 
transcerebral draining vein along the length of the 
associated cavernous malformation. It was their 
aim to interrupt this pathological venous vessel, 
which seems to be the cause of ﬂ ow disturbances 
and microhemorrhages with the potential for an-
giogenesis. After that type of surgery they had no 
recurrences and no de novo lesions in those pa-
tients in whom the associated DVA was coagulated 
at surgery.

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
41
Fig. 2.18. Comparison of GRE 
sequences at 1.5 T (left) and 
7 T (right) in a patient with 
multiple cavernomas through-
out the brain; 7 T showed the 
larger extent of all lesions and 
detected much more addition-
al lesions not seen with 1.5 T
Spinal cavernomas are a speciﬁ c problem. The 
vast majority (~ 80%) of patients who initially pres-
ent with neuropathic pain due to spinal cavernoma 
hemorrhage may suffer a chronic pain syndrome af-
ter resection of the lesion. The experience of  Cohen-
Gadol et al. (2006) is that neuropathic pain due to 
cavernoma hemorrhage is refractory to surgical 
treatment. Therefore, the pain associated with spi-
nal cavernoma hemorrhage may not provide ade-
quate justiﬁ cation for surgical therapy. Prophylactic 
surgery in spinal cavernoma is not recommended.
To optimize therapeutic approaches to CNS cav-
ernomas, a randomized multicenter trial dedicated 
to different therapeutic options would be necessary.
 2.2 
Capillary Telangiectasia
2.2.1 
Pathology
Capillary telangiectasias are a distinct category 
of cerebral vascular malformations, consisting of 
localized collections of multiple thin-walled vas-
cular channels interposed between normal brain 
parenchyma. They were ﬁ rst described in 1959 
(Russell and Rubinstein 1989) and are charac-
terized by small capillaries with a maximum di-
ameter of 30 μm. In contrast to cavernomas, brain 
parenchyma is located between the dilated vessels. 
There is still some disagreement in the literature 
as to whether the vessels of a capillary telangi-
ectasia have a normal wall (Ferszt 1989) or not 
(Okazaki 1989). Growth and bleeding have not 
been observed so far; however, hemosiderin may 
be seen rarely in the surrounding tissue (Küker 
et al. 2000).
The true incidence of capillary malformations 
or telangiectasias of the brain is difﬁ cult to discern 
because the vast majority are obviously clinically 
asymptomatic. Estimates from autopsy series sug-
gest they are not uncommon, representing approxi-
mately 16%–20% of all CNS vascular malformations 
(Chaloupka and Huddle 1998). Capillary telangi-
ectasias, although known to occur throughout the 
brain and spine, are most frequently found within 
the striate pons and are the most frequent inciden-
tal vascular malformation of the pons at autopsy 
(Russell and Rubinstein 1959; McCormick et al. 
1968). Other locations are the basal ganglia, where 
they usually cause confusion because of their en-
hancement and the lack of mass effect (Castillo et 
al. 2001).
Several authors found an association of capillary 
telangiectasias with cavernomas in their patients 
(Küker et al. 2000), or suggested that both vascular 
abnormalities have a common origin ( Rigamonti 
et al. 1991). However, in contrast to cavernomas, the 
occurrence of capillary telangiectasias seems to be 

42 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
mainly sporadic. No hereditary forms have been 
reported and no underlying genetic abnormali-
ties were identiﬁ ed in this speciﬁ c form of vascu-
lar abnormality. However, genetic defects may be 
responsible for the occurrence of cerebral venous 
malformations in general (Korpelainen et al. 1999; 
Vikkula et al. 1996).
It has been suggested that DVAs have a common 
origin with cavernomas (Rigamonti et al. 1991; 
Awad et al. 1993). Therefore, hemorrhagic compli-
cations may be due to associated cavernomas and 
not to bleeding of the capillary telangiectasia. How-
ever, in some large groups of cavernomas, no asso-
ciation with capillary telangiectasias has been re-
ported (Mull et al. 1995). It remains undetermined 
to date whether capillary telangiectasias change 
with time or are developmental abnormalities, i.e., 
small DVA.
The rarity of in vivo histologic veriﬁ cation in-
dicates that the benign clinical behavior and the 
critical anatomic localization of brainstem capillary 
telangiectasias do not allow stereotactic biopsy on a 
regular basis. The earlier case reports relied on his-
tologic examinations of cadaver specimens.
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-
Osler disease) is not associated with cerebral cap-
illary telangiectasia, but with other forms of cere-
bral vascular malformations (Maher et al. 2001), 
mainly true pial arteriovenous malformations, 
dural arteriovenous malformations, and, rarely, 
cavernomas.
2.2.2 
Clinical Presentation
Capillary telangiectasias are vascular malforma-
tions of unknown origin and unknown clinical sig-
niﬁ cance (Rigamonti et al. 1991; Awad et al. 1993). 
In vivo diagnosis is only possible with MRI because 
these lesions are so small that they are undetectable 
by either conventional angiography or CT (Barr et 
al. 1996). Furthermore, slow blood ﬂ ow may also 
contribute to the lack of angiographic opaciﬁ ca-
tion.
Most capillary telangiectasia are incidental ﬁ nd-
ings on examinations performed for other reasons 
than brainstem symptoms. In general, the clinical 
manifestations related to capillary malformations 
are variable, although typically they are regarded 
as quiescent lesions occasionally presenting with 
headache, confusion, weakness, dizziness, visual 
changes, vertigo, tinnitus, or seizures (Barr et al. 
1996; Lee et al. 1997).
However, there is evidence of a possible symp-
tomatic subgroup of capillary telangiectasias 
(Huddle et al. 1999; Scaglione et al. 2001). One 
of our patients (see Fig. 2.9) also presented with 
symptoms attributable to a vascular malformation 
of the brainstem, which best ﬁ ts into the category 
of capillary telangiectasia. Whereas the patients 
reported by Scaglione et al. (2001) had only minor 
complaints with disputable cause due to capillary 
telangiectasias, the patient reported by Huddle 
et al. (1999) had severe neurologic symptoms and 
died presumably due to the ensuing brainstem 
dysfunction. Both severely symptomatic patients 
showed an extensive T2 signal abnormality of the 
affected parts of the brainstem. Furthermore, for 
us there might be an association of tinnitus and 
pontine capillary telangiectasias. Further observa-
tions will be necessary to establish whether there is 
in fact a severely symptomatic, aggressive subform 
of capillary telangiectasias.
Up to now, there has been no pertinent hypoth-
esis for a possible pathomechanism for the ensuing 
symptoms.
2.2.3 
Diagnostic Imaging
The number of observations of presumed brainstem 
capillary telangiectasias is limited. There are only 
two reports of MRI features in a larger group of 
patients (Barr et al. 1996; Lee et al. 1997). These 30 
cases seem to have very similar imaging ﬁ ndings. 
With two exceptions, all were located in the brain-
stem with a predominance of the mid-pons.
MRI is the imaging modality of choice for the 
evaluation of brainstem lesions in general (Küker 
et al. 2000) and is the only tool by which capillary 
telangiectasias can be visualized during life.
Capillary telangiectasias are usually ﬁ rst discov-
ered on T1-weighted images after contrast injection 
(Fig. 2.19). Depending on slice thickness and indi-
vidual appearance, the characteristic picture is dom-
inated by small radiating venous vessels converging 
on a small collecting vein. In other patients, there is 
just a ﬂ uffy hyperintensity without apparent indi-
vidual vessels. In these cases, the radiating vessels 
are so small that even thin section MRI is not able to 
discriminate between them. In such conditions, the 
vascular malformation appears as a homogenous, 

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
43
Fig. 2.19a–c. Combination of brainstem cavernoma and capillary telangiectasia. 
a This T1-weighted transverse image after contrast administration at the level of 
the upper pons shows a cavernoma (open arrow) and transparenchymal venous 
vessels (arrowhead), belonging to a capillary telangiectasia. b This midline sagit-
tal T1 image after contrast injection shows the venous tributary of the capillary 
telangiectasia, a typical sign of capillary malformations. c This T1 image slightly 
off the midline demonstrates the draining veins of the capillary telangiectasia 
( arrowhead), as well as a second cavernoma (open arrow)
a
c
b
somewhat irregularly contoured lesion (Küker et 
al. 2000; Barr et al. 1996; Lee et al. 1997).
In contrast to cavernous hemangiomas or other 
brain-stem lesions, the contrast enhancement of cap-
illary telangiectasia is only of short duration. In typi-
cal cases, it will not last longer than 20 min. Dynamic 
MRI, therefore, will reveal a fast signal increase and a 
substantial signal decrease after 20 min. In some pa-
tients, brain-stem metastasis might be a reasonable 
differential diagnosis. And, usually, metastatic dis-
ease accumulates contrast agent over time and will 
reach a peak enhancement between 15 and 30 min 
following administration. Dynamic MRI is an ap-
propriate tool to differentiate between both entities.
A highly suggestive feature of a capillary telangi-
ectasia is the presence of a larger, easily detectable 
draining vein (Küker et al. 2000; Barr et al. 1996).
Because capillary telangiectasias are usually dark 
on T2*-weighted images, the use of GRE sequences 
for differential diagnosis has been strongly advo-
cated (Fig. 2.20). Lee et al. (1997) reported that most 
lesions in their series were not detectable on either 
T1- or T2-weighted images, but were consistently 
identiﬁ ed as regions of pronounced loss of signal on 
the GRE images, which they considered essential for 
making the diagnosis. Macroscopic hemorrhage and 
calciﬁ cations are rare in capillary telangiectasia, 
suggesting that the ﬁ nding on T2*-weighted images 
are probably related to the presence of deoxyhemo-
globin in the slow-ﬂ owing blood (Auffray-Calvier 
et al. 1999).
A dark lesion on GRE images, which is not visible 
on conventional T2, is usually not a cavernoma but 
a capillary malformation. Edema, gliosis, or signs of 
previous hemorrhage are usually absent. Follow-up 
images have never revealed any change in capillary 
malformations.
Curiously, about two thirds of capillary telangi-
ectasias show an enlarged vessel believed to repre-
sent a draining vein. This observation has led some 
authors to consider the concept of “transitional mal-
formations” (Rigamonti et al. 1991).
DSA is not required for diagnostic workup in 
typical cases.
The exact nature of pontine lesions classiﬁ ed as 
capillary malformations will remain speculative in 
the vast majority of patients. Beside vascular malfor-
mations, the differential diagnosis of an enhancing 
pontine lesion might include neoplasm, demyelin-
ating disease, infection, infarction, or, rarely, cen-
tral pontine myelinolysis. The absence of mass ef-
fect or signiﬁ cant T2 prolongation, however, argues 

44 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Fig. 2.20a–g. Symptomatic vascular lesion of the brainstem, presumably aggressive cap-
illary telangiectasia. a This T2-weighted image in the sagittal plain shows a hyperintense 
lesion of the medulla oblongata from the pons to the foramen magnum. The brainstem is 
not expanded or otherwise altered. b This T1-weighted image in the sagittal plain after 
injection of contrast agent (Gd-DTPA 0.1 mmol/kg) shows a small vessel in the middle 
of the medulla oblongata. There is a faint, diffuse enhancement of the brain parenchyma 
in the medulla, corresponding to the signal abnormality in the T2 image. c This sagittal 
T1 image after contrast injection slightly beyond the midline shows small vessels in the 
border zone of the brainstem lesion. d T1-weighted image of the medulla oblongata be-
fore contrast injection. The image appears normal. e In the same position, there is diffuse 
enhancement of the medulla and a small vessel can be seen near to the dorsal surface 
of the brainstem. f This T1-weighted transverse slice in a more caudal position shows a 
blood vessel in the cerebrospinal-ﬂ uid space on the right of the medulla. The absence of a 
ﬂ ow void suggests a draining vein. However, the vertebral arteries are also hyperintense. 
g This T2*-weighted image shows a hypointense lesion in the medulla, predominately 
on the right. An arteriovenous malformation was ruled out by intraarterial angiography 
and the lesion was stable on follow-up magnetic resonance imaging
g
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
45
Fig. 2.21a–f. Asymptomatic 
capillary telangiectasia of the 
pons with normal T2 appearance. 
a This transverse, thin-section 
T2 image of the pons is normal. 
b The T1 image of the brain stem 
in the coronal view before admin-
istration of contrast agent shows 
an abnormal vessel in the pons on 
the left, but is otherwise normal. 
c T1-weighted image in the coro-
nal plain. After contrast adminis-
tration (Gd-DTPA 0.1 mmol/kg), 
there is a diffuse enhancement in 
the pons, more pronounced on 
the left and in the center. d The 
T1 image in the sagittal plain 
after contrast injection shows the 
typical aspect of a large capil-
lary telangiectasia. e Transverse 
T1-weighted image after contrast 
injection. Even in this 3-mm slice, 
the tiny vessels can not be sepa-
rated. f Apart from a more ho-
mogenous enhancing area, there 
is a small vessel displaying ﬂ ow 
void on the left border of the pons
a
c
e
b
d
f

46 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
strongly against each of these entities. In particular, 
the distinction from neoplasm must be reinforced to 
avoid unnecessary biopsy in these patients. A rela-
tively common misinterpretation is that of a pontine 
glioma; and again: capillary malformations do not 
exhibit a mass effect and do not change over time! 
In addition, decreased signal on GRE images is not a 
typical feature of pontine gliomas.
Fig. 2.22a–f. Asymptomatic pontine capillary telangiectasia with T2-signal abnormality. a Sagittal T2-weighted image. 
There is a abnormal structure in the pons with a tree-like appearance. b The thin-section, T2-weighted turbo spin-echo 
image shows a signal abnormality on the left side of the pons. c The lesion is also apparent on this T2-weighted FLAIR im-
age. d The T1-weighted image before contrast injection is normal. e After administration of contrast agent (Gd-DTPA, 0.1 
mmol/kg), there is an enhancing lesion in the brain stem, corresponding to the area of abnormal T2 signal. f The T1 image 
in the coronal plain also shows the typical capillary telangiectasia
a
c
e
b
d
f
Although thought to be typical of the brainstem 
(Figs. 2.21 and 2.22), close scrutiny of high quality 
MR images disclose similar abnormalities in other 
locations as well. Capillary telangiectasias may be 
located in the cerebral hemispheres and in the basal 
ganglia. This should always be kept in mind prior 
to embarking on surgery or biopsy (Castillo et al. 
2001).

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
47
Bristot R, Santoro A, Fantozzi L, Delﬁ ni R (1997) Caver-
noma of the cavernous sinus: case report. Surg Neurol 
48:160–163
Brunereau L, Labauge P, Tournier Lasserve E, Laberge S, 
Levy C, Houtteville JP (2000a) Familial form of intra-
cranial cavernous angioma: MR imaging ﬁ ndings in 51 
families. French Society of Neurosurgery. Radiology 
214:209–216
Brunereau L, Levy C, Laberge S, Houtteville J, Labauge P 
(2000b) De novo lesions in familial form of cerebral cav-
ernous malformations: clinical and MR features in 29 
non-Hispanic families. Surg Neurol 53(5):475–482; dis-
cussion 482–483
Buhl R, Hempelmann RG, Stark AM, Mehdorn HM (2002) 
Therapeutical considerations in patients with intracra-
nial venous angiomas. Eur J Neurol 9(2):165–169
Campeau NG, Lane JI (2005) De novo development of a le-
sion with the appearance of a cavernous malformation 
adjacent to an existing developmental venous anomaly. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 26(1):156–159
Castillo M, Morrison T, Shaw JA, Bouldin TW (2001) MR im-
aging and histologic features of capillary telangiectasia of 
the basal ganglia. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22:1553–1555
Chaloupka JC, Huddle DC (1998) Classiﬁ cation of vascular 
malformations of the central nervous system. Neuroim-
aging Clin North Am 8:295–321
Chang SD, Steinberg GK, Rosario M, Crowley RS, Hevner RF 
(1997) Mixed arteriovenous and capillary teleangiectasia: 
a rare subset of mixed vascular malformations. J Neuro-
surg 86:699–703
Ciricillo SF, Cogen PH, Edwards MSB (1993) Cryptic vascu-
lar malformations in children: presentation, radiology, 
treatment and outcome in 36 consecutive patients [ab-
stract]. J Neurosurg 78:354
Ciricillo SF, Dillon WP, Fink ME, Edwards MS (1994) Pro-
gression of multiple cryptic vascular malformations as-
sociated with anomalous venous drainage. Case report. 
J Neurosurg 81(3):477–481
Clatterbuck RE, Moriaritiy JL, Elmaci I, Lee RR, Breiter SN, 
Rigamonti D (2000) Dynamic nature of cavernous mal-
formations: a prospective magnetic resonance imaging 
study with volumetric analyses. J Neurosurg 93:981–986
Cohen HC, Tucker WS, Humphreys RP, Perrin RJ (1982) An-
giographically cryptic histologically veriﬁ ed cerebrovas-
cular malformations. Neurosurgery 10:704–714
Cohen-Gadol AA, Jacob JT, Edwards DA, Krauss WE (2006) 
Coexistence of intracranial and spinal cavernous mal-
formations: a study of prevalence and natural history. 
J Neurosurg 104(3):376–381
Crawford J, Russell D (1956) Cryptic arteriovenous and ve-
nous hamartomas of the brain. J Neurol Neurosurg Psy-
chiatr 19:1–11
Crivelli G, Dario A, Cerati M, Dorizzi A (2002) Third ven-
tricle cavernoma associated with venous angioma. Case 
report and review of the literature. J Neurosurg Sci 
46(3/4):127–130
Davenport WJ, Siegel AM, Dichgans J, Drigo P, Mammi I, 
Pereda P, Wood NW, Rouleau GA (2001) CCM1 gene mu-
tations in families segregating cerebral cavernous mal-
formations. Neurology 56:540–543
Del Curling O, Kelly DL, Elster AD, Craven TE (1991) An 
analysis of the natural history of cavernous angiomas. 
J Neurosurg 75:702–708
Because of its benign clinical course and the lack 
of therapeutic options, invasive diagnostic proce-
dures like biopsy or DSA must be avoided. However, 
it is still unclear whether these patients are at in-
creased risk for hemorrhage or the development of 
cavernous angiomas (Barr et al. 1996).
2.2.4 
Therapy
No therapy is available, nor is it usually required. 
It is not even established practice to perform any 
follow-up imaging (unless you want to conﬁ rm the 
diagnosis). If the diagnosis is established, there is 
no need for further follow-up.
References
Abe T, Singer RJ, Marks MP, Norbash AM, Crowley RS, Stein-
berg GK (1998) Coexistence of occult vascular malforma-
tions and developmental venous anomalies in the central 
nervous system: MR evaluation. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
19(1):51–57
Aiba T, Tanaka R, Koike T, Kamayama S, Takeda N, Komata 
T (1995) Natural history of intracranial cavernous mal-
formations. J Neurosurg 83:56–59
Amirjamshidi A, Abbassioun K (2000) Radiation-induced 
tumors of the central nervous system occurring in child-
hood and adolescence. Four unusual lesions in three pa-
tients and a review of the literature. Childs Nerv Syst 
16:390–397
Auffray-Calvier E, Desal HA, Freund P, Laplaud D, Mathon 
G, de Kersaint-Gilly A (1999) Capillary teleangiectasias: 
angiographically occult vascular malformations – MRI 
symptomatology apropos of 7 cases. J Neuroradiol 
26:257–261
Awad IA, Robinson JR, Mohanty S, Estes ML (1993) Mixed 
vascular malformations of the brain: clinical and patho-
genetic considerations. Neurosurgery 33:179–188
Barr RM, Dillon WP, Wilson CB (1996) Slow-ﬂ ow vascular 
malformations of the pons: capillary telangiectasias? 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 17:71–78
Baumann CR, Schuknecht B, Lo Russo G, Cossu M, Citterio 
A, Andermann F, Siegel AM (2006) Seizure outcome af-
ter resection of cavernous malformations is better when 
surrounding hemosiderin-stained brain also is removed. 
Epilepsia 47(3):563–566
Baumgartner JE, Ater JL, Ha CS, Kuttesch JF, Leeds NE, Fuller 
GN, Wilson RJ (2003) Pathologically proven cavernous an-
giomas of the brain following radiation therapy for pediat-
ric brain tumors. Pediatr Neurosurg 39(4):201–207
Bertalanffy H, Gilsbach JM, Eggert HR, Seeger W (1991) Mi-
crosurgery of deep-seated cavernous angiomas: report of 
26 cases. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 108(3/4):91–99

48 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
Desal HA, Lee SK, Kim BS, Raoul S, Tymianski M, TerBrugge 
KG (2005) Multiple de novo vascular malformations in 
relation to diffuse venous occlusive disease: a case report. 
Neuroradiology 47(1):38–42
Dillon WP (1997) Cryptic vascular malformations: contro-
versies in terminology, diagnosis, pathophysiology, and 
treatment. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 18:1839–1846
Dorsch NWC, McMahon JHA (1998) Intracranial cavernous 
malformations – natural history and management. Crit 
Rev Neurosurg 8(3):154–168
Duhem R, Vinchon M, Leblond P, Soto-Ares G, Dhellemmes 
P (2005) Cavernous malformations after cerebral irradia-
tion during childhood: report of nine cases. Childs Nerv 
Syst 21(10):922–925
Ferrante L, Acqui M, Trillo G, Antonio M, Nardacci B, Celli 
P (1998) Cavernous angioma of the VIIIth cranial nerve. 
A case report. Neurosurg Rev 21:270–276
Felbor U (2006) Genetics of cerebral cavernous angioma. 
Zentralbl Neurochir 67:110–116
Ferroli P, Casazza M, Marras C, Mendola C, Franzini A, 
Broggi G (2006) Cerebral cavernomas and seizures: a ret-
rospective study on 163 patients who underwent pure le-
sionectomy. Neurol Sci 26(6):390–394
Ferszt R (1989) Kreislaufstörungen des Nervensystems. In: 
Cervos-Navarro J, Ferszt R (eds) Klinische Neuropatholo-
gie. Thieme, Stuttgart, p 112
Gaensler EH, Dillon WP, Edwards MS, Larson DA, Rosenau 
W, Wilson CB (1994) Radiation-induced telangiectasia in 
the brain simulates cryptic vascular malformations at 
MR imaging. Radiology 193(3):629–636
Giulioni M, Acciarri N, Padovani R, Galassi E (1995) Results 
of surgery in children with cerebral cavernous angiomas 
causing epilepsy. Br J Neurosurg 9(2):135–141
Hammen T, Romstöck J, Dörﬂ er A, Kerling F, Buchfelder M, 
Stefan H (2007) Prediction of postoperative outcome with 
special respect to removal of hemosiderin fringe: a study 
in patients with cavernous haemangiomas associated 
with symptomatic epilepsy. Seizure 16(3):248–253
Hasegawa T, Mclnerney J, Kondziolka D, Lee JYK, Flickinger 
JC, Lunsford LD (2002) Long-term results after stereotac-
tic radiosurgery for patients with cavernous malforma-
tions. Neurosurgery 50:1190–1198
Herata Y, Matsukado Y, Nagahiro S, Kuratsu J (1986) In-
tracerebral venous angioma with arterial blood supply: 
a mixed angioma. Surg Neurol 25:227–232
Hsu PW, Chang CN, Tseng CK, Wei KC, Wang CC, Chuang 
CC, Huang YC (2007) Treatment of epileptogenic cav-
ernomas: surgery versus radiosurgery. Cerebrovasc Dis 
24(1):116–120
Huddle DC, Chaloupka JC, Sehgal V (1999) Clinically aggres-
sive diffuse capillary telangiectasia of the brain stem: a 
clinical radiologic-pathologic case study. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 20:1674–1677
Jabbour P, Gault J, Murk SE, Awad IA (2004) Multiple 
spinal cavernous malformations with atypical pheno-
type after prior irradiation: case report. Neurosurgery 
55(6):1431
Karlsson B, Kihlstroem L, Iindquist C, Ericson K, Steiner L 
(1998) Radiosurgery for cavernous malformations. J Neu-
rosurg 88:293–297
Kim DG, Park YG, Choi JU, Chung SS, Lee KC (1997) An 
analysis of the natural history of cavernous malforma-
tions. Surg Neurol 48:9–18
Kim MS, Pyo SY, Jeong YG, Lee SI, Jung YT, Sim JH (2005) 
Gamma knife surgery for intracranial cavernous heman-
gioma. J Neurosurg 102(Suppl):102–106
Kim P, Castellani R, Tresser N (1996) Cerebral venous mal-
formation complicated by spontaneous thrombosis. 
Childs Nerv Syst 12(3):172–175
Konan AV, Raymond J, Bourgouin P, Lesage J, Milot G, Roy D 
(1999) Cerebellar infarct caused by spontaneous throm-
bosis of a developmental venous anomaly of the posterior 
fossa. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 20(2):256–258
Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Flickinger JC, Kestle JRW 
(1995a) Reduction of hemorrhagic risk after stereotactic 
radiosurgery for cavernous malformations. J Neurosurg 
83:825–831
Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Flickinger JC (1995b) The natu-
ral history of cerebral cavernous malformations J Neu-
rosurg 83:820–824
Korpelainen EI, Karkkainen M, Gunji Y, Vikkula M, Alitalo 
K (1999) Endothelials receptor tyrosine kinases activate 
the STAT signaling pathway: mutant Tie-2 causing ve-
nous malformations signals a distinct STAT activation 
response. Oncogene 18:1–8
Küker W, Nacimiento W, Block F, Thron A (2000) Presumed 
capillary telangiectasia of the pons: MRI and follow-up. 
Eur Radiol 10:945–950
Kupersmith MJ, Kalish H, Epstein F, Yu G, Berenstein A, 
Woo H, Jafar J, Mandel G, De Lara F (2001) Natural his-
tory of brainstem cavernous malformations. Neurosur-
gery 48:47–53
Labauge P, Laberge S, Brunerau L, Levy C, Tournier Lasserve 
E (1998) Hereditary cerebral cavernous angiomas: clini-
cal and genetic features in 57 French families. Societe 
Fran-caise de Neurochirurgie. Lancet 352:1892–1897
Labauge P, Brunereau L, Levy C, Laberge S, Houtteville JP 
(2000) The natural history of familial cerebral caverno-
mas: a retrospective MRI study of 40 patients. Neurora-
diology 42:327–332
Larson JJ, Ball WS, Bove KE, Crone KR, Tew JM Jr (1998) For-
mation of intracerebral cavernous malformations after 
radiation treatment for central nervous system neoplasia 
in children. J Neurosurg 88(1):51–56
Lee RR, Becher MW, Benson ML, Rigamonti D (1997) Brain 
capillary telangiectasia: MR imaging appearance and 
clini-cohistopathologic ﬁ ndings. Radiology 205:797–805
Liscak R, Vladyka V, Simonova G, Vymazal J, Novotny J Jr 
(2005) Gamma knife surgery of brain cavernous heman-
giomas. J Neurosurg 102(Suppl):207–213
Liu KD, Chung WY, Wu HM, Shiau CY, Wang LW, Guo 
WY, Pan DH (2005) Gamma knife surgery for cavernous 
hemangiomas: an analysis of 125 patients. J Neurosurg. 
102(Suppl):81–86
Maher CO, Piepgras DG, Brown RD, Friedman JA, Pollock 
BE (2001) Cerebrovascular manifestations in 321 cases 
of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Stroke 32:877–
882
Maraire JN, Awad IA (1995) Intracranial cavernous mal-
formations: lesion behavior and management strategies. 
Neurosurgery 37:591–605
McCormick WF, Nofzinger JD (1966) “Cryptic” vascular 
malformations of the central nervous system. J Neuro-
surg 24:865–875
McCormick WF, Hardman JM, Boulter TR (1968) Vascular 
malformations (“angiomas”) of the brain, with special 

 
 
Cavernomas and Capillary Telangiectasias 
49
reference to those occurring in the posterior fossa. J Neu-
rosurg 28:241–251
McLaughlin MR, Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC, Lunsford S, 
Lunsford LD (1998) The prospective natural history of 
cerebral venous malformations. Neurosurgery 43(2):195–
200
Merten CL, Knitelius HO, Hedde JP, Assheuer J, Bewermeyer 
H (1998) Intracerebral haemorrhage from a venous an-
gioma following thrombosis of a draining vein. Neuro-
radiology 40(1):15–18
Moran NF, Fish DR, Kitchen N, Shorvon S, Kendall BE, Ste-
vens JM (1999) Supratentorial cavernous haemangio mas 
and epilepsy: a review of the literature and case series. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 66:561–568
Moriarity JL, Wetzel M, Clatterbuck RE, Javedan SJ, Shep-
pard JM, Hoenig-Rigamonti K, Crone NE, Breiter SN, Lee 
RR, Rigamonti D (1999) The natural history of cavernous 
malformations: a prospective study of 68 patients. Neu-
rosurgery 44:1166–1173
Mull M, Reinhardt J, Bertalanffy H, Thron A (1995) Pre- 
and postoperative ﬁ ndings in cavernomas of the CNS-
diagnostic limitations and pitfalls. Neuroradiology 
37(Suppl 1):49
Naff NJ, Wemmer J, Hoenig-Rigamonti K, Rigamonti DR 
(1998) A longitudinal study of patients with venous malfor-
mations: documentation of a negligible hemorrhage risk 
and benign natural history. Neurology 50(6):1709–1714
Nimjee SM, Powers CJ, Bulsara KR (2006) Review of the 
literature on de novo formation of cavernous malforma-
tions of the central nervous system after radiation ther-
apy. Neurosurg Focus 21(1):e4javascript:PopUpMenu2_
Set(Menu9633715);
Novak V, Chowdhary A, Abduljalil A, Novak P, Chakeres D 
(2003) Venous cavernoma at 8 Tesla MRI. Magn Reson 
Imaging 21(9):1087–1089
Novelli PM, Reigel DH, Langham Gleason P, Yunis E (1997) 
Multiple cavernous angiomas after high-dose whole-brain 
radiation therapy. Pediatr Neurosurg 26(6):322–325
Nussbaum ES, Heros RC, Madison MT, Awasthi D, Truwit CL 
(1998) The pathogenesis of arteriovenous malformations: 
insights provided by a case of multiple arteriovenous 
malformations developing in relation to a developmental 
venous anomaly. Neurosurgery 43(2):347–351; discussion 
351–352
Nyary I, Major O, Hanzely Z, Szeifert GT (2005) Histopatho-
logical ﬁ ndings in a surgically resected thalamic cavern-
ous hemangioma 1 year after 40-Gy irradiation. J Neuro-
surg 102(Suppl):56–58
Okazaki H (1989) Cerebrovascular disease. In: Okazaki H 
(ed) Fundamentals of neuropathology. Igaku-Shoin, New 
York, pp 27–94
Olivero WC, Deshmukh P, Gujrati M (2000) Radiation-in-
duced cavernous angioma mimicking metastatic disease. 
Br J Neurosurg 14:575–578
Porter RW, Detwiler PW, Spetzler RF, Lawton MT, Baskin 
JJ, Derksen PT et al. (1999) Cavernous malformations of-
the brainstem: experience with 100 patients. J Neurosurg 
90:50–58
Poussaint TY, Siffert J, Barnes PD, Pomeroy SL, Goumnerova 
LC, Anthony DC, Sallan SE, Tarbell NJ (1995) Hemor-
rhagic vasculopathy after treatment of central nervous 
system neoplasia in childhood: diagnosis and follow-up. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16(4):693–699
Pozzati E, Acciarri N, Tognetti F, Marliani F, Giangaspero 
F (1996a) Growth, subsequent bleeding, and de novo ap-
pearance of cerebral cavernous angiomas. Neurosurgery 
38(4):662–669; discussion 669–670
Pozzati E, Giangaspero F, Marliani F, Acciarri N (1996b) 
Occult cerebrovascular malformations after irradiation. 
Neurosurgery 39(4):677–682; discussion 682–684
Pryor J, Setton A, Berenstein A (1999) Venous anomalies 
and associated lesions. Neurosurg Clin N Am 10(3):519–
525
Reyns N, Assaker R, Louis E, Lejeune JP (1999) Intraventric-
ular cavernomas: three cases and review of the literature. 
Neurosurgery 44:648–654
Rigamonti D, SpetzlerRF (1988) The association of venous 
and cavernous malformations. Report of four cases 
and discussion of the pathophysiological, diagnostic 
and therapeutic implications. Acta Neurochirur (Wien) 
92:100–105
Rigamonti D, Drayer B, Johnson P, Hadley M, Zabramski J, 
Spetzler R (1987) The MRI appearance of cavernous mal-
formations (angiomas). J Neurosurg 67:518–524
Rigamonti D, Hadley MN, Drayer BP, Johnson PC, Hoenig-
Rigamonti K, Knight JT, Spetzler RF (1988) Cerebral cav-
ernous malformations. Incidence and familial occurence. 
N Engl J Med 319:343–347
Rigamonti D, Johnson PC, Spetzler RF, Hadley MN, Drayer 
BP (1991) Cavernous malformations and capillary telan-
giectasie: a spectrum within a single pathological entity. 
Neurosurgery 28:60–64
Rivera PP, Willinsky RA, Porter PJ (2003) Intracranial 
cavernous malformations. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 
13(1):27–40
Robinson JR, Awad IA, Little JR (1991) Natural history of the 
cavernous angioma. J Neurosurg 75:709–714
Russel DS, Rubinstein LJ (1989) Tumours and hamartomas 
of the blood vessels. In: Russel DS, Rubinstein LJ (eds) 
The pathology of tumours of the nervous system, 5th edn. 
Arnold, London, pp 727–790
Sarraf D, Payne AM, Kitchen ND, Sehmi KS, Downes SM, Bird 
AC (2000) Familial cavernous hemangioma: an expand-
ing ocular spectrum. Arch Ophthalmol 118:969–973
Sasaki O, Tanaka R, Koike T, Koide A, Koizumi T, Ogawa H 
(1991) Excision of cavernous angioma with preservation 
of coexisting venous angioma. Case report. J Neurosurg 
75(3):461–464
Savoiardo M, Strada L, Passerini A (1983) Intracranial cav-
ernous hemangioma: neuroradiologic review of 36 oper-
ated cases. Am J Neuroradiol AJNR 4:945–950
Scaglione C, Salvi F, Riguzzi P, Vergelli M, Tassinari CA, 
Mascal-chi M (2001) Symptomatic unruptured capillary 
telangiectasia of the brain stem: report of three cases and 
review of the literature. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
71:390–393
Simard JM, Garcia-Bengochea F, Ballinger WE, Mickle JP, 
Quisling RG (1986) Cavernous angioma: a review of 126 
collected and 12 new clinical cases. Neurosurgery 18:162–
172
Sure U, Freman S, Bozinov O, Benes L, Siegel AM, Berta-
lanffy H (2005) Biological activity of adult cavernous 
malformations: a study of 56 patients. J Neurosurg 
102(2):342–347
Tu J, Stoodley MA, Morgan MK, Storer KP (2005) Ultrastruc-
tural characteristics of hemorrhagic, nonhemorrhagic, 

50 
W. Küker and M. Forsting
and recurrent cavernous malformations. J Neurosurg 
103(5):903–909
Vikkula M, Boon LM, Carraway KL, Calvert JT, Diamonti 
AJ, Goumnerov B, Pasyk KA, Marchuk DA, Warman ML, 
Cantley LC, Mulliken JB, Olsen BR (1996) Vascular dys-
morphogenesis caused by an activating mutation in the 
receptor tyrosine kinase TIE2. Cell 87:1181–1190
Voigt K, Yasargil MG (1976) Cerebral cavernous haemangio-
mas or cavernomas. Neurochirurgia 19:59–68
Wilson CB (1992) Cryptic vascular malformations. Clin Neu-
rosurg 38:49–84
Wong JH, Awad IA, Kim JH (2000) Ultrastructural patho-
logical features of cerebrovascular malformations: a pre-
liminary report. Neurosurgery 46:1454–1459
Wurm G, Schnizer M, Nussbaumer K, Wies W, Holl K (2003) 
Recurrent cryptic vascular malformation associated 
with a developmental venous anomaly. Br J Neurosurg. 
17(2):188–195
Wurm G, Schnizer M, Fellner FA (2005) Cerebral cavernous 
malformations associated with venous anomalies: surgi-
cal considerations. Neurosurgery 57(1 Suppl):42–58; dis-
cussion 42–58
Zabramski JM, Wascher TM, Spetzler RF, Johnson B, Golﬁ -
nos J, Drayer BP, Brown B, Rigamonti D, Brown G (1994) 
The natural history of familial cavernous malformation: 
results of an ongoing study. J Neurosurg 80:422–432
Zhang J, Clatterbuck RE, Rigamonti D, Dietz HC (2000) Mu-
tations in KRIT1 in familial cerebral cavernous malfor-
mations. Neurosurgery 46:1272–1277
Zimmerman RS, Spetzler RF, Lee KS, Zabramski JM, Har-
graves RW (1991) Cavernous malformations of the brain 
stem. J Neurosurg 75(1):32–39

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
51
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
3
Christophe Cognard, Laurent Spelle, and Laurent Pierot
C O N T E N T S
 3.1 
Introduction 52
 3.2 
Pathology 53
3.2.1 
Epidemiology 53
3.2.2 
Pathology, Genetics, and
 
Hemodynamics 54
3.2.2.1 Pathology 54
3.2.2.2 Genetics 55
3.2.2.3 Hemodynamics 55
3.2.3 
Physiopathology and Biology 56
 3.3 
Clinical Presentation 56
3.3.1 
Natural History 56
3.3.2 
Intracranial Hemorrhage 57
3.3.2.1 Factors Increasing the Risk of Bleeding 57
3.3.2.2 Factors Decreasing the Risk of
 
Bleeding 60
3.3.2.3 Annual Rate of Bleeding 60
3.3.2.4 Severity of the Hemorrhage 61
3.3.3 
Epilepsy 61
3.3.4 
Headache 61
3.3.5 
Focal Neurologic Deﬁ cits 61
 3.4 
Diagnostic Imaging 62
3.4.1 
Goals of Imaging 62
3.4.2 
Imaging Modalities 62
3.4.2.1 CT Scan 62
3.4.2.2 MR 66
3.4.2.3 Selective and
 
Superselective Angiography 72
3.4.3 
Imaging Strategy 73
3.4.3.1 Ruptured AVM 73
3.4.3.2 Unruptured AVM 73
3.4.4 
Classiﬁ cation of Brain AVMs 73
3.4.4.1 Classiﬁ cation of Spetzler and Martin 73
3.4.4.2 Classiﬁ cation of Nataf et al. 74
C. Cognard, MD
Service de Neuroradiologie, Hôpital Purpan, Place du Dr 
Baylac, 31059 Toulouse Cedex, France
L. Spelle, MD
Département de Neuroradiologie interventionnelle et fonc-
tionnelle, Fondation A. de Rothschild, 25–29 Rue Manin, 
75940 Paris Cedex 19, France
L. Pierot, MD
Service de Radiologie, Hôpital Maison-Blanche, 45 rue 
Cognacq-Jay, 51092 Reims Cedex, France
K e y  P o i n t s
Most frequent clinical presentations of brain 
AVMs are hemorrhage, seizure, chronic head-
ache and focal deﬁ cits not related to hemor-
rhage (e.g. steal phenomenon)
Therapeutic strategy for an AVM should be 
decided by an experienced, multidisciplinary 
team consistent of a neurosurgeon, a neuro-
radiologist and a radiosurgeon
If treatment of an AVM is discussed, complete 
elimination of the AVM should be the goal
Partial treatment of an AVM should not be 
performed with the intention of decreasing 
the bleeding risk since subtotal therapy might 
increase the bleeding risk
Partial treatment of an AVM should not be 
performed to eliminate or to improve fre-
quency of seizures since that concept is of 
unproved efﬁ ciency
Factors increasing the risk of hemorrhage are 
discussed: associated aneurysms, small AVM 
size, deep venous drainage, venous stenosis
Factors decreasing the risk of hemorrhage are 
discussed: arterial stenosis, arterial angioec-
tasia with recruitment and enlargement of 
leptomeningeal and subependymal anasto-
mosis
Annual bleeding rate of AVM is estimated  
2%–4%, but caution is advised since data on 
bleeding rate are inhomogenous
The classiﬁ cation of Spetzler and Martin is a 
grading system to assess the surgical risk of 
complications
The classiﬁ cation of Nataf tries to evaluate the 
individual bleeding risk











52 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
 3.1 
Introduction
Arteriovenous malformations of the brain (brain 
AVMs) correspond to congenital cerebrovascu-
lar anomalies, also known as intracerebral or pial 
AVMs. First of all, it is important to stress the fact 
that this is not a neoplastic lesion and therefore not 
an “angioma”, which is obviously an inappropri-
ate though commonly used term (Rosenblum et 
al. 1996).
Clinically, brain AVMs are an increasingly rec-
ognized cause of death and long-term morbidity, 
mostly due to intracranial hemorrhage and epilepsy; 
however, they may remain silent over a long period 
of time, even over an entire lifetime. Anatomically 
speaking, they are constituted by a complex, tangled 
web of afferent arteries and draining veins linked 
by an abnormal intervening capillary bed – the so-
called nidus – which may or not harbor direct arte-
riovenous shunts (Challa et al. 1995; Rosenblum 
et al. 1996; The Arteriovenous Malformation 
Study Group 1999), of which two categories must be 
recognized: AV malformations (AVMs) and AV ﬁ s-
tulas (AVFs) (Lasjaunias and Berenstein 1993a).
1. AVMs are composed of a network of channels 
interposed between feeding arteries and drain-
ing veins, without any direct shunt. Two dif-
ferent anatomic types of nidus may be more or 
less differentiated: compact nidus, constituting a 
tumor-like well-circumscribed network, and dif-
fuse nidus, with sparse, abnormal AV channels 
spread within normal brain parenchyma (Chin 
et al. 1992).
2. AVFs are formed by direct communication 
between an enlarged artery and vein without inter-
posed nidus. Lack of a capillary bed in the AVM 
nidus results in direct arteriovenous communi-
cation, which may be unique or multiple (Stapf 
and Mohr 2000). AVFs are much more rare than 
AVMs (2%, Lasjaunias and  Berenstein 1993a) 
and are always located on the brain surface. They 
may be present within an AVM nidus as a direct 
AV shunt surrounded by the network of arterio-
venous channels.
AVMs may be situated in any region of the brain, 
lying mostly within the distribution of the middle 
cerebral arteries and involving the hemispheric con-
vexities in continuity with the adjacent leptomenin-
ges; however, they can be restricted to the dura or 
choroid plexus. They vary in size from cryptic le-
sions, which remain invisible even on angiographic 
studies and are discovered on anatomic studies of 
surgically removed hematomas, to giant AVMs, 
which can involve a whole hemisphere.
Feeding arteries may be one or numerous. They 
may be very enlarged or present an almost normal 
diameter. High ﬂ ow may produce either (a) saccu-
lar aneurysm formation, located at the level of the 
circle of Willis or the feeding arteries or within the 
nidus (Cunha e Sa et al. 1992; Ogilvy et al. 2001; 
 Lasjaunias et al. 1988; Meisel et al. 2000; Redekop 
et al. 1998; Thompson et al. 1998; Turjman et al. 
1994), or (b) high-ﬂ ow angiopathy with progressive 
stenosis and eventual occlusion of feeding arteries 
(Mawad et al. 1984).
Draining veins as well may be one or numerous, 
deep or cortical. Direct shunting of blood at arterial 
pressure causes dilatation and tortuosity in the in-
volved veins. High ﬂ ow may also produce localized 
stenosis, frequently at the level where the veins cross 
the dura to reach the sinus (Mansmann et al. 2000; 
Miyasaka et al. 1992) and secondary venous aneu-
rysmal dilatation (Nataf et al. 1997).
 3.5 
Therapy 74
3.5.1 
Neurosurgery 74
3.5.1.1 Elective Surgery 74
3.5.1.2 Outcome of Direct Surgery 74
3.5.2 
Radiosurgery 76
3.5.2.1 Factors Inﬂ uencing the
 
Obliteration Rate After Radiosurgery 76
3.5.2.2 Angioarchitecture and Hemodynamics 77
3.5.2.3 Rate of Complications 77
3.5.2.4 Re-irradiation after
 
Radiosurgery Failure 78
3.5.2.5 Risk of Recurrence 78
3.5.3 
Endovascular Embolization 79
3.5.3.1 General Considerations 79
3.5.3.2 Technique 80
3.5.3.3 Complications 86
3.5.3.4 Particular Instances 90
3.5.3.5 Goals and Results 99
3.5.3.6 Intranidal Embolization with
 
Nonadhesive Liquid Embolic Agents 
 
(*Modiﬁ ed by Prof. I. Wanke) 104
3.5.4 
Therapeutic Strategy 112
 
References 112

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
53
 3.2 
Pathology
3.2.1 
Epidemiology
There is very little information in the literature 
about the prevalence of AVMs, i.e., the propor-
tion of a population living with the diagnosis of 
AVM at a single point in time. Because of the rarity 
of the disease and the existence of asymptomatic 
patients, establishing a true prevalence rate is dif-
ﬁ cult and probably not feasible (Stapf et al. 2000). 
Considering unselected populations, Al-Shahi 
and Warlow (2001) found a prevalence of AVMs 
in a retrospective study in a region of Scotland of 
15 per 100,000 living adults over 16 years of age. 
In this series, prevalence is obviously underesti-
mated, since it does not consider asymptomatic 
AVMs. Only large post-mortem studies in the gen-
eral population could give a more accurate estima-
tion of the prevalence of both symptomatic and 
clinically silent AVM. However, such a series does 
not exist. Only few hospital-based post-mortem 
studies are available, in which the prevalence of 
AVMs was found to be between 400 and 600 per 
100,000 (Al-Shahi and Warlow 2001; Berman et 
al. 2000; Jellinger 1986). This huge discrepancy 
is obviously due to the fact that the prevalence in 
living subjects is underestimated, ﬁ rst because of 
the lack of diagnosed cases being ﬁ led in a regis-
try in retrospective studies, and second because 
the entire group of nonsymptomatic AVMs are 
not included in the counting because they are not 
detected. Berman et al. (2000) have provided a 
very interesting paper in which they reviewed all 
of the relevant original literature. They conclude 
that “the estimates for AVM prevalence that are 
published in the medical literature are unfounded”. 
For these authors, the most reliable estimate for 
the occurrence of the disease is the detection rate 
for symptomatic lesions: 0.94 per 100,000 persons 
per year.
Incidence corresponds to the proportion of a 
population newly diagnosed with an AVM. Popu-
lation-based incidence data are also very difﬁ cult 
to evaluate; only two population-based studies of 
AVM incidence are available (Brown et al. 1996a; 
 Jessurun et al. 1993), and both are retrospective. 
Over a 10-year-period (between 1980 and 1990) in 
the Netherlands Antilles, the annual incidence of 
symptomatic AVMs was 1.1 per 100,000 per year 
(Jessurun et al. 1993).
In a second study, using the comprehensive Mayo 
Clinic medical records linkage system over a 27 year 
period from 1965 to 1972 in Olmsted County (USA), 
the incidence of symptomatic AVMs was 1.84 per 
100,000 per year (Brown et al. 1996b). Interestingly, 
the incidence rate increased over time, probably 
due to the use of more advanced brain imaging mo-
dalities. Obviously, a prospective study would give 
a more accurate estimate of AVM incidence and a 
better description of the population affected by the 
disease, but such a study is currently lacking.
Where other demographic characteristics of pa-
tients with brain AVMs are concerned, mean age at 
diagnosis is between 30 and 40 years (Hofmeister et 
al. 2000; Jessurun et al. 1993; The  Arteriovenous 
Malformation Study Group 1999) and it affects 
both sexes in nearly equal proportions ( Hofmeister 
et al. 2000; The Arteriovenous Malformation 
Study Group 1999).
Even though brain AVMs are considered to be 
a congenital disorder, nonsystematized familial 
AVMs are extremely rare and very few familial cases 
have been reported in the literature (Aberfeld and 
Rao 1981; Herzig et al. 2000; Kamiryo et al. 2000; 
Yokoyama et al. 1991). No genetic predisposition 
was found and the occurrence of brain AVMs in two 
members of the same family could be purely acci-
dental.
Autopsy data showed that only 12% of AVMs 
become symptomatic during life (The Arterio-
venous Malformation Study Group 1999), 
and intracranial hemorrhage is the most common 
clinical presentation (Al-Shahi and Warlow 2001; 
 Hofmeister et al. 2000; The Arteriovenous 
 Malformation Study Group 1999).
AVMs typically present as solitary lesion. Multi-
ple brain AVMs occur in approximately 0.3%–3.2% 
of all cases. Surprisingly enough, Willinsky et al. 
(1990) reported 11 cases of multiple AVMs among 
203 patients (6%). Although multiple AVMs may oc-
cur spontaneously, they are frequently associated 
with cutaneous or extracranial vascular anomalies 
(Salcman et al. 1992), such as Rendu-Osler-Weber 
disease and Wyburn-Mason syndrome. However, 
the clinical mode of presentation, age and sex of the 
patient, and anatomic distribution of the lesions are 
the same as those in patients with single arteriove-
nous malformations.
Rendu-Osler-Weber disease – also known as he-
reditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) – is a 

54 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
rare autosomal dominant angiodysplastic disorder 
with a prevalence estimated at between 2 and 40 per 
100,000 people (Guttmacher et al. 1995). Rendu-
Osler-Weber disease is characterized by multisys-
temic vascular dysplasia and recurrent hemorrhage 
of the nose, skin, lung, brain, and gastrointestinal 
tract. It includes: (a) multiple capillary telangiecta-
sias of the skin and mucosa, and (b) arteriovenous 
malformations and ﬁ stulas located in the liver (30% 
of the cases) (Ralls et al. 1992), the lungs (15%–
20%), the brain (28%) or the spine (8%). Epistaxis 
is the most frequent symptom, present in 85% of the 
patients (Guttmacher et al. 1995; Porteous et al. 
1992).
The prevalence of brain AVMs in patients pre-
senting with Rendu-Osler-Weber disease is esti-
mated to be between 4% and 13% (Porteous et al. 
1992; Roman et al. 1978; Willinsky et al. 1990). 
They have no speciﬁ c characteristics, especially 
regarding location and angioarchitecture. How-
ever, multiple AVMs in this syndrome are more 
frequent than in the general population, with a fre-
quency estimated at around 30% (Aesch et al. 1991; 
Hasegawa et al. 1999;  Jellinger 1986; Jessurun 
et al. 1993;  Matsubara et al. 2000; Putman et al. 
1996; Roman et al. 1978; Sobel and Norman 1984; 
Willemse et al. 2000; Willinsky et al. 1990). A re-
cent study of 196 patients with Rendu-Osler-Weber 
disease (Willemse et al. 2000) showed that 12% 
had a brain AVM, and 96% of these were low grade 
(Spetzler-Martin grade I or II). The risk of bleeding 
has been estimated to be lower than in non-Rendu-
Osler-Weber disease brain AVMs, ranging from 0.4 
to 0.72 per year (Kjeldsen et al. 1999). For some 
families, linkage has been established to a mutated 
gene located on chromosome 9 q, which induces ab-
normality in endoglin, a transforming growth fac-
tor beta-binding protein expressed on endothelial 
cells (Cheifetz et al. 1992; McAllister et al. 1994; 
Shovlin et al. 1997); other linkage studies have es-
tablished another locus at chromosome 12 q, result-
ing in a mutation in the activin receptor-like kinase 
gene (“ALK-1” gene), also predominantly expressed 
on endothelial cells and also related to the same 
TGF-b receptor system (Berg et al. 1997; Johnson 
et al. 1996).
The very rare Bonnet-Blanc-Dechaume syndrome 
– also called Wyburn-Mason syndrome, neuroreti-
nal angiomatosis, or mesencephalo-oculo-facial 
angiomatosis – corresponds to the association of 
unilateral retinal angiomatosis and a cutaneous 
hemangioma in an ipsilateral trigeminal distribu-
tion with an AVM located in the midbrain (Patel 
and Gupta 1990; Rosenblum et al. 1996;  Willinsky 
et al. 1990). In the 25 cases reported by Theron et al. 
(1974), the lesions involved the optic nerve, then fol-
lowed the optic track as a unique continuous nidus 
or as multiple focal AVMs.
3.2.2 
Pathology, Genetics, and Hemodynamics
3.2.2.1 
Pathology
In macroscopic pathology, brain AVMs are com-
posed of (a) clustered and abnormally muscular-
ized feeding arteries, which may also show changes 
such as duplication or destruction of the elastica, 
ﬁ brosis of the media, and focal thinning of the 
wall; (b) arterialized veins of varying size and 
wall thickness; (c) structurally ambiguous ves-
sels formed, solely of ﬁ brous tissue or displaying 
both arterial and venous characteristics; and (d) 
intervening gliotic neural parenchyma (Jellinger 
1986; Mandybur and Nazek 1990; McCormick 
1966; Rosenblum et al. 1996) (Fig. 3.1). They anas-
tomose with normal cerebral vessels. Critical to 
the distinction of the true brain AVM from nor-
mal leptomeningeal vessels that may assume the 
appearance of a malformation in neurosurgical 
material as a result of artifactual compaction are 
the former’s conspicuous mural anomalies. Chief 
among these are striking ﬂ uctuations in medial 
thickness, architectural disarray, or focal disap-
pearance of the media altogether, or its separation 
into inner and outer coats by a seemingly aber-
rant elastic lamina. Numerous abnormalities of the 
muscular layer were identiﬁ ed, including partially 
developed media, two layers of the media separated 
by a well-formed internal elastic membrane, total 
or partial disarray of the muscle coat, and par-
tial absence of the media (Mandybur and Nazek 
1990). Previously described large capillaries proved 
to be postcapillary venules by virtue of having a 
distinct muscular layer. Mandybur and colleagues 
performed serial sectioning, indicating that the 
previously described “polypoid projections” of 
the media are mostly artifacts, and the concept of 
“arterialization of veins in arteriovenous malfor-
mations” could not be substantiated (Mandybur 
and Nazek 1990; Rosenblum et al. 1996).

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
55
Ultrastructural pathological features of brain 
AVMs were also studied but consist only in the dis-
organization of collagen bundles within nidal ves-
sels’ walls (Wong et al. 2000).
Embolization results in endothelial cell disrup-
tion with preservation of the underlying subendo-
thelial vessel wall (Wong et al. 2000). Lesions sub-
jected to embolization with bucrylate or polyvinyl 
alcohol (Germano et al. 1992; Vinters et al. 1986) 
exhibit a foreign-body response and may undergo 
focal necrosis. Entrapped neuropil usually mani-
fests dense astrogliosis, neuronal depopulation, and 
ferruginous encrustation of included neuroglial 
elements. Within interstices of AVM, oligodendro-
glioma-like regions may be encountered that may 
be intrinsic to the underlying misdevelopment pro-
cess or the result of abnormal oligodendroglial ag-
gregation caused by the ischemic contraction of en-
trapped white matter (Lombardi et al. 1991; Nazek 
et al. 1988; Rosenblum et al. 1996).
3.2.2.2 
Genetics
The majority of AVMs are believed to be congeni-
tal, although it is possible that some lesions are ac-
quired. Thus, even though they are developmental 
anomalies, it is likely that a combination of con-
genital predisposition and extrinsic factors lead to 
their generation (Challa et al. 1995; Chaloupka 
et al. 1998). The vast majority of cases are sporadic, 
in which no familial association is observed, and 
no speciﬁ c gene mutations have been reported for 
these AVMs.
Although familial brain AVMs are rare, elective 
screening of individuals with a family history of 
AVM is recommended (Aberfeld and Rao 1981; 
Amin-Hanjani et al. 1998). An exception is the rare 
setting of Rendu-Osler-Weber disease, mapped to 
the endoglin gene on chromosome 9 q, or the activin 
receptor-like kinase gene on chromosome 12 q, both 
expressed on endothelial cells and related to the 
TGF-beta receptor system. It is presumed that the 
genetic defects in this disease result in a signaling-
pathway abnormality, potentially affecting vascular 
assembly and remodeling. It is not yet known why 
abnormal vascular morphology is limited to focal 
AVM lesions and whether more common sporadic 
AVMs also reﬂ ect similar mechanisms of dysmor-
phogenesis (Hademenos et al. 2001).
3.2.2.3 
Hemodynamics
The velocity of blood ﬂ ow is considerably higher 
through AVMs than through normal brain paren-
chyma. As a result of the abnormal hemodynamic 
condition, feeding arteries and draining veins be-
come progressively dilated and tortuous. The he-
modynamic effects of shunt ﬂ ow through an AVM 
on the surrounding brain have been implicated 
in the pathogenesis of pretreatment neurological 
deﬁ cits. In fact, AVMs could be compared to vas-
cular “sponges”, which consume large volumes of 
blood, depriving the brain of normal circulation 
(Barnett et al. 1987; Duckwiler et al. 1990; Jun-
greis et al. 1989; Spetzler et al. 1992; Young et 
al. 1994b). A decrease in the perfusion pressure 
may place these neighboring vascular territories 
below the lower limit of autoregulation by a com-
bination of arterial hypotension and venous hy-
pertension. Focal neurological deﬁ cits have been 
attributed to this phenomenon of “cerebral steal” 
(Fink 1992; Manchola et al. 1993; Marks et al. 
1991; Nornes and Grip 1980); its reported clini-
cal frequency varies widely but is probably much 
lower than was previously thought (Mast et al. 
1995). Moreover, in the same prospective series, 
Mast and colleagues demonstrated that there was 
no relation between feeding artery pressure or ﬂ ow 
velocity and the occurrence of focal neurological 
deﬁ cit.
Fig. 3.1. Macroscopic view of a surgically resected brain 
AVM depicts enlarged feeding arteries and draining veins 
with arteriovenous shunts. Normal brain surrounds the 
AVM with partially necrosed areas. (Courtesy of Pr. Mikol, 
Neuropathology Department, Lariboisière, Paris, France)

56 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
3.2.3 
Physiopathology and Biology
The pathogenesis of brain AVMs is currently un-
known, but recent work suggests that their genesis 
and development may be linked to aberrant vas-
culogenesis or angiogenesis (Shalaby et al. 1995). 
Indeed, in embryos, vascular morphogenesis is a 
two-stage process: The ﬁ rst stage – vasculogenesis 
– corresponds to the differentiation of angioblasts 
into endothelial cells to form the primary vascular 
plexus. During the second stage – angiogenesis – 
this primary vascular plexus undergoes remodeling 
and organization including recruitment of perien-
dothelial cell support (Hashimoto et al. 2001). In 
both processes, blood vessels are established and 
remodeled by protein ligands that bind and modu-
late the activity of transmembrane receptor tyrosine 
kinases. Recent studies have clariﬁ ed two main sys-
tems of angiogenesis growth factor and the endothe-
lial cell-speciﬁ c protein tyrosine kinase (Hanahan 
1997). The high-afﬁ nity binding receptors of the 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-R1 and 
VEGF-R2) appear to mediate various facets of endo-
thelial cell proliferation, migration, adhesion, and 
tube formation (Uranishi et al. 2001). A recently 
discovered group of cytokines, the angiopoietins 1 
and 2, and their receptors Tie-1 and Tie-2, play an 
important role at later stages of vascular develop-
ment (Sato et al. 1995).
More precisely, when VEGF binds to VEGF-R2 
during embryogenesis, endothelial cells are cre-
ated and caused to proliferate. When VEGF binds 
to VEGF-R1, endothelial cells interact and capillary 
tubes are formed (Fong et al. 1995; Shalaby et al. 
1995). When angiopoietin-1 binds to Tie-2, perien-
dothelial support cells are recruited and caused to 
associate with endothelial cells (Patan 1998). When 
angiopoietin-2 binds to Tie-2, kinase activation in 
endothelial cells is blocked and vessel structures be-
come loosened.
Experimental embryos that are deﬁ cient in Tie-2 
produce the formation of abnormal enlarged vessels 
without intervening normal capillaries (Sato et al. 
1995), and these abnormal vessels resemble human 
brain AVMs. Embryos that are deﬁ cient in Tie-1 fail 
to establish the structural integrity of vascular en-
dothelial cells, resulting in vascular leakage, edema, 
and breakthrough hemorrhage. Targeted disruption 
of angiopoietin-1 in the embryo is lethal, and associ-
ated vascular defects resemble those in the tie-2-de-
ﬁ cient model. Angiopoietin-2 has been shown to be 
a naturally occurring antagonist for angiopoietin-1 
and Tie-1. Transgenic overexpression of angiopoi-
etin-2 disrupts blood vessel formation in the mouse 
embryo (Maisonpierre et al. 1997).
Interestingly, it has been proven that endothelial 
cell expression of VEGF-R and angiopoietin recep-
tors in endothelial cells is signiﬁ cantly higher in pa-
tients with surgically resected brain AVMs than in 
controls (Hashimoto 2001; Uranishi et al. 2001). 
The signiﬁ cant up-regulation of VEGF and Tie in 
AVMs may indicate some ongoing angiogenesis, 
possibly contributing to the slow growth and main-
tenance of the AVM, and could be of potential use in 
the therapeutic targeting of these lesions.
However, it is currently difﬁ cult to attribute ab-
normal VEGF-R expression to speciﬁ c pathophysi-
ological features of AVMs. It is likely that biological 
alterations reﬂ ect not only the speciﬁ c mechanisms 
that triggered lesion genesis but also subsequent 
nonspeciﬁ c changes attributable to ﬂ ow hemor-
rhage, and other injury responses.
 3.3 
Clinical Presentation
The most frequent clinical presentations of brain 
AVMs are hemorrhage, seizure, chronic headache, 
and focal deﬁ cits not related to hemorrhage (Mast 
et al. 1995).
3.3.1 
Natural History
Brain AVMs are lesions that are not affected by im-
portant anatomic modiﬁ cations over time. However, 
as was outlined by Berenstein and  Lasjaunias 
(1992), AVMs are dynamic, i.e., they undergo contin-
uous subtle anatomic and hemodynamic changes. 
A cerebral AVM becomes clinically evident when 
the host’s capacity to compensate effectively has 
reached its threshold. Cerebral AVMs are often 
symptomatic in young adults, typically before the 
age of 40 ( Hofmeister et al. 2000).
From an anatomic point of view, the natural his-
tory of brain AVMs may rarely include enlargement, 
decrease, or regression (Minakawa et al. 1989; 
Chen et al. 1991; Krapf et al. 2001). Surprisingly, 
in a small series of 20 patients followed up by an-

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
57
giography for periods of 5–28 years, Minakawa ob-
served an increase in size of the AVM in 4 patients, 
a decrease in 4, and total regression in 4. Enlarge-
ment of brain AVMs is observed in young patients 
(under 30 years of age), and especially in child-
hood ( Krayenbuhl 1977; Mendelow et al. 1987; 
Minakawa et al. 1989).
Spontaneous obliteration of cerebral AVMs is rare; 
only 50 cases have been reported in the literature. Fac-
tors predisposing an AVM to regression by thrombosis 
are those that affect the venous hemodynamic state of 
the AVM: anatomy of the AVM, surgical manipulation 
of the lesion, compression of the AVM by surround-
ing mass lesions (Chen et al. 1991). Most often, the 
thrombosis of the AVM nidus will occur secondary to 
an intracerebral or subarachnoid hemorrhage. In this 
case, the mass effect of the blood clot may alter the 
dynamic of the AVM and decrease blood ﬂ ow, prob-
ably by compression of draining veins to the extent 
that thrombosis may occur. Surgical intervention, 
including evacuation of a blood clot or placement of 
a shunt, has been associated with regression of AVMs 
explained by compression of the veins from bleeding 
or swelling. Spontaneous regression may also occur 
(Krapf et al. 2001). Several factors appear to be asso-
ciated with spontaneous occlusion of cerebral AVM: 
single draining vein (84% of cases of spontaneous oc-
clusion), solitary arterial feeder (30%), small size of 
the nidus (< 3 cm in 50%) (Krapf et al. 2001).
3.3.2 
Intracranial Hemorrhage
Intracranial hemorrhage is the most common clini-
cal presentation of brain AVM, with a frequency of 
between 30% and 82% (Mast et al. 1995). Identiﬁ -
cation of factors increasing the risk of bleeding of 
a brain AVM is very important with regard to the 
treatment strategy. However, two difﬁ culties are en-
countered in an analysis of the literature:
There is a lack of consistency in the terminology 
used to describe clinical and radiographic fea-
tures of brain AVMs. Recently, the Joint Writing 
Group of the Technology Assessment Committee, 
American Society of Interventional and Thera-
peutic Neuroradiology, Joint Section on Cere-
brovascular Neurosurgery, Section of Stroke and 
Section of Interventional Neurology of the Ameri-
can Academy of Neurology (Ogilvy et al. 2001) 
proposed a uniform terminology for clinical and 
radiographic description of brain AVMs.

The identiﬁ cation of factors affecting the bleeding 
risk of brain AVMs is difﬁ cult, because anatomic 
and hemodynamic factors are often not indepen-
dent, and a precise analysis has to be performed 
(Mansmann et al. 2000).
3.3.2.1 
Factors Increasing the Risk of Bleeding
Several factors may increase the risk of a ﬁ rst hemor-
rhage in case of brain AVM.
Anatomic Factors
Many factors have been studied to evaluate their in-
ﬂ uence on the bleeding rate of brain AVMs (Marks 
et al. 1990; Houdart et al. 1993; Spetzler et al. 1992; 
Kader et al. 1994; Turjman et al. 1995a;  Pollock 
et al. 1996a; Nataf et al. 1997; Mansmann et al. 
2000).
Feeding Vessels
Arterial Aneurysms
The prevalence of arterial aneurysms is estimated 
at between 2.7% and 22.7%, with a mean of about 
10%.
Several classiﬁ cations of arterial aneurysms as-
sociated with brain AVMs have been proposed. Ac-
cording to Houdart et al.(1993), three groups of 
aneurysms associated with brain AVMs have to be 
deﬁ ned according to their site: type I, proximally 
on a large artery; type II, distally on a large feed-
ing artery; type III, intra- or juxtanidal. Cunha e 
Sa et al. (1992) have proposed another classiﬁ cation: 
type I, proximal on ipsilateral major artery feeding 
the AVM; type Ia, proximal on major artery related 
but contralateral to the AVM; type II, distal on su-
perﬁ cial artery feeding the AVM; type III, proximal 
or distal on deep artery feeding the AVM; type IV, 
on artery unrelated to the AVM. In fact, the most 
useful classiﬁ cation of aneurysms associated with 
brain AVMs is probably that proposed by the Joint 
Writing Group (Ogilvy et al. 2001). Aneurysms are 
categorized as ﬂ ow related, non-ﬂ ow related, nidal, 
proximal, and distal. Flow-related aneurysms are lo-
cated on a pathway supplying the brain AVM shunt. 
Aneurysms are deﬁ ned as saccular luminal dilata-
tions of the parent feeding vessel. Nidal is deﬁ ned 
as contiguous with the nidus. Proximal aneurysms 
would be located on the vessel or branch points of 
the circle of Willis or proximal to it. Distal refers to 


58 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
locations beyond the circle of Willis. A similar clas-
siﬁ cation was recently used in a series dealing with 
brain AVMs associated with arterial aneurysms 
(Redekop et al. 1998). Piotin et al. (2001) also de-
ﬁ ne proximal, distal, and intranidal aneurysms but 
do not distinguish between ﬂ ow-related and non-
ﬂ ow-related aneurysms.
As outlined by Houdart et al. (1993), the depic-
tion of intranidal aneurysms is difﬁ cult; it is often 
performed at the time of superselective angiogra-
phy. Moreover, true arterial intranidal aneurysms 
have to be distinguished from pseudoaneurysms, 
which are at the point of rupture of the nidus or of 
the venous drainage.
The signiﬁ cance of aneurysms associated with 
brain AVMs in the occurrence of bleeding is unclear. 
Pollock et al. (1996) ﬁ nd no association between 
proximal or nidal associated aneurysms and intra-
cranial bleeding. The univariate and multivariate 
analysis performed by Mansmann et al. (2000) in 
a large series of patients revealed no association be-
tween aneurysms in the feeders or intranidal aneu-
rysms and intracranial hemorrhage. In other series, 
arterial aneurysms and intranidal aneurysms are 
associated with a high prevalence of hemorrhage 
(Marks et al. 1990; Turjman et al. 1995; Thompson 
et al. 1998; Redekop et al. 1998; Piotin et al. 2001).
In the series of Cunha e Sa et al. (1992) the site 
of rupture was the aneurysm in 46% of cases, the 
AVM in 33% of cases, and undetermined in 21% of 
cases. In other series (Batjer et al. 1986; Piotin et 
al. 2001), the source of hemorrhage in patients har-
boring brain AVMs and associated aneurysms was 
identiﬁ ed as an aneurysm in approximately 80% of 
cases.
Thus, we can postulate with Berenstein and 
Lasjaunias (1992) that intranidal aneurysms repre-
sent a weakness of the angioarchitecture and should 
inﬂ uence treatment strategy. This is probably also 
true for other associated aneurysms.
A higher percentage of multiple aneurysms has 
been reported in the population of patients with 
brain AVMs (Batjer et al. 1986; Brown et al. 1990; 
Cunha e Sa et al. 1992; Thompson et al. 1998), but 
this feature seems not to be associated with a higher 
risk of hemorrhage (Piotin et al. 2001).
Feeders from the External Carotid Artery
Some brain AVMs are fed by branches of external 
carotid arteries, and the signiﬁ cance of this ana-
tomic situation is uncertain. Is there an intradural 
compartment of the AVM? Or is there a vascular-
ization of the nidus through arterial anastomosis 
coming from external branches? Whatever, it seems 
that the incidence of bleeding is not increased when 
the brain AVM is fed by branches of the external 
arteries.
Others
Turjman et al. (1995a) have shown an increased risk 
of bleeding in case of feeding by perforators and by 
the vertebrobasilar system. As outlined by Turjman, 
perforators are involved in the supply of deep AVMs, 
such as corpus callosum and basal ganglia AVMs, 
and it is difﬁ cult to evaluate which feature is the 
most important for determination of the bleeding 
risk.
Regarding feeders coming from the vertebrobasi-
lar system, the discussion is the same as for the loca-
tion of AVMs (see below).
Nidus
Size
A relationship between the size of an AVM and its 
tendency to rupture has been suggested. In the se-
ries of Graf et al. (1983), the risk of hemorrhage at 
5 years was 10% for large AVMs (> 3.0 cm in diame-
ter) and 52% for small AVMs (< 3 cm in diameter). In 
the series of Spetzler et al. (1992), 82% of patients 
with small AVMs (less than 3 cm), 29% of patients 
with medium-sized AVMs (3–6 cm), and 12% of pa-
tients with large AVM (greater than 6 cm) presented 
with hemorrhage. The same relation between ni-
dus size and bleeding was found by other authors 
(Itoyama et al. 1989; Kader et al. 1994; Duong et 
al. 1998). The multivariate analysis performed in the 
large series of patients studied by Mansmann et al. 
(2000) also identiﬁ ed AVM size of more than 3 cm 
as a factor negatively associated with intracranial 
hemorrhage.
However, the absolute risk of spontaneous in-
tracranial hemorrhage from small and large brain 
AVMs is still a matter of controversy. In the series 
of Crawford et al. (1986), 21% small and 18% large 
AVM rebled within 5 years. Small and large AVMs 
may have the same risk of bleeding. Large AVMs can 
more often present in other ways than hemorrhage 
(seizures, progressive deﬁ cits, headache), and this 
may lead to an overestimation of the rate of bleed-
ing of small AVMs. In this case, age at the time of 
presentation would be higher in the group of pa-
tients with hemorrhage than in the group without. 
However, age at the time of presentation is the same 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
59
in both groups (Kader et al. 1994), supporting the 
idea that small AVMs have a higher risk of hemor-
rhage. Moreover, by measuring the feeding artery 
pressure intraoperatively, Spetzler et al. (1992) 
demonstrated that the pressure is higher in small 
brain AVMs, which could explain the higher rate of 
bleeding of small AVMs (see below).
Hematoma size seems to be inversely related to 
the size of the AVM (Spetzler et al. 1992).
Location
The risk of bleeding of brain AVMs depending on 
their location has not been evaluated systematically. 
Some authors suggest that AVMs in deep locations, 
such as in the basal ganglia or in the periventricu-
lar or intraventricular space, have an increased 
risk of bleeding (Marks et al. 1990; Turjmann et 
al. 1995). Willinski et al. (1988) concluded that 
hemorrhage is more likely to occur in deep lesions 
and posterior fossa AVMs. However, Crawford et 
al. (1986) showed that the depth of the AVM had 
no inﬂ uence on the risk of hemorrhage. Moreover, 
the high prevalence of hemorrhage in deep-seated 
AVMs identiﬁ ed in some series may be partially 
explained by the fact that the patients are less likely 
to present with focal neurologic deﬁ cits or seizure 
disorders.
The results published by Stapf et al. (2000) sug-
gest that an arterial border zone location of brain 
AVMs is an independent determinant of lower risk 
of incident AVM hemorrhage.
Angiogenesis
This factor was deﬁ ned as transdural anastomosis 
or secondarily acquired perilesional angiogenesis 
(Mansmann et al. 2000). When it is combined with 
arterial stenosis or dural venous stenosis, this factor 
may increase the risk of intracranial hemorrhage.
Venous Drainage
Deep Venous Drainage
Deep venous drainage is associated with a higher 
risk of bleeding (Marks et al. 1990; Miyasaka et al. 
1992; Kader et al. 1994; Nataf et al. 1997; Duong et 
al. 1998). Superﬁ cial and deep venous drainage are 
different from an anatomic point of view. The veins 
of the central drainage have one ﬁ nal common path-
way which is the vein of Galen and the straight sinus. 
On the other hand, superﬁ cial veins have more con-
nections and may drain posteriorly via the superior 
sagittal sinus and anteriorly via the sylvian vein. The 
superﬁ cial venous system is probably more ﬂ exible 
in adaptation to the hemodynamic situation created 
by the presence of the AVM.
Venous Stenosis
The presence of a stenosis on the venous drainage of 
a brain AVM is associated with an increased risk of 
bleeding (Miyasaka et al. 1992; Nataf et al. 1997), 
probably due to proximal venous hypertension. 
This factor was also identiﬁ ed in the large series 
of patients analyzed by Mansmann et al. (2000), 
but venous stenosis was not statistically associated 
with intracranial hemorrhage for cortical AVMs. Ve-
nous dilatation was correlated to an increased risk 
of hemorrhagic presentation in dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stulas (Cognard et al. 1995).
The suggested mechanisms for venous stenosis 
in AVMs are varied: endovascular proliferation in 
reaction to increased venous ﬂ ow or pressure (Fry 
1968), congenital extrinsic anatomic narrowing of 
the lumen as it traverses the dura mater or curves 
around bone (Crawford et al. 1986; Willinsky 
et al. 1988), kinking in ectatic veins (Nataf et al. 
1997).
Others
The presence of a single draining vein may be associ-
ated with an increased risk of bleeding (Miyasaka 
et al. 1992; Pollock et al. 1996).
Venous reﬂ ux into a sinus or a deep vein seems to 
be positively correlated with the risk of hemorrhage 
(Nataf et al. 1997), but this feature has seldom been 
studied. In contrast, venous recruitment seems to be 
protective against bleeding.
Venous ectasia may be intra- or paranidal and the 
sign of a previous hemorrhage. Venous ectasia may 
also be remote from the nidus. The link between ve-
nous ectasia and bleeding is unclear (Nataf et al. 
1997).
Hemodynamic Factors
Feeding Artery Pressures
In a relatively small series of patients, Spetzler et 
al. (1992) evaluated the perfusion pressure of AVM 
arterial feeders. The difference between mean arte-
rial blood pressure and the feeding artery pressure 
was higher in ruptured than in non-ruptured AVMs. 
Moreover, smaller AVMs had signiﬁ cantly higher 
feeding artery pressure than larger AVMs and were 
associated with larger hematomas. These results 
were partially conﬁ rmed by Kader et al. (1994), who 

60 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
found that patients presenting with hemorrhage had 
higher feeding artery pressure than patients in the 
nonhemorrhage group. The feeding artery pressure 
was only weakly related to the size of the lesion, but 
measurements were performed only in medium and 
large-sized AVMs.
In a large series of patients, Duong et al. (1998) 
also found that feeding arterial pressure was posi-
tively correlated with the occurrence of bleeding.
In the study performed by Norbash et al. (1994), 
feeding arterial pressure was not statistically dif-
ferent in the hemorrhage and nonhemorrhage 
groups and was not related to the size. A non-sta-
tistically signiﬁ cant trend to decreasing feeding 
arterial pressures from AVMs having a central ve-
nous drainage to those having peripheral venous 
drainage was observed. Moreover, the feeding arte-
rial pressure was lower when the feeding artery was 
longer, and the length of the feeding artery was also 
correlated to the type of venous drainage (deep or 
superﬁ cial).
Draining Vein Pressures
The draining vein pressure did not differ between 
patients with hemorrhage and those without (Kader 
et al. 1994).
3.3.2.2 
Factors Decreasing the Risk of Bleeding
Very few studies have evaluated anatomic factors 
decreasing the risk of bleeding of a brain AVM. Two 
factors were identiﬁ ed on the arterial side as having 
a protective effect against bleeding (Mansmann et 
al. 2000):
1. Arterial stenosis, which is deﬁ ned as a reduction 
in arterial caliber and could be intrinsic (con-
centric narrowing by intraluminal protrusions 
related to high-ﬂ ow angiopathy) or extrinsic 
(bony, dural or venous compression)
2. Arterial angioectasia, which is deﬁ ned as seg-
mental arterial capillary dilatation in the col-
lateral system in the vicinity of the AVMs (with 
recruitment and enlargement of leptomeningeal 
and subependymal anastomoses) and hemody-
namic enlargement of preexisting feeding arter-
ies.
These two factors probably contribute to the de-
crease of the pressure inside the nidus.
Arteriovenous ﬁ stulas, deﬁ ned as large arterio-
venous communications between the arterial and 
venous components of AVMs with high ﬂ ow velocity 
and a visible shunting transition, seem to be also as-
sociated with a lower risk of bleeding (Mansmann 
et al. 2000).
In summary, several factors have been identi-
ﬁ ed which potentially modify the risk of bleeding of 
brain AVMs. However, there is clearly a general bias 
in many studies regarding the evaluation of bleeding 
rates. Indeed, some anatomic characteristics identi-
ﬁ ed as increasing the risk of bleeding are also related 
to a less frequent nonhemorrhagic presentation such 
as epilepsy or focal deﬁ cit, e.g., small size of the 
AVM, deep location, and deep venous drainage. If a 
group of brain AVMs can be only asymptomatic or 
hemorrhagic, then the percentage of bleeding in this 
group will be 100%, except if asymptomatic AVMs 
are detected for any reason by CT or MRI.
3.3.2.3 
Annual Rate of Bleeding
The natural history of brain AVMs has been studied 
in different series of untreated patients (Graf et al. 
1983; Fults and Kelly 1984; Crawford et al. 1986; 
Brown et al. 1988; Itoyama et al. 1989; Ondra et 
al. 1990). There are a number of biases in these dif-
ferent studies:
Generally, studies were conducted at centers spe-
cializing in the treatment of cerebrovascular dis-
orders, thus creating a recruitment bias.
The number of patients included in these series is 
usually small (50–343 patients).
In the majority of series, natural history was stud-
ied in the group of patients managed nonsurgi-
cally, and this is a very important recruitment 
bias.
Most studies are retrospective.
For all these reasons, we have to be careful with 
the data provided by these series.
Graf et al. (1983) reported a series of 191 patients 
presenting with unruptured or ruptured AVMs. 
The average yearly risk of bleeding was estimated 
to be between 2% and 3%. Crawford et al. (1986) 
reported a series of 217 patients harboring AVMs 
who were managed without surgery with a mean fol-
low-up period of 10.4 years. There was 42% risk of 
hemorrhage, 29% risk of death, 18% risk of epilepsy, 
and 27% risk of having a neurological handicap at 
20 years after diagnosis.
Brown et al. (1988) reported a series of 168 pa-
tients with unruptured AVMs followed for a mean 





 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
61
period of 8.2 years. The mean risk of hemorrhage 
was estimated to 2.2% per year. The risk of death 
from rupture was 29%.
The series of Ondra et al. (1990) included 166 
patients with a mean follow-up of 24 years (Ondra 
et al. 1990). The annual rate of bleeding was 4% per 
year and the mortality was 1% per year. The com-
bined rate of major morbidity and mortality was 
2.7% per year. Overall, the percentages are rela-
tively close between the different series, with an-
nual rates of bleeding between 2% and 4% (Jomin 
et al. 1993).
The occurrence of a ﬁ rst hemorrhage seems to 
be associated with an increased risk of subsequent 
hemorrhage (Graf et al. 1983; Itoyama et al. 1989; 
Mast et al. 1997). In the series of Graf et al. (1983), 
patients with ruptured AVMs had a 6% risk of re-
bleeding in the ﬁ rst year after hemorrhage and 2% 
thereafter. Itoyama et al. (1989) found relatively 
similar results. The incidence of rebleeding after a 
ﬁ rst hemorrhage is 6.9% in the ﬁ rst year, 1.9% per 
year after 5 years and 0.9% after 15 years.
Pregnancy does not appear to increase signiﬁ -
cantly the likelihood of hemorrhage from an AVM 
(Finnerty et al. 1999). In a large retrospective 
study of 451 women (Horton et al. 1990), the hem-
orrhage rate for pregnant and nonpregnant women 
of childbearing age with an unruptured AVM was 
respectively 0.035 per person-year and 0.032 per 
person-year. Women with an AVM have a 3.5% risk 
of hemorrhage during pregnancy. In this series, 
none of the hemorrhages occurred during labor, 
vaginal delivery, or Cesarean section. Thus, the 
route of delivery should be based on obstetric con-
siderations (Horton et al. 1990; Dias and Sekhar 
1990).
3.3.2.4 
Severity of the Hemorrhage
On the basis of retrospective analysis, the rupture 
of brain AVMs is estimated to be less severe than 
that of intracranial aneurysms, with mortality be-
tween 10% and 15% and an overall morbidity of 
less than 50% (The Arteriovenous Malforma-
tion Study Group 1999). Hemorrhages of brain 
AVMs are subarachnoidal (30%), parenchymal 
(23%), intraventricular (16%), and in combined 
locations in 31% of cases (Hartmann et al. 1998). 
Parenchymal hemorrhages were most likely to re-
sult in a neurological deﬁ cit (52%). Overall, in the 
series of Hartmann et al. (1998), 47% of patients 
had a good outcome after the bleeding and an ad-
ditional 37% of patients were independent in their 
daily life.
In fact, as was shown by Hillman (2001), the 
rupture of an AVM is as devastating as that of an 
aneurysm. While aneurysm rupture is more lethal 
than AVM rupture (21% vs 9%), a good outcome is 
obtained less frequently in AVM than in aneurysm 
ruptures (49% vs 56%), due to the high incidence of 
parenchymal hematoma.
3.3.3 
Epilepsy
Seizures are the initial symptom in 16%–53% of pa-
tients, with a mean of 34% (Mast et al. 1995). In the 
majority of cases, seizures are focal or focal complex 
(Osipov et al. 1997). Grand mal seizures are encoun-
tered in 27%–35% of cases (Osipov et al. 1997).
Cortical AVMs are more often associated with 
seizures (Turjman et al. 1995). In a large number 
of cases antiepileptic drugs provide good control of 
seizures (Osipov et al. 1997).
3.3.4 
Headache
Chronic headache is the initial symptom in 7%–48% 
(mean: 31%) of cases (Mast et al. 1995). The relation 
between headache, migraine, and arteriovenous 
malformations is unclear. In a large review of the 
literature, Frishberg (1997)concluded that “while 
most patients with AVM who have headache have 
it on the side of the AVM, migraine patients with 
strictly unilateral location of headache are very un-
likely to have an AVM”.
There is no feature such as frequency, duration, 
or severity suggesting the diagnosis of AVM (The 
Arteriovenous Malformation Study Group 
1999).
3.3.5 
Focal Neurologic Defi cits
Focal neurologic deﬁ cits without hemorrhage are the 
initial symptom in 1%–40% of patients (Mast et al. 
1995). In fact, this clinical presentation is probably 
infrequent (The Arteriovenous  Malformation 
Study Group 1999). As outlined by Mast et al. 

62 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Fig. 3.2a–f. A 14-year-old girl presenting with sudden headaches and deﬁ cit of right lower limb. a CT-scan shows a subcor-
tical frontoparietal hematoma with hypodense structures. b Proton density MR, ﬂ ow void serpiginous structures anterior 
to the hematoma very evocative of brain AVM. c Time of ﬂ ight (TOF) angio-MR shows feeding arteries and nidus size and 
morphology. d Phase contrast (PC) angio-MR shows nidus and draining veins. Combined information from TOF and PC 
concerning arterial feeders, nidus, and venous drainage morphology were considered accurate enough to plan treatment. 
Embolization was decided on ﬁ rst and was performed 3 months after bleeding. Digital angiography in lateral and AP view 
(e, f) was done with the patient under general anesthesia at beginning of embolization. Retrospectively, AVM architecture 
was very precisely analyzed on angio-MR
(1995), focal neurologic deﬁ cits encountered in pa-
tients harboring brain AVMs may be progressive, 
stable, or reversible. Reversible focal neurologic 
deﬁ cits are questionable regarding their mecha-
nism, since a post-ictal etiology cannot be ruled 
out. The progression of neurologic deﬁ cit may have 
different explanations: steal phenomenon (Carter 
and Gumerlock 1995), venous hypertension, or 
mass effect (Miyasaka et al. 1997). The relevance 
of the steal phenomenon is in fact very difﬁ cult to 
demonstrate in patients presenting with progres-
sive neurologic deﬁ cits (Mast et al. 1995). Indeed, 
positron emission tomography studies (Fink 1992; 
Kaminaga et al. 1999) showed a decrease of cere-
bral blood ﬂ ow in brain tissues surrounding AVMs, 
but without increase in parenchymal blood volume 
or modiﬁ cations of glucose and oxygen extraction 
fractions.
Mass effect is detected in a relatively high per-
centage of nonhemorrhagic cases (44%, Miyasaka 
et al. 1997). Cortical sulci obliteration and lateral 
ventricle displacement are frequently observed. 
Mass effect could be related to the size of the AVM 
itself or to the presence of large dilated venous sacs 
or ectatic veins. White-matter edema is rarely the 
cause of mass effect.
 3.4 
Diagnostic Imaging
3.4.1 
Goals of Imaging
Imaging has several roles and goals:
1. To establish the diagnosis of brain AVM in vari-
ous clinical situations
2. To make a pretherapeutic evaluation of the AVM 
to help in decision-making
3. To treat the AVM as a sole therapy or in associa-
tion with surgery or radiosurgery
4. To perform post-therapeutic evaluation
3.4.2 
Imaging Modalities
3.4.2.1 
CT Scan
In patients with a sudden-onset of a neurological 
deﬁ cit, a CT scan is usually the ﬁ rst imaging modal-
ity used, mainly to rule out hemorrhage (Ducreux 
et al. 2001). CT is able to show very early parenchy-
mal, subarachnoid, and intraventricular bleeding. 
The diagnosis of brain AVM should be discussed 
when the patient is young, if the parenchymal hema-
toma has a lobar topography, and if calciﬁ cations or 
spontaneously hyperdense serpiginous structures 
are visible (Fig. 3.2).
In case of unruptured AVM, non-contrast-en-
hanced CT scans can be normal. However, in some 
patients slightly hyperdense serpiginous structures 
can be seen (Fig. 3.3). Parenchymatous calciﬁ cations 
are observed in 20% of cases, related to intravascular 
thrombosis or evolution of an old hematoma. Contrast 
agent injection is absolutely mandatory to depict the 
brain AVM (Figs. 3.4 and 3.5) on CT. Abnormalities of 
the parenchymal density are visible in approximately 
25% of cases, related to the presence of gliosis or an old 
hematoma. Abnormalities of the ventricular system 
can be observed: focal dilatation in case of associated 
parenchymal atrophy; compression of the ventricular 
system in case of mass effect caused by the AVM. Hy-
drocephalus can be observed in case of previous hem-
orrhage or if the ventricular system is compressed by 
enlarged draining veins of the AVM.
The role of CT angiography in the diagnostic 
workup of brain AVMs is not precisely deﬁ ned. Aoki 
et al. (1998) showed that 3D CT angiography provided 
precise anatomic information on nidus and draining 
veins but did not demonstrate small feeders.
In patients with a large hematoma for which emer-
gency evacuation is necessary, CTA may be useful 
to detect a brain AVM preoperatively and thus give 
the surgeon some idea about the surgical strategy to 
be followed. However, small AVMs can be misdiag-
nosed by this technique.

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
63
e
c
a
b
d
f
Fig. 3.2a–f. 

64 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
e
c
a
b
d
f
Fig. 3.3a–f. A 46-year-old man who presented with a parenchymal frontal hematoma in 1976, resulting in a slight residual 
right hemiparesis predominating at the level of the lower limb. The patient came to our department in 2000 complaining of 
progressive worsening of the deﬁ cit, conﬁ rmed by repeated clinical examination during the preceding 6 months. Contrast 
CT scan shows an AVM of the left medial frontal lobe with calciﬁ cations (a) and an aneurysm of the anterior communicat-
ing (Acom) artery (b). Digital angiography shows Acom aneurysm and huge frontoparietal AVM fed by both anterior and 
middle cerebral artery branches and deeply involving the white matter (c, d). Acom aneurysm was considered the weakest 
point and treated ﬁ rst (e, f). Treatment was difﬁ cult due to aneurysm neck size and high ﬂ ow. Oversized coils were neces-
sary to keep them in the aneurysm cavity. The AVM is still under an embolization protocol with the aim of reducing AVM 
volume and ﬂ ow to improve progressively worsening symptoms

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
65
Fig. 3.4a–j. A 42-year-old woman 
presenting with two episodes of 
seizures. Pre- and post-contrast CT 
scans (a, b) show a right temporal 
AVM. A slightly hyperdense struc-
ture is visible before and, strongly 
enhanced, after injection. Frontal 
and axial T2 images perfectly local-
ize the AVM within the white matter 
of the right temporal lobe, but deter-
mination of the nidus border is dif-
ﬁ cult (c, d). A 3D TOF image does 
not show the nidus limits precisely 
and affords poor understanding of 
the AVM architecture (e). Digital 
angiography performed during em-
bolization shows the arterial feed-
ers, nidus size and venous drain-
age much better (f). Superselective 
injection during embolization al-
lows a much better understanding 
of nidus arteriovenous architecture. 
Distal catheterization shows imme-
diate opaciﬁ cation of draining veins 
(g). Such arteriovenous anatomy 
allows very efﬁ cient embolization 
with easy gluing of origin of drain-
ing veins (h). Three and 18 months 
after second embolization, follow-
up angiography showed complete 
occlusion (i, j)
g
a
c
e
b
d
f
i
h
j

66 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
3.4.2.2 
MR
Patients presenting with ruptured AVMs are usually 
examined in the acute phase by a CT scan. MRI is 
currently used in case of unruptured AVM or to ﬁ nd 
the underlying lesion in case of lobar hematoma, 
generally days or weeks after the bleeding.
Given the different sequences available in MR im-
aging, MRI is able to give three levels of analysis of 
the AVM:
Anatomic analysis using conventional sequences
Vascular analysis using MR angiography
Functional analysis using fMRI



Anatomic Analysis
Conventional sequences (T1, T2, T1 with gadolinium) 
enable a very precise analysis of the brain AVM 
(Smith et al. 1988b). On T1- and T2-weighted images, 
circulating vessels have no signal because of the ﬂ ow 
void phenomenon (Fig. 3.5). On T1-weighted images 
with gadolinium, vessels are enhanced.
The size and the anatomic location of the nidus 
are precisely delineated by MRI (Figs. 3.4 and 3.6). 
Smith et al. (1988) showed that the size of the nidus 
was more precisely shown by MRI than by conven-
tional angiography. Anatomic location was always 
better deﬁ ned by MRI than by angiography. Depic-
Fig. 3.5a–d. A 63-year-old woman presenting with common headaches. Post-contrast CT scan shows an abnormal vessel 
within the right temporal lobe (a). Axial proton density image shows enlarged ﬂ ow void vessel (b). Digital angiography 
depicts a very small superﬁ cial temporal AVM draining into a single, slightly dilated, superﬁ cial vein (c, d). AVM is sup-
plied by very short “en passage” feeders. Due to patient’s age, absence of symptoms, and AVM morphology no therapy was 
planned
a
c
b
d

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
67
a
c
e
b
d
f
Fig. 3.6a–f. A 27-year-old man presenting with a small deep hematoma with ventricular hemorrhage. Axial proton density 
MR image shows a left temporopolar small brain AVM (a) and the hematoma in a remote, more posterior location at the 
medial aspect of the left temporal lobe (b). Internal carotid injection shows the temporal AVM with a deep venous drain-
age (c). An intranidal aneurysm or false aneurysm is visible; this must be considered the most likely cause of the bleeding 
and should be the ﬁ rst target of embolization. Superselective catheterization of the lenticulostriate artery harboring the 
aneurysm allowed gluing of both aneurysm and AVM (d). Final follow-up angiography after four embolizations showed 
incomplete obliteration of the AVM with disappearance of any nidus but persistent early venous drainage (e, f)

68 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Fig. 3.7a–i. A 34-year-old man who presented with a ﬁ rst episode of 
bleeding in 1985 from a deep brain AVM. The patient was treated with ra-
diosurgery. He presented a new hemorrhage in 1987, with major clinical 
consequences (right severe hemiparesis and aphasia). a Axial T2 image 
performed in 1998 shows deep paraventricular AVM with old hematoma 
of left striatum and posterior limb of internal capsule. Three-dimen-
sional TOF angio-MR in sagittal and frontal views (b, c) allows good 
delineation of nidus limits and angioarchitecture evaluation. Digital 
angiography by internal carotid injection in AP view (d) and vertebral 
injection in sagittal view (e) provide the same information about feeders, 
nidus shape and architecture, and drainage. Very early phase of verte-
bral injection depicts a small intranidal aneurysm or false aneurysm of 
distal thalamo-perforating artery; this was considered a weak point of 
the malformation and treated ﬁ rst (f). Superselective catheterization of 
posterolateral choroidal arteries performed immediately after thalamo-
perforating artery and aneurysm gluing showed intranidal wedge posi-
tioning of catheter tip (g). Late venous phase of this injection showed 
intraventricular hemorrhage. Glue injection was performed immediately 
after bleeding was recognized (h). Post-embolization CT scan conﬁ rmed 
intraventricular hemorrhage but no parenchymal hematoma (i). Exter-
nal ventricular shunting was performed just after embolization. Patient 
was awakened 3 days later and showed moderate worsening of initial 
symptoms. At 3-month follow-up examination he had completely recov-
ered his initial clinical status
tion of arterial feeders and draining veins is often 
incomplete with conventional sequences.
MRI is also a good tool to clearly demonstrate 
parenchymal lesions caused by the AVM. Because 
of the high sensibility to hemosiderin, MR is able to 
depict a recent, but also an old hematoma (Fig. 3.7). 
However, the presence of a recent hematoma may 
mask a small AVM leading to a false-negative MR 
(Fig. 3.8). In the absence of hemorrhage, perinidal 
abnormalities of signal, particularly hypersignal 
on T2-weighted images, can be evidence of perini-
dal ischemic changes or gliosis. Fluid-attenuated 
inversion-recovery sequence (FLAIR) seems to 
be superior to the conventional T2-weighted fast 
spin-echo sequences in the assessment of intral-
esional and perilesional gliosis (Essig et al. 2000). 
More precisely than CT, MR is able to depict either 
morphological changes induced by the AVM itself 
or its parenchymal or ventricular consequences: 
parenchymal atrophy with focal dilatation of the 
ventricular system; compression of the ventricular 
system in case of mass effect caused by the AVM; 
hydrocephalus in case of previous hemorrhage or 
if the ventricular system is compressed by enlarged 
draining veins of the AVM.
Vascular Analysis
Until recently, only phase-contrast and time-of-
ﬂ ight techniques were available to study the vascu-
lar system (Fig. 3.2). These have been demonstrated 
to be of value in providing three-dimensional 
representations of AVM vascular architecture 
( Marchal et al. 1990). However, these techniques 
a
c
b
 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
69
g
h
e
d
f
i

70 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Fig. 3.8a–f. A 42-year-old woman who presented with sudden headaches 
and aphasia at 7 months of pregnancy. CT scan showed a left temporal 
hematoma. Digital angiography was performed and considered normal 
(not available). Pregnancy was carried out to term and cesarean delivery 
was performed. She progressively recovered and came to our institution 
3 months later. CT-scan and MR were performed at that time. CT scan 
showed chronic hypodense hematoma (a). MR T1 and T2 axial images 
showed hyperintense signal within the hematoma due to extracellular 
methemoglobin (b, c). Three-dimensional TOF MIP reconstruction was 
normal (d). Both axial conventional images and angio-MR were consid-
ered not accurate enough to rule out a small AVM. Digital angiography 
depicts a small left temporal micro-AVM (e). Superselective catheteriza-
tion allowed more precise understanding of nidus morphology (f). More 
distal catheterization did not obtain wedge positioning of catheter tip 
and good control of the ﬂ ow. Consequently, embolization was not per-
formed and the patient was treated with radiosurgery
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
71
have limited anatomic coverage and are not able 
to adequately depict the precise anatomy in a large 
number of cases: The correct size of the nidus can-
not be assessed (Fig. 3.4); intranidal aneurysms are 
frequently not visible (Fig. 3.7); depiction of the 
draining veins is inconsistent (Fig. 3.9); small-cal-
iber vessels and regions of slow blood ﬂ ow cannot 
be consistently revealed (Fig. 3.9) (Edelman et al. 
1989; Marchal et al. 1990; Nüssel et al. 1991). 
Moreover, dynamic information is not provided by 
these sequences.
Multiple overlapping thin-slab acquisition time-
of-ﬂ ight MR allows greater anatomic coverage and 
produces better signal-to-noise ratio and higher 
resolution than conventional MR angiography, but 
slab boundary artifacts represent a major limitation 
(Liu and Rutt 1998; Warren et al. 2001).
Gadolinium-enhanced MRA techniques are cur-
rently in development which are superior to TOF MR 
angiograms but still inferior to DSA images for de-
piction of AVM components because of limitations 
in both temporal and spatial resolution ( Takano et 
Fig. 3.9a–d. A 51-year-old woman who presented with a left 
hematoma of the posterior limb of the internal and external 
capsule in 1985, with subsequent slight right hemiparesis 
and lateral right hemianopia. Digital angiography was per-
formed in 1985 and 1994 and showed a sylvian ﬁ ssure AVM. 
Due to the angioarchitecture, no treatment was decided on 
at that time. The patient returned in 1999 and complained 
about recurrent episodes of right side hemiparesthesia. Ax-
ial T2 images done at that time showed sequelae of a deep 
hematoma and abnormal vessels along the wall of the pos-
terior aspect of the lateral ventricle (a). Three-dimensional 
TOF angio-MR depicts very small abnormal vessels arising 
from left middle and posterior cerebral arteries (b). Left 
internal carotid injection shows an AVM extending into the 
left sylvian ﬁ ssure supplied by numerous small “en passage” 
feeders coming from the branches of the middle cerebral 
artery (c). Venous drainage is very abnormal, with a large 
ectatic vein draining into a single small narrowed vein to 
the transverse sinus (d). Embolization was considered in-
appropriate due to the arterial feeder anatomy. Patient was 
sent to radiosurgery
a
c
b
d

72 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
al. 1999; Grifﬁ ths et al. 2000; Warren et al. 2001; 
Farb et al. 2001).
Functional Analysis
Functional MRI (fMRI) includes perfusion and dif-
fusion imaging and study of brain function.
The role of DWI has to be determined (Ducreux 
et al. 2001). The nidus usually has a low signal with 
a large and homogeneous increase of the apparent 
diffusion coefﬁ cient (ADC). However, to date DWI 
does not play a major role in AVMs.
Perfusion MRI is an additional tool, but its role 
in brain AVMs is also still unclear. It may be pos-
sible to evaluate hemodynamic characteristics of 
different AVMs, but no scientiﬁ c data are currently 
available.
Functional MRI activation has been studied 
largely in patients with brain AVMs (Latchaw et 
al. 1995; Maldjian et al. 1996; Schlosser et al. 
1997; Vikingstad et al. 2000; Lazar et al. 2000; 
Alkadhi et al. 2000; Carpentier et al. 2001). 
fMRI activation is a potentially very interesting 
tool to depict functional areas of the brain, when a 
brain AVM is located in an eloquent area, particu-
larly sensorimotor, visual, and language cortex. 
Bold sequences used for the performance of fMRI 
activation are based primarily on the detection of 
hemodynamic changes in the cortex during the per-
formance of a task. Given the huge hemodynamic 
modiﬁ cations induced by the AVM in the perinidal 
parenchyma, there is some doubt regarding fMRI 
activation  patterns.
In the great majority of cases, no activation is 
detected inside the nidus during the performance 
of a task. This could be related to the absence of 
functional tissue within the nidus, but the detec-
tion of subtle and minor activation within an AVM 
could also be obscured by the complex relation-
ships between the BOLD effect and AVM circula-
tory patterns (Vikingstad et al. 2000). Activation 
can be observed in the cortical regions adjacent to 
AVMs. In the majority of cases where brain AVMs 
are located in eloquent areas, a shift of the activated 
areas with a frequent interhemispheric transfer is 
observed.
A tudy showed a discrepancy between the su-
perselective Wada test and fMRI activation in a 
patient with a left frontal brain AVM (Lazar et al. 
2000). An area which was activated during fMRI 
was not detected as a language area by the Wada 
test.
Thus, fMRI activation has a potential for the 
study of brain function in brain AVMs, but larger 
series are necessary to evaluate the liability of this 
technique.
3.4.2.3 
Selective and Superselective Angiography
As shown in Section 3.3.2.1, many anatomic factors 
have to be analyzed to evaluate the risk of rupture 
of an AVM and to decide which treatment is ap-
propriate. Despite recent developments, CTA and 
MRA are currently not sufﬁ cient to obtain a pre-
cise description of the AVM from an anatomic and 
hemodynamic point of view. Selective angiography 
is still always necessary to make a decision regard-
ing the treatment. In summary: the diagnosis of 
an AVM nowadays is usually based on CT or MR; 
the exact and therapeutically relevant anatomic and 
functional information still has to be obtained by 
catheter angiography.
Technically, selective angiography has to be per-
formed according to a rigorous protocol. To assess 
as precisely as possible the anatomic components 
of the AVM, it is important to inject selectively the 
internal and external carotid arteries and vertebral 
arteries. Analysis of the arterial feeders, nidus, 
and venous drainage is obtained by performing 
multiple projections (anteroposterior, lateral, and 
oblique). Three-dimensional angiography may be 
helpful.
However, even excellent angiograms are often in-
adequate for reaching correct therapeutic decisions 
(Nakstad and Nornes 1994). The exact anatomy of 
large feeding arteries may be obscure with selective 
injections. Small feeding arteries are sometimes not 
visible on selective angiograms. Although the size of 
the nidus is generally well evaluated by selective an-
giography, intranidal aneurysms (Fig. 3.7) and di-
rect intranidal AV ﬁ stulas are often misdiagnosed. 
The venous drainage of the AVM is generally well 
studied by selective angiography, but the compart-
ments of the AVM and their venous drainage are of-
ten not depicted because the AVM is injected as a 
whole (Fig. 3.4).
For all these reasons, superselective angiog-
raphy often gives a more detailed analysis of the 
AVM and may become more important in making 
the diagnosis. Superselective angiography is per-
formed by manual injection of each separate arte-
rial feeder. It is usually the ﬁ rst step of emboliza-
tion.

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
73
3.4.3 
Imaging Strategy
Imaging strategy is closely related to the clinical 
presentation (rupture of the AVM or not) and the 
clinical status of the patient.
3.4.3.1 
Ruptured AVM
In this situation, the patient has the clinical presen-
tation of a parenchymal hematoma or a subarach-
noid hemorrhage or both. The ﬁ rst examination is 
the CT scan, which has a high sensibility to detect 
intracranial hemorrhage in the acute phase with a 
high speciﬁ city.
Contrast-enhanced CT scan and CT angiogra-
phy are becoming more useful. Small AVMs may be 
mistaken by CTA and the anatomic data provided 
by this technique are often not sufﬁ cient to make a 
therapeutic decision. In patients with a large space-
occupying hematoma CTA can be performed to try 
to indicate to the neurosurgeon whether a brain 
AVM is the underlying cause of bleeding, before 
emergency surgery is performed.
With the exception of this speciﬁ c situation, the 
next step after the diagnosis of the hemorrhage is se-
lective angiography. In case of isolated subarachnoid 
hemorrhage or when a brain hematoma may be re-
lated to a ruptured aneurysm, it has to be performed 
emergently. In other cases, the time to perform an-
giography is a matter of debate. When an intrapa-
renchymal hematoma is present it can compress the 
AVM, leading in some cases to a false-negative di-
agnosis. For the same reasons, anatomic analysis in 
the acute phase may be erroneous. Therefore, selec-
tive angiography should probably be delayed. How-
ever, angiography is often performed at the acute 
phase of bleeding to obtain a deﬁ nite diagnosis 
and to have all the information at hand concerning 
the AVM in case the patient’s clinical status should 
worsen, requiring prompt surgery. Moreover, when 
the cause of bleeding is unclear (AVM or associated 
aneurysm), angiography is also important to deter-
mine if an associated aneurysm is present, and in 
such instances angiographic criteria combined with 
CT or MR ﬁ ndings may be helpful to determine the 
site of bleeding (Fig. 3.6).
After the acute phase of bleeding, the therapeutic 
approach to the AVM will be deﬁ ned on the basis of 
anatomic data provided by MRI and selective angi-
ography (Figs. 3.2 and 3.7).
3.4.3.2 
Unruptured AVM
For an unruptured AVM, CT is not indicated; the ﬁ rst 
step is MRI and MRA to obtain all the information 
needed to make a therapeutic decision. In a great num-
ber of cases, clinical data, MRI, and MRA are sufﬁ cient 
to make a decision regarding therapeutic options: – in 
some cases, it is clear that treatment should be conser-
vative, and in this situation selective angiography is 
not needed; in other cases, the AVM has to be treated 
and the next step depends on the therapeutic strategy. 
If embolization is the ﬁ rst step of treatment, there is no 
reason to perform ﬁ rst a selective angiogram and then 
superselective angiography and embolization. In this 
situation, complete information has to be given to the 
patient and selective, superselective angiography and 
the ﬁ rst embolization have to be performed at the same 
time. If surgery is the modality of choice, selective an-
giography has to be performed ﬁ rst. If radiosurgery is 
indicated as the sole treatment, selective angiography 
has to be performed immediately before treatment for 
stereotactic localization of the AVM.
In some cases, the therapeutic decision is not 
clear after MRI and MRA, and selective angiography 
is performed to make a decision.
3.4.4 
Classifi cation of Brain AVMs
Several systems have been designed to classify 
patients with brain AVMs regarding surgical risk 
(Spetzler et al. 1992) and individual hemorrhagic 
risk (Nataf et al. 1998).
3.4.4.1 
Classifi cation of Spetzler and Martin
The Spetzler and Martin (1986) classiﬁ cation was 
established to grade AVMs according to their degree 
of surgical difﬁ culty and the risk of surgical mor-
bidity and mortality. To assign an AVM grade, the 
size, the venous drainage, and the eloquence of the 
adjacent brain are determined from angiography, 
computed tomography, and MRI. A numerical value 
is assigned for each of the categories:
1. Size of the AVM: small (< 3 cm): 1; 
medium (3–6 cm): 2; large (> 6 cm): 3
2. Eloquence of adjacent brain: 
non-eloquent: 0; eloquent: 1
3. Pattern of venous drainage: 
superﬁ cial only: 0; deep: 1

74 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
The grade of the lesion is obtained by summing 
up the points assigned for each category. As previ-
ously outlined, the Spetzler-Martin grading system 
is clearly a surgical one and is of little value for in-
terventional neuroradiologists and radiotherapists 
(Mansmann et al. 2000).
3.4.4.2 
Classifi cation of Nataf et al.
Based on a retrospective study of 250 consecutive 
patients treated by radiotherapy, the classiﬁ cation of 
Nataf et al. (1998) was established to evaluate indi-
vidually the risk of hemorrhage. Five angiographic 
parameters were considered to be determinants of 
the bleeding risk, leading to a four-grade classiﬁ ca-
tion:
Grade I: 
No risk factor
 
Ia: 
With venous recruitment
 
Ib: Without venous recruitment
Grade II: 
Venous stenosis or venous reﬂ ux
Grade III: Deep venous drainage only
Grade IV: Intra- or juxtanidal aneurysm
In the series mentioned, there were 13% of hemor-
rhages in grade Ia, 38% in grade Ib, 48% in grade II, 
and 90% in grades III and IV.
 3.5 
Therapy
3.5.1 
Neurosurgery
Neurosurgery may be indicated in emergency to 
remove a large life-threatening hematoma. Only 
superﬁ cial AVMs, more easy to control, may be re-
moved with the hematoma. When surgery of a brain 
AVM is difﬁ cult, the hematoma may be removed 
and the treatment strategy may then be decided 
without hurry regarding AVM location, size, and 
architecture. Treatment of AVM is then performed 
later, after the patient has recovered. Very few papers 
report patient outcome after early surgical treat-
ment of intracerebral hemorrhage caused by AVMs 
(Lamy et al. 1990; Jafar and Rezai 1994; Puzzilli 
et al. 1998). The numbers of patients are too small 
to allow any ﬁ rm conclusions. In the largest series 
of 24 operated patients there were 53% good results, 
25% comatose patients, and 21% deaths (Lamy et 
al. 1990).
3.5.1.1 
Elective Surgery
In a non-emergent situation surgery is elective, by 
the standard microsurgical technique with an op-
erating microscope (Ogilvy et al. 2001). Usually, 
the arterial feeders are attacked ﬁ rst, followed by 
the nidus, and only at the very end of treatment 
the draining veins (Yasargil 1988). The goal of 
surgery is complete cure, which should be proven 
by intraoperative and postoperative angiography. 
In case of residual AVM a new surgical approach 
should be considered immediately to avoid subse-
quent bleeding that may be favored by subtotal oc-
clusion of the nidus. Radiosurgery or embolization 
of postoperative residual AVM may be considered 
even if the ﬁ rst carries a risk of bleeding until com-
plete occlusion.
3.5.1.2 
Outcome of Direct Surgery
A recently published meta-analysis reviewed all se-
ries of more than 50 patients published since 1990 
(25 series, 2452 patients) (Castel and  Kantor 
2000). The clinical presentation was hemorrhage 
in 57% of cases. Global mortality varied from 0% 
to 15%, mean 3.3% (68 of the 2452 patients). It 
was below 5% in 81% of the reported cases. Post-
operative global morbidity was 1.5%–18.7%, mean 
8.6%. Hamilton and Spetzler (1994) made a pro-
spective study of 120 consecutive patients who un-
derwent complete microsurgical excision of their 
AVM, with or without previous embolization, to 
evaluate correlation between the Spetzler-Martin 
grade and clinical complications. Permanent ma-
jor morbidities were 0% for grades I–III, 21.9% for 
grade IV, and 16.7% for grade V. Deﬁ cit related 
to surgery and evaluated 6 weeks after operation 
was 0% in grade I, 4.2% in grade II, 2.8% in grade 
III, 31% in grade IV, and 50% in grade V. Mor-
tality directly related to surgery was 0%. Risk of 
surgery is quite well estimated by the Spetzler-
 Martin grading system, with a favorable outcome 
in 92%–100% grade I, 95% grade II, 88% grade III, 
73% grade IV, and 57% grade V ( Spetzler and 
Martin 1986; Heros et al. 1990). Series in which 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
75
patients were examined before surgery, postopera-
tively, and over the long term by independent neu-
rologists showed less good results: 124 prospective 
patients were studied by Hartmann et al. (2000). 
Postoperatively, 41% of the patients had new neu-
rological deﬁ cits, 15% disabling and 26% non-
disabling. At long-term follow up 38% of patients 
had surgery-related deﬁ cits, 6% disabling and 32% 
non-disabling. Morgan et al. (1993) reported a 
series of 112 patients with 44 small (< 2 cm), 43 
medium, and 25 large (> 4 cm) AVMs. There was 
3.6% mortality and 18% morbidity. Comparing 
their results with others, the authors stressed the 
considerable variation of results published in the 
literature, i.e., 0%–12.5% mortality and 3%–30% 
morbidity. This variation may be explained by se-
lection criteria for surgery as well as by methods 
of analysis. One example highlighted by Morgan 
was the 1.5% mortality in the series of Davis and 
Symon (1985), which would have been 10% if seven 
patients who died postoperatively and who had a 
poor neurological grade on admission had been 
included. In the series of Morgan the major cause 
of mortality and severe morbidity were neurologi-
cal deﬁ cits unrelated to hemorrhage or edema, 
normal pressure perfusion breakthrough, and 
intraoperative hemorrhage. Batjer et al. (1989a) 
deﬁ ned hyperemic complications as “unexpected 
brain swelling or hemorrhage unrelated to tech-
nical error or concealed ventricular hemorrhage, 
CT evidence of edema associated with neurologi-
cal deﬁ cits not related to inadvertent proximal 
vascular occlusion or intraoperative brain retrac-
tion, or hemorrhage after angiographically proven 
complete AVM resection”. They reported 13 cases 
(21%) in 62 patients operated on (seven dead or 
severely disabled). Spetzler et al. (1987), as well 
as Andrews and Wilson (1987), considered this 
complication to be sufﬁ ciently frequent in large 
AVMs that they proposed performing staged sur-
gical resection. Another series conﬁ rmed the cor-
relation between size, deep venous drainage, and 
the Spetzler-Martin scale (Schaller et al. 1998). 
In this series, 150 operated patients presented with 
15.3% surgical morbidity and early new deﬁ cits in 
39.3%, permanent new deﬁ cits in 10.6%, being sig-
niﬁ cant in 7.3%. There was statistical evidence of a 
trend to risk of poor surgical outcome across three 
categories: non-eloquent, less eloquent (ex: visual 
cortex), and highly eloquent (ex: brainstem, basal 
ganglia, precentral cortex). The authors empha-
sized that “eloquence of Spetzler-Martin classiﬁ -
cation should be divided in two categories of less 
eloquent and highly eloquent, which is important 
for risk analysis of the treatment of asymptomatic 
and deep-seated AVMs and for future trials com-
paring various treatment modalities”.
Small superﬁ cial AVMs may be operated on with 
a very low morbidity (1.5%–9.7%) (Pik and  Margan 
2000; Schaller et al. 1998; Sisit et al. 1993). In 
contrast, morbidity of deep-seated lesions is much 
higher, at 9% in 22 patients (Lawton et al. 1995), 
17% in 18 patients (De Oliveira et al. 1997), 20% 
in 22 patients (Sasaki et al. 1998), and 25% in 16 pa-
tients (U et al. 1992). Lawton et al. (1995) empha-
sized the role of preoperative embolization.  Sasaki 
et al. (1998) did not report any cases of surgical 
treatment of deep-seated lesion since 1990 and ad-
vised a multimodality approach. Surgery of poste-
rior fossa AVMs is supposed to be more dangerous. 
In the series of Drake et al. (1986), 8 (19.5%) of 41 
patients operated on died. In the series of 30 patients 
of Batjer et al. (1986), mortality was 7% and perma-
nent morbidity was 13%.
Surgery may be helped by two imaging facilities: 
In 8%–19% intraoperative angiography showed re-
sidual AVMs not suspected during surgery ( Munshi 
et al. 1999; Pietila et al. 1998). Nevertheless, the 
risk of cerebral angiography performed under dif-
ﬁ cult conditions during brain surgery should be 
taken into account. Computer-assisted resection 
for nidus deﬁ nition and depiction was described 
(Muacevic and Steiger 1999). It may allow a better 
understanding of AVMs and their relationship with 
adjacent brain structures as well as a better surgical 
approach.
Many papers have described the risk of recur-
rence of cerebral AVMs after complete AVM oc-
clusion conﬁ rmed by postoperative angiography 
(Sano et al. 1978; Kader et al. 1996; Lanzino et 
al. 1997; Fox 1997; Patil 1997; Freudenstein et 
al. 2001). Kondziolka et al. (1992) reported two 
recurrences in 70 patients who had undergone 
complete AVM resection, and 2 patients presented 
3 years later with recurrent hemorrhage. True re-
growth of brain AVM can be considered only in 
children. Postoperative vasospasm, thrombosis 
of arteries and veins, and, above all, delayed re-
cruitment of collateral arteries are the more likely 
explanations for the so-called recurrences. This 
emphasizes the role of delayed postoperative an-
giography, which should be performed 6 months 
to 1 year after surgery to assess a deﬁ nitively com-
plete cure.

76 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
3.5.2 
Radiosurgery
The concept of radiosurgery is to obtain a progres-
sive obliteration of nidal vessels by focusing a high 
radiation dose. It has proven to be equally safe and 
effective whatever the device used, gamma knife, 
cyclotron, or linear accelerator (Colombo et al. 
1989; Kjellberg 1989; Steiner 1988; Lunsford et 
al. 1991). Nataf et al. (2001a) recently reported a 
series of 705 patients treated by radiosurgery alone 
or in combination with embolization or surgery. The 
overall complete obliteration rate (OR) was 55%. The 
OR was correlated to size: 77% for nidus < 15 mm, 
62% for nidus between 15 mm and 25 mm, 44% for 
nidus > 25 mm; dose at reference isodose; minimal 
dose; and morphological parameters: presence of 
meningeal feeders, AV ﬁ stulas, plexiform angioar-
chitecture, arterial steal, arterial recruitment, deep 
exclusive drainage, venous ectasia, conﬂ uence or re-
ﬂ ux. Presence of a dural component with meningeal 
feeders decreased the OR from 58% to 33%. Embo-
lization was reported to be a “confusion factor not 
associated with OR”. At multivariate analysis only 
minimal dose and complete coverage of the AVM 
were correlated to OR. Mortality in that series was 
1.6%, mainly due to recurrent bleeding, which oc-
curred in 6.5% of the cases. Rate of recurrent bleed-
ing was 2.98%/year/patient. Neurological deﬁ cits re-
lated to radiosurgery and not related to hemorrhage 
were observed in 5.37% of the cases and were perma-
nent in 1.46% of the cases. This series summarizes 
well the current results of radiosurgery and major 
issues concerning rate of obliteration, factors related 
to success or failure, and complication rate.
A meta-analysis of the literature is difﬁ cult to per-
form because of: (a) the different techniques used, 
e.g., most teams nowadays use a high single dose at 
least for small AVMs, but the minimum target dose, 
treated volume, and target deﬁ nition may vary from 
one team to another; (b) very different patient selec-
tion with various AVM sizes, locations (lobar, deep, 
brain stem, choroidal or ventricular), and symptoms 
(bleeding or not); (c) different patient follow-up strat-
egy for evaluation of obliteration rate: up to 2 years, 
3 years or more, on angiography or MR, systematic 
or not. Nataf et al. (2001a) highlighted the fact that 
the rate of patients followed is very variable from 
one series to another: 55.6% for Kjellberg (1986), 
42%–64% for Steiner et al. (1992, 1993), 51.5% for 
Colombo et al. (1994), and 20.3% for Lunsford et 
al. (1991).
3.5.2.1 
Factors Infl uencing the Obliteration Rate After 
Radiosurgery
An evaluation of overall obliteration rate (OR) in 
the recent literature shows very different results, 
OR being 22% (Kjellberg 1986), 80% (Lunsford 
et al. 1991), 79%–86.5% (Steiner et al. 1992, 1993), 
88.9% (Aoki et al. 1996), or 64% (Schlienger et al. 
2000). These differences are explained mainly by 
selection criteria.
AVM volume: the AVM volume is certainly the 
main factor determining AVM cure (Betti and 
Munari 1992; Lunsford 1993; Colombo et al. 
1994). Friedman et al. (1995) reported an OR of 
70% in 37 of 57 patients with small AVMs. OR was 
90% at 2 years for AVMs < 2.5 cm (Colombo et 
al. 1994), 82% for AVMs < 2.2 cm (Kondziolka 
et al. 1993), and 94% for AVMs < 2 cm (Betti 
and Munari 1992). Pollock et al. (1996b) docu-
mented angiographic obliteration of only 27 (42%) 
of 65 Spetzler-Martin grade I and II AVMs. In the 
series of Steinberg et al. (1993), the OR was 94% 
at 2 years and 100% at 3 years for AVMs with a 
volume < 4 cc (20 mm diameter), 75% at 2 years 
and 95% at 3 years for volumes between 4 cc and 
25 cc, and 42% at 2 years and 73% at 3 years for 
volumes > 25 cc. Results concerning treatment of 
large AVMs were speciﬁ cally studied (Pan et al. 
2000; Friedman et al. 1996; Yamamoto et al. 1995; 
Nataf et al. 2001b). Pan et al. (2000) reviewed 240 
treated AVMs, classiﬁ ed as small (< 3 cc), medium 
(3–10 cc), and large (> 10 cc). Evaluated using the 
Kaplan-Meier method, the actual complete OR 
was 75% at 40 months. Complete ORs for small, 
medium, and large AVMs were 92%, 80%, and 
50%, respectively. In the group of large AVMs the 
OR was 77% for nidus of 10–15 cc and 25% for 
nidus > 15 cc. The latency for complete oblitera-
tion was signiﬁ cantly longer for large AVMs. There 
was no signiﬁ cant correlation between AVM size 
and the occurrence of neurological complications. 
Friedman et al. (1996) reported an OR of 69% for 
AVMs larger than 10 cc. In the series of Nataf, in 
112 patients with an AVM > 10 cc the OR was 39%. 
Miyawaki et al. (1999) reported an OR of 23% for 
AVMs > 14 cc. None of the AVMs which received a 
minimal dose below 14 Gy were cured, but induced 
radionecrosis necessitated surgical excision in 22% 
of patients who received more than 16 Gy.
Target determination: the main factor associ-
ated with successful radiosurgery and rapid 



 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
77
decrease of bleeding risk is irradiation of 
the entire nidus (Gallina et al. 1998). In 
the series of Colombo, among 180 patients 
who underwent radiosurgery, 153 (85%) were 
treated as usual with the entire nidus receiv-
ing the prescribed radiation dose, while for 27 
(15%) only part of the nidus was covered with 
a dose adequate for obliteration (Colombo et 
al. 1994). In totally irradiated cases, bleeding 
risk decreased from 4.8% in the first 6 months 
to 0% after 12 months. In partially irradiated 
cases, bleeding risk decreased to 10%–12% from 
6 to 18 months and 5.5% from 18 to 24 months 
after treatment. Overall incidence of bleeding 
was 5% in the 153 patients with total irradiation 
and 26% in the 27 patients with partial irradia-
tion. Inadequate nidus definition is known to be 
the major cause of treatment failure (Kwon Y 
et al. 2000; Gallina et al. 1998;  Pollock et al. 
1998). Stereotactic angiography is known to be 
not completely accurate in evaluation of nidus 
shape and size. The combined use of CT scan 
or MR and stereotactic angiography for target 
determination were evaluated. Blat et al. (1993) 
showed that determination of nidus diameter 
and isocenter may be different depending on 
whether enhanced stereotactic CT scan or ste-
reotactic angiography is used. MR images and 
CT scan were said to be “superior” to angiogra-
phy in determining different structures of the 
AVM (Smith 1988a). Stereotactic MR angiogra-
phy was compared with stereotactic angiogra-
phy in 28 cases (Kondziolka et al. 1994): in 24 
cases the two techniques were similar, in three 
cases MR was shown to be “superior”, and in 
one case angiography determined nidus shape 
better. In 45 patients who underwent repeated 
radiosurgery for residual nidus, incomplete 
original angiographic definition of AVM nidus 
was the most frequent definite cause of initial 
radiosurgery failure (26/45 cases, 58%) (Yama-
moto et al. 1995). The authors claimed that the 
risk of poor nidus shape evaluation is reduced 
when stereotactic MR images are included in 
the dose-planning database. However, stereo-
tactic angiography is still the best examination 
for delineating small AVMs. The combination of 
different imaging modalities such as 3D angiog-
raphy, MR cross-sections, and angio-MR per-
formed with three-dimensional acquisition will 
probably allow much better delineation of nidus 
shape, feeders, nidus and veins.
3.5.2.2 
Angioarchitecture and Hemodynamics
A small number of draining veins was correlated 
with better OR (Pollock et al. 1998). In the same 
study, presence of direct AV ﬁ stula was a negative 
predictor of successful radiosurgery. The same 
conclusion that high-ﬂ ow AV shunt decreases the 
chance for complete cure was shown in other series 
(Nataf et al. 2001a; Kwon OK et al. 2000). Prera-
diosurgical embolization was a negative predictor of 
success in several series (Pollock et al. 1998; Kwon 
OK et al. 2000). Recanalization of compartments of 
the nidus previously presumed to be occluded by 
embolization was responsible for nidus recurrence. 
Failure of radiosurgery was then attributed to failure 
of embolization. Such recanalization is not surpris-
ing, in view of the technique used for presurgical 
embolization at that time. Great strides have been 
made in the embolization technique for brain AVMs 
with the development of intranidal embolization us-
ing permanent liquid embolic agents (see Sect. 3.5.3 
on embolization) have completely modiﬁ ed the goal 
and results of embolization. Consequently, series 
reporting a bad inﬂ uence of preradiosurgical em-
bolization should not be considered today in treat-
ment decision-making because results of particle 
injection in pedicle feeders and intranidal deﬁ nitive 
gluing cannot be compared.
AVM location: hemispheric location of the AVM 
was correlated to better OR (Pollock et al. 1998). 
There is more risk of clinical complications with 
radiosurgery of brain-stem AVMs than of superﬁ -
cial AVMs (Karlsson et al. 1996). A recent series 
reported the results in 45 patients with brain-stem 
AVMs (Regis et al. 2001). The overall OR was 82%. 
Complications were neurological deﬁ cit in three 
patients (two permanent) and recurrent hemor-
rhage in two. Choroidal and cisternal AVMs seem 
to be less radiosensitive, with an OR of 47.6% 
(Nataf et al. 2001d).
3.5.2.3 
Rate of Complications
The American Stroke Association estimated that 
there is a 5%–7% risk of treatment-related compli-
cations with radiosurgery and, in addition, a 3%–4% 
risk per year of hemorrhage prior to obliteration. 
Over a 3 year period the patient has a 14%–19% risk 
of complications or hemorrhage (The Arteriove-
nous Malformation Study Group 1999).


78 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
The rate of rebleeding (RR) is probably increased 
during the ﬁ rst 3 years after radiosurgery. In 
the large series of Nataf et al. (2001a), bleeding 
recurred in 6.5% of the cases and was responsible 
for a mortality of 1.6%. The RR was 2.98%/year/
patient. Steiner et al. (1992) reported an actuarial 
RR of 1.9%–6.5% up to 60 months after radiosur-
gery. The overall RR was even higher in another 
series with 12.5% (Betti et al. 1989). It was 7.7% 
during the ﬁ rst 8 months after radiosurgery in 
grade I and II AVMs (Pollock et al. 1994), 6.6% in 
AVMs < 10 cc (Yamamoto et al. 1995), and 9.2% 
in AVMs > 10 cc (Pan et al. 2000). Hemorrhage 
occurring in the latency period before complete 
obliteration of the AVM is responsible for a high 
rate of severe clinical complications. The rate of 
death after hemorrhage was 50% (Yamamoto et 
al. 1995) and 40% in patients with grade I and II 
(Pollock et al. 1994).
Neurologic deﬁ cits related to radiosurgery and 
not related to hemorrhage were observed in 
5.37% of the cases and were permanent in 1.46% 
(Nataf et al. 2001a). In a series of 240 patients, 
the rate of permanent deﬁ cit was 3.9% in AVMs 
> 10 cc, 3.8% in AVMs between 10 and 3 cc, and 
2.4% in AVMs < 3 cc (Pan et al. 2000). Brain 
parenchyma reactions due to radiosurgery, so-
called radionecrosis (RN), have been known 
since 1930 (Fischer and Er 1930). RN was clas-
siﬁ ed as acute, subacute, or late (Jellinger 
1977). According to this series, there was a cor-
relation between dose of radiosurgery and delay 
of RN appearance. MR parenchymal lesions 
associated with RN may be classiﬁ ed into four 
grades (Nataf et al. 1997): grade I, no anoma-
lies; grade II, hypersignal (HyperS) T2; grade III, 
associated homogeneous contrast (gadolinium) 
enhancement on T1; grade IV, central hyposig-
nal T1 and heterogeneous peripheral contrast 
enhancement, rim of hypoS T1 and T2 (hemosid-
erin). In the series of Nataf et al. (2001c), the 
size of the AVM was the only factor correlated 
to the appearance of these parenchymal lesions. 
Presence of a grade-IV MR lesion was the only 
factor correlated to neurologic deﬁ cit. On the 
other hand, the appearance of T2 hyperinten-
sity was correlated to radiosurgery efﬁ cacy and 
achieved 72% sensitivity in predicting success-
ful treatment response (Mobin et al. 1999). The 
formation of cystic lesions has been described in 
the long-term MR follow-up of irradiated AVMs 
(Yamamoto et al. 1998).


3.5.2.4 
Re-irradiation after Radiosurgery Failure
In the series of Pollock et al. (1996), 21% of the 
210 AVMs irradiated underwent re-irradiation. 
 Karlsson et al. (1998) reported the most important 
series about re-irradiation including 115 patients 
previously irradiated from 1976 to 1994. The mean 
delay between the two radiosurgical treatments was 
3.6 years. The OR was 65%, the rate of clinical com-
plications 14%. The authors concluded that the OR 
following gamma-knife surgery for previously ir-
radiated AVM is similar to that after primary sur-
gery, but that complication rate increases with the 
amount of radiation previously given. Very similar 
results were shown in a series of 39 patients who were 
re-irradiated (Schlienger et al. 2001). The OR was 
60.7% and the rate of complications was 14.7%.
3.5.2.5 
Risk of Recurrence
AVMs may reappear after having been completely 
occluded after radiosurgery (Yamamoto et al. 
1992). In the series of Lindquist et al. (2000), cov-
ering 48 patients who underwent angiograms more 
than 4 years after their AVM had been proven to 
be occluded, 10 (21%) patients developed clinical 
symptoms attributable to the AVM. There was evi-
dence of residual AVM nidus in four cases. Three of 
the recurrent AVMs were revealed by hemorrhage. 
It is well known that the risk of recurrence after ra-
diosurgery and surgery is higher in young patients. 
Kader et al. (1996) reported a 3.5% rate of hemor-
rhage in 141 patients less than 18 years of age who 
were thought to have been cured by surgery. The 
imaging strategy for follow-up varies greatly from 
one center to another. Most authors consider that 
irradiated AVMs must be followed up with MR and 
MRA, but that only angiograms can assess a com-
plete cure. A recent series showed that important 
AVM changes seen on early angiograms are highly 
predictive of radiosurgical success (Oppenheim et 
al. 1999). Nevertheless, we think that repeated an-
giograms increase the overall morbidity and cost 
of the radiosurgery, and that the information pro-
vided by these early repeated angiograms does not 
justify their practice. We advise the performance 
of MR each year after radiosurgery to follow AVM 
changes on MRA and parenchymal anomalies on 
cross-sections. Final angiography should be per-
formed 3 years after radiosurgery to evaluate the 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
79
ﬁ nal efﬁ cacy of the treatment. In case of complete 
AVM obliteration, another follow-up angiogram 
should be performed several years later in children 
or young adults to monitor the long-term efﬁ cacy 
of radiosurgery.
3.5.3 
Endovascular Embolization
3.5.3.1 
General Considerations
Endovascular treatment of brain AVMs is still con-
troversial for several reasons:
The goal of the treatment itself, which can be 
regarded as an invasive technique to prevent a 
likely risk of bleeding in patients presenting few 
or no symptoms
The availability of alternative therapeutic options
The variety of techniques, embolic agents, and 
even basic treatment concepts from one team to 
another and then from one publication to another, 
making evaluation of the results extremely dif-
ﬁ cult
The lack of uniformity of interventional training 
and very different levels of specialization
The absence of large series and accurate evalu-
ation of clinical and angiographic results, and 
clinical complications
Fundamental rules must be followed:
Therapeutic decisions should always be taken by a 
multidisciplinary team of neurologists, neurosur-
geons, radiotherapists, and neuroradiologists.
Embolization must be performed as one step in 
the global therapeutic approach and as an associ-
ated technique.
Specialists must determine the goal of the treat-
ment concerning:
 The angiographic result: complete occlusion or 
targeted and partial occlusion.
 Clinical results: prevention of bleeding or 
improvement of clinical symptoms (intractable 
seizures, neurologic deﬁ cit, headaches).
The strategy, goal of treatment, and practical 
organization of the different steps and procedures 
should be explained in detail to the patient and, if 
possible, to his or her relatives.
The neurointervention itself should be performed 
by a qualiﬁ ed neuroradiologist, a neuroanesthe-
siologist, and a technical team, starting with the 












pre-procedural planning, continuing through the 
procedural organization, and including post-pro-
cedural care. Medical treatment necessitated by 
the embolization before, during, and after the 
procedure should be decided on by the neurora-
diologist.
The patient should be monitored within an inten-
sive care unit for 24 h after the procedure. A neu-
rosurgeon must be available to provide shunting 
if necessary, or emergent surgery for hematoma 
evacuation.
The anesthetic procedure: most embolizations 
today are performed with the patient under gen-
eral anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. 
There are at least two reasons for this tendency:
 The duration of the procedure (2–4 h) with no 
possibility of movement makes embolization very 
uncomfortable and painful for the patient when 
local anesthesia is used.
 Total immobility of the head is mandatory to 
allow safe catheterization and embolic agent 
injection under road-mapping.
Some teams are still performing brain AVM em-
bolization using local anesthesia, mainly because 
this allows clinical testing during selective catheter-
ization with the superselective Amytal test to predict 
neurologic dysfunction before embolization. Intra-
arterial injection of Amytal (amobarbitol) was de-
scribed by Wada and Rasmussen (1960) to evaluate 
brain function within the vascular distribution of the 
injected artery. This technique is still performed for 
presurgical evaluation in patients with intractable 
seizures to determine which cerebral hemisphere is 
dominant. However, fMRI is progressively replacing 
the Wada test in this indication (Binder et al. 1996). 
Superselective Amytal injection prior to emboliza-
tion was described and used in large series of pa-
tients (Purdy et al. 1991b; Rauch et al. 1992a,b). In 
their original paper concerning the method, Rauch 
et al. (1992a) concluded that the injection of 30 mg 
Amytal into a vessel can produce transient neuro-
logic deﬁ cits if normal brain tissue is supplied by the 
vessel; that the test is safe, with no long-term adverse 
effect; and that EEG testing is mandatory, because 
in 50% of the cases no clinical symptoms were as-
sociated with EEG disturbances. In the second paper 
concerning the clinical use in brain AVMs on 30 pa-
tients who underwent 147 embolizations, the authors 
reported the following: none of the patients with a 
negative Amytal test had clinical or EEG changes; 
the test was positive in 20% of cases; in the few cases 





80 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
where patients were embolized despite a positive test 
the rate of neurologic complications was very high 
(40%); using fractionated embolization with mul-
tiple procedures, the rate of clinical complications 
was signiﬁ cantly higher (8%) in cases where a se-
ries of embolizations were performed after a single 
Amytal test as compared with a single embolization 
performed after an Amytal test. This means that the 
Amytal test performed during the initial procedure 
cannot be considered an accurate method for pre-
dicting the risk of further procedures.
For many years the Amytal test was considered 
to be mandatory before brain AVM embolization. 
 Debrun et al. (1997) still claimed that “Amytal test-
ing continues to have extremely important medico-
legal implications, and most experts who would be 
asked to review a case of severe complications oc-
curring during an embolization of brain AVM with 
acrylate glue would criticize the interventionalist 
for not having performed the Amytal test”. How-
ever, the recently published recommendations for 
the management of brain AVMs (Ogilvy et al. 2001) 
concluded that there was no evidence that either 
general anesthesia or intravenous sedation is asso-
ciated with a lower rate of complications (level IV 
evidence).
In our own experience, all the patients underwent 
embolization under general anesthesia, and in al-
most all French centers the Amytal test has not been 
performed for many years. The main reason is that 
principle of brain AVM embolization has been com-
pletely modiﬁ ed in the past 10 years owing to the 
great strides made in catheter and guidewire capa-
bilities. Our current technique is intranidal wedged 
injection. The tip of the catheter is placed in the 
most distal arterioles and the glue is injected within 
the nidus itself, so that no normal brain is threat-
ened. Obviously, there is still some risk of normal 
artery occlusion and consequent neurologic deﬁ cit. 
This may be due either to reﬂ ux of glue along the tip 
of the catheter or to opening of the arterio-arterial 
anastomosis within the nidus and reﬂ ux in normal 
arteries. However, an Amytal test would not be able 
to predict these inadvertent embolizations.
Bladder catheters help with ﬂ uid management as 
well as patient comfort at the end of the procedure. 
Careful management of coagulation is required to 
prevent thromboembolic complications during the 
procedure. In our teams, intravenous heparin is 
given with the aim of obtaining activated clotting 
time at twice the normal value throughout the pro-
cedure. In comparison, during endovascular treat-
ment of intracranial aneurysms the anticoagulation 
therapy aims at keeping the ACT at four to six times 
above the normal value. The risk of embolic compli-
cations is indeed much less important in treatment 
of brain AVMs due to the high-ﬂ ow arteriovenous 
shunt that protects against clot formation and distal 
artery occlusion. Heparin is stopped at the end of 
the procedure, and the femoral sheath is removed 
immediately thereafter.
Hypertension may be induced during the proce-
dure to help distal catheter progression and nidus 
approach (Picard et al. 2001). However, recent tre-
mendous advances in catheter technology now pro-
vide considerable capabilities for catheterization of 
very distal and tortuous arteries, and hypertension is 
much less induced. In contrast, profound deliberate 
systemic hypotension during glue injection has been 
proposed (Ogilvy et al. 2001) to slow the ﬂ ow within 
the pedicle and provide more controlled glue depo-
sition in arterial, nidal, and venous compartments 
of the AVM. Hypotension can be provoked by either 
vasoactive agents, general anesthetic, or – in some 
rare instances – adenosine-induced cardiac pause 
(Pile-Speelman et al. 1999). This technique is used 
today only in case of high-ﬂ ow direct ﬁ stulas, where 
glue injection is very tricky and risky. Otherwise, it is 
seldom useful due to improvements in the technique 
of glue injection and choice of concentration.
3.5.3.2 
Technique
The ﬁ rst embolization was performed by Luessen-
hop and Spence (1960) using Silastic spheres. The 
later advances include transfemoral embolization of 
brain AVMs (Kricheff et al. 1972), use of detachable 
balloons (Serbinenko 1974; Debrun et al. 1978), and 
the calibrated-leak balloon (Kerber 1976; Pevsner 
1977). At the beginning of the 1990s, many authors 
reported results of preoperative embolization with 
polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles (Purdy et al. 1990; 
Fox et al. 1990; Schumacher and  Horton 1991; 
Nakstad et al. 1992). Nevertheless, there are many 
drawbacks related to PVA embolization: PVA par-
ticles do not afford long-term occlusion of emboli-
zed arteries and nidus and recanalization is more 
frequent; migration of particles in normal adjacent 
branches is much more likely because catheteriza-
tion is less distal; because very different arteriove-
nous shunt size may be observed within the nidus 
with direct ﬁ stula, most of the particles may reach 
the venous side in some instances and produce ei-

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
81
ther no embolization efﬁ cacy or, on the contrary, 
inadvertent venous occlusion. We feel that this kind 
of embolization should no longer be performed be-
cause it carries more risk and is much less efﬁ cient 
than glue embolization. Microcoils were also used to 
treat brain AVMs in order to increase the effective-
ness of occlusion by PVA ( Nakstad et al. 1992). Such 
embolization consists in a proximal occlusion of the 
feeding arteries which, in the long term, favors the 
recruitment of arterio-arterial anastomosis. There-
fore, the treatment is not efﬁ cient to reduce the nidus 
because occlusion is too proximal and the nidus size 
remains the same even if the AVM is fed by collateral 
channels. Furthermore, coil occlusion shuts the door 
to further embolization, which cannot be performed 
through an arterio-arterial anastomosis. For these 
reasons, coil occlusion should be performed only in 
case of direct AV ﬁ stulas in which the AV junction 
itself may be occluded by the coils. Other agents have 
been used for brain AVM treatment, such as silk su-
tures (Deveikis et al. 1994), pure ethanol (Yakes et 
al. 1997), or Ethibloc. Their efﬁ cacy and safety have 
never been assessed in large series and their use has 
been more or less abandoned. Cyanoacrylates were 
ﬁ rst used at the end of the 1970s for preoperative 
embolization (Debrun et al. 1982; Picard et al. 1984; 
Vinuela et al. 1984, 1986, 1991; Wallace et al. 1995; 
Jafar et al. 1993); the results were compared with 
those obtained with PVA for that indication. Due 
to the great strides made in catheter and guidewire 
technology, the technique and goal of embolization 
progressively switched from proximal feeding artery 
occlusion as the preoperative goal to intranidal oc-
clusion for deﬁ nitive treatment.
Intranidal Embolization with Cyanoacrylates
Principles
The concept of embolization with cyanoacrylates 
is to occlude the nidus and the draining veins. The 
arteries should be occluded only at the level of very 
distal arterioles. The principle of intranidal embo-
lization consists in placing the catheter in a wedge 
position in those very small arterioles close to the 
origin of the draining veins. The catheterization has 
to be as distal as possible (Figs. 3.4 and 3.10). In this 
position the injection of contrast medium during a 
run or under subtracted ﬂ uoroscopy showed a stag-
nation of the contrast medium in the pedicle, from 
the tip of the catheter to the nidus or vein. Arterial 
ﬂ ow is almost completely stopped by the catheter. 
Following a pre-embolization test injection a reﬂ ux 
of contrast along the tip of the catheter within the 
distal artery should be carefully looked for. This 
often predicts a very rapid reﬂ ux of glue along the 
catheter and risk of gluing normal adjacent arteries 
or gluing the catheter. When a wedge position is 
obtained, the glue may progress slowly without arte-
rial ﬂ ow contamination and ﬁ nally reach the origin 
of the veins, or enter another part of the nidus, and 
even reﬂ ux into other feeding arteries through the 
nidus. The progression of the glue has to be followed 
under subtracted ﬂ uoroscopy. Biplane equipment is 
mandatory to follow this progression in two different 
projections. Two major issues should be addressed 
prior to gluing: what is the course of the feeding 
artery (which is revealed by the catheter), and where 
is the origin of the draining vein? Indeed, before 
injecting the glue the operator should understand 
the anatomy perfectly and be able to determine as 
soon as possible when the glue begins to reﬂ ux along 
the tip of the catheter, and when the glue penetrates 
the origin of the draining vein, in order to predict 
to what point the glue has to be pushed. These two 
arterial and venous limits of gluing should be de-
cided prior to the injection. It is mandatory to ﬁ nd 
the best projections to separate: (a) the course of 
the feeding arteries from the nidus and the veins 
and avoid overlapping of the structures which need 
to be occluded (nidus and veins) and the one which 
should not (feeding artery), and (b) the nidus from 
the vein (Figs. 3.4, 3.6 and 3.10). Biplane equipment 
makes it possible to follow the injection and progres-
sion of glue by looking alternately at the two screens. 
As soon as the injection begins the operator should 
carefully look at the distal tip of the catheter to see 
the slow progression of the glue. The injection must 
be very slow when glue comes out of the catheter 
to avoid the formation of multiple little drops of 
glue exiting too rapidly and spreading quickly in 
the veins. In contrast, the ﬁ rst kernel of glue should 
be pushed very gently from the tip of the catheter to 
the distal artery and nidus. The penetration of the 
glue in the origin of the draining vein is recognized 
by an enlargement of this kernel (Fig. 3.4). The in-
jection must be stopped for a few seconds and then 
resumed. If the glue again progresses in the vein or 
enters another vein, the injection is stopped again 
for 4–5 s and then resumed. Here again, the opera-
tor should decide before performing the injection 
whether the goal of the injection is to occlude the 
vein completely or just to reach its origin, keeping it 
patent. In case of large AVMs with multiple feeders, 
the aim of each injection from the ﬁ rst to the last 

82 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Fig. 3.10a–k. A 32-year-old man presenting with seizures. 
Left internal carotid (a, c), internal carotid (b, d), and verte-
bral (e) injections show a right compact parietal AVM fed by 
parietal distal branches of anterior, middle, and posterior 
cerebral arteries. Determination of size of the nidus itself 
and nidus limits is difﬁ cult due to the presence of multiple, 
very dilated draining veins. First and second superselective 
catheterization during ﬁ rst embolization showed favorable 
angioarchitecture with very good access to the origin of 
the draining veins (f, g). A 20% mixture of Histoacryl and 
Lipiodol was injected in both cases. Gluing of the origin of 
the draining vein obtained after the ﬁ rst injection is visible 
(g). Cast of glue at the end of the two sessions of emboliza-
tion delineates the exact size of the nidus itself and origin 
of veins (h). Right internal carotid injection in lateral (i) 
and AP (j) views and right vertebral injection (k) performed 
3 months later conﬁ rm complete cure
a
c
e
b
d
 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
83
g
h
f
i
k
j

84 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Fig. 3.11a–f. A 27-year-old man presenting with a frontal AVM 
revealed by seizures. Axial T1 image precisely localizes the frontal 
AVM at the surface of the cortex and extending partially within 
the white matter (a). Poor understanding of AVM architecture, 
nidus shape and limits, and determination of venous compart-
ment are obtained with this axial image. Right internal carotid 
injection in the early arterial (b) and venous phase (c) shows type 
of arteriovenous shunt better, with a compact nidus and a single 
dilated vein. During the second embolization the microcatheter 
broke during retrieval at the end of glue injection (d), outside of 
the patient, approximately 20 cm from the hub. It was cut at the 
level of the skin of the groin. Patient was treated for 2 weeks with 
low-molecular-weight heparin and for 3 months with aspirin. 
This technical complication had no clinical consequences. Four 
embolizations resulted in incomplete occlusion with residual ni-
dus draining into a small collateral vein which was visible on 
pre-treatment angiography (e, f). Radiosurgery was performed
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
85
procedure should be the occlusion of the draining 
veins (Figs. 3.10 and 3.11). In case of a small AVM, 
with only one draining vein, the operator should 
decide before injecting whether the goal is to oc-
clude all the nidus and the draining vein in one 
shot or to occlude just one part of the nidus, to 
enter the origin of the vein with glue but keep the 
vein patent. In the ﬁ rst strategy the operator has to 
foresee, during the injection, whether it will be pos-
sible or not to occlude all the nidus before deciding 
to completely occlude the vein. In the last strategy, 
the injection has to be stopped as soon as the glue 
penetrates the vein. Within a few minutes the kernel 
of glue will progressively laminate the walls of the 
vein, producing a reduction of the ﬂ ow (Fig. 3.10). 
At the end of the injection the operator must as-
pirate back the glue with the syringe, then rapidly 
pull the microcatheter into the guiding catheter to 
avoid inadvertent migration of some drops of glue 
in the normal circulation. Before the development of 
the glide microcatheter, both the microcatheter and 
the guiding catheter were abruptly pulled out of the 
femoral sheath to avoid rupture of the microcatheter 
body or gluing tip. Very smooth microcatheters can 
be pulled out alone and the guiding catheter can be 
left in place.
The technique of intranidal embolization with 
Histoacryl requires tremendous experience on the 
part of the operator, because the injection is fast 
(from a few seconds to 1–2 min) and clinical conse-
quences or improper gluing are disastrous.
Material
A 5- or 6-F guiding catheter is placed through the 
femoral sheet into the internal carotid or vertebral 
artery. The tip of the catheter should be placed high 
enough to facilitate microcatheterization by allow-
ing the possibility of pushing more on the micro-
catheter and guidewires. However, too distal cath-
eterization may induce a spasm of the artery which 
may decrease the ﬂ ow and may, on the contrary, 
render the microcatheterization more difﬁ cult. Ni-
modipine may be injected in the guiding catheter 
to treat vasospasm induced by the guiding catheter. 
Two milligrams of nimodipine (10 cc) may be slowly 
injected two or three times. Nimodipine has very 
little effect on the systemic blood pressure. Its ef-
ﬁ cacy lasts throughout the procedure.
Types of Catheters
Microcatheterization is performed today with two 
different types of catheters:
The true ﬂ ow-guided catheter (Magic 1.8, 1.5- 
or 1.2-F, Balt Extrusion, Montmorency, France; 
Elite 1.8, 1.5-F, Target therapeutic, Fremont, 
Calif., USA). Diluted contrast medium is injected 
through the catheter under subtracted ﬂ uoros-
copy to select the desired pedicle. Although 
these catheters are supposed to navigate with the 
ﬂ ow, they frequently enter normal, not dilated, 
branches instead of being aspirated by the ﬂ ow 
into dilated arteries feeding the AVM. Catheter-
ization of the desired branch is then performed 
by ﬂ ushing pure saline or a mixture of saline and 
contrast medium within the microcatheter with a 
different pressure. That way, the tip of the cath-
eter tends to go back (depending on the pressure 
produced on the syringe) and to vibrate. This 
makes it possible to guide the tip (which was pre-
viously shaped as a small curve) from one artery 
to another. If the catheter fails to progress one can 
use a microguidewire in the ﬂ ow-guided catheter 
to provide more stiffness and increase “pushabil-
ity”. The wire is pushed almost up to the tip of 
the catheter, but extreme caution should be used 
to keep the guidewire from extending beyond the 
tip of the catheter. The catheter and guidewire are 
then pushed together and the guidewire is very 
quickly removed. The catheter usually progresses 
in the last step when the wire is pulled back. This 
procedure is repeated until no more progression 
of the tip is achieved.
The intermediate-flow-guided/over-the-wire 
catheter (Ultraﬂ ow and Marathon1.8- or 1.5-F, 
Microtherapeutics, Irvine, Calif., USA). These 
catheters do not navigate without a guidewire. 
The very ﬂ oppy guidewire is placed within the 
catheter almost at its tip. Both catheter and guide-
wire are pushed simultaneously, making distal 
catheterization very easy and fast. The guidewire 
may be pushed outside the tip of the catheter into 
the desired branch of a bifurcation or in order to 
navigate into distal acute curves. The catheter pro-
gresses very easily with the guidewire. In contrast, 
a true ﬂ ow-guided catheter does not navigate over 
the wire when the wire is pushed outside its tip. 
Thus, these new catheters behave as intermediate-
ﬂ ow-guided/over-the-wire catheters. The disad-
vantage is that they are more rigid because of the 
guidewire than true ﬂ ow-guided catheters. They 
may modify the course of the catheterized artery, 
and they may induce spasm or arterial damage 
during abrupt removal. The chance of very distal 
catheterization may be higher.



86 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Concentration of the Glue Mixture
Superselective angiography precedes each emboli-
zation. Since 1988, NBCA (N-butyl cyanoacrylate) 
has replaced IBCA (I-butyl cyanoacrylate). Histo-
acryl (B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) was the only 
glue available in Europe for many years. This glue is 
still not approved by the European Community for 
the indication of intracranial arterial embolization. 
Nevertheless, it was used for more than 10 years in 
thousands of patients and is considered by all the 
experts to be safe. A new glue has recently been ap-
proved by the Food and Drug Administration in the 
USA (Truﬁ ll n-BCA Liquid embolic system, Cordis, 
Miami) and another one in Europe (Glubran, GEM, 
Viareggio, Italy).
Histoacryl is mixed with Lipiodol (Guerbet, Aul-
nay sous Bois, France) in concentrations varying 
from 17% to 100%. Tantalum powder (Nycomed In-
genor, Paris, France) was previously used as a con-
trast agent to enhance the visibility of the mixture. 
Due to tremendous new improvements made in an-
giography rooms, however, the mixture is now very 
well visible under subtracted ﬂ uoroscopy. The best 
concentration of glue/Lipiodol is very difﬁ cult to 
determine and the choice depends on the operator’s 
experience and knowledge of glue embolization in 
brain AVMs. The choice is purely subjective and is 
made on the basis of the pre-embolization super-
selective angiograph. In case of a wedge position 
within the nidus without very early venous drainage, 
a dilution of 17% (1 cc Histoacryl in 4.5 cc Lipiodol) 
allows very slow and long injection and progression 
within the nidus without a major risk of gluing the 
catheter. This concentration may be increased from 
17% to 20%, 25%, or 33% (respectively, 1 cc Histoac-
ryl in 4 cc, 3 cc, or 2 cc Lipiodol). Various situations 
call for the use of these more concentrated mixtures 
– when the origin of a vein which should not be oc-
cluded is very close to the catheter tip (Fig. 3.4), for 
instance, or when the “security distance” from the 
tip of the catheter to normal arteries is short and re-
ﬂ ux along the tip of the catheter must be perfectly 
controlled. This is particularly true during emboli-
zation of perforating arteries (lenticulostriate, an-
terior choroidal, posterolateral and posteromedian 
choroidal, thalamo-perforating arteries). They are 
also necessary when a direct arteriovenous ﬁ stula 
without interposed arterioles induces a risk of not 
being able to control the glue, some drops of which 
may ﬂ ow through the shunt into the venous system. 
Highly concentrated mixtures are rarely used: 50% 
(1 cc Histoacryl in 1 cc Lipiodol), – 66% (1 cc His-
toacryl in 0.5 cc Lipiodol), and pure Histoacryl is 
extremely rare. These concentrations are used only 
in large-caliber direct ﬁ stulas in which the catheter 
tends to be aspirated into the vein. In this situation 
the tip of the catheter has to be pulled back into the 
arterial side of the shunt. The glue should be in-
jected as slowly as possible to obtain the formation 
of a kernel stuck at the tip of the catheter, which can 
be progressively inﬂ ated to obtain slow occlusion of 
the shunt from the artery to the vein. The operator 
should not give slack to the catheter, which might 
be aspirated by the kernel in the ﬂ ow and reach the 
vein. Although the glue is very concentrated, there is 
a risk the column of glue will detach prior to polym-
erization and rapidly migrate into the distal veins, 
sinus, or extracranial veins. This is why it is neces-
sary to wait several seconds for glue polymerization 
before pulling the catheter.
3.5.3.3 
Complications
Technical Complications
Gluing the Tip of the Catheter
In some instances the catheter may be stuck within 
the nidus during its rapid removal at the end of 
gluing (Fig. 3.11). A Magic catheter may rupture at 
the level of one of the distal junctions, or the body 
of the catheter may not rupture but elongate. No 
endovascular mechanical maneuver to retrieve the 
catheter should be done. Neurosurgery aimed at re-
moving the catheter tip should be proscribed as not 
useful and dangerous. Clinical complications due to 
the presence of a broken catheter within intracranial 
arteries, the internal carotid or vertebral artery, or 
the aorta are very rare. In such instances we recom-
mend anticoagulation treatment for the patient for 
1 week with low-molecular-weight heparin and for 
3 months with aspirin. In case of distal rupture the 
risk is related to progressive migration of the bro-
ken distal portion into intracranial distal arteries. 
When the catheter is not ruptured, it may be cut at 
the level of the skin and left in the iliac artery. With 
more resistant catheters the risk of tearing the nidus 
when pulling back the catheter is probably higher. 
The catheter does not rupture, and even very elastic 
catheters may stretch the feeding artery and damage 
the nidus with eventual bleeding. Different steps 
must be followed to minimize the risk of gluing 
the catheter (Debrun et al. 1997): wedge position 
on preembolization angiography with no reﬂ ux of 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
87
contrast on catheter tip; good projection of work 
to separate the tip of the catheter from nidus and 
vein on subtracted ﬂ uoroscopy; removal of any loop 
in the microcatheter before injection of glue; use 
of diluted mixture (17%–33%); aspiration with the 
syringe before pulling the catheter.
Catheter Rupture
During difﬁ cult distal and tortuous navigation the 
catheter may be perforated by the guidewire due to 
repeated “push and pull” maneuvers in acute curves. 
The major problem is to depict this rupture dur-
ing superselective preembolization angiography or 
during contrast medium injection before injecting 
the glue. In such cases, the contrast medium opaci-
ﬁ es the parent artery at the same time as the distal 
artery downstream of the catheter tip. The operator 
can sometimes feel less resistance during injection. 
The risk of injecting glue through the perforation 
of the catheter within the parent artery is extreme, 
and clinical consequences related to occlusion of 
major vessels may be disastrous. In any case where 
the operator suspects a likely perforation, he should 
remove the catheter and not inject glue.
Polymerization Within the Catheter
Prior to injection of glue, the dead space of the cath-
eter and hub must be ﬁ lled with 5% dextrose solu-
tion to avoid polymerization of the glue within the 
catheter. In some cases, however, this unexplained 
rapid polymerization may happen. The main rea-
son is probably poor quality control of Histoacryl 
or Lipiodol. The operator should always push the 
glue slowly through the microcatheter and follow 
its progression at the level of its distal tip. If the 
glue does not exit the tip of the catheter, and even 
if there is no increased resistance to pressure on the 
syringe, the operator should never increase the in-
jection pressure. The major risk is catheter rupture 
and major artery occlusion or embolization of distal 
normal arteries.
Clinical Complications
The major risk of brain AVM embolization is acute 
postembolization hemorrhage (APEH). APEH is 
both the most frequent and the most neurologically 
devastating complication of embolization. Ischemic 
complications due to inadvertent embolization of 
normal arteries feeding adjacent brain parenchyma 
is much more rare and is associated with a better 
neurologic outcome.
APEH may be due to multiple causes and can be 
more or less predictable. Many groups have studied 
retrospectively the angioarchitectural character-
istics correlated with hemorrhagic presentation of 
brain AVMs (Kader et al. 1994; Marks et al. 1990; 
Nataf et al. 1997; Turjman et al. 1995; Thompson et 
al. 1998; Meisel et al. 2000; Piotin et al. 2001). Vari-
ous architectural and hemodynamic factors may 
increase the risk of APEH. Other studies addressed 
the cerebral hemodynamic of brain AVM before, 
during, and after embolization to provide a theo-
retical basis for a possible physiopathology of APEH 
(Nornes and Grip 1980; Barnet et al. 1987; Handa 
et al. 1993; Al-Rodhan et al. 1993; Young et al. 1994; 
Sorimachi et al. 1995; Young et al. 1996; Gao et al. 
1997; Kaminaga et al. 1999; Massoud et al. 2000). 
The different causes of APEH are occlusion of the 
draining vein with glue, delayed venous thrombo-
sis, normal perfusion pressure breakthrough, in-
tranidal aneurysm rupture, and vessel wall tearing 
during microcatheter retrieval. The only causes of 
APEH that may be accurately recognized are occlu-
sion of the draining vein with glue or delayed venous 
occlusion. In others instances the cause is only puta-
tive (Fig. 3.7).
Occlusion of the Draining Vein with Glue and 
Delayed Venous Thrombosis
These complications involve the so-called occlusive 
hyperemia syndrome. This term was introduced by 
Al-Rodhan et al. (1993) to describe another mecha-
nism of APEH related to impaired venous drainage 
due to AVM resection or embolization. Secondary to 
embolization, impaired venous drainage can result 
from gluing of the draining vein; delayed venous 
thrombosis may be due to occlusion of substan-
tial arteries and nidus. Progressive and extensive 
thrombosis of the residual nidus and draining vein 
has been described (Vinuela et al. 1983b; Purdy et 
al. 1991a; Duckwiler et al. 1992; Picard et al. 2001). 
Purdy et al. (1991a) reported three hemorrhages in 
the week after embolization with PVA foam par-
ticles and platinum microcoils. They believed that 
hemorrhages were related to venous thrombosis 
due to stasis caused by substantial obliteration of 
AVM, which slowed the ﬂ ow in the enlarged venous 
channel, rather than by direct occlusion of the vein 
by embolic material. Nevertheless, inadvertent em-
bolization with sudden complete occlusion of the 
veins is probably the most frequent cause of APEH. 
Deruty et al. (1996) reported 5 cases of APEH in 40 
patients (12.5%) in the week after embolization. In 

88 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
four of these ﬁ ve cases occlusion of the main venous 
drainage was demonstrated. Continued inﬂ ow into 
the malformation with impaired outﬂ ow is a very 
high risk situation for rupture and hemorrhage. Par-
tial occlusion of the draining vein with glue, associ-
ated with decreased arterial ﬂ ow, may favor further 
complete venous thrombosis and hemorrhage. The 
time course of the complications may indicate the 
etiology of the problem: Inadvertent venous occlu-
sion causes immediate or early postprocedural com-
plications, while delayed venous thrombosis causes 
delayed complications.
Normal Perfusion Pressure Breakthrough
This concept of normal perfusion pressure break-
through (NPPB) was ﬁ rst described by Spetzler et 
al. (1978), who assessed that the normal brain paren-
chyma surrounding brain AVMs is subjected to the 
chronic vascular steal phenomenon by the AVM and 
disturbed vascular autoregulation. The acute reduc-
tion of ﬂ ow after resection of an AVM reestablishes 
a normal ﬂ ow in the surrounding brain; the lack of 
autoregulation results in disruption of local capil-
lary beds and produces subsequent brain edema or 
hemorrhage. There is experimental evidence for the 
theory that vasomotor regulation can be seriously 
impaired due to the long period of arteriole inactiv-
ity (Nornes and Grip 1980). With intraoperative 
measurements of cerebral vascular reactivity to CO2 
in the cortex surrounding the AVM, Barnett et 
al. (1987) showed that impaired reactivity was as-
sociated with APEH. Folkow et al. (1971) showed 
an adaptive structural change of the resistance ves-
sels in chronically hypotensive beds with reduc-
tion of the media and greatly increased lumina. 
The maximal contractile strength and steepness of 
the resistance curve were decreased. The hemody-
namics of AVMs and surrounding brain have been 
debated for years. Pre- and postoperative cerebral 
blood ﬂ ow was studied using various techniques: 
thermodilution (Barnett et al. 1987; Spetzler et 
al. 1987), -xenon CT scan (Spetzler et al. 1987), 
single photon emission computerized tomography 
(Batjer et al. 1988; Takeuchi et al. 1987; Hacein-
Bey et al. 1995), and positron emission tomography 
(Kaminaga et al. 1999). Intraoperative vascular 
pressure measurements were performed with either 
direct puncture (Barnett et al. 1987; Hassler and 
Steinmetz 1987; Spetzler et al. 1987; Young et 
al. 1994) or Doppler ultrasonography. They showed 
that the pressure is reduced in the pedicle feeding 
the AVM and that obliteration markedly elevates 
the pressure after AVM occlusion. Similar changes 
were measured during catheterization and embo-
lization (Handa et al. 1993; Jungreis et al. 1989; 
Sorimachi et al. 1995). Young et al. (1994) showed 
that the transnidal pressure gradients were lower 
in larger AVMs. In the experience of Sorimachi 
et al. (1995), the pressure was higher in pedicles 
feeding both the AVM and normal adjacent brain. 
This is due to the fact that brain-supplying arteries 
have a higher resistance than AVM-feeding vessels. 
The authors concluded that the lower the feeder 
pressure, the more likely complications are to oc-
cur, due to tremendous postembolization hemody-
namic alterations. In contrast, Duckwiler et al. 
(1990), who performed pressure measurements in 
more than 250 pedicles in 100 patients, did not ﬁ nd 
any direct correlation between pressure changes 
and risk of hemorrhage. The observation of pres-
sure gradients > 40 mmHg between feeding arteries 
and cervical arteries was highly suggestive of the 
presence of direct ﬁ stula associated with the AVM 
nidus. The hemodynamic changes expected from 
obliteration of different-sized AVM shunt ﬂ ows were 
estimated using a computational model (Gao et al. 
1997). Three important issues became evident. First, 
the nonlinearity of the arterial pressure increase 
that occurs with gradual occlusion of the shunt at 
the feeding artery level can be expressed as the per-
centage of occlusion at half maximal pressure (% of 
ﬂ ow reduction to increased feeding artery pressure 
from baseline pretreatment level to a level mid-way 
to the ﬁ nal vascular pressure expected with com-
plete occlusion of the shunt ﬂ ow). The percentage 
of occlusion at half maximal pressure increase was 
92% for a large and 71% for a medium AVM model. 
This suggests that there might be a higher risk of 
increased pressure gradients (a) during ﬁ nal stages 
of embolization, (b) in the presence of a small AVM 
remnant post embolization or surgery, (c) during 
the ﬁ nal stage of radiosurgery. Second, pressure 
changes are relatively minor near the circle of Wil-
lis and much more profound approaching the nidus 
as the ﬂ ow shunt is decreased. Third, at a ﬁ xed ﬂ ow 
there is a buffering effect of direct ﬁ stula, such that 
higher-ﬂ ow ﬁ stulas are exposed to smaller varia-
tions in intravascular pressure during manipulation 
of systemic arterial pressure. This means that the 
pressure changes to be expected in distal vascular 
structures close to the nidus will be proportionally 
less than changes in systemic pressure; the degree 
of proportionality depending on the magnitude of 
AVM shunt ﬂ ow.

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
89
Intranidal Aneurysm Rupture
An APEH may happen due to the rupture of an in-
tranidal aneurysm or false aneurysm after partial 
occlusion of the AVM. The likely increase in blood 
pressure in the feeding artery and part of the nidus 
not embolized is probably responsible for the APEH 
in some cases. This is why it is mandatory to analyze 
precisely the angioarchitecture of the nidus before 
deciding on the embolization strategy. First embo-
lizations should focus on the weakest compartment 
of the AVM. Small false aneurysms must be system-
atically researched on selective and superselective 
angiography and compared with CT scan and MRI 
(Figs. 3.6 and 3.7).
Tearing of Vessel Wall During Microcatheter 
Retrieval
Arteries may be damaged during microcatheter re-
trieval. Several conditions may favor the tearing and 
bleeding of vessel walls: very distal and tortuous 
catheterization, vasospasm of the catheterized ped-
icle, reﬂ ux of glue along the tip of the catheter, very 
small arterial feeders, choroidal feeders, looping of 
the catheter within artery. Such arterial damage is 
very rarely encountered with ﬂ oppy ﬂ ow-guided 
catheters. The safety of the use of intermediate cath-
eters (good gliding properties but more rigid) has to 
be evaluated.
Frequency of Acute Postembolization Hemorrhage
In the very early period of brain AVM embolization, 
procedures involved injection of Silastic spheres or 
silicone rubber. Kvam et al. (1980) were the ﬁ rst 
to report on postembolization hemorrhage. At the 
same time they made the excellent suggestion of 
staging the embolization in several steps to avoid 
abrupt dramatic changes in blood pressure. This 
recommendation should be kept in mind by all in-
terventional neuroradiologists as the main way to 
decrease the rate of bleeding. Picard et al. (2001) 
did a recent review of the literature and presented 
the largest series ever published on APEH. In 18 
series of brain AVM embolizations in which cases 
of spontaneous APEH were reported there were 58 
(4.8%) APEHs among 1206 patients. These series in-
volved very different embolization techniques and 
embolic materials (pellets, IBCA, silk suture, PVA, 
NBCA). Considering only series with glue emboli-
zation, there were 31 (8.2%) APEH in 379 patients 
(Bank et al. 1981; Debrun et al. 1982, 1997;  Deruty 
et al. 1996; Fournier et al. 1991; Jafar et al. 1993; 
Lawton et al. 1995; Merland et al. 1986;  Wallace 
et al. 1995). However, these publication are very in-
homogeneous and almost obsolete in view of the 
tremendous changes in embolization techniques 
and devices seen in recent years. Debrun et al. 
(1997) reported a risk of 3.9% APEH per emboliza-
tion (6/152) and 11% per patient. In a series of 283 
patients, the risk of post-embolization subarachnoid 
hemorrhage and intraparenchymal hematoma was, 
respectively, 3.1% and 2.1% (Vinuela 1992). The 
most recent publication from Picard et al. (2001) 
gives probably the most up-to-date rate of hemor-
rhagic complications using the intranidal injection 
technique as described above. They report a series 
of 564 patients with brain AVMs; 492 (87%) were 
treated with intranidal injection in a total of 1569 
procedures, with a mean embolization of three ped-
icles per procedure. The rate of APEH was 1% per 
embolization (15/1569) and 3% per patient (15/492). 
Of these 15 patients, only three had previously bled 
prior to treatment. Four patients were asymptomatic 
after hemorrhage (incidental discovery on system-
atic third-day CT scan), seven had excellent or good 
outcomes, two had fair outcomes, and two died. Se-
vere morbidity and mortality combined was 0.8% 
(4/492 patients).
Basic Rules for Avoiding APEH
Several recommendations for minimizing the risk of 
APEH may be highlighted: Treatment should always 
be staged, except for grade I AVMs, in which all the 
feeders as well as the origins of draining veins can be 
occluded in one session. When the vein has to be pre-
served, the venous passage should be controlled by 
pausing for a few seconds when the glue reaches the 
vein before continuing to ﬁ ll the nidus. Reﬂ ux along 
the tip of the catheter should be avoided. First em-
bolizations should focus on weak points (intranidal 
aneurysms). Floppy ﬂ ow-guided catheters should be 
used in tortuous thin arteries.
Management of APEH
Like spontaneous hemorrhage, APEH may present 
with either no symptoms (incidental discovery on 
systematic post-embolization CT scan), headaches, 
or more aggressive symptoms with neurologic deﬁ -
cit or coma. APEH may occur during the proce-
dure or within the following days. Prompt surgical 
evacuation of the hematoma is mandatory in case of 
mass effect and risk of herniation (Jafar and Rezai 
1994). Some angiographic features may predict an 
increased risk of APEH: (a) occlusion or very slow 
ﬂ ow of one of the major draining veins, (b) stagna-

90 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
tion of contrast within the nidus, (c) almost com-
plete occlusion of a small AVM with persistent tiny 
residual nidus, (d) occlusion of a large direct ﬁ stula 
within a nidus. In these instances it is necessary 
to treat the patient with antihypertensive drugs for 
several days after the procedure in the intensive care 
unit. The ability of induced systemic hypotension to 
prevent nidus rupture was analyzed by Massoud 
et al. (2000), using a theoretical model. The authors 
distinguished ﬁ ve hypothetical mechanisms for ni-
dus hemorrhage: intranidal rerouting of blood pres-
sure due to occlusion of direct ﬁ stula, extranidal 
rerouting of blood pressure (NPPB), occlusion of a 
draining vein, delayed thrombosis of draining veins, 
and excessively high injection pressure during su-
perselective catheterization. These different mecha-
nisms had the same capacity to generate surges in 
intranidal hemodynamic parameters, resulting in 
nidus rupture. Using their theoretical model, the 
authors showed that inducing systemic hypotension 
reduced the risk of hemorrhage whatever the mecha-
nism involved.
3.5.3.4 
Particular Instances
AVM and Aneurysms
The association of brain AVMs and aneurysms has 
been discussed for many years in numerous papers. 
However, management of these cases is still con-
troversial. The incidence of aneurysms associated 
with brain AVM reported in the literature ranges 
from 2.7% to 58% (Batjer et al. 1986; Brown et 
al. 1990; Cunha e Sa et al. 1992; Deruty et al. 
1990;  Nakahara et al. 1999; Redekop et al. 1998; 
 Thompson et al. 1998; Turjman et al. 1994). This 
great discrepancies is due to the lack of uniformity 
in aneurysm classiﬁ cations. In the series of Turjman 
et al. (1995b), 58 of 100 consecutive patients pre-
senting with brain AVM had associated aneurysms. 
They were classiﬁ ed as intranidal aneurysms (INA) 
in 25 cases and feeding artery aneurysms (FAA) in 
38 cases. Many systems have been proposed to clas-
sify aneurysms associated with brain AVM, but a 
widely accepted system of classiﬁ cation based on 
their anatomic and pathophysiological relationship 
to the AVM has yet to be developed and validated. 
According to Redekop and coworkers, aneurysms 
may be classiﬁ ed as intranidal or ﬂ ow related when 
located along the course of arteries that eventually 
supply the nidus. These aneurysms were classiﬁ ed 
as proximal, if located at the usual topography of 
typical aneurysms, or as distal, if above the MCA 
bifurcation, anterior communicating, or ﬁ rst seg-
ment of posterior cerebral arteries. They are unre-
lated to AVM if occurring on arteries not supplying 
the AVM. Due to the absence of any reliable fac-
tors to assess whether the aneurysm is ﬂ ow related 
or not, Piotin et al. (2001) simply classiﬁ ed aneu-
rysms (except for intranidal aneurysms) depending 
on their location as proximal or distal. Basically, it 
is necessary to differentiate between feeding artery 
aneurysms (FAA) and intranidal aneurysms (INA).
Feeding Artery Aneurysms
Three major papers reported the rate of FAA. The 
numbers of patients exhibiting FAA were 45 of 
600 (7.5%) (Thompson et al. 1998), 71 of 632 (12%) 
( Redekop et al. 1998), and 30 of 270 (11%) (Piotin et 
al. 2001). Among the 45 patients of Thompson et al. 
(1998), 23 (51%) presented with bleeding. Bleeding 
occurred from the AVM in 15, from the aneurysm 
in 5, and the source of bleeding could not be deter-
mined in three. Among the 71 patients of Redekop 
et al. (1998), 15 (21%) presented with bleeding from 
the AVM and 12 (17%) from the aneurysm. Among 
the 30 patients of Piotin et al. (2001), 15 (50%) pre-
sented with bleeding, which occurred from the AVM 
in three and from aneurysm in 12. In this last series, 
only 66 of the 240 patients (27.5%) without aneurysm 
bled. The coexistence of AVM and aneurysms cor-
related signiﬁ cantly with intracranial hemorrhage 
at presentation. Similarly, Cunha e Sa et al. (1992) 
identiﬁ ed the source of hemorrhage as the aneurysm 
in 18 (46%) of 39 patients and as the AVM in 13 (33%). 
According to Batjer et al. (1986), there were 9 (41%) 
of 22 patients with hemorrhage and the aneurysm 
was thought to be responsible for it in 7 (78%) of 
these cases. Thus it is now obvious that in patients 
with both AVM and aneurysm either one may be the 
source of hemorrhage. However, Meisel et al. (2000) 
reported opposite results in a large series of 662 pa-
tients with brain AVMs, in which 305 (46%) of them 
had either FAA or INA. Pretreatment hemorrhage 
occurred in 54.8% of the patients with aneurysms 
(56.8% in case of only FAA and 44% in case of FAA 
and INA). The bleeding rate among patients without 
aneurysm was 55%, suggesting that FAA are not the 
primary source of bleeding. The therapeutic strat-
egy of the authors was based on a hypothesis stated 
in 1998 (Lasjaunias et al. 1988) and consisted of 
targeting the embolization on AVM compartments 
harboring INA or compartments fed by arteries har-
boring FAA. Partial targeted embolization was per-

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
91
formed in 450 (68%) of the 662 patients; 138 (30.7%) 
of them had at least one FAA. Follow-up of 83 pa-
tients with 149 FAAs showed 100% FAA shrinkage 
in 12 cases (8.1%), and more than 50% in 33 of the 
149 FAAs (22%). No shrinkage was observed in 40 of 
the 102 (39%) FAAs with AVM occlusion of less than 
50% and in 26 of 47 (55.3%) FAA with AVM occlu-
sion of more than 50%. The authors concluded that 
because the FAAs shrink and do not rupture during 
targeted AVM treatment they should be considered 
as indicators of high-ﬂ ow angiopathic changes and 
that there is no evidence that they should be treated 
prior to AVM treatment.
Because there is no consensus concerning treat-
ment of AVM and associated aneurysms, we propose 
the following practical strategy:
In case of subarachnoid hemorrhage or parenchy-
mal hematoma obviously related to FAA rupture, 
the aneurysm should be treated in emergency.
 If the aneurysm is proximal on the arterial 
feeder it should be treated with coils as a regu-
lar aneurysm (Fig. 3.3). Treatment of these aneu-
rysms may be very tricky because of a large neck, 
high arterial ﬂ ow, and very dysplastic, enlarged 
feeders. The remodeling technique described by 
Moret et al. (1997) may be very useful in these 
instances to ease coiling, control possible perop-
erative rupture, and perform dense packing of the 
neck. All pre-, per-, and postoperative care should 
be exactly the same as for regular aneurysms not 
associated with brain AVM, except for anticoagu-
lation, which may be less strong due to less risk of 
thromboembolic complications.
 If the aneurysm is distal on the arterial feeder 
treatment may be performed either with coils or 
with glue. Intra-aneurysmal glue injection was 
described for treatment of distal aneurysms with-
out associated brain AVM (Cognard et al. 1999). 
This technique may aim at occluding both the 
aneurysm and feeding artery or only the aneurysm, 
preserving the patency of the parent artery. There 
are several advantages to aneurysm glue occlusion 
compared with coiling: very distal catheterization 
is much easier and safer with a ﬂ ow-guided cath-
eter than with a catheter for coil delivery, and the 
risk of aneurysm rupture during embolization is 
very low, primarily because the glue is injected 
very slowly into the aneurysm and secondarily 
because no manipulation is required as it is for 
coiling. The major drawback of this technique is 
parent artery occlusion, which hinders further 
AVM embolization. We advocate the use of this 



technique only in cases of very distally located 
aneurysm in which occlusion of the parent vessel 
is not critical. To allow simultaneous treatment of 
both the aneurysm and the AVM, the treatment 
can be achieved by intranidal glue injection until 
there is a reﬂ ux along the tip of the catheter into 
the arterial feeder and aneurysmal sac.
In cases where the hemorrhage is clearly due to 
AVM rupture the treatment is aimed primarily at 
the AVM. The ﬁ rst embolization procedure may be 
performed after the acute phase, as for ruptured 
brain AVM not associated with aneurysms.
In case the subarachnoid hemorrhage or paren-
chymal hematoma cannot be obviously ascribed 
to FAA or AVM rupture, the aneurysm should 
be treated in emergency (Pucheu). The treatment 
should indeed focus on the lesion presenting the 
more important risk of rebleeding and likely more 
severe clinical consequences.
In cases without hemorrhage, indications for treat-
ing ﬁ rst the aneurysm or the AVM are highly con-
troversial. FAA may be regarded as a risk factor 
of bleeding that should be treated ﬁ rst, owing to 
the severe clinical consequences, or as high-ﬂ ow 
angiopathic changes that may disappear after 
AVM occlusion. Two options may be proposed:
 AVM nidus-staged, stepwise embolization. If 
this option is considered, the ﬁ rst embolization 
procedure should be targeted at compartments of 
the nidus fed by arteries harboring the aneurysm. 
Cases in which the aneurysm has not shrunk at 
follow-up, despite complete occlusion of the AVM, 
could be treated with coils. At this point, the treat-
ment decision is as difﬁ cult to make as for unrup-
tured regular aneurysm and depends basically on 
the aneurysm size.
 Selective aneurysm treatment to be performed 
ﬁ rst (Fig. 3.3), the rationale for this option being 
that the morbidity and mortality associated with 
aneurysm hemorrhage are greater than those 
associated with AVM, and that the presence of 
the AVM downstream of the aneurysm protects 
against thromboembolic complications which 
could occur during aneurysm treatment, render-
ing the coiling very safe.
In fact, it is not possible to elaborate a strategy 
of treatment based on a theoretical approach and 
treatment planning should be determined in each 
individual depending on many factors such as an-
eurysm location, size, neck, and morphology and 
nidus size and architecture.






92 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Intranidal aneurysms (INA) are located within 
or in the immediate vicinity of the AVM nidus. 
They should be differentiated from “false or 
pseudoaneurysms” observed after an AVM rup-
ture (Figs. 3.12–3.14). These pseudoaneurysms are 
supposed to correspond to an unclotted portion of 
the hematoma still communicating with the vessel 
lumen. Pseudoaneurysms should be suspected in 
the presence of a vascular cavity, usually of irreg-
ular shape, within or at the periphery of the hema-
toma (Fig. 3.6). Nevertheless, it is impossible to 
determine accurately in the case of AVM rupture 
whether the lesion is a true or a false aneurysm. 
Garcia-Monaco et al. (1993) reported 15 cases of 
pseudoaneurysm in a population of 189 patients 
with brain AVMs. Eight of the nine cases not 
treated by embolization or surgery had resolved 
at follow-up angiography. None of the pseudoan-
eurysms was conﬁ rmed histologically. Marks et 
al. (1992) reported 15 patients with INA detected 
after AVM rupture. In two of the three patients 
operated on the aneurysms were located in the 
pathological specimens. Histological evaluation 
demonstrated these aneurysms to be thin-walled 
vascular structures rather than pseudoaneurysms 
due to AVM rupture. In fact, the acquired nature 
of a pseudoaneurysm secondary to AVM rupture 
can be asserted only when comparison with avail-
able pre-hemorrhage angiography conﬁ rms the 
aneurysm as a new angioarchitectural feature. 
However, even though it is almost impossible to 
differentiate between INA and pseudoaneurysms, 
both lesions should be considered risk factors for 
acute rebleeding. That risk was 11% in a small 
series of supposed pseudoaneurysms (Garcia-
Monaco et al. 1993) and 11% in a large series of 
INA (Meisel et al. 2000). The therapeutic plan-
ning concerning INA may be the following:
 Where a pseudoaneurysm or a false aneurysm 
is responsible for the hemorrhage, the ﬁ rst step 
of embolization must be performed in the acute 
phase and should focus on aneurysm occlusion 
(Figs. 3.12 and 3.13). Superselective angiography 
performed with the ﬂ ow-guided catheter must 
be carried out to discover which feeding artery 
is supplying the compartment of the nidus har-
boring the INA (Fig. 3.6). Catheter progression 
within the desired vessel should be performed 
as usual but with minimal injection of contrast 
material (Garcia-Monaco et al. 1993). Overinjec-
tion of ﬂ uid may exert a signiﬁ cant strain on the 
false aneurysm and increase the risk of rupture. 


A wedge position of the tip of the catheter may 
produce rebleeding as well, because the injection 
force is directly transmitted to the pseudoaneu-
rysm (Lasjaunias et al. 1988). Glue embolization 
is performed as usual, with the aim of occluding 
the nidus and aneurysm at the same shot.
 In case of unruptured AVM associated with INA 
or ruptured AVM with INA not responsible for the 
bleeding, there is no need to perform the treat-
ment in the acute phase. The ﬁ rst embolization 
procedure should be performed several weeks 
after bleeding and must be targeted at the com-
partment of the AVM harboring the INA.
Direct Arteriovenous Fistulas
Direct communication between arteries and veins 
without interposed nidus may be observed. Two 
types of direct AVF must be distinguished, pial AVF 
and AVF within a brain AVM nidus.
The two major types of pial AVF are vein of Galen 
aneurysmal malformations (VGAMs) located in the 
subarachnoid space, and direct AVF (brain AVFs) 
between cortical arteries and pial veins located in 
the subpial space (Lasjaunias and Berenstein 
1993b). VGAMs are encountered mainly in neonates 
and children and correspond to a separated entity 
with speciﬁ c embryology, physiopathology, clini-
cal presentation, and treatment strategy. Therefore, 
they will not be treated in this chapter. Brain AVFs 
may present in children with systemic manifestation 
due to high-ﬂ ow shunt with congestive heart failure 
or failure to thrive. They may also present in adults 
with the same symptoms as brain AVMs. Because 
they are very rare, there is no large series published 
in the literature concerning their rate of bleeding 
and rebleeding and speciﬁ c treatment. Nevertheless, 
treatment consists of occluding the arteriovenous 
shunt itself. This may be attained by glue injection 
or parent artery coil occlusion. The best therapeutic 
option is shunt gluing, because it allows complete 
occlusion of the AV communication from the arte-
rial side to the origin of the vein. Catheterization is 
often easy with regard to the dilatation of the feed-
ing vessel, even though the shunt is very distal. The 
tip of the catheter is aspirated in the venous system 
and has to be pulled back in the arterial side if pos-
sible, in a curve of the feeding artery, to obtain bet-
ter control of the glue injection. The operator should 
not give too much slack to the catheter, which could, 
under these conditions, progress during the injec-
tion of glue into the veins and result in total absence 
of control of glue deposition, with no arterial em-


 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
93
Fig. 3.12a–e. A 30-year-old man presenting with a Hunt 
and Hess grade I intraventricular hemorrhage within the 
left ventricular horn. Two- (a) and three-dimensional (b, 
c) left vertebral artery injections show a small AVM of the 
inferomedial temporal lobe with a large false aneurysm. 
Embolization was performed in the acute phase due to 
the high risk of rebleeding. Superselective injection gives 
a more precise picture of the angioanatomy, with the false 
aneurysm located on the arterial side of the nidus (d). Glue 
injection achieved complete obliteration of both aneurysm 
and nidus (e)
a
c
e
b
d

94 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Fig. 3.13a–i. A 23-year-old man presenting with sudden 
headaches and vomiting but no neurologic deﬁ cit or con-
sciousness disturbance. CT scan shows right cerebellar he-
matoma with intraventricular rupture and moderate ven-
tricular dilatation (a). Left vertebral artery injection in AP 
(b) and lateral (c) views show an AVM of the right cerebellar 
a
c
e
b
d
 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
95
g
h
f
i
hemisphere with compact nidus fed by the superior cerebellar artery. Early arterial phase shows a round intranidal structure 
which may correspond to either an intranidal aneurysm or a false aneurysm, as well as the origin of the draining vein (d). 
Selective catheterization during embolization reveals that this round structure is located on the arterial side of the shunt 
and likely corresponds to a false aneurysm (e). Control angiograph obtained at the end of the ﬁ rst embolization shows 
efﬁ cient gluing of that structure (f, g). Follow-up angiography performed 3 months after the third embolization showed 
complete occlusion of the AVM (h, i)

96 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
bolization but venous occlusion and consequent 
bleeding. The injection of a concentrated mixture 
of glue and Lipiodol has to be as slow as possible to 
avoid formation of small drops of glue ﬂ owing into 
the veins. After progressive inﬂ ation of the kernel 
of glue from the artery to the foot of the vein, the 
operator should stop the injection and wait several 
seconds for glue polymerization before withdrawing 
the catheter. Removal of the catheter too early may 
result in more or less fast progression of the kernel of 
glue to the veins. This technique, however, requires 
experience with glue injection and may be danger-
ous if uncontrolled. This is why in some instances the 
shunt may be occluded with coils. A ﬂ oppy catheter 
with a very small diameter should be used to avoid 
arterial damage (Fig. 3.15). Small three-dimensional 
Fig. 3.14a–d. A 43-year-old man presenting with a frontal hematoma with no neurologic deﬁ cit, only headaches and apraxia. 
Digital angiography in AP (a) and sagittal (b) projections performed 2 days after the hematoma occurred showed a small 
frontal superﬁ cial AVM fed by very small branches arising from the “en passage” posteromedial frontal artery. A small 
aneurysm is visible in the medial aspect of the nidus. Due to the unfavorable angioarchitecture no embolization was per-
formed. Due to the large size of the hematoma and very small size of the AVM, surgery was not considered in the acute 
phase considering the likely difﬁ culty of ﬁ nding the AVM. At follow-up 2 months later, angiography in AP (c) and sagit-
tal (d) projections showed disappearance of the aneurysm. Such spontaneous aneurysm regression is consistent with the 
diagnosis of false aneurysm
a
c
b
d

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
97
soft coils should be used to perform dense packing 
on a short arterial segment and avoid occlusion of 
normal adjacent arteries.
Intranidal Direct Fistulas
The angioarchitecture of brain AVM may sometimes 
associate usual nidus and direct ﬁ stulas. True AVFs 
are recognized when the tip of the catheter reaches 
the origin of the vein during superselective catheter-
ization (Fig. 3.16). In contrast, very rapid opaciﬁ ca-
tion of the foot of the vein after opaciﬁ cation of a 
very short arterial segment should not be considered 
as an AVF but as a very distal intranidal catheter-
ization (Figs. 3.4 and 3.10). When a true AVF is en-
countered within a brain AVM nidus the problem 
is to determine which compartment should be the 
ﬁ rst target of the treatment. The abrupt occlusion of 
an intranidal ﬁ stula may result in rerouting of sig-
niﬁ cantly high shunting blood ﬂ ow through delicate 
plexiform portions of the nidus and subsequent im-
mediate rupture (Fig. 3.16). The hypothesis that par-
tial nidus embolization causes upstream pressure el-
evation in arterial feeders and that pressure increase 
is transmitted to persistently unobliterated portions 
Fig. 3.15a–e. A 35-year-old woman who presented in an 
acute coma due to a subdural and parenchymal occipital 
hematoma. Emergency surgery was performed following 
diagnostic angiography, which disclosed a pial AV ﬁ stula. 
The patient rebled during surgery, which made it possible 
only to evacuate the hematomas, but ﬁ stula occlusion could 
not be done. Embolization was performed the following day. 
Internal carotid injection showed the direct ﬁ stula between 
the temporo-occipital artery and a dysplastic dilated corti-
cal vein (a, b). Because the operator did not feel conﬁ dent 
about treating the direct high-ﬂ ow AV ﬁ stula with glue, em-
bolization with coils was performed; a poor packing of coils 
was achieved (c) but there was immediate occlusion of the 
shunt (d). Three-month follow-up angiography conﬁ rmed 
the complete occlusion (e)
a
c
e
b
d

98 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
g
h
a
c
e
b
d
f


 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
99
of the nidus producing a risk of nidus rupture was 
evaluated with a theoretical model (Massoud et al. 
2000). Intranidal rerouting of blood pressure due to 
occlusion of a direct ﬁ stula generated surges in intra-
nidal hemodynamic parameters, resulting in nidus 
rupture. In the same way, a computational model 
analysis showed that direct ﬁ stulas have a buffering 
effect, so that their abrupt occlusion may produce 
an increased pressure gradient in the nonembolized 
arteries and related nidus (Gao et al. 1997). There is a 
theoretically higher risk of occluding a direct ﬁ stula 
before nidus occlusion, and the strategy might be 
to focus in the ﬁ rst embolization procedure on the 
nidus and keep the direct AVF open until the end 
of the treatment. The other reason for this strategy 
is that, by deﬁ nition, direct AVFs give access to the 
vein, and if a direct AVF is embolized at the end of 
nidus embolization it may allow venous gluing and 
complete cure of the AVM. In contrast, if the AVF 
is treated ﬁ rst there is an important risk of inad-
vertent venous gluing and occlusion with a major 
risk of nidus rupture. The major drawback of this 
strategy is that it is sometimes almost impossible to 
understand the angioarchitecture of the nidus when 
a direct AVF is associated with it. The occlusion of a 
direct AVF ﬁ rst rapidly clariﬁ es the angioarchitec-
ture of the nidus. Besides, because pedicles feeding 
AVFs are larger and have a higher ﬂ ow, ﬂ ow-guided 
catheters are systematically aspirated by the direct 
AVF and feeders of the nidus itself are almost impos-
sible to catheterize.
3.5.3.5 
Goals and Results
Goals
The goal of treating brain AVMs is ﬁ rst to elimi-
nate the risk of hemorrhage and then to completely 
eliminate the AVM. Complete cure must be deﬁ ned 
as complete disappearance of the nidus and absence 
of early venous drainage (Figs. 3.4, 3.10, 3.12, 3.13 
and 3.15). To attain that goal a multidisciplinary 
strategy must be decided on by the neuroradiologist, 
neurosurgeon, and the radiotherapist. If emboliza-
tion is considered as the ﬁ rst step of the therapeutic 
strategy, its goal is to occlude the AVM or to decrease 
its size as much as possible, because occlusion and 
complication rates after radiosurgery are closely re-
lated to the size of the residual AVM. Embolization 
should aim obtaining a single residual nidus and 
avoid spreading the AVM in multiple separated re-
sidual nidus compartments (Fig. 3.11). For this rea-
son, each embolization should be targeted at speciﬁ c 
compartments of the nidus to try to occlude the 
AVM from the periphery to the center. We consider 
the embolization completed when further catheter-
ization and glue injection is no more possible (too 
thin or tortuous pedicles, or pedicles feeding the 
AVM through arterio-arterial anastomosis). At that 
time, depending on the ﬁ nal result of embolization, 
radiosurgery or surgery is performed to obtain com-
plete occlusion of the AVM.
Fig. 3.16a–i. A 57-year-old man who presented with a frontal hema-
toma (grade II, Hunt and Hess). Left internal carotid angiography in 
lateral (a, b) and AP (c, d) views done on day 2 after bleeding showed 
a large brain AVM with very dilated feeding arteries and draining 
veins. Such dilatation of the feeding arteries indicates the presence of 
direct AV ﬁ stula shunts within the nidus. Superselective catheteriza-
tion was performed, showing multiple direct ﬁ stulas but no true nidus 
(e). Injection of glue in these very high ﬂ ow shunts was considered too 
hazardous. Catheterization of the origin of the feeding vessels with 
a nondetachable balloon catheter allowed much better control of the 
glue injection by balloon inﬂ ation (f). Two injections were performed, 
which occluded several direct shunts (g, h). The patient awoke from 
anesthesia in the same clinical status as before treatment. Three hours 
later he became hemiplegic, then comatose. CT scan showed a wide, 
deep, left hematoma with ventricular rupture (i). The patient died 
several hours later. Dramatic modiﬁ cation of the hemodynamics due 
to sudden occlusion of several ﬁ stulas with increased pressure in 
residual feeders and shunts is the most likely explanation for such 
bleeding. Nevertheless, although the nidus should theoretically be 
considered the ﬁ rst target in case of direct AV ﬁ stula, recognition 
and catheterization of the nidus itself is almost impossible because 
the catheter is systematically aspirated through the direct ﬁ stula
i

100 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
In some instances, complete cure is deemed 
impossible despite a combined technique. Partial 
treatment can yet be indicated in some cases: (a) to 
cure a weak point of the AVM such as a false aneu-
rysm, intranidal aneurysms, or large feeding artery 
aneurysms (Fig. 3.6); (b) to improve the clinical 
symptoms in case of a large AVM presenting with 
progressive neurologic deﬁ cits (Fox 1997).
The efﬁ cacy of partial embolization to improve 
the condition of patients with intractable seizures 
has never been proved, and such embolization should 
not be performed owing to the risk induced by re-
peated embolization with no evidence of beneﬁ ts. In 
the same way, the efﬁ cacy of partial embolization to 
reduce the risk of bleeding has not been proved. On 
the contrary, the computational model from Gao et 
al. (1997) suggests that there might be a higher risk 
of increased pressure gradients and subsequent risk 
of bleeding during ﬁ nal stages of embolization. Par-
tial embolization with the aim of reducing the risk 
of bleeding should therefore not be performed.
Results
Several factors make it impossible to accurately 
evaluate the results of brain AVM embolization: (a) 
the tremendous variety of embolic agents used; (b) 
considering only glue embolization, the extreme 
variety of techniques used (pedicle vs intranidal 
embolization) and the very rapid evolution of cath-
eter technology and changes in operator experience 
and skill, along with technological improvement; 
(c) the very different methods of patient selection 
(nonsurgical brain AVMs with series reporting only 
grade III–V AVM, vs series in which embolization is 
indicated as the ﬁ rst treatment step before surgery 
or radiosurgery); (d) the different goals of treatment 
(presurgical embolization aimed at reducing the 
ﬂ ow, vs curative embolization aimed at deﬁ nitely 
occluding the AVM). Neurosurgeons are right when 
they claim that no large series with good methodol-
ogy can accurately evaluate the results of current 
brain AVM embolization. In a meta-analysis, Friz-
zel and co-workers reviewed the past 35 years of 
brain AVM embolization (32 series, 1246 patients) 
(Frizzel and Fisher 1995). This study having been 
published in 1995, all the reviewed papers concerned 
almost obsolete embolization techniques and cer-
tainly do not reﬂ ect the current embolization tech-
niques and results. Embolization resulted in AVM 
cure in only 5%. Permanent morbidity was 9% and 
mortality 2%–1%. Ten years ago, complete occlusion 
of a brain AVM was supposed to be possible only in 
case of a small single pedicle AVM (Pelz et al. 1988; 
Berthelsen et al. 1990). In addition, these authors 
reported a case of complete obliterated AVM with a 
later recanalization, suggesting what is still in the 
mind of many neurosurgeons – that glue emboliza-
tion does not provide long-term occlusion of brain 
AVMs. More recent, though still obsolete, series 
reported cure rates of 10%–20% including large le-
sions (Berenstein and Choi 1988; Grzyska et al. 
1993; Guo et al. 1993). A cure rate of 70% has been 
reported for small lesions (Berenstein and Choi 
1988). Three small series reported much better re-
sults with cure rates of more than 50% (Samson et 
al. 1981; Nakstad et al. 1992; Wilms et al. 1993). 
Nevertheless, these results are quite surprising with 
regard to the embolization material used and no de-
tails are available concerning AVM characteristics. 
Wikholm et al. (1996) reported, for 150 patients 
treated, a cure rate of 13% with a mortality of 1.3% 
and severe morbidity of 6.7%. However, in this series 
the referred patients were selected by the neurosur-
geons, creating a recruitment bias favoring left side 
and eloquent-located AVMs as well as high Spetzler-
Martin grades (85% of the AVMs were grades III–V). 
Much better but still unpublished results include 
an obliteration rate by embolization alone of 33% 
(138/419 patients) (Picard et al. 1999).
The long-term stability of nidus occlusion with 
glue has been a matter of debate for many years; 
some authors have raised questions about the dan-
ger of revascularization. This concern was based 
on two different observations: (a) that revascular-
ization of a nidus may occur after incomplete oc-
clusion of large brain AVM (Vinters et al. 1986; 
Vinuela et al. 1986); (b) the long-term resorption 
of cyanoacrylate cast (Rao et al. 1989). The ﬁ rst 
ﬁ nding of revascularization of the nidus due to de-
velopment of extensive collaterals after incomplete 
occlusion of large brain AVM has been correlated to 
the proximity of the deposition of the embolic ma-
terial ( Vinuela et al. 1986; Fournier et al. 1990). 
This phenomenon is well recognized today as being 
secondary to too proximal occlusion of the feeding 
vessel without intranidal gluing. The proximal oc-
clusion favors extensive collateral recruitment to 
supply the nidus, which may be misinterpreted as 
recanalization due to poor long-term efﬁ cacy of the 
glue itself (Fig. 3.17). However, it is certain today 
that when complete occlusion is obtained by intra-
nidal injection the result is permanent (Wikholm et 
al. 1995). However, complete disappearance of any 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
101
Fig. 3.17a–g. An 18-year-old woman presenting with a 3-year history of intractable seizures despite adapted therapy. Right 
internal carotid injection in lateral (a, b) and AP (c, d) views show a large frontoparietal medial AVM, fed mainly by frontal 
branches of the anterior cerebral artery, as well as by a leptomeningeal anastomosis arising from distal branches of middle 
cerebral arteries. Final angiography obtained after four procedures shows important nidus remnant due to too proximal 
embolization of feeding pedicles from the anterior cerebral artery branches and opaciﬁ cation of the distal aspect of these 
embolized arteries by the pial anastomosis from middle cerebral artery branches (e–g). Embolization through these anas-
tomoses should never be performed in view of the certain subsequent neurologic deﬁ cit
g
a
c
e
b
d
f

102 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Fig. 3.18a–g. A 28-
year-old who presented 
with a huge cerebellar 
hematoma with head-
aches, diplopia, and 
consciousness distur-
bances but no deﬁ cit 
(a). Right vertebral 
injection shows a ver-
mian AVM fed by both 
superior cerebellar ar-
teries with a compact 
nidus draining into a 
single vermian vein 
presenting extensive 
ectasia, probably cor-
responding to the rup-
ture site (b, c). Control 
angiography obtained 
at the end of the two 
sessions of emboliza-
tion showed the cast of 
Histoacryl (d, e) and 
complete occlusion of 
the AVM (f). Follow-
up angiography at 3 
months showed a re-
sidual nidus and early 
venous drainage (g). 
The patient was treated 
with radiosurgery
g
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
103
nidus and draining vein immediately after emboli-
zation does not always predict deﬁ nitive occlusion, 
which can be ascertained only on angiography at 
several months’ follow-up (Fig. 3.18). The second 
observation, concerning resorption of the glue at 
follow-up angiography (Rao et al. 1989) is a con-
stant phenomenon (Fig. 3.19). Long-term follow-up 
of embolized brain AVM, whatever the result (cured 
or not cured), always shows a progressive disap-
pearance of the cast of glue. The reason why the glue 
is less and less visible over years is still not clear. 
A chronic inﬂ ammatory response with varying de-
grees of collagenization, ﬁ brosis, and mild lympho-
histiocytic inﬁ ltrates with an indistinct layer of nor-
mal vessel walls were observed on light microscopy 
(Kish et al. 1983; Vinters et al. 1985). The giant cell 
reaction is conﬁ ned to the vessel lumen, without any 
reaction in the media or adventitia (Freeny et al. 
1979; Vinters et al. 1986). The most likely mecha-
nism to explain the progressive decreased density of 
the cast is intracellular phagocytosis of bucrylates 
or Lipiodol.
Fig. 3.19a–d. Large parietal AVM. Cast of glue obtained after two embolizations, AP and lateral view (a, b). The patient was 
lost to follow-up for 3 years. Nonsubtracted images obtained at the beginning of the third procedure of embolization show 
almost complete resorption of the cast of glue (c, d)
a
c
b
d

104 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
3.5.3.6 
Intranidal Embolization with Nonadhesive Liquid 
Embolic Agents
(*Modifi ed by Prof. I. Wanke)
A nonadhesive liquid polymer was developed (Onyx, 
Micro Therapeutics, Inc., Irvine, Calif.) (Taki et 
al. 1990; Murayama et al. 1998). Onyx is made 
of a mixture of ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer 
(EVOH) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). EVOH is 
a copolymer of polyethylene and polyvinyl alcohol. 
Polyethylene was used for artiﬁ cial joint implanta-
tion and polyvinyl alcohol constituted the particles 
of PVA used for embolization. The EVOH is dis-
solved in the DMSO at three different concentra-
tions: 6% (with 6% copolymer and 94% solvent, 
Onyx 18), 6.5% (Onyx 20), and – 8% (Onyx 34). 
A low concentration (6%) is less viscous and can 
allow more distal nidal penetration. The mixture 
is made opaque with tantalum powder. Onyx is 
supplied in prepared vials that must be kept on a 
speciﬁ c shaker for at least 20 min prior to its injec-
tion to avoid tantalum settlement and poor opacity. 
Only catheters compatible with DMSO can be used 
(Ultraﬂ ow, Marathon, Echelon, Micro Therapeutics, 
Inc., Irvine, Calif.). The main advantage of a non-
adhesive liquid is that it theoretically eliminates 
the risk of gluing the catheter and makes it possible 
to perform a more durable injection, with a larger 
amount of agent delivered in a single injection. Taki 
et al. (1990) ﬁ rst described the use of Onyx in ce-
rebral AVM (Goto et al. 1991; Terada et al. 1991; 
Yamashita et al. 1994; Murayama et al. 1999). 
Onyx was used in 23 patients, achieving an average 
of 63% volume reduction after a total of 129 arterial 
feeder embolizations (Jahan et al. 2001). Morbidity 
was 4% permanent deﬁ cits and no death. No com-
plete cure was obtained. Eleven patients were subse-
quently operated on. Histopathologic study showed 
inﬂ ammatory changes as well as angionecrosis of 
embolized vessels in two cases.
Onyx as non-adhesive liquid embolic has now 
become a widely used material to treat AV-malfor-
mations and also pial and dural AV-ﬁ stulas. With 
knowledge of the morphologic characteristics of 
AVMs that are suitable for a treatment with Onyx, 
high occlusion rates and low complication rates in 
treating a small number of feeders are feasible. Su-
perselective intranidal or perinidal catheter posi-
tions and slow, controlled injections that protect the 
draining veins make the therapy safe even in com-
plex AVMs and critical locations. Complete oblit-
eration can be achieved in small and medium sized 
AVMs without additional surgery or radiotherapy 
(Figs. 3.20 and 3.21) and to a lesser extent also in 
large AVM (Fig. 3.22). Although there is a learning 
curve the number of complete AVM obliterations 
is higher than after embolisation with glue. A great 
advantage is that large AVMs can be adequately re-
duced in size for additional surgical or radiosurgical 
treatment (Fig. 3.23). Preoperative use of Onyx in ce-
rebral AVM treatment allows profound occlusion by 
targeted embolization and provides a basis for safe 
neurosurgical resection (Weber et al. 2007). From a 
neurosurgical point of view, Onyx is suitable for pre-
operative embolization of AVMs, because the nidus 
intraoperatively remains elastic and formable and 
can be dissected from the surrounding brain tissue 
quite well by microsurgical technique (Duffner et 
al. 2002; Akin et al. 2003).
In 47 patients Weber and coworkers could achieve 
a mean nidus reduction of 84% using Onyx. During 
the procedure ﬁ ve vessel perforations occurred and 
four microcatheters were stuck, but without clinical 
sequelae in those patients. In two patients delayed 
bleeding after intervention occurred but again with 
good clinical outcome. In 44 patients treated with 
Onyx for an AVM, van Rooij et al. (2007) had a mor-
bidity rate of 4.6% and a mortality rate of 2.3%. They 
achieved a mean nidus reduction of 75% and a total 
obliteration in 16% of the cases. Theses numbers do 
reﬂ ect the possibility to occlude a high proportion of 
the nidus with Onyx.
These numbers also demonstrate that complica-
tions might occur using Onyx but do not have to 
lead to serious clinical sequelae. Vessel perforation 
is observed more often with the use of Onyx since an 
intranidal microcatheter position is desired due to 
the nature of the material that it does not ﬂ ow with 
the blood stream like glue. Extremely ﬂ exible mi-
crocatheters, compatible with the use of Onyx, are 
able to easily reach the AVM nidus, in other words 
superselective microcatheter position in pathologic 
nidus vessels is performed. Probably due to this rea-
son vessel perforation, either with the microcatheter 
or just during injection of contrast agent through 
the microcatheter, occurs more often but is gener-
ally without any consequence for the patient. If a de-
layed bleeding occurs clinical sequelae are generally 
worse since obviously hemodynamic changes were 
present.
In patients with a high ﬂ ow ﬁ stula associated 
with an AV-malformation the use of a microballoon 
proximally is extremely helpful to block the arterial 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
105
Fig. 3.20a–e. Brain AVM with a high ﬂ ow ﬁ stulous compartment (arrow). Elimination of the ﬁ stula (arrowhead) with coils 
and Onyx could be achieved during proximal ﬂ ow interruption using a microballoon (Hyperglide, MTI)
a
c
e
b
d

106 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
ﬂ ow and to achieve stasis to be able to inject Onyx or 
a combination of coils and Onyx (Fig. 3.24).
Onyx has some advantages and some drawbacks 
to its use in AVMs:
Advantages
The major advantage to the use of Onyx compared 
with cyanoacrylates is the ease of injection. The 
catheter should be placed in the same wedge situ-
ation as for intranidal glue injection. The injection 
should be very slow, as well. It may be stopped for 
a few seconds or minutes to wait for precipitation 
of Onyx in order to avoid reﬂ ux, and then resumed. 
Control angiography may be performed during 
Onyx injection for a better understanding of mate-
rial progression and of nidus and vein occlusion. 
Onyx always behaves as a column, and the formation 
of small drops ﬂ owing into the vein that may be seen 
when glue is injected too fast normally do not occur. 
In a brain AVM associated with a high ﬂ ow ﬁ stula 
passover of Onyx into the venous system might oc-
cur. In such a condition, high concentration Onyx 
(Onyx 34) should be used sometimes necessarily in 
Fig. 3.21a–d. Temporal small brain AVM with superﬁ cial 
venous drainage in a patient with seizures. Complete oblit-
eration with Onyx could be achieved; the Onyx cast dem-
onstrates penetration of Onyx into the proximal part of the 
vein (arrow)
a
c
b
d

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
107
Fig. 3.22a–e. Small infratentorial brain AVM with two as-
sociated aneurysms along the PICA in a patient with SAH. 
Complete endovascular cure could be performed while coil-
ing the proximal aneurysm and embolising the AVM with 
Onyx through the superior cerebellar artery. Note: after 
AVM-treatment the more distal aneurysm disappeared
a
c
e
b
d

108 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
a
c
e
b
d
f


 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
109
Fig. 3.23a–h. Large occipital brain AVM in a patient with 
longstanding migraine and learning problems. This AVM 
(Spetzler grade IV) could be completely obliterated with 
Onyx in two sessions. 3 month control showed stable oc-
clusion of the AVM, the migraine was completely gone
association with proximal ﬂ ow reduction, e.g. with 
adjunct microballoon. The injection may last for 
several minutes or even tens of minutes. The total 
amount of Onyx injected at one time in one single 
pedicle may therefore be much more than with glue. 
It reduces the number of catheters used and the total 
number of procedures needed to achieve a complete 
cure of the AVM. The other major advantage is that 
because injection is more prolonged and the deci-
sion to stop or continue the injection does not have 
to be made immediately, as it does for glue injection, 
the training of young neuroradiologists to perform 
Onyx injection is much easier than the mastering 
of glue injection.
Disadvantages
The toxicity of DMSO has been discussed in a few 
reports (Chaloupka et al. 1994; Sampei et al. 1996; 
Murayama et al. 1998; Chaloupka et al. 1999). The 
ﬁ rst paper of Chaloupka and coworkers emphasized 
the risk of severe vasospasm after injection of 0.8 ml 
EVOH and DMSO in the swine rete mirabile with 
subsequent infarction. Injection of 0.5 ml resulted in 
delayed (7–14 days) subarachnoid hemorrhage with 
angionecrosis on histology and arterial microaneu-
rysms. Two other studies reexamined this toxicity 
and concluded that the two major points are contact 
time with the arterial wall and volume of injection 
(Murayama et al. 1998; Chaloupka et al. 1999). 
Finally, it has been proved that injection of 0.3 ml for 
40 s produced neither vasospasm nor angionecrosis. 
The protocol of injection is as follows: Prior to injec-
tion the microcatheter is ﬂ ushed with 5 ml normal 
saline. Then 0.25 ml DMSO is injected over more 
than 40 s for dead space catheter ﬁ lling. Onyx is then 
injected slowly (Jahan et al. 2001). Nevertheless, 
despite the fact that this protocol was used in all the 
23 patients treated, histology showed angionecrosis 
of many vessels in two of four patients operated on 
1 day after embolization. Consequently, there is still 
some question of a likely toxicity of DMSO. One is-
sue may be that because of the wedge position of the 
catheter, there might be a stagnation of DMSO in the 
pedicle and nidus, with prolonged contact of DMSO 
with the vessel wall and risk of necrosis.
At the beginning of injection there is frequently a 
reﬂ ux of Onyx along the tip of the catheter. The in-
jection must be stopped and resumed a few seconds 
or minutes later until a progression within the nidus 
is observed. As soon as it has precipitated around 
the tip of the catheter, Onyx tends to open different 
compartments of the nidus and the injection may be 
prolonged. This technique carries two risks: the oc-
g
h

110 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Fig. 3.24a–d. Temporo-frontal brain AVM (Spetzler grade III) in a very eloquent area in a 36-year-old patient with a hem-
orrhage a year ago clinically associated with transient speech problems. Preoperative tremendous nidal reduction could 
be achieved in two sessions using Onyx. After resection of the residual nidus the patient was neurologically intact without 
any speech problems
a
b
ZZ
clusion of an adjacent normal branch due to reﬂ ux 
of Onyx in the feeding pedicle; gluing of the tip of 
the catheter because of a very prolonged injection. 
Although Onyx is not adhesive, catheter withdrawal 
may be difﬁ cult and result in either gluing or break-
ing of the catheter, or stretching and rupture of the 
AVM and artery. Attachment of the catheter is due to 
physically clutching the microcatheter, if that con-
dition occurs it is important to withdraw the cath-
eter very slowly under continuous gentle pulling. In 
the posterior circulation this may result in very low 
heart frequency until asystolie. Pushing back the 
microcatheter will immediately recover heart beat 
and the manoeuvre should be redone. But in gen-
eral, very prolonged injection with serious reﬂ ux 
more than 1.5 cm along the catheter tip should be 
unconditionally avoided.
One of the major advantages of Onyx is that a 
large volume may be introduced in one single cathe-
ter injection. However, there is a risk of hemorrhage. 
The operator may be temped to occlude a very large 
portion of the nidus in one procedure. Many years 

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
111
c
d
ago it was proven that staged embolization aimed at 
reducing the nidus in several sessions is mandatory 
to progressively modify the ﬂ ow dynamics. Very 
sudden and large-scale occlusion of the nidus surely 
increases the risk of postprocedural hemorrhage, as 
discussed above.
There are still two situations in which Onyx 
should not be used today: direct ﬁ stula, in which 
the Onyx cannot occlude solely a high-ﬂ ow large 
shunt because it is not adhesive, and a feeding ped-
icle “en passage”, in which reﬂ ux on the tip of the 
catheter is not allowed due to major risk of normal 
vessel occlusion like in any other liquid embolic 
material. But if the “en passage-vessel” could be 
catheterized far enough slowly injection of Onyx 
might be possible and other compartments of the 
nidus could be reached from this position. A very 
important point is that one should be aware of the 
amount of reﬂ ux. To avoid extensive amount of re-
ﬂ ux the concept is to wait and plug the “way back” 
which can take some minutes but time investment 
is justiﬁ ed.

112 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
3.5.4 
Therapeutic Strategy
It is extremely difﬁ cult to establish a therapeutic 
algorithm for brain AVM. The indication for treat-
ment basically depends on:
Clinical presentation (hemorrhage or not)
Patient age
Natural risk, roughly evaluated by the presence 
or not of likely risk factors of bleeding (associated 
aneurysm or false aneurysm, venous stenosis or 
ectasia)
AVM size, location (superﬁ cial or deep, eloquent 
or not) and angioarchitecture (compact or dif-
fuse)
The goal of treatment may be:
Deﬁ nitive complete obliteration to protect from 
hemorrhage
Partially targeted treatment (embolization) to 
eliminate risk factors of bleeding/rebleeding 
(feeding artery aneurysms, intranidal aneurysms, 
false aneurysms)
Partial treatment in case of AVM presenting with 
worsening neurologic deﬁ cits (although the efﬁ -
cacy of such treatment is yet to be proven)
Partial treatment should not be performed to:
Decrease bleeding risk, because even subtotal 
therapy does not confer protection from hemor-
rhage
Improve seizures, because of treatment-induced 
risks and unproved efﬁ ciency
The indication for treatment, goal of treatment, 
and therapeutic strategy should be decided on by an 
experienced multidisciplinary team in agreement 
with the patient, who has been precisely informed of 
natural and therapeutic risks. Multimodality treat-
ment is frequently performed – either as a planned 
maneuver, typically with embolization followed by 
radiosurgery or surgery, or as an unplanned maneu-
ver when one modality fails and a second modality 
is required for complete obliteration. Goals of the 
different modalities should be clear at the outset. In 
our experience, embolization is the ﬁ rst-intention 
approach in the vast majority of the patients, fol-
lowed by either surgery or radiosurgery. Neverthe-
less, because of the extreme variability of resources 
available in any one area of the country or world, as 
well as very different skills and experience on the 
part of neurosurgeons and interventional neurora-









diologists, it is impossible to draft any recommen-
dations about strategy itself. Because there is almost 
never a need for brain AVM treatment in emergency 
(as opposed to aneurysm treatment), patients with 
brain AVMs should be sent to very specialized and 
experienced centers that can afford the most up-to-
date multimodality therapy.
Acknowledgements go to Drs. Zhang Peng and Zhu 
Fengshiu for their major contribution to the biblio-
graphic research.
References
Aberfeld DC, Rao KR (1981) Familial arteriovenous malfor-
mation of the brain. Neurology 31:184–186
Aesch B, Lioret E, deToffel B et al. (1991) Multiple cerebral 
angiomas and Rendu-Osler-Weber disease: case report. 
Neurosurgery 29:599–602
Akin ED, Perkins E, Ross IB (2003) Surgical handling char-
acteristics of an ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer com-
pared with N-butyl cyanoacrylate used for embolization 
of vessels in an arteriovenous malformation resection 
model in swine. J Neurosurg 98(2):366–370
Alkadhi H, Kollias SS, Crelier GR et al. (2000) Plasticity of 
the human motor cortex in patients with arteriovenous 
malformations: a functional MR imaging study. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 21:1423–1433
Al-Rodhan NRF, Sundt TM Jr, Piepgras DG (1993) A theory 
for the hemodynamic complications following resection 
of intracerebral arteriovenous malformations. J Neuro-
surg 78:167–175
Al-Shahi R, Warlow C (2001) A systematic review of the fre-
quency and prognosis of arteriovenous malformations of 
the brain in adults. Brain 124:1900–1926
Amin-Hanjani S, Robertzon R, Arginteanu MS, Scott RM 
(1998) Familial intracranial arteriovenous malforma-
tions. Case report and review of the literature. Pediatr 
Neurosurg 29:208–213
Andrews BT, Wilson CB (1987) Staged treatment of arte-
riovenous malformations of the brain. Neurosurgery 
21:314–323
Aoki Y, Nakasawa K, Tago M et al. (1996) Clinical evaluation 
of Gamma knife radiosurgery for intracranial arteriove-
nous malformations. Radiat Med 14:265–268
Aoki S, Sasaki Y, Machida T et al. (1998) 3D-CT angiogra-
phy of cerebral arteriovenous malformations. Radiat Med 
16:263–271
Bank WO, Kerber CW, Cromwell LD (1981) Treatment of in-
tracerebral arteriovenous malformations with isobutyl 
2-cyanoacrylate: initial experience. Radiology 31:1
Barnett GH, Little JR, Ebrahim ZY, Jones SC, Friel HT (1987) 
Cerebral circulation during arteriovenous malformation 
operation. Neurosurgery 20:836–842
Batjer HH, Suss RA, Samson D (1986) Intracranial arterio-
venous malformations associated with aneurysms. Neu-
rosurgery 18:29–35

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
113
Batjer HH, Devous MD Sr, Meyer YJ, Purdy PD, Samson DS 
(1988) Cerebrovascular hemodynamics in arteriovenous 
malformation complicated by normal perfusion pressure 
breakthrough. Neurosurgery 22:503–509
Batjer HH, Devous MD Sr, Seibert GB et al. (1989a) Intracra-
nial arteriovenous malformation: relationship between 
clinical factors and surgical complications. Neurosurgery 
24:75–79
Batjer HH, Purdy PD, Giller CA, Samson DS (1989b) Evidence 
of redistribution of cerebral blood ﬂ ow during treatment 
for an intracranial arteriovenous malformation. Neuro-
surgery 25:599–605
Berenstein A, Choi IS (1988) Surgical neuroangiography of 
intracranial lesions. Radiol Clin North Am 26:1143–1151
Berenstein A, Lasjaunias P (1992) Classiﬁ cation of brain arte-
riovenous malformations. In: Surgical neuroangiography, 
vol 4. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, pp 1–86
Berg JN, Gallione CJ, Stenzel T et al. (1997) The activin recep-
tor-like-kinase 1 gene: genomic structure and mutations 
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type 2. Am J 
Hum Genet 61:60–67
Berman MF, Sciacca RR, Pile-Spellman J et al. (2000) The 
epidemiology of brain arteriovenous malformations. 
Neurosurgery 47:389–396
Berthelsen B, Lofgren J, Svendsen P (1990) Embolization of ce-
rebral arteriovenous malformations with bucrylate: expe-
rience in a ﬁ rst series of 29 patients. Acta Radiol 31:13–21
Betti OO, Munari C (1992) Traitement radiochirurgical avec 
accélérateur linéaire des “petites” malformations artério-
veineus intra-craniennes. Neurochirurgie 38:27–34
Betti OO, Munari C, Rosler R (1989) Stereotactic radiosur-
gery with linear accelerator: treatment of arterio-venous 
malformations. Neurosurgery 24:311–321
Binder JR, Swanson SJ, Hammeke TA et al. (1996) Determi-
nation of language dominance with fMRI: a comparison 
with the Wada test. Neurology 46:978–984
Blat DR, Friedman WA, Bova FJ (1993) Modiﬁ cations based 
on computed tomographic imaging in planning the ra-
diosurgical treatment of arterio-venous malformations. 
Neurosurgery 33:588–595
Brown RD, Wiebers DO, Forbes G et al. (1988) The natural 
history of unruptured intracranial arteriovenous malfor-
mations. J Neurosurg 68:352–357
Brown RD, Wiebers DO, Forbes GS (1990) Unruptured intra-
cranial aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations and 
relationship of lesions. J Neurosurg 73:859–863
Brown RD Jr, Wiebers DO, Torner JC, O’Fallon WM (1996a) 
Incidence and prevalence of intracranial vascular mal-
formations in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1965 to 1992. 
Neurology 46:949–952
Brown RD Jr, Wiebers DO, Torner JC et al. (1996b) Frequency 
of intracranial hemorrhage as a presenting symtom and 
subtype analysis: a population-based study of intracra-
nial vascular malformations in Olmsted Country, Min-
nesota. J Neurosurg 85:29–32
Carpentier AC, Constable RT, Schlosser MJ et al. (2001) Pat-
terns of functional magnetic resonance imaging activa-
tion in association with structural lesions in the rolandic 
region: a classiﬁ cation system. J Neurosurg 94:946–954
Carter LP, Gumerlock MK (1995) Steal and cerebral arterio-
venous malformations. Stroke 26:2371–2372
Castel JP, Kantor G (2000) Postoperative morbidity and mor-
tality after microsurgical exclusion of cerebral arteriove-
nous malformations. Current data and analysis of recent 
literature. Neurochirurgie 47:369–383
Challa VR, Moody DM, Brown WR (1995) Vascular malfor-
mations in the central nervous system. J Neuropathol Exp 
Neurol 54:609–621
Chaloupka JC, Vinuela F, Vinters HV, Robert J (1994) Tech-
nical feasibility and histopathologic studies of ethylene 
vinyl copolymer (EVAL) using a swine endovascular em-
bolization model. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 15:1107–1115
Chaloupka JC, Huddle DC, Alderman JJ et al. (1998) Classi-
ﬁ cation of vascular malformations of the central nervous 
system. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 54:609–621
Chaloupka JC, Huddle DC, Alderman J et al. (1999) A reex-
amination of the angiotoxicity of superselective injection 
of DMSO in the swine rete embolization model. AJNR Am 
J Neuroradiol 20:401–410
Cheifetz S, Bellon T, Calles C, Vera S et al. (1992) Endoglin 
is a component of the transforming growth factor-beta 
receptor system in human endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 
267:19027–19030
Chen JW, Kerber C, Hoi-Sang U (1991) Spontaneous regres-
sion of large bilateral basal ganglia arteriovenous malfor-
mations. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 12:835–837
Chin LS, Raffel C, Gonzalez-Gomez I, Giannotta SL, Mc-
Comb JG (1992) Diffuse arteriovenous malformations: a 
clinical, radiological and pathological description. Neu-
rosurgery 31:863–868
Cognard C, Weill A, Tovi M, Castaings L et al. (1999) Treat-
ment of distal aneurysms of the cerebellar arteries by in-
tra-aneurysmal injection of glue. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
20:780–784
Colombo F (1989) Linear accelerator radiosurgery. A clinical 
experience. J Neurosurg Sci 33:123–125
Colombo F, Benedetti A, Pozza F et al. (1989) Linear accel-
erator radiosurgery of cerebral arteriovenous malforma-
tions. Neurosurgery 24:833–840
Colombo F, Pozza F, Chierego G et al. (1994) Linear accel-
erator radiosurgery of cerebral arteriovenous malforma-
tions: an update. Neurosugery 34:14–21
Crawford M, West CR, Chadwick DW et al. (1986) Arteriove-
nous malformations of the brain: natural history in unop-
erated patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 49:1–10
Cunha e Sa MJ, Stein BM, Solomon RA et al. (1992) The treat-
ment of associated intracranial aneurysms and arteriove-
nous malformations. J Neurosurg 77:853–859
Davis C, Symon L (1985) The management of cerebral arterio-
venous malformations. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 74:4–11
Debrun G, Lacour P, Caron JP et al. (1978) Detachable balloon 
and calibrated leak balloon techniques in the treatment 
of cerebral vascular lesions. J Neurosurg 49:635–649
Debrun G, Vinuela F, Fox A et al. (1982) Embolization of 
cerebral arteriovenous malformations with bucrylate. 
J Neurosurg 56:615–627
Debrun GM, Aletich V, Ausman JI et al. (1997) Embolization 
of nidus of brain arteriovenous malformations with n-
butyl cyanoacrylate. Neurosurgery 40:112–121
De Oliveira E, Tedeschi H, Siqueira MG et al. (1997) Arteriove-
nous malformations of the basal ganglia region: rationale 
for surgical management. Acta Neurochir 139:487–506
Deruty R, Mottolese C, Soustiel JF, Pelissou-Guyotat I (1990) 
Association of cerebral arteriovenous malformation and 
cerebral aneurysm. Diagnosis and management. Acta 
Neurochir (Wien) 107:133–139

114 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Deruty R, Pelissou-Guyotat I, Mottolese C, Amat D et al. 
(1996) Therapeutic risk in multidisciplinary approach of 
cerebral arteriovenous malformations. Neurochirurgie 
42:35–43
Deveikis JP, Manz HJ, Luessenhop AJ et al. (1994) A clinical 
and neuropathologic study of silk suture as an embolic 
agent for brain arteriovenous malformation. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 15:263–271
Dias MS, Sekhar LN (1990) Intracranial hemorrhage from an-
eurysms and arteriovenous malformations during preg-
nancy and the puerperium. Neurosurgery 27:855–866
Drake CG, Friedman AH, Peerless SJ (1986) Posterior fossa 
arteriovenous malformations. J Neurosurg 64:1–10
Duckwiler GR, Dion JE, Vinuela F, Jabour B, Martin N, Bent-
son J (1990) Intravascular microcatheter pressure moni-
toring: experimental results and early clinical evaluation. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 11:169–175
Duckwiler GR, Dion JE, Vinuela F et al. (1992) Delayed venous 
occlusion following embolotherapy of vascular malforma-
tions in the brain. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 13:1571–1579
Ducreux D, Trystram D, Oppenheim C et al. (2001) Imagerie 
diagnostique des malformations artério-veineuses céré-
brales. Neurochirurgie 47:190–200
Duffner F, Ritz R, Bornemann A, Freudenstein D, Wiendl H, 
Siekmann R (2002) Combined therapy of cerebral arterio-
venous malformations: histological differences between a 
non-adhesive liquid embolic agent and n-butyl 2-cyano-
acrylate (NBCA). Clin Neuropathol 21(1):13–17
Duong DH, Young WL, Vang MC et al. (1998) Feeding artery 
pressure and venous drainage pattern are primary de-
terminants of hemorrhage from cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations. Stroke 29:1167–1176
Edelman RR, Wentz KU, Mattle HP et al. (1989) Intracerebral 
arteriovenous malformations: evaluation with selective 
MR angiography and venography. Radiology 173:831–837
Essig M, Wenz F, Schoenberg SO et al. (2000) Arteriove-
nous malformations. Assessment of gliotic and ischemic 
changes with ﬂ uid-attenuated inversion-recovery MRI. 
Invest Radiol 35:689–694
Farb RI, McGregor C, Kim JK et al. (2001) Intracranial arte-
riovenous malformations: real-time auto-triggered ellip-
tic centric-ordered 3D gadolinium – enhanced MR angi-
ography – initial assessment. Radiology 220:244–251
Fink GR (1992) Effects of cerebral angiomas on perifocal and 
remote tissue: a multivariate positron emission tomogra-
phy study. Stroke 23:1099–1105
Finnerty JJ, Chisholm CA, Chapple H et al. (1999) Cerebral 
arteriovenous malformation in pregnancy: presentation 
and neurologic, obstetric, and ethical signiﬁ cance. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 181:296–303
Fischer AW, Er H (1930) Lokales Amyloid im Gehirn. Eine 
Spätfolge von Roentgenbestrahlungen. Dtsch Z Chir 
227:475–483
Folkow B, Gurevich M, Hallbach M, Lundgren Y et al. (1971) 
The hemodynamic consequences of regional hypotension 
in spontaneously hypertensive and normotensive rats. 
Acta Physiol Scand 83:532–541
Fong GH, Rossant J, Gertsenstein M, Breitman ML (1995) 
Role of the Flt-1 receptor tyrosine kinase in regulating the 
assembly of vascular endothelium. Nature 376:66–70
Fournier D, Terbrugge K, Rodesch G et al. (1990) Revascular-
ization of brain arteriovenous malformations after em-
bolization with bucrylate. Neuroradiology 32:497–501
Fournier D, Terbrugge K, Willinsky R et al. (1991) Endovas-
cular treatment of intracerebral arteriovenous malfor-
mations: experience in 49 cases. J Neurosurg 75:228–233
Fox AJ (1997) Recurrent AVMs after negative angiography. 
J Neurosurg 86:170–171
Fox AJ, Pelz DM, Lee DH (1990) Arteriovenous malforma-
tions of the brain: recent results of endovascular therapy. 
Radiology 177:51–57
Freeny PC, Mennemeyer R, Kidd CR (1979) Long-time ra-
diographic pathologic follow-up of patients treated with 
visceral transcatheter occlusion using isobutyl 2-cyano-
acrylate (bucrylate). Radiology 132:51–60
Freudenstein D, Duffner F, Ernemann U et al. (2001) Recur-
rence of a cerebral arteriovenous malformation after sur-
gical excision. Cerebrovasc Disc 11:59–64
Friedman WA, Bova FJ, Mendenhall WM (1995) Linear accel-
erator radiosurgery for arterio-venous malformations. The 
relationship of size to outcome. J Neurosurg 82:180–189
Friedman WA, Blatt DL, Bova FJ et al. (1996) The risk of 
hemorrhage after radiosurgery for arterio-venous mal-
formations. J Neurosurg 84:912–919
Frishberg BM (1997) Neuroimaging in presumed primary 
headache disorders. Semin Neurol 17:373–382
Frizzel RT, Fisher WS (1995) Cure, morbidity, and mortality 
associated with embolization of cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations: a review of 1246 patients in 32 series over 
a 35-year period. Neurosurgery 37:1031–1040
Fry D (1968) Acute vascular endothelial changes associ-
ated with increased blood velocity gradients. Circ Res 
22:165–197
Fults D, Kelly DL (1984) Natural history of arteriovenous 
malformations of the brain: a clinical study. Neurosur-
gery 15:658–662
Gallina P, Merienne L, Meder JF et al. (1998) Failure in radio-
surgery treatment of cerebral arteriovenous malforma-
tions. Neurosurgery 2:996–1004
Gao E, Young WL, Pile-Spellman J et al. (1997) Cerebral ar-
teriovenous malformations feeding artefact aneurysms: a 
theoretical model of intravascular pressure changes after 
treatment. Neurosurgery 41:1345–1356
Garcia-Monaco R, Rodesch G, Alvarez H et al. (1993) Pseu-
doaneurysms within ruptured intracranial arteriovenous 
malformations: diagnosis and early endovascular man-
agement. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 14:315–321
Garretson HD (1985) Intracranial arteriovenous malforma-
tions. In: Wilkins RH, Rengachary SS (eds) Neurosurgery. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, pp 1448–1457
Germano IM, Davis RL, Wilson CB, Hieshima GB (1992) His-
topathological follow-up study of 66 cerebral arteriove-
nous malformations after therapeutic embolization with 
polyvinyl alcohol. J Neurosurg 76:607–614
Goto K, Uda K, Ogata N (1991) Embolization of cerebral ar-
teriovenous malformations (AVMs): material selection, 
improved technique, and tactics in the initial therapy of 
cerebral AVMs. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) 33(Suppl):193–
199
Graf CJ, Perret GE, Torner JC (1983) Bleeding from cerebral 
arteriovenous malformations as part of their natural his-
tory. J Neurosurg 58:331–337
Grifﬁ ths PD, Hoggard N, Warren DJ et al. (2000) Brain arte-
riovenous malformations: assessment with dynamic MR 
digital subtraction angiography. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
21:1892–1899

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
115
Grzyska U, Westphal M, Zanella F, Freckmann N, Herrmann 
HD, Zeumer H (1993) A joint protocol for the neurosurgi-
cal and neuroradiologic treatment of cerebral arteriove-
nous malformations: indications, technique, and results 
in 76 cases. Surg Neurol 40:476–484
Guo WY, Wikholm G, Karlsson B, Lindquist C, Svendsen 
P, Ericson K (1993) Combined embolization and gamma 
knife radiosurgery for cerebral arteriovenous malforma-
tions. Acta Radiol 34:600–606
Guttmacher AE, Marchuk DA, White RIJ (1995) Hereditary 
hemorrhagic telanciectasia. N Engl J Med 33:918–924
Hacein-Bey L, Nour R, Pile-Spellman J et al. (1995) Adap-
tive changes in autoregulation to chronic cerebral hypo-
tension with arteriovenous malformations: an acetazol-
amide-enhanced single-photon emission CT study. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 16(9):1865–1874
Hademenos GJ, Alberts MJ, Awad I, Maiberg M et al. (2001) 
Advances in the genetics of cerebrovascular disease and 
stroke. Neurology 56:997–1008
Hamilton MG, Spetzler RF (1994) The prospective applica-
tion of a grading system for arteriovenous malforma-
tions. Neurosurgery 34:2–7
Hanahan D (1997) Signaling vascular morphogenesis and 
maintenance. Sciences 277:48–50
Handa T, Negoro M, Miyachi S et al. (1993) Evaluation of 
pressure changes in feeding arteries during embolization 
intracerebral arteriovenous malformations. J Neurosurg 
79:383–389
Hartmann A, Mast H, Mohr JP et al. (1998) Morbidity of in-
tracranial hemorrhage in patients with cerebral arterio-
venous malformation. Stroke 29:931–934
Hartmann A, Stapf C, Hofmeister C et al. (2000) Determi-
nants of neurological outcome after surgery for brain 
arteriovenous malformations. Stroke 31:2361–2364
Hasegawa S, Hamada JI, Morioka M, Kai Y, Takaki S, Ushio 
(1999) Multiple cerebral arteriovenous malformations 
(AVMs) associated with spinal AVM. Acta Neurochir 
(Wien) 141:315–319
Hashimoto N (2001) Microsurgery for cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations: a dissection technique and its theoretical 
implications. Neurosurgery 48:1278–1281
Hashimoto N, Emala CW, Joshi S, Mesa-Tejada R et al. 
(2001) Abnormal pattern of Tie-2 and vascular endothe-
lial growth factor receptor expression in human cerebral 
arteriovenous malformations. Neurosurgery 47:910–918
Hassler W, Steinmetz H (1987) Cerebral hemodynamics in 
angioma patients: an intraoperative study. J Neurosurg 
67:822–831
Henkes H, Nahser HC, Berg-Dammer E et al. (1998) Endo-
vascular therapy of brain AVMs prior to radiosurgery. 
Neurol Res 20:479–492
Heros RC, Korosue K, Diebold PM (1990) Surgical excision of 
cerebral arteriovenous malformations: late results. Neu-
rosurgery 26:570–578
Herzig R, Burval S, Vladyka V et al. (2000) Familial occurrence 
of cerebral arteriovenous malformation in sisters: case re-
port and review of the literature. Eur J Neurol 7:95–100
Hillman J (2001) Population-based analysis of arteriovenous 
malformation treatment. J Neurosurg 95:633–637
Hofmeister C, Stapf C, Hartmann A et al. (2000) Demo-
graphic, morphological, and clinical characteristics of 
1289 patients with brain arteriovenous malformation. 
Stroke 31:1307–1310
Horton JC, Chambers WA, Lyons SL et al. (1990) Pregnancy 
and the risk of hemorrhage from cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations. Neurosurgery 27:867–872
Houdart E, Gobin YP, Casasco A, Aymard A, Herbreteau D, 
Merland JJ (1993) A proposed angiographic classiﬁ cation 
of intracranial arterio-venous ﬁ stulae and malforma-
tions. Neuroradioly 35:381–385
Itoyama Y, Uemura S, Ushio Y et al. (1989) Natural course 
of unoperated intracranial arteriovenous malformations: 
study of 50 cases. J Neurosurg 71:805–809
Jafar JJ, Rezai AR (1994) Acute surgical management of in-
tracranial arteriovenous malformations. Neurosurgery 
34:8–13
Jafar JJ, Daviss AJ, Berenstein A (1993) The effect of embo-
lization with n-butyl cyanoacrylate prior to surgical re-
section of cerebral arteriovenous malformations. J Neu-
rosurg 78:60–69
Jahan R, Murayama Y, Gobin YP et al. (2001) Emboliza-
tion of arteriovenous malformations with Onyx: clini-
copathological experience in 23 patients. Neurosurgery 
48:984–997
Jellinger K (1977) Human central nervous system lesions 
following radiation therapy. Zentralbl Neurochir 38:199–
200
Jellinger K (1986) Vascular malformations of the ventral 
nervous system: a morphological overview. Neurosurg 
Rev 9:177–216
Jessurun GA, Kamphuis DJ, van der Zande FH, Nossent 
JC (1993) Cerebral arteriovenous malformations in the 
Netherlands Antilles. High prevalence of heridatary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia-related single and multiple 
cerebral arteriovenous malformations. Clin Neurol Neu-
rosurg 95:193–198
Johnson DW, Berg JN, Baldwin MA, Gallione CJ et al. (1996) 
Mutations in the activin receptor-like kinase 1 gene in 
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia type 2. Nat Genet 
13:189–195
Jomin M, Lejeune JP, Blond S (1993) Histoire naturelle et 
pronostic spontané des malformations artério-veineuses 
cérébrales. Neurochirurgie 39:205–211
Jungreis CA, Horton JA, Hecht ST (1989) Blood pressure 
changes in feeders to cerebral arteriovenous malforma-
tions during therapeutic embolization. AJNR Am J Neu-
roradiol 10:575–577
Kader A, Young WL, Pile-Spellman J et al. (1994) The inﬂ u-
ence of hemodynamic and anatomic factors on hemor-
rhage from cerebral arteriovenous malformations. Neu-
rosurgery 34:801–808
Kader A, Goodrich JT, Sonstein WJ (1996) Arteriovenous 
malformations after negative postoperative angiograms. 
J Neurosurg 85:14–18
Kaminaga T, Hayashida K, Iwama T et al. (1999) Hemody-
namic changes around cerebral arteriovenous malforma-
tion before and after embolization measured with PET. 
J Neuroradiol 26:236–241
Kamiryo T, Nelson PK, Bose A et al. (2000) Familial arterio-
venous malformations in siblings. Surg Neurol 53:255–
259
Karlsson B, Lax I, Soderman M et al. (1996) Prediction of re-
sults following Gamma-Knife surgery for brain stem and 
other centrally located arterio-venous malformations: 
relation to natural course. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 
66(Suppl 1):260–268

116 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Karlsson B, Kihlström L, Lindquist C et al. (1998) Gamma 
Knife surgery for previously irradiated arterio-venous 
malformations. Neurosurgery 42:1–6
Kerber C (1976) Balloon catheter with a calibrated leak: a 
new system for superselective angiography and occlusive 
catheter therapy. Radiology 120:547–550
Kish KK, Rapp SM, Wilner HL et al. (1983) Histopathologic 
effects of transarterial bucrylate occlusion of intracere-
bral arteries in mongrel dogs. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
4:385–387
Kjeldsen AD, Vase P, Green A (1999) Hereditary haemor-
rhagic telangiectasia: a population-based study of preva-
lence and mortality in Danish patients. J Intern Med 
245:31–39
Kjellberg RN (1986) Stereotactic Bragg peak proton beam 
radiosurgery for cerebral arteriovenous malformations. 
Ann Clin Res 18(Suppl 47):17–19
Kjellberg RN (1989) Radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 25:670–
672
Kondziolka D, Humphreys RP, Hoffman HJ (1992) Arterio-
venous alformations of the brain in children: a forty-year 
experience. Can J Neurol Sci 19:40–45
Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Flickinger JC (1993) Gamma 
Knife stereotactic radiosurgery for cerebral vascular mal-
formations. In: Alexander E III, Loefﬂ er JS, Lunsford LD 
(eds) Stereotactic radiosurgery. McGraw Hill, New York, 
pp 136–146
Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD, Kanal E et al. (1994) Stereotac-
tic magnetic resonance angiography for targeting in ar-
teriovenous malformations radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 
35:585–591
Krapf H, Siekmann R, Freudenstein D et al. (2001) Spontane-
ous occlusion of a cerebral arteriovenous malformation: 
angiography and MR imaging: follow-up and review of 
the literature. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22:1556–1560
Krayenbuhl HA (1977) Angiographic contribution to the 
problem of enlargement of cerebral arteriovenous mal-
formations. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 36:215–242
Kricheff II, Madayag M, Braunstein P (1972) Transfemoral 
catheter embolization of cerebral and posterior fossa ar-
teriovenous malformations. Radiology 120:457–550
Kvam DA, Michelsen J, Quest DO (1980) Intracerebral hem-
orrhage as a complication of artiﬁ cial embolization. Neu-
rosurgery 7:491–494
Kwon OK, Han DH, Han MH et al. (2000) Palliatively treated 
cerebral arterio-venous malformations: follow-up results. 
J Clin Neurosci 7:69–72
Kwon Y, Ryong S, Hoon J et al. (2000) Analysis of the causes 
of treatment failure in gamma knife radiosurgery for 
intracranial arteriovenous malformations. J Neurosurg 
93:104–106
Lamy B, Jourdan R, Deschamps J et al. (1990) Hematome 
intracerebral par rupture d’une arteriovenous malfor-
mations cerebral. Analyse et pronostic d’une serie de 35 
patients comateux admis en reanimation. Agressologie 
31:299–302
Lanzino G, Fergus AH, Jensen ME et al. (1997) Long-time 
outcome after surgical excision of parenchymla arterio-
venous malformations in patients over 60 years of age. 
Surg Neurol 47:258–263
Lasjaunias P, Berenstein A (1993a) Surgical neuroangiog-
raphy, vol 2. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, pp 
379–383
Lasjaunias P, Berenstein A (1993b) Surgical angiography, 
vol 4. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, pp 268–317
Lasjaunias P, Piske R, TerBrugge K et al. (1988) Cerebral arte-
riovenous malformations (CVM) and associated arterial 
aneurysms(AA): analysis of 101 CAVM cases, with 37 AA 
in 23 patients. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 91:29–36
Latchaw RE, Hu X, Ugurbil K et al. (1995) Functional mag-
netic resonance imaging as a management tool for ce-
rebral 
arteriovenous 
malformations. 
Neurosurgery 
37:619–626
Lawton MT, Hamilton MG, Spetzler RF (1995)Multimo-
dality treatment of deep arteriovenous malformations: 
thalamus, basal ganglia, and brain stem. Neurosurgery 
37:29–36
Lazar RM, Marshall RS, Pile-Spellman J et al. (2000) Inter-
hemispheric transfer of language in patients with left 
frontal cerebral arteriovenous malformation. Neuropsy-
chologia 38:1325–1332
Lindquist M, Karlsson B, Guo WY et al. (2000) Angiographic 
long-term follow-up data for arteriovenous malformation 
previously proven to be obliterated after Gamma Knife 
radiosurgery. Neurosurgery 46:803–810
Liu K, Rutt BK (1998) Sliding interleaved kY (SLINKY) acqui-
sition: a novel 3D MRA technique with suppressed slab 
boundary artifact. J Magn Reson Imaging 8:903–911
Lombardi D, Scheithauer BW, Piepgras D, Meyer FB, Forbes 
GS (1991) “Angioglioma” and the arteriovenous malfor-
mation-glioma association. J Neurosurg 75:589–596
Luessenhop AJ, Spence WT (1960) Artiﬁ cial embolization of 
cerebral arteries:report of use in a case of arteriovenous 
malformation. JAMA 172:1153–1155
Lunsford LD (1993) The role of stereotactic radiosurgery in 
the management of brain vascular malformations. In: Al-
exander E III, Loefﬂ er JS, Lunsford LD (eds) Stereotactic 
radiosurgery. McGraw-Hill, New York, pp 111–121
Lunsford LD, Kondziolka D, Flickinger JC et al. (1991) Ste-
reotactic radiosurgery for arteriovenous malformations 
of the brain. J Neurosurg 75:512–524
Maisonpierre PC, Suri C, Jones PF, Bartunkova S et al. (1997) 
Angiopoietin-2, a natural antagonist for Tie2 that dis-
rupts in vivo angiogenesis. Science 277:55–60
Maldjian J, Atlas SW, Howard RS et al. (1996) Functional 
magnetic resonance imaging of regional brain activity in 
patients with intracranial arteriovenous malformations 
before surgical or endovascular therapy. J Neurosurg 
84:477–483
Manchola IF, De Salles AA, Foo TK, Ackerman TH et al. 
(1993) Arteriovenous malformation hemodynamics: a 
transcranial Doppler study. Neurosurgery 33:556–562
Mandybur TI, Nazek M (1990) Cerebral arteriovenous mal-
formations. A detailed morphological and dimmuno-
histochemical study using actin. Arch Pathol Lab Med 
114:970–973
Mansmann U, Meisel J, Brock M et al. (2000) Factors associ-
ated with intracranial hemorrhage in cases of cerebral 
arteriovenous malformation. Neurosurgery 46:272–281
Marchal G, Bosmans H, Van Fraeyenhoven L et al. (1990) 
Intracranial vascular lesions: optimization and clinical 
evaluation of three-dimensional time-of-ﬂ ight MR angi-
ography. Radiology 175:443–448
Marks MP, Lane B, Steinberg GK et al. (1990) Hemorrhage in 
intracerebral arteriovenous malformations: angiographic 
determinants. Radiology 176:807–813

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
117
Marks MP, Lane B, Steinberg GK, Chang P (1991) Vascular 
characteristics of intracerebral arteriovenous malforma-
tions in patients with clinical steal. AJNR Am J Neurora-
diol 12:489–496
Marks MP, Lane B, Steinberg GK et al. (1992) Intranidal 
aneurysms in cerebral arteriovenous malformations: 
evaluation and endovascular treatment. Radiology 
183:355–360
Massoud TF, Hademenos GJ, Young WL et al. (2000) Can 
induction of systemic hypotension help prevent nidus 
rupture commplicating cerebral arteriovenous malfor-
mation embolization? Analysis underlying mechanisms 
achieved using a theoretical model. AJNR Am J Neuro-
radiol 21:1255–1267
Mast H, Mohr JP, Osipov A et al. (1995) “Steal” is an unestab-
lished mechanism for the clinical presentation of cerebral 
arteriovenous malformations. Stroke 26:1215–1220
Mast H, Youg WL, Koennecke HC et al. (1997) Risk of spon-
taneous haemorrhage after diagnosis of cerebral arterio-
venous malformation. Lancet 350:1065–1068
Matsubara S, Manzia JL, Terbrugge K et al. (2000) Angio-
graphic and clinical characteristics of patients with ce-
rebral arteriovenous malformations associated with he-
reditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. AJNR Am J Neuro-
radiol 21:1016–1020
Mawad ME, Hilal SK, Michelsen WJ, Stein B et al. (1984) Oc-
clusive vascular disease associated with cerebral arterio-
venous malformations. Radiology 153:401–408
McAllister KA, Grogg KM, Johnson DW et al. (1994) Endo-
glin, a TGF-beta binding protein of endothelial cells, is 
the gene for hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasis type 
1. Nat Genet 8:345–351
McCormick WF (1966) The pathology of vascular (arteriove-
nous) malformations. J Neurosurg 24:807–816
Meisel HJ, Mansmann U, Alvarez H et al. (2000) Cerebral 
arteriovenous malformations and associated aneurysms: 
analysis of 305 cases from a series of 662 patients. Neu-
rosurgery 46:793–800
Mendelow AD, Erefurth A, Grossart K et al. (1987) Do ce-
rebral arteriovenous malformations increase in size? 
J Neurol 50:980–987
Merland JJ, Rufenacht D, Laurent A et al. (1986) Endovascu-
lar treatment with isobutyl cyanoacrylate in patients with 
arteriovenous malformation of the brain: indications, re-
sults and complications. Acta Radiol 369:621–622
Minakawa T, Tanaka R, Koike T et al. (1989) Angiographic 
follow-up study of cerebral arteriovenous malformations 
with reference to their enlargement and regression. Neu-
rosurgery 24:68–74
Miyasaka Y, Yada K, Ohwada T, Kitahara T (1992) An analy-
sis of the venous drainage system as a factor in hemor-
rhage from arteriovenous malformations. J Neurosurg 
76:239–243
Miyasaka Y, Kurata A, Tanaka R et al. (1997) Mass effect 
caused by clinically unruptured cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations. Neurosurgery 41:1060–1064
Mobin F, De Salles AA, Abdelaziz O et al. (1999) Stereotactic 
radiosurgery for arteriovenous malformations: appear-
ance of perinidal T2 hyperintensity signal as a predictor 
of favorable treatment response. Stereotact Funct Neu-
rosurg 73:50–59
Moret J, Cognard C, Weill A, Castaings L, Rey A (1997) The 
“remodelling technique” in the treatment of wide-neck 
intracranial aneurysms. Angiographic results and clini-
cal follow-up in 56 cases. Intervent Neuroradiol 3:21–35
Morgan MK, Johnston IH, Hallinan JM et al. (1993) Compli-
cations of surgery for arteriovenous malformations of the 
brain. J Neurosurgery 78:176–182
Muacevic A, Steiger HJ (1999) Computer-assisted resection 
of cerebral arteriovenous malformations. Neurosurgery 
45:1164–1170
Munshi I, Macdonald RL, Weir BK (1999) Intraoperative an-
giography of brain arteriovenous malformations. Neuro-
surgery 45:491–497
Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Ulhoa A et al. (1998) Nonadhesive 
liquid embolic agent for cerebral arteriovenous malfor-
mations: preliminary histopathological studies in swine 
rete mirabile. Neurosurgery 43:1164–1175
Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Duckwiler G et al. (1999) Non-adhe-
sive liquid embolic agent for the treatment of cerebral AVM: 
clinical results at UCLA. Intervent Neuroradiol 5:78
Nakahara I, Taki W, Kikuchi H et al. (1999) Endovascular 
treatment of aneurysms on the feeding arteries of intra-
cranial arteriovenous malformations. Neuroradiology 
41:60–66
Nakstad PH, Nornes H (1994) Superselective angiography, 
embolisation and surgery in treatment of arteriovenous 
malformations of the brain. Neuroradiology 36:410–413
Nakstad PH, Bakke SJ, Hald JK (1992) Embolization of in-
tracranial arteriovenous malformations and ﬁ stulas with 
polyvinyl alcohol particles and platinum ﬁ bre coils. Neu-
roradiology 34:348–351
Nataf F, Meder JF, Roux FX et al. (1997) Angioarchitecture 
associated with haemorrhage in cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations: a prognostic statistical model. Neurora-
diol 39:52–58
Nataf F, Meder JF, Merienne L et al. (1998) Stratégie théra-
peutique des malformations artérioveineuses cérébrales. 
Neurochirurgie 44:83–93
Nataf F, Merienne L, Sclienger M et al. (2001a) Résultats de la 
série de 705 malformations artério-veineuses cérébrales 
traitées par radiochirurgie. Neurochirurgie 47:268–282
Nataf F, Merienne L, Schlienger M (2001b) La radiochirur-
gie des malformations artério-veineuses de grande taille. 
Neurochirurgie 47:298–303
Nataf F, Ghossoub M, Missir O et al. (2001c) Parenchymal 
changes after radiosurgery of cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations. Clinical and MRI data. Neurochirurgie 
47:355–368
Nataf F, Meder JF, Oppenheim C et al. (2001d) Radiochirur-
gie des malformations artério-veineuses cérébrales cho-
roïdiennes et cisternales. Neurochirurgie 47:283–290
Nazek M, Mandybur TI, Kashiwagi S (1988) Oligodendrog-
lial proliferative abnormality associated with arteriove-
nous malformation: report of three cases with review of 
the literature. Neurosurgery 23:781–785
Norbash AM, Marks MP, Lane B (1994) Correlation of pressure 
measurements with angiographic characteristics predis-
posing to hemorrhage and steal in cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 15:809–813
Nornes H, Grip A (1980) Hemodynamic aspects of cerebral 
arteriovenous malformations. J Neurosurg 53:456–464
Nüssel F, Wegmüller H, Huber P (1991) Comparison of mag-
netic resonance, angiography magnetic resonance imag-
ing and conventional angiography in cerebral arteriove-
nous malformation. Neuroradiology 33:56–61

118 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
Ogilvy CS, Stieg PE, Awad I et al. (2001) Recommendation for 
the management of intracranial arteriovenous malfor-
mations: a statement for health-care professionals from 
a special writing group of the Stroke Council, American 
Stroke Association. Stroke 32:1458–1471
Ondra SL, Troupp H, George ED et al. (1990) The natural 
history of symptomatic arteriovenous malformations of 
the brain: a 24-year follow-up assessment. J Neurosurg 
73:387–391
Oppenheim C, Meder JF, Trystram D et al. (1999) Radio-
surgery of cerebral arteriovenous malformations: is 
an early angiogram needed? AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
20:475–481
Osipov A, Koennecke HC, Hartmann A et al. (1997) Seizures 
in cerebral arteriovenous malformations: type, clinical, 
course, and medical management. Intervent Neuroradiol 
3:37–41
Pan DH, Guo WY, Chung WY et al. (2000) Gamma knife ra-
diosurgery as a single treatment modality for arteriove-
nous malformations. J Neurosurg 12:113–119
Patan S (1998) TIE1 and TIE2 receptor tyrosine kinases in-
versely regulate embryonic angiogenesis by the mecha-
nism of intussusceptive microvascular growth. Micro-
vasc Res 56:1–26
Patel V, Gupta SC (1990) Wyburn-Mason syndrome. A case 
report and review of the literature. Neuroradiology 
31:544–546
Patil A (1997) Recurrent AVMs after negative angiography. 
J Neurosurg 86:170
Pelz DM, Fox AJ, Vinuela F, Drake CC, Ferguson GG (1988) 
Preoperative embolization of brain AVMs with isobutyl-2 
cyanoacrylate. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 9:757–764
Pevsner PH (1977) Micro-balloon catheter for superselective 
angiography and therapeutic occlusion. AJR Am J Roent-
genol 128:225–230
Picard L, Moret J, Lepoire J et al. (1984) Endovascular treat-
ment of intracerebral arteriovenous angiomas. Tech-
nique, indications and results. J Neuroradiol 11:9–28
Picard L, Bracard S, Anxionnat R, Macho J (1999) Long-
term anatomic and clinical outcomes in embolized brain 
AVMs. World Federation of Interventional and Therapeu-
tic Neuroradiology, Algarve (Portugal)
Picard L, Costa EDA, Anxionnat R et al. (2001) Acute spon-
taneous hemorrhage after embolization of cerebral ar-
teriovenous malformations with n-butyl cyanoacrylate. 
J Neuroradiol 28:147–165
Pietila TA, Stendel R, Jansons J et al. (1998) The value of 
intraoperative angiography for surgical treatment of ce-
rebral arteriovenous malformations in eloquent brain 
areas. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 140:1161–1165
Pik JHT, Margan MK (2000) Microsurgery for small arterio-
venous malformations of the brain: results in 110 con-
secutive patients. Neurosurgery 47:571–577
Pile-Spellman J, Young WL, Joshi S et al. (1999) Adenosine-
induced cardiac pause for endovascular embolization of 
cerebral arteriovenous malformations: technical case re-
port. Neurosurgery 44:881–887
Piotin M, Ross IB, Weill A et al. (2001) Intracranial arterial 
aneurysms associated with arteriovenous malformations: 
endovascular treatment. Radiology 220:506–513
Pollock BE, Lunsford LD, Kondziolka D et al. (1994) Patients’ 
outcome after radiosurgery for “operable” arterio-venous 
malformations. Neurosurgery 35:1–7
Pollock BE, Flickinger JC, Lunsford LD et al. (1996a) Factors 
that predict the bleeding risk of cerebral arteriovenous 
maformations. Stroke 27:1–6
Pollock BE, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD et al. (1996b) Re-
peat stereotactic radiosurgery of arteriovenous malfor-
mations: factors associated with incomplete obliteration. 
Neurosurgery 38:318–324
Pollock BE, Flickinger JC, Lunsford LD et al. (1998) Factors 
associated with successful arteriovenous malformation 
radiosurgery. Radiosurgery 42:1239–1247
Porteous ME, Brun J, Proctor SJ (1992) Hereditary haem-
orrhagic telangiectasia: a clinical analysis. J Med Genet 
29:527–530
Purdy PD, Samson D, Batjer HH et al. (1990) Preoperative 
embolization of cerebral arteriovenous malformations 
with polyvinyl alcohol particles: experience in 51 adults. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 11:501–510
Purdy PD, Batjer HH, Samson D (1991a) Management of 
hemorrhagic complication from preoperative emboli-
zation of arteriovenous malformation. J Neurosurgery 
74:205–211
Purdy PD, Batjer HH, Samson D et al. (1991b) Intra-arterial 
sodium amytal administration to guide pre-operative 
embolization of cerebral arteriovenous malformations. 
J Neurosurg Anesth 3:103–106
Putman CM, Chaloupka JC, Fulbright RK et al. (1996) Ex-
ceptional multiplicity of cerebral arteriovenous malfor-
mations associated with hereditary hemorrhagic telan-
giectasia (Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome). AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 17:1733–1742
Puzzilli F, Mastronardi L, Ruggeri A et al. (1998) Early sur-
gical treatment of intracerebral hemorrhages caused by 
AVM: our experience in 10 cases. Reurosurg Rev 21:87–
92
Ralls PW, Johnson MB, Radin R et al. (1992) Hereditary hem-
orrhagic telangiectasia: ﬁ ndings in the liver with color 
Doppler sonography. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 159:59–61
Rao VR, Mandalam KR, Gupta AK et al. (1989) Dissolution of 
isobutyl 2-cyanoacrylate on long-term follow-up. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 10:135–141
Rauch RA, Vinuela F, Dion J et al. (1992a) Preembolization 
functional evaluation in brain arteriovenous malforma-
tions: The superselective amytal test. AJNR Am J Neuro-
radiol 13:303–308
Rauch RA, Vinuela F, Dion J et al. (1992b) Preembolization 
functional evaluation in brain arteriovenous malforma-
tions: the ability of superselective Amytal test to predict 
neurologic dysfunction before embolization. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 13:309–314
Redekop G, TerBrugge K, Montanera W et al. (1998) Arterial 
aneurysms associated with cerebral arteriovenous mal-
formations: classiﬁ cation, incidence, and risk of hemor-
rhage. J Neurosurg 89:539–546
Regis J, Massager N, Levrier O (2001) Traitement radiochi-
rurgical Gamma knife des malformations artério-veineu-
ses du tronc cérébral Neurochirurgie 47:291–297
Roman G, Fisher M, Perl DP et al. (1978) Neurological 
manifestations of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia 
(Rendu-Osler-Weber disease): report of two cases and re-
view of the literature. Ann Neurol 4:130–144
Rosenblum MK, BilbaoJM, Ang LC (1996) Central nervous 
system. In: Rosai J (ed) Ackerman’s surgical pathology. 
Mosby, St Louis, pp 2238–2241

 
 
Pial Arteriovenous Malformations 
119
Salcman M, Scholtz H, Numaguchi Y (1992) Multiple intrace-
rebral arteriovenous malformations: report of three cases 
and review of the literature. Surg Neurol 38:121–128
Sampei K, Hashimoto N, Kazekawa K et al. (1996) Histologi-
cal changes in brain tissue and vasculature after intraca-
rotid infusion of organic solvents in rats. Neurordiology 
38:291–294
Samson D, Ditmore QM, Beyer CW Jr (1981) Intravascular use 
of isobutyl 2-cyanoacrylate: 1. Treatment of intracranial 
arteriovenous malformations. Neurosurgery 8:43–51
Sano K, Ueda Y, Saito I (1978) Subarachnoid hemorrhage in 
children. Childs Brain 4:38–46
Sasaki T, Kurita H, Saito I et al. (1998) Arteriovenous malfor-
mations in the basal ganglia and thalamus: management 
and results in 101 cases. J Neurosurg 88:285–292
Sato TN, Tozawa Y, Deutsch U et al. (1995) Distinct roles 
of the receptor tyrosine kinases Tie-1 and Tie-2 in blood 
vessel formation. Nature 376:70–74
Schaller C, Schramm J, Haun D (1998) Signiﬁ cance of fac-
tors contributing to surgical complications and to late 
outcome after elective surgery of cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 65:547–
554
Schlienger M, Atlan D, Lefkopoulos D et al. (2000) Linac 
radiosurgery for cerebral arteriovenous: results in 169 
patients. Int J Radiat Biol Phys 46:1135–1142
Schlienger M, Merienne L, Lefkopoulos D et al. (2001) Ré-ir-
radiation des malformations artérioveineuses cérébrales. 
Neurochirurgie 47:324–331
Schlosser MJ, McCarthy G, Fulbright RK et al. (1997) Ce-
rebral vascular malformations adjacent to sensorimotor 
and visual cortex. Stroke 28:1130–1137
Schumacher M, Horton JA (1991) Treatment of cerebral arte-
riovenous malformations with PVA: results and analysis 
of complications. Neuroradiology 33:101–105
Serbinenko FA (1974) Balloon catheterization and occlusion 
of major cerebral vessels. J Neurosurg 41:125–145
Shalaby F, Rossant Y, Yamaguchi TP, Gertsenstein M, Wu XF 
et al. (1995) Failure of blood-island formation and vascu-
logenesis in Flk-1 deﬁ cient mice. Nature 376:62–66
Shovlin CL, Hughes JM, Scott J, Seidman CE, Seidman JG 
(1997) Characterization of endoglin and identiﬁ cation of 
novel mutations in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiecta-
sia. Am J Hum Genet 61:68–79
Sisit MB, Kader A, Stein BM (1993) Microsurgery for 67 in-
tracranial arteriovenous malformations less than 3 cm in 
diameter. J Neurosurg 65:476–483
Smith HJ, Strother CM, Kikuchi Y et al. (1988a) MR imaging 
in the management of supratentorial intracranial AVMs. 
AJR Am J Roentgenol 150:1143–1153
Smith HJ, Strother CM, Kikuchi Y et al. (1988b) MR imaging 
in the management of supratentorial intracranial AVMs. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 9:225–235
Sobel D, Norman D (1984) CNS malformations of hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
5:569–573
Sorimachi T, Takeuchi S, Koike T et al. (1995) Blood pres-
sure monitoring in feeding arteries of cerebral arterio-
venous malformations during embolization: a preven-
tive role in hemodynamic complication. Neurosurgery 
37:1041–1048
Spetzler RF, Martin NA (1986) A proposed grading system 
for arteriovenous maformations. J Neurosur 65:476–483
Spetzler RF, Wilson CB, Weinstein P et al. (1978) Normal 
perfusion pressure breakthrough theory. Clin Neurosurg 
25:651–672
Spetzler RF, Martin NA, Carter LP et al. (1987) Surgical 
management of large AVMs by staged embolization and 
operative excision. J Neurosurg 67:17–28
Spetzler RF, Hargraves RW, McCormick PW et al. (1992) Re-
lationship of perfusion pressure and size to risk of hem-
orrhage from arteriovenous malformations. J Neurosur 
76:918–923
Stapf C, Mohr JP (2000) New concepts in adult brain arterio-
venous malformations. Curr Opin Neurol 13:63–67
Stapf C, Mohr JP, Sciacca RR et al. (2000) Incident hemor-
rhage risk of brain arteriovenous malformations located 
in the arterial border zones. Stroke 31:2365–2368
SteinbergGK, Levy RP, Marks MP et al. (1993) Charged-par-
ticle radiosurgery. In: Alexander E III, Loefﬂ er JS, Lun-
sford LD (eds) Stereotactic radiosurgery. McGraw Hill, 
New York, pp 122–134
Steiner L (1988) Stereotactic radiosurgery with the cobalt-
60 gamma unit in the surgical treatment of intracranial 
tumor and cerebral arteriovenous malformations. In: 
Schmidek HH, Sweet WH (eds) Operative neurosurgical 
techniques. Grune and Stratton, New York, pp 515–529
Steiner L, Lindquist C, Adler JR et al. (1992) Outcome of ra-
diosurgery for cerebral AVM. J Neurosurg 77:823
Steiner L, Lindquist C, Cail W et al. (1993) Microsurgery 
and radiosurgery in brain arteriovenous malformations. 
J Neurosurg 79:647–652
Takano K, Utsunomiya H, Ono H et al. (1999) Dynamic con-
trast-enhanced subtraction MR angiography in intracra-
nial vascular abnormalities. Eur Radiol 9:1909–1912
Takeuchi S, Kikuchi H, Karasawa J, Naruo Y et al. (1987) Ce-
rebral hemodynamics in arteriovenous malformations: 
evaluation by single-photon emission CT. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 8:193–197
Taki W, Kikuchi H, Iwata H et al. (1990) Embolization of arte-
riovenous malformations using EVAL mixture (a new liq-
uid embolization material). Neuroradiology 33:195–196
Terada T, Nakamura Y, Nakai K, Tsuura M et al. (1991) Em-
bolization of arteriovenous malformations with periph-
eral aneurysms using ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer: 
report of three cases. J Neurosurg 75:655–660
The Arteriovenous Malformation Study Group (1999) Arte-
riovenous malformations of the brain in adults. N Engl J 
Med 340:1812–1818
Theron J, Newton TH, Hoyt WF (1974) Unilateral retinoce-
phalic vascular malformations. Neuroradiology 7:185–
196
Thompson RC, Steinberg GK, Levy RP et al. (1998) The man-
agement of patients with arteriovenous malformations 
and associated intracranial aneurysms. Neurosurgery 
43:202–212
Turjman F, Massoud TF, Vinuela F et al. (1994) Aneurysms 
related to cerebral arteriovenous malformations: super-
selective andiographic assessment in 58 patients. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 15:1601–1605
Turjman F, Massoud TF, Vinuela F et al. (1995a) Correlation 
of the angioarchitectural features of cerebral arteriove-
nous malformations with clinical presentation of hemor-
rhage. Neurosurgery 37:856–860
Turjman F, Massoud TF, Sayre JW et al. (1995b) Epilepsy 
associated with cerebral arteriovenous malformations: a 

120 
C. Cognard, L. Spelle, and L. Pierot
multivariate analysis of angioarchitectural characteris-
tics. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16:345–350
U HS, Kerber CW, Todd MM (1992) Multimodality treatment 
of deep periventricular cerebral arteriovenous malfor-
mations. Surg Neurol 38:192–203
Uranischi R, Baev NI, Ng PY, Kim JH, Awad IA (2001) Ex-
pression of endothelial cell angiogenesis receptors in 
human cerebrovascular malformations. Neurosurgery 
48:359–367
van Rooij WJ, Sluzewski M, Beute GN (2007) Brain AVM 
embolization with Onyx. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2007 
Jan;28(1):172–177; discussion 178
Vikingstad EM, Cao Y, Thomas AJ et al. (2000) Language 
hemispheric dominance in patients with congenital le-
sions of eloquent brain. Neurosurg 47:562–570
Vinters HV, Galil KA, Lundie MJ et al. (1985) The histotoxic-
ity of cyaoacrylates. Neuroradiology 27:279–291
Vinters HV, Lundie MJ, Kaufmann JCE (1986) Long-term 
pathological follow-up of cerebral arteriovenous malfor-
mation treated by embolization with bucrylate. N Engl J 
Med 314:477–483
Vinuela F (1992) Functional evaluation and embolization of 
intracranial arterio-venous malformations. In: Vinuela F, 
Van Halbach V, Dion J (eds) Interventional neuroradiol-
ogy, endovascular therapy of the central nervous system. 
Raven, New York, pp 77–86
Vinuela F, Debrun GM, Fox AJ et al. (1983a) Dominant-
hemisphere arteriovenous malformations: therapeutic 
embolization with isobutyl-2-cyanoacrymate. AJNR Am 
J Neuroradiol 4:959–966
Vinuela F, Fox AJ, Debrun G et al. (1983b) Progressive 
thrombosis of brain arteriovenous malformations after 
embolization with isobutyl-2 cyanoacrylate. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 4:1233–1238
Vinuela F, Fox AJ, Debrun G et al. (1984) Preembolization 
superselective angiography: role in the treatment of brain 
arteriovenous malformations with isobutyl-2 cyanoacry-
late. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 5:765–769
Vinuela F, Fox AJ, Pelz D et al. (1986) Angiographic follow-up 
of large cerebral AVMs incompletely embolized with iso-
butyl-2 cyanoacrylate. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 7:919–925
Vinuela F, Dion JE, Duckwiler G et al. (1991) Combined en-
dovascular embolization and surgery in the management 
of cerebral arteriovenous malformations: experience with 
101 cases. J Neurosurg 75:856–864
Wada J, Rasmussen T (1960) Intracarotid injection of so-
dium amytal for the lateralization of cerebral speech 
dominance: experimental and clinical observations. 
J Neurosurg 17:266–282
Wallace RC, Flom RA, Khayata MH et al. (1995) The safety 
and effectiveness of brain arteriovenous malformation 
embolization using acrylic and particles: the experiences 
of a single institution. Neurosurgery 37:606–618
Warren DJ, Hoggard N, Radatz MWR et al. (2001) Cerebral 
arteriovenous malformations: comparison of novel mag-
netic resonance angiographic techniques and conven-
tional catheter angiography. Neurosurgery 48:973–983
Weber W, Kis B, Siekmann R, Jans P, Laumer R, Kühne D 
(2007a) Preoperative embolization of intracranial ar-
teriovenous malformations with Onyx. Neurosurgery 
61(2):244–252; discussion 252–254
Weber W, Kis B, Siekmann R, Kühne D (2007b) Endovascular 
treatment of intracranial arteriovenous malformations 
with onyx: technical aspects. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
28(2):371–377
Wikholm K, Taki W, Lwata H et al. (1995) Occlusion of cere-
bral arteriovenous malformations with N-butyl cyano-ac-
rylate is permanent. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16:479–482
Wikholm K, Lundqvist C, Svendsen (1996) Embolization 
of cerebral arteriovenous malformations, part I. Tech-
nique, morphology, and complications. Neurosurgery 
39:448–459
Willemse RB, Mager JJ, Westermann CJ et al. (2000) Bleed-
ing risk of cerebrovascular malformations in hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia. J Neurosurg 92:799–784
Willinsky RA, Lasjaunias P, Terbrugge K et al. (1988) Mal-
formations arterio-veineuses cérébrales. J Neuroradiol 
15:225–237
Willinsky RA, Lasjaunias P, Terbrugge K (1990) Multiple 
cerebral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs): review of 
our experience from 203 patients with cerebral vascular 
lesions. Neuroradiology 32:207–210
Wilms G, Gofﬁ n J, Plets C, Van Calenbergh F, Van Hemel-
rijck J, Van Aken H, Baert AL (1993) Embolization of 
arteriovenous malformations of the brain: preliminary 
experience. J Belge Radiol 76:299–303
Wong JH, Awas IA, Kim JH (2000) Ultrastructural pathologi-
cal feature of cerebrovascular malformations: a prelimi-
nary report. Neurosurgery 46:1454–1459
Yakes WF, Krauth L, Ecklund J, Swengle R et al. (1997) Eth-
anol endovascular management of brain arteriovenous 
malformations: initial results. Neurosurgery 40:1145–
1154
Yamamoto M, Jimbo M, Ide M et al. (1992) Long-term follow-
up of radiosurgically treated arterio-venous malforma-
tions in children. Surg Neurol 38:95–100
Yamamoto Y, Coffey RJ, Nichols DA et al. (1995) Interim re-
port on the radiosurgical treatment of cerebral arterio-
venous malformations. The inﬂ uence of size, dose, time 
and technical factors on obliteration rate. J Neurosurg 
83:832–837
Yamashita K, Taki W, Iwata H et al. (1994) Characteristics of 
ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer (EVAL) mixtures. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 15:1103–1105
Yasargil MG (1988) Deep central AVMs. In: Yasargil MG 
(ed) Microneurosurgery IIIB. AVM of the brain. Clinical 
considerations, general and special operative techniques, 
surgical results, nonoperated cases, cavernous and ve-
nous angiomas, neuroanesthesia. Thieme, Stuttgart, pp 
204–368
Yokoyama K, Asano Y, Murakawa T, Takada M (1991) Fa-
milial occurrence of arteriovenous malformation of the 
brain. J Neurosurg 74:585–589
Young WL, Kader A, Pile-Spellman J et al. (1994a) Colum-
bia University AVM study project. Arteriovenous malfor-
mations draining vein physiology and determinants of 
transnidal pressure gradients. Neurosurgery 35:389–396
Young WL, Pile-Spellman J, Prohovnik I et al. (1994b) Co-
lumbia University AVM study project: evidence for adap-
tive autoregulatory displacement in hypotensive cortical 
territories adjacent to arteriovenous malformations. 
Neurosurgery 34:601–611
Young WL, Kader A, Ornstein E et al. (1996) Cerebral hy-
peremia after arteriovenous malformations resection is 
related to “breakthrough” complications but not to feed-
ing artery pressure. Neurosurgery 38:1085–1095

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
121
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
4
István Szikora
C O N T E N T S
4.1 
Pathology 122
4.1.1 
Deﬁ nition 122
4.1.2 
Etiology and Pathogenesis 122
4.1.2.1 Venous Occlusive Disease 122
4.1.2.2 Histopathology 124
4.1.2.3 Pathogenesis 124
4.1.3 
Morphology 126
4.1.4 
Location 126
4.1.5 
Hemodynamics 127
4.2 
Clinical Presentation 127
4.2.1 
Signs and Symptoms 127
4.2.2 
Natural History and Classiﬁ cation 137
4.3 
Diagnostic Imaging 141
4.3.1 
Computer Tomography 142
4.3.2 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging 143
4.3.3 
Angiography 147
4.4 
Therapy 149
4.4.1 
Indications 149
4.4.2 
Conservative Treatment 149
4.4.3 
Endovascular Treatment 151
4.4.3.1 Transarterial Embolization 151
4.4.3.2 Transvenous Embolization 153
4.4.3.3 Sinus Recanalization 159
4.4.4 
Surgical Treatment 159
4.4.5 
Stereotactic Irradiation
 
(Radiosurgery) 160
4.4.6 
Management Strategy and
 
Choice of Treatment 160
 
References 162
I. Szikora, MD, PhD
National Institute of Neurosurgery, Amerikai ut 57, 
1145 Budapest, Hungary
K E Y  P O I N T S
Dural arteriovenous malformations (DAVM) are 
abnormal shunts between the arterial and the 
venous side of the vascular tree  that are located 
within the dura, most frequently within the wall 
of or immediately around the venous sinuses. 
DAVM are rare, most of them are acquired and 
may develop by opening of existing micros-
hunts within the dura or by angiogenesis 
leading to the development of new shunts. 
DAVMs are frequently associated with stenosis 
or occlusion of the draining dural sinuses. 
The etiology and pathogenesis of the DAVM 
is still not fully understood. Venous throm-
bosis has been proposed as the most probable 
pathogenetic mechanism. 
DAVMs may occur anywhere within the cra-
nium or the spinal canal. In adults, DAVMs 
mostly present in middle-aged or older 
patients with a mean age of 50–60 years. 
Spinal DAVMs commonly present after the 
fourth decade. 
Classiﬁ cation is mainly based on venous 
drainage with those DAVMs draining into a 
cortical vein classiﬁ ed as dangerous. In many 
patients CT and/or MRI can already conﬁ rm 
the diagnosis of a DAVM.
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is 
absolutely mandatory for classiﬁ cation and 
treatment planning. Endovascular treatment 
can be done via the transarterial way or trans-
venous approach. 
Treatment indication depends on clinical 
symptoms and angiographic classiﬁ cation.
The 
endovascular 
approach 
sometimes 
fails and a complex neurosurgical approach 
becomes necessary.









122 
I. Szikora
 4.1 
Pathology
4.1.1 
Defi nition
Dural arteriovenous malformations (DAVMs), ﬁ rst 
described by Sachs and Tonnis (Aminoff 1973), 
are deﬁ ned as abnormal connections (“shunts”) be-
tween the arterial and the venous side of the vascular 
tree located on the surface of the dura mater. Arte-
rial supply is provided by meningeal branches, and 
either dural sinuses or meningeal or subarachnoid 
veins drain the lesions. By deﬁ nition, DAVMs are lo-
cated within the dura, most frequently on the wall of 
or immediately around the venous sinuses (Fig. 4.1a). 
The currently used terminology is not uniform. The 
term malformation is used to express the frequent 
“spontaneous” etiology of these lesions and to de-
scribe similarities with brain or spine arteriovenous 
malformations (AVM). However, this term involves 
the developmental origin of the lesion, which is prob-
ably not the case with DAVM. While some of them are 
connatal, the majority seem to be acquired. To avoid 
confusion, many authors use the term dural arterio-
venous ﬁ stula (DAVF). This may be more appropriate 
concerning etiology, but it implies a single type of 
morphology (ﬁ stula) and therefore is less adequate in 
this regard. As of today, both terms are used in the 
literature without indicating either a certain etiologic 
origin or a particular angioarchitecture of the lesion. 
In this chapter, the term DAVM will be used as the 
general name of the pathology.
4.1.2 
Etiology and Pathogenesis
DAVMs are relatively rare lesions, constituting ap-
proximately 10%–15% of all intracranial vascular 
malformations (Newton and Cronqvist 1969). 
Originally, these lesions were thought to be congeni-
tal (Aminoff 1973). Coincidence with other vascular 
anomalies, such as aneurysms (Kaech et al. 1987; 
Murai et al. 1999; Friedman et al. 2000; Suzuki et 
al. 2000), intradural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae (Ratliff 
and Voorhies 1999), brain arteriovenous AVM 
(Lasjaunias and Berenstein 1987; Yamada et al. 
1993) and others (Hieshima et al. 1977; Yamada et 
al. 1993) has also been reported, indicating a con-
genital origin of the lesions.
However, many DAVMs have been proved to be 
acquired. It is hypothesized that DAVMs develop ei-
ther: (1) by opening of existing microshunts within 
the dura, or (2) by angioneogenesis, leading to the 
development of new shunts. The triggering factor 
for the development of DAVM is thought to be a 
change in the normal arteriovenous pressure gradi-
ent within the dura. Either elevation of the arterial 
pressure (arterial hypertension) or increase of the 
venous pressure (venous obstruction) may dilate 
existing arteriovenous communications, leading 
to hemodynamically signiﬁ cant shunts. While the 
predisposing factor for the development of a perma-
nent DAVM remains unknown, several events may 
increase the venous pressure and serve as a trigger. 
These include developmental anomalies of the ve-
nous system, venous thrombosis, head trauma, or 
transcranial surgery (Watanabe et al. 1984). It is 
presumed that head trauma caused by either sur-
gery or injury may induce venous thrombosis or at 
least alteration of the venous outﬂ ow, subsequently 
resulting in changes of the arteriovenous pressure 
gradient (Lasjaunias and Berenstein 1987). The 
frequent coincidence of DAVMs with previous major 
surgery (other than transcranial) and child delivery 
suggests that increased systemic thrombotic activ-
ity may also serve as a trigger. DAVMs occurring in 
association with pregnancy and the menopausal pe-
riod suggest that hormonal changes may also play a 
role, potentially by inducing increased angiogenesis 
(Djindjan and Merland 1978).
4.1.2.1 
Venous Occlusive Disease
DAVMs are frequently associated with stenosis or 
occlusion of the draining dural sinuses (Djindjan 
and Merland 1978). In 1979, Houser et al. reported 
two cases of DAVM that developed years after docu-
mented sinus thrombosis. Later, Chaudhary et al. 
(1982) demonstrated the development of DAVM in 
patients following head trauma. They proposed that 
sinus thrombosis might be the primary factor leading 
to the development of a DAVM. During the normal 
recanalization process, arteries within the sinus wall 
penetrate the intraluminal organizing thrombus, es-
tablishing a communication between mural arteries 
and the lumen of the sinus. A number of publications 
have since reported an association between sinus 
thrombosis or sinus occlusive disease and DAVM (Al-
Mefty et al. 1986; Convers et al. 1986; Barnwell et 
al. 1991a,b; Pierot et al. 1993; Cognard et al. 1998). 

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
123
Signiﬁ cant controversy exists, however, as to whether 
thrombosis is the cause or the result of DAVM.
Some observations suggest that dural sinus 
thrombosis is the primary factor leading to the 
development of DAVM. This hypothesis seems to 
be substantiated by ﬁ ndings related to increased 
thrombotic activity in some patients. Prothrombin 
gene mutation was found in a patient who developed 
sinus thrombosis and later DAVM (Singh et al. 
2001). The most frequent cause of venous thrombotic 
disease, resistance to activated protein C (APCR), 
was detected with signiﬁ cantly higher prevalence 
in patients with DAVM as compared with normal 
controls. In addition, factor V Leyden was found in 
these patients as a result of a mutation in factor V 
gene (Kraus et al. 1998, 2000).
Fig. 4.1a–e. Pathomorphology of dural arteriovenous mal-
formations. a Selective digital subtraction angiography 
(DSA) of a dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM) 
(asterisk) involving the sigmoid sinus on the left. Left oc-
cipital artery injection (arrow), anteroposterior (AP) view. 
The DAVM is drained by the ipsilateral jugular vein (broken 
arrow). b Macroscopic image of the same DAVM taken dur-
ing autopsy. The sigmoid sinus on the left is opened (arrow). 
Spongy, ﬁ brous material (broken arrow) ﬁ lls the lumen of the 
involved segment of the sinus. c Lumen of the sigmoid sinus 
following removal of the ﬁ brous material. d Microscopic 
section of the spongy tissue removed from the sinus, dem-
onstrating multiple cross sections of thin-walled sinusoidal 
vascular structures (arrows) within ﬁ brous proliferating 
tissue (hematoxylin-eosin stain, +40). e Cross section of a 
large vessel with irregular elastic laminae (arrowheads). The 
lumen is ﬁ lled with organizing thrombus, containing cross 
sections of newly formed blood vessels (arrows) representing 
neovascularization
c
b
e
d
a

124 
I. Szikora
On the other hand, several studies have reported 
nonthrombotic occlusion of the dural sinuses as the 
primary cause in the pathogenetic process. Occlu-
sion of the sinuses due to the direct compression of 
tumors (Arnautovic et al. 1998) or due to the surgi-
cal sacriﬁ ce of the sinus during tumor removal may 
equally result in development of DAVM as late as 
up to 7 years following surgery (Sakaki et al. 1996). 
These latter ﬁ ndings suggest that venous congestion 
and hypertension, rather than sinus thrombosis, lead 
to dural AV shunts. To check this assumption a num-
ber of animal experiments were recently carried out. 
In rats, surgically induced venous hypertension by 
artiﬁ cial carotid-jugular ﬁ stula and proximal jugu-
lar vein ligation resulted in development of arteriove-
nous malformations, one of them located on a dural 
sinus (Terada et al. 1994). A combination of signiﬁ -
cant (three- to sixfold) increase of the venous pres-
sure (by ligation of the draining vein of the transverse 
sinus) and artiﬁ cially induced superior sagittal sinus 
thrombosis resulted in arteriovenous ﬁ stulae that de-
veloped within the dura near the thrombosed section 
of the sinus. However, a direct connection between 
the ﬁ stula and the thrombus was found in only half 
of the cases (Herman et al. 1995). In another series 
of experiments, superior sagittal sinus thrombosis 
was induced in all animals, with or without venous 
hypertension. Angiogenic activity of the dura mater 
adjacent to the thrombosed section of the sinus was 
tested and found to be positively correlated with ve-
nous hypertension but was not correlated with sinus 
thrombosis. Development of dural AV ﬁ stulae corre-
lated positively with both venous hypertension and 
increased angiogenic activity, suggesting that venous 
hypertension is the primary etiologic factor in the de-
velopment of DAVM (Lawton et al. 1997). Evidence 
of increased angiogenic activity was also found in as-
sociation with DAVM in human beings. Surgically ex-
cised specimens were studied that had been removed 
from patients harboring DAVMs associated with si-
nus thrombosis. The subendothelial and medial layer 
of the sinus wall, as well as the wall of proliferating 
vessels and connective tissue around the involved si-
nuses expressed basic ﬁ broblast growth factor (bFGF) 
on immunohistochemical staining. The endothelium 
of the sinus expressed vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) (Uranishi et al. 1999).
Although this study proves the role of increased 
vasogenic activity in the development of human 
DAVM, it does not provide information regarding 
the cause of such increased activity. As DAVMs, par-
ticularly those involving the cavernous sinus, have 
a high incidence in women of menopausal age, the 
potential role of hormonal changes has also been in-
vestigated, but it remains unclear. Sudden decrease 
of blood estradiol levels was implicated as a precipi-
tating factor in cavernous sinus DAVM in women 
(Kurata et al. 1999). In contrast, ovariectomy with 
or without estrogen therapy did not induce an in-
creased rate of DAVM formation in experimental 
rats (Terada et al. 1998).
4.1.2.2 
Histopathology
Most histopathological studies demonstrate thicken-
ing of the dura and intensive vascular proliferation 
within and around the wall of the involved sinus. In 
some cases, a spongy mass of ﬁ brous tissue can be 
found inside the lumen of the sinus. This mass con-
tains numerous irregular vascular spaces (Graeb 
and Dolman 1986) (Fig. 4.1). Increasing evidence 
suggests that the primary arteriovenous shunt exists 
within the wall of the sinus, with secondary shunting 
between the venous side of the proliferating vascular 
network and the lumen of the sinus. In several stud-
ies a mass of dilated small dural vessels was found in 
subendothelial location within the sinus wall. Mul-
tiple microshunts were seen connecting those dural 
arteries and veins with each other (Nishijima et al. 
1992; Momoji et al. 1997). One study demonstrated 
arteriovenous connections within the sinus wall 
via small abnormal vessels of approximately 30 μm 
in diameter (“crack-like vessels”). Histologically, 
these vessels were proven to be veins (Hamada et 
al. 1997). Larger openings (approximately 200 μm) 
provided connection between intramural veins and 
the lumen of the sinus (Momoji et al. 1997). On 
the other hand, signs of organized thrombus and 
neovascularization were conﬁ rmed in only a few of 
the studied cases (Sakaki et al. 1996). The location 
of the arteriovenous shunts within the dura and the 
sinus wall may explain why some DAVMs drain into 
major dural sinuses, others into meningeal veins, 
yet others directly into subarachnoid veins adjacent 
to sinuses.
4.1.2.3 
Pathogenesis
The etiology and pathogenesis of DAVM is still not 
fully understood. It is now generally accepted that 
DAVMs are acquired lesions. It has been postulated 
that even DAVMs presenting in infants are not con-

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
125
genital, but rather connatal, and develop during 
the fetal period in response to venous obstruction 
(Lasjaunias and Berenstein 1987). Increasing evi-
dence suggests that the primary pathogenetic factor 
is venous hypertension related to either thrombotic 
or nonthrombotic reduction of venous outﬂ ow. Sig-
niﬁ cant increase of venous pressure may lead to 
opening of existing microshunts within the dura. 
Such microshunts have been proposed previously by 
Kerber and Newton (1973) intracranially and by 
Manelfe et al. (1972) intraspinally. Alternatively, 
venous hypertension results in cerebral hypoperfu-
sion and ischemia. This may secondarily produce 
sprouting vasogenesis and the development of ar-
teriovenous shunts within the adjacent meninges 
(Lawton et al. 1997). Sinus thrombosis maybe one 
of the primary factors leading to venous hyperten-
sion and initiating the vicious circle that leads to 
a DAVM. In those cases predisposing factors for 
venous thrombosis, such as hypercoagulopathy, 
trauma, or surgery, may play an etiologic role. Al-
ternatively, sinus thrombosis may occur secondary 
to DAVM by several mechanisms. The growing mass 
of proliferating vessels within the sinus wall may 
gradually narrow its lumen, leading to either steno-
sis or occlusion of the sinus.
Fast and/or turbulent arterial ﬂ ow within the si-
nus due to existing DAVM may result in intimal in-
jury, secondary hyperplasia, and sinus stenosis or 
occlusion. In some cases the two mechanisms may 
be involved simultaneously. In a case reported by 
 Wakamoto et al (1999), angiographically proven si-
nus thrombosis resulted in venous infarction without 
an arteriovenous shunt. A DAVM developed 4 months 
later (presumably as a result of sinus thrombosis), at 
which time the sinus has already recanalized. The 
DAVM persisted and resulted in rethrombosis of the 
sinus within another year (Wakamoto et al. 1999).
Venous thrombosis has been proposed as the 
most probable pathogenetic mechanism for spinal 
DAVMs, although minor venous anomalies have 
also been recognized in such patients that may serve 
as predisposing factors (McCutcheon et al. 1996).
The behavior of sinus thrombosis may impact the 
natural history of an individual lesion. Cessation of 
venous hypertension by complete recanalization of 
the thrombosed sinus will interrupt the vicious cir-
cle and may lead to spontaneous cure of the disease. 
Progressive thrombosis or occlusion of the venous 
outﬂ ow channels may further increase venous hy-
pertension, however, leading to an aggressive clini-
cal course (Lawton et al. 1997).
Fig. 4.2a,b. Morphological characteristics of the arteriovenous shunt within dural arteriovenous malformations (DAVMs). 
a Plexiform nidus. DSA, superselective injection of the middle meningeal artery (arrow) supplying a DAVM involving the 
left sigmoid sinus (broken arrow), anteroposterior view. Arteriovenous shunt is established via a meshwork of small vessels 
(small arrows). The ipsilateral sigmoid sinus is occluded. Note reﬂ ux into the transverse sinuses and the superior sagittal 
sinus (arrowheads). b Direct arteriovenous ﬁ stula. Digital subtraction angiography, superselective injection of a middle 
meningeal artery feeder (arrow) draining directly (asterisk) into an extremely enlarged transverse sinus (broken arrow). 
Lateral view
a
b

126 
I. Szikora
4.1.3 
Morphology
DAVMs consist of arterial feeders and draining ve-
nous structures with or without an intervening mesh 
of small vessels. Arterial supply is primarily pro-
vided by periosteal and meningeal arteries, but in 
large DAVMs enlarged collaterals from cutaneous 
or even subarachnoid branches may also contribute. 
The feeding pedicles are connected with the draining 
venous structure through a tangle of small abnor-
mal vascular channels (nidus, Fig. 4.2a) or via sin-
gle or multiple holes between those vessels (ﬁ stulae, 
Fig. 4.2b). This later corresponds to the thick, ﬁ brous 
sections of the dura that is rich in vascular channels, 
as seen on pathological specimens (Fig. 4.1d). The 
shunt is drained either by one of the dural sinuses, 
or by meningeal or subarachnoid veins, or both. Sin-
gle or multiple narrowing or occlusion of the dural 
sinus system frequently results in rerouting of the 
venous outﬂ ow. In some DAVMs with meningeal or 
subarachnoid venous drainage enlarged varices or 
venous lakes are seen on the venous side. Arterial 
aneurysms may develop on the feeding pedicles or 
elsewhere on the cerebral arteries.
Concerning spinal DAVM, Kendall and Logue 
(1977) introduced the concept that the majority of 
spinal intradural AVMs are actually enlarged ar-
terialized draining veins of dural AVMs. This has 
been conﬁ rmed by microangiography studies of 
surgically removed specimens demonstrating dural 
branches of the radiculomedullary arteries that feed 
a network of small vessels within the dura. This net-
work is connected directly (without a capillary bed) 
to the draining vein, usually an enlarged intradu-
ral, perimedullary vein (McCutcheon et al. 1996). 
Spinal DAVMs may also drain into periosteal and 
epidural veins (Borden et al. 1995; McCutcheon 
et al. 1996).
4.1.4 
Location
DAVMs may occur anywhere within the cranium or 
in the spinal column. Intracranial DAVMs are located 
either in the anterior cranial fossa on or around the 
ethmoid groove (Fig. 4.3, 1), in the middle cranial 
fossa at the cavernous sinuses (Fig. 4.3, 2), in the 
posterior fossa at the transverse (Fig. 4.3, 3) or the 
sigmoid (Fig. 4.3, 4) sinuses, at the conﬂ uens sin-
uum (Fig. 4.3, 5), or around the foramen magnum 
(Fig. 4.3, 6). DAVMs are found on the base (Fig. 4.3, 7) 
and at the free margin of the tentorium (Fig. 4.3, 8). 
Lesions of the straight sinus or the vein of Galen are 
rare (Fig. 4.3, 9) (Halbach et al. 1989a–c). Finally, 
DAVMs are found on the dura of the convexity and 
at the superior sagittal sinus (not demonstrated in 
Fig. 4.3). In a meta-analysis of 258 published cases, 
Lucas et al. (1997) found 26% on the cavernous sinus, 
25% on the transverse and sigmoid sinuses, 26% at 
the tentorial incisura, 11% on the convexity and supe-
rior sagittal sinus, 9% in the anterior fossa, and 4% in 
the middle fossa outside the cavernous sinus (Lucas 
et al. 1997). Multiple lesions are found in 7%–8% of all 
cases (Barnwell et al. 1991a; Fujita et al. 2001; van 
Dijk et al. 2002). DAVMs of the anterior fossa may 
drain into frontal veins and the olfactory vein; lesions 
of the cavernous sinus drain either into the superior 
ophthalmic vein, the contralateral cavernous sinus, 
the inferior petrosal sinus(es) or into temporal sub-
arachnoid veins. Venous drainage for transverse and 
sigmoid sinus DAVMs may be provided by one or both 
transvers and sigmoid sinuses towards the internal 
jugular vein(s) and/or temporal subarachnoid veins, 
mainly the vein of Labbé. Lesions at the conﬂ uens 
sinuum drain into both or either one of the transverse 
sinuses, into the superior sagittal sinus in a retrograde 
fashion or into occipital or temporal subarachnoid 
veins. DAVMs of the tentorium are connected with 
either the superior petrosal sinus, the petrous vein, 
tentorial veins, or the basal vein of Rosenthal. Shunts 
Fig. 4.3. Typical locations of intracranial dural arterial mal-
formations. 1, anterior fossa; 2, cavernous sinus; 3, trans-
verse sinus; 4, sigmoid sinus; 5, conﬂ uens sinuum; 6, fora-
men magnum; 7, tentorial incisura; 8, base of the tentorium; 
9, straight sinus and vein of Galen

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
127
located around the tentorial incisura may drain into 
lateral mesencephalic veins and into spinal epidural 
veins. Lesions located around the foramen magnum 
and on the clivus drain into the clival venous plexus 
and towards spinal epidural veins (Lasjaunias and 
Berenstein 1987) (Table 4.1).
Spinal DAVMs are considered the most common 
spinal vascular malformations, constituting 80% of 
all spinal AVMs (Anson and Spetzler 1992; Lee et 
al. 1998). The majority of these lesions are located in 
the thoracolumbar region.
4.1.5 
Hemodynamics
The rate of ﬂ ow through a DAVM is related to the size 
of the draining venous system. Direct ﬁ stulae on pat-
ent sinuses may have exceedingly high ﬂ ow; others, 
particularly those with small venous channels, such 
as many cavernous sinus and spinal dural ﬁ stulae 
demonstrate slow ﬂ ow. In theory, both the arterial 
steal phenomenon and increased venous pressure 
can be implicated as hemodynamic effects of DAVMs. 
Clinically, elevated venous pressure seems to be the 
single most important hemodynamic effect that is 
related to the venous outﬂ ow pattern and largely 
independent from the ﬂ ow rate. Reduced regional 
cerebral blood ﬂ ow (rCBF) and increased regional 
cerebral blood volume (rCBV) were demonstrated by 
single photon emission computerized tomography 
(SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET), 
indicating venous congestion and impaired cerebral 
perfusion in cases with retrograde cortical venous 
drainage and sinus occlusion. These hemodynamic 
effects were not related to the ﬂ ow rate of the ﬁ stula 
(Tanimoto et al. 1984; Kawaguchi et al. 2000).
 4.2 
Clinical Presentation
4.2.1 
Signs and Symptoms
Intracranial DAVMs are rare in infancy and child-
hood (Boet et al. 2001; Kincaid et al. 2001). In adults 
they present mostly in middle-aged or elderly patients 
with a mean age of 50–60 years. Spinal DAVMs com-
monly present after the 4th decade. Men and women 
are equally affected except for cavernous sinus ﬁ s-
tulae, which have a signiﬁ cantly higher incidence in 
women (85% of all lesions) (Cognard et al. 1995). 
Clinical signs and symptoms most commonly asso-
ciated with DAVM include pulsatile tinnitus, objec-
tive bruit, cranial nerve palsies, ocular symptoms 
including proptosis and chemosis (“red eye”), optic 
nerve atrophy, papilledema, headaches, nausea and/
or vomiting as signs of elevated intracranial pres-
sure (ICP), epileptic seizures, focal neurological deﬁ -
cit, and intracranial hemorrhage. High-ﬂ ow ﬁ stulae 
that typically present in infants and children may 
lead to heart failure. Hydrocephalus may also develop 
mostly in children with fast-ﬂ ow lesions. Symptoms 
are strongly related to the location and hemodynamic 
pattern of the lesion. Table 4.2 summarizes the most 
typical symptoms of each DAVM location. Potential 
pathomechanisms include venous congestion, perfu-
sion deﬁ cit due to venous hypertension, mass effect, 
and arterial steal phenomenon (Lasjaunias et al. 
1986). As a general rule, involvement of leptomen-
ingeal veins in venous drainage is associated with 
increased incidence of hemorrhagic and nonhemor-
rhagic neurological complications and therefore is 
considered an indicator of aggressive clinical course 
(see below). This is thought to be related to high pres-
sure within subarachnoid veins, leading to venous 
rupture and subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), and/or 
venous ischemia, resulting in venous infarction and 
subsequent parenchymal hemorrhage.
Table 4.1. Venous drainage pathways of intracranial dural 
arteriovenous malformations in different locations
Location
Potential venous drainage pathway
Anterior fossa
Olfactory vein, frontal veins
Cavernous sinus
Contralateral cavernous sinus, 
 ophthalmic veins, inferior petrosal 
sinus, temporal veins
Transverse,
sigmoid sinus
Sigmoid sinus, jugular vein,straight 
sinus, superior sagittal sinus, 
 temporal occipital veins
Conﬂ uens sinuum
Superior sagittal sinus, transverse 
 sinuses, straight sinus, occipital 
veins, temporal veins
Tentorium
Superior petrosal sinus, petrous vein, 
tentorial veins, vein of Rosenthal, 
lateral mesencephalic vein, spinal 
perimedullary veins
Foramen magnum
Clival venous plexus,
spinal  perimedullary veins

128 
I. Szikora
Table 4.2. Characteristic signs and symptoms associated with dural arteriovenous malformations in different locations
ICH Bruit
Pulsatile 
tinnitus
Ocular 
palsy
“Red eye” Nonocular  
cranial 
nerve
Headache
Seizures Papilledema Neurological  
deﬁ cit
Anterior fossa +
+
Cavernous 
sinus
+
+
+
+
+
+
Transverse-
sigmoid
sinuses
+
+
+
+
+
+
Conﬂ uens 
sinuum
+
+
+
+
+
+
Tentorium
+
+
+
+
+
Straight sinus 
and vein of 
Galen
+
+
+
+
+
Foramen 
magnum
+
+
+
+
+
+
Convexity
+
+
+
+
Superior
sagittal sinus
+
+
+
+
Spinal
+
Dural AVMs in the anterior fossa frequently 
present with intradural bleeding, likely caused by 
the obligate leptomeningeal venous drainage in this 
condition (Fig. 4.4).
Cavernous sinus DAVMs have a characteristic 
clinical presentation including proptosis, chemosis 
(Fig. 4.5a,b), ocular movement disorder due to sixth 
and/or third nerve palsy, leading to double vision, 
retinal hemorrhages, reduced vision, pulsatile tin-
nitus, and bruit. Most of those symptoms are related 
to venous overload of the primary draining veins, 
namely the superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) and 
the inferior petrosal sinus (Fig. 4.5c,d). Congestion 
in the SOV results in chemosis, proptosis, and reti-
nal hemorrhage and is probably involved in visual 
loss due to hypoperfusion of the optic nerve and the 
retina. Fast arterialized ﬂ ow within the SOV leads 
to bruit that can be detected over the eye. Involve-
ment of the inferior petrosal sinus, if present, pro-
duces pulsatile tinnitus. Cranial nerve paresis lead-
ing to ocular movement disorder can be explained 
by mass effect within the cavernous sinus and the 
orbit, although arterial steal phenomenon has also 
been mentioned as a potential cause (Lasjaunias et 
al. 1986). Thrombosis of the major venous outlets of 
the cavernous sinus may occur, further aggravating 
symptoms. Rerouting of the venous ﬂ ow toward the 
contralateral cavernous sinus results in contralat-
eral eye symptoms (Fig. 4.5e). Venous drainage via 
temporal veins maybe associated with neurologi-
cal symptoms and in rare cases with hemorrhage 
(Fig. 4.5f,i).
Transverse and sigmoid sinus DAVMs typically 
present with pulsatile bruit that is easily explained 
by fast ﬂ ow within the sigmoid sinus and jugular 
vein close to the middle ear (Fig. 4.6a). The fre-
quent association of either contra- or ipsilateral oc-
clusion of the transverse or sigmoid sinuses leads 
to rerouting of venous ﬂ ow towards the contralat-
eral transverse sinus, the superior sagittal sinus 
and/or into leptomeningeal veins. This may result 
in elevated venous and intracranial pressure and 
subsequent papilledema, neurological symptoms, 
seizures, and optic nerve atrophy (Fig. 4.6b). High-
ﬂ ow ﬁ stulae typically involve this region in infants 
and children. The resulting extreme enlargement 
of the sinus may cause mass effect, chronic venous 
hypertension, and communicating hydrocephalus 
(Fig. 4.6c).
Similarly, DAVMs involving the conﬂ uens sinuum 
tend to be large, with exceedingly high ﬂ ow and with 
reﬂ ux into the straight and superior sagittal sinus, 
producing frequent hemorrhagic and nonhemor-
rhagic neurological complications (Fig. 4.7).

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
129
Fig. 4.4a–c. DAVM located in the anterior fossa. a Right internal ca-
rotid artery injection. Digital subtraction angiography, lateral view, 
demonstrating dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM) fed by an 
ethmoidal branch of the ophthalmic artery (arrow) and drained by 
a frontal vein (open arrow). b Right external carotid artery injection 
of the same DAVM demonstrating arterial supply from ethmoidal 
branches of the distal internal maxillary artery and venous drainage 
via the cavernous sinus (small open arrow) and the inferior petro-
sal sinus (small broken arrow). c Computer tomography of the same 
patient demonstrating parenchymal hemorrhage (arrow) within the 
right frontal lobe
a
b
c
DAVMs located on the tentorium frequently bleed; 
this is thought to be related to the typical leptomen-
ingeal venous drainage of this region (Fig. 4.8).
Lesions in the posterior fossa, and particularly 
that of the clivus and the foramen magnum, may 
have a very special clinical presentation. As some of 
them tend to drain into spinal perimedullary veins, 
they typically produce spinal venous hypertension. 
The resulting hypoperfusion of the spinal cord re-
sults in myelopathy and subsequent neurological 
deﬁ cit (Woimant et al. 1982; Cognard et al. 1995; 
Brunereau et al. 1996; Ricolﬁ  et al. 1999; Slaba et 
al. 2000; Reinges et al. 2001). Most patients present 
with a long history of slowly progressing and ﬂ uc-
tuating symptoms (Fig. 4.9). Hemorrhage has also 
been reported in cases of spinal epidural drainage 
(Cognard et al. 1995).
Arteriovenous malformations of the superior sag-
ittal sinus produce a complex neurological picture. 
These lesions tend to be morphologically complex 
with multiple arterial feeders and high ﬂ ow. Subse-
quently, the venous overload is signiﬁ cant, resulting 
in highly elevated intracranial pressure, headache, 
papilledema, visual disturbances, progressive de-
mentia, neurological deﬁ cits, and seizures. Sinus 
thrombosis is frequently associated, leading to bi-
zarre venous ﬂ ow patterns. Occlusion of the supe-
rior sagittal sinus itself leads to retrograde venous 

130 
I. Szikora
Fig. 4.5a–i. Clinical and radiomorphological characteristics of cavernous sinus (CS) dural arteriovenous malformation 
(DAVM). a Typical ocular signs of CS DAVM on the right, including moderate exophthalmos, chemosis, and conjunctival 
hyperemia (“red eye”). b Resolution of the ocular signs following successful treatment of the lesion. c Typical angiographic 
appearance of CS DAVM (arrow) with exclusive venous drainage via the superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) (open arrow). 
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA), internal carotid artery (ICA) injection, lateral view. d Venous drainage of a CS 
( arrow) DAVM via the inferior petrosal sinus (broken arrow). Note that the SOV is not opaciﬁ ed. DSA, ICA injection, lateral 
view. e CS DAVM drained via the intercavernous sinus and the contralateral SOV (open arrow). DSA, common carotid ar-
tery (CCA) injection, anteroposterior view. f Cortical venous drainage of a CS DAVM (arrow) via the Sylvian vein (curved 
 arrow) and multiple frontal cortical veins (arrowheads) towards the superior sagittal sinus (small arrow) and via the basal 
a
b
c
d
e
f
ZZ

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
131
drainage via subependymal veins. These patients 
typically present with headache and progressive 
dementia (Jaillard et al. 1999). Occlusion of the 
transverse sinuses will reroute venous ﬂ ow into cor-
tical veins and into the straight sinus. Blood may 
eventually exit the cranium via the superior oph-
thalmic vein (producing exophthalmos and bruit) 
and via perimesencephalic veins towards the spi-
nal perimedullary venous system. Ectatic draining 
veins may produce a mass effect on the brain stem or 
the spinal cord, further complicating the neurologi-
cal course (Fig. 4.10).
Arteriovenous shunts on the dura of the convexity 
commonly present with hemorrhage due to the obli-
gate leptomeningeal venous drainage (Fig. 4.11).
Spinal DAVMs are rare. These lesions produce 
slowly progressing symptoms of spinal myelopathy, 
including weakness, gait disturbances, sensory deﬁ -
cit of the lower extremities, and sphincter dysfunc-
tion, thought to be a result of the venous hypertension 
and resulting hypoperfusion. Symptoms typically 
develop in a slow and ﬂ uctuating fashion, frequently 
delaying the diagnosis signiﬁ cantly (Stecker et al. 
1996; Kataoka et al. 2001) (Fig. 4.12).
g
h
i
vein of Rosenthal towards the straight sinus (broken arrow). 
g Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the patient demonstrated in 
(c), exhibiting an enlarged SOV that intensely enhances with 
contrast material (open arrow). h Magnetic resonance im-
age (MRI) of the same patient: T1-weighted (T1-W) coronal 
section following contrast administration demonstrates an 
enlarged CS (arrow). i Noncontrast CT scan of the patient 
demonstrated in (f) depicting left temporal lobe hemorrhage 
(asterisk)

132 
I. Szikora
Fig. 4.6a–c. Angiographic features of dural arteriovenous malformations (DAVMs) involving the transverse and sigmoid 
sinuses. a Digital subtraction angiography (DSA), external carotid artery (ECA) injection, lateral view, demonstrating a 
sigmoid sinus (SS) DAVM (asterisk). Venous drainage is antegrade via SS (large arrow). Multiple feeding pedicles of the 
middle meningeal (small arrow), the occipital (arrow), the ascending pharyngeal (broken arrow), and the retroauricular 
(arrowhead) arteries are delineated. b DSA of an SS DAVM (asterisk) with ECA injection in anteroposterior view. The SS is 
occluded ( arrow). Venous drainage is retrograde. Note severe stenosis of the ipsi- (curved arrow) and contralateral (small 
arrow) transverse sinuses (TS) and reﬂ ux into the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) (broken arrow). c DSA in lateral view, ECA 
injection delineating an extensive DAVM draining into an ectatic transverse sinus (asterisk). Patient is a 10-month-old baby. 
Prominent feeders arise from the middle meningeal (small arrow) and the occipital (arrow) arteries
a
c
b
Fig. 4.7a–c. Dural arteriovenous malformation involving the conﬂ uens 
sinuum. a The medial segment of the transverse sinus is extremely en-
larged (broken arrow). The sinus ectasia involves the conﬂ uens sinuum. 
The sigmoid sinus on the left is occluded (asterisk). Note reﬂ ux into the su-
perior sagittal sinus (arrow) and retrograde ﬂ ow within the contralateral 
transverse sinus (small arrow). b T2-W MRI demonstrates dilatation of the 
transverse sinus with mass effect. c T2-W MRI depicting multiple areas of 
mixed signal intensity within the cerebellum (arrowheads) corresponding 
to repeated small hemorrhages due to signiﬁ cant venous hypertension and 
perfusion deﬁ cit
a
c
b

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
133
Fig. 4.8a–e. Radiomorphological characteristics of dural 
arteriovenous malformations (DAVMs) involving the tento-
rium. a,b Digital subtraction angiography (DSA), external 
carotid artery (ECA) (a) and internal carotid artery (ICA) 
(b) injection, lateral view. The DAVM (asterisk) is located in 
the tentorial incisura and drains directly into an enlarged 
leptomeningeal vein (open arrow) towards the straight sinus. 
Arterial supply is provided by multiple ECA branches (small 
arrows) and the tentorial marginal branch of the ICA ( arrow). 
T1-W sagittal (c) and T2-W axial (d) MRI scan demonstrating 
location of the same DAVM (asterisk), the draining vein, and 
its dilated segment (open arrow) within the tentorial incisura 
with mass effect on the cerebellum. e Noncontrast CT scan of 
the same patient demonstrates perifocal hemorrhage around 
the dilated draining vein (broken arrow)
a
c
e
b
d

134 
I. Szikora
Fig. 4.9a–f. Dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM) of the posterior fossa with spinal perimedullary drainage. a,b Com-
mon carotid injection, lateral view. Multiple external carotid artery (ECA) branches (arrows) and the tentorial marginal 
branch of the internal carotid artery (ICA) (small curved arrow) feed an arteriovenous connection with a venous varix (open 
arrow). Narrow, irregular vein drains the DAVM towards the transverse sinus (large arrow) and pontomesencephalic veins 
into anterior and posterior intradural spinal veins (small open arrows). c,d Noncontrast, T2-W axial (c) and sagittal (d) MRI 
images demonstrating hyperintense signal within the medulla, representing venous ischemia (arrow). e,f Post-treatment 
ECA (e) and ICA (f) angiograms demonstrating complete occlusion of the malformation following embolization from all 
feeders with diluted cyanoacrylate glue (Histoacryl)
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
135
Fig. 4.10a–f. Dural arteriovenous malformation of the superior sagittal sinus with signiﬁ cant venous occlusive disease. a,b 
Digital subtraction angiography with selective external carotid artery (ECA) and internal carotid artery (ICA) injections 
in lateral view demonstrates intense ﬁ lling of the superior sagittal sinus (broken arrow) in the arterial phase from mul-
tiple ECA feeders including transosseal branches of the superﬁ cial temporal and branches of the middle meningeal artery 
(small arrows in a), from the anterior meningeal artery (small arrow in b) and from subarachnoid branches of the anterior 
cerebral artery (small curved arrow). c,d Left ICA injection, late venous phase, lateral (c) and anteroposterior (d) views. 
Both transverse sinuses are occluded. Anteriorly, venous drainage is provided by a large frontal cortical vein (small arrow) 
and the sylvian vein into cavernous sinus. An extremely dilated superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) (broken arrow) drains the 
cavernous sinus. Posteriorly, retrograde ﬂ ow is seen within the straight sinus and the vein of Rosenthal draining into a 
large pontomesencephalic vein (small curved arrows) and spinal perimedullary veins. e,f MRI study, T1-W sagittal sections 
depicting the giant SOV (broken arrow) producing exophthalmos and the large pontomesencephalic vein with severe mass 
effect on the brain stem and the spinal cord (arrowheads)
a
c
e
b
d
f

136 
I. Szikora
Fig. 4.11a–d. Dural arteriovenous malformation of the convexity. a,b Direct communication (asterisk) between the 
middle meningeal artery (arrow) and a tortuous leptomeningeal vein of the frontal convexity (large arrow) close to the 
superior sagittal sinus (open arrow). c Time of ﬂ ight (TOF) magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), maximum intensity 
projection (MIP), delineates the feeding pedicle (small arrow) and arteriovenous shunt (asterisk). d T2-W MRI demon-
strates cross sections of multiple large vessels by signal void within the subarachnoid space corresponding to enlarged 
veins (small arrows). A small intraparenchymal hemorrhage is seen within the frontal parasagittal parenchyma (broken 
arrow)
a
c
b
d

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
137
4.2.2 
Natural History and Classifi cation
DAVMs are dynamic lesions with a highly vari-
able clinical course that extends from spontane-
ous cure to fatal hemorrhage. The clinical pre-
sentation of DAVMs has been classiﬁ ed as either 
benign or aggressive. Lesions producing ocular 
symptoms, pulsatile tinnitus, bruit, and/or local 
cranial nerve deﬁ cits only are considered benign. 
Those associated with intracranial hemorrhage or 
nonhemorrhagic neurological deﬁ cit are classiﬁ ed 
as aggressive. While symptomatology is inﬂ uenced 
by location, the natural history is dominated by 
the venous ﬂ ow pattern. Growing evidence sug-
gests that retrograde venous drainage and venous 
drainage into leptomeningeal veins is associated 
with more severe clinical presentation and a more 
aggressive natural history. Careful analysis of the 
hemodynamics as demonstrated by angiography 
is therefore a prerequisite to proper therapeutic 
decision-making. During the past several decades, 
several classiﬁ cation systems have been developed 
based on the venous ﬂ ow pattern.
Djindjan and Merland (1978) recognized the 
signiﬁ cance of retrograde venous drainage early on 
and created a classiﬁ cation system as demonstrated 
in Table 4.3 and Figures 4.13, 4.14. In this system, 
grade 1 lesions drain into the involved sinus in ei-
ther an ante- or a retrograde fashion (Fig. 4.13a–c). 
Grade 2 lesions drain into sinuses, too, but have re-
ﬂ ux into cerebral veins (Fig. 4.13d, e). Grade 3 lesions 
are characterized by exclusive drainage into cortical 
veins (Fig. 4.13e–g, j), and grade 4 DAVMs drain into 
or towards large venous lakes (Fig. 4.13h).
Cognard et al. (1995) retrospectively analyzed 
a series of 205 patients with DAVMs and modiﬁ ed 
Djindjan and Merland’s classiﬁ cation based on fur-
ther details of the venous pathway that he found to 
signiﬁ cantly inﬂ uence the clinical course (Table 4.3, 
Figs. 4.13, 4.14). In his system, type I lesions drain 
into dural sinuses in an antegrade direction only 
(Fig. 4.13a). Type II is characterized by dispropor-
tionately high arterial load and insufﬁ cient ante-
grade venous drainage, resulting in retrograde ﬂ ow. 
This category is further divided into three sub-
groups, including II/a with retrograde ﬂ ow within 
the sinuses only (Fig. 4.13b, c), II/b with antegrade 
ﬂ ow within the sinus and reﬂ ux into cortical veins 
(Fig. 4.13d), and II/a+b with retrograde ﬂ ow within 
both the sinus and cortical veins (Fig. 4.13e). Type 
III lesions drain exclusively into cortical veins 
Fig. 4.12a,b. Spinal dural arteriovenous malfor-
mation (DAVM). a Digital subtraction angiog-
raphy, selective injection of an L.IV segmental 
artery on the left (arrow) demonstrates a DAVM 
involving the nerve root sheath (curved arrow), 
draining into a perimedullary vein (open arrow) 
and into dilated spinal intradural veins (broken 
arrow). b Sagittal T1-W MRI study demonstrates 
large intradural vessels within the L.I–IV seg-
ments (broken arrow), typical of spinal DAVM. 
Contrast enhancement at the lower thoracic level 
is due to previous surgery
a
b

138 
I. Szikora
Table 4.3. Classiﬁ cation of intracranial dural arteriovenous malformations (DAVMs) in relation to venous drainage 
 pattern
Venous drainage pattern: intracranial DAVM
See
Figure 4.13
Classiﬁ cation
Site of shunt 
Venous outﬂ ow
Djindjan
Cognard
Borden
Dural sinus/meningeal vein
Sinus, antegrade
A
1
1
1
Dural sinus/meningeal vein
Sinus, ante/retrograde
B
1
2/A
1
Dural sinus/meningeal vein
with sinus occlusion
Sinus, retrograde
C
1
2/A
1
Dural sinus/meningeal vein
Sinus antegrade
+ reﬂ ux into subarachnoid vein
D
2
2/B
2
Dural sinus/meningeal vein
Sinus ante/retrograde
+ reﬂ ux into subarachnoid vein
E
2
2/A+B
2
Subarachnoid vein
Subarachnoid vein
F
3
3
3
Isolated sinus with reﬂ ux 
into subarachnoid vein
Subarachnoid vein
G
3
3
3
Venous lake 
Subarachnoid vein
H
4
4
3
Spinal perimedullary vein
Subarachnoid vein
J
3
5
3
Fig. 4.13a–i. Venous drainage patterns of intracranial dural arteriovenous malformations (DAVMs). a–c DAVM shunting 
into a dural sinus with antegrade (a), ante- and retrograde (b), and exclusively retrograde ﬂ ow (due to sinus occlusion, (c) 
within the sinus system. d,e DAVM shunting into a dural sinus with retrograde ﬂ ow in leptomeningeal veins due to venous 
overload of the sinus, with (e) or without (d) retrograde ﬂ ow inside the sinus itself. f DAVM shunting directly into a lepto-
meningeal vein. g Isolated sinus due to sinus occlusion with retrograde leptomeningeal venous drainage. h DAVM draining 
into venous ectasia. i Intracranial DAVM draining into spinal perimedullary veins
g
a
c
e
b
d
f
i
h

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
139
Fig. 4.14a–f. Examples of intracranial dural arteriovenous malfor-
mations (DAVMs) with different venous drainage patterns. a DAVM 
( asterisk) of the sigmoid sinus (SS), shunting into the sinus (arrow) 
with antegrade ﬂ ow only. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA), exter-
nal carotid artery (ECA) injection, anteroposterior (AP) view. b DAVM 
( asterisk) of the sigmoid-transverse sinus with retrograde ﬂ ow (arrow) 
and reﬂ ux into the superior sagittal sinus (SSS). DSA, ECA injection, AP 
view. c DAVM of the frontal convexity (asterisk) draining into a dilated 
cortical vein (arrow). DSA, Right ECA injection, AP view. d DAVM of 
the SS (asterisk) on the left with retrograde ﬂ ow within multiple cortical 
veins (arrows) draining into the SSS (arrow). DSA, left ECA injection, 
AP view. e DAVM at the tentorial incisura (asterisk) draining into a 
venous varix (arrow). DSA with ECA injection, lateral view. f DAVM 
on the clivus draining into spinal perimedullary veins (arrow). DSA, 
internal carotid artery injection, lateral view
b
a
c
e
d
f

140 
I. Szikora
(Fig. 4.13f). Type IV lesions drain into cortical veins 
with venous ectasia (Fig. 4.13h). Finally, Cognard 
added another entity, lesions that drain into spinal 
perimedullary veins, classiﬁ ed as type V (Fig. 4.13j). 
In his analysis of 205 patients, Cognard found an 
aggressive clinical course in one of 84 patients with 
type I ﬁ stulae, 45% in type II, 76% in type III, 96% in 
type IV, and in 100% in type V. In addition, hemor-
rhage, as the most severe complication, was related 
strictly to cortical venous drainage. No hemorrhage 
was found in types I and II/a, 20% in type II/b, 6% 
in type II/a+b, 40% in type III, and 66% in type IV. 
Five of 12 patients with spinal venous drainage had 
hemorrhage, and in all of them the spinal drainage 
was directed into the epidural space in the cervical 
region. The signiﬁ cant difference between type III 
and IV demonstrates that venous ectasia is associ-
ated with a particularly high likelihood of hemor-
rhage. Histopathological signs of venous wall de-
generation have been found in such venous pouches 
(Hamada et al. 2000). This classiﬁ cation system, 
although somewhat complicated, has a high predic-
tive value regarding aggressive clinical course and 
particularly concerning hemorrhage.
Finally, Borden et al. (1995) created a simpli-
ﬁ ed system by combining the previous two and 
including spinal DAVMs in the same classiﬁ ca-
tion (Tables 4.3 and 4.4, Figs. 4.13–4.15). This sys-
tem focuses on aggressivity of the clinical course, 
which, hemorrhagic or not, requires treatment. All 
malformations draining into dural sinuses or men-
ingeal or spinal epidural veins with normal (an-
tegrade) ﬂ ow within the subarachnoid/leptomen-
ingeal veins are considered type I (Fig.  4.13a–c). 
Those that drain into sinuses or meningeal or epi-
dural veins resulting in reversed ﬂ ow within nor-
mal veins draining into those sinuses are classiﬁ ed 
as type II (Fig. 4.13d,e,g). Lesions draining directly 
into subarachnoid veins (brain or spine) belong to 
type III (Fig. 4.13f,j). Type I lesions in an intracra-
nial location have a benign course, but those lo-
cated spinally may present with medullopathy or 
epidural hemorrhage. Type II lesions, either spinal 
or cranial, present with hemorrhage or neurologi-
cal symptoms due to venous hypertension. Type III 
lesions typically present with hemorrhage intracra-
nially and with spinal medullopathy.
In an attempt to validate the classiﬁ cations de-
scribed above, Davies et al. (1996) applied both 
systems retrospectively to 102 patients harboring 
DAVMs. By deﬁ nition, Cognard types I and II/a were 
considered as Borden type I, Cognard II/b and II/
a+b as Borden II and Cognard III, IV, and V as Bor-
den III (Table 4.3.). Of the 102 patients, 31 (30%) had 
an aggressive presentation: 16 had hemorrhage and 
15 had nonhemorrhagic neurological symptoms. 
Fig. 4.15a–c. Venous drainage patterns of spinal dural arteriovenous malformations. (NR, nerve root; RA, radicular artery; 
DM, dura mater; M, medulla). Meningeal branch of the radicular artery feeds arteriovenous shunt located on the dura (small 
arrow). a Venous drainage by epidural veins (arrow). b Venous drainage via epidural veins and a perimedullary vein (arrow) 
into the coronal venous plexus (arrowheads). c Exclusive venous drainage by perimedullary vein (arrow) and the coronal 
venous plexus (arrowheads)
a
b
c

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
141
Aggressive presentation correlated well with both 
Borden and Cognard grades: Either hemorrhagic or 
nonhemorrhagic aggressive symptoms were found 
in 2% of Borden I, 39% of Borden II, and 79% of Bor-
den III cases. In the Borden I group Cognard type 
II/a patients had more nonhemorrhagic symptoms 
(7%) than those with Cognard type I lesions (0%). 
In the Borden III group, the incidence of hemor-
rhagic presentation correlated positively with Cog-
nard grades, demonstrating 38% incidence in type 
III, 50% in type IV, and 75% in type V. While the 
Borden classiﬁ cation reliably predicts aggressive 
clinical presentation, the Cognard system provides 
more precise correlation between hemorrhage and 
venous drainage.
In addition, the clinical presentation was ana-
lyzed in relation to location of the lesions by sev-
eral authors. In a meta-analysis of 100 benign and 
277 aggressive DAVM cases, Awad and colleagues 
(1990) found no correlation between aggressive pre-
sentation and ﬂ ow rate. Although the lowest rate of 
aggressive behavior was found in transverse and 
cavernous sinus locations and the highest in tento-
rial DAVMs, no location was immune to an aggres-
sive neurological course. Leptomeningeal venous 
drainage, venous dilatations, and galenic drainage 
were found to signiﬁ cantly correlate with aggressive 
symptoms. No aggressive symptoms were found in 
association with lesions involving the cavernous si-
nus, while there were aggressive symptoms in 27% 
of transverse sinus DAVMs, in 100% of those at the 
conﬂ uens sinuum, in 65% at the superior sagittal 
sinus, in 92% at the tentorium, and in 88% in the 
anterior fossa (Cognard et al. 1995). Analysis of the 
venous drainage pattern demonstrated that high 
incidence of aggressive symptoms in certain loca-
tions was related to the speciﬁ c venous pattern in 
each location rather than to the location itself. All 
ﬁ stulae in the anterior cranial fossa were classiﬁ ed 
as Borden type III, while 78% of them on the tento-
rium, 13% on the transverse sinus, and none on the 
cavernous sinus belonged into this clinically aggres-
sive group (Davies et al. 1996). Multiple DAVM loca-
tion was found to correlate signiﬁ cantly with lepto-
meningeal venous drainage (84%) and subsequently 
with aggressive presentation. These patients had a 
three times higher incidence of hemorrhage than 
those with a single DAVM (van Dijk et al. 2002). In 
general, location has a signiﬁ cant impact on the ve-
nous drainage pattern but the clinical presentation 
is determined by the venous drainage itself, and not 
by the location.
While the above-cited studies provide good 
correlation between venous morphology and 
clinical symptomatology at the time of the initial 
presentation, this is of limited value regarding 
the natural history and the prognosis of the dis-
ease. Some DAVMs may disappear without treat-
ment (Bitoh and Sakaki 1979; Chaudhary et al. 
1982;  Lasjaunias et al. 1984; Meder et al. 1995; 
Luciani et al. 2001); others may lead to death. As 
treatment is complicated and carries certain risks, 
proper selection of patients requiring treatment 
necessitates reliable prognosis of each particular 
case.  Davies and colleagues (1997a,b) analyzed 
the clinical course of 55 Borden grade I (benign) 
and 46 Borden grade II–III intracranial DAVM 
patients for 133 patient years and for 344 patient 
months, respectively, following presentation. Of 26 
Borden I patients, 21 improved and ﬁ ve remained 
stable without treatment. In contrast, four of the 
29 Borden III patients treated conservatively died 
within the follow-up period. This group had a 
19%/year incidence of hemorrhage, 11%/year of 
nonhemorrhagic complications, and a 19%/year 
mortality. Although the number of observed cases 
is small, this study supports the concept that the 
type of venous drainage not only determines the 
ﬁ rst clinical presentation but also reliably predicts 
the natural history, and therefore may serve as a 
basis for therapeutic  decision-making.
 4.3 
Diagnostic Imaging
Although plain X-ray ﬁ lms may occasionally dem-
onstrate prominent vascular impressions on the 
skull, the contribution of conventional radiogra-
phy to the imaging diagnosis of DAVM is limited. 
Although myelography depicts enlarged intradural 
vessels by negative contrast, this does not justify 
using this technique for the demonstration of spinal 
DAVM (Chen et al. 1995). Cross-sectional imaging 
techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrate 
consequences of the dural arteriovenous shunt on 
the brain and the cerebrospinal ﬂ uid (CSF) spaces. 
Less invasive or noninvasive angiographic tech-
niques such as CT angiography (CTA) or MR angi-
ography (MRA) are capable of depicting the vascular 
pathology itself. Catheter angiography is required 

142 
I. Szikora
for the accurate localization of the shunt and evalu-
ation of the hemodynamic pattern.
4.3.1 
Computer Tomography
Computer tomography (CT) scan without contrast 
demonstrates changes secondary to DAVMs. These 
include hydrocephalus, cortical atrophy, and hem-
orrhage (Figs. 4.4, 4.5, 4.8, 4.16) that can be either 
subarachnoid (Kagawa et al. 2001), subdural, pa-
renchymal (Solis et al. 1977), or intraventricular 
(Kawaguchi et al. 1999b). Noncontrast CT scan may 
raise the suspicion of sinus thrombosis by hyperden-
sity within the involved sinus. Contrast-enhanced 
CT delineates enlarged draining veins as serpentine 
enhancing structures. This is particularly charac-
teristic in cavernous sinus DAVM with superior oph-
thalmic vein (SOV) drainage in which the enlarged 
SOV is well demonstrated as tubular enhancement 
within the orbit that also exhibits signs of associated 
exophthalmus (Fig. 4.5g). If coupled with typical 
clinical symptoms, these signs on CT may provide 
the diagnosis of a cavernous sinus arteriovenous 
shunt; however, differentiation between direct ca-
rotid cavernous ﬁ stula and a cavernous sinus DAVM 
is not possible based on CT scan. Enlarged drain-
ing veins are delineated in cases of DAVM in other 
locations with either direct leptomeningeal venous 
drainage or reﬂ ux into leptomeningeal veins due to 
venous overload of the sinuses. Mass effect from ve-
Fig. 4.16a–c. Typical signs of intracranial du-
ral arteriovenous malformation (DAVM) by CT. 
a Ectatic venous structure and hydrocephalus. 
b Multiple enhancing vascular structures follow-
ing contrast administration, representing drain-
ing veins. c Dilated subarachnoid spaces due to 
cortical atrophy
a
b
c

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
143
nous varices is well depicted (Fig. 4.16a,b). In cases 
of DAVM with antegrade sinus drainage, CT scan is 
usually normal (Chiras et al. 1982). The use of mul-
tislice CT (Klingebiel et al. 2001) and CT angiogra-
phy (CTA) (Alberico et al. 1999) has been proposed 
for the less invasive evaluation of cerebral vascular 
malformation. DAVMs, particularly those with large 
and complex nidi, are likely to be detected by CTA. 
However, the dynamic evaluation of the lesion nec-
essary for making a therapeutic decision may not be 
possible by CT/CTA techniques. Computed tomog-
raphy with contrast is useful in demonstrating sinus 
thrombosis as lack of contrast enhancement within 
the involved sinus(es) in association with DAVM. CT 
scanning has been applied to evaluate the results fol-
lowing embolization of spinal DAVM, but it cannot 
be successfully used for the initial diagnostic imag-
ing of such lesions (Cognard et al. 1996).
4.3.2 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Unlike pial AVMs, the nidus of a DAVM is usu-
ally not demonstrated by spin echo (SE) MRI. This 
is because the nidus of a DAVM is located within 
a thin sheet of the dura that is difﬁ cult to detect 
by cross-sectional imaging. MRI depicts indirect 
signs of DAVM. Similar to CT, hydrocephalus, cor-
tical atrophy, and mass effect from enlarged venous 
structures are easily demonstrated (Figs. 4.7b, 4.8d, 
4.10e). Large draining veins are well delineated by 
ﬂ ow void on spin echo images either intraorbital or 
intracranial (Fig. 4.10e,f). High velocity signal loss 
can be seen within the cavernous sinus as a sign 
of arterial ﬂ ow, indicating DAVM (Hirabuki et al. 
1988). When the venous ﬂ ow is diverted towards the 
subependymal veins and midline venous structures, 
multiple cross sections of enlarged medullary veins 
may be seen within the white matter as small foci 
of ﬂ ow void. Although the nidus itself is usually 
not delineated, the presence of dilated pial vessels 
(draining veins) without an AVM nidus is suggestive 
of DAVM with venous occlusive disease and venous 
congestion (Fig. 4.11d). This is found in over two 
thirds of patients with venous reﬂ ux (De Marco et 
al. 1990; Willinsky et al. 1994). Venous ischemia 
is indicated by high signal intensity on T2-weighted 
(T2-W) images that typically does not correspond 
to arterial distribution (Figs. 4.10c, d, 4.17f). High 
signal intensity areas may enhance with gadolinium, 
indicating disruption of the blood-brain barrier due 
to venous hypoperfusion (Willinsky et al. 1994; 
Kawaguchi et al. 2001). Bithalamic T2 hyperintensi-
ties have been described as a result of reversible ve-
nous ischemia (Greenough et al. 1999). Intradural 
hemorrhage, either subdural or parenchymal, due to 
DAVM is easily detected by MRI as mixed signal in-
tensity on SE images (Figs. 4.7c, 4.8c, 4.11/d). Dural 
sinus thrombosis that is frequently associated with 
DAVM might be demonstrated as lack of signal loss 
within the involved segment of the sinus on SE im-
ages. This can be conﬁ rmed by the lack of contrast 
enhancement and lack of visualization of the oc-
cluded sinus by venous MRA. However, correct as-
sessment of venous occlusive disease by MRI might 
be difﬁ cult. Parenchymal hemorrhage is commonly 
associated with venous infarction. SE MRI in cases 
of DAVM with antegrade sinus drainage might be 
normal (De Marco et al. 1990).
Magnetic resonance angiography improves the 
delineation of the site of the shunt and feeding and 
draining pedicles. Either two- and three-dimen-
sional phase contrast (PC) or time of ﬂ ight (TOF) 
MRA may demonstrate the nidus. Phase-contrast 
MRA may demonstrate ﬂ ow reversal in sinuses or 
draining veins (Cellerini et al. 1999). Stenosis or 
occlusion of sinuses and dilated cortical veins, how-
ever, might be missed by either PC or TOF MRA 
(Chen et al. 1992; Cellerini et al. 1999) (Figs. 4.11c, 
4.17d). First-pass, gadolinium-enhanced fast MRA 
signiﬁ cantly improves delineation of the nidus, feed-
ing pedicle, and draining veins (Farb et al. 2001).
An intracranial DAVM draining into the spinal 
venous system produces spinal venous ischemia, 
indicated by enlargement and increased T2 signal 
intensity of the cervical spinal cord (Fig. 4.9c,d). 
Diffuse gadolinium contrast enhancement of the 
cervical medulla has also been reported (Bousson 
et al. 1999). Enlarged intradural draining veins may 
or may not be depicted by MRI of the cervical spine. 
Clinical evidence of myelopathy with cervical spi-
nal cord signal changes should raise the suspicion of 
such DAVM and prompt intracranial vascular stud-
ies (MRA, DSA) (Ernst et al. 1997; Chen et al. 1998; 
Bousson et al. 1999).
Most spinal DAVMs generate spinal venous hy-
pertension leading to myelopathy that, if untreated, 
results in permanent disabling neurological deﬁ -
cit. Symptoms commonly develop in a slow and 
ﬂ uctuating manner, making the clinical diagnosis 
extremely difﬁ cult. Proper imaging is of utmost 
importance to establish the diagnosis before per-
manent damage to the spinal cord occurs. Yet the 

144 
I. Szikora
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
145
average time from the onset of symptoms until di-
agnosis was found to be 27 months in a large study 
of 66 patients with spinal DAVM (Gilbertson et al. 
1995). As localization of the lesion by clinical signs 
is often difﬁ cult or impossible and spinal catheter 
angiography is highly invasive, MRI and MRA play 
an outstanding role as noninvasive tools in the di-
agnosis of spinal DAVM. The most common signs 
of spinal DAVM are related to venous ischemia and 
include hyperintense T2 signal, enlargement, and 
gadolinium enhancement of the spinal cord. These 
signs have been reported in 94%–100%, 45%–65% 
and 60%–88% of patients, respectively. Intradural, 
serpentine structures visualized by ﬂ ow void and 
contrast enhancement are typical direct signs of 
the vascular dural arteriovenous shunts, represent-
ing enlarged veins of the coronal venous plexus that 
drains the lesion (Fig. 4.12). These vessel-like linear 
areas, located mostly on the dorsal surface of the 
cord, are present in 45%–82% of cases (Terwey et 
al. 1989; Gilbertson et al. 1995; Willinsky et al. 
1995). Changes most commonly associated with spi-
nal DAVM are therefore nonspeciﬁ c, and enlarged 
vessels lead the diagnosis in the correct direction in 
only one half to three quarter of the cases. More re-
cently, hypointense T2 signal changes were found on 
the periphery of the medulla in a consecutive series 
of 11 cases of spinal DAVM. This is thought to be 
a sign of venous myelopathy, speciﬁ c to venous hy-
pertension and arteriovenous shunt. These ﬁ ndings 
and their explanation need to be conﬁ rmed in larger 
studies (Hurst and  Grossman 2000). Presently, 
magnetic resonance angiography is increasingly 
being used to conﬁ rm the diagnosis of DAVM based 
on direct signs and to localize the ﬁ stula prior to 
selective angiography. Both TOF and PC MRA were 
tested in demonstrating spinal DAVM (Gelbert et 
al. 1992; Bowen et al. 1995; Mascalchi et al. 1995, 
1997, 1999, 2001; Bowen and Pattany 1997, 1998, 
2000; Binkert et al. 1999; Shigematsu et al. 2000) 
and were found to improve the speciﬁ city of MRI. 
However, most MRA techniques applied until re-
cently demonstrate enlarged intradural vessels but 
are not capable of delineating the feeding pedicle and 
draining vein, and therefore do not contribute to the 
localization of the ﬁ stula itself. Contrast-enhanced 
TOF and PC sequences (Bowen and Pattany 1997, 
1998) and phase display of 2D PC MRA (Mascalchi 
et al. 1999) have been found useful in some cases 
in delineating the ﬁ stula site. Rapidly repeated 3D 
angiographic sequences immediately following 
administration of gadolinium contrast agent and 
detection of the ﬁ rst pass of gadolinium improved 
visualization of the draining vein within the neu-
ral foramen (Binkert et al. 1999; Shigematsu et 
al. 2000). Most recently, Farb and colleagues (2002) 
applied automatic triggering of a fast, three-dimen-
sional MR angiographic sequence by detection of 
the ﬁ rst pass of gadolinium within the aorta. This 
technique allowed accurate delineation of the feed-
ing pedicle, and the draining vein and determina-
tion of the foraminal level of the ﬁ stula in all nine of 
their cases. With the most recent advances in MRA 
technology, MRI and MRA studies should be the 
primary tools in the diagnostic workup for spinal 
DAVM with an attempt to delineate the level and site 
of the ﬁ stula (Luetmer et al. 2005). Selective angi-
ography is still required, focusing on the level pre-
viously determined by MRA. The goal of catheter 
angiography is to evaluate small anatomical details, 
such as the origin of radicular arteries supplying the 
anterior spinal artery, and to perform endovascular 
therapy if possible. Extensive angiographic workup 
of the entire spine should be avoided (Fig. 4.18a–e).
Magnetic resonance techniques are also used 
for follow-up after treatment. Gradual disappear-
ance of intramedullary high signal, cord enlarge-
ment, and contrast enhancement by MRI within 
1–23 months following treatment (Willinsky et al. 
1995; Horikoshi et al. 2000), as well as lack of en-
larged perimedullary vessels by MRA (Mascalchi 
et al. 2001), conﬁ rms the result of either surgical or 
endovascular disconnection of the arteriovenous 
shunt (Fig. 4.18f,g).
Fig. 4.17a–f. Typical signs of intracranial dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM) by MRI. a–d DAVM of the tentorial 
incisura. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) with left external carotid artery (ECA) injection (a) demonstrates the 
DAVM draining into a venous lake (arrow). The dilated draining vein is demonstrated by ﬂ ow void on T2-W MRI (arrow 
in b) and by ﬂ ow enhancement on the source image of time-of-ﬂ ight magnetic resononce angiography (MRA) (arrow in c). 
Maximum intensity projection reconstructed MRA delineates the draining vein (arrow in d). e–f DAVM of the superior 
sagittal sinus with occlusion of both transverse sinuses. Sinus occlusion is demonstrated by DSA (arrow) in (e). An ischemic 
area of increased T2 signal intensity (arrow in f) is seen as a result of venous hypertension. Figure 4.10 demonstrates further 
details of the case

146 
I. Szikora
Fig. 4.18a–g. Spinal dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula. a,b T2-W MRI of the thoracic spine demonstrating hyperintense signal 
within the spinal cord (arrows) as sign of perfusion deﬁ cit due to venous hypertension and serpentineous signal voids cor-
responding to dilated perimedullary veins (arrowheads). c Digital subtraction angiography (DSA), selective injection of the 
Th. VIII. intercostal artery, demonstrating a dural branch of the radicular artery (vertical arrow), dural AV ﬁ stula (asterisk) 
and the draining perimedullary vein (horizontal arrow). d DSA, selective injection of the Th. IX. interecostal artery on the 
left demonstrating a radiculomedullary artery (arrow), supplying the anterior spinal artery (open arrow). e Microcatheter 
injection of the ﬁ stula prior to embolization with cyanoacrylate glue. f Control injection of the same segmental branch 
following embolization demonstrates complete occlusion of the ﬁ stula. g T2-W MRI of the thoracis spine 3 months later 
demonstrates normal signal intensity within the spinal cord and lack of dilated veins
g
a
b
c
d
e
f

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
147
4.3.3 
Angiography
Noninvasive or minimally invasive imaging tech-
niques including CT, MRI, and MRA, coupled with 
careful analysis of the clinical history, enable the 
diagnosis of a DAVM with relatively high conﬁ dence 
in many cases. Borden type I lesions, however, may 
not produce any pathological changes on CT and 
MRI. Moreover, analysis of the hemodynamic pat-
tern requires temporal resolution not provided by 
MRA. Details of the venous circulation and asso-
ciated venous occlusive disease may not be prop-
erly visualized by MR/CT techniques (Chen et al. 
1992; Kallmes et al. 1998; Cellerini et al. 1999). 
As these details are critical in evaluating the risks 
associated with the individual pathology, selective 
angiography remains necessary for therapeutic de-
cision-making.
Proper angiographic evaluation of patients with 
intracranial DAVM requires analysis of all potential 
sources of arterial supply as well as draining veins 
and venous structures. The rich vascular supply of 
the dura provides anastomotic connections between 
different territories, and even the falx or the tento-
rium does not provide a barrier between the two 
hemispheres or the infra- and supratentorial com-
partments (Lasjaunias and Berenstein 1987). 
Selective injections of all arteries that potentially 
supply a certain anatomical location are therefore 
indispensable for proper angiographic evaluation 
(Table 4.5) (Djindjan and Merland 1978). While 
analysis of the arterial supply is important in dis-
closing the diagnosis, thorough study and under-
standing of the venous outlet is critical in order to 
establish the proper prognosis. This will allow ap-
propriate indication of treatment and selection of 
the adequate therapeutic modality.
Anterior fossa DAVMs are fed by branches of ei-
ther ophthalmic artery (OphA), distal branches of 
the internal maxillary artery (IMA), and the middle 
meningeal artery (MMA) (Fig. 4.4a,b). In cavernous 
sinus DAVM, the most common arterial supply arises 
from cavernous branches of the ipsi- and contralat-
eral internal carotid arteries (ICA), distal branches of 
the IMA, cavernous branches of the (MMA), and the 
anterior division of the ascending pharyngeal artery 
(APA) (Figs. 4.5, 4.20). Transverse, sigmoid sinus, 
and conﬂ uens sinuum DAVMs receive blood from the 
tentorial branch of the ipsi- and sometimes contralat-
eral ICA, the MMA, the posterior auricular (PA), the 
occipital (OA), and the posterior meningeal branches 
of the vertebral (VA) arteries. High-ﬂ ow DAVMs in 
these locations may recruit a blood supply from 
large branches of the subclavian artery such as the 
ascending cervical artery (Fig. 4.6). Lesions involv-
ing the tentorium are supplied by tentorial branches 
of the ICA bilaterally, by the neuromeningeal trunk 
of the APA on either side, and by the posterior di-
vision of the MMA, OA, and meningeal branches of 
the VA (Fig. 4.8). The blood supply to DAVMs around 
the foramen magnum may be recruited from tento-
rial branches of the ICA, posterior division of the 
MMA, neuromeningeal trunk of the APA, OA, and 
VA (Fig. 4.9). Superior sagittal sinus DAVMs have 
complex supply involving branches of the anterior 
(from OphA), middle, and posterior (from VA) men-
ingeal arteries, and meningeal branches of the OAs. 
These usually high-ﬂ ow lesions recruit arterial feed-
ers from transosseal and subcutaneous sources such 
as the superﬁ cial temporal arteries (STA) and from 
pial arteries, such as branches of the anterior cerebral 
arteries. Blood supply is typically bilateral (Fig. 4.10). 
Dural shunts located on the convexity in the middle 
cranial fossa are supplied mostly by MMA branches 
(Fig. 4.11). The differential diagnosis of slowly pro-
Table 4.4. Classiﬁ cation of spinal dural arteriovenous malformations (DAVMs) in relation to  venous 
drainage pattern
Venous drainage pattern:
Spinal DAVM
Classiﬁ cation
Site of shunt
Venous outﬂ ow
Borden
Nerve root sleeve dura
Periosteal epidural veins
1
Nerve root sleeve dura
Epidural veins with reﬂ ux into perimedullary veins
2
Nerve root sleeve dura
Perimedullary veins
3

148 
I. Szikora
Table 4.5. Expected feeding pedicles, recommended selective injections, and projections for intracranial dural arteriove-
nous malformations (DAVMs) in different locations
Location of DAVM
Expected arterial supply
Selective injections recommended
Branches
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Arteries projection
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
AP 
Lateral
AP 
Lateral
Anterior fossa
OphA
+
+
ICA
+
+
+
IMA
+
+
ECA
+
+
+
MMA
+
VA
Cavernous sinus
ICA
+
+
ICA
+
+
+
IMA
+
+
ECA
+
+
+
MMA
+
+
VA
APA
+
+
Transverse and 
sigmoid sinuses
ICA
+
ICA
+
MMA
+
ECA
+
+
+
APA
+
VA
+
+
+
+
PA
+
OA
+
+
VA
+
+
Conﬂ uens sinuum
ICA
+
+
ICA
+
+
MMA
+
+
ECA
+
+
+
+
APA
+
+
VA
+
+
+
+
PA
+
+
OA
+
+
VA
+
+
Tentorium
ICA
+
+
ICA
+
+
+
MMA
+
ECA
+
+
+
APA
+
+
VA
+
+
+
OA
+
VA
+
+
Foramen magnum
ICA
+
ICA
+
+
MMA
+
ECA
+
+
+
APA
+
+
VA
+
+
+
OA
+
+
VA
+
+
Convexity
OphA
+
+
ICA
+
+
+
MMA
+
 
ECA
+
+
+
OA
+
+
VA
+
+
+
VA
+
+
Superior sagittal 
sinus
ICA
+
+
ICA
+
+
+
+
OphA
+
+
ECA
+
+
+
+
IMA
+
+
VA
+
+
+
MMA
+
+
APA
+
+
OA
+
+
VA
+
+

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
149
gressing myelopathy should include spinal DAVM 
that leads to spinal venous hypertension and hypo-
perfusion. Usually, MRI discloses spinal cord isch-
emia and enlarged intradural vessels. Spinal angiog-
raphy is used to demonstrate the feeding pedicle and 
the draining vein of the ﬁ stula. Unless MRA provides 
accurate information on the foraminal level, selec-
tive injections of all segmental arteries potentially 
providing blood supply to the involved region of the 
spinal column must be studied, until the ﬁ stula is 
found. Spinal cord ischemia might be remote from 
the ﬁ stula site, which may make angiographic evalu-
ation of the entire spine necessary, particularly if ve-
nous stasis is seen in spinal veins ( Willinsky et al. 
1990). If arteriovenous shunt within the spine cannot 
be demonstrated, a DAVM within the posterior fossa 
must be suspected that drains into spinal perimedul-
lary veins, and appropriate injections must be per-
formed (Fig. 4.9).
Expected feeding pedicles and recommended 
injections and projections are listed in Table 4.5. 
Because of the many anatomical variants and the 
dynamic nature of the disease, however, strict rules 
cannot be established and the angiographer should 
use the best individual judgment to explore all poten-
tial feeders. Long series with delayed images are nec-
essary to study the venous drainage of the lesion. In 
addition to studying the venous outlet of the ﬁ stula 
itself, the venous drainage of the brain parenchyma 
must be demonstrated. All major dural sinuses should 
be studied to disclose venous occlusive disease and to 
demonstrate patency and direction of ﬂ ow within the 
major venous channels draining the brain.
 4.4 
Therapy
4.4.1 
Indications
Currently available therapeutic options include no 
treatment, conservative treatment, palliative or de-
ﬁ nitive endovascular treatment, surgery, a combi-
nation of endovascular treatment and surgery, and 
radiosurgery. As detailed in Sections 4.2.2 and 4.2.3, 
the natural history of DAVM may vary from sponta-
neous cure (Magidson and Weinberg 1976; Bitoh 
and Sakaki 1979; Endo et al. 1979; Luciani et al. 
2001) (Fig. 4.18) to fatal hemorrhage (Awad et al. 
1990). With this large spectrum, not the diagno-
sis, but rather the expected prognosis of the disease 
should indicate treatment. This makes proper clas-
siﬁ cation of patients by angiography mandatory.
In a recent study by Davies et al. 1997a, 21 of 26 
patients with Borden type I DAVMs experienced 
resolution or improvement of their symptoms with-
out any treatment, and the other ﬁ ve remained 
unchanged. Owing to the low risk implied by the 
natural history of this type, and considering that 
malignant transformation following incomplete 
treatment may occur (Watanabe et al. 1984, 2000), 
this group of patients should be observed or treated 
conservatively if symptoms are tolerated. Palliative 
or (if possible without high risk) deﬁ nitive endovas-
cular treatment should be offered for those whose 
symptoms (for instance pulsatile tinnitus) result in 
signiﬁ cant impairment of their quality of life. Simi-
larly, progressive decrease of visual acuity or immi-
nent loss of vision may prompt endovascular inter-
vention in cases of cavernous sinus DAVM.
Spontaneous transformation of a benign (Bor-
den I) DAVM to a malignant (Borden II–III) one has 
been reported (Cognard et al. 1997). Patients with 
high-ﬂ ow Borden I DAVM, particularly those in the 
subgroup of Cognard II/a, may develop malignant 
elevation of ICP. Subsequently, patients with con-
servative or incomplete treatment should be closely 
observed and treated if necessary (Cognard et al. 
1995; Davies et al. 1997a,b).
On the other hand, the high risk of DAVM with 
leptomeningeal venous drainage (Borden I–II) has 
been well documented (Awad et al. 1990; Borden 
et al. 1995; Cognard et al. 1995; Davies et al. 1996). 
Four of 14 patients died, representing a 19% yearly 
mortality (Davies et al. 1997a,b). The malignant 
course of the disease in this group requires aggres-
sive therapy leading to permanent elimination of 
factors posing a high risk. The treatment modality 
should be chosen by a team of experienced neuro-
interventionists and neurosurgeons based on the 
individual pathology.
4.4.2 
Conservative Treatment
Conservative treatment is offered to patients with 
Borden I ﬁ stula, who generally have their lesion on 
the cavernous sinus or on the transverse/sigmoid 
sinuses. These two are the most benign and the most 
common location of intracranial DAVMs. In a ret-

150 
I. Szikora
rospective study by Cognard et al. (1995), 69% of 
transverse sinus and 87% of cavernous sinus lesions 
had no leptomeningeal venous drainage (Borden I) 
and these two locations corresponded to 66% of all 
DAVMs studied.
Conservative treatment has two components. 
Manual vascular compression is utilized to facilitate 
spontaneous closure of the ﬁ stula. Medical treat-
ment is used to control ocular symptoms if present.
In case of benign transverse sinus ﬁ stulae, the 
pulsating occipital artery can be compressed over 
the mastoid by the patient for up to 30 min per treat-
ment. This may reduce ﬂ ow and induce spontane-
ous thrombosis with a reported frequency of 27% 
( Halbach et al. 1987). Patients harboring DAVMs 
on the cavernous sinus might be treated similarly. 
In these cases, the common carotid artery – jugular 
vein complex is compressed (Matas maneuver) on 
the side of the ﬁ stula. As this manipulation carries 
some risks, patients with atherosclerotic carotid dis-
ease should not be treated. Patients in this group are 
instructed to compress their carotid bifurcation with 
their contralateral hand, so that if cerebral ischemia 
occurs the resulting motor weakness will automati-
cally interrupt the procedure. The suspected mech-
anism is simultaneous decrease of the arterial and 
increase of the venous pressure, promoting throm-
bosis of the arteriovenous connection. Halbach et 
al. (1987) reported a 33% rate of success with manual 
compressions of 10–30 s four to six times in each 
hour during the day for up to 6 weeks (Valavanis 
1993). As the incidence of spontaneous thrombosis 
(Fig. 4.19) is unknown, the efﬁ cacy of the treatment 
cannot be established.
In cavernous sinus DAVM the ocular symptoms 
require ophthalmological and medical therapy, 
including control of the (frequently elevated) in-
traocular pressure and protective treatment of the 
conjunctiva in cases of extensive chemosis. Mild 
diuresis utilizing furosemide (e.g. Lasix), 5–10 mg/
day usually provides signiﬁ cant relief of the external 
ocular symptoms. Visual acuity, fundus, and intra-
ocular pressure should be periodically checked in 
patients under conservative treatment.
In our practice we initially propose observation 
only to patients with benign DAVM (regardless of 
location). Compression therapy is recommended to 
patients presenting with signiﬁ cant ocular symp-
toms and those complaining of poorly tolerated 
tinnitus. Additional medical and ophthalmological 
therapy is applied if necessary. Patients are followed 
in cooperation with the ophthalmologist. Spontane-
ous closure of cavernous sinus DAVM is frequently 
preceded by transient worsening of the symptoms, 
including retinal hemorrhages and reduced vision. 
Central retinal vein thrombosis has been implicated 
as the underlying pathomechanism (Miki et al. 1988; 
Suzuki et al. 1989). If the ocular symptoms progress 
Fig. 4.19a,b. Spontaneous cure of dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM). a Common carotid artery digital subtraction 
angiography in lateral view demonstrates cavernous sinus (CS) DAVM (arrow) that drains into the superior ophthalamic 
vein (small arrow). b Follow-up angiography 2 months later demonstrates complete obliteration of the DAVM. No treatment 
was performed
a
b

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
151
to an imminent loss of vision we consider repeat an-
giography and embolization. Signiﬁ cant change of 
the symptoms, including improvement such as ces-
sation of tinnitus, may indicate spontaneous closure. 
However, this should raise the suspicion of a change 
in the venous drainage pattern and prompt repeat 
studies before the patient is considered cured.
4.4.3 
Endovascular Treatment
The goal of aggressive treatment of a DAVM can 
be: (a) cure of the lesion, (b) conversion of a high-
risk ﬁ stula to a low-risk one, and (c) palliation of 
symptoms caused by a low-risk lesion. As previously 
shown, the pathological entity of DAVM seems to 
be located within the wall of dural sinuses, veins, 
or leptomeningeal veins. The pathophysiological ef-
fect of the shunt is exercised on the venous system. 
Complete and permanent cure can be achieved only 
by closing all pathological connections between the 
arterial and venous side of the lesion. Theoretically, 
this can be obtained by: (a) approaching the site of 
shunt through the feeding arteries and plugging the 
arteriovenous communication with an embolic ma-
terial, or (b) sealing the lumen of the draining venous 
structure off from the arteriovenous shunt (that ex-
ists inside its wall) by packing the entire section of 
that venous structure with an embolic material.
4.4.3.1 
Transarterial Embolization
Considering the multiplicity of the arterial feeders 
that drain into a single venous channel and the mul-
tiple microshunts that exist inside the wall of the 
vein between arteriolae and venulae (Nishijima et 
al. 1992; Hamada et al. 1997; Momoji et al. 1997), 
complete closure is often difﬁ cult or impossible to 
achieve from the arterial side. Embolic material in-
jected from the feeding arteries is very likely to get 
wedged proximal to the shunt. Transarterial embo-
lization therefore rarely results in complete cure of 
DAVMs and should be reserved for those cases in 
which the ﬁ stula cannot be reached via the transve-
nous route (goal a), for the palliation of symptoms in 
case of low-risk DAVMs (goal c), or as a preoperative 
measure to facilitate surgery (goal a).
Technically, solid – i.e., polyvinyl alcohol particles 
(PVA), platinum coils – and liquid embolics are used 
that are delivered through microcatheters coaxi-
ally introduced into a distal superselective position 
within the feeding pedicles. Dangerous anastomoses 
should always be considered prior to transarterial 
embolization. Potential connections between the 
IMA and the OphA, the MMA and the OphA and 
ICA, between the anterior division of the APA and 
the ICA, the posterior division of the APA and the 
VA, the OA and the VA must always be kept in mind, 
even if not visualized by superselective injection. 
The blood supply to cranial nerves should be con-
sidered when embolizing from the MMA and APA 
(Lasjaunias and Berenstein 1987). Inadvertent 
injection of the embolic material into cerebral arter-
ies via dangerous anastomotic channels will result in 
stroke. Application of particles as an embolic agent 
carries little risk of stroke, as these particles are un-
likely to reach intracerebral vessels via small-caliber 
anastomoses. Intra-arterially delivered microcoils 
will stay at the site of delivery and therefore carry no 
risk of intracerebral embolization (Nakstad et al. 
1992). This material will, however, produce proximal 
occlusion of the feeding pedicles, which will result in 
collateral blood supply to the shunt.
In our experience, using transarterial emboliza-
tion with particles in cavernous sinus DAVM may 
facilitate spontaneous occlusion of the ﬁ stula by de-
creasing the arterial load towards the draining vein. 
We apply this technique in cases where treatment is 
necessitated by progressive symptoms and the le-
sion is not reachable via the venous route. Transient 
worsening of the ocular symptoms may occur after 
partial transarterial embolization and can be at-
tributed to progressive thrombosis of the superior 
ophthalmic vein (Sergott et al. 1987; Nagy et al. 
1995) or the central retinal vein (Hashimoto et al. 
1989). This requires aggressive dehydration includ-
ing the administration of furosemide, mannitol, 
and steroids. In most cases this is followed by grad-
ual improvement and (probably spontaneous) cure 
(Sergott et al. 1987). During this period, patients 
need to be carefully followed, their ocular status and 
visual acuity regularly checked. In case of progres-
sive loss of vision a more effective treatment modal-
ity must be considered.
Multiple ECA feeders can be embolized with 
small PVA particles (50–250 μm). Generally, the 
smaller the particles, the better the result that can 
be expected. In the presence of dangerous anasto-
moses, larger particles should be selected to avoid 
complications. Catheterization of small cavernous 
branches of the ICA is usually difﬁ cult, frequently 
impossible. Embolization with small particles from 
a narrow, short meningeal branch might be dan-

152 
I. Szikora
gerous even if technically feasible (Halbach et al. 
1989a). In such cases microcoils can be placed to 
reduce ﬂ ow via ICA branches followed by extensive 
embolization through ECA feeders (Fig. 4.20).
Particulate embolization can also be applied pre-
operatively for lesions requiring extensive surgery. 
As fast recanalization is expected, surgery should 
follow embolization with little delay.
In case of high-risk (Borden II–III) DAVMs, 
particulate embolization as a sole treatment does 
not provide safe and permanent prevention from 
subsequent bleeding. If transarterial embolization 
is considered in such cases because neither sur-
gery nor transvenous embolization is feasible or 
recommended, liquid embolics should be chosen 
(Fig. 4.21). Cyanoacrylate glue mixed with Lipiodol 
Fig. 4.20a–d. Endovascular treatment of dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM) by transarterial embolization. a,b 
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) with selective external carotid artery (ECA) (a) and internal carotid artery (ICA) 
(b) injections demonstrate cavernous sinus DAVM (broken arrow) draining into the superior ophthalmic vein (open ar-
row), fed by distal internal maxillary (small arrow), middle meningeal (small curved arrow), ascending pharyngeal (arrow) 
branches and a prominent dural pedicle of the meningohypophyseal branch of the ICA. c,d Complete obliteration of the 
DAVM following transarterial embolization of the ECA branches using polyvinyl alcohol particles and occlusion of the 
meningohypophyseal pedicle by deposition of a small detachable microcoil within its lumen (arrow)
a
b
c
d

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
153
is most commonly employed as a liquid embolic 
agent. The glue, N-butyl-cyanoacrylate, polymerizes 
quickly in an ionic environment such as blood. Lipi-
odol, a radiopaque oil, is added to provide radiopac-
ity and to regulate solidiﬁ cation time ( Cromwell 
and Kerber 1979; Kerber et al. 1979; Bank et al. 
1981). Most DAVMs have relatively small-caliber 
feeders and a meshwork of ﬁ ne arteries within the 
nidus. For effective embolization, the microcatheter 
must be placed in a very distal position (Fig. 4.21c) 
and the glue needs to be highly diluted with Lipi-
odol (Liu et al. 2000; Iizuka et al. 2001). Depend-
ing on the arteriovenous transit time, a glue-to-oil 
ratio of 1:3–1:7 is frequently used. The best result of 
transarterial embolization with glue is achieved if 
the radiopaque glue reaches the venous site of the le-
sion without producing occlusion of major draining 
veins (Fig. 4.21d,e). In case of direct arteriovenous 
communication, much lower dilution or even un-
diluted glue needs to be applied to avoid undesired 
venous occlusion or pulmonary embolism. Both 
potential dangerous anastomoses and cranial nerve 
blood supply must be seriously considered if diluted 
glue is used, since the risk of stroke or cranial nerve 
ischemia is signiﬁ cantly higher than if particles are 
used. Reﬂ ux of glue proximal to the microcatheter 
tip may also lead to inadvertent embolization of nor-
mal arteries.
Because transvenous embolization is not feasible 
for spinal lesions, transarterial embolization with 
glue is the treatment of choice for a spinal DAVM 
with an arterial feeder that allows safe and distal 
catheterization and does not supply the anterior 
spinal artery. Glue should be pushed until it reaches 
the draining vein (Fig. 4.18) (Cognard et al. 1996; 
Song et al. 2001). Clinical outcome seems to depen-
dent on the severity of the symptoms at the time of 
treatment (Nagata et al. 2006).
4.4.3.2 
Transvenous Embolization
While it is difﬁ cult to obliterate multiple arterio-
venous connections via the feeding arteries, this 
can be easily achieved by packing the lumen of the 
single venous channel of the lesion. Although this 
might induce transient pressure elevation inside 
the nidus, rupture and bleeding does not occur, 
as the nidus is located within the dura and is sur-
rounded by thick walls, reinforced by connective 
tissue proliferation (Houdart et al. 1993). In con-
trast to brain AVMs, venous occlusion is feasible 
and highly effective for DAVMs (Halbach et al. 
1989b–d). Permanent and complete sacriﬁ ce of 
a dural sinus is feasible without causing venous 
infarction if the involved section does not drain 
the brain tissue. Venous embolization therefore 
requires thorough study of the venous circulation. 
Venous drainage of both the anterior and posterior 
circulation needs to be investigated on both sides. 
Long angiographic series must be obtained. Drain-
age of the malformation is seen in the late arterial 
phase. Venous drainage of the brain tissue can be 
observed on late venous phase images, frequently 
with long delay representing venous congestion. 
Visualization of the same venous structure (sinus 
or cortical vein) in both the early and late phases 
demonstrates participation of the involved seg-
ment in normal venous ﬂ ow. Occlusion of a ve-
nous segment draining brain tissue may result in 
venous infarction and should not be performed. If 
the venous ﬂ ow cannot be properly clariﬁ ed, the 
normal venous routes can be studied during tem-
porary test occlusion of the involved sinus using 
detachable balloons (Urtasun et al. 1996; Roy and 
Raymond 1997).
The venous approach to intracranial DAVMs is 
variable. A simultaneous transfemoral arterial cath-
eterization of one of the main feeding arteries is nec-
essary. This will provide the possibility of generating 
a road map of the venous system using the late phase 
of the arterial injection. It will also allow for control 
arterial injections during the procedure. The trans-
femoral approach via the femoral vein provides the 
most convenient access to the intracranial sinuses. 
Usually 5- or 6-French (F) guiding catheters are 
used, except if balloon test occlusion or permanent 
balloon occlusion is entertained that requires 8-F 
guides. Catheter navigation into the internal jugular 
veins, however, might be difﬁ cult or impossible. In 
such cases, direct retrograde puncture of the inter-
nal jugular vein should be considered (Urtasun et 
al. 1996). If even this maneuver does not allow access 
to the involved segment of the dural sinuses, a more 
distal direct venous puncture can be obtained, de-
pending on the individual anatomy as demonstrated 
by angiography. As an example, microcatheters can 
be introduced into the superior ophthalmic vein 
and the cavernous sinus via the facial vein on some 
occasions. Finally, direct puncture of the superior 
sagittal sinus and transverse/sigmoid sinuses can be 
obtained via surgically created burr holes (Urtasun 
et al. 1996) or intraoperatively, through a small cra-
niotomy (Endo et al. 1998).

154 
I. Szikora
Fig. 4.21a–e. Transarterial cyanoacrylate glue embolization of a Borden 
type III. occipital dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM). a Digital 
subtraction angiography, arterial phase, external carotid artery (ECA) 
injection, posteroanterior (PA) view demonstrates prominent middle 
meningeal (arrow) and occipital artery (broken arrow) branches supply-
ing a direct ﬁ stula draining into a venous lake (open arrow). b Same injec-
tion, venous phase, demonstrating occlusion of the ipsilateral transverse 
sinus (arrow), drainage of the venous lake by multiple dural and cortical 
veins (arroheads), antegrade ﬂ ow within the the ipsilateral sigmoid sinus 
(open arrow) and reﬂ ux into the superior sgittal sinus and contralateral 
transverse sinus (dashed arrows). c Superselectiv microcatheter injection 
into the ﬁ stula, PA view (arrow indicates the shadow of the microcath-
eter, and open arrow the venous lake). d Cast of diluted cyanoacrylate 
glue penetrating into the venous lake following multiple injections via 
the middle meningeal and occipital feeders (arrow indicates the middle 
meningeal branch and open arrow the venous lake). e Postembolization 
ECA injection, PA view demonstrates complete closure of the ﬁ stula
a
c
e
b
d

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
155
Occlusion or thrombosis of the major sinuses 
that frequently complicates DAVM may make 
transvenous access challenging. However, distal 
catheterization of the internal jugular vein gen-
erally makes introduction of microcatheters pos-
sible through occluded segments of the sigmoid 
or transverse sinus (Gobin et al. 1993; Naito et 
al. 2001). Alternately, access can be gained via the 
contralateral transverse sinus and the conﬂ uens 
sinuum. The ipsilateral inferior petrosal sinus pro-
vides the most convenient access to the cavernous 
sinus (Fig. 4.22). Even if not visualized on arterio-
grams, its entrance can usually be found with some 
manipulation of the guidewire within the jugular 
vein (Halbach et al. 1989b). With the help of mi-
cro-guidewires, hydrophilic microcatheters can 
than be easily navigated into the cavernous sinus. 
A phlebogram using a large volume of contrast 
medium may help in identifying a remnant of the 
inferior petrosal sinus (Benndorf et al. 2000). If 
the ipsilateral inferior petrosal sinus is not found, 
the cavernous sinus might be catheterized with mi-
crocatheters introduced via the contralateral infe-
rior petrosal sinus into the contralateral cavernous 
sinus and crossing the midline via intercavernous 
veins (Halbach et al. 1989b).
Fig. 4.22a–d. Endovascular treatment of cavernous sinus dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM) with transvenous embo-
lization. a Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) with internal carotid artery (ICA) injection, lateral view demonstrates DAVM 
of the posterior cavernous sinus (CS) (open arrow) draining via the inferior petrosal sinus (IPS) (arrow). b Late venous phase of 
an ICA injection in an oblique view demonstrates bilateral superior petrosal sinus drainage (arrows). c Superselective injection 
of the ipsilateral CS (open arrow) following transfemoral catheterization of the ipsilateral internal jugular vein and introduction 
of a microcatheter via the IPS. Bilateral IPS drainage is well seen. d Complete obliteration of the DAVM is demonstrated by ICA 
injection in lateral view following the deposition of several detachable microcoils within the posterior CS (broken arrow)
a
b
c
d

156 
I. Szikora
If none of the above avenues are feasible, for cav-
ernous sinus DAVM the superior ophthalmic vein 
offers an excellent approach (Fig. 4.23a, b) (Labbe 
et al. 1987; Hanneken et al. 1989; Miller et al. 1995; 
Quinones et al. 1997; Klink et al. 2001). Through 
a small incision in the upper sulcus of the superior 
eyelid the orbital septum is opened and the superior 
ophthalmic vein is exposed within the retroseptal 
orbital fat (Fig. 4.23c). Once identiﬁ ed, the superior 
ophthalmic vein is incised between ligatures and a 
microcatheter is introduced under ﬂ uoroscopy into 
the cavernous sinus. Either microballoons or mi-
crocoils can be used to occlude the ﬁ stula (Fig. 23d, 
e). In case of normal drainage of the sylvian vein 
into the same cavernous sinus, the compartment 
receiving the shunt should be selectively occluded 
(Nakamura et al. 1998). Either the superior oph-
thalmic vein is permanently ligated or the incision 
is closed with microsutures at the end of the pro-
cedure (Miller et al. 1995). Direct puncture of the 
superior ophthalmic vein has also been reported 
(Benndorf et al. 2001). In case of DAVM involving 
subarachnoid veins that drain into sinuses, selective 
transvenous retrograde catheterization of the vein 
itself can be attempted. If successful, the vein itself 
can be occluded with microcoils, and patency of the 
sinus (which in this case is normal) can be spared 
(Mironov 1998). The draining vein can be occluded 
from a transarterial approach, too, if enlarged arte-
rial feeders and the arteriovenous connection allow 
the microcatheter to pass the ﬁ stula (Fukai et al. 
2001).
Once transvenous access to the ﬁ stula site has 
been secured, the involved venous segment can be 
occluded using detachable balloons, microcoils, 
detachable microcoils, or glue. The segment that 
carries the malformation and any cortical veins 
that drain into the same sinus must be identiﬁ ed 
with extreme care. The entire section with ﬁ stulous 
connections must be tightly packed. Failure to oc-
clude all arteriovenous connections may convert 
an originally benign venous pattern to a more ag-
gressive one by blocking its antegrade outlet and 
forcing high-pressure arterial blood into the ret-
rograde direction or, more malignantly (Davies et 
al. 1997a,b), into cortical veins. On the other hand, 
closure of the entrance of normal subarachnoid 
veins may lead to venous infarction and hemor-
rhage. The use of detachable microballoons allows 
precise analysis of the venous circulation by tem-
porary test occlusion prior to permanent closure 
(Urtasun et al. 1996; Roy and Raymond 1997). 
The disadvantage of using balloons is that they re-
quire a large (8-F) guiding catheter. Furthermore, 
any space remaining unpacked between balloons 
within the sinus will become an isolated sinus. If 
that segment carries residual arterial feeders as well 
as cortical veins, a high-grade ﬁ stula (Borden III) 
has been created. Alternatively, detachable and free 
pushable microcoils are being used to pack dural 
sinuses (Fig. 4.24). Detachable coils can be deliv-
ered with more accuracy, in relation to any vascu-
lar structure (normal veins) that needs to be spared 
(Fig. 4.24f). One or more detachable coils can be 
placed at the end of the involved segment that is 
distal in relation to the tip of the guiding catheter. 
Once the distal edge of the occlusion is secured, the 
rest of the sinus is packed with free pushable coils, 
proceeding proximally. The disadvantage of using 
coils is that usually a large number of expensive 
microcoils and a lengthy procedure are required to 
achieve complete occlusion. To reduce the number 
of coils, glue can be injected in combination with 
coils once the ﬂ ow has been signiﬁ cantly reduced, 
or ﬂ ow can be diminished by manual compression 
of the eyeball in case of cavernous sinus DAVM 
(Roy and Raymond 1997). To facilitate transve-
nous occlusion of DAVM, transarterial emboliza-
tion may be obtained prior to venous occlusion to 
reduce arterial load.
In studies analyzing results of transvenous embo-
lization in series of 20–24 patients with nonselected 
DAVM, anatomical cure of 71%–88%, signiﬁ cant 
ﬂ ow reduction of 12%, clinical cure in 83%–96%, and 
clinical improvement of 13% are reported (Urtasun 
et al. 1996; Roy and Raymond 1997). Patients in se-
ries of 10–13 with cavernous sinus DAVM treated via 
the superior ophthalmic vein approach experienced 
a 92%–100% clinical and anatomical cure rate and 
15% transient worsening of the ocular symptoms 
(Miller et al. 1995; Quinones et al. 1997).
Other transient complications including cranial 
nerve palsies and hearing loss (Roy and Raymond 
1997; Oishi et al. 1999), as well as subdural hema-
toma associated with direct sinus puncture through 
a burr hole and perforation of sinus wall (Urtasun 
et al. 1996), are reported with low incidence (Irie 
et al. 2001). Recurrence of DAVM at another loca-
tion following transvenous obliteration of cavern-
ous sinus lesions occurs (Nakagawa et al. 1992; 
 Kawaguchi et al. 1999a; Kubota et al. 1999). It is 
unclear whether this is related to a permanent eleva-
tion of venous pressure, increased release of angio-
genetic factors, or increased thrombogenic activity.

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
157
Fig. 4.23a–e. Transvenous embolization of a cav-
ernous sinus DAVM via the superior ophthalmic 
vein (SOV) approach. a T1-weighted MRI demon-
strating dilated SOV on the left. b Digital subtrac-
tion angiography (DSA), left internal carotid artery 
(ICA, arrow) injection, lateral view deomstrating 
early ﬁ lling of the cavernous sinus (asterisk) exclu-
sively drained by the SOV (broken arrow). Note that 
no other venous outﬂ ow is visualized and none of 
the arterial feeders is reachable. c Surgical exposure 
of the superior ophthalmic vein (arrow) through 
an incision of the upper eyelid. d Microcatheter 
(arrow) introduced into the cavernous sinus via 
the SOV and the involved segment of the cavern-
ous sinus is packed with microcoils (open arrow). 
e Postembolization DSA, ICA injection, lateral view 
demonstrates complete closure of the ﬁ stula
a
c
e
b
d

158 
I. Szikora
Fig. 4.24a–f. Endovascular treatment of sigmoid sinus dural arteriovenous malformation (DAVM) with trans-
venous embolization. a Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) with left external carotid artery (ECA) injection 
demonstrates DAVM involving the sigmoid sinus (SS) (asterisk) on the left with antegrade (small arrow) and 
retrograde (arrow) ﬂ ow within the sinus. b Left internal carotid artery (ICA) injection, anteroposterior view, 
late phase demonstrates “functional occlusion” of the SS on the left: arterial pressure from the DAVM prevents 
venous drainage of the brain parenchyma. c Lateral view of the ICA injection in the late phase demonstrates 
a prominent ipsilateral vein of Labbé (open arrow) that drains into the sinus in a retrograde fashion. d DSA, 
ECA injection following extensive transarterial embolization reduction of shunt ﬂ ow and antegrade venous 
drainage only. The patient continued complaining of intolerable pulsatile tinnitus. e Complete occlusion of 
the DAVM following endovascular packing of the SS with several microcoils (broken arrow). DSA, left ECA 
injection, lateral view. f ICA injection conﬁ rms patency of the vein of Labbé (arrow) following sinus and 
DAVM occlusion
a
b
c
d
e
f

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
159
Combined surgical-endovascular approaches for 
sinus occlusion have been reported by several authors. 
Sections of sinuses isolated by complete sinus throm-
bosis can be packed with coils through a small cra-
niotomy (Endo et al. 1998). During such procedures, 
direct measurements demonstrated 30%–60% of sys-
temic blood pressure and purely arterial blood gas lev-
els within the involved sinuses prior to treatment. If 
surgically exposed, the involved segment of the sinus 
can be isolated by surgical clamping, the subarachnoid 
veins draining into this segment ligated, and the sinus 
injected with glue (Halbach et al. 1989d). The disad-
vantage of these combinations is that they require in-
traoperative angiographic facilities that are not always 
available, and even if they are, the quality may not be 
that of a dedicated endovascular laboratory. With cur-
rently used techniques endovascular access to intra-
cranial sinuses can be gained with a high success rate. 
If this is not feasible, surgical treatment of the disease 
(with preoperative embolization if necessary) seems 
more reasonable than endovascular techniques ap-
plied in a surgical environment. This latter combina-
tion should be reserved for cases where neither embo-
lization nor surgery can be safely employed.
4.4.3.3 
Sinus Recanalization
Although the relationship between sinus throm-
bosis and DAVM is not yet fully understood, the 
etiologic role of thrombosis has been raised. If the 
occlusion or thrombosis of a dural sinus is the pri-
mary cause of a DAVM, then recanalization of that 
sinus would be a highly reasonable approach to 
treatment. Revascularization of thrombosed sinu-
ses using local ﬁ brinolysis with selective infusion 
of urokinase has been employed in cases of DAVM 
associated with symptomatic sinus thrombosis 
(Barnwell et al. 1991a,b; Smith et al. 1994). More 
recently, mechanical recanalization of an occluded 
sigmoid sinus has been attempted using balloon an-
gioplasty and stent placement. Balloon angioplasty 
resulted in conversion of the ﬁ stula from Borden 
II to Borden I by reestablishing antegrade venous 
drainage through the sigmoid sinus. Rethrombo-
sis of the sinus occurred and a second procedure 
was performed, resulting in complete obliteration of 
the DAVM, normal antegrade ﬂ ow within the sinus, 
and clinical improvement of the patient (Murphy 
et al. 2000). Liebig and colleagues (2005) treated 
four patients with transvenous angioplasty and stent 
placement within the involved transverse-sigmoid 
sinuses resulting in permanent occlusion of the ﬁ -
stula. Levrier et al. (2006) treated 10 cases with this 
technique and achieved complete occlusion in four, 
ﬂ ow reduction in four and clinical improvement in 
another two patients who refused follow-up angio-
graphy (Levrier et al. 2006). This might be related 
to the normalization of the venous pressure and may 
conﬁ rm the role of venous hypertension in the pa-
thogenesis of DAVM. Reconstruction of an occluded 
venous channel certainly seems more physiological 
than what has been widely practiced: artiﬁ cial oc-
clusion of what was not yet (completely) occluded. 
What needs to be kept in mind on the other hand 
is, that the recanalization procedure applying syste-
matic use of antiaggregants in association with stent 
placement may signiﬁ cantly deteriorate the sequela 
of bleeding that may occur as a result of a high-grade 
DAVM. Further experience needs to be collected to 
clarify current controversies.
4.4.4 
Surgical Treatment
The goal of surgical treatment is permanent cure of 
the DAVM (goal a). For DAVMs that drain directly 
into leptomeningeal veins, simple interruption of 
that vein at the level of the dural entry results in 
complete elimination of the DAVM (Thompson et al. 
1994; Hoh et al. 1998; Collice et al. 2000). For spinal 
DAVMs surgical disconnection of the draining vein 
at the dural level is the obligate treatment.
Lesions draining into sinuses are more complex 
and require extended surgery. The surrounding 
dura that contains the multiple arteriovenous shunts 
needs to be cut off the sinus (“skeletonization”) and/
or the diseased segment of the sinus needs to be re-
moved or occluded (Sundt and Piepgras 1983). 
With proper preoperative angiographic analysis, the 
most appropriate surgical technique can be selected 
(Collice et al. 2000).
Skeletonization, or removal of the sinus, requires 
extensive exploration of the dura and may be as-
sociated with signiﬁ cant blood loss and morbidity. 
Preoperative transarterial embolization is therefore 
recommended if that type of surgery is required. 
Such a combination is usually associated with ex-
cellent results: an anatomical cure rate of 100%, with 
0% permanent procedure-related morbidity and no 
mortality, is reported by several studies in series 
consisting of 17–34 patients with high-risk intracra-
nial DAVM (Goto et al. 1999; Collice et al. 2000).

160 
I. Szikora
Preoperative embolization should concentrate 
on reduction of blood ﬂ ow towards the nidus of the 
lesion. This is best achieved using liquid embolics; 
however, temporary results can be obtained with 
particles, too, which is associated with fewer risks. It 
should be kept in mind that superﬁ cial arterial feed-
ers, such as those arising from the occipital artery, 
can be relatively easily handled during surgery, while 
blood supply from the tentorial branch of the ICA 
creates more difﬁ culties for the surgeon. Transos-
seous blood supply and venous drainage results in 
signiﬁ cant blood loss that is difﬁ cult to control surgi-
cally. Surgery should follow preoperative emboliza-
tion within a few days to avoid recanalization.
The treatment of spinal DAVM by surgery is easy, 
safe, and effective and requires interruption of the 
draining vein at its dural entrance only (Anson and 
Spetzler 1992). Therefore, embolization of spinal 
DAVM should be offered only if the feeding pedicle 
provides a safe approach to a position close to the ﬁ s-
tula site and it does not give rise to radiculomedullary 
branches supplying the anterior spinal artery. If there 
is a risk of reﬂ ux into the anterior spinal artery, sur-
gery is signiﬁ cantly safer and should be performed.
4.4.5 
Stereotactic Irradiation (Radiosurgery)
Several authors investigated stereotactic irradiation 
as a treatment modality for intracranial DAVM. Tar-
geting of the lesions may require stereotactic an-
giography and image fusion with MRI (Guo et al. 
1998). Maximum target doses of 22–30 Gy are used, 
delivered by gamma knife. In some series, treat-
ment embolization was applied either to alleviate 
symptoms or in an attempt to block leptomeningeal 
venous drainage and subsequently reduce the risk 
of hemorrhage during the latency period of gamma 
knife radiosurgery (Link et al. 1996; Pollock et al. 
1999). In a series of 18–29 patients treated, rates of 
72%–86% for angiographically complete occlusion 
and 15% for recurrence of symptoms are reported 
within a follow-up of 12–36 months, without signiﬁ -
cant complication and no bleeding after irradiation 
(Link et al. 1996; Guo et al. 1998; Pollock et al. 
1999). In a recent series of 49 patients reported by the 
Karolinska group, complete occlusion was detected 
by angiography in 68% and partial obliteration in 
another 24% of the cases. This was associated with 
two radiation induced complications and two hem-
orrhagic events in the 2 years following treatment 
(Soderman et al. 2006). While these numbers are 
promising, considering the benign nature and pro-
pensity for spontaneous resolution of many DAVMs, 
it is difﬁ cult to draw a conclusion regarding the 
efﬁ cacy of this treatment modality. Radiosurgery is 
reported in a number of cavernous sinus DAVMs. 
Many cavernous sinus lesions do not necessitate 
treatment, and those that do require fast resolution 
of ocular symptoms cannot be achieved by irradia-
tion. In view of the natural history of DAVM (as pres-
ently known), we believe that radiosurgery should be 
reserved for cases in which treatment is necessary 
and no other alternative is feasible.
4.4.6 
Management Strategy and Choice of Treatment
Indication for treatment should be based primar-
ily on angiographic assessment of venous drainage 
and secondarily on clinical presentation. Patients 
without leptomeningeal drainage (Borden I) do not 
need to be treated if symptoms are well tolerated 
and do not cause an imminent visual loss. Medical 
and ophthalmological treatment should be applied 
as needed. If symptoms are not tolerated, treatment 
should be offered. Although complete closure of the 
shunt is desirable, palliative therapy is acceptable 
considering the low risk of the disease in this group. 
Within the Borden I category, Cognard type II/a le-
sions require closer follow-up. If signs of elevated ICP 
are detected aggressive treatment is recommended to 
avoid complications. All Borden type II and III pa-
tients require deﬁ nitive closure of the arteriovenous 
shunt because of the high risk of bleeding or neuro-
logical deterioration in these cases (Fig. 4.25).
If treatment is decided on, medical conditions, 
location, arterial and venous anatomy need to be 
taken into consideration in order to select the best 
operative technique. In a recent meta-analysis of 
258 reported cases, results of endovascular, surgi-
cal, and combined endovascular and surgical proce-
dures, as well as surgical feeding artery ligation, were 
compared. Treatment was considered successful if 
complete angiographic occlusion was achieved. Not 
surprisingly, proximal occlusion of the feeding ar-
tery was found highly ineffective. For transverse-sig-
moid sinus DAVMs, combined endovascular-surgical 
treatment (including all potential endovascular and 
surgical techniques) was more effective than all the 
other techniques together, demonstrating a success 
rate of 68%. Embolization alone was effective in 41% 

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
161
only. Similarly, DAVMs of the tentorial incisura were 
obliterated by the combined approach in 89%, while 
surgery alone demonstrated 78% and embolization 
alone 31% success. All cavernous sinus DAVMs were 
treated endovascularly. The venous approach was ef-
fective in 78%, arterial embolization in 62% only. An-
terior fossa DAVMs were treated by surgery only, with 
a success rate of 95%. The number of cases located 
on the superior sagittal sinus or on the convexity was 
too low to draw a statistical conclusion (Lucas et al. 
1997). These conclusions were later conﬁ rmed by and 
updated from the same authors (Lucas et al. 2005)
As shown by these reports, cavernous sinus DAVM 
is a disease which should primarily be treated endo-
vascularly, while anterior fossa lesions are generally 
better treated by surgery. Curative embolization 
can be carried out in many spinal DAVMs, but if the 
feeding pedicle is too small to safely reach the ﬁ stula 
site or it shares a common origin with a radiculom-
edullary artery, surgery should be considered. Selec-
tion of the most appropriate technique for all other 
locations requires careful individual analysis of the 
anatomy in close cooperation between the neuro-
surgeon and the neurointerventionist. Not only the 
decision-making but also the operation itself may 
require collaboration of the two parties. The per-
sonal experience of both surgeon and endovascular 
therapist will greatly inﬂ uence the choice of tech-
nique. If an endovascular procedure is selected, the 
beneﬁ ts and disadvantages of both the venous and 
the arterial approach should be carefully analyzed. 
For cavernous sinus DAVM, transarterial emboliza-
tion may be applied as a palliative treatment that 
in some case may also facilitate spontaneous cure. 
In case of complex arterial supply involving men-
ingeal branches of the ICAs, the venous approach 
is preferred. For other locations, venous occlusion 
should be considered ﬁ rst, with or without previous 
arterial embolization. For permanent arterial occlu-
sion a liquid embolic material must be employed. If 
complete occlusion of the sinus or meningeal vein is 
not feasible, surgery always needs to be taken into 
consideration. Preoperative transarterial emboliza-
tion provides effective help for the surgical treat-
ment while preoperative venous embolization may 
not be necessary. Stereotactic radiosurgery should 
be offered to those patients who need to be treated 
and are not candidates for either embolization or 
surgery. Although DAVMs present one of the most 
challenging groups of cerebrovascular disease for 
surgeons and radiologists, with state-of-the-art 
imaging techniques, thorough analysis, and under-
standing of the pathology, and with the joint effort 
of an experienced neurosurgical–neuroendovascu-
lar team, most patients can be successfully man-
aged, either conservatively or aggressively.
Fig. 4.25. Management strategy and indications for treatment
stable 
patient
elevated 
ICP
no
treatment
conservative 
treatment
palliative 
treatment
definitive 
treatment
Borden
III.
II.
I.
Cognard
II/a
I.
observation
definitive treatment 
symptoms not tolerated 
symptoms tolerated 
II/b
II/a+b
III.
VI.
V.

162 
I. Szikora
References
Al-Mefty O, Jinkins JR, Fox JL (1986) Extensive dural arteriove-
nous malformation. Case report. J Neurosurg 65:417–420
Alberico RA, Barnes P, Robertson RL et al (1999) Helical CT 
angiography: dynamic cerebrovascular imaging in chil-
dren. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 20:328–334
Aminoff MJ (1973) Vascular anomalies in the intracranial 
dura mater. Brain 96:601–612
Anson J, Spetzler R (1992) Classiﬁ cation of spinal arteriove-
nous malformations and implication for treatment. BNIQ 
8:2–10
Arnautovic KI, Al-Mefty O, Angtuaco E et al (1998) Dural 
arteriovenous malformations of the transverse/sigmoid 
sinus acquired from dominant sinus occlusion by a tu-
mor: report of two cases. Neurosurgery 42:383–388
Awad IA, Little JR, Akarawi WP et al (1990) Intracranial 
dural arteriovenous malformations: factors predispos-
ing to an aggressive neurological course. J Neurosurg 
72:839–850
Bank WO, Kerber CW, Cromwell LD (1981) Treatment of in-
tracerebral arteriovenous malformations with isobutyl 
2-cyanoacrylate: initial clinical experience. Radiology 
139:609–616
Barnwell SL, Halbach VV, Dowd CF et al (1991a) Multiple 
dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas of the cranium and spine. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 12:441–445
Barnwell SL, Higashida RT, Halbach VV et al (1991b) Di-
rect endovascular thrombolytic therapy for dural sinus 
thrombosis. Neurosurgery 28:135–142
Benndorf G, Bender A, Lehmann R et al (2000) Transvenous 
occlusion of dural cavernous sinus ﬁ stulas through the 
thrombosed inferior petrosal sinus: report of four cases 
and review of the literature. Surg Neurol 54:42–54
Benndorf G, Bender A, Campi A et al (2001) Treatment of a 
cavernous sinus dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula by deep or-
bital puncture of the superior ophthalmic vein. Neurora-
diology 43:499–502
Binkert CA, Kollias SS,Valavanis A (1999) Spinal cord vascu-
lar disease: characterization with fast three-dimensional 
contrast-enhanced MR angiography. AJNR Am J Neuro-
radiol 20:1785–1793
Bitoh S, Sakaki S (1979) Spontaneous cure of dural arterio-
venous malformation in the posterior fossa. Surg Neurol 
12:111–114
Boet RS, Poon WS, Chan MY et al (2001) Childhood posterior 
fossa pial-dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula treated by endovas-
cular occlusion. Childs Nerv Syst 17:681–684
Borden JA, Wu JK, Shucart WA (1995) A proposed classiﬁ ca-
tion for spinal and cranial dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulous 
malformations and implications for treatment. J Neuro-
surg 82:166–179
Bousson V, Brunereau L, Vahedi K et al (1999) Intracranial 
dural ﬁ stula as a cause of diffuse MR enhancement of 
the cervical spinal cord. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
67:227–230
Bowen BC, Pattany PM (1997) Spine MR angiography. Clin 
Neurosci 4:165–173
Bowen BC, Pattany PM (1998) MR angiography of the spine. 
Magn Reson Imaging Clin North Am 6:165–178
Bowen BC, Pattany PM (2000) Contrast-enhanced MR an-
giography of spinal vessels. Magn Reson Imaging Clin 
North Am 8:597–614
Bowen BC, Fraser K, Kochan JP et al (1995) Spinal dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stulas: evaluation with MR angiography. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16:2029–2043
Brunereau L, Gobin YP, Meder JF et al (1996) Intracranial 
dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas with spinal venous drainage: 
relation between clinical presentation and angiographic 
ﬁ ndings. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 17:1549–1554
Cellerini M, Mascalchi M, Mangiaﬁ co S et al (1999) Phase-
contrast MR angiography of intracranial dural arteriove-
nous ﬁ stulae. Neuroradiology 41:487–492
Chaudhary MY, Sachdev VP, Cho SH et al (1982) Dural arte-
riovenous malformation of the major venous sinuses: an 
acquired lesion. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 3:13–19
Chen CJ, Ro LS, Cheng WC et al (1995) MRI/myelographic lo-
calization of ﬁ stulous tract in spinal dural arteriovenous 
malformations prior to arteriography. J Comput Assist 
Tomogr 19:893–896
Chen CJ, Chen CM, Lin TK (1998) Enhanced cervical MRI in 
identifying intracranial dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae with 
spinal perimedullary venous drainage. Neuroradiology 
40:393–397
Chen JC, Tsuruda JS, Halbach VV (1992) Suspected dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stula: results with screening MR angiog-
raphy in seven patients. Radiology 183:265–271
Chiras J, Bories J, Leger JM et al (1982) CT scan of dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stulas. Neuroradiology 23:185–194
Cognard C, Gobin YP, Pierot L et al (1995) Cerebral dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stulas: clinical and angiographic corre-
lation with a revised classiﬁ cation of venous drainage. 
Radiology 194:671–680
Cognard C, Miaux Y, Pierot L et al (1996) The role of CT in 
evaluation of the effectiveness of embolisation of spinal 
dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae with N-butyl cyanoacrylate. 
Neuroradiology 38:603–608
Cognard C, Houdart E, Casasco A et al (1997) Long-term 
changes in intracranial dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae lead-
ing to worsening in the type of venous drainage. Neuro-
radiology 39:59–66
Cognard C, Casasco A, Toevi M et al (1998) Dural arterio-
venous ﬁ stulas as a cause of intracranial hypertension 
due to impairment of cranial venous outﬂ ow. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 65:308–316
Collice M, D’Aliberti G, Arena O et al (2000) Surgical treat-
ment of intracranial dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae: role 
of venous drainage. Neurosurgery 47:56–66; discussion 
66–57
Convers P, Michel D, Brunon J et al (1986) Dural arte-
riovenous ﬁ stulas of the posterior cerebral fossa and 
thrombosis of the lateral sinus. Discussion of their rela-
tions and treatment apropos of 2 cases. Neurochirurgie 
32:495–500
Cromwell LD, Kerber CW (1979) Modiﬁ cation of cyanoac-
rylate for therapeutic embolization: preliminary experi-
ence. AJR Am J Roentgenol 132:799–801
Davies MA, Ter Brugge K, Willinsky R et al (1996) The va-
lidity of classiﬁ cation for the clinical presentation of 
intracranial dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas. J Neurosurg 
85:830–837
Davies M, Saleh J, Ter Brugge K et al (1997a) The natural 
history and management of dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae, 
part 1. Bening lesions. Intervent Neuroradiol 3:295–302
Davies M, Ter Brugge K, Willinsky R et al (1997b) The natu-
ral history and management of intracranial dural arte-

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
163
riovenous ﬁ stuilae, part 2. Aggressive lesions. Intervent 
Neuroradiol 3:303–311
De Marco JK, Dillon WP, Halback VV et al (1990) Dural arte-
riovenous ﬁ stulas: evaluation with MR imaging. Radiol-
ogy 175:193–199
Djindjan R, Merland J (1978) Superselective angiography of 
the external carotid artery. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg 
New York
Endo S, Koshu K, Kodama N et al (1979) Spontaneous regres-
sion of a posterior fossa dural arteriovenous malforma-
tion (author’s translation). No Shinkei Geka 7:1001–1004
Endo S, Kuwayama N, Takaku A et al (1998) Direct packing 
of the isolated sinus in patients with dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stulas of the transverse-sigmoid sinus. J Neurosurg 
88:449–456
Ernst RJ, Gaskill-Shipley M, Tomsick TA et al (1997) Cervical 
myelopathy associated with intracranial dural arterio-
venous ﬁ stula: MR ﬁ ndings before and after treatment. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 18:1330–1334
Farb RI, McGregor C, Kim JK et al (2001) Intracranial arte-
riovenous malformations: real-time auto-triggered ellip-
tic centric-ordered 3D gadolinium-enhanced MR angiog-
raphy – initial assessment. Radiology 220:244–251
Farb RI, Kim JK, Willinsky RA et al (2002) Spinal dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stula localization with a technique of 
ﬁ rst-pass gadolinium-enhanced MR angiography: initial 
experience. Radiology 222:843–850
Friedman JA, Pollock BE, Nichols DA (2000) Development 
of a cerebral arteriovenous malformation documented in 
an adult by serial angiography. Case report. J Neurosurg 
93:1058–1061
Fujita A, Nakamura M, Tamaki N (2001) Multiple dural arte-
riovenous ﬁ stulas involving both the cavernous sinus and 
the posterior fossa: report of two cases and review of the 
literature. No Shinkei Geka 29:1065–1072
Fukai J, Terada T, Kuwata T et al (2001) Transarterial in-
travenous coil embolization of dural arteriovenous ﬁ s-
tula involving the superior sagittal sinus. Surg Neurol 
55:353–358
Gelbert F, Guichard JP, Mourier KL et al (1992) Phase-con-
trast MR angiography of vascular malformations of the 
spinal cord at 0.5 T. J Magn Reson Imaging 2:631–636
Gilbertson JR, Miller GM, Goldman MS et al (1995) Spinal 
dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas: MR and myelographic ﬁ nd-
ings. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16:2049–2057
Gobin YP, Houdart E, Rogopoulos A et al (1993) Percutane-
ous transvenous embolization through the thrombosed 
sinus in transverse sinus dural ﬁ stula. AJNR Am J Neu-
roradiol 14:1102–1105
Goto K, Sidipratomo P, Ogata N et al (1999) Combining endo-
vascular and neurosurgical treatments of high-risk dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stulas in the lateral sinus and the conﬂ u-
ence of the sinuses. J Neurosurg 90:289–299
Graeb DA, Dolman CL (1986) Radiological and pathologi-
cal aspects of dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas. Case report. 
J Neurosurg 64:962–967
Greenough GP, Mamourian A, Harbaugh RE (1999) Venous 
hypertension associated with a posterior fossa dural arte-
riovenous ﬁ stula: another cause of bithalamic lesions on 
MR images. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 20:145–147
Guo WY, Pan DH, Wu HM et al (1998) Radiosurgery as a treat-
ment alternative for dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas of the cav-
ernous sinus. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 19:1081–1087
Halbach VV, Higashida RT, Hieshima GB et al (1987) Dural 
ﬁ stulas involving the transverse and sigmoid sinuses: re-
sults of treatment in 28 patients. Radiology 163:443–447
Halbach VV, Higashida RT, Hieshima GB et al (1989a) Embo-
lization of branches arising from the cavernous portion 
of the internal carotid artery. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
10:143–150
Halbach VV, Higashida RT, Hieshima GB et al (1989b) Trans-
venous embolization of dural ﬁ stulas involving the cav-
ernous sinus. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 10:377–383
Halbach VV, Higashida RT, Hieshima GB et al (1989c) 
Transvenous embolization of dural ﬁ stulas involving the 
transverse and sigmoid sinuses. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
10:385–392
Halbach VV, Higashida RT, Hieshima GB et al (1989d) Treat-
ment of dural ﬁ stulas involving the deep cerebral venous 
system. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 10:393–399
Hamada J, Yano S, Kai Y et al (2000) Histopathological study 
of venous aneurysms in patients with dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stulas. J Neurosurg 92:1023–1027
Hamada Y, Goto K, Inoue T et al (1997) Histopathological 
aspects of dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas in the transverse-
sigmoid sinus region in nine patients. Neurosurgery 
40:452–456; discussion 456–458
Hanneken AM, Miller NR, Debrun GM et al (1989) Treat-
ment of carotid-cavernous sinus ﬁ stulas using a detach-
able balloon catheter through the superior ophthalmic 
vein. Arch Ophthalmol 107:87–92
Hashimoto M, Yokota A, Matsuoka S et al (1989) Central 
retinal vein occlusion after treatment of cavernous dural 
arteriovenous malformation. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 10 
[Suppl 5]:S30–S31
Herman JM, Spetzler RF, Bederson JB et al (1995) Genesis 
of a dural arteriovenous malformation in a rat model. 
J Neurosurg 83:539–545
Hieshima GB, Cahan LD, Berlin MS et al (1977) Calvarial, 
orbital and dural vascular anomalies in hereditary hem-
orrhagic telangiectasia. Surg Neurol 8:263–267
Hirabuki N, Miura T, Mitomo M et al (1988) MR imaging 
of dural arteriovenous malformations with ocular signs. 
Neuroradiology 30:390–394
Hoh BL, Choudhri TF, Connolly ES Jr et al (1998) Surgical 
management of high-grade intracranial dural arteriove-
nous ﬁ stulas: leptomeningeal venous disruption without 
nidus excision. Neurosurgery 42:796–804; discussion 
804–795
Horikoshi T, Hida K, Iwasaki Y et al (2000) Chronological 
changes in MRI ﬁ ndings of spinal dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stula. Surg Neurol 53: 243–249
Houdart E, Gobin YP, Casasco A et al (1993) A proposed 
angiographic classiﬁ cation of intracranial arteriovenous 
ﬁ stulae and malformations. Neuroradiology 35:381–385
Houser OW, Campbell JK, Campbell RJ et al (1979) Arteriove-
nous malformation affecting the transverse dural venous 
sinus – an acquired lesion. Mayo Clin Proc 54:651–661
Hurst RW, Grossman RI (2000) Peripheral spinal cord hy-
pointensity on T2-weighted MR images: a reliable imag-
ing sign of venous hypertensive myelopathy. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 21:781–786
Iizuka Y, Maehara T, Hishii M et al (2001) Successful tran-
sarterial glue embolisation by wedged technique for a 
tentorial dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula presenting with a 
conjunctival injection. Neuroradiology 43:677–679

164 
I. Szikora
Irie K, Kawanishi M, Kunishio K et al (2001) The efﬁ cacy and 
safety of transvenous embolisation in the treatment of 
intracranial dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas. J Clin Neurosci 
8 [Suppl 1]:92–96
Jaillard AS, Peres B, Hommel M (1999) Neuropsychological 
features of dementia due to dural arteriovenous malfor-
mation. Cerebrovasc Dis 9:91–97
Kaech D, de Tribolet N, Lasjaunias P (1987) Anterior infe-
rior cerebellar artery aneurysm, carotid bifurcation an-
eurysm, and dural arteriovenous malformation of the 
tentorium in the same patient. Neurosurgery 21:575–582
Kagawa K, Nishimura S, Seki K (2001) Cavernous sinus dural 
arteriovenous shunt presenting with subarachnoid hem-
orrhage and acute subdural hematoma: a case report. No 
Shinkei Geka 29:457–463
Kallmes DF, Cloft HJ, Jensen ME et al (1998) Dural arterio-
venous ﬁ stula: a pitfall of time-of-ﬂ ight MR venography 
for the diagnosis of sinus thrombosis. Neuroradiology 
40:242–244
Kataoka H, Miyamoto S, Nagata I et al (2001) Venous con-
gestion is a major cause of neurological deterioration 
in spinal arteriovenous malformations. Neurosurgery 
48:1224–1229; discussion 1229–1230
Kawaguchi T, Kawano T, Kaneko Y et al (1999a) Dural ar-
teriovenous ﬁ stula of the transverse sigmoid sinus after 
transvenous embolization of the carotid cavernous ﬁ s-
tula. No To Shinkei 51:1065–1069
Kawaguchi T, Kawano T, Kaneko Y et al (1999b) Dural ar-
teriovenous ﬁ stula of the transverse-sigmoid sinus with 
intraventricular hemorrhage: a case report. No Shinkei 
Geka 27:1133–1138
Kawaguchi T, Kawano T, Kaneko Y et al (2000) rCBF study 
with 123I-IMP SPECT of dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula. No 
To Shinkei 52:991–996
Kawaguchi T, Kawano T, Kaneko Y et al (2001) Classiﬁ cation 
of venous ischaemia with MRI. J Clin Neurosci 8 [Suppl 
1]:82–88
Kendall BE, Logue V (1977) Spinal epidural angiomatous 
malformations draining into intrathecal veins. Neurora-
diology 13:181–189
Kerber CW, Newton TH (1973) The macro and microvascula-
ture of the dura mater. Neuroradiology 6:175–179
Kerber CW, Bank WO, Cromwell LD (1979) Cyanoacrylate 
occlusion of carotid-cavernous ﬁ stula with preservation 
of carotid artery ﬂ ow. Neurosurgery 4:210–215
Kincaid PK, Duckwiler GR, Gobin YP et al (2001) Dural ar-
teriovenous ﬁ stula in children: endovascular treatment 
and outcomes in seven cases. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
22:1217–1225
Klingebiel R, Zimmer C, Rogalla P et al (2001) Assessment of 
the arteriovenous cerebrovascular system by multi-slice 
CT. A single-bolus, monophasic protocol. Acta Radiol 
42:560–562
Klink T, Hofmann E, Lieb W (2001) Transvenous embo-
lization of carotid cavernous ﬁ stulas via the superior 
ophthalmic vein. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 
239:583–588
Kraus JA, Stuper BK, Berlit P (1998) Association of resistance 
to activated protein C and dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas. 
J Neurol 245:731–733
Kraus JA, Stuper BK, Nahser HC et al (2000) Signiﬁ cantly 
increased prevalence of factor V Leiden in patients with 
dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas. J Neurol 247:521–523
Kubota Y, Ueda T, Kaku Y et al (1999) Development of a du-
ral arteriovenous ﬁ stula around the jugular valve after 
transvenous embolization of cavernous dural arteriove-
nous ﬁ stula. Surg Neurol 51:174–176
Kurata A, Miyasaka Y, Oka H et al (1999) Spontaneous ca-
rotid cavernous ﬁ stulas with special reference to the in-
ﬂ uence of estradiol decrease. Neurol Res 21:631–639
Labbe D, Courtheoux P, Rigot-Jolivet M et al (1987) Bilateral 
dural carotid-cavernous ﬁ stula. Its treatment by way of 
the superior ophthalmic vein. Rev Stomatol Chir Maxil-
lofac 88:120–124
Lasjaunias P, Berenstein A (1987) Surgical neuroangiography, 
1st edn, vol 2. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York
Lasjaunias P, Halimi P, Lopez-Ibor L et al (1984) Endovascu-
lar treatment of pure spontaneous dural vascular malfor-
mations. Review of 23 cases studied and treated between 
May 1980 and October 1983. Neurochirurgie 30:207–223
Lasjaunias P, Chiu M, Ter Brugge K et al (1986) Neurological 
manifestations of intracranial dural arteriovenous mal-
formations. J Neurosurg 64:724–730
Lawton MT, Jacobowitz R, Spetzler RF (1997) Redeﬁ ned role 
of angiogenesis in the pathogenesis of dural arteriove-
nous malformations. J Neurosurg 87:267–274
Lee TT, Gromelski EB, Bowen BC et al (1998) Diagnostic and 
surgical management of spinal dural arteriovenous ﬁ stu-
las. Neurosurgery 43:242–246; discussion 246–247
Levrier O, Metellus P, Fuentes S et al (2006) Use of a self ex-
panding stent with balloon angioplasty in the treatment 
of dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas involving the transverse 
and/or sigmoid sinus: functional and neurimaging-based 
outcome in 10 patients. J Neurosurg 104: 254-263
Liebig T, Henkes H, Brew S et al (2005) Reconstructive treat-
ment of dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas of the transverse and 
sigmoid sinus: transvenous angioplasty and stent deploy-
ment. Neuroradiology 47:543–551
Link MJ, Coffey RJ, Nichols DA et al (1996) The role of radio-
surgery and particulate embolization in the treatment of 
dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas. J Neurosurg 84:804–809
Liu HM, Huang YC, Wang YH et al (2000) Transarterial 
embolisation of complex cavernous sinus dural arterio-
venous ﬁ stulae with low-concentration cyanoacrylate. 
Neuroradiology 42:766–770
Lucas CP, Zabramski JM, Spetzler RF et al (1997) Treatment 
for intracranial dural arteriovenous malformations: a 
meta-analysis from the English language literature. Neu-
rosurgery 40:1119–1130; discussion 1130–1112
Lucas CP, Prandini MN, Caldas JG et al (2005) Analysis of the 
best therapeutic alternative for intracranial dural arterio-
venous malformations. Arq Neuropsiquiatr 63:605–613
Luciani A, Houdart E, Mounayer C et al (2001) Spontaneous 
closure of dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas: report of three 
cases and review of the literature. AJNR Am J Neurora-
diol 22:992–996
Luetmer P, Lane J, Gilbertson J et al (2005) Preangiographic 
evaluation of spinal dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas with el-
liptic centric contrast-enhanced MR Angiography and ef-
fect on radiation dose and volume of iodinated contrast 
material. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 26:711–718
Magidson MA, Weinberg PE (1976) Spontaneous closure of 
a dural arteriovenous malformation. Surg Neurol 6:107–
110
Manelfe C, Lazorthes G, Roulleau J (1972) Artères de la dure-
mère rachidienne chez l’homme. Acta Radiol 13:829–841

 
 
Dural Arteriovenous Malformations 
165
Mascalchi M, Bianchi MC, Quilici N et al (1995) MR angi-
ography of spinal vascular malformations. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 16:289–297
Mascalchi M, Quilici N, Ferrito G et al (1997) Identiﬁ ca-
tion of the feeding arteries of spinal vascular lesions via 
phase-contrast MR angiography with three-dimensional 
acquisition and phase display. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
18:351–358
Mascalchi M, Cosottini M, Ferrito G et al (1999) Contrast-en-
hanced time-resolved MR angiography of spinal vascular 
malformations. J Comput Assist Tomogr 23:341–345
Mascalchi M, Ferrito G, Quilici N et al (2001) Spinal vascular 
malformations: MR angiography after treatment. Radiol-
ogy 219:346–353
McCutcheon IE, Doppman JL, Oldﬁ eld EH (1996) Micro-
vascular anatomy of dural arteriovenous abnormalities 
of the spine: a microangiographic study. J Neurosurg 
84:215–220
Meder JF, Devaux B, Merland JJ et al (1995) Spontaneous dis-
appearance of a spinal dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 16:2058–2062
Miki T, Nagai K, Saitoh Y et al (1988) Matas procedure in the 
treatment of spontaneous carotid cavernous sinus ﬁ stula: 
a complication of retinal hemorrhage. No Shinkei Geka 
16:971–976
Miller NR, Monsein LH, Debrun GM et al (1995) Treatment 
of carotid-cavernous sinus ﬁ stulas using a superior oph-
thalmic vein approach. J Neurosurg 83:838–842
Mironov A (1998) Selective transvenous embolization of du-
ral ﬁ stulas without occlusion of the dural sinus. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 19:389–391
Momoji J, Mukawa J, Yamashiro K et al (1997) Histopatho-
logical examinations of dural arteriovenous malforma-
tions of posterior fossa. No Shinkei Geka 25:137–142
Murai Y, Yamashita Y, Ikeda Y et al (1999) Ruptured aneu-
rysm of the orbitofrontal artery associated with dural 
arteriovenous malformation in the anterior cranial fossa 
– case report. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) 39:157–160
Murphy KJ, Gailloud P, Venbrux A et al (2000) Endovascular 
treatment of a grade IV transverse sinus dural arterio-
venous ﬁ stula by sinus recanalization, angioplasty, and 
stent placement: technical case report. Neurosurgery 
46:497–500; discussion 500–491
Nagata S, Morioka T, Natori Y et al (2006) Factors that ef-
fect the surgical outcomes of spinal dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stulas. Surg Neurol 65:563–568
Nagy ZZ, Nemeth J, Suveges I et al (1995) A case of para-
doxical worsening of dural-sinus arteriovenous malfor-
mation syndrome after neurosurgery. Eur J Ophthalmol 
5:265–270
Naito I, Iwai T, Shimaguchi H et al (2001) Percutaneous 
transvenous embolisation through the occluded sinus 
for transverse-sigmoid dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas with 
sinus occlusion. Neuroradiology 43:672–676
Nakagawa H, Kubo S, Nakajima Y et al (1992) Shifting of 
dural arteriovenous malformation from the cavernous 
sinus to the sigmoid sinus to the transverse sinus after 
transvenous embolization. A case of left spontaneous ca-
rotid-cavernous sinus ﬁ stula. Surg Neurol 37:30–38
Nakamura M, Tamaki N, Kawaguchi T et al (1998) Selective 
transvenous embolization of dural carotid-cavernous si-
nus ﬁ stulas with preservation of sylvian venous outﬂ ow. 
Report of three cases. J Neurosurg 89:825–829
Nakstad PH, Bakke SJ, Hald JK (1992) Embolization of in-
tracranial arteriovenous malformations and ﬁ stulas with 
polyvinyl alcohol particles and platinum ﬁ bre coils. Neu-
roradiology 34:348–351
Newton TH,Cronqvist S (1969) Involvement of dural arteries 
in intracranial arteriovenous malformations. Radiology 
93:1071–1078
Nishijima M, Takaku A, Endo S et al (1992) Etiological evalu-
ation of dural arteriovenous malformations of the lateral 
and sigmoid sinuses based on histopathological exami-
nations. J Neurosurg 76:600–606
Oishi H, Arai H, Sato K et al (1999) Complications associ-
ated with transvenous embolisation of cavernous dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stula. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 141:1265–
1271
Pierot L, Chiras J, Duyckaerts C et al (1993) Intracranial du-
ral arteriovenous ﬁ stulas and sinus thrombosis. Report 
of ﬁ ve cases. J Neuroradiol 20:9–18
Pollock BE, Nichols DA, Garrity JA et al (1999) Stereotactic 
radiosurgery and particulate embolization for cavernous 
sinus dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae. Neurosurgery 45:459–
466; discussion 466–457
Quinones D, Duckwiler G, Gobin PY et al (1997) Emboliza-
tion of dural cavernous ﬁ stulas via superior ophthalmic 
vein approach. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 18:921–928
Ratliff J, Voorhies RM (1999) Arteriovenous ﬁ stula with as-
sociated aneurysms coexisting with dural arteriovenous 
malformation of the anterior inferior falx. Case report 
and review of the literature. J Neurosurg 91:303–307
Reinges MH, Thron A, Mull M et al (2001) Dural arteriove-
nous ﬁ stulae at the foramen magnum. J Neurol 248:197–
203
Ricolﬁ  F, Manelfe C, Meder JF et al (1999) Intracranial dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stulae with perimedullary venous drain-
age. Anatomical, clinical and therapeutic considerations. 
Neuroradiology 41:803–812
Roy D, Raymond J (1997) The role of transvenous emboli-
zation in the treatment of intracranial dural arteriove-
nous ﬁ stulas. Neurosurgery 40:1133–1141; discussion 
1141–1134
Sakaki T, Morimoto T, Nakase H et al (1996) Dural arteriove-
nous ﬁ stula of the posterior fossa developing after surgi-
cal occlusion of the sigmoid sinus. Report of ﬁ ve cases. 
J Neurosurg 84:113–118
Sergott RC, Grossman RI, Savino PJ et al (1987) The syndrome 
of paradoxical worsening of dural-cavernous sinus arte-
riovenous malformations. Ophthalmology 94:205–212
Shigematsu Y, Korogi Y, Yoshizumi K et al (2000) Three cases 
of spinal dural AVF: evaluation with ﬁ rst-pass, gado-
linium-enhanced, three-dimensional MR angiography. 
J Magn Reson Imaging 12:949–952
Singh V, Meyers PM, Halbach VH et al (2001) Dural arterio-
venous ﬁ stula associated with prothrombin gene muta-
tion. J Neuroimaging 11:319–321
Slaba S, Smayra T, Hage P et al (2000) An unusual cause 
of acute myelopathy: a dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula at the 
craniocervical junction. J Med Liban 48:168–172
Smith TP, Higashida RT, Barnwell SL et al (1994) Treatment 
of dural sinus thrombosis by urokinase infusion. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 15:801–807
Soderman M, Edner G, Ericson K et al (2006) Gamma knife 
radiosurgery for dural arteriovenous shunts: 25 years of 
experience. J Neurosurg 10:867–875

166 
I. Szikora
Solis OJ, Davis KR, Ellis GT (1977) Dural arteriovenous 
malformation associated with subdural and intracere-
bral hematoma: a CT scan and angiographic correlation. 
Comput Tomogr 1:145–150
Song JK, Gobin YP, Duckwiler GR et al (2001) N-butyl 2-
cyanoacrylate embolization of spinal dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stulae. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22:40–47
Stecker MM, Marcotte P, Hurst R et al (1996) Spinal dural 
arteriovenous malformations. Intraoperative evoked po-
tential evidence for pathophysiology. A case report. Spine 
21:512–515
Sundt TM Jr, Piepgras DG (1983) The surgical approach to 
arteriovenous malformations of the lateral and sigmoid 
dural sinuses. J Neurosurg 59:32–39
Suzuki S, Tanaka R, Miyasaka Y et al (2000) Dural arteriove-
nous malformations associated with cerebral aneurysms. 
J Clin Neurosci 7 [Suppl 1]:36–38
Suzuki Y, Kase M, Yokoi M et al (1989) Development of cen-
tral retinal vein occlusion in dural carotid-cavernous 
ﬁ stula. Ophthalmologica 199:28–33
Tanimoto M, Tamaki N, Kuwamura K et al (1984) Hemo-
dynamic study of cerebral arteriovenous malformation 
by using 133Xe inhalation method. No Shinkei Geka 
12:1513–1520
Terada T, Higashida RT, Halbach VV et al (1994) Develop-
ment of acquired arteriovenous ﬁ stulas in rats due to ve-
nous hypertension. J Neurosurg 80:884–889
Terada T, Higashida RT, Halbach VV et al (1998) The effect 
of oestrogen on the development of arteriovenous ﬁ stulae 
induced by venous hypertension in rats. Acta Neurochir 
(Wien) 140:82–86
Terwey B, Becker H, Thron AK et al (1989) Gadolinium-
DTPA enhanced MR imaging of spinal dural arteriove-
nous ﬁ stulas. J Comput Assist Tomogr 13:30–37
Thompson BG, Doppman JL,Oldﬁ eld EH (1994) Treatment 
of cranial dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae by interruption 
of leptomeningeal venous drainage. J Neurosurg 80:617–
623
Uranishi R, Nakase H, Sakaki T (1999) Expression of an-
giogenic growth factors in dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula. 
J Neurosurg 91:781–786
Urtasun F, Biondi A, Casaco A et al (1996) Cerebral dural 
arteriovenous ﬁ stulas: percutaneous transvenous embo-
lization. Radiology 199:209–217
Valavanis A (ed) (1993) Interventional neuroradiology. Med-
ical radiology. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York
Van Dijk JM, TerBrugge KG, Willinsky RA et al (2002) Mul-
tiplicity of dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulas. J Neurosurg 
96:76–78
Wakamoto H, Miyazaki H, Shinoda A et al (1999) The natural 
history of a dural arteriovenous ﬁ stula associated with sinus 
thrombosis: a case report. No Shinkei Geka 27:563–568
Watanabe A, Takahara Y, Ibuchi Y et al (1984) Two cases of 
dural arteriovenous malformation occurring after intra-
cranial surgery. Neuroradiology 26:375–380
Watanabe T, Matsumaru Y, Sonobe M et al (2000) Multiple 
dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae involving the cavernous and 
sphenoparietal sinuses. Neuroradiology 42:771–774
Willinsky R, Lasjaunias P, Terbrugge K et al (1990) Angiog-
raphy in the investigation of spinal dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stula. A protocol with application of the venous phase. 
Neuroradiology 32:114–116
Willinsky R, Terbrugge K, Montanera W et al (1994) Venous 
congestion: an MR ﬁ nding in dural arteriovenous mal-
formations with cortical venous drainage. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 15:1501–1507
Willinsky RA, Ter Brugge K, Montanera W et al (1995) Post-
treatment MR ﬁ ndings in spinal dural arteriovenous 
malformations. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16:2063–2071
Woimant F, Merland JJ, Riche MC et al (1982) Bulbospinal 
syndrome related to a meningeal arteriovenous ﬁ stula 
of the lateral sinus draining into spinal cord veins. Rev 
Neurol (Paris) 138:559–566
Yamada T, Okuchi K, Tuji H et al (1993) A case of intra-
cerebral AVM fed by the anterior ethmoidal artery. No 
Shinkei Geka 21:459–462

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
167
Intracranial Aneurysms 
5
Isabel Wanke, Arnd Dörﬂ er, and Michael Forsting
C O N T E N T S
5.1 
Pathology 168
5.1.1 
Classiﬁ cation 168
5.1.2 
Saccular Aneurysms 169
5.1.3 
Dissecting Aneurysms 170
5.1.4 
Fusiform Aneurysms 171
5.1.5 
Infectious Aneurysms 172
5.1.6 
Traumatic Aneurysms 174
5.1.7 
Inﬂ ammatory Aneurysms 174
5.1.8 
Neoplastic and Radiation-Induced
 
Aneurysms 174
5.1.9 
Aneurysms Associated with
 
Arteriovenous Malformations 175
5.1.10 
Distribution 175
5.1.11 
Familial Occurrence 175
5.2 
Clinical Presentation 177
5.2.1 
Epidemiology 178
5.2.2 
Incidence and Risk of Rupture 178
5.2.3 
Natural History of Ruptured Aneurysms and 
 
Patient Outcome 180
5.2.4 
Pathophysiology of Aneurysm Rupture 181
5.2.5 
Other Causes of SAH 181
5.2.5.1 
Perimesencephalic Non-aneurysmal
 
Hemorrhage 181
5.2.5.2 
Dural Arteriovenous Fistulae 182
5.2.5.3 
Cervical AVMs 182
5.2.5.4 
Saccular Aneurysms of Spinal Arteries 182
5.2.5.5 
Cardiac Myxoma 183
5.2.5.6 
Sickle Cell Disease 183
5.2.5.7 
Cocaine Abuse 183
5.2.5.8 
Anticoagulants 183
5.2.5.9 
Sinus-Venous Thrombosis 183
5.2.6 
Complications of SAH 183
5.2.6.1 
Hydrocephalus 183
5.2.6.2 
Rebleeding 184
5.2.6.3 
Hematoma 185
5.2.6.4 
Vasospasm 185
5.2.6.5 
Cerebral Ischemia and Infarction 186
5.2.7 
Unruptured Aneurysms 186
5.3 
Imaging 189
5.3.1 
Computed Tomography 189
5.3.1.1 
CT Angiography 191
I. Wanke, MD, PhD, Professor
M. Forsting, MD, PhD, Professor
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventinal Radiology and 
Neuroradiology, University of Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, 
45122 Essen, Germany
A. Dörﬂ er, MD, PhD
Department of Neuroradiology, University of Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-University, Schwabachanlage 6, 91054 
Erlangen, Germany
5.3.2 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging 194
5.3.2.1 
Magnetic Resonance Angiography 194
5.3.3 
Cerebral Angiography 200
5.3.3.1 
3D Rotational Angiography 203
5.3.4 
Patients with SAH of
 
Unidentiﬁ able Cause 204
5.3.4.1 
Screening 204
5.3.5 
Transcranial Ultrasound 204
5.4 
Therapy 205
5.4.1 
General Considerations 205
5.4.2 
The ISAT Study 206
5.4.3 
Treatment of Unruptured Aneurysms 207
5.4.4 
Treatment of Ruptured Aneurysms 210
5.4.5 
Endovascular Therapy 211
5.4.5.1 
History 211
5.4.5.2 
Basic Assumptions for
 
Endovascular Aneurysm Therapy 212
5.4.6 
Devices for
 
Endovascular Aneurysm Therapy 215
5.4.6.1 
Catheters and Delivery Systems 215
5.4.7 
Embolic Materials for
 
Endovascular Aneurysm Therapy 216
5.4.7.1 
Detachable Balloons 216
5.4.7.2 
Nondetachable Balloons 216
5.4.7.3 
Coils 217
5.4.7.4 
Detachable Coils 218
5.4.7.5 
Hydrogel-Coils 218
5.4.7.6 
Three-Dimensional Coils: TriSpan 220
5.4.7.7 
Stents 220
5.4.7.8 
Stents Designed for Intracranial Use 220
5.4.7.9 
Liquid Embolic Agents 221
5.4.8 
Techniques of Endovascular Therapy 221
5.4.8.1 
General Remarks 221
5.4.8.2 
Remodelling Technique 225
5.4.9 
Anatomic Considerations for
 
Endovascular Aneurysm Therapy 225
5.4.9.1 
Internal Carotid Artery 225
5.4.9.2 
Anterior Cerebral Artery 231
5.4.9.3 
Middle Cerebral Artery 237
5.4.9.4 
Vertebrobasilar Arteries 238
5.4.9.5 
Rare Locations 246
5.4.10 
Special Considerations 251
5.4.10.1 Giant Aneurysms 251
5.4.10.2 Pediatric Aneurysms 252
5.4.10.3 Aneurysms in the Elderly 254
5.4.10.4 Multiple Aneurysms 255
5.4.10.5 Incompletely Treated
 
Aneurysms/Aneurysm Remnants 258
5.4.10.6 Combined Therapies 259
5.4.10.7 Complications of
 
Endovascular Therapy 262
5.4.10.8 Monitoring and Therapy of Vasospasm 263
5.4.10.9 Follow-Up and Outcome 267
5.4.10.10 Final Remarks 269
 
References 270 

168 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Intracranial aneurysms do not fall precisely into the 
category of true vascular malformations; they are 
usually acquired. However, we included them be-
cause any neuroradiologist with an interest in vas-
cular malformations and/or endovascular therapy 
clearly expects this entity to be covered extensively 
K E Y  P O I N T S :
Risk factors leading to development of an 
aneurysm and a SAH comprise older age, ath-
erosclerosis, hypertension, smoking, heavy 
alcohol consumption, the female gender, and 
Finish or Japanese decent
ISAT changed the concept of aneurysm man-
agement in a lot of countries and also of 
unruptured aneurysms
Patients with coiled ruptured aneurysms need 
ventricular drainage to a signiﬁ cantly lesser 
extent and have signiﬁ cantly less seizures
Rebleeding rate in coiled aneurysms is very 
low; it would take at least 40 more years to 
outweigh the clinical beneﬁ ts in patients with 
coiled aneurysms
The ﬁ rst treatment option in ruptured aneu-
rysms should be via the endovascular route if 
judged feasible by the neurointerventionalist
Wide necked aneurysms are less prone to rup-
ture compared to small necked aneurysms
First degree relatives of patients with SAH 
have a much higher risk of harbouring an 
aneurysm compared to the normal popula-
tion
Multiple aneurysms occur in about 20%–30% 
of patients with an aneurysm
Paraophthalmic aneurysms are very difﬁ cult 
aneurysms to treat due to their conﬁ gura-
tion with generally a wide neck and due to 
the difﬁ culty to obtain a stable microcatheter 
position
Neurovascular stents might help to repair the 
aneurysm bearing vessel segment with long 
lasting results, reﬂ ecting a more causative 
treatment than selective aneurysm occlusion
Despite all the tremendous developments in 
techniques to treat aneurysms, treatment of 
the SAH itself and the sequelae is still less 
than desired and further research is urgently 
necessary to solve the problem of delayed 
ischemia











in a book such as this. Instead of using modern 
methods of communicating data (coloured boxes 
and tables), we have used the traditional form of 
writing with reiteration, mixing facts with opinions 
and illustrating as much as possible with radiologi-
cal images. It is our hope that many people will 
read the chapter from beginning to end, and that 
redundancy and images will help to memorize new 
information.
 5.1 
Pathology
5.1.1 
Classifi cation
Classiﬁ cation of intracranial aneurysms may be 
based on morphology, size, location and etiology. 
The majority of intracranial aneurysms are true an-
eurysms containing all layers or components of the 
normal vessel wall. In contrast, in false aneurysms 
or pseudoaneurysms, the vascular lumen does not 
enlarge, although the external diameter of the ab-
normal segment may be increased. These aneurysms 
are rare within the skull.
Usually, intracranial aneurysms are divided 
into three basic types: saccular, fusiform and dis-
secting. They can arise as solitary (70%–75%) or 
multiple (25%–30%) vascular lesions, usually lo-
cated at the Circle of Willis. While traumatic, in-
fectious or tumor-associated aneurysms are rare, 
most of them develop spontaneously. However, the 
pathogenetic criteria for the development of spon-
taneous aneurysms are only partially understood. 
Endogenous factors like elevated arterial blood 
pressure, special anatomical relationships given 
by the Circle of Willis, altered ﬂ ow conditions, and 
exogenous factors like cigarette smoking, heavy 
alcohol consumption and use of anticoagulant or 
contraceptive medications have all been found to 
be associated with the occurrence of cerebral an-
eurysms (Juvela et al. 2001; Longstreth et al. 
1985; Stehbens 1989; Teunissen et al. 1996; Weir 
et al. 1998). The most common causes for the de-
velopment of an aneurysm are hemodynamically 
induced vascular injuries, atherosclerosis, un-
derlying vasculopathy and high ﬂ ow states. More 
uncommon etiologies are trauma, infection, drug 
abuse and neoplasms.

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
169
5.1.2 
Saccular Aneurysms
Saccular aneurysms are berry-like vessel outpouch-
ings mostly arising from arterial bifurcations and 
account for 66%–98% of intracranial aneurysms 
(Yong-Zhong and van Alphen 1990). The vast ma-
jority of aneurysms (85%) are located in the anterior 
and only 15% are located in the posterior circulation 
(Kassell and Torner 1983).
The majority of saccular aneurysms are not con-
sidered to be congenital, but develop during life. 
Cerebral aneurysms are rare in children and almost 
never occur in neonates (Heiskanen 1989). If a 
neonate or young baby suffers from an aneurysmal 
hemorrhage, a connective tissue disease is usually 
the underlying cause. In adults the role of acquired 
changes in the arterial wall is likely because there 
are general risk factors for subarachnoid hemor-
rhage (SAH) and responsible for the development of 
aneurysms like hypertension, smoking and alcohol 
abuse (Teunissen et al. 1996). These factors might 
contribute to general thickening of the intimal layer 
in the arterial wall, distal and proximal to branch-
ing sites. These “intimal pads” are probably the ear-
liest stages of aneurysm formation. Within these 
pads, the intimal layer is inelastic and therefore 
causes increased strain of the more elastic portions 
of the vessel wall (Crompton 1966). Abnormali-
ties in structural proteins of the extracellular ma-
trix additionally contribute to aneurysm formation 
(Chyatte et al. 1990). However, it is not known why 
only some adults develop aneurysms at arterial bi-
furcations and most do not. The popular theory of a 
congenital defect in the tunica media of the muscle 
layer as a weak spot through which the inner layer of 
the arterial wall would bulge has had doubt cast upon 
it by a number of contradicting observations. Gaps 
in the muscle layer are equally present in patients 
with and without aneurysms (Stehbens 1989). If the 
aneurysm has formed, any defect in the muscle layer 
is not located at the neck, but somewhere in the an-
eurysmal wall of the sac (Stehbens 1989).
The most plausible pathogenetic theory is that 
they are acquired due to hemodynamic stress on 
the relatively unsupported bifurcations of cerebral 
arteries (Timperman et al. 1995). This is supported 
by the clinical observation that many patients with 
an anterior communicating artery (Acom) aneu-
rysm do have one hypoplastic or absent Al segment 
and thus an increased hemodynamic stress on the 
AcomA. Other factors than hemodynamics and 
structural alterations of the vessel wall contributing 
to the development of saccular aneurysms may be 
genetic, infection, trauma, neoplasms, radiation or 
idiopathic.
Fig. 5.1. a Aneurysm of the basilar artery in a newborn (ap view). b Aneurysmography revealed a large bilobulated aneu-
rysm (ap view)
a
b

170 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
5.1.3 
Dissecting Aneurysms
Spontaneous arterial dissection has been well rec-
ognized at the cervical portion of the carotid artery 
and extracranial vertebral artery as an important 
cause of ischemic stroke in young adults. In con-
trast, intracranial or intradural dissections more 
often cause subarachnoid hemorrhage instead of 
stroke. The true prevalence of intracranial dissec-
tions is unknown. Sasaki et al. (1991) described 
dissecting aneurysms accounting for 4.5% of the 
autopsy cases of SAH. In contrast to saccular an-
eurysms dissecting aneurysms occur much more 
often in the vertebrobasilar system and more of-
ten in man than in woman (Yamaura et al. 2000). 
Fig. 5.2a–f. Dissection of the right internal carotid artery with extracranial enlarging pseudoa-
neurysm. a Contrast-enhanced MR angiography demonstrating the aneurysm at the extracra-
nial ICA. b Conventional DSA, oblique view. c CT angiography, sagittal reformation reveals the 
small aneurysm neck. d Conventional DSA before and (e, f) after endovascular coil emboliza-
tion demonstrating aneurysm occlusion with preservation of the internal carotid artery
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
171
Dissecting aneurysms of the extracranial carotid 
and vertebral arteries are often traumatic in origin. 
However, they may also be caused by ﬁ bromuscular 
dysplasia, atherosclerosis, infection, arthritis, heri-
table connective tissue disorders and chiropractic 
manoeuvres, or may occur spontaneously. Dissect-
ing aneurysms are usually aneurysms consisting of 
a false lumen within an injured arterial wall. An 
intimal tear is followed by an intramural hemor-
rhage between the media and adventitia (Schievink 
2001). The majority of dissecting aneurysms in su-
praaortal vessels are found at extracranial segments. 
However, if dissections occur intracranially, e.g. at 
the intradural portion of the vertebral or carotid 
artery, these can cause subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
often only revealed in lumbar puncture. Magnetic 
resonance imaging is the diagnostic modality of 
choice, since the intramural hematoma can be di-
rectly visualized. Angiography may reveal luminal 
dilatation followed by tapering of the vessel (string 
sign). If later on, after the dissection, formation of 
an intracranial aneurysm occurred, it often pres-
ents with a devastating subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(Albuquerque et al. 2005).
In contrast to intracranial dissecting aneurysms, 
the major clinical concern of extracranial dissec-
tions are distal embolization or subsequent arterial 
occlusion. Rupture of an extracranial dissecting an-
eurysm is rare (Schievink 2001). The therapeutic 
gold standard is anticoagulation and this usually 
leads to a good outcome. Surgical or endovascular 
therapy is generally reserved for those patients who 
do not respond to medical therapy or those with 
enlarging lesions. The major clinical feature of in-
tracranial arterial dissection is SAH due to rupture 
(58%). Ischemic infarction due to stenosis or occlu-
sion by the intramural hematoma or by remote em-
bolism occurs in around 42% of patients (Yamaura 
et al. 2000). Intracranially, there is some difﬁ culty in 
differentiating dissection from stenotic lesions. Iso-
lated unusual locations of arterial stenosis as well as 
the presence of smooth rather than irregular nar-
rowing should help to differentiate dissection from 
vasospasm due to SAH. The optimal treatment of in-
tracranial dissection has not been determined. Dis-
sections that result in a complete stroke are beyond 
treatment; however, those within a certain time win-
dow might be candidates for recanalization therapy. 
In patients with SAH due to dissecting aneurysms, 
endovascular therapy with stents to remodel the lu-
men will probably be the future type of therapy. In 
contrast to extracranial dissections, the intramural 
hematoma in most intracranial dissections forms 
between the internal elastic lamina and the media 
(Endo et al. 1993). Intracranial dissections may not 
be explained solely by a defect in the media. Rather, 
they originate at intimal alterations due to defects 
of the elastic tissue. The absence of external elastica 
may allow rupture into the subarachnoid space. An-
eurysmal dilatation might occur if the underlying 
media is also abnormal (Endo et al. 1993).
5.1.4 
Fusiform Aneurysms
Fusiform aneurysms are dilated, tortuous and elon-
gated arterial segments. The term dolichoectasia 
describes a giant ectatic vessel of this type of aneu-
rysms. Fusiform aneurysms are characterized by the 
absence of a deﬁ ned neck, circumferential involve-
ment of the parent artery and a longish course. The 
aneurysm can be partially thrombosed.
The spectrum of fusiform aneurysms may arise 
from congenital, acquired, or iatrogenic defects in 
the vessel wall, with or without atherosclerosis, and 
hypertension, or may develop after intimal tear from 
dissection (Anson et al. 1996; Gobin et al. 1996). Fusi-
form aneurysms can occur in any location; however, 
they most frequently occur in the distal vertebral ar-
tery, basilar artery, PI segment of the posterior cere-
bral artery and the supraclinoid internal carotid ar-
tery. Hemorrhage from these aneurysms is unusual, 
although not impossible. Presenting symptoms such 
as cranial neuropathy, brain stem compression and 
cerebral ischemia are mainly due to mass effect 
and distal embolization.  Flemming et al. (2005) 
analysed a cohort of 159 patients (thereof 74% male) 
with vertebrobasilar nonsaccular aneurysms and 
described symptoms in 40% as aneurysm unrelated, 
in 22% due to mass effect and in 28% due to cere-
bral ischemia or transient neurological deﬁ cit. Only 
3% presented with hemorrhage. A distinct subgroup 
of fusiform aneurysms are serpentine aneurysms: 
large and partially thrombosed tortuous aneurysms 
with a central parent channel, eccentrically located 
within the intraluminal clot. This channel is not en-
dothelialized and does not contain elastic lamina or 
media. The clot may become organized or calcined 
over time. The etiology of serpentine aneurysms is 
still totally unclear. They may develop from a degen-
erative form of atherosclerosis, infection, or may be 
congenital (Mawad and Klucznik 1995). They oc-
cur most commonly in the internal carotid artery, 

172 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
the middle cerebral artery and posterior cerebral ar-
tery. Typically, they present with symptoms of mass 
effect. Subarachnoid or intracerebral hemorrhage is 
rare. MRI may reveal different stages of hemoglo-
bin degradation within the thrombosed part of the 
aneurysms. Fusiform aneurysms are usually not 
suitable for endovascular obliteration because they 
do not have a circumscribed neck. In selected cases, 
endovascular parent vessel occlusion with or with-
out surgical bypass may be a therapeutic option, 
particularly if mass effect is the leading symptom. 
The aneurysm may subsequently shrink in size or 
completely resolve (Mawad and Klucznik 1995).
5.1.5 
Infectious Aneurysms
The ﬁ rst infectious intracranial aneurysm was 
probably described by Church in 1869 when he 
established a relationship between an intracranial 
aneurysm and infectious endocarditis. The term “in-
fectious aneurysm” should be preferred; “bacterial” 
or “mycotic” should be used only if bacteria or fungi 
are demonstrated as the causative organisms. The 
frequently used term “mycotic” is misleading in the 
vast majority of patients because bacterial infection 
represents the most common cause for infectious 
Fig. 5.3a–d. Fusiform basilar aneurysm causing massive brain stem compression in a 54-year-old man with hemiparesis 
and dysarthria. Stent deployment (Leo, Balt) and coiling was performed, 3 month later patient was able to walk
a
c
b
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
173
cerebral aneurysms. The pathogenesis of infectious 
aneurysm formation has been well characterized 
in animal models. After septic emboli arise, poly-
morphonuclear leucocytes inﬁ ltrate the vessel wall 
from toward the internal elastic membrane. Most 
of them concentrate within Virchow-Robin spaces. 
Infectious intracranial aneurysms account for 2%–
3% of all intracranial aneurysms. They commonly 
result from embolization of cardiac vegetations in 
endocarditis, with Streptococcus as the most fre-
quent organism, followed by Staphylococcus and 
Enterococcus. Infected tissue debris entering the 
blood stream may embolize in cerebral artery walls 
leading to aneurysmal dilatation. The risk of aneu-
rysm formation due to endocarditis is 5%. While 
there is decreasing overall incidence of infectious 
cerebral aneurysms, the incidence of infectious an-
eurysms increased in drug abusers and immuno-
compromised patients. Pathologically, damage of 
the intimal layer is characteristic in bacterial cere-
bral aneurysms. Subendothelial inﬂ ammation and 
necrosis of the media and internal elastic lamina 
results in weakening of the vessel wall, leading to 
aneurysm formation. Aneurysms associated with 
infective endocarditis are often irregularly shaped, 
fusiform, frequently multiple and peripheral and in 
the majority of patients located at distal branches of 
the middle cerebral artery. The time interval from 
septic embolism to aneurysmal dilatation can be as 
short as 24 h. Another pathomechanism for the de-
Fig. 5.4a–c. Infectious aneurysm of the right 
posterior cerebral artery. T2-weighted image 
(a), FLAIR image (b) with subarachnoid blood 
around the aneurysm and DSA (c)
a
c
b

174 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
velopment of infectious aneurysms are local infec-
tions like meningitis, cavernous sinusitis and orbital 
cellulitis. Aneurysm characteristics and prognosis 
differ obviously in this patient group. Infectious 
aneurysms due to meningitis tend to occur in the 
vertebrobasilar territory and are more prone for fa-
tal SAH even under medical treatment than infec-
tious aneurysms due to endocarditis (Kannoth et 
al. 2007).
True mycotic aneurysms are rare. The under-
lying condition is often a craniofacial infection 
with aspergillus, phycomycetes or Candida endo-
carditis. In contrast to bacterial etiology the time 
course of mycotic aneurysms is longer, sometimes 
taking months to develop. Mycotic aneurysms are 
typically proximal in location (carotid or basilar ar-
tery) and fusiform (Lau et al. 1991). Rupture of such 
aneurysms may lead to massive SAH in the basal 
cisterns, indistinguishable from SAH of saccular 
aneurysms. Aspergillosis is difﬁ cult to diagnose, 
but should be considered particularly in patients 
undergoing long-term treatment with steroids, im-
munosuppressive agents and antibiotics, or in HIV-
infected patients.
The course of infectious aneurysms is unpre-
dictable. Under antibiotic or antimycotic therapy 
they may shrink, or completely disappear. How-
ever, enlargement during treatment has also been 
reported (Brust et al. 1990). Septic aneurysms can 
be obliterated surgically or by endovascular treat-
ment (Chapot et al. 2002; Phuong et al. 2002; 
 Steinberg et al. 1992). The theoretical assumption 
that implantation of foreign material – like plati-
num coils – into an infectious lesion might worsen 
the problem is not true for infectious intracranial 
aneurysms. Mortality due to rupture of bacterial 
cerebral aneurysms is reported to be up to 60% 
(Barrow and Prats 1990; Bohmfalk et al. 1978; 
Clare and Barrow 1992).
There is no scientiﬁ c opinion about screening 
high risk patients for infectious aneurysms, e.g. 
those with a bacterial endocarditis. However, this 
may be a ﬁ eld of collaboration between cardiologists 
and neuroradiologists.
5.1.6 
Traumatic Aneurysms
Traumatic aneurysms result from a direct injury to 
the arterial wall or to acceleration-induced shear. 
Cervical, cerebral or meningeal arteries can be af-
fected. Traumatic aneurysms may develop within 
hours after trauma and the majority are false an-
eurysms. More than 50% of traumatic aneurysms 
are associated with a skull fracture (Holmes and 
Harbaugh 1993). Traumatic aneurysms tend to 
develop on the longitudinal aspect of the injured 
vessel. The majority of intracranial traumatic an-
eurysms are located at the distal middle cerebral 
artery (MCA) or at anterior cerebral artery (ACA) 
branches. Angiography typically demonstrates ir-
regular aneurysms, absence of a true neck, and a pe-
ripheral location (Amirjamshidi et al. 1996). They 
may shrink, thrombose, enlarge or rupture. If there 
is no spontaneous healing, fatal subarachnoid or 
intraparenchymal hemorrhage may occur in up to 
60% with an associated mortality of 50% (Holmes 
and Harbaugh 1993).
5.1.7 
Infl ammatory Aneurysms
Inﬂ ammatory transmural angiitis in systemic lu-
pus erythematosus, polyarteritis nodosa, or gi-
ant cell arteritis causes focal ﬁ brinoid necrosis 
and elastic tissue disruption. Subacute or chronic 
changes usually produce ectasia and may facilitate 
aneurysm formation. Aneurysms in acute arteritis 
tend to be multiple, peripheral and non side-wall in 
 conﬁ guration.
5.1.8 
Neoplastic and Radiation-Induced Aneurysms
Oncotic aneurysms may arise from cerebral emboli-
zation of neoplastic cells with inﬁ ltration of the ves-
sel wall and subsequent aneurysm formation. Thus, 
the underlying pathomechanism is quite similar to 
infectious aneurysms. Subarachnoid or intraparen-
chymal hemorrhage may result. Neoplastic aneu-
rysms have been reported with cardiac myxoma, 
choriocarcinoma, bronchogenic and undifferenti-
ated carcinomas. Treatment consists of resection of 
the involved segment, if possible, and evacuation of 
the symptomatic lesion (Weir et al. 1978) Formation 
of fusiform aneurysms following radiation and ra-
dioactive intrathecal gold therapy has been reported 
after treatment of germinoma and medulloblastoma. 
These aneurysms are located in the midline of the 
parasellar region, and tend to enlarge and rupture 
(Benson and Sung 1989).

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
175
5.1.9 
Aneurysms Associated with 
Arteriovenous Malformations
There is an increased incidence, or better, an in-
creased amount of visible aneurysms associated 
with arteriovenous malformations. The incidence of 
these aneurysms in AVMs is up to 25% (Brown RD 
et al. 1990; Stapf et al. 2002). Approximately 50% of 
these aneurysms are located on a feeding artery, 25% 
within the nidus. Stapf and colleagues analysed their 
extensive AVM database and ﬁ gured out that feed-
ing artery aneurysms are an important independent 
determinant for an increased risk of hemorrhage 
in AVM. Flow-related aneurysms probably develop 
due to hemodynamic stress caused by increased ﬂ ow 
and pressure, with subsequent dilatation and patho-
logic changes in feeding arteries. AVM-associated 
aneurysms contribute to an increased risk of hemor-
rhage. A 7% risk of hemorrhage for these combined 
lesions is estimated compared to a 1.7%–3% risk 
for AVMs without associated aneurysms (Turjman 
et al. 1994). In case of rupture the hemorrhage is 
more often located intraparenchymally than sub-
arachnoidally (Brown RD et al. 1990).
Management of these combined lesions is still dis-
cussed controversially. However, these aneurysms 
should be treated – preferentially by the endovascu-
lar route – in order to eliminate bleeding risk due 
to the aneurysm. In fact, elimination of the AVM 
with subsequent change in hemodynamics might 
place the aneurysm at risk. In accordance with our 
opinion, other authors also advocate to treat the an-
eurysm before eliminating the AVM (Nakahara et 
al. 1999; Thompson et al. 1998). On the other hand, 
proximal asymptomatic aneurysms may regress af-
ter removal of the AVM. If this is not the case, an 
interval of 3 months after AVM treatment might be 
justiﬁ ed before considering a further therapy for a 
proximal aneurysm. However, aneurysms located 
in the posterior circulation associated with an AVM 
are at higher risk of rupture and therefore should 
be treated as soon as possible even if they had not 
ruptured before.
5.1.10 
Distribution
Most arterial aneurysms arise at the bifurcation of 
major arteries, and this is also true for the intracra-
nial location. Around 85% of all intracranial aneu-
rysms originate from the anterior circulation. The 
most common location (30%–35%) is the anterior 
communicating artery (Acom). However, many of 
these so-called Acom aneurysms do have their ori-
gin at the A1/A2 junction of the anterior cerebral ar-
tery and do not involve the anterior communicating 
artery. Internal carotid and posterior communicat-
ing artery aneurysms account for 30% and middle 
cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation aneurysms for 
20%. Around 15% of intracranial aneurysms arise 
at the vertebrobasilar circulation. Half of them de-
velop at the basilar tip (with various degrees of in-
volvement of the PI segments) and the other 50% 
from other posterior fossa vessels. Aneurysms of the 
anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) and ver-
tebral artery (VA) aneurysms without involvement 
of the VA-PICA junction or the vertebrobasilar site 
are extremely rare.
5.1.11 
Familial Occurrence
The prevalence of intracranial aneurysms among 
ﬁ rst-degree relatives of patients with cerebral an-
eurysms is higher than in the general population. 
The risk for a ﬁ rst-degree relative harbouring 
an aneurysm is about three to four times higher 
than for someone from the general population 
( Raaymakers 1999, 2000; Ronkainen et al. 1997). 
Fig. 5.5. Distal small aneurysm of the anterior inferior cer-
ebellar artery (AICA) associated with a high-ﬂ ow arterious-
venous malformation

176 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
In other words, the incidence of intracranial aneu-
rysms is between 8% and 9% in persons with two or 
more relatives who have had an aneurysm or a SAH 
( Raaymakers et al. 1998b; Ronkainen et al. 1997). 
This was conﬁ rmed by Okamoto et al. (2003). They 
found that the SAH risk was elevated when: (1) any 
ﬁ rst degree relative had a positive episode of SAH, 
(2) a mother or father had a relative with a positive 
episode of SAH (an effect much greater in magnitude 
in a positive maternal rather than paternal history), 
(3) any ﬁ rst-degree relative less than 50 years of age 
had had a SAH. Kojima et al. (1998) conﬁ rmed that 
asymptomatic aneurysms were more likely to rup-
ture among family members with aneurysmal SAH 
than among those without. Familial aneurysms are 
generally larger at time of rupture and more likely 
to be multiple than sporadic aneurysms (Ruigrok 
et al. 2004). According to the group around Leblanc 
(Leblanc 1996; Lozano and Leblanc 1987) cere-
bral aneurysms in patients with a positive family 
history might result from a mesenchymal defect af-
fecting the cerebral vessel wall produced by a lesion 
of chromosome 16. Okamoto et al. (2003) found an 
urgent need for early prevention of SAH by screen-
ing individuals with any positive family history of 
SAH of a ﬁ rst-degree relative.
Various hereditary connective tissue disorders 
have been associated with formation of aneurysms, 
most likely as a result of the weakening of the ves-
sel wall. Intracranial aneurysms may develop in 
10%–15% of patients with polycystic kidney dis-
ease, an autosomal dominant disorder. Although 
Marfan syndrome was previously identiﬁ ed as a 
risk factor for aneurysms, a recent study did not 
ﬁ nd any signiﬁ cant relationship (Conway et al. 
1999). Coarctation of the aorta, ﬁ bromuscular dys-
plasia and pheochromocytoma are associated with 
intracranial aneurysms, most likely because of the 
elevated blood pressure that occurs in these condi-
tions.
Fig. 5.6a–d. Various locations of an-
eurysms. a Vertebrobasilar junction 
aneurysm. b True PICA aneurysm. 
c Basilar trunk aneurysm. d Basilar 
trunk aneurysm between origin of su-
perior cerebellar artery and posterior 
cerebral artery, so-called superior cer-
ebellar artery aneurysm
ZZ
b
a
c
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
177
There are some presumptions on neuroﬁ broma-
tosis type 1 (NFl) and intracranial aneurysms. In a 
recent study, Conway et al. (2001) concluded from 
their own data and an extensive analysis of the lit-
erature that an association between NFl and intra-
cranial aneurysms has never been identiﬁ ed in large 
clinical studies of NFl patients and that there is no 
evidence for any association between NFl and intra-
cranial aneurysms.
 5.2 
Clinical Presentation
Most intracranial aneurysms remain undetected 
until the time of rupture. SAH, a medical emer-
gency, is by far the most common initial clinical 
presentation. A history of abrupt onset of a severe 
headache of atypical quality (“the worst headache in 
my life”) is typical of SAH. Headache onset may or 
Fig. 5.6e–l. Various locations of an-
eurysms (continued). e Small basilar 
trunk aneurysm and aneurysm at the 
P1 segment. f Basilar tip aneurysm. 
g Acom aneurysm. h ICA aneurysm 
at the origin of the Pcom artery, so-
called Pcom aneurysm. i Aneurysm at 
the bifurcation of the pericallosal and 
callosomarginal artery, so-called peri-
callosal aneurysm. j MCA bifurcation 
aneurysm. k ICA aneurysm at the ori-
gin of the ophthalmic artery, so-called 
paraophthalmic aneurysm. l Distal ca-
rotid bifurcation aneurysm
e
f
h
g
i
k
j
l

178 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
may not be associated with brief loss of conscious-
ness, nausea and vomiting, focal neurologic deﬁ cits 
or meningism. Despite the characteristic history, 
SAH is frequently misdiagnosed. Nearly half of the 
patients present with milder symptoms caused by 
a warning leak before severe rupture of the aneu-
rysm (Ostergaard 1991). Another problem – from 
a clinical point of view – is the so-called thunderclap 
headache which is caused by a SAH in only 10%–
20%. Other ﬁ ndings in these patients are: cerebral 
infarction, meningitis, intracerebral hemorrhage, 
cerebral edema or even nothing. From a purely clini-
cal standpoint it can sometimes be difﬁ cult to decide 
whether a thunderclap headache was related to the 
SAH/warning leak complex or not. There is no clear 
evidence what to do in a situation like this; our rec-
ommendation is to perform a CSF examination and 
a MRI plus MRA. Landtblom et al. (2002) ﬁ gured 
out that it is clearly not justiﬁ ed to do an invasive 
angiogram in these patients.
5.2.1 
Epidemiology
Although the pathogenesis and etiology of cerebral 
aneurysms has been studied extensively, both are 
still poorly understood. Endogenous factors like el-
evated blood pressure, the special anatomy of the 
Circle of Willis or the effect of hemodynamic factors, 
particularly originating at vessel bifurcations, are 
all known to be involved in the growth and rupture 
of an aneurysm. Arteriosclerosis and inﬂ ammatory 
reactions, however, might also have an impact. Ex-
ogenous factors like cigarette smoking, heavy alco-
hol consumption or certain medications are thought 
to be risk factors in the pathogenesis of an aneurysm 
or at least increase the risk of rupture. Furthermore, 
a genetic component is discussed. First degree rela-
tives of patients with an aneurysmal SAH have a sig-
niﬁ cant higher risk to harbour a cerebral aneurysm 
compared with the normal population.
5.2.2 
Incidence and Risk of Rupture
Intracranial aneurysms are common. Autopsy stud-
ies have shown that the overall frequency in the gen-
eral population ranges from 0.4% to 10% (Chason 
and Hindman 1958; Housepian and Pool 1958; In-
agawa and Hirano 1990; McCormick and Acosta-
Rua 1970). Aneurysms increase in frequency with 
age beyond the third decade, are approximately 1.6 
times more common in women and are associated 
with a number of genetic conditions (Wardlaw and 
White 2000). Elevated arterial blood pressure (hy-
pertension) and endovascular ﬂ ow conditions seem 
to be important for the development, growth and 
rupture risk of cerebral aneurysms. There is also a 
strong correlation between the presence of multiple 
aneurysms and hypertension: Patients with multiple 
aneurysms present signiﬁ cantly more often with hy-
pertension than patients with solitary aneurysms 
or the normal population. Other risk factors not 
only for the development but also for rupture of 
aneurysms are smoking, heavy alcohol consump-
tion (> 150 mg/week), and arteriosclerosis (for more 
details see Sect. 5.1.11). Rinkel et al. (1998) analysed 
23 studies with 56,304 patients published between 
1955 and 1996 and found a prevalence of 2.3% for 
intracranial aneurysms in adults without a risk fac-
tor for SAH and an overall annual risk of rupture 
of 1.9%. They included retrospective and prospec-
tive autopsy and angiographic studies and found 
a higher incidence in the prospective arm of their 
analysis.
It might be reasonable to assume that the average 
prevalence is around 2%. Based on this number, in 
Fig. 5.7. Seven years after clipping an Pcom aneurysm on 
the right side a de novo aneurysm at the distal carotid bi-
furcation was found on the left side, primarily seen on MRI 
performed because of headache

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
179
the German population approximately 1.5–2 mil-
lion people are assumed to harbour an intracranial 
aneurysm. The same group around Rinkel released 
an update including 14 new series published since 
1996 until 2005 with a mean follow-up of 5.6 years 
(26,122 patient-years). Those patients who had a sig-
niﬁ cantly increased association with an increased 
risk of rupture were older than 60 years, female, and 
of Japanese or Finnish descent. Smoking turned out 
to be a risk factor, but it was not statistically signiﬁ -
cant.
Aneurysm characteristics related to an increased 
risk of ruptured were located in the posterior loca-
tion, size > 5 mm and symptoms caused by the an-
eurysm other than SAH. The risk of rupture was in 
close relationship to the follow-up period, and was 
1.2% for follow-up in the ﬁ rst 5 years, 0.6% for fol-
low-up between 5 and 10 years, and 1.3% for a follow-
up after more than 10 years (Wermer et al. 2007).
The fact that there is a higher risk of rupture for 
the Japanese population is conﬁ rmed by a systematic 
review by Morita et al. (2005) (3801 patient years) 
with an annual rupture rate of 2.7%. In this series, 
again aneurysms in the posterior circulation, with 
large size and aneurysms associated with symp-
toms, had a signiﬁ cantly higher risk for rupture. 
Weir et al. (2003) performed an interesting study 
on geometry characteristics of aneurysms related 
Fig. 5.8a–c. Basilar trunk aneurysm in a newborn 
after bleeding (a) (FLAIR) resulting in acute hy-
drocephalus, before (b) and after (c) endovascular 
treatment with selective occlusion of the aneu-
rysm. The baby‘s outcome was excellent with no 
neurologic deﬁ cits
a
c
b

180 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
to rupture risk and concluded that the aspect ratio 
should be considered since aneurysms with a small 
neck have a higher risk to rupture than aneurysms 
with a wide neck.
The incidence of SAH in the Western hemisphere 
is around 6–10 per 100,000 people per year, peak-
ing in the sixth decade with risk for SAH increas-
ing linearly with age. The incidence of SAH in some 
other countries like Finland or Japan is known to be 
higher – about 15/100,000 per year – although the 
prevalence of intracranial aneurysms in Finland is 
similar to other countries; comparable Japanese data 
regarding prevalence of intracranial aneurysms are 
lacking. SAH accounts for a quarter of cerebrovas-
cular deaths.
The high morbidity and mortality in patients 
with ruptured aneurysms prompted interest in re-
pair of aneurysms that are diagnosed before they 
have ruptured. Following publication of the initial 
results of the International Study of Unruptured 
Intracranial Aneurysms (ISUIA 1998), enthusiasm 
for this strategy was markedly reduced. In this 
study patients were classiﬁ ed in those with no his-
tory and those with history of SAH. The risk posed 
by unruptured aneurysms was reported lower than 
had been previously expected and also morbidity 
and mortality to treat aneurysms were higher than 
had previously been reported. The updated results 
of the same group analysed 6544 patients years of 
prospective follow up of untreated aneurysms, 1692 
had no treatment, 1917 had surgical repair and 451 
had their unruptured aneurysm coiled. The cut off 
size of an aneurysm in the anterior circulation (not 
including Pcom aneurysms) with a 5 year cumula-
tive rupture risk of 0% was lowered down to 7 mm 
(ISUIA 2003). But the current data do not support 
decision making to treat or not to treat on aneurysm 
size alone but should include evaluation of all poten-
tial risk factors!
5.2.3 
Natural History of Ruptured Aneurysms and 
Patient Outcome
The peak incidence of rebleeding after the initial 
rupture is during the ﬁ rst day. Early rebleeding 
within hours after the onset of initial hemorrhage 
occurs in about 15% of patients (Fujii et al. 1996). 
As many as 20% of patients may rebleed within the 
ﬁ rst 2 weeks, one third in the ﬁ rst month, and 50% 
will rebleed within 6 months, if the aneurysm is not 
treated. Mortality of recurrent SAH is up to 50% 
(Weaver and Fisher 1994). In patients surviving 
the ﬁ rst day, the risk of rebleeding is evenly dis-
tributed over the next 4 weeks with a second peak 
early in the third week (Hijdra et al. 1987). Be-
tween 4 weeks and 6 months after SAH, the risk of 
rebleeding gradually decreases from initially 1%–
2% per day to a constant level of approximately 3% 
a year (Winn et al. 1977). Of patients who survive 
the hemorrhage, approximately one third remain 
dependent. However, even recovery to an indepen-
dent state does not necessarily mean that outcome 
Fig. 5.9a,b. Typical perimes-
encephalic hemorrhage on 
CT scan
a
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
181
is good. Various series have shown that the sequelae 
of SAH have a great impact on neuropsychologi-
cal performance and cognition independent of the 
treatment modality (Bendel et al. 2006; Haug et 
al. 2007; Powell et al. 2004; Egge et al. 2005). Only 
a small minority of patients with SAH has a truly 
good outcome; around 20% of them do not have a 
reduction of quality of life.
5.2.4 
Pathophysiology of Aneurysm Rupture
There may be a small number of SAH presenting as 
“warning leak” or sentinel hemorrhage, usually only 
associated with a sudden severe headache (Hughes 
1992). In general, there is a correlation between the 
extent of SAH and the clinical grade, incidence of va-
sospasm, and other complications such as cerebral 
ischemia, increased intracranial pressure, and hy-
drocephalus. With increased severity of SAH there 
are increasing changes in physiologic parameters 
such as reduced cerebral blood ﬂ ow (due to reduced 
cerebral autoregulation), hypovolemia, hyponatre-
mia, hypermetabolism and cardiac arrhythmia. If 
intracerebral pressure is increased up to diastolic 
blood pressure cerebral blood ﬂ ow persists during 
systole (Nornes 1973). Stopping of a SAH is caused 
by a combination of tamponade due to reduced 
transmural pressure gradient across the arterial 
wall and coagulation.
5.2.5 
Other Causes of SAH
5.2.5.1 
Perimesencephalic Non-aneurysmal Hemorrhage
Perimesencephalic hemorrhage constitutes ap-
proximately 10% of all SAH. Mean age at onset is 
50 years with a preponderance in males. The sub-
arachnoid blood is conﬁ ned to the perimesence-
phalic cisterns. The centre of the bleeding is an-
terior to the midbrain (Schwartz and Solomon 
1996). Usually there is no subarachnoid blood in 
the sylvian ﬁ ssure or the anterior interhemispheric 
ﬁ ssure. There might be some sedimented blood in 
the occipital horns of the lateral ventricles, but mas-
sive intraventricular hemorrhage or intracerebral 
hemorrhage is not a feature of this benign perimes-
encephalic hemorrhage. Conventional angiography 
is the next step to rule out an aneurysm, although 
this is hardly found. In the presence of the typical 
CT pattern the yield of repeated angiography is low, 
and some investigators have abandoned it. Some 
of them even consider CT angiography sufﬁ cient 
to rule out an aneurysm. From a clinical percep-
tion, perimesencephalic non-aneurysmal hemor-
rhage is barely distinguishable from aneurysmal 
hemorrhage. The onset of headache is often more 
gradual than in true aneurysmal hemorrhage (Linn 
et al. 1998), but this is a poor diagnostic hint. Focal 
symptoms or loss of consciousness are exceptional 
Fig. 5.10a,b. Frontal dural AV-ﬁ stula with cortical drainage 
and left frontal intraparenchymal hemorrhage
a
b

182 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
and do occur only transient. Usually, these patients 
are clinically Hunt and Hess grade I. Seizures were 
never reported in perimesencephalic hemorrhage. 
Apart from their headache the patients are in a very 
good clinical condition. The clinical course is typi-
cally uneventful. Rebleeding, acute hydrocephalus, 
or secondary cerebral ischemia due to vasospasm 
do not typically occur in this entity. Rebleeds after 
the hospital period have not been reported and the 
quality of life in the long-term is excellent. The time 
of convalescence is usually short and the outcome 
is good or excellent with almost all patients (94%) 
able to return to their previous work and activities 
(Brilstra et al. 1997). In summary, this is really a 
benign variant of SAH, but clearly requires a diag-
nostic work-up like a typical SAH in order not to 
overlook the rare aneurysmal-caused perimesence-
phalic SAH and other causes.
5.2.5.2 
Dural Arteriovenous Fistulae
Hemorrhage from a basal dural arteriovenous ﬁ stu-
lae might be not distinguishable from aneurysmal 
SAH. The risk of hemorrhage in dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stulae depends on the pattern of venous drainage 
(Cognard et al. 1995). A cortical venous drainage is 
associated with a relatively high risk of hemorrhage, 
drainage into the main sinus is associated with a 
very low risk of bleeding. After a ﬁ rst rupture has 
occurred, the risk of rebleeding is very high.
5.2.5.3 
Cervical AVMs
Intracranial SAH is the presenting symptom of a 
spinal AVM in about 10% of patients. In more than 
50% of these patients, the ﬁ rst hemorrhage occurs 
before the age of 20 (Kandel 1980). Clinically, a 
severe pain in the lower part of the neck radiating 
to the shoulders and arms may indicate the cervical 
source of bleeding. MRI should be the ﬁ rst imaging 
modality to localize the source of bleeding, followed 
by selective spinal angiography. However, it is difﬁ -
cult to establish the spinal source of hemorrhage. In 
many patients CT reveals an intracranial SAH and 
the four-vessel angiogram is negative. In an ideal 
setting cervical vessels are additionally injected, but 
it is clearly not routine to do a spinal angiogram in 
this subgroup of patients. However, in all SAH pa-
tients with a negative angiogram a spinal MR should 
be performed to rule out a vascular malformation 
(Fig 5.12) which can of course occur at any location 
of the spinal cord (Lavoie et al. 2007).
5.2.5.4 
Saccular Aneurysms of Spinal Arteries
Saccular aneurysms of spinal arteries are rare. The 
clinical features of spinal SAH are usually associ-
ated with those of a transverse spinal cord lesion but 
may mimic SAH due to an intracranial aneurysm 
(Mohsenipour et al. 1994, Kocak et al. 2006).
Fig. 5.11a,b. Infratentorial dural AV-ﬁ stula and subarach-
noid hemorrhage
a
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
183
5.2.5.5 
Cardiac Myxoma
Cardiac myxoma may be a very rare cause of SAH. 
In exceptional cases it may metastasize into an in-
tracranial artery, inﬁ ltrate the vessel wall and ini-
tiate aneurysm formation, even more than 1 year 
after excision of the primary tumour (Furuya et 
al. 1995).
5.2.5.6 
Sickle Cell Disease
SAH in sickle cell anemia is characterized by multi-
ple hemorrhages, often distally and in unusual loca-
tions. CT scan demonstrates blood in the superﬁ cial 
cortical sulci. Angiography reveals multiple distal 
branch occlusions and a collateral circulation via 
leptomeningeal vessels. SAH is attributed to rupture 
of these leptomeningeal collaterals, the outcome is 
usually poor (Carey et al. 1990). Approximately 
30% of patients with sickle cell disease and SAH 
are children. Some patients with sickle cell disease 
harbour intracranial aneurysms which maybe an-
other cause for SAH (Vicari et al. 2004).
5.2.5.7 
Cocaine Abuse
SAH related to the abuse of cocaine is associated 
with an underlying aneurysm in 70% of patients 
using hydrochloride (“crack”) vs 30%–40% of 
patients using the alkaloid form (Levine et al. 
1990, 1991). The pattern of SAH on CT may be the 
same as that of a ruptured saccular aneurysm. 
Rebleeding frequently occurs and the outcome is 
often poor. Cocaine use is associated with a 2.8-
fold higher risk for development of vasospasm 
and with a 3.3-fold greater risk for poor outcome 
and this ﬁ nding is independent of Hunt and Hess 
grade and incidence of vasospasm (Howington 
et al. 2003). The vasoactive properties of the drug 
appear to aggravate the already tenuous situation 
of SAH and increase both the occurrence and in-
ﬂ uence of vasospasm. The association between 
cocaine use and the formation and rupture of an-
eurysms is thought to be due to increased turbu-
lence of blood ﬂ ow and repeated, transient bouts 
of hypertension. Among cocaine users, aneurysms 
have been found in signiﬁ cantly younger patients 
and in vessels with a smaller diameter (Nanda 
et al. 2000).
5.2.5.8 
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulant drugs are rarely the sole cause of 
SAH (Mattle et al. 1989). If SAH occurs in a pa-
tient under anticoagulation therapy the outcome 
is poor.
5.2.5.9 
Sinus-Venous Thrombosis
It is well known that sino-venous thrombosis can 
cause atypical intracerebral hemorrhage (Pradhan 
et al. 2007; Wang et al. 2007; Spitzer et al. 2005; 
Oppenheim et al. 2005). Under rare circumstances, 
however, thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus 
can cause pure subarachnoid hemorrhage without 
intraaxial bleeding. Mostly, SAH is then located at 
the Sylvian ﬁ ssure, probably due to dilated Sylvian 
veins, and in the parietal sulci.
5.2.6 
Complications of SAH
Hydrocephalus, rebleeding from aneurysmal rerup-
ture and cerebral vasospasm with ischemia are the 
three major complications following SAH.
5.2.6.1 
Hydrocephalus
Acute hydrocephalus within the ﬁ rst 24 h of hem-
orrhage may develop due to blood within the basal 
cisterns or in the ventricular system causing ob-
struction of CSF ﬂ ow. Clinically, slow pupillary 
responses to light and deviation of the eyes are 
characteristic for acute hydrocephalus. If con-
ﬁ rmed by CT, early ventricular drainage is indi-
cated and can dramatically improve the clinical 
status of the patient. Nowak et al. (1994) reported 
the use of a ventricular drainage as an early test to 
evaluate neurologic viability. They chose surgical 
candidates in whom neurologic improvement oc-
curred after CSF drainage. Thereby, ventriculos-
tomy might not only serve as a therapeutic device 
but also as an indicator which severe-grade patients 
should be treated more aggressively (Arnold et al. 
1994; Nowak et al. 1994). However, caution dur-
ing placement of a ventricular drain is important, 
since sudden drainage may precede aneurysm re-
rupture, mainly because the transmural pressure 

184 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
along the aneurysm wall may exceed the intraven-
tricular pressure. Large amounts of intraventricu-
lar blood are often associated with a poor clinical 
condition. Hydrocephalus may also develop over 
days or weeks following SAH, clinically often pre-
senting with gait disturbance, impaired intellectual 
function, and progressive lethargy. In these cases, 
ventriculoperitoneal or ventriculo-atrial shunting 
is commonly indicated.
The possibility to eliminate major parts of the 
subarachnoid blood by intraoperative lavage and 
thereby decreasing the incidence of vasospasm and 
hydrocephalus is widely considered as an advantage 
of the neurosurgical approach compared to the en-
dovascular route. However, in a retrospective study 
comparing 100 matched patients who had suffered 
SAH, the therapeutic procedure, either clipping or 
coil embolization, did not signiﬁ cantly affect the 
development of chronic hydrocephalus (Sethi et al. 
2000). If the initial CT already reveals early signs 
of hydrocephalus, the ventricular drainage should 
be placed before endovascular treatment starts. 
This concept avoids a neurosurgical approach af-
ter having the patient on heparin and/or aspirin 
(which in many institutions is the case during or 
after coiling). In addition, a ventricular drainage is 
extremely helpful and can be life-saving in the rare 
event of aneurysm rupture during the endovascular 
 procedure.
5.2.6.2 
Rebleeding
Rebleeding is a frequent and sometimes devastating 
neurologic complication of SAH and is postulated to 
be due to breakdown of perianeurysmal clot. Early 
rebleeding in the ﬁ rst hours after admission for the 
initial hemorrhage with clinical deterioration oc-
curs in up to 18% of patients (Fujii et al. 1996). Since 
these early rebleedings commonly occur before the 
ﬁ rst CT scan is obtained, the true frequency of early 
rebleeding is deﬁ nitely underestimated. As many as 
20% of patients may rebleed within the ﬁ rst 2 weeks, 
one third in the ﬁ rst month, and 50% will rebleed 
within 6 months, if the aneurysm is not treated. The 
peak incidence of rebleeding is during the ﬁ rst day. 
There is a secondary peak 1 week after SAH. Mortal-
ity of recurrent SAH is 50% (Weaver and Fisher 
1994). Between 4 weeks and 6 months after SAH, the 
risk of rebleeding gradually decreases from initially 
1%–2% a day to a constant level of approximately 3% 
a year (Winn et al. 1977).
The Cooperative Aneurysm Study reported that 
women have a 2.2 times higher recurrence rate of 
hemorrhage than men. Recurrent hemorrhage was 
also more frequently associated with a poorer neu-
rologic grade at presentation and increased systolic 
blood pressure (Torner et al. 1981). Clinically, re-
current hemorrhage may present with new neuro-
Fig. 5.12a,b. A 9-year-old boy with acute headache and initially misdiagnosed as meningitis. Lumbar puncture revealed 
SAH due to a ruptured cervical AVM
a
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
185
logic deﬁ cits, increasing headache, vomiting and a 
decreased level of consciousness. Seizures might 
occur as a result, but not as the cause of bleeding. 
Clot formation and tissue damage stimulate ﬁ bri-
nolytic activity in the CSF, increasing the potential 
risk of rebleeding. This observation justiﬁ ed the ra-
tionale for the use of antiﬁ brinolytic drugs such as 
aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid to prevent 
rebleeding. A randomized placebo-controlled trial, 
a non-randomized trial and other reports assess-
ing the efﬁ cacy of antiﬁ brinolytic therapy showed 
a signiﬁ cantly decreased incidence of rebleeding. 
However, mortality was not altered, but this thera-
peutic approach was associated with an increased 
risk of delayed cerebral ischemia, embolism, and 
deep venous thrombosis (Vermeulen et al. 1984; 
Roos et al. 2000). The ISAT study revealed aneu-
rysmal rebleeding before treatment in 23 neuro-
surgical patients – 16 of them died – and in only 
14 patients randomized for coiling. The reason for 
this signiﬁ cant difference was probably that the de-
lay between initial bleeding and surgery is longer 
than the interval between the bleeding and coil-
ing ( Molyneux et al. 2002). Again, this indicates 
strongly that early rebleeding is a signiﬁ cant prog-
nostic factor and any therapeutic delay might turn 
into a problem for the patient. However, we are not 
voting for immediate angiography and subsequent 
endovascular therapy for all SAH patients. Usually, 
we provide this service during the day until 10.00 p.
m. Patients admitted later get their diagnostic an-
giogram and endovascular therapy early in the 
next morning.
5.2.6.3 
Hematoma
Intracerebral hematoma (ICH) occurs in up to 30% 
of patients with aneurysmal rupture (van Gijn 
and van Dongen 1982). The outcome is clearly 
worse than with SAH alone. If a space occupying 
life threatening hematoma is present, immediate 
evacuation of the hematoma is mandatory, eventu-
ally in combination with clipping of the aneurysm, 
if it can be identiﬁ ed. In this setting, CT angiog-
raphy might serve as valuable and fast imaging 
modality to disclose the aneurysm prior to surgi-
cal intervention. Immediate surgical evacuation is 
also indicated in acute subdural hematoma (SDH), 
which is usually associated with recurrent aneu-
rysmal rupture. However, SDH can also occur with 
the initial SAH or can be the only extravascular 
space involved after aneurysmal rupture. There is 
an ongoing debate about endovascular therapy in 
patients with ICH due to aneurysm rupture. If the 
hematoma is acute life threatening, it is no question 
that surgical evacuation needs to be done as soon as 
possible. However, it is a well known clinical experi-
ence that during hematoma evacuation – due to the 
decrease of tissue pressure – the risk of aneurysm 
rerupture increases. Having this in mind it might be 
advantageous to coil the aneurysm ﬁ rst – in order 
to prevent rebleeding – before surgical evacuation 
of the hematoma in those patients with a stable 
clinical condition.
5.2.6.4 
Vasospasm
Vasospasm is a major cause of morbidity and mor-
tality in patients after SAH and is often associated 
with delayed cerebral ischemia. However, many 
patients are asymptomatic despite various degrees 
of angiographically visible vasospasms. Although 
vasospasm is noted angiographically in 70% after 
SAH, it becomes symptomatic only in about half of 
those patients (Biller et al. 1988). This difference 
probably reﬂ ects the different collateral circula-
tion and different degrees of vasospasm. Unlike 
rebleeding, the clinical presentation of vasospasm 
develops slowly over hours up to days. Delayed 
cerebral ischemia occurs usually ﬁ rst on the third 
day after hemorrhage, peaks between day 4 and 
12, and may persist as long as 3 weeks after SAH 
(Biller et al. 1988). Vasospasm is best detected 
on angiograms. However, transcranial Doppler ul-
trasound is the method of choice to monitor blood 
ﬂ ow velocities in patients after SAH. The role of 
CTA and MRA has not been determined in this 
subgroup of patients. A couple of studies revealed 
that CT perfusion is feasible in detecting vaso-
spasm and might even predict outcome. However, 
all these series are based on small patient groups 
(Kanazawa et al. 2007; Laslo et al. 2006, 2007; 
Harrigan et al. 2005; Sviri et al. 2006). In order 
to assess vasospasms – speciﬁ cally important in 
intubated patients – serial CT examinations have 
to be done and it remains questionable at what 
time intervals these should be performed. MRI 
as another tool to evaluate cerebral vasospasms 
seems applicable as well (Hertel et al. 2005; 
 Rordorf et al. 1999) but has even more logistic 
problems and again patient numbers in these se-
ries are very small.

186 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
5.2.6.5 
Cerebral Ischemia and Infarction
In some patients, aneurysmal rupture leads to a pro-
longed period of global cerebral ischemia at the time 
of hemorrhage, probably as a result of increased in-
tracranial pressure to a level above that in arterial 
vessels (Grote and Hassler 1988). Clinically, these 
patients present with progressive dysfunction of the 
brainstem. Outcome is generally fatal. CT might re-
veal no other abnormality than subarachnoid blood. 
This entity is quite distinct from delayed cerebral 
ischemia, which is focal or multifocal. A major factor 
for this condition of global cerebral ischemia is vaso-
spasm that in some patients occur immediately after 
aneurysmal rupture. From our experience aneurysm 
rupture during endovascular therapy has more or less 
no consequence in those patients without immediate 
severe vasospasm. Morbidity and mortality of acute 
aneurysm rupture is probably most strongly associ-
ated with the amount and the length of acute vaso-
spasms. Delayed cerebral ischemia usually occurs in 
the ﬁ rst or second week after SAH in up to one third 
of patients. Despite intensive research, the patho-
genesis has not been entirely elucidated. Release of 
yet unidentiﬁ ed factors into the subarachnoid space 
are considered to induce vasospasm and subsequent 
cerebral ischemia. There is widespread postulation 
of a close relationship between the amount of sub-
arachnoid blood clots and the degree of vasospasm 
and delayed cerebral ischemia (Fisher et al. 1980). 
However, there are several arguments against these 
assumptions. Subarachnoid blood is not a predictor 
of vasospasm per se, since vasospasm and delayed 
cerebral ischemia rarely occur in patients with SAH 
after rupture of an AVM or perimesencephalic SAH. 
Furthermore, the site of delayed cerebral ischemia 
does not always correspond with the distribution 
of subarachnoid blood (Hop et al. 1999). The fact 
that many patients with angiographically visible va-
sospasms never develop cerebral ischemia suggests 
additional factors determining whether and where 
secondary cerebral ischemia occurs. There is ad-
ditional evidence that it is not simply the amount 
of blood that determines the severity of vasospasm. 
Since there is no way to remove subarachnoidal clot 
during coiling one would expect a lower incidence of 
vasospasm after clipping. But this effect has not been 
observed (de Oliveira et al. 2007; Hoh et al. 2004). 
So far, there are slight tendencies towards a lower fre-
quency of vasospasm after coiling (Yalamanchili 
et al. 1998; Hohlrieder et al. 2002).
5.2.7 
Unruptured Aneurysms
Asymptomatic aneurysms may be deﬁ ned as ad-
ditional aneurysms found in patients with another 
symptomatic aneurysm, which are not responsi-
ble for the clinical symptoms or those aneurysms 
found in patients investigated because they are at 
risk of harbouring an aneurysm. Incidental aneu-
rysms may be deﬁ ned as those found unexpectedly 
in patients undergoing investigation for any other 
suspected pathology or unrelated clinical symp-
toms. Depending on the location of an unruptured 
aneurysm it can be completely asymptomatic. On 
the other hand, unruptured aneurysms can cause 
neurologic symptoms while touching or transmit-
ting pulsation to cranial nerves or other cerebral 
structures. Symptoms can be pain, cranial nerve 
palsies, visual disturbances, dysesthesia, vertigo 
and seizures. In case of thromboembolism, mainly 
out of large or giant aneurysms, but also occurring 
in small aneurysms in any location, symptoms due 
to transient ischemia or permanent infarction do 
appear. Ischemic events can occur distal to both 
small and large unruptured intracranial aneurysms 
(predominantly in the anterior circulation). In a 
series of 269 patients harbouring unruptured an-
eurysms ischemic strokes or transient ischemic at-
Fig. 5.13. CT reveals massive basal subarachnoid 
hemorrhage and dilated temporal horns of the lat-
eral ventricles

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
187
Fig. 5.14. Right temporal lobe intracerebral hem-
orrhage due to a ruptured MCA aneurysm. Beside 
basal subarachnoid hemorrhage CT reveals brain 
edema, compression of the basal cisterns and the 
cerebral peduncle
Fig. 5.15a–c. Different grades of vasospasm after SAH. a Moderate vasospasm 
of the basilar artery and severe vasospasm of both P1 segments of the posterior 
cerebral artery. b, c Severe vasospasm of the intradural ICA (sagittal view) and 
proximal MCA and ACA (ap view)
b
a
c
tacks (TIAs) attributable to embolization from the 
aneurysmal sac were observed in 3.3% (Qureshi 
et al. 2000a). Symptomatic unruptured aneurysms 
are usually larger than incidental aneurysms and 
are often discovered near to the skull base where 
they are more likely to affect cranial nerves. The 
most frequent affected cranial nerves are the ocu-
lomotor nerve and the optic nerve. Given the high 
mortality and morbidity associated with aneurysm 
rupture, it is crucial to determine the likelihood 
of rupture to decide whether to treat an aneurysm 
or not. The ﬁ ndings of the International Study of 
Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms (Wiebers et 
al. 1998) were published in 1998 and in 2003. Up 
to now, the ISUIA is the largest evaluation of the 
risk of aneurysmal rupture. Examination of 2621 
patient records at 53 medical centres over 7.5 years 
yielded an average annual rupture rate below those 
of previous estimates. Aneurysms less than 10 mm 
in diameter had an average annual rupture rate of 
0.05% in patients with no history of SAH; however, 
the rupture rate was ten times higher for aneu-
rysms of a similar size in patients with a history 
of SAH. The annual rupture rate for larger aneu-
rysms approached 1%. However, there was a lot 
of criticism to that study. The authors included a 
large number of patients with aneurysms of the 
cavernous portion of the ICA. These aneurysms are 
usually large or giant, but due to their anatomical 
location they almost never cause a subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. Including a fairly high number of 
large aneurysms with almost no risk of SAH in a 
study cohort clearly leads to an overestimation of 
the critical aneurysm size. And it is a well accepted 
due to clinical experience that the majority of rup-
tured aneurysms are far below the ISUIA value 
of 10 mm; in our patient population the average 
aneurysms size in patients with SAH was between 
4 mm and 7 mm. Recently, the ISUIA group did 

188 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
redeﬁ ne the critical aneurysm size from 10 mm 
down to 7 mm, indicating that the clinical impres-
sion and the evidence-based data are coming closer 
together (Wiebers et al. 2003). Nevertheless, all 
these results still do not explain why the majority 
of ruptured aneurysms are below the size of 7 mm! 
In our opinion there are at least two major draw-
backs in the ISUIA study. First, the criteria for or 
against treatment of an aneurysm remain unclear. 
Assuming that the majority of patients were seen 
and advised by experts, factors like multi-lobular-
ity or hypoplastic vessel segments might have had 
a major impact on treatment decisions and thus 
heavily biased the results. To come to the point: 
maybe ISUIA just demonstrated that the involved 
physicians were excellent in predicting which an-
eurysms were dangerous and which not – totally 
independent of the size. The second problem is 
the under-representation of Acom aneurysms and 
again the over-representation of those aneurysms 
located at the cavernous part of the ICA. Usually 
Acom aneurysms account for around 30% of all 
intracranial aneurysms, in the ISUIA study only 
10% were located at that site. It may be that these 
aneurysms just develop, grow up to 4 mm and 
rupture. The cavernosal aneurysms are usually 
large and never – or at least rarely – cause a SAH 
( Kupersmith et al. 2002). This way the bias of 
these aneurysms is that they increase the average 
size of non-ruptured aneurysms.
Fig. 5.16. a Giant ICA aneu-
rysm inducing optic nerve 
compression in a 10-year-old 
boy with visual deﬁ cit on the 
right eye. b Brain stem aneu-
rysm between origin of the 
superior 
cerebellar 
artery 
and posterior cerebral artery 
resulting in right sided ocu-
lomotor palsy. c, d Pcom an-
eurysm (c DSA, lateral view) 
in a 46-year-old-patient with 
oculomotor palsy; note the 
close relationship of the an-
eurysm and the oculomotor 
nerve (arrow) but without vis-
ible contact (d, sagittal recon-
struction of CISS sequence)
a
c
b
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
189
 5.3 
Imaging
5.3.1 
Computed Tomography
If SAH is suspected clinically, CT of the brain is the 
initial diagnostic imaging modality of choice and 
clearly the gold standard to identify, localize and 
quantify subarachnoid hemorrhage. Typically, the 
subarachnoid blood appears hyperdense on an un-
enhanced CT. The pattern of SAH can suggest the 
location of the underlying aneurysm (van Gijn and 
van Dongen 1982). Intraparenchymal hemorrhage 
occurs with aneurysms of the posterior communicat-
ing artery and middle cerebral artery more frequently 
than with other locations. Interhemispheric or intra-
ventricular hemorrhage, occurring in autopsy stud-
ies in about 50% of patients, is characteristic of Acom 
or distal anterior cerebral artery aneurysms. Rup-
tured PICA aneurysms almost always coexist with 
hydrocephalus and intraventricular hemorrhage in 
the fourth ventricle, which be can also seen on CT. 
Intracerebral hemorrhage is also more common in 
patients who rebled, since the ﬁ rst bleeding may lead 
to ﬁ brosis of the surrounding subarachnoid space 
and adhesion of the aneurysm to the brain. Subdu-
ral hematoma occurs in about 5% of patients, but is 
rarely the only location of bleeding. Small amounts 
of SAH may be overlooked, CT thus should be care-
fully read. However, even if the CT scan is really 
normal (no mis-reading!), aneurysmal SAH cannot 
be ruled out. The sensitivity of CT for detecting SAH 
depends on the volume of the extravasated blood, 
the hematocrit, and the time elapsed after the acute 
event. Using modern CT scanners and performed 
within 24 h after the ictus CT detects SAH in up to 
95%. However, due to dilution by CSF the density of 
the hemorrhage decreases rapidly over time, thus 
after only a few days it may be impossible to dem-
onstrate subarachnoid blood on CT (van der Wee 
et al. 1995). Sensitivity of CT decreases to 80% at 
day 3, to 70% at day 5, to 50% at 1 week, and to 30% 
at 2 weeks (Adams et al. 1983). CT may also help 
to distinguish aneurysmal from traumatic SAH. In 
traumatic SAH the subarachnoid blood is usually 
located on the brain convexity. In patients with basal 
contusions there might be a pattern of hemorrhage 
resembling aneurysmal SAH due to a rupture of an 
aneurysm at the anterior part of the Circle of Wil-
lis. The same might be the case for hemorrhage into 
the Sylvian ﬁ ssure. In these patients, in whom it is 
impossible to exclude aneurysmal hemorrhage or in 
Fig. 5.17. a Massive subarachnoid and intraven-
tricular hemorrhage. Even without any vessel visu-
alization the pattern of hemorrhage on CT already 
suggests that the underlying cause will be an aneu-
rysm of the anterior cerebral artery complex. b DSA 
reveals a typical Acom aneurysm ﬁ lling from the 
right. The left A1 segment was hypoplastic
a
b

190 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
whom the trauma might be a consequence of the 
initial aneurysm rupture, conventional angiography 
should be performed. In patients with Sylvian ﬁ ssure 
hemorrhages (and without angiographically visible 
aneurysm) any imaging modality should be used to 
rule out sinovenous thrombosis. Very rarely, mas-
sive brain edema and meningitis may mimic SAH on 
brain CT and may lead to a false positive diagnosis 
of SAH. However, if CT is negative despite a convinc-
ing history of sudden headache, lumbar puncture is 
still the next diagnostic step to rule out SAH, if there 
is no contraindication such as bleeding disorder or 
space-occupying intracranial lesion (MacDonald 
and Mendelow 1988). Lumbar puncture should not 
be performed before 6 h after onset of headache, pref-
erably 12 h between onset of headache and spinal 
tap have elapsed. After this interval sufﬁ cient lysis 
of erythrocytes occurred to form bilirubin and oxy-
Fig. 5.18a,b. Sometimes it is more difﬁ cult to localize an aneurysm based on the bleeding pattern. a CT re-
veals frontal intracerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid, and intraventricular hemorrhage. b DSA: the bleeding 
source in this patient was a MCA aneurysm
a
b
Fig. 5.19a,b. Severe hypoxia and brain edema mimicking basal SAH on CT
a
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
191
hemoglobin. These pigments give the CSF the “typi-
cal” xanthochrome yellowish tinge after centrifuga-
tion, an essential feature in the differentiation from 
traumatic SAH. This xanthochromia is invariably 
detectable until at least 2 weeks, usually 3 (in 70% 
of patients) to 7 weeks after SAH (Vermeulen et 
al. 1989). Identiﬁ cation of factors predictive of out-
come or speciﬁ c complications is important in the 
management of SAH. The risk of a given patient to 
suffer from vasospasm can be estimated by the loca-
tion, thickness, and density of subarachnoid blood 
on CT. Fisher et al. (1980) provided a description 
of 47 patients in whom the amount and distribution 
of subarachnoid blood after aneurysmal rupture on 
the initial CT was correlated with subsequent occur-
rence of vasospasm demonstrated by angiography. 
Two of 18 patients (11%) developed vasospasm when 
no or diffuse thin SAH was present on CT, whereas 
none did with only intraventricular or intracere-
bral hemorrhage. Of 24 patients with diffuse, thick 
SAH, 23 (96%) developed severe symptomatic vaso-
spasm (Fisher et al. 1980). Since then, the CT-based 
Fisher classiﬁ cation of quantifying local amounts 
of subarachnoid blood as a powerful predictor for 
the occurrence of vasospasms and delayed cerebral 
ischemia has been conﬁ rmed by several clinical and 
experimental studies (Grosset et al. 1992; Findlay 
et al. 1995; Jarus-Dziedzic et al. 2000; Suzuki et 
al. 1980). However, the predictive value of the Fisher 
grading system is not perfect. Never assume that a 
patient will not develop vasospasm just because he 
has a low Fisher score! All patients with SAH have to 
be carefully monitored during the ﬁ rst 2 weeks after 
the hemorrhage, regardless of their initial CT score.
Hijdra et al. (1990) suggested a new grading system 
for the amount of subarachnoid blood estimating 
separately 10 subarachnoid cisterns and ﬁ ssures and 
scoring on a scale of 0 to 3, as follows: 0 = no blood, 1 
= small amount of blood, 2 = moderately ﬁ lled with 
blood, and 3 = completely ﬁ lled with blood. The total 
SAH score is then calculated by adding the scores 
of the ten subarachnoid compartments (total score 
0–30) (Hijdra et al. 1990). Despite the excellent idea 
to use a more detailed scoring system to estimate the 
risk of vasospasm, it was not well accepted by the 
clinical community and does not play a relevant role 
in daily practice. Aneurysmal rupture is followed 
by intraventricular spread of blood in up to 50% 
(Le Roux and Winn 1998). Solely primary intraven-
tricular hemorrhage is usually associated with good 
outcome. The outcome is particularly better than in 
patients with a comparable volume of subarachnoid 
blood, indicating that the subarachnoid blood com-
ponent is by far the most important determinant for 
clinical outcome (Roos et al. 1995).
In a study analyzing 219 patients with ruptured 
aneurysms, Mayfrank et al. (2001) reported in-
creased mortality and unfavourable outcome in 
patients with additional moderate and severe intra-
ventricular hemorrhage, indicating that severity of 
intraventricular hemorrhage is an independent pre-
dictor of mortality and functional outcome.
5.3.1.1 
CT Angiography
Selective catheter angiography is still the standard 
method for diagnostic work-up of intracranial an-
eurysms (see below). Although the risk of perma-
nent neurologic complications in patients undergo-
ing DSA for suspected cerebral aneurysms is low, 
this method remains time consuming and invasive. 
To identify patients with unruptured aneurysms 
among those with thunderclap headache, an accu-
rate noninvasive vascular imaging technique would 
be of considerable interest. Sensitivity of single-slice 
CT angiography in the investigation of intracranial 
aneurysms has been reported to range from 67% 
to 100% (Liang et al. 1995; Vieco et al. 1995) with 
an accuracy of approximately 90% and an interob-
server agreement ranging from 75% to 84% (White 
et al. 2000). Nevertheless, this technique has demon-
strated a limited sensitivity for aneurysms smaller 
than 3 mm (25%–64% compared with 92%–100% 
for aneurysms > 3 mm) (Korogi et al. 1999; White 
et al. 2000). Moreover, CTA still has pitfalls if the 
aneurysm is located at a site where adjacent bone or 
considerable vessel overlap exist, such as the para-
clinoid and terminal ICA segments or at the MCA 
bifurcation.
Table 5.1. Fisher’s grading scale for SAH
Group Subarachnoid blood
Risk of vasospasm
1
No blood
Low
2
Diffuse or vertical layers 
< 1 mm
Only moderate
3
Localized clot and/or vertical 
layer > 1 mm
High
4
Intracerebral or intraventric-
ular clot with only diffuse or 
no SAH

192 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
The implementation of multidetector row tech-
nology led to a major step forward in the ﬁ eld of CT 
angiography, notably for small vessels and for intra-
cranial aneurysms. This technique offers a reduction 
in acquisition time despite the use of pitch values 
inferior to unity. The improvement of image quality 
and spatial resolution ends up in better diagnostic 
results for intracranial aneurysms. Wintermark et 
al. (2003) found sensitivity, speciﬁ city and accuracy 
values of multi-row CTA of 99%, 95.2% and 98.3%, 
respectively. The positive and negative predictive 
values on a per patient basis were 99% and 95.2%, 
respectively. In aneurysms smaller than 2 mm sen-
sitivity was 50%; in aneurysms larger than 2 mm 
sensitivity was 95.8%. The interobserver agreement 
was 98%. Multi-row CT technology will clearly make 
life easier at emergency departments. Patients with a 
ﬁ rst-time headache and a negative unenhanced CT 
scan will get a quick and reliable CTA. To optimise 
treatment planning and work-ﬂ ow CTA may also 
be used to stratify patients into endovascular and 
surgical treatment groups. However, whether CTA 
really will allow us to ﬁ gure out which therapeutic 
modality is best suited still has to be determined. 
In our opinion there are drawbacks when describ-
ing the anatomy of the neck and the true relation-
ship of tiny vessels originating near to the entrance 
of the aneurysm or adjacent to the aneurysm dome. 
Furthermore, CTA requires iodine contrast agent 
and is associated with radiation exposure, which is 
a signiﬁ cant drawback in using CTA for community 
screening, particularly if this needs to be performed 
several times during an individual patient’s lifetime. 
However, CTA clearly plays a role in the pre-thera-
peutic phase in large and giant aneurysms. In these 
patients it is often difﬁ cult to visualize the exact 
anatomy of the neck and the relationship to adja-
cent bony structures, such as in the paraophthal-
mic region with conventional DSA alone. Moreover, 
CTA is very helpful in the pretherapeutic planning 
Fig. 5.20. Acutely ruptured fusiform posterior cerebral artery aneurysm before and after endovascular treatment. Overlay 
of 3D vessel anatomy on cross-sectional CT-like images showing extensive SAH

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
193
of partially calciﬁ ed and thrombosed aneurysms 
and might help to determine the best treatment 
modality. In patients with large, space-occupying 
hematomas CTA is sufﬁ cient to rule out an underly-
ing aneurysm. In this speciﬁ c situation DSA is prob-
ably not indicated any more. Comparing CTA with 
the non-invasive competitor MRA there are pros 
and cons for both methods. Patients with typical 
contraindications for MRA, such as ferromagnetic 
clips (Klucznik et al. 1993) or pacemakers, or pa-
tients on life-support devices and claustrophobia 
are usually candidates for CTA. CTA is more or less 
independent of ﬂ ow rate, the images will be diag-
nostic even in patients with a low cardiac output, 
whereas in MRA this may lead to saturation effects. 
Flow-related artefacts seen in larger aneurysms on 
MRA are not seen with CTA. Additionally, CTA may 
depict aneurysm wall calciﬁ cations, for example at 
the neck, which might cause difﬁ culties during clip-
ping (Schwartz et al. 1994). CTA is more likely to 
be useful in patients after aneurysm clipping: there 
are reconstruction algorithms available allowing to 
reduce clip-related artefacts to a minimum and thus 
enabling us to decide whether the aneurysm is com-
pletely clipped or not (Brown JH et al. 1999; Vieco 
et al. 1996, Wallace et al. 2007). There are promis-
ing preliminary so far unpublished observations us-
ing angiographic computed tomography in repaired 
aneurysms since this technique might also reduce 
metallic artefacts. On MRA, however, even the stan-
dard non-magnetic clips cause severe ﬁ eld distur-
bances. Therefore, MRA is not a diagnostic tool for 
these patients. However, technical developments are 
on-going. Gonner et al. (2002) recently described an 
MRA technique with ultrashort echo times reducing 
clip artefacts signiﬁ cantly. The images are still not 
diagnostic, but progress is still going on.
Patients treated with endovascular methods need 
angiographic follow-up. But coil artefacts preclude 
the use of CTA in these patients. MRA is clearly an 
Fig. 5.21. Aneurysm rupture during coiling of an acutely ruptured basilar tip aneurysm. Angio-CT (Flat-detector) before 
and after coil embolization compared to conventional CT

194 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
excellent tool for patients with previously coiled 
aneurysms. In this patient group we rely on time-
of-ﬂ ight MRA (TOF-MRA) as method of choice 
( Brunereau et al. 1999; Kahara et al. 1999; Weber 
et al. 2001). Contrast-enhanced MRA may be nec-
essary as an adjunct method to examine large and 
giant aneurysms with low ﬂ ow. Recanalisation in 
these aneurysms can be overlooked with TOF-MRA. 
According to our experience TOF-MRA solely as fol-
low-up tool is sufﬁ cient for aneurysms smaller than 
10 mm.
5.3.2 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging and MR angiography 
are increasingly used in the diagnostic work-up of 
patients with cerebral aneurysms. However, MRI is 
less suitable than CT in patients with acute SAH 
because they are often restless and need extensive 
monitoring. It is used in patients with a negative 
angiogram to detect other causes of SAH, such as 
a thrombosed aneurysm or spinal vascular malfor-
mation and it will increasingly be used in screening 
programs and as a follow-up tool after endovascu-
lar therapy. Conventional MRI sequences are less 
sensitive to SAH than CT scanning. Since SAH is 
mostly arterial in origin, the predominant form of 
hemoglobin is Oxy-Hb. Immediately after the ex-
travasation of blood into the subarachnoid space, 
there is a shortening of T1 due to the increase in 
hydration layer water owing to the higher protein 
content of CSF. This results in an increased signal 
on T1-weighted and proton-density images. Fluid-
attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences 
are more sensitive. The signal from CSF is almost 
completely reduced while producing a heavy T2-
weighting. On FLAIR images SAH appears hyper-
intense compared to CSF and the surrounding brain 
(Noguchi et al. 1995). Currently, it is widely ac-
cepted that even subtle amounts of subarachnoid 
blood can be detected by MR when using FLAIR or 
proton-density weighted MR sequences (Wiesmann 
et al. 2002). False-positive FLAIR results which may 
be caused by ﬂ ow-related enhancement within the 
CSF may occur. However, this problem could be 
overcome with the interpretation of proton-density 
weighted sequences. Even hyperacute SAH can be 
detected with MR. Compared with CSF the hyper-
acute blood has a slightly lower signal intensity on 
T2*-weighted gradient-echo images and increased 
signal intensity on T2-weighted spin-echo images 
(Rumboldt et al. 2003).
5.3.2.1 
Magnetic Resonance Angiography
MR angiography provides a fast, accurate and 
non-invasive evaluation of intracranial aneurysms 
without the risk of conventional angiography. The 
TOF-MRA technique has an excellent spatial resolu-
tion and sufﬁ cient ﬁ eld of view, covering all relevant 
intradural arteries and can be performed within a 
Fig. 5.22. Basilar stem aneurysm treated with Neuroform stent and coils. Angiographic FD-CT nicely shows the stent and 
the adjacent coil basket

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
195
reasonable acquisition time. However, MRA has not 
yet replaced catheter angiography. The accuracy of 
MRA depends on how the images are processed 
and reviewed. Using maximum intensity projec-
tion alone sensitivity for identiﬁ cation of at least 
one aneurysm per patient was 75%, increasing to 
95% when axial source and spin-echo images were 
reviewed as well (Ross et al. 1990). Aneurysm size 
is a crucial factor for sensitivity. MRA studies con-
sistently indicate sensitivity rates of more than 95% 
for aneurysms larger than 6 mm, but much less for 
smaller aneurysms (Atlas et al. 1997). For aneu-
rysms smaller than 5 mm, which constitute as many 
as a third of aneurysms in asymptomatic patients 
(Kojima et al. 1998), detection rates of 56% and 
less have been reported (Korogi et al. 1996). How-
ever, these aneurysms should not be ignored even if 
their rupture risk seems to be low (Wiebers et al. 
2003). In our experience, in most patients MRA can 
detect aneurysms as small as 3 mm; the problem in 
detecting lesions below this size is well known. The 
results of Atlas et al. (1997) and Korogi et al. (1996) 
reported problems in the identiﬁ cation of untreated 
aneurysms smaller than 3 mm in size. Therefore, 
TOF-MRA might not be reliable in patients with an 
aneurysm initially smaller than or equal to 3 mm. 
This should be taken into account for all screening 
programs, but also for those follow-up examinations 
(after coiling), when the initial size of the aneurysm 
was around 3 mm. In a study comparing 3D TOF-
MRA with intraarterial DSA, Adams and colleagues 
examined 29 patients harbouring 42 intracerebral 
aneurysms. MR data were examined in different 
forms, i.e. axial source data, maximum intensity 
projection images, multiplanar reconstructions, 
and 3D isosurface images. Three aneurysms were 
not detected by MRA. These aneurysms were either 
smaller than 3 mm or in anatomically difﬁ cult loca-
tions (MCA bifurcation) or obscured by an adjacent 
hematoma. Time-of-ﬂ ight techniques may obscure 
some anatomical details due to ﬂ ow disturbances. 
The authors conclude that MRA is inferior to intra-
arterial DSA for pre-treatment assessment of intra-
cranial aneurysms; however, MRA can provide com-
plementary information to DSA such as intramural 
thrombus. If MRA is used analysis of both axial 
source data and reconstructed images is mandatory 
(Adams et al. 2000). The study by Ronkainen et 
al. (1997) illustrates the current problems of non-
invasive aneurysm imaging. Screening 85 families 
of patients with SAH using MRA, Ronkainen et al. 
(1997) found 58 aneurysms in 45 of 438 screened pa-
tients. Conventional angiography was performed in 
43 of these 45 patients, revealing that seven of these 
43 did not have an aneurysm (MRA false positive), 
and the remaining 36 actually had 60 aneurysms 
(13 of which had been missed on MRA false nega-
tive). The true positive rate for MRA was 78%, the 
false positive rate was 15% and the false negative 
rate was 22%. Positive predictive value was 87%, 
but since 395 subjects did not undergo conventional 
angiography, the true negative rate and negative 
predictive value cannot be calculated for the whole 
study. Okahara et al. (2002) compared MRA with 
DSA in 133 patients with aneurysms. This study is 
of particular interest because the authors mainly 
focussed on evaluation of the images by a neuro-
radiologists, a neurosurgeon, a general radiologist 
and a resident in neuroradiology. This study clearly 
has more clinical impact than many others done 
before. The diagnosis is not made by the technique 
– not surprising, but never mentioned with such evi-
dence – but is dependent on the skills of the reader. 
The results were as follows: 79% of aneurysms were 
detected by the neuroradiologist, 73% by the neuro-
surgeon, 63% by the general radiologist and 60% by 
the resident in neuroradiology. Again, 3 mm was a 
crucial size of aneurysms: below that size, it seems 
to be very difﬁ cult to get reliable results. Despite all 
these mentioned limitations – and we have given 
details about these studies, because the scientiﬁ c 
community is still discussing this problem without 
an evidence based solution – MRA is increasingly 
used for screening of aneurysms (Kojima et al. 1998; 
Bossuyt et al. 2005), especially in families of SAH 
patients. However, another excellent indication for 
MRA is clearly follow-up in patients who had endo-
vascular aneurysm treatment before. It is increas-
ingly accepted that MRA techniques in this patient 
subgroup are sufﬁ cient enough to detect those an-
eurysm recanalizations that require retreatment. In 
addition to TOF techniques contrast-enhanced MR 
angiography is a complementary tool to visualize 
supraaortal and intracranial arteries. The spatial 
resolution is still lower than with TOF, acquisition 
time is much shorter (down to 12 s for a 3D data 
set) and the FOV covers the whole area from the 
aortic arch to the circle of Willis. Only few studies 
have directly compared enhanced vs non-enhanced 
MR-angiography. A beneﬁ t of this technique is 
certainly demonstrated for large resp. giant aneu-
rysms ( Cottier et al. 2003). Although comparable 
sensitivity and speciﬁ city rates are described most 
authors conclude that TOF-MRA is sufﬁ cient in 

196 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.23. a, b 3D CTA of bilateral MCA aneurysm and a 
small vertebral aneurysm. c–e DSA (ap view), aneurysmog-
raphy and 3D CTA of a large MCA aneurysm demonstrat-
ing that one major MCA branch is originating very close to 
the neck of the aneurysm. f, g Fusiform MCA aneurysm: 
3D CTA and DSA match perfectly. h–j Broad-based basilar 
artery aneurysm encroaching both P1 segments demon-
strated on 3D CTA as well as on DSA. k–m Ruptured Pcom 
aneurysm (arrow)
g
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
197
k
h
i
j
l
m

198 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.24. a Flair sequence with some artefact after clipping of a MCA aneurysm on the left side. b Axial 
source image of the TOF-MRA reveals signal loss at the course of the MCA and next to the basilar artery 
after coiling of a left superior cerebellar artery aneurysm. c,d There is no ﬂ ow signal on the 3D recon-
struction images of the TOF-MRA as well as of the contrast-enhanced MRA. e DSA of an incompletely 
clipped MCA aneurysm. f Due to the artefacts caused by the clip 3D CTA is not useful in evaluating 
residual aneurysm after clipping
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
199
Fig. 5.25a,b. Flair sequence demonstrating blood in the subarachnoid space around the brain stem and 
predominantly on the occipital surface and in the ventricles as well as acute hydrocephalus after rupture 
of a left vertebral aneurysm
b
a
Fig. 5.26. a Time-of-ﬂ ight MR angiography of normal in-
tracranial vessels. b Contrast-enhanced MRA technique 
with a large ﬁ eld-of-view covering all vessels from the aortic 
arch to the circle of Willis
a
b

200 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
detecting recurrent aneurysm after endovascular 
treatment which need retreatment (Pierot et al. 
2006;  Wallace et al. 2007).
The advantage of higher ﬁ eld strengths in MRA (3 
or 7 Tesla) is promising. Already with 3 Tesla more 
distal arteries and smaller vessels can be visualized 
and 7 Tesla might additionally bring new insights 
into in vivo imaging of the vessel wall.
Present indications for MRA in the evaluation of 
cerebral aneurysms in general include:
Incidental ﬁ ndings on CT or MRI suspicious for 
an aneurysm
Evaluation of speciﬁ c clinical symptoms (i.e., 
third cranial nerve palsy) or non-speciﬁ c symp-
toms in whom an aneurysm might explain the 
clinical presentation (thunderclap headache)
Contraindications for conventional angiography



Non-invasive follow-up of patients with known 
aneurysms or endovascular treated aneurysms
Screening in “high risk” patients (ﬁ rst degree 
relatives of patients with SAH or multiple aneu-
rysms, patients with polycystic kidney disease or 
with connective tissue disease)
5.3.3 
Cerebral Angiography
Owing to its excellent spatial resolution, conven-
tional cerebral angiography is still the gold standard 
for the detection of a cerebral aneurysm. Currently, 
this is performed during the ﬁ rst available moment 
after presentation of the patient at the hospital after 
SAH. Considering that the risk of rehemorrhage is 
highest in the ﬁ rst 24 h (4%), an early angiogram 
is crucial for any therapeutic decision and for the 
patient’s outcome. Cerebral angiography can local-
ize the lesion, reveal aneurysm shape and geometry, 
determine the presence of multiple aneurysms, de-
ﬁ ne vascular anatomy and collateral situation, and 
assess the presence and degree of vasospasm. Due 
to the frequency of multiple aneurysms a complete 
four-vessel angiography is essential. However, in the 
case of a space occupying hematoma angiography 
of the most likely affected vessel is recommended. 
Anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique views are sys-
tematically performed with crosscompression to 
demonstrate the Acom, if necessary. Additional 
views may be necessary to optimize demonstration 
of the aneurysm neck. If no aneurysm is found, se-
lective catheterization of both external carotid ar-
teries is performed to exclude a dural arteriovenous 
ﬁ stula. The potential for collateral circulation from 
the vertebrobasilar system maybe evaluated when 
the vertebral artery is injected during carotid artery 
compression (Allcock test) demonstrating patency, 
size and collateral potential of the PI segment of the 
PCA and the posterior communicating artery ipsi-
lateral to the carotid artery compressed. As a pre-
requisite to angiography, survey of renal function 
and coagulation factors is required in all patients. 
Digital subtraction angiography technique is neces-
sary; biplane angiography facilitates the diagnostic 
workup and is useful for safe and fast therapeutic 
interventions. It shortens examination time and 
increases the safety during aneurysm obliteration. 
High-quality ﬂ uoroscopy and roadmapping are es-
sential to perform intracranial interventions. Newer 
developments include CT-like tissue imaging with 


Fig. 5.27. TOF-MRA of a small Acom aneurysm
Fig. 5.28. TOF-MRA of an ICA/Pcom aneurysm. MRA even 
reveals that the aneurysm has a small neck and is suitable 
for endovascular therapy

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
201
Fig. 5.29a–f. MCA aneurysm with a small branch arising from the sac. More homogenous signal of the an-
eurysm was seen with 7 Tesla (b); b, c 3D Time of ﬂ ight MRA demonstrating a paraophthalmic aneurysm on 
1.5 T and 7 T, distal vessel depiction is nicely demonstrated on 7 T MRA; e, f paraophthalmic aneurysm on 
DSA and well demonstrated on non-enhanced MPR age sequence imaged with 7 T
a
c
e
b
d
f

202 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
a
c
b
Fig. 5.30a–c. Giant basilar stem aneurysm, recurrent aneurysm could have been missed on TOF-MRA, but is delineated 
on contrast-enhanced MRA
Fig. 5.31. a Paraophthalmic aneu-
rysm. b On 3D rotational DSA the oph-
thalmic artery is assumed to originate 
from the aneurysm, but after complete 
occlusion of the aneurysm this vessel 
remained patent (c)
a
c
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
203
the DSA (ﬂ at panel) equipment. The ﬁ rst obvious 
advantage may be the detection of intraprocedural 
SAH, e.g. to visualize the extent of the SAH and po-
tential intracerebral components of the bleeding.
5.3.3.1 
3D Rotational Angiography
The precise visualization of the aneurysm neck, 
the shape and the size of the aneurysm, and its re-
lationship to parent vessels are important factors 
for endovascular therapy. Rotational angiography 
in a 2D or 3D mode is available on most new gen-
eration neurointerventional angio suites and rep-
resents a valuable supplement to standard biplane 
DSA series. Using rotational angiography, multiple 
oblique views are obtained as the source for 3D re-
construction. Data acquisition usually consists of 
a rotational mask followed by a second run during 
contrast injection while the patients’s head is placed 
in the isocenter (Fahrig et al. 1997). Rotational an-
giography helps to deﬁ ne the aneurysm neck, ﬁ nd 
the appropriate working position and perform ac-
curate measurements. Three-dimensional angiog-
raphy thereby improves planning of surgical and 
interventional procedures, especially in complex an-
eurysms (Anxionnat et al. 2001). However, even the 
highest standard 3D DSA techniques cannot always 
precisely describe the exact anatomy of the neck and 
the exact relationship of tiny adjacent vessels to the 
aneurysm dome and neck. As an interventionalist 
you still have to rely on your experience and – in rare 
cases – on superselective catheterization of the an-
eurysm itself. And sometimes you have to combine it 
with temporary coil placement without subsequent 
detachment. Stroke complication rate for diagnos-
tic angiography at our institution is less than 0.5%, 
comparable to other major interventional centers 
across Europe and the US (Heiserman et al. 1994). 
Thus the risk:beneﬁ t ratio still justiﬁ es conventional 
angiography in the diagnostic management of an-
eurysms. Other complications may include allergic 
reaction to contrast agent, renal failure, and bleed-
Fig. 5.32. a ICA aneurysm. 
b Aneurysmography: selec-
tive angiography with the tip 
of the microcatheter placed 
within the aneurysm
a
b
Fig. 5.33. Aneurysmography of a small 
Acom aneurysm

204 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
ing at the puncture site. In fact, the incidence of 
allergic reaction seems to be very low and bleeding 
complications at the puncture site decreased due 
to application of speciﬁ c devices allowing a “surgi-
cal” closure of the puncture site. Aneurysm rup-
ture during angiography is reported in less than 3% 
of patients investigated with SAH. “Less than 3%” 
is correct, but for us it sounds higher than reality 
shows. In our institution, and now studying about 
200 patients per year with intracranial aneurysms, 
we have seen only one single aneurysm rupture dur-
ing diagnostic angiography in the last 10 years. The 
risk of aneurysm rupture may be increased by using 
a powerinjector to perform the series. Another cause 
of increased risk of aneurysm rupture, however, may 
be due to superselective aneurysmography. Superse-
lective angiography with the tip of the microcatheter 
placed within the aneurysm and gentle injection of 
contrast may be helpful in demonstrating morpho-
logical details of the entire aneurysm, especially 
concerning the identiﬁ cation of vessels arising from 
the aneurysm. Gailloud et al. (1997) reported a 
posterior perforating artery originating from the 
dome of a basilar tip aneurysm identiﬁ ed only by 
selective aneurysmography.
5.3.4 
Patients with SAH of Unidentifi able Cause
If the initial angiography is negative despite aneu-
rysmal pattern of hemorrhage, repeated angiography 
within 2–3 weeks is indicated. Cranial or spinal MRI 
may be indicated to exclude other sources of hemor-
rhage. The risk of rebleeding is up to 10% (Canhao 
et al. 1995). There might be several explanations for 
the missing radiological detection of an aneurysm: 
apart from technical limitations such as insufﬁ -
cient projections, vasospasm, aneurysm thrombo-
sis or obliteration of the aneurysm by pressure of 
adjacent hematoma might contribute to the failing 
radiological demonstration. If a second angiogram 
also fails to reveal the suspected aneurysm, a third 
angiography depending on the patient’s age might 
be indicated after an interval of several months and 
may then demonstrate the aneurysm (Rinkel et al. 
1991). If cerebral angiography is negative in a pattern 
of perimesencephalic hemorrhage the diagnosis of 
non-aneurysmal hemorrhage should be established 
and no repeat studies are needed.
5.3.4.1 
Screening
Screening for a cerebral aneurysm is indicated in 
patients in whom the risk of harbouring an aneu-
rysm is higher compared to the normal population. 
The natural history, however, is not clearly deﬁ ned. 
Screening has been recommended for ﬁ rst-degree 
relatives of a family member with two or more 
aneurysms and for patients with autosomal domi-
nant polycystic kidney disease (Schievink 1997; 
Schievink et al. 1997). In identical twins with one 
suffering SAH, the risk of harbouring an aneurysm 
is increased in the other and screening is also in-
dicated.
5.3.5 
Transcranial Ultrasound
Transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD) has proved 
to be a suitable non-invasive technique for measur-
ing cerebral blood ﬂ ow velocity in large cerebral 
arteries. The technique of TCD can be combined 
with duplex imaging and with colour coding. Co-
lour TCD ultrasound became available in the early 
1990s, with some success at identiﬁ cation of aneu-
rysms (Becker et al. 1992). A recently developed 
technology of colour coded Doppler, i.e. colour Dop-
pler energy or power Doppler, showed a signiﬁ cant 
greater sensitivity to ﬂ owing blood than standard 
colour ﬂ ow imaging (Wardlaw and Cannon 1996). 
However, in the detection of cerebral aneurysms, 
power TCD is less sensitive than other non-invasive 
techniques such as CTA and MRA. Especially in 
small aneurysms of less than 6 mm sensitivity is 
very poor (0.35), the internal carotid artery is the 
most difﬁ cult segment to interpret on ultrasound 
(Griewing et al. 1998; White et al. 2001). Addi-
tionally, insonation of the MCA is inadequate or 
even impossible in 5%–20% of all patients because 
of insufﬁ cient ultrasound transmission through the 
skull (White et al. 2001). Although the technique 
is quick, safe, inexpensive and non-invasive, it is 
highly dependent on the skills of the operator. At 
the moment, TCD for the detection of cerebral an-
eurysms is only of scientiﬁ c interest and cannot be 
recommended for routine use. In fact, it does not 
play any role in the diagnostic work-up of SAH pa-
tients or in screening.

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
205
5.4 
Therapy
5.4.1 
General Considerations
The primary treatment goal of cerebral aneurysms 
is prevention of rupture. Surgical clipping has been 
the treatment modality of choice for both ruptured 
and unruptured cerebral aneurysms for decades. 
Just over 20 years ago endovascular treatment was 
mainly restricted to those patients with aneurysms 
unsuitable for clipping due to the size or location, 
or in whom surgical clipping was contraindicated 
because of the general medical condition. Since 
the introduction of controlled detachable coils for 
packing of aneurysms (Guglielmi et al. 1991a,b), 
endovascular embolization is increasingly used. 
Numerous observational studies have published 
complications rates, occlusion rates and short-term 
follow-up results. These have been summarized up 
to March 1997 in a systematic review of 48 eligible 
studies of 1383 patients with ruptured and unrup-
tured aneurysms (Brilstra et al. 1999). Permanent 
procedural complications occurred in 3.7% of 1256 
patients. More than 90% occlusion of the aneurysm 
was achieved in around 90% of patients. The most 
frequent procedural complication was cerebral isch-
Fig. 5.34a–c. Patient after SAH with a basilar 
tip aneurysm seen on CTA in an outside hos-
pital. a Initial DSA did show vasospasm of the 
P1 segment and the superior cerebellar artery 
on both sides. In addition, some irregularity 
at the tip of the basilar artery was noted but 
no real aneurysm. b Repeated DSA 2 months 
later showed a small basilar tip aneurysm suit-
able for endovascular treatment. c The patient 
was scheduled for embolization 10 days later 
but the aneurysm again was not visible. The 
patient was referred to surgery
a
b
c

206 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
emia, the second most frequent complication was 
aneurysm perforation, which occurred in about 2% 
of patients. Rerupture of angiographically success-
ful coiled aneurysms may occur, long-term rates of 
rebleeding after endovascular coiling still need to be 
established. In 2002 the ﬁ rst results of the ISAT study 
were published; the clear beneﬁ t of the endovascu-
lar treated patients did deﬁ nitely change treatment 
strategies for patients with intracranial aneurysms 
in a lot of centers (Molyneux et al. 2002). The en-
dovascular approach will become the ﬁ rst line treat-
ment option, whenever this option is available. ISAT 
represents a landmark in the evolution of aneurysm 
treatment and, therefore, a more detailed discus-
sion of these results seems justiﬁ ed. A recently pub-
lished evidence-based review (Qureshi et al. 2007) 
provides an objective comparison on clipping and 
coiling in ruptured and unruptured aneurysms 
analysing single-center studies, multicenter studies 
with and without independent outcome ascertain-
ment, and randomised clinical trials. The authors 
found that outcome at discharge, at 2–6 months, and 
at 1 year, and later survival, were all better after 
endovascular treatment than after surgery. Their 
results suggest that the higher rates of incomplete 
obliteration and the need of retreatment in patients 
after endovascular treatment do not affect patient’s 
clinical outcome. Observational studies conﬁ rmed 
better discharge outcome and lower costs for pa-
tients treated for an unruptured aneurysm, no dif-
ference concerning outcome and rebleeding rate was 
revealed after 1 year in this patient group, but only a 
few data were available for the latter comparison.
5.4.2 
The ISAT Study
ISAT was a randomised, prospective, international, 
controlled trial of endovascular coiling vs surgical 
clipping for a selected group of patients with rup-
tured intracranial aneurysms deemed suitable for 
both types of therapy. Most patients were treated at 
high-volume centres in the United Kingdom, with 
the remainders from other European countries, Aus-
tralia, Canada, and the United States. The primary 
endpoint was patient outcome, deﬁ ned as a modi-
ﬁ ed Rankin scale of 3–6 (dependent or deceased) 
at 1 year. The primary hypothesis was that endo-
vascular treatment would reduce the proportion of 
patients dependent or deceased by 25% at 1 year. 
A total of 9559 patients with SAH were screened 
and around one quarter (n=2143) were randomly as-
signed to both treatment groups. Those patients who 
were screened but not randomized were treated sur-
gically in 39%, endovascularly in 29% or by an un-
recorded therapy (11%). Most randomized patients 
had aneurysms located at the AcomA or intracranial 
ICA. A total of 94% of randomised patients were in 
good condition (WFNS grades I–III). The study was 
prematurely stopped after the results of a planned 
interim analysis were available: at 1 year, 23.7% of 
the patients allocated to endovascular treatment 
were dependent or dead, as compared with 30.6% 
of patients in the surgical group. Later on, the study 
group reported the revised outcome results with an 
even greater absolute risk reduction of 8.7% and a 
relative risk reduction of 26.8% for patients after 
coiling compared to patients after clipping (Kerr 
and Molyneux 2003). In addition, patients after 
coiling experienced signiﬁ cantly less seizures and 
needed to a signiﬁ cant lesser extent a CSF drain-
age. The results of the ISAT study were not read-
ily accepted, particularly not in the neurosurgical 
community. We strongly recommend reading the 
statement written by the Executive Committee of the 
American Society of Interventional and Therapeutic 
Neuroradiology and the American Society of Neu-
roradiology (Derdeyn et al. 2003). The authors an-
swer a lot of frequently asked questions about ISAT. 
A major issue is the durability of aneurysm occlu-
sion after coiling. It is true that long-term durability 
of endovascular therapy remains to be determined. 
The present data, however, suggest that it is very un-
likely that late aneurysm rebleeding after coiling will 
occur at a rate that would signiﬁ cantly affect the dif-
ference in outcome between surgery and coiling. The 
ISAT data indicate a risk of rebleeding after 1 year of 
2 per 1276 (0.16%) patient-years of follow-up. Thus 
it would take more than 40 years to overcome the 
beneﬁ t seen at 1 year with endovascular treatment. 
Another major issue was the doubt about the compe-
tence of British neurosurgeons. However, they were 
very experienced – just looking at the numbers of 
patients they treated – and their results pretty much 
matched the results of the tirilazad study, a prospec-
tive multicenter study, mainly involving US neuro-
surgeons (Haley et al. 1997; Lanzino and Kassell 
1999). In this study, in the 3 month follow-up, 9.2% 
of the grades I–III patients had died. In ISAT 8.3% 
of the surgically randomised patients were dead at 
2 months, increasing to 10.1% at 1 year. Incidentally, 
similar data were reported from the European and 
Australian arm of the tirilazad study (Lanzino et al. 

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
207
1999a). The low randomization rate is another point 
of criticism: randomization rates were less than 
40% in NASCET and less than 4% in ACAS. ISAT 
is within the range of randomization rates given by 
other large studies. There is absolutely no indica-
tion that randomisation rate could affect the ﬁ nal 
result. Beside these frequently asked questions there 
are a number of important implications of ISAT: 
ISAT will signiﬁ cantly change our policy for patients 
with an unruptured aneurysm. We look ahead for 
those metaanalyses based on the treatment results 
of ISAT. Since ISAT it is mandatory that all patients 
should be seen by a neurointerventionalist to decide 
whether the aneurysm is suitable for coiling or not. 
If one treatment is recommended over another, the 
reasons for this decision should be documented as 
in accordance with the usual standards for informed 
consent. Furthermore, the ISAT data add support 
for the treatment of patients with aneurysmal SAH 
in high-volume centers that offer both surgery and 
endovascular therapy.
5.4.3 
Treatment of Unruptured Aneurysms
This is still a controversial topic and up to now there 
is still no agreement about indications. First of all, 
the easiest parts: there are two groups of unruptured 
aneurysms, asymptomatic aneurysms detected in-
cidentally and those causing clinical symptoms due 
to compression of nerval structures or emboli aris-
ing from the non-ruptured sac. The former group 
also includes those aneurysms detected during an-
giography in patients with SAH with an aneurysm 
in another location. The management of unruptured 
aneurysms remains controversial and depends on a 
full understanding of their natural history balanced 
against the risks of treatment and long-term protec-
tion afforded. Aneurysm prevalence in the general 
population shows wide variation. However, in those 
with a family history of SAH, the prevalence of un-
ruptured aneurysms has been reported from 10% to 
13% (Kojima et al. 1998). And, detection of aneu-
rysms during life is increasing due to increased use 
of accurate imaging methods and due to screening 
programs introduced, e.g. in Japan. In summary, 
unruptured aneurysms will be identiﬁ ed with regu-
larity in most units involved in neuroimaging and 
the management of these patients is a universal 
problem. Unfortunately, unruptured aneurysms are 
a heterogeneous entity, both in terms of morphology 
and behaviour, e.g. tendency to rupture. This is in 
part reﬂ ected in the extreme variation in reported 
5 year cumulative rupture rate in the literature be-
tween 0.05% and 5% (Wiebers et al. 1998; Wiebers 
et al. 1981). Aneurysm size seems to be an important 
factor to predict the risk of rupture: ISUIA part one 
Fig. 5.35a,b. Giant vertebral aneurysm in a 9-year-old boy with nausea and vomiting due to brain stem com-
pression. a DSA ap view. b Axial contrast-enhanced CCT)
a
b

208 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
tried to teach us that 10 mm is a critical size. Smaller 
aneurysms (without a history of SAH from another 
aneurysm) had a 5 year cumulative rupture risk of 
0.05%. There was a lot of criticism about this study, 
mainly because the daily experience of nearly all 
physicians treating aneurysmal SAH patients is that 
the vast majority of ruptured aneurysms are less 
than 7 mm in size. The second part of the ISUIA 
study – published in July 2003 – came out with a 
slightly different result: the critical size of the aneu-
rysm was downsized to 7 mm and there were certain 
locations with an increased risk of rupture per se: 
Posterior circulation aneurysms and those aneu-
rysms arising from the posterior communicating 
artery (Wiebers et al. 2003). Other studies found 
the incidence of rupture of all coincidental aneu-
rysms to be between 1% and 3.2% per year, with 
hypertension and aneurysm multiplicity being spe-
ciﬁ c risk factors (Winn et al. 1983; Yasui et al. 1997). 
Other factors for a higher probability of rupture 
 include 
multilobular 
aneurysm 
morphology 
( Hademenos et al. 1998), posterior location 
( Hademenos et al. 1998; Rinkel et al. 1998; Wiebers 
et al. 2003), symptoms related to symptoms other 
than SAH caused by the aneurysm, and female sex, 
heavy alcohol consumption, smoking and hyperten-
sion (Wermer et al. 2007). A striking observation 
in many studies on unruptured aneurysms is that 
Acom aneurysms are generally underrepresented. 
One possible explanation is that these aneurysms 
have a different natural history; they may form and 
subsequently rupture rapidly so that the opportu-
nity to detect these as unruptured lesions is limited. 
If this explanation is true, the ISUIA ﬁ ndings (see 
Table 5.2) have to be interpreted with much more 
care than previously done. The early and late out-
come after surgery of unruptured aneurysms is well 
documented in the literature. A meta-analysis by 
Raaymakers et al. (1998) of 61 studies on 2460 pa-
tients with 2568 clipped aneurysms showed a per-
manent morbidity of 10.9% and mortality of 2.6% 
with the best results in small and anterior circula-
tion aneurysms. A study by Johnston et al. (1999a) 
compared the clinical outcomes of patients who had 
unruptured aneurysms treated by surgery and en-
dovascular therapy. Morbidity was signiﬁ cantly 
higher in the surgical group (18.5%) than in the 
endovascular group (10.6%). Mortality was 2.3% af-
ter surgery and 0.4% after coiling. A further study 
by the same authors showed improved clinical out-
comes, shorter hospital stay, shorter recovery pe-
riod, reduced costs and reduced long term symp-
toms in those patients treated with coil embolization 
(Johnston et al. 2000). Technical feasibility of over 
90% in our patient group and in those of other au-
thors with a high occlusion rate justify comparison 
with neurosurgical data on unruptured aneurysms 
(Murayama et al. 1999; Wanke et al. 2002). We had 
a morbidity of 4.8%, mortality was zero. Murayama 
et al. (1999) reported a morbidity of 4.3% in a total 
of 109 patients after endovascular treatment of un-
ruptured aneurysms, with no morbidity in the last 
65 patients. Comparisons between surgical and en-
dovascular treatment of unruptured aneurysms 
demonstrated that the costs treating an unruptured 
aneurysm are signiﬁ cantly lower than treating pa-
tients with SAH regarding length of hospital stay 
and sequelae of morbidity (Johnston et al. 1999a,b, 
2000; Murayama et al. 1999; Wardlaw and White 
2000; Wiebers et al. 1992). By comparing the results 
of surgical clipping and coil embolization of 60 uni-
Table 5.2. 5-Year cumulative rupture rates of intracranial 
aneurysms (Wiebers et al. 2003)
Size/location
<7 mm
7–12 mm
13–24 mm
>25
ICA/AcomA/ 
ACA/MCA
0%
2.6%
14.5%
40%
PcomA/Posterior 
circulation
2.5%
14.5%
18.4%
50%
Fig. 5.36. Distal basilar artery aneurysms in 
a patient with right-sided oculomotor palsy

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
209
versity hospitals, Johnston et al. (1999) reported 
signiﬁ cant higher costs ($43,000 vs $30,000) and sig-
niﬁ cant longer hospital stay (9.6 days vs 4.6 days) for 
the surgical cases. All these facts encourage us to 
use the endovascular route instead of clipping in the 
vast majority of patients with unruptured aneu-
rysms. In cases of a ruptured aneurysm in another 
location the relative risk of rupture of an additional 
non-ruptured aneurysm is higher than without a 
history of SAH (Wiebers 1998) and therefore treat-
ment is indicated. However, in this speciﬁ c subgroup 
there are different opinions about the best strategy 
(Inagawa et al. 1992; Mizoi et al. 1995;  Raaymakers 
et al. 1998; Wiebers 1998; Wiebers et al. 2003). The 
MARS group analyzed risk and beneﬁ t of screening 
for intracranial aneurysms in ﬁ rst-degree relatives 
of patients with SAH (626 ﬁ rst-degree relatives). Of 
patients with aneurysms, 18 out of 25 had neurosur-
gical clipping of their unruptured aneurysm; none 
of them had endovascular therapy. They conclude 
that screening is not warranted at this time since the 
slight increase in life expectancy does not offset the 
risk of postoperative sequelae (Raaymakers 2000). 
Wardlaw and White (2000) concluded that the 
indication and cost-effectiveness of screening for 
aneurysms is totally unclear because prevalence 
varies, rupture rate is still unclear and non-invasive 
imaging modalities are not yet accurate enough to 
exclude aneurysms smaller than 5 mm. The major 
drawback of all these studies is that the results of 
endovascular treatment in unruptured aneurysms 
were not taken into account. More recently, Hoh et 
al. (2003) established that endovascular treatment 
of unruptured aneurysms has an average mortality 
Fig. 5.37. a DWI with silent small infarct of the 
PICA after embolization of a left vertebral an-
eurysm. b, c DWI showing small acute cerebral 
infarctions in the territory of the MCA after em-
bolization of an unruptured right paraophthalmic 
aneurysm; the patient had no neurological symp-
toms
a
c
b

210 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
of 1.7% and morbidity of 7.6%. However, mortality 
rate was lower at high-volume hospitals (1% vs 3.7%), 
and morbidity at hospitals with high referral rates 
was 5.2% vs 17.6% for hospitals treating less than 
four unruptured aneurysms per year. In addition, at 
high volume hospitals length of stay was shorter and 
total hospital charges were signiﬁ cantly lower. In 
conclusion, their recommendation to patients with 
unruptured aneurysms is to look for high-volume 
hospitals and physicians treating a high number of 
patients (Hoh et al. 2003). Currently, healthcare is 
undergoing a major reorganization to meet growing 
economic pressure and the aspect of preventive 
therapy becomes more and more important. There-
fore, indication for treatment of an unruptured an-
eurysm has to be considered in several respects: 
what is the risk of aneurysm rupture and what are 
the costs to treat a subarachnoid hemorrhage? What 
are the costs of treating an unruptured aneurysm 
either neurosurgically or via an endovascular ap-
proach to avoid SAH with possibly fatal complica-
tions? Costs arising treating an aneurysmal hemor-
rhage have to be weighted against the risk of rupture 
of an incidentally detected aneurysm. It is necessary 
to provide the patient all treatment options. Regard-
ing the cost-effectiveness and the fact that endovas-
cular treatment has a lower morbidity and mortality 
than neurosurgically treated patients, in our opin-
ion, unruptured cerebral aneurysms in any location 
should be considered ﬁ rst for endovascular treat-
ment. In unruptured aneurysms we administer an-
tiplatelet therapy a week prior intervention in large 
(> 10 mm) and broad based aneurysms.
5.4.4 
Treatment of Ruptured Aneurysms
SAH is the most common sequelae in patients with 
a ruptured intracranial aneurysm. The ﬁ rst clinical 
symptom is usually an acute onset of headache. In 
most patients, such headache was not experienced 
ever before in life (“the worst headache of my life”). 
In patients with known migraine or other types of 
headache SAH can be overlooked, but usually pa-
tients themselves can clearly distinguish between 
these different types of headache. Aspirin should be 
avoided in these patients. A warning leak, deﬁ ned 
as a sudden episode of headache, vomiting, nuchal 
pain, dizziness or drowsiness, might precede this 
event in a considerable number (Hauerberg et al. 
1991). The ﬁ rst symptom could also be due to an 
intraparenchymal bleeding preceded by a minor 
SAH. These patients typically suffer from a fron-
tobasal bleeding and might be referred to a psy-
chiatric department because of a sudden onset of 
Fig. 5.38a,b. Frontal intraparenchymal hemorrhage without SAH due to a ruptured Acom aneurysm in a 
patient with sudden onset of a psychotic episode
a
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
211
a psychotic episode (Yildiz et al. 2007). Therefore, 
cross sectional imaging is indicated in patients with 
sudden change of behaviour. Very few patients do 
not experience the onset of SAH as an acute onset 
of headache, but realize the symptoms of infarc-
tion due to subsequent vasospasm. In these patients, 
Doppler sonography and lumbar puncture should 
reveal the cause of the disease. Since the rebleeding 
rate of a ruptured aneurysm depending on the loca-
tion is as high as 50% the urge to treat a ruptured 
aneurysm is obvious. The clinical categorization of 
patient’s symptoms was summarized by Hunt and 
Hess. This classiﬁ cation is internationally accepted 
and widely used to describe the patient’s condition 
at admission after SAH.
5.4.5 
Endovascular Therapy
5.4.5.1 
History
Attempts to induce thrombosis of systemic aneu-
rysms either by introducing foreign bodies or appli-
cation of electrical or thermic injury date back to the 
ﬁ rst half of the nineteenth century. Velpeu (1831) and 
Phillips (1832) independently described a method 
of introducing arterial thrombosis by inserting a 
needle into the aneurysmal lumen and withdraw-
ing it after thrombus has formed. In 1941 Werner 
and colleagues reported successful electrothermic 
thrombosis of an acute ruptured intracranial aneu-
rysm. Through a transorbital approach, a silver wire 
was introduced and heated, causing arrest of the 
aneurysmal bleeding. Gallagher (1963) proposed 
a technique of inducing thrombosis of intracranial 
aneurysms by high-speed delivery of dog or horse 
hairs into the aneurysm using a pneumatic gun (“pi-
lojection”) (Gallagher 1963, 1964;  Gallagher 
and Baiz 1964). However, despite encouraging early 
results this method did not gain acceptance. Fur-
ther improvements in endovascular devices, balloon 
techniques, and arterial catheterization, rapidly led 
Table 5.3. Hunt and Hess classiﬁ cation of SAH
I
Asymptomatic, or minimal headache and slight  nuchal 
rigidity
II
Moderate or severe headache, nuchal rigidity, no neu-
rological deﬁ cit (except cranial nerve palsy)
III
Drowsiness, confusion, or mild focal deﬁ cit
IV
Stupor, moderate or severe hemiparesis, possible early 
decerebrate rigidity and vegetative disturbance
V
Deep coma, decerebrate rigidity, moribund
Fig. 5.39a,b. Right MCA infarct in a patient who was administered with mild left sided hemiparesis. 
Doppler sonography revealed slightly increased velocity of the ICA and MCA and lumbar puncture 
showed hemosiderin. The patient did not report a typical sudden onset of headache. DSA revealed 
a small Pcom aneurysm but no visible vasospasms
a
b

212 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
to the idea of endovascular navigation and occlu-
sion of the aneurysmal sac. The ﬁ rst successful bal-
loon embolization was performed by Serbinenko in 
1973 (Serbinenko 1974a,b), establishing the way 
for modern endovascular treatment of cerebral an-
eurysms. However, several drawbacks of latex bal-
loons, i.e. deﬂ ation, aneurysm rupture, protrusion 
into the parent vessel, distal embolization, and fre-
quent rebleedings, prompted the search for better 
materials for aneurysm occlusion. Although balloon 
occlusion of parent vessels is still a therapeutic op-
tion for large, giant, or fusiform aneurysms, this 
technique has been mainly abandoned in favour of 
coil embolization. In 1991, the Italian neurosurgeon 
Guido Guglielmi published his preliminary expe-
rience with electrolytically detachable platinum 
coils (Guglielmi Detachable Coils, GDC), opening 
a new era in aneurysm treatment (Guglielmi et 
al. 1991a,b, 1992). The “coiling” technique repre-
sents the current “gold standard” in endovascular 
aneurysm therapy with more than 80,000 patients 
having been treated worldwide to date. And there is 
still ongoing progress in the ﬁ eld of endovascular 
therapy for intracranial aneurysms with develop-
ment of new coil designs or other endovascular de-
vices. The next step is supposed to replace the simply 
ﬁ lling techniques with materials that promote real 
endothelialization of the aneurysm neck.
5.4.5.2 
Basic Assumptions for Endovascular Aneurysm 
Therapy
5.4.5.2.1 
Contraindications to Endovascular Aneurysm Therapy
True contraindications to endovascular aneurysm 
therapy (EVT) are very rare including not manage-
able coagulopathies and known adverse reactions to 
heparin or contrast agents. Renal failure restricting 
the use of contrast material might be a relative con-
traindication. In cases of allergy to material which 
is intended to implanted necessary for aneurysms 
treatment, e.g. stents containing nickel, this poten-
tial risk should be weighted against the risk of alter-
native options. Case reports describing systemic al-
lergic reaction after implantation of medical devices 
are published (Dasika et al. 2003; Gimenez-Arnau 
et al. 2000).
5.4.5.2.2 
General Considerations About Surgery or 
Endovascular Aneurysm Therapy
Initially, endovascular therapy was restricted to 
surgical “difﬁ cult” or inaccessible lesions, predomi-
nantly in the posterior circulation. Nowadays, the 
Fig. 5.40a–c. Multilobulated Acom aneurysm before (a, b) and after embolization (c)
a
c
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
213
Fig. 5.41. a Broad based 
basilar tip aneurysm. b, c 
Endovascular treatment 
was performed with a 
stent and platinum coils. 
The stent was deployed 
with the distal end in the 
P1 segment left and the 
proximal end in the mid 
basilar artery (markers). 
Coiling was done through 
the mesh of the stent. 
d 10 month follow-up still 
showed complete aneu-
rysm occlusion with re-
modelling of the basilar tip
increasing experience and development of appropri-
ate devices has widened the indications, and EVT 
has become a true alternative to surgical treatment 
(Molyneux et al. 2002). However, the current state of 
the art in endovascular therapy still has some limita-
tions such as the anatomic situation of the aneurysm, 
aneurysm size or unfavourable or invisible geometry 
(neck/fundus ratio). Relative limitations correspond 
to the expertise and experience of a given team. With 
increasing experience even wide neck or multilobu-
lated aneurysms can be successfully treated via the 
endovascular approach. The decision to treat an 
aneurysm endovascularly rather than surgically is 
not easy and requires a multidisciplinary input. It is 
important to jointly discuss the cases, preferentially 
in daily conferences and rounds. This collaboration 
requires both the neurosurgeon and the intervention-
alist to be extremely honest about what they think 
they can achieve with each approach. Neurosurgery 
and interventional neuroradiology are not competi-
tive facilities, but the complementary nature of tech-
niques offers the best chance for reducing treatment 
morbidity and improving long-term outcome in dif-
ﬁ cult aneurysms. However, currently more and more 
aneurysms are treated via the endovascular approach 
and – in complete contrast to the situation of two 
decades ago – surgery is increasingly indicated in 
difﬁ cult endovascularly inaccessible aneurysms.
a
c
b
d

214 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
In our institution, the way to decide who treats 
the patient has changed somewhat over time. Dur-
ing the ﬁ rst 2 years each individual aneurysm was 
discussed between neurointerventionalists and the 
vascular neurosurgeons. Over time it turned out – 
promoted by scientiﬁ c data and by the institutional 
experience – that the endovascular route should be 
preferred, if technically possible, e.g. if the geometry 
and anatomy of the aneurysm makes it suitable for 
embolization. We have reached a point where most 
of the aneurysms are treated by an endovascular 
technique (up to 85%). Due to this circumstance 
the question of how to maintain the neurosurgeon’s 
expertise is becoming increasingly important. Re-
garding timing, in recent years the strategy of over-
all management has changed, focussing now on 
early referral and immediate therapeutic interven-
tion to minimize the risk of rebleeding and enhance 
the possibilities of aggressive neurointensive care to 
prevent vasospasm and secondary ischemic compli-
cations. One beneﬁ t of the endovascular arm in ISAT 
was the earlier treatment compared to the surgical 
group.
5.4.5.2.3 
Standards for Endovascular Aneurysm Therapy
The neurointerventionalist performing the proce-
dure should have appropriate training and experi-
ence in neuroangiography and cerebral interven-
tions, a full understanding of the disease process 
and alternative methods of treatment, and should 
fully appreciate the risks and beneﬁ ts of the proce-
dure. A thorough understanding of vascular neuro-
anatomy, angiographic equipment, radiation safety 
considerations, and physiologic monitoring equip-
ment is taken for granted, as well as access to an 
adequate supply of catheters, guidewires, embolic 
devices, equipment for intraarterial thrombolysis or 
treatment of vasospasm. The neurointerventionalist 
should be familiar with anticoagulation regimens 
and detection and management of neuroangio-
graphic complications, such as treatment of vessel 
occlusion, and vasospasm, as well as management 
of intraprocedural aneurysm rupture. Endovascular 
treatment should be performed within an environ-
ment in which appropriate neurosurgical care can 
be instituted promptly. A readily available neuro-
surgeon should be aware of the endovascular pro-
cedure prior its start and available to back up if 
necessary. A CT scanner should be readily available 
in the facility.
5.4.5.2.4 
Radiographic Equipment Standards for Endovascular 
Aneurysm Therapy
The availability of a biplane angiography with digi-
tal subtraction technique, a high resolution image 
intensiﬁ er and road-mapping ﬂ uoroscopy capabil-
ity is desirable for endovascular aneurysm therapy. 
Speciﬁ cally in difﬁ cult anatomic locations the ca-
pability of 3D angiographic techniques (either CTA 
or DSA) can be extremely helpful. Development of 
ﬂ at panel technique might further improve patient 
management during endovascular procedure since 
a cross sectional imaging method with a high spa-
tial and contrast resolution, readily available in the 
angio suite, allows immediate imaging of the brain 
parenchyma, subarachnoid space and ventricular 
system (Akpek et al. 2005).
5.4.5.2.5 
Peri- and Postprocedural Care
The role of anaesthesia in interventional neuroradiol-
ogy consists in providing patient comfort by analge-
sia and sedation, adequate monitoring, maintenance 
of vital functions and (if required) management of 
systemic heparinization. The patient’s underlying 
condition, duration and kind of intervention have to 
be considered to decide on the anaesthetic manage-
ment (Luginbuhl and Remonda 1999). Emboliza-
tion of intracranial aneurysms is performed with 
the patient in general anaesthesia at most centres. 
Although such an approach does not allow intra-
procedural evaluation of the patient’s neurological 
status and carries additional risks associated with 
general anaesthesia and mechanical ventilation 
(Phuong et al. 2002), we clearly prefer it during 
all endovascular procedures occluding intracranial 
aneurysms. A British group recently published that 
GDC occlusion of an intracranial aneurysm can be 
performed in a safe manner with the patient awake 
(Qureshi et al. 2001). However, if aneurysm rup-
ture occurs during treatment it is quite difﬁ cult to 
continue embolization if the patient is under local 
anaesthesia alone. In order to minimize thrombo-
embolic complications, anticoagulation and or an-
tiplatelet therapy is useful. We recommend admin-
istration of i.v. aspirin, which we routinely start in 
ruptured aneurysms after insertion of the ﬁ rst coil. 
In unruptured aneurysms administration of aspirin 
is started at the best at least one week prior to the 
intervention. Every patient receives aspirin (100 mg/

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
215
day) for 3 months after the procedure. There are 
no evidenced-based data recommending a standard 
therapy against blood clotting, some groups hepa-
rinize all patients during the intervention. If throm-
bus formation occurs during treatment and does 
not resolve after elevation of the blood pressure and 
aspirin i.v. then glyocoprotein receptor antagonists 
are recommended since they have a partial lytic ef-
fect. Again local ﬁ brinolysis with urokinase or rt-PA 
is not recommended in patients with ruptured an-
eurysms because fatal rebleeding is often observed. 
For recanalisation of occluded vessels, mechanical 
tools should be used instead of rt-PA. If the patient 
was in good condition before the treatment or had an 
unruptured aneurysm he should be extubated in the 
angio suite. This is speciﬁ cally important after treat-
ment of MCA and basilar tip aneurysms: these are 
associated with a higher risk of thrombotic compli-
cations resulting in morbidity. After the procedure 
the patient should be supervised on an intensive 
care unit and must be monitored by an experienced 
neurovascular team in order to detect symptomatic 
vasospasms before occurrence of infarction. Moni-
toring (clinical status including transcranial Dop-
pler sonography, heart rate, blood pressure, pO2, 
puncture site) should be done at least for 24 h in all 
patients with an unruptured aneurysms, in case of 
a recent bleeding monitoring is depending upon the 
clinical status and on the interval of the bleeding, but 
should at least continue for 7 days. The patient then 
could be transferred to an intermediate care unit, 
where continuous surveillance of vital parameters 
and a regular examination by experienced nurses 
is performed. No endovascular procedure should 
be performed without an appropriate follow-up 
imaging protocol. In our institution, every patient 
gets a MR scan (MRI and MRA: TOF and contrast 
enhanced MRA) within 3 days after the procedure. 
In cases of satisﬁ ed occlusion rate (total or subtotal 
occlusion) the patient should be scheduled for a con-
trol DSA and MRA 6 months after the procedure. If 
there is a good correlation between DSA and MRA at 
6 month follow-up could be done solely with MRA. 
We try to get follow-up imaging for at least 3 years 
but try to continue follow-up as long as the patient 
collaborates.
5.4.6 
Devices for Endovascular Aneurysm Therapy
5.4.6.1 
Catheters and Delivery Systems
Since Luessenhopp et al. (1960) reported the ﬁ rst 
intravascular cerebral embolization of an AVM by 
injecting silastic beads into the arteries of the neck, 
endovascular treatment of brain diseases has been 
considerably reﬁ ned. There has been improvement 
in ﬂ uoroscopic equipment, angiographic techniques 
and progressive miniaturization of endovascular 
devices to permit increasingly more distal, so to 
say “superselective”, catheterization. The following 
section tries to give an overview of the different 
materials to be used in endovascular therapy of 
intracranial aneurysms. However, it is a subjective 
choice. We did not want to give a complete over-
view; this can be done by the companies. In addition, 
products change so fast that a book like this cannot 
be up-to-date. We simply picked a few examples and 
give some general comments. We were not paid by 
any company to either mention or not mention any 
particular product. In general, it depends on indi-
vidual experiences what type of catheter, wire or coil 
you use. A book is written by individuals and we do 
have individual opinions. Every reader, however, is 
welcome to comment on our recommendations.
5.4.6.1.1 
Guiding Catheters
Distal placement of the guiding catheter in the in-
ternal carotid or vertebral artery facilitates stable 
navigation of the microcatheter and subsequent coil 
placement. A soft tip with hydrophilic coating allows 
atraumatic distal catheterisation. A large inner lu-
men enables continuous ﬂ ushing and road mapping 
or angiograms during the procedure without a sec-
ond guiding catheter in place. Continuous ﬂ ushing 
with heparinized saline through a hemostatic valve 
is essential to prevent retrograde ﬂ ow and clotting. 
In general, this is possible with 5- or 6-F guiding 
catheters, such as Envoy (Cordis), or FasGuide (Bos-
ton Scientiﬁ c).
5.4.6.1.2 
Microcatheters
In general, there are two types of microcatheters 
available: wire-directed microcatheters of 0.010–

216 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
0.016 in calibre, and ﬂ ow-guided microcatheters 
usually close to 0.010 in. Flow-guided microcath-
eters are mainly used for the treatment of AVMs 
to deliver liquid embolic agents or small particles. 
For endovascular aneurysm therapy wire-directed 
microcatheters are mandatory. Their hydrophilic 
coating facilitates distal catheterizations. Micro-
catheters for aneurysm therapy usually have two 
markers at the distal end to allow alignment of the 
detachment zone of coils regardless of the type of 
detachment. We prefer to use an Excel 14 (Boston 
Scientiﬁ c) but other sizes mainly depending of the 
material intended to use are also suitable to treat an-
eurysms. Steam shaping of the distal tip, individu-
ally formed according the neck, direction and size 
of the aneurysm to be catheterized might be helpful. 
Microcatheters already preshaped (Prowler; Cordis 
Corp.) are also available. Shaping of a microcatheter 
should be part of the training of all neurointerven-
tionalists.
5.4.6.1.3 
Microwires
The ideal microwire is ﬂ exible, soft, shapeable, 
with an atraumatic tip, easy to navigate, and has 
no or minimal friction. These qualities are difﬁ cult 
to combine in one device. Neurointerventional mi-
crowires are of 0.010–0.016 in caliber. Most of the 
available microwires have a hydrophilic coating. In 
our institution, we prefer the Transend 0.014 (Bos-
ton Scientiﬁ c) combining most of these qualities. 
The Terumo wire 0.016 and 0.010 are of excellent 
torqueability, but have a very stiff preformed tip, 
that can easily injure the vessel wall or rupture 
the aneurysm sac. Therefore, we do not use them 
for aneurysm therapy any more. For intracranial 
stenting long exchange micro-wires (> 300 cm) 
may be helpful. They vary considerably in stiff-
ness. Most of the wires from cardiology are too 
stiff and therefore cannot be recommended for 
intracranial use. Softer wires, like the ACS High 
Torque Traverse (Guidant), or the ChoICE (Bos-
ton Scientiﬁ c) are better, but they still have the 
potential to perforate distal vessels. Recently, the 
Transend became available with a length of 300 cm 
and is now the standard wire at our institution 
for intracranial stent procedures. However, we are 
convinced that even the delay between writing the 
manuscript and availability of the book will give 
the companies enough time to further improve 
their products.
5.4.7 
Embolic Materials for Endovascular Aneurysm 
Therapy
In general, there are four different types of embolic 
materials available: balloons, particles, coils and 
liquids.
5.4.7.1 
Detachable Balloons
Detachable balloons, initially developed by Ser-
binenko for the selective treatment of aneurysms, 
now are mainly used for major vessel occlusion, such 
as the internal carotid or vertebral artery. The bal-
loon is mounted at the distal end of a microcatheter, 
then navigated in the targeted position and after 
ﬁ lling with contrast material or a solidifying agent 
it is detached from the microcatheter. Balloons are 
available with self-sealing valves ensuring that the 
balloon remains inﬂ ated when the microcatheter is 
withdrawn. There are two types of balloons avail-
able: latex balloons and silicone balloons. Latex 
balloons: While latex is an essentially impermeable 
membrane, silicone is semipermeable. They have a 
tendency to undergo spontaneous deﬂ ation within 
days or weeks. Silicone balloons: These have to be 
inﬂ ated with isomolar solutions. Silicone balloons 
have a higher expansion coefﬁ cient and are softer 
and less rigid than latex balloons. Under normal 
circumstances they do not deﬂ ate, unlike latex bal-
loons, and do not induce a surrounding inﬂ amma-
tory reaction to adjacent tissue. Silicone balloons 
have a propensity for forward movement. 
5.4.7.2 
Nondetachable Balloons
Various nondetachable balloons are available for 
temporary vessel occlusion, angioplasty for vaso-
spasm therapy or remodelling techniques for broad 
based aneurysms. Larger vessels like the carotid or 
vertebral artery can be occluded with a double lu-
men balloon catheter, i.e. Meditech (Cook). For in-
tracranial angioplasty and remodeling smaller, more 
ﬂ exible balloons, like the Hyperglide (MTI), Eclipse 
(Balt), or the Copernic (Balt) are required. Addition-
ally to these balloons the Hyperform microballoon 
(MTI) can be used for remodelling technique.

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
217
5.4.7.3 
Coils
There is a great variety of different coils currently 
available. Stainless steel coils have been used for a 
long time for peripheral embolizations. Due to an 
attached Dacron ﬁ bre they are extremely thrombo-
genic, facilitating even parent vessel occlusion. They 
might be increasingly used for this indication, if de-
tachable balloons are really not available any more. 
However, for cerebral embolizations they are too 
stiff. Platinum coils are much softer than stainless 
steel coils. Meanwhile, there exist different types 
of CE marked detachable platinum coils provided 
from different companies. All of those are retriev-
able and are similar in the compound of the alloy, 
but they mainly differ in their technique to detach. 
The newest generation of coils has a coated surface 
or provides bioactive substances in order to facilitate 
endothelial growth and real healing of the aneurysm 
entrance.
Over the last several years, the number of coil 
sizes has been increased, multidimensional coils 
have become available, and, more recently, softer 
coils allowing safer initial and last coil placement 
have been introduced.
They are available in different shapes, lengths 
and diameter for neurointerventional procedures.
Fig. 5.42a–d. Acom aneurysm: angiogram before endovascular therapy, after placement of the ﬁ rst GDC 
(GDC 10: 6×15 3D) and after complete coil occlusion
a
c
b
d

218 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Stretch-resistant (SR) coils have a polypropyl-
ene thread through the primary helix, associated 
with greater strength of the coil. It provides more 
safety against damage if it needs to be withdrawn 
from the aneurysm. We strongly recommend using 
the stretch-resistant-type coils whenever possible 
or available. This technology really helps to protect 
patients and reduces the stress factor for the inter-
ventionalist.
Recently there has been growing interest in 
modifying platinum coils by coating the surface 
with extracellular matrix proteins, non-biodegrad-
able polymers, ﬁ broblasts, and vascular endothelial 
growth factors. Experimental studies indicate that 
these modiﬁ cations might promote endothelializa-
tion, clot organization, and tissue integration of the 
coils and thereby may lead to improved aneurysm 
occlusion and outcome (Abrahams et al. 2000, 
2001a,b; Dawson et al.1995; Kallmes et al. 1998; 
Murayama et al. 1997, 2001).
5.4.7.4 
Detachable Coils
Guglielmi et al. (1991a,b) developed electrolytically 
detachable platinum coils (GDC) for endovascular 
occlusion of aneurysms. The coil is attached to a 
stainless steel delivery wire. This allows reposi-
tioning and selective placement of the coil within 
the aneurysm. The coil can be delivered through 
a microcatheter and is detached electrolytically by 
applying a 9 V positive electric current to the pa-
tient. The current dissolves the non-insulated stain-
less steel junction located between the GDC and the 
insulated delivery wire. Using the new generation 
GDC detachment takes about 20–30 s. Detachable 
coils in general have to be delivered through special 
microcatheters, which have a radiopaque marker lo-
cated 3 cm from the distal tip of the microcatheter. 
For detachment of the coils the radiopaque marker 
of the delivery wire of the coil usually has to be 
aligned to the marker of the microcatheter. The coil 
design combines the advantage of very soft, compli-
ant platinum and retrievability resulting in mark-
edly improved safety and efﬁ cacy. An improperly 
ﬁ tting coil can be removed, repositioned or replaced 
with another coil of different size, length or shape. 
Recently, many new designs in coil conﬁ guration, 
shape, and material have become available by nu-
merous vendors and have signiﬁ cantly increased 
the versatility of this device for aneurysm therapy. 
Bidimensional coils (2D coils), in which the ﬁ rst 1.5 
coil loop is about 75% smaller in helical diameter, 
helps the following loops to stay within the aneu-
rysm and avoids protruding into the parent artery. A 
lot of 3D coils are available from different companies 
(Boston, Micrus, Microvention). Due to its spherical 
shaped memory this 3D coils spontaneously form 
a complex cage after deployment thereby serving 
as basket for subsequent coils. Ourselves, we very 
rarely use 3D coils. In the vast majority of patients, 
conventional 2D coils allow a complete packing of 
the aneurysm, 3D coils will not increase packing 
density. This was conﬁ rmed by Piotin et al. (2007). 
They found that 3D coils do not augment packing 
density. In the same study they had an interesting 
ﬁ nding in their group of aneurysms treated with 
complex coils, helical coils or a combination of both: 
packing density – thought to have a major impact 
on recurrencies – is not related to protection against 
recurrence.
5.4.7.5 
Hydrogel-Coils
Hydrogel-coils (MicroVention, Inc., Aliso Viejo, 
CA) consist of a carrier platinum coil coupled to an 
expandable hydrogel material, which undergoes a 
tremendous increase in volume when placed into a 
physiological environment with a certain pH value, 
e.g. blood. Compared to a non-coated platinum coil 
10, a fully expanded hydrogel coil 14 of the same 
length will have seven times the volume. The hydro-
gel coils were designed to offer an enhanced ability 
to ﬁ ll aneurysm cavities. Distinct from previous de-
Fig. 5.43. Different size of Hydrogel-coated coils in com-
parison with bare coils
 18 Coil 
HydroCoil 
HydroCoil 
10 Coil
 
18 
14

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
219
vices aimed at speeding the organization of throm-
bus, the new device has been designed to entirely ﬁ ll 
the aneurysm cavity, with complete or near-com-
plete exclusion of thrombus. Unlike thrombus, the 
hydrogel material is stable and unaffected by natural 
thrombolytic processes and thus may reduce ob-
served rates of aneurysm recanalization (Kallmes 
and Fujiwara 2002). In our own series aneurysm 
treatment with hydrogel coils was extremely prom-
ising. Complication rate was not higher than usual. 
Long-term observations need to reveal if there is 
a real beneﬁ t over bare platinum coils. The HEAL 
study, a multicenter registry randomizing aneu-
rysms to treatment with hydrogel vs treatment with 
bare coils, did show that when used 75% or more 
hydrogel coil length aneurysm recurrent rate at 3–
6 month follow-up was 0%. But when less than 75% 
of hydrogel coil length was implanted recurrent rate 
was not lower than published rates (Cloft 2007). 
Kang et al. (2007) analysed recanalisation rates in a 
multicenter trial and had only 9% major recanalisa-
tion mainly in large aneurysms. Berenstein et al. 
(2006) found a lower compaction and recanalisation 
rate in larger aneurysms but observed some cases 
of delayed hydrocephalus. A matched pair analyses 
found also lower recurrent rates and stated a higher 
packing density with hydrogel coils with decreased 
coil length (Gaba et al. 2006) which is an important 
point since those coils are more expensive than bare 
coils.
Fig. 5.44a–d. A 39-year-old male, SAH 2 years 
previously, second recurrent aneurysm after em-
bolization with bare coils (a) after hydrogel-coil-
embolization (b), and 6 month FU with a stable 
result (c). d ToF-MRA after 2 years showed stable 
aneurysm occlusion
a
c
b
d

220 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
5.4.7.6 
Three-Dimensional Coils: TriSpan
To support coil deposition of wide-necked aneu-
rysms a detachable device, the TriSpan (Boston Sci-
entiﬁ c, Fremont, USA) was designed and approved 
for clinical use in Europe. The TriSpan can be placed 
at the base of the aneurysm prior to coil emboli-
zation which is delivered through a second micro-
catheter. The TriSpan acts as a supporting structure 
and bridges the neck for subsequent coils. However, 
experience with this new device is limited mainly 
to broad-based basilar tip aneurysms. Since it is 
combined with an additional catheter the procedure 
is somewhat more complex and not really widely 
used.
5.4.7.7 
Stents
The idea of using an intravascular stent followed by 
trans-stent placement of coils is a treatment option 
in patients with a wide-necked aneurysm in which 
direct surgical clipping or conventional endovascu-
lar therapy would be difﬁ cult or impossible, and in 
whom parent artery occlusion is not a viable option 
(Byrne et al. 2000; Lanzino et al. 1999b; Horowitz 
et al. 2001; Lownie et al. 2000; Lylyk et al. 2001).
Stents are deployed either by balloon expansion or 
release of a self-expanding nitinol or steel stent from 
a constraining sheath. Balloon expandable stents 
had been used for intracranial treatment, usually 
coronary stents (covering size ranges up to 4 mm), 
but these stents are very stiff and bearing the risk of 
damaging a dysplastic aneurysm bearing segment 
of the artery with eventual rupture of the vessel. The 
large proﬁ le and relative stiffness of these stent de-
livery systems limit the locations that are able to be 
accessed and increase the risk of vessel dissection. 
In summary, the balloon expandable stents were not 
a real treatment option. Complication rates were too 
high and in the majority of patients it was impossible 
to obtain access to the intracranial target vessel.
Covered stents would be extremely useful in large 
or giant aneurysms as long they are located along 
vessel segments without perforating arteries. They 
can exclude aneurysms located at the extracranial 
part of the ICA up to the paraophthalmic segment; 
and of course at the vertebral artery. The advantage 
is that ﬁ lling of the aneurysm with embolic material 
is not necessary, but the disadvantages are ﬁ rst the 
limited locations where deployment is suitable and 
second the stiffness of the system which makes ac-
cess to the target vessel sometimes impossible.
5.4.7.8 
Stents Designed for Intracranial Use
Nowadays there are several self expanding stents spe-
ciﬁ cally designed for intracranial use available. These 
stents are extremely ﬂ exible and access through tor-
tuous vessels is facilitated. Even distal arteries can be 
reached easily. Since they are not balloon mounted 
the risk of damaging the artery is reduced.
The Neuroform Stent (Boston Scientiﬁ c, USA) is one 
of these self expandable microstent systems. It consists 
of three parts: the self expanding microstent, which 
is supplied in a 3-F delivery microcatheter, and a 2-F 
stabilizer. The stent comes preloaded in a 3-F delivery 
catheter and is currently available in diameters from 
2.0 to 4.5 mm, in 0.5 mm increments, and in lengths of 
15 mm and 30 mm. In our experience the stent revealed 
an excellent tractability and could be easily navigated 
even through very tortuous vessels. We did not observe 
occlusion of perforating arteries which were covered 
by the stent (Wanke et al. 2003). In our experience 
with nearly 100 implanted stents of this type the self-
expandable Neuroform is an enormous improvement 
in treating formerly endovascularly untreatable aneu-
rysms. Many broad-based aneurysms – most of them 
surgical candidates up to now – can be treated with 
this device. Some other self expanding stents are now 
available with different designs: Enterprise (Cordis), 
Solo (MTI) and Leo (Balt). The advantage of the Enter-
prise and the Solo is that they can be withdrawn even 
if more than 75% of the stent is already deployed. Both 
are as ﬂ exible as the Neuroform stent. A large series 
from Fiorella et al. (2006) analysed a large series of 
stent assisted aneurysm treatment (n=156) and found 
an instent-stenosis rate of 5.8%, but only 1.7% were 
symptomatic. First published data about aneurysm 
recurrences after stent assisted treatment are promis-
ing and showed good midterm angiographic results 
focussed on the subgroup of wide necked aneurysms 
(Fiorella et al. 2005; Wanke et al. 2005; Biondi et al. 
2007). Future developments, such as covered or coated 
or high proﬁ le stents lining the neck of the aneurysm, 
would effectively exclude the aneurysm from the cir-
culation and might theoretically present a perfect cure 
for selected aneurysms. Depending on the stent design 
coiling might not be necessary any more since a dense 
stent mesh would promote aneurysm thrombosis. 
Preliminary data proved aneurysms thrombosis in all 
experimental induced aneurysms without consecutive 

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
221
coiling using a very high proﬁ le stent (Kallmes et al. 
2007).
5.4.7.9 
Liquid Embolic Agents
Liquid materials are commonly used for endovas-
cular treatment of AVMs. Cyanoacrylate, a common 
used liquid embolic material in brain AVMs, poly-
merises after contact with blood and becomes solid 
(Eskridge 1989). The use of liquid embolics for en-
dovascular occlusion of cerebral aneurysms is still 
limited to a small group of patients and there is only 
limited experience with that technique (MacDonald 
et al. 1998; Tokunaga et al. 1998). An important issue 
of this technique is the difﬁ culty to prevent migration 
of the liquid adhesive into the parent artery. New liq-
uid embolic agents, such as Onyx (MTI, Irvine, CA), 
are used in combination with protective devices, such 
as balloons, and/or stents. Onyx (MTI, Irvine, CA) 
is a biocompatible polymer (ethylene-vinyl alcohol 
copolymer, EVOH) dissolved in its organic solvent 
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). To obtain an appropriate 
radiopacity, micronized tantalum powder is added. 
When this mixture contacts a liquid agent such as 
blood, DMSO rapidly diffuses away from the mix-
ture, causing in situ precipitation and solidiﬁ cation 
of the polymer. The use of Onyx and DMSO requires 
dedicated microcatheters to prevent material incom-
patibility between the solvent and the hub plastics. In 
their experimental study, Murayama et al. (2000) 
demonstrated the technical feasibility of endovas-
cular therapy using this liquid agent and different 
protective devices in porcine side-wall aneurysms. 
Currently, mainly large or giant ICA aneurysms are 
treated with this technique because this approach 
usually allows selective occlu sion of the aneurysm 
with preservation of the parent artery. However, it 
turned out that using this material to treat aneu-
rysms recanalisation rates are not reduced as previ-
ously thought (Cekirge et al. 2006). Recanalisation 
rate in large and giant aneurysms were still 36%.
5.4.8 
Techniques of Endovascular Therapy
5.4.8.1 
General Remarks
Neurointerventional methods concerning aneurysm 
treatment are broadly classiﬁ ed as deconstructive or 
reconstructive procedures. We therefore distinguish 
two strategies to treat cerebral aneurysms via the 
endovascular approach: ﬁ rst, occlusion of the aneu-
rysmal sac with embolic material preserving the 
parent artery and, second, in otherwise untreatable 
aneurysms occlusion of the parent artery in order 
to exclude the aneurysm from the blood circulation. 
Endovascular therapy for intracranial aneurysms 
has evolved tremendously since Serbinenko pio-
neered embolization of the parent artery with latex 
balloons in the 1970s (Serbinenko 1974a,b). Occlu-
sion of the parent artery has become a therapeutic 
alternative especially in patients with giant broad-
based aneurysms of the internal carotid artery 
which are surgically inaccessible. The basic assump-
tion for this treatment modality is that the patient 
will tolerate parent vessel occlusion without isch-
emic complications. Although there is no general 
consensus about the protocol to predict patient’s 
tolerance to permanent vessel occlusion, some au-
thors recommend blood ﬂ ow studies to decide which 
patient will tolerate acute balloon occlusion and who 
will need an extracranial-intracranial (EC-IC) by-
pass to avoid ischemic complications (Brunberg et 
al. 1994; Eckard et al. 1992; Fox et al. 1986; Linskey 
et al. 1994; Standard et al. 1995; Yonas et al. 1992). 
Complex scenarios include balloon test occlusion 
with SEP monitoring, SPECT imaging before, during 
and after test occlusion, and different degrees of 
hypotension during test occlusion. In our experi-
ence, a pretty simple test has a high predictive value: 
the compression test with injection into the contra-
lateral ICA while the symptomatic ICA gets com-
pressed. If the veins of the compressed side opacify 
not more than 1 s later than those of the injected 
site, anatomical preconditions for ICA occlusion are 
excellent. More important than the “development” 
of numerous test or pre-test procedures is probably 
how to take care for the patient after the procedure. 
Our strategy is to keep the patient recumbent and 
elevate his head by 30°/day. Blood pressure should 
be a little bit above the normal level in order to adapt 
to the different blood ﬂ ow. After the third day the 
patient is allowed to sit on the bed, on day 4 the 
patient can walk with assistance. In case of any prob-
lems during the ﬁ rst walk around, the period of 
lying down should be prolonged. In experienced 
hands occlusion of the parent artery has proved to 
be safe, convenient and effective. Vessel occlusion 
could be done either with a detachable balloon or 
detachable coils positioned proximal to the aneu-
rysm. Some authors recommend lesion trapping in 

222 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.45a–e. Giant internal carotid artery aneurysm in a 10-year-old boy presenting with visual disturbance of the right 
eye. a Conventional angiography. b T2-weighted MRI. c Endovascular occlusion of the right internal carotid artery with 
balloons was performed. d Injection in the left ICA demonstrates sufﬁ cient collateralization of the right hemisphere via 
the Acom. e T1-weighted MRI, coronal plane: before therapy and at 6 month follow-up demonstrating complete retraction 
of the aneurysm
a
c
e
b
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
223
order to prevent retrograde ﬁ lling of the aneurysm 
(Berenstein et al. 1984; Debrun et al. 1981; Fox et 
al. 1987; Hieshima et al. 1981; Higashida et al. 1989, 
1991; Kupersmith et al. 1984; Larson et al. 1995; 
Nelson 1998; Pasqualin et al. 1988; Serbinenko 
1974a,b; Tan et al. 1986; van Rooij et al. 2000). In 
order to reconstruct an aneurysm bearing vessel 
there exist different techniques nowadays. In the 
past aneurysmal sac occlusion with a detachable 
balloon was performed but this is now clearly obso-
lete. Although it is technically feasible there is no 
detachable balloon with different conﬁ gurations 
which could be navigated over a microwire in order 
to access the aneurysm lumen in an arbitrarily man-
ner. In addition, the relative high risk of complica-
tions – mainly due to thromboembolic events as well 
as aneurysm rupture during or after the procedure 
– with a high procedure-related mortality (reported 
up to 18%) as well as the fact that the balloon would 
not keep its conﬁ guration over time necessitated a 
more sophisticated endovascular technique for an-
eurysm embolization (Debrun et al. 1981;  Higashida 
et al. 1989, 1990, 1991). Over the last 20 years, im-
provement in the development of ﬂ exible microcath-
eters which can navigate through cerebral vessels to 
lesions distally has allowed the treatment of an in-
creasing range of intracranial aneurysms. The focus 
of modern endovascular therapy has shifted to the 
use of detachable platinum coils. In 1991, the ﬁ rst 
detachable platinum coil was introduced for treat-
ment of cerebral aneurysms – the so-called Gug-
lielmi detachable coil (GDC) developed by the for-
mer company Target Therapeutics, CA, USA. 
Through a guiding catheter (e.g. 5 F, 6 F) a micro-
catheter (2.3 F) is coaxially advanced into the cere-
bral vasculature and over a soft microwire it can be 
navigated into the aneurysm lumen, optimal placed 
in the aneurysm center in a stable position. To ease 
the access into the aneurysm the wire should be 
conﬁ gurated and the microcatheter can be pre-
shaped over steam but is also available in a pre-
shaped conﬁ guration with different angles. There-
fore, it is very important that neither the catheter 
nor the wire will contact the aneurysm wall too 
strongly in order to avoid aneurysm rupture. The 
interventionalist should be always aware of possible 
movements of the catheter while manipulating with 
the wire or with the coil. After gently and slowly 
removing the microwire the ﬁ rst platinum coil is 
delivered through the microcatheter. Pioneering in 
the development was that these coils are retrievable 
until the operator is satisﬁ ed with placement and 
then could be detached. The diameter of the ﬁ rst coil 
should be chosen according to the aneurysm diam-
eter. The size of the following coils is usually the 
same of the ﬁ rst coil or smaller to densely pack the 
center of the aneurysm. There is no general rule 
which coil conﬁ guration, complex or helical, should 
be used ﬁ rst, some groups solely use complex coils. 
Introduction of coils should be continued until no 
more coils can be deployed into the aneurysm. The 
idea of this treatment is to ﬁ ll the aneurysmal sack 
with coils and thrombus in order to exclude it from 
the blood circulation and thereby prevent bleeding. 
Endosaccular embolization with platinum coils is 
performed in unruptured aneurysms and in patients 
acutely ill after subarachnoid haemorrhage. Usually 
and speciﬁ cally in patients in the acute stage of 
bleeding endovascular embolization is done under 
general anaesthesia (GA). We recommend intubat-
ing all patients because in the case of a complication, 
e.g. aneurysm perforation, the patient’s status could 
deteriorate suddenly and dramatically. A standard 
transfemoral approach is used like in diagnostic an-
giography. Endovascular embolization of cerebral 
aneurysms could be done without GA (Qureshi et 
al. 2001). But, in order to manage procedure-related 
complications such as aneurysm perforation better, 
we recommended local anaesthesia only for those 
patients who clearly have an increased risk with GA. 
Although there are several advantages of coil embo-
lization over surgery, there is a disadvantage of en-
dovascular treatment. Due to coil compaction and 
residual inﬂ ow in initially incompletely obliterated 
aneurysms a potential risk of recanalization with 
aneurysmal regrowth exist. In particular, the geom-
etry of wide-necked aneurysms is less favourable for 
obtaining maximal coil packing (Tong et al. 2000). 
In cases of an unfavourable dome to neck ratio en-
dovascular treatment can be feasible and sometimes 
more effective by simultaneous temporary balloon 
protection. Hereby, a microcatheter-mounted non-
detachable balloon provides a temporary barrier 
across the aneurysmal neck while introducing the 
coils into the aneurysmal sac. Reports in the litera-
ture have offered discussions of the feasibility, efﬁ -
cacy, and safety of balloon-assisted coil placement 
in wide-necked intracranial aneurysms which was 
ﬁ rst described by J. Moret in 1997 as the “remodel-
ling technique”. The use of simultaneous temporary 
balloon protection may allow more dense intra-
 aneurysmal coil packing, especially at the neck, 
without parent artery compromise than did the use 
of coils alone (Aletich et al. 2000; Malek et al. 

224 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.46a–f. Giant paraophthalmic aneurysm in a 37-year-old female with vision loss on left 
side. Aneurysm was completely excluded by deploying a covered stent (Mastergraft, Jomed). 
Note: after stent placement perfusion of MCA branches is much better
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
225
2000; Mericle et al. 1997; Moret et al. 1997a,b; 
Nelson and Levy 2001). Despite enormous advances 
in the development of ﬂ exible microcatheters, coil 
conﬁ gurations, and embolic materials and use of 
remodelling technique, wide-necked aneurysms 
still remain a therapeutic challenge to 100% occlude 
the aneurysm. However, incomplete occlusion car-
ries the risk of aneurysm recanalization, regrowth 
and rerupture (Byrne et al. 1999; Cognard et al. 
1999; Raymond et al. 2003). With the recent devel-
opment and reﬁ nement of endovascular stents, the 
signiﬁ cant potential for these devices in the treat-
ment of wide-necked and fusiform aneurysms has 
become apparent. The technique of using an intra-
vascular stent to create a bridging scaffold followed 
by endovascular placement of coils through the in-
terstices of the stent into a wide-necked or fusiform 
aneurysm has been described in experimental stud-
ies (Byrne et al. 2000; Massoud et al. 1995; Szikora 
et al. 1994) and in humans (Higashida et al. 1997; 
Horowitz et al. 2001; Lanzino et al. 1999; Lownie 
et al. 2000; Lylyk et al. 1998, 2001; Mericle et al. 
1998; Sekhon et al. 1998; Weber et al. 2000, Wanke 
et al. 2003). As described before, new ﬂ exible and 
self expanding stents are available now and create 
the next shift from surgery towards endovascular 
therapy.
5.4.8.2 
Remodelling Technique
The remodelling technique was ﬁ rst introduced by 
Jacques Moret in 1997 (Moret et al. 1997a,b). This 
technique was developed for wide necked aneurysms 
for which conventional coiling techniques without 
any aid of a device is not feasible. The technique 
comprises the temporary inﬂ ation of a non-detach-
able balloon in front of the aneurysm neck during 
each coil placement. Hereby, coil prolapse or protru-
sion is avoided. In this study this technique allowed 
the treatment of 52 wide neck or badly shaped aneu-
rysms that were not treatable without this technique. 
The same group treated MCA aneurysms with this 
technique and noticed that remodelling technique 
is a fundamental tool in the treatment at this loca-
tion (Vanzin et al. 2005). A potential risk might 
be induced by higher pressure inside the aneurysm 
while inﬂ ation of the balloon and inserting coils 
facilitating aneurysm rupture. But in this case rein-
ﬂ ation of the balloon and immediate further coiling 
is the consequence. Some studies did reveal a higher 
percentage of thromboembolic complications others 
did not (Sluzewski et al. 2006; Moret et al. 1997a,b; 
Vanzin et al. 2005). Sluzewski and colleagues did 
perform balloon-assisted coil embolization in 8.6% 
out of 827 aneurysms and found a higher thrombo-
embolic rate of 14.1% compare to 3% in those proce-
dures without using a balloon. In addition, packing 
density was calculated and did not differ between 
conventional and balloon-assisted coiling, and for 
the authors it was not surprising that recanalisation 
rates did not differ either. In our opinion, probably 
selection of the aneurysms is completely different 
in those series. There are groups using a balloon 
in almost all aneurysms, assuming that it would 
probably not necessary in most of them. The group 
of Sluzewski and colleagues did use a balloon only 
when conventional coiling was not feasible, in very 
large and geometrically very difﬁ cult conﬁ gurated 
aneurysms and might therefore account for more 
complications. The future will show whether bal-
loon assisted coiling would be replaced by deploying 
stents since there is already a trend that healing after 
stenting is better and that results in reduced recana-
lisation rates. So ﬁ nally, stents and balloons are both 
nice mechanical protection devices that avoid coil 
herniation into the parent vessel and allow treating 
broad-based aneurysms via the endovascular ap-
proach. However, stents are bioactive by stimulat-
ing neointimal growth. At the end, this feature of 
bioactivity with an increased healing effect might 
replace the remodelling technique.
5.4.9 
Anatomic Considerations for Endovascular 
Aneurysm Therapy
Usually, there is not just one way to treat an an-
eurysm. The right treatment depends on the skills 
and experience of the team and may differ from our 
recommendations. We mainly report our own way of 
treating different aneurysms, but do not think that 
it cannot be done in another way.
5.4.9.1 
Internal Carotid Artery
Aneurysms of the internal carotid artery account 
for about 30%–40% of all intracranial aneurysms. 
Therefore, the ICA is the most frequent aneurysm 
bearing artery. In descending frequency ICA an-
eurysms do occur at the following sites: posterior 
communicating artery (52%), termination of ICA 

226 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
(20%), paraophthalmic segment (13%), cavernous 
ICA (10%), anterior choroidal artery (5%). Due to the 
surgical inaccessibility the endovascular approach 
is the therapeutic modality of choice in proximal 
symptomatic aneurysms. Carotid artery occlusion 
is usually the therapeutic modality of choice in gi-
ant symptomatic wide-necked ICA aneurysms. This 
leads to subsequent thrombosis and regression of 
the aneurysmal sac. Ideally, ICA occlusion is per-
formed distal and proximal to the aneurysm origin 
in order to prevent retrograde ﬁ lling of the ICA with 
subsequent ﬁ lling of the aneurysm (see section par-
ent artery occlusion). However, the proximal and 
distal occlusion is more important in patients with 
CCF. If the passage of the aneurysm is not possible 
– due to elongation of the ICA itself or the giant na-
ture of the aneurysm – proximal occlusion is usually 
enough and should be performed.
5.4.9.1.1 
Cavernous ICA/Paraclinoid/Paraophthalmic
Aneurysms related to the carotid artery in the region 
of the anterior clinoid process, the so-called “para-
clinoid” aneurysms are often in association with the 
ophthalmic artery. They may originate in the cavern-
ous sinus and extend into the subarachnoid space, 
carrying the risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage, even 
if the origin of the aneurysm is clearly extradural. 
Frequently presenting symptoms of aneurysms lo-
cated within or around the cavernous sinus and the 
paraophthalmic region are visual deﬁ cits or cranial 
nerve palsies since the cavernous sinus harbours 
cranial nerves III, IV, V, and VI. Retroorbital pain 
due to venous congestion and visual ﬁ eld limitations 
due to compression of the optic nerve or chiasm 
may also occur. If aneurysms of the intracavernous 
portion of the carotid artery rupture they cause a 
carotid-cavernous ﬁ stula rather than bleeding into 
the subarachnoid space.
Sufﬁ cient radiologic evaluation with delineation 
of the extent and location of the aneurysm in rela-
tion to the subarachnoid space is extremely impor-
tant to decide whether or not to treat an aneurysm in 
this location. For surgical planning it is important 
to visualize the relationship of the aneurysm to the 
anterior clinoid process which can be best achieved 
by CT angiography. In general, treatment of this en-
tity is controversial. Since the mortality rate from 
untreated cavernous aneurysms is low, treatment 
in asymptomatic patients should be reserved for 
those aneurysms extending into the subarachnoid 
space, because this is associated with a risk of sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage, and those who demonstrate 
aneurysm enlargement (Linskey et al. 1990). Treat-
ment in symptomatic patients should be reserved for 
those with progressive ophthalmoplegia or visual 
loss, ipsilateral facial or orbital pain, epistaxis or 
SAH. Treatment of these symptomatic aneurysms is 
aimed to eliminate mass effect and to cure symptoms. 
Eliminating the aneurysm also protects the patient 
from risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage. Treatment 
Fig. 5.47a,b. Before and after GDC treatment of a paraophthalmic ICA aneurysm
a
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
227
of choice is the endovascular approach since surgery 
is accompanied by signiﬁ cant morbidity and mor-
tality, and those aneurysms involving the cavernous 
sinus are usually regarded as not surgically acces-
sible. With endovascular treatment rapidly under-
going major developments, the treatment of carotid 
artery aneurysms have improved signiﬁ cantly in 
recent years. The primary aim is selective occlu-
sion of the aneurysm with preservation of the par-
ent artery. However, many aneurysms located at the 
paraophthalmic region have an unfavourable aneu-
rysm geometry with a wide neck. Additionally, they 
may be large, partially thrombosed or calciﬁ ed. In 
our experience, paraophthalmic aneurysms are very 
challenging. Due to the usually wide neck coils tend 
to herniate and even migrate into the parent vessel, 
the microcatheter rarely gets into a stable position 
especially when ﬁ lling the neck. These aneurysms 
are not for beginners. Thornton et al. (2000a) re-
viewed 66 patients with 71 ruptured and unruptured 
paraclinoid aneurysms (distal to the cavernous seg-
ment of the internal carotid artery and proximal to 
the posterior communicating artery) treated by an 
endovascular approach. Coiling was performed in 
78 aneurysms (including 45 with the remodelling 
technique), permanent balloon occlusion in 9, and 
3 had both coiling and permanent balloon occlu-
sion. In ten aneurysms it was not possible to place 
coils in the lumen of the aneurysm, ﬁ ve of these were 
treated surgically and ﬁ ve remain untreated. All pa-
Fig. 5.48. a Cavernous ICA aneurysm. b, c After balloon test occlusion the parent artery was occluded with platinum coils. 
d Although cross ﬁ lling via the Acom is ﬂ imsy the patient had no neurologic deﬁ cit after the intervention
a
c
b
d

228 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
tients had immediate post procedure angiography. 
In 90 procedures performed, 2 (2.2%) patients had 
major permanent deﬁ cits (1 monocular blindness, 1 
hemiparesis), 1 (1.1%) had a minor visual ﬁ eld deﬁ -
cit, and 2 (2.2%) patients died from major embolic 
events. Follow up 6 months after treatment showed 
more than 95% occlusion in 52/61 (85.2%) and less 
than 95% occlusion in 9/61 (14.8%). The authors con-
cluded that properly selected paraclinoid aneurysms 
can be successfully treated by endovascular technol-
ogy with a morbidity and mortality rate equal to or 
better than the published surgical series of similar 
aneurysms. Similar ﬁ ndings were published by Park 
and colleagues in 70 patients treated for paraclinoid 
aneurysms (Park 2003).
Despite these advances, occlusion of the parent 
artery is sometimes necessary because of the wide 
aneurysm neck. Balloon occlusion of the ICA is a re-
liable treatment for intracavernous giant aneurysms. 
In a series of 58 patients, Larson et al. (1995) reported 
a morbidity rate of 10% caused by transient cerebral 
ischemia, a permanent ischemic morbidity rate of 
5%, and mortality rate of 5%. The authors reported 
a good resolution of cranial nerve deﬁ cits and visual 
Fig. 5.49. a, b Conventional angiography, ap and lateral view, of the internal carotid artery: CCF due 
to a ruptured cavernous aneurysm before (c) and after (d) selective treatment of the aneurysm in a 
patient with acute ophthalmoplegia
a
c
b
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
229
impairment. For preocclusion work-up prior deﬁ nite 
occlusion of the carotid artery balloon test occlusion 
should be performed to assess if occlusion is toler-
ated. In a series of 500 temporary balloon occlusions 
of the ICA, Mathis et al. (1995) described a compli-
cation rate of 1.6% asymptomatic, and 1.2% transient 
and 0.4% permanent ischemic complications. During 
temporary balloon occlusion, it is of crucial impor-
tance to evaluate cross-ﬁ lling from the other side and 
simultaneous venous drainage. There is an increased 
risk for delayed ipsilateral ischemic deﬁ cits after ICA 
occlusion for treatment of aneurysms (Larson et al. 
1995; Linskey et al. 1994). Proximal ICA occlusion 
alone will cure the aneurysm in most cases, except 
those that have collateral inﬂ ow from cavernous or 
petrous branches of the ICA keeping the aneurysm 
open. The incidence of de novo aneurysm formation 
was reported as 1.4%–4% after carotid ligation. A 
direct relation between hemodynamic stress and the 
development of aneurysms at the anterior communi-
cating artery has been suggested by several authors 
( Timperman et al. 1995). Therefore, a close long term 
follow-up, preferentially using non-invasive MRA 
to detect a possible development of an aneurysm at 
the Acom region, should be done in these patients. 
In patients with bilateral aneurysms of the internal 
carotid artery, carotid occlusion on one side should 
be performed with caution since this might stress the 
contralateral aneurysm leading to potentially cata-
strophic results.
5.4.9.1.2 
Supraclinoid/Intracranial Carotid Bifurcation
The majority of posterior communicating artery 
(Pcom) aneurysms arise from the ICA at the origin of 
the Pcom. True Pcom aneurysms are rare and might 
be more difﬁ cult to catheterize. About 30%–40% of 
Fig. 5.50a–d. Giant partially thrombosed paraophthalmic 
ICA aneurysm with some calciﬁ cation at the ventral rim
a
c
b
d

230 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Pcom aneurysms are associated with third nerve cra-
nial palsy with or without subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(Birchall et al. 1999; Perneczky and Czech 1984). 
From a surgical point of view the approach to these 
aneurysms is not too difﬁ cult. However, many of 
them have a small neck and are good candidates for 
endovascular therapy. In case of aneurysms smaller 
than 4mm we always use a microballoon in order 
to be prepared for eventual rupture occurring more 
often in this location than somewhere else (our ex-
perience! We don’t have any scientiﬁ c data about 
that). The non-inﬂ ated balloon should be placed at 
the origin of the aneurysm and if it ruptures the bal-
loon can easily stop the bleeding. In our experience, 
those aneurysms arising from the posterior wall of 
the ICA might be slightly different compared to other 
intracranial aneurysms. They might have a higher 
tendency of recanalization than generally expected 
from a side wall aneurysm and some of them are 
more fragile and have a tendency not only to rupture 
at the dome, but also to pop out of the ICA wall. 
The latter situation is extremely difﬁ cult to handle 
Fig. 5.51a–c. Small broad-based paraophthalmic aneurysm treated with remodelling technique, previously coiled Acom 
aneurysm
a
c
b
Fig. 5.52. a, b Large paraophthalmic broad-based ICA aneurysm extending cranially superior to the clinoid process with 
partial calciﬁ cation. c “Evacuation trapping technique” during clipping was performed after transient balloon occlusion of 
the left internal carotid artery
a
c
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
231
and usually ends up with a parent vessel occlusion 
of the ICA. Aneurysms of the intracranial carotid 
bifurcation usually arise at the apex of the T-shaped 
bifurcation and the majority of them points upward 
and towards the anterior perforated substance. Due 
to the perforating branches at this site clipping of 
these aneurysms is associated with a substantial risk 
of ischemic infarctions. The endovascular approach 
is usually easy from a technical point of view (like 
in basilar tip aneurysms). Even if these aneurysms 
look broad based, coiling is usually possible without 
the aid of remodelling or stenting.
5.4.9.2 
Anterior Cerebral Artery
5.4.9.2.1 
Anterior Communicating Artery
The rupture of an aneurysm at the anterior com-
municating artery (Acom) is responsible for approxi-
mately 40% of subarachnoid hemorrhages (Kassell 
et al. 1990a,b). Treatment of these aneurysms is thus 
a frequent situation and of great importance. In the 
past, Acom aneurysms were treated nearly exclu-
Fig. 5.53a,b. Conventional angiog-
raphy, before and after coil treat-
ment of a distal ICA aneurysm
b
a
a
c
b
Fig. 5.54a–c. Typical intracranial carotid bifurcation aneurysm. MRA 6 month after embolization revealed stable  occlusion

232 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
sively by surgical clipping, using either a pterional 
or interhemispheric approach. With the increasing 
use of endovascular techniques Acom aneurysms are 
frequently treated by coil embolization and in some 
institutions it is now the ﬁ rst-line treatment. Moret 
et al. (1996) reported their results on 251 berry aneu-
rysms treated by detachable coils, of which 36 were 
located at the Acom and treated with coils. There 
were 23 aneurysms which were completely and 6 were 
partially occluded. In three cases, no endovascular 
treatment was attempted because the aneurysmal 
neck was not clearly distinct from the adjacent, or 
parent vessels. In four cases, treatment failed be-
cause of atheroma of the cervical and intracranial 
vessels. The authors reported one permanent neu-
rologic complication, two patients died as a result 
Fig. 5.55a,b. Small Acom aneurysm: before (a) and after (b) endovascular embolization
a
b
Fig. 5.56a,b. Medium sized Acom aneurysm: before (a) and after (b) endovascular treatment; the parent 
artery is still open
a
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
233
Fig. 5.57a–c. Before and after complete coil 
embolization of an Acom aneurysm. Note, 
the simultaneous bilateral carotid injection 
demonstrating patency of the Acom
a
c
b
Fig. 5.58a,b. Before and after complete coil embolization of a multilobulated Acom aneurysm
a
b

234 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
of complications of subarachnoid haemorrhage. In 
summary, the authors concluded that endovascular 
treatment using GDC is an efﬁ cient technique for 
treating anterior communicating artery aneurysms 
even in the acute phase of SAH (Moret et al. 1996). 
This is in accordance with our own results, dem-
onstrating that GDC treatment of ruptured Acom 
aneurysms is effective and can be performed with 
acceptable mortality and morbidity, also during the 
vulnerable period of vasospasms. Remodelling seems 
to be feasible for wide-necked aneurysms of the Acom 
(Levy 1997), but is not routine at this location. In 
our experience recanalization of these aneurysms 
is usually not a problem in downward looking an-
eurysms. Those aneurysms looking upward indeed 
have a higher tendency of recanalization even after 
initial complete occlusion. Follow-up is therefore of 
utmost importance in the latter group.
Fig. 5.59a–c. Conventional angiography before 
treatment revealed severe vasospasm of the ACA, 
despite the spasm endosaccular treatment with 
complete obliteration of the Acom aneurysm was 
performed and vasospasmolysis after treatment 
resulting in almost complete regression of spasm
a
b
c

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
235
5.4.9.2.2 
Distal Anterior Cerebral Artery/Pericallosal Artery
Distal anterior cerebral artery aneurysms are rare, 
accounting for about 4.5% of all intracranial an-
eurysms (Inci et al. 1998), and usually arise at the 
bifurcation of the pericallosal and callosomarginal 
arteries. SAH due to rupture of a distal anterior 
cerebral artery aneurysms is frequently associated 
with ICH in and/or along the corpus callosum and 
anterior interhemispheric ﬁ ssure and subsequent 
intraventricular hemorrhage.
Pericallosal aneurysms frequently have a broad 
base or absent neck associated with a small diameter 
of the parent vessel. In some cases the pericallosal 
artery arises out of the aneurysm sac. This anatomic 
feature is difﬁ cult for both surgery and endovascular 
therapy. Due to the particular anatomy of pericallo-
sal aneurysms surgical approach is different from 
those of other anterior circulation aneurysms and 
precise neck clipping might be difﬁ cult even for an 
experienced surgeon. Using the frontal interhemi-
spheric route, which is the usual approach for most 
surgeons, the pericallosal aneurysm neck is exposed 
after the fundus, which might become a delicate 
procedure and is frequently associated with intra-
operative aneurysm rupture (Proust et al. 1997). 
Additionally, there might be difﬁ culties in clip ap-
plication due to the small space of the pericallosal 
cistern, dense adhesions between the cingulate gyri, 
difﬁ culty in controlling the parent artery, and the 
association of vascular anomalies (Inci et al. 1998).
Proust et al. (1997) reported the results of a ret-
rospective multicenter study in 43 patients with 50 
distal anterior cerebral artery aneurysms, with only 
2 aneurysms treated endovascularly. In their series 
an 11.4% incidence of thrombosis was observed on 
postoperative control angiography, mainly in the 
distal pericallosal segment or callosomarginal ar-
tery, associated with a poor outcome. The authors 
reported a higher tendency of rebleeding in this 
location. This is in accordance with the results of 
Sindou et al. (1988) reporting a 16% rebleeding rate 
in their series. But times are changing. Recently, 
Menovsky et al. (2002) reported on 12 patients with 
pericallosal aneurysms, all treated with the endo-
vascular method. In all 12 patients, the pericallosal 
aneurysm could be reached with a microcatheter 
and platinum coils could be deployed. There were 
no procedure-related complications. Initial occlu-
sion was complete in 11 aneurysms and near com-
plete in 1 patient. The conclusion of the authors is 
that coiling of ruptured pericallosal aneurysms 
can be considered as an alternative to surgical clip-
ping. Increasingly improved results of endovascular 
therapy at different locations of the Circle of Willis 
Fig. 5.60a,b. Multilobulated aneurysm of the 
pericallosal artery; because of an associated intra-
parenchymal hematoma surgery was performed
a
b

236 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.62a–c. Before and after endovas-
cular treatment of a small aneurysm of 
the pericallosal artery; aneurysmogra-
phy revealed a very close relationship of 
the aneurysm and the callosomarginal 
artery
a
c
b
a
b
Fig. 5.61a,b. Before and after endovascular treatment of a small aneurysm of the pericallosal artery

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
237
are mainly based on increased skills of the inter-
ventionalist, but are also related to the continuous 
improvement of all parts of the material, allowing 
easier access to the aneurysm and denser packing 
with softer coils. In our opinion, the endovascular 
approach in pericallosal artery aneurysms is of-
ten feasible with good outcome This is conﬁ rmed 
by recently published data (Menovsky et al. 2002; 
 Keston et al. 2004).
5.4.9.3 
Middle Cerebral Artery
MCA aneurysms are often small and wide necked, 
and often incorporate neighbouring arterial 
branches in the aneurysm base. Additionally, they 
are frequently associated with multiple intracranial 
aneurysms (“mirror aneurysms”). Due to the local 
anatomy and neck conﬁ guration MCA aneurysms 
need particular consideration. For aneurysms with 
a very wide neck or difﬁ cult geometry, surgery is 
still the therapy of choice. If a space-occupying he-
matoma is present, immediate evacuation of the he-
matoma is mandatory, in combination with clipping 
of the aneurysm (van Gijn and van Dongen 1982). 
Regli et al. (1999) recommend not to attempt coil 
embolization in MCA aneurysms since in their study 
of 35 consecutive patients harbouring 40 unruptured 
MCA aneurysms, only 6% could be successfully em-
bolized with coils whereas 94% (32/34) of patients 
had to be clipped. The two major angioanatomic 
features responsible for the failure of endovascular 
treatment were an unfavourable dome-to-neck ratio 
of less than 1.5, and/or arterial branching from the 
aneurysm base. Compared to other aneurysm lo-
cations, the risk of thromboembolic complications 
or local compression of surrounding neighbouring 
vessels seems to be increased. We also made the 
experience that endovascular treatment in this lo-
cation is more often associated with complications 
such as thrombus formation at or near the base of 
the aneurysm. However, we could not conﬁ rm the 
results of the above mentioned study. Regarding 
feasibility we were able to treat almost 90% of MCA 
aneurysms and the clinical outcome of our consecu-
tive series of 39 patients with 41 ruptured and un-
ruptured aneurysms at the middle cerebral artery 
encountered only 2.6% with a permanent neuro-
logic deﬁ cit due to the procedure. Although the to-
tal rate of complications including vessel occlusion, 
coil protrusion and groin hematoma was higher, 
this number of 2.6% reﬂ ects a very low procedural 
permanent morbidity. Therefore, we think after ap-
propriate patient selection endovascular therapy in 
these aneurysms might become more applicable as 
it is by now (Doerﬂ er et al. 2006). Careful evalu-
ation of the angioarchitecture using rotational 3D 
angiography, superselective angiography with the 
microcatheter (aneurysmography), or 3D helical 
CT angiography might be extremely helpful in the 
precise visualization of the aneurysm neck, shape 
and the size of the aneurysm, supporting further 
treatment decisions and planning. MRA can pro-
vide complementary information to DSA, such as 
intraaneurysmal thrombus. Sometimes the endo-
vascular attempt only with introducing the micro-
catheter and delivering a coil could reveal if coiling 
seems to be possible without an unusual high risk. 
In selected cases the remodelling technique in broad 
based MCA bifurcation aneurysms can be very help-
ful; in many cases it is even not necessary to inﬂ ate 
the balloon; it may be enough to have just a second 
microcatheter at the aneurysm entrance to provide 
coils from migration into a parent branch. To pre-
vent thromboembolic complications and compres-
sion of neighbouring arterial branches by coils, our 
“philosophy” for selected MCA aneurysms treated 
endovascularly is to wait longer (5–10 min) before 
detachment of the coils. In these aneurysms we pre-
fer to rather underestimate the coil diameter than 
to choose a coil which is slightly greater than the 
maximum diameter of the aneurysm. In an unrup-
tured aneurysm we put the patient under antiplatelet 
therapy, at optimal at least a week prior intervention. 
If there is at least subtotal occlusion, further aneu-
rysm thrombosis is possible and was observed in 
some of our patients at follow-up on DSA and MRA 
6 months after coil embolization. However, Pierot 
et al. (1997) reported rebleeding in an only partially 
treated MCA aneurysm. General recommendation 
should imply dense packing for MCA aneurysms 
even if sudden intraaneurysmal thrombosis occurs 
and no inﬂ ow is seen anymore. This is actually a 
sign that thrombosis might promote into the parent 
artery and control series should be obtained at least 
15–30 min after insertion of the last coil. In patients 
with loose coil packing follow-up is essential like in 
any other locations, to see if there is growth of neck 
remnants or subsequent thrombosis during follow 
up. When unclippable or endovascularly untreatable 
aneurysms involve the Ml, M2, and M3 branches 
of the middle cerebral artery (MCA), bypass sur-
gery can obviously be a therapeutic option in com-
bination with parent artery occlusion (Drake and 

238 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
 Peerless 1997; Peerless et al. 1982). However, and 
this again is our experience, this is the exception.
5.4.9.4 
Vertebrobasilar Arteries
Aneurysms of the posterior circulation account for 
about 15% of all intracranial aneurysms saccular 
aneurysms and those of the basilar tip are the most 
frequent accounting for 5%–8% of all intracranial 
aneurysms. Ruptured aneurysms in the posterior cir-
culation have a worse prognosis than patients with a 
ruptured aneurysm in another location (Schievink 
et al. 1995) and early rerupture occurs more often in 
this location. Despite improvement in microsurgi-
cal therapy, clipping for posterior circulation aneu-
rysms remains challenging. The main problems are 
the deep location, the presence of many eloquent 
structures around the sac and the neck as well as 
the restricted access to the aneurysm neck. Further-
more, SAH and cerebral edema increase the difﬁ cul-
ties of the surgical approach much more than in any 
other location. Surgical complications speciﬁ c for 
non-giant basilar bifurcation aneurysms are mid-
brain and/or thalamic infarctions from perforator 
injury or occlusion, intraoperative rupture, and fre-
quent but nearly always transient cranial nerve pa-
resis (Drake 1965; Horikoshi et al. 1999;  Peerless 
et al. 1987, 1994; Rice et al. 1990). Nowadays, it is ac-
cepted that endovascular treatment should be done 
as ﬁ rst treatment option since clinical outcome is 
much improved compared to clipping (Bavinzski 
et al. 1999; Lusseveld et al. 2002; Richling et al. 
1995; Tateshima et al. 2000; Vallee et al. 2003). 
The early recognition and acceptance that coiling is 
clearly better than clipping in hind brain circulation 
Fig. 5.63a–d. Small broad-based ruptured MCA bifurcation aneurysm before and after endovascular 
embolization with a stable occlusion after 6 months (d)
a
c
b
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
239
aneurysms is the reason that these aneurysms are 
underrepresented in the ISAT study (Molyneux et 
al. 2002). Almost exclusively aneurysms of the ante-
rior circulation were involved, posterior circulation 
aneurysms, for which the endovascular approach 
is generally accepted as ﬁ rst-line treatment, made 
up only 2.7%. In most of the cases inclusion was 
thought to be unethical.
5.4.9.4.1 
Tip of the Basilar Artery
Aneurysms of the basilar tip remain an extreme sur-
gical challenge, both in terms of technical difﬁ culties 
associated with the access and the signiﬁ cant post-
operative morbidity and mortality rates reported 
by experienced centres following direct clipping. 
Clear results about morbidity and mortality rates 
in patients surgically clipped for an unruptured an-
eurysm gives the meta-analysis of Raaymakers et 
al. (1998). This analysis included 61 studies with a 
total of 2460 patients with at least 2568 unruptured 
aneurysms. Only 158 patients had a postoperative 
angiogram which revealed a residual aneurysm in 
7%. Although the proportion of aneurysms in the 
posterior circulation of about 30% was somewhat 
high, the study revealed a mortality and morbid-
ity rate for non-giant aneurysms of 3% and 12.9%, 
respectively. The results for giant aneurysms in the 
same location were much worse with a morbidity 
and mortality of 37.9% and 9.6%, respectively.
In contrast to the surgical approach, the endovas-
cular approach is relatively easy (unless the patient 
has severe arteriosclerotic disease with increased 
vessel elongation and stenosis). However, the access 
to the basilar tip plays a minor role in most cases. 
Fig. 5.64a–c. Before and after GDC treatment of 
a left MCA aneurysm, note the slight persistent 
inﬂ ow in the centre of the aneurysm (b) imme-
diately after embolization; c 6-month follow-up 
demonstrated complete occlusion without any 
residual inﬂ ow
a
c
b

240 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.65a–f. Angiography: before and after incomplete coil embolization of an unruptured left MCA 
aneurysm. Due to progressive thrombosis out of the aneurysm gradual MCA occlusion developed 
4.5 h after the intervention. The vessel could be reopened by selective intraarterial thrombolysis us-
ing urokinase (1,000,000 IU). Although a small basal ganglia infarction was induced the patient had 
a good recovery with only mild deﬁ cits
a
c
e
b
d
f

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
241
The main technical challenge of the endovascular 
procedure depends on the shape of the aneurysm 
and not on its location. But since the introduction of 
very ﬂ exible neurostents and the development of dif-
ferent coil designs most of the basilar tip aneurysms 
are now treatable with the endovascular approach. 
This is also true for broad-based aneurysms which 
may encroach one or both P1 segments. Bavinzski 
et al. 1999 treated a series of ruptured (n=34) and 
unruptured (n=11) basilar tip aneurysms and had a 
morbidity of 4.4% and mortality of 2.2%. Even better 
results were obtained by the group with Tateshima 
et al. (2000) who treated 73 patients with 75 basi-
lar tip aneurysms of which 42 patients had a SAH, 
Fig. 5.67a,b. Before and after endovascular treatment of a broad-based ruptured basilar tip aneurysm
a
b
Fig. 5.66a,b. Before and after endovascular treatment of a non-ruptured basilar tip aneurysm
a
b

242 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.68a,b. Before and 
after endovascular treat-
ment of a small ruptured 
basilar tip aneurysm
Fig. 5.69a–d. Typical regrowing basilar tip aneu-
rysm after initial coiling. After stent placement 
the aneurysm could be completely occluded and at 
12 month follow-up MRA showed a stable result
a
b
a
c
b
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
243
Fig. 5.70. a, b Before and after stent application in combination with coil treatment in a broad-based 
basilar tip aneurysm encroaching the P1 segment on the right side. c The stent was placed from the right 
P1 segment to the basilar artery. d A 7 month FU showed further obliteration of the initially subtotal 
occluded aneurysm
8 presented with symptoms due to mass effect and 
23 had an incidental ﬁ nding. The procedure-re-
lated morbidity was 4.1% and mortality was 1.4%. 
Because most single center reports on endovascu-
lar treatment of basilar tip aneurysms revealed an 
extremely low morbidity and mortality rate which 
matches our own experience we do recommend en-
dovascular treatment as the treatment of choice in 
ruptured or unruptured aneurysms in this location 
(Bavinzski et al. 1999; Birchall et al. 2001; Pierot 
et al. 1996; Richling et al. 1995; Tateshima et al. 
2000;  Vallee et al. 2003; Lusseveld et al. 2002; 
Henkes et al. 2005).
5.4.9.4.2 
Vertebral Aneurysms
Aneurysms of the vertebral artery leading to SAH 
are located at the V4 segment. Dissecting aneurysms 
are more frequent in this location than non-dis-
a
c
b
d

244 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.72a,b. Small vertebral aneurysm before and after endovascular treatment
a
b
secting berry aneurysms. Aneurysms are located 
proximal to the origin of the PICA, at the origin 
of the PICA (so-called PICA aneurysms) or slightly 
distal to the origin of the PICA. In patients with a 
dissecting aneurysm of the vertebral artery result-
ing in subarachnoid hemorrhage, either occlusion of 
the vertebral artery at the site of the aneurysm or 
trapping of the lesion is commonly advocated to pre-
vent subsequent rupture. Fusiform aneurysms are 
usually considered due to atherosclerosis in adults. 
But, more common in the vertebrobasilar system, 
there is a subset of cerebral aneurysms with fusiform 
morphology, apparently unrelated to cerebral ath-
erosclerosis or systemic connective tissue disease, 
thin-walled in part or whole, possibly containing 
thrombus (Findlay et al. 2002). These aneurysms 
can rupture or cause cranial nerve or brain stem 
compression.
Fig. 5.71a–c. Broad based vertebral aneurysm at the origin of the PICA before and after stent placement and implantation 
of platinum coils
c
b
a

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
245
a
c
e
b
d
Fig. 5.73. a Very small ruptured vertebral aneu-
rysm. b, d Two microstents (INX, Medtronic) were 
placed in front of the aneurysm. c Immediately, 
contrast stasis in the aneurysm was noted. Re-
peated DSA 10 days and 7 months (e) after inter-
vention revealed complete aneurysm obliteration

246 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
5.4.9.5 
Rare Locations
5.4.9.5.1 
Posterior Cerebral Artery
Aneurysms of the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) 
are relatively rare compared with those in other 
locations. Extremely rare are singular berry aneu-
rysms of the PCA. Often, this type of aneurysm is 
either associated with the incidence of multiple an-
eurysms or with other vascular disorders like ar-
terious-venous-malformations, moyamoya disease 
or ipsilateral internal carotid occlusion for various 
reasons. Other rare causes are infectious and post-
traumatic conditions. Some authors ﬁ gured out that 
the incidence of PCA aneurysms is approximately 
1% of all intracranial aneurysms (Ciceri et al. 2001; 
Drake 1977; Sakata et al. 1993).
Surgical treatment of these aneurysms is com-
plex and often associated with high morbidity rates 
due to the close relationship to cranial nerves and 
the upper brain stem. A precise knowledge of the 
segmental anatomy of the PCA and its branches 
is essential when the surgical or endovascular ap-
proach to an aneurysm is planned, particularly if 
parent vessel occlusion is intended. In our opinion, 
the treatment of choice is selective endovascular 
obliteration of the aneurysm with preservation of 
the parent artery. In cases of fusiform aneurysms or 
wide-necked aneurysms occlusion of the parent ar-
tery might be necessary. Although no evaluation of 
potentially existing collaterals prior to endovascular 
treatment can be performed parent artery occlusion 
Fig. 5.74a–c. Before, 6 months after and 1 year 
after endosaccular treatment of a proximal PCA 
aneurysm (P1 segment), an additional small basi-
lar stem aneurysm was not treated
a
c
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
247
Fig. 5.75. a, b DSA before and after endovascu-
lar treatment of a right distal PCA aneurysm. 
c At 15 min after selective parent artery occlu-
sion there is still some residual aneurysm ﬁ ll-
ing immediately after parent vessel occlusion. 
d, e Control angiography 3 days after vessel 
 occlusion demonstrated complete aneurysm 
occlusion. f, g 3 months follow-up reveals sta-
ble occlusion
g
a
c
e
b
d
f

248 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
can be performed with a low incidence of visual ﬁ eld 
deﬁ cits due to good collateralisation. Nevertheless, 
one should be aware of the perforating arteries aris-
ing from the PI and P2 segment supplying the brain 
stem and thalamus.
5.4.9.5.2 
Posterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery
In contrast to vertebral aneurysms located at the ori-
gin of the PICA, real PICA aneurysms are located ei-
ther proximally or distally at the PICA itself. Endovas-
cular therapy with preservation of the parent artery 
was thought to be very difﬁ cult in this location. Like 
in basilar tip aneurysms and brain stem aneurysms 
the access to aneurysms at the PICA is easy to perform 
and this is in contrast to the surgical approach. Al-
though PICA aneurysms tend to be fusiform or at least 
broad based most of these aneurysms can be occluded 
sufﬁ ciently and often with preservation of the PICA 
via the endovascular route. If parent artery occlusion 
is necessary to exclude the aneurysm the PICA is a 
very “occlusion-resistant” artery. However, proximal 
occlusion of the PICA is associated with a very low 
morbidity due to the excellent collateralisation of the 
cerebellum via the AICA and via the SCA.
Fig. 5.76a–c. Before and after selective endosaccular 
treatment of a PICA aneurysm with preservation of the 
parent artery, 7 month FU showed a stable obliteration
a
c
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
249
5.4.9.5.3 
Basilar Trunk Aneurysms
Saccular aneurysms of the basilar trunk are rare 
lesions with an incidence of less than 1% of all intra-
cranial aneurysms. Damage to the perforating arter-
ies is one of the major complications during surgery. 
Given the high risk of surgery on basilar trunk an-
eurysms and the simple endovascular access endo-
vascular therapy should be ﬁ rst line treatment op-
tion. Van Rooij et al. (2003) treated a consecutive 
series of eight patients with this type of aneurysm; 
only one was non-ruptured. All patients had a good 
outcome except one who died as a consequence of 
the SAH. Procedure-related complications were not 
noted. As a consequence the authors do recommend 
treatment of aneurysms in this location via the en-
dovascular route as ﬁ rst option. Uda et al. (2001) 
reached the same conclusion. They treated 41 basilar 
trunk aneurysms and had a morbidity and mortality 
rate of 2.6% each. The endovascular catheterization 
of these lesions is relatively simple, in contrast to 
the complex neurosurgical approaches. Obviously, 
obliteration of these aneurysms decreases the possi-
bility of unwanted occlusion of perforating arteries 
to the brainstem and therefore prevents brain stem 
Fig. 5.77a–d. Before and after intended endovascular occlusion of a dysplastic PICA revealing at least 
four aneurysms. MRI: T2 images showed only a very small infarction in the PICA territory without caus-
ing clinical symptoms
a
c
b
d

250 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.79a,b. Conven-
tional angiography: be-
fore and after selective 
obliteration of a basilar 
stem aneurysm located 
in the distal third of 
the vessel proximal to 
the origin of the supe-
rior cerebellar artery
b
a
Fig. 5.78a–c. Conventional angiography. a, b Be-
fore and after stent placement in combination with 
platinum coils to treat two small proximal located 
basilar stem aneurysms. c A 6 month control an-
giography demonstrated complete obliteration of 
the two aneurysms, the distal markers of the stent 
are slightly seen (arrow)
a
c
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
251
infarction. In case of a broad base or a very small 
size a stent to bridge the neck might be necessary. 
During the last few years it has become more and 
more obvious that many of these aneurysms are 
probably of dissecting nature. This might explain 
why endosaccular coiling alone very often resulted 
not only in recanalisation but in further growth 
of the aneurysm sac. Stent-protected coiling – our 
opinion – will be the method of choice in the future 
for these aneurysms.
5.4.10 
Special Considerations
5.4.10.1 
Giant Aneurysms
Giant aneurysms, deﬁ ned as larger than 25 mm, 
are rare intracranial lesions with a prevalence of 
about 5%–8% of aneurysms. Only one fourth to one 
third of giant aneurysms present with subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. Presenting symptoms are usually due 
to mass effect (75%), intracerebral hemorrhage or 
thromboembolism. Thrombosis and stroke due to 
blood clot formation within the aneurysm and sub-
sequent distant emboli occur in 2%–5% of patients 
with giant aneurysms. Symptoms are related to 
the anatomic location, headache is also a frequent 
symptom. Typically, giant aneurysms in the anterior 
circulation are in vicinity of the optic pathway, asso-
ciated with symptoms related to vision. As many as 
60% of giant aneurysms occur at the internal carotid 
artery. The most common site is the cavernous part 
of the internal carotid artery. Approximately 40% 
have calciﬁ cations in their walls that usually make 
clipping difﬁ cult. These calciﬁ cations can easily be 
identiﬁ ed on CT, which should be part of the di-
agnostic work-up in all these giant aneurysms. An 
additional 10% occur at the anterior communicating 
artery region, 10% are located at the middle cerebral 
artery. Some 15% of giant aneurysms occur at the 
top of the basilar artery, and approximately 5% arise 
from the vertebral artery.
Giant aneurysms are frequently (at least 60%) as-
sociated with either partial, or less common complete 
thrombosis. Recanalization of a completely throm-
bosed giant aneurysm has been also reported (Lee 
et al. 1999). Symptomatic giant aneurysms usually 
have a grim natural history and poor  prognosis.
There are several different strategies available to 
manage giant aneurysms. This is mainly due to the 
fact that no single technique is perfect in dealing 
with all giant aneurysms. Treatment options for gi-
ant lesions include surgical clipping, endovascular 
embolization, and combined approaches. Indirect 
surgical techniques include proximal occlusion and 
trapping of the aneurysm. Trapping and proximal 
ligation are usually deﬁ nitive treatments provided 
that the patient’s collateral circulation can tolerate 
major vessel occlusion. Depending on the location 
of the aneurysm, patients should have pre-operative 
evaluation with temporary balloon occlusion to test 
tolerance of trapping or proximal ligation. Major 
arterial branches leaving from the aneurysm dome 
can make proximal ligation the only therapeutic op-
tion. In some patients inadequate collateral circu-
lation mandates bypass surgery in the therapeutic 
approach. This is speciﬁ cally true for patients with 
giant aneurysms at the MCA bifurcation or the in-
tracranial ICA. There seems to be a correlation be-
tween size and incidence of complications during 
surgery for unruptured intracranial aneurysms. 
Aneurysms larger than 2.5 cm (giant aneurysm) 
in diameter have a 20-fold risk of signiﬁ cant sur-
gical morbidity or poor outcome during surgical 
treatment. However, giant aneurysms are also not 
really good candidates for endovascular therapy, 
since they carry a high risk of recanalization and 
regrowth, due to the size of aneurysm, nature of 
coils and continuous ﬂ ow-related stress on the aneu-
rysm. Pre-existing thrombus within the aneurysm 
and coil migration into the thrombus may addi-
tionally facilitate coil compaction. Up to now it has 
been totally unclear whether combined techniques 
with stents and coils might overcome this problem 
of recanalization. Ideal would be a very high proﬁ le 
stent inducing thrombosis of the aneurysm without 
the necessity of subsequent coiling. Endovascular 
techniques also include parent vessel occlusion us-
ing balloons or coils. Proximal balloon occlusion is 
a useful and often used technique for giant internal 
carotid artery aneurysms. There are several advan-
tages of intravascular balloon treatment over other 
treatment modalities. If an extradural aneurysm is 
excluded from circulation by placing the balloon 
across or proximal to the aneurysm neck, there is a 
very low probability of aneurysm ﬁ lling by collateral 
circulation. The anatomical dead space is decreased, 
reducing the incidence of emboli potentially asso-
ciated with ICA thrombosis. Additionally, there is 
thrombosis and shrinkage of the aneurysm and de-
crease of pulsatility. The mass effect is also gradu-
ally decreasing. Unfortunately, transient worsening 

252 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
of mass effect can happen shortly after endovascu-
lar therapy (Hecht et al. 1991). There maybe also a 
late increase in mass effect as reported by Blanc et 
al. (2001) after parent vessel occlusion of the internal 
carotid artery for a giant supraclinoid aneurysm in 
a 47-year-old woman, who became hemiparetic and 
dysphasic 8 days after treatment. It has been shown 
experimentally that a thrombosed aneurysm may 
swell up to 15%–40% of the original size, speciﬁ cally 
if located at the basilar tip. In experimental aneu-
rysms extensive neovascularity was observed within 
the ﬁ rst week after coil embolization. Increased 
capillary permeability of these neovessels within 
the evolving thrombus likely promotes transient 
enlargement of the aneurysm cavity. Steroid medi-
cation a week prior and up to 5 days after therapy 
might be indicated, and may prevent these delayed 
complications in an individual patient. However, 
this is not an evidence-based therapeutic regimen.
5.4.10.1.1 
Results of Endovascular Therapy in Giant Aneurysms
Different endovascular techniques may serve as an 
adjunct to surgery and may further improve therapy 
of giant aneurysms. In general, therapy of giant an-
eurysms should be tailored to each patient and al-
ways arise from the combined therapeutic plan of 
neurosurgeons and neurointerventionalists using a 
multimodality approach to minimize morbidity and 
mortality. However, as mentioned above, parent ves-
sel occlusion – if tolerated by the patient – is by far 
the most effective type of treatment. Surgery alone 
has an extensive risk, endovascular therapy alone 
has a lower procedural risk but recanalization is a 
frequent observation during follow-up.
5.4.10.2 
Pediatric Aneurysms
The incidence of cerebral aneurysms in children 
is low. In patients under 15 years of age, it consti-
tutes 1%–2% of all intracranial aneurysms (Patel 
and Richardson 1971), in children under 5 years, 
0.1%–0.05% (Locksley et al. 1966). In a large co-
operative study of intracranial aneurysms and sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage including 2627 aneurysms, 
in only 1.5% of patients did the aneurysm rupture 
before the age of 19 (Locksley et al. 1966). Analysis 
of previous reports indicated several distinct char-
acteristics of this entity. There is a predominant 
male:female ratio approaching 2:1 to 3:1. Compared 
with adults, a high number of these aneurysms arise 
in the posterior circulation (Allison et al. 1998). 
Aneurysms in children tend to be large; approxi-
mately 30%–45% are giant aneurysms (Patel and 
Richardson 1971). Ferrante et al. (1988) reported 
the prevalence of giant aneurysms in children to be 
26.8% compared to 2% in adults, and the prevalence 
for large aneurysms to be 50% compared to 27% 
in adults. In contrast, multiple aneurysms are less 
common in children (3%–5%) compared to adults 
(20%). Presenting symptoms are rather due to the 
mass effect of the aneurysm than due to aneurysm 
rupture. Compared to adults there is an increased 
incidence of infectious or mycotic aneurysms in 
the pediatric population, frequently secondary to 
bacterial endocarditis ( Allison et al. 1998; Lee et 
al. 1998). Since general anaesthesia is mostly neces-
sary for balloon occlusion of the internal carotid 
artery in children and clinical monitoring during 
occlusion is impossible, monitoring of somatosen-
sory evoked potentials in ICA aneurysms as a simple 
and reliable neurophysiological technique is very 
helpful. Likewise, basilar aneurysms may not be ef-
fectively monitored with SEP or brain stem audi-
tory evoked potentials because basilar perforator 
occlusion may not affect either the somatosensory 
or auditory pathways (Friedman et al. 1987, 1991; 
Friedman and Grundy 1987). Again, as mentioned 
above, we do not perform balloon test occlusions 
any more, but rely more – and in the majority of 
patients exclusively – on the analysis of the circle of 
Willis. Patients who do not tolerate the balloon test 
occlusion, or do not have a simultaneous ﬁ lling of 
the veins via the circle of Willis while compressing 
the target vessel, should undergo extracranial-intra-
cranial bypass before parent vessel occlusion.
Fig. 5.80. a PA view. Giant vertebral artery aneurysm in 
a 9-year-old boy presenting with dizziness, vomiting and 
nausea. b Lateral view. Endovascular occlusion of the left 
vertebral artery was performed distal to the PICA using 
one GDC-Vortx-Coil. c Injection into the contralateral 
vertebral artery revealed no retrograde ﬁ lling of the 
aneurysm. d–f CT: before (d) and 6 months after (e, f) 
vessel occlusion demonstrated complete retraction of the 
aneurysm

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
253
a
c
e
b
d
f

254 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
5.4.10.3 
Aneurysms in the Elderly
Deﬁ nition of the term “elderly” varies widely. Per-
haps the most widely accepted deﬁ nition for elderly 
is more than 65 years old, primarily since this is 
associated commonly with retirement. Incidence of 
SAH increases with age, from 1.5 to 2.5 per 100,000 
per year in the third decade of life to 40 to 78 per 
100,000 in the eighth decade of life (Phillips et 
al. 1980; Sacco et al. 1984). Advanced age is com-
monly associated with a poorer outcome after SAH 
( Elliott and Le Roux 1998). This might be for 
several reasons: older patients are more likely than 
younger patients to present with a poor clinical sta-
tus at admission, larger amounts of SAH. Addition-
ally, older patients more frequently have preexisting 
comorbidities, such as hypertension or atheroscle-
rosis, which might independently have an adverse 
effect on outcome. Anticoagulation therapy for the 
treatment of atherosclerotic heart or cerebrovascu-
lar disease is also more frequent in older patients, 
which also increases the risk of poor outcome follow-
ing aneurysmal SAH (Rinkel et al. 1997). However, 
when stratifying older patients according to clinical 
grade, an association of advanced age and outcome 
is not observed (Elliott and Le Roux 1998). This 
is in accordance with the results of our institution. 
As a consequence, we think to decline treatment 
solely on the basis of advanced age is not justiﬁ ed. 
The decision to treat elderly patients should be made 
according to the patients’ overall situation, includ-
ing clinical grade, overall physiologic condition and 
associated risk factors. Conservative treatment of 
ruptured aneurysms in older patients seems to be 
associated with a poor outcome (Ellenbogen 1970). 
There is some evidence that surgically treated el-
derly patients do better than conservatively treated 
patients after aneurysm rupture. Fridriksson et al. 
(1995) reported that two thirds of patients between 
70 and 74 years of age treated surgically returned to 
independent living and good mental state, whereas 
among 93 age-matched controls, refusion of surgery 
because of age resulted in 75% in signiﬁ cant mor-
bidity and mortality, more than 50% died within 
3 months (Fridriksson et al. 1995). In a small series 
of patients over 80 years of age with ruptured an-
terior circulation aneurysms and a poor Hunt and 
Hess grade, Hamada et al. (2001) reported a bad 
outcome for the conservatively treated patients, and 
still disappointing results for the surgically treated 
patients. The best results were obtained for MCA 
aneurysms. Only few data are available on the re-
sults of endovascular aneurysm therapy in elderly 
patients; the reported results, however, suggest that 
this treatment is promising in this age group (Rowe 
et al. 1996). Sugiu et al. (2005) demonstrated that 
the outcome was strongly related to the preoperative 
condition. Therefore, general risk factors such as 
hypertension and atherosclerotic disease should be 
evaluated before treatment. Patients with low Hunt 
and Kosnik grade seem to be most suitable for endo-
vascular treatment. On the other hand, outcome of 
patients with poor preoperative grade was worse de-
spite the less invasive nature of endovascular treat-
ment. Another group found that aneurysms at the 
anterior communicating artery are associated with a 
higher incidence of poor neuropsychologic outcome 
than aneurysms in other locations ( Bornstein et 
al. 1987). In elderly patients even subtle changes 
in neuropsychology can have a strong inﬂ uence. 
In our opinion, endovascular therapy should be 
more strongly considered as ﬁ rst line therapy for 
elderly patients with SAH whenever possible. This 
way the aneurysms can be embolized in every phase 
after hemorrhage and rebleeding can be prevented 
( Fridriksson et al. 1995; Hamada et al. 2001).
Atherosclerotic vascular disease is more frequent 
in elderly patients and may be associated with more 
tortuous vessel anatomy. Superselective catheteriza-
tions of distal cerebral vessels might thus become 
technically more difﬁ cult. Atherosclerotic carotid 
bifurcation disease is frequently associated in pa-
tients with advanced age and might increase the risk 
of thromboembolic complications. In selected cases, 
a combined approach, ﬁ rst stenting of the carotid 
artery stenosis and subsequently coil embolization 
of the ruptured aneurysm might be a therapeutic 
option.
5.4.10.3.1 
Unruptured Aneurysms in the Elderly
Treatment decisions for unruptured aneurysms in 
older patients require estimation of the patient’s in-
dividual life expectancy and the risk of aneurysm 
rupture. Taylor et al. (1995) reported that only 
2% of unruptured aneurysms in elderly patients 
rupture within 2.5 years of diagnosis. Considering 
these data, aggressive treatment, either surgical or 
endovascular do not appear to be beneﬁ cial. In any 
case, careful consideration should be given to the 
patient’s general health, coexisting morbidities, and 
personal and familial background before consider-

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
255
ing aneurysm therapy (Taylor et al. 1995). A very 
important factor is the estimation of the procedural 
risk by the neurointerventionalist, and in case of 
surgery estimated by the neurosurgeon. However, 
for many patients an explanation of the statistics is 
not the solution of the problem. If the ﬁ rst physician 
compares the – let’s say – incidental aneurysm with 
a bomb in the head, quality of life usually drops dra-
matically and sometimes occlusion of the aneurysm 
is the only way to overcome the psychologic problem 
of the patient, not only in the elderly patient.
5.4.10.4 
Multiple Aneurysms
The frequency of multiple aneurysms ranges from 
5% to 33% (Andrews and Spiegel 1979; Bigelow 
1955; Inagawa 1991; McKissock et al. 1964; Mizoi 
et al. 1989) and seems to be higher in females than 
in males (Andrews and Spiegel 1979; McKissock 
et al. 1964). Multiple aneurysms are found in up to 
34% of patients presenting with aneurysmal SAH 
(Rinne et al. 1994). In our patient population ev-
Fig. 5.81a–e. High-grade ICA stenosis due to atheromatous plaques in a patient with a ruptured Acom aneurysm. 
After stenting of the stenosis under heparin the Acom aneurysm was successfully embolized, the patient got 
antiplatelet therapy immediately after this two-step procedure
b
a
c
e
d

256 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
ery third patient had two or more aneurysms. The 
optimal treatment of associated – and asymptom-
atic – aneurysms is still controversial. Treatment of 
multiple aneurysms should always consider loca-
tion, patient’s age, and neurological status, as well 
as anatomic relation to the symptomatic aneurysm. 
The symptomatic aneurysm should be treated ﬁ rst 
and the others can be treated in the same setting if 
they are in same territory and do not necessitate a 
high procedural risk, e.g. stent implantation. If an 
unruptured aneurysm can clearly be deﬁ ned as such 
and is in a different location we recommend therapy 
not in the acute stage after hemorrhage but after 
rehabilitation (earliest 3–6 month after the bleed-
ing). The localization of blood on the CT scan can 
help to identify the aneurysm responsible for the 
SAH. Nehls et al. (1985) showed that in patients 
presenting with multiple aneurysms and SAH the 
ruptured aneurysm could be correctly identiﬁ ed in 
97.5% on the basis of clinical, CT and angiographic 
data. However, there is also evidence in the litera-
ture that blood distribution on CT does not enable 
identiﬁ cation of the site of the ruptured aneurysm. 
Another hint may be that the larger and more irregu-
larly shaped aneurysm is usually the one which has 
ruptured. If there are two aneurysms at one artery 
Fig. 5.82a–c. Coil embolization of multiple aneu-
rysms in one procedure: Acom, Pcom and carotid-
T aneurysm before and after coil embolization
a
c
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
257
the most proximal and large aneurysm is the one 
that usually has ruptured. If no blood is seen on 
imaging studies, treatment of all aneurysms prob-
ably has to be performed. However, little is known 
of the overall management outcome of multiple an-
eurysms. In an unselected series of 302 patients with 
multiple intracranial aneurysms, Rinne et al. (1995) 
reported the management outcome 1 year after clip-
ping signiﬁ cantly poorer for patients with multiple 
than for those with single intracranial aneurysms. 
The frequency of poor outcome (GCS 3–5) was most 
evident in patients with Hunt and Hess Grades II 
and III (29%), compared to patients with a single 
aneurysm (19%) in the same clinical grade (Rinne et 
al. 1995). The authors attribute their results mainly 
to the increased manipulation of cerebral arteries 
and brain tissue associated with increased delayed 
neurologic deﬁ cits in this patient group. This is com-
parable with the data by Vajda (1992) reporting a 
26% frequency of poor outcome during long-term 
follow-up in patients with multiple intracranial an-
eurysms. However, a lot of other series have op-
posite results, with equal results in patients with 
multiple and single cerebral aneurysms (Inagawa 
1991; Mizoi et al. 1989; Yasargil 1984).
A major advantage of endovascular therapy is the 
ability to treat more than one aneurysm in a single 
approach if different vessel territories are involved. 
Additionally, the increased manipulation of cere-
bral arteries and brain tissue during surgery can 
Fig. 5.83a–e. Coil embolization of multiple aneurysms in one procedure: Cavernous aneurysm, Pcom and carotid-T aneu-
rysm before and after coil embolization
b
a
c
e
d

258 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
be avoided by the endovascular approach. This is in 
accordance with the results reported by Solander 
et al. (1999) evaluating their results of endovascu-
lar treatment of multiple aneurysms in single-stage 
procedures. The authors reported 38 consecutive pa-
tients with 101 cerebral aneurysms, 79 of which were 
treated with GDC, 14 neurosurgically, and 8 left un-
treated. A total of 25 patients (66%) underwent treat-
ment for all aneurysms within 3 days after admis-
sion. Follow up angiographic studies demonstrated 
unchanged or improved results in 94% of patients and 
an overall excellent clinical outcome in 89%. The au-
thors conclude that endovascular GDC treatment of 
multiple cerebral aneurysms, regardless of their lo-
cation, can be performed safely in one session. In the 
same way, this single-staged procedure may protect 
patients from rebleeding and eliminates the risk of 
mistakenly treating only the unruptured aneurysm 
(Solander et al. 1999). Pierot et al. (1997) reported 
their experience of 53 patients with a total of 128 an-
eurysms. Endo-vascular treatment was performed 
in 67 aneurysms in 46 patients, resulting in complete 
occlusion in 58 aneurysms and partial occlusion in 
9. Permanent neurologic complications occurred in 
6.5%, one patient rebled. In patients with multiple 
unruptured aneurysms the authors treated two an-
eurysms at the same time if endovascular treatment 
proves easy (Pierot et al. 1997).
5.4.10.5 
Incompletely Treated Aneurysms/
Aneurysm Remnants
Although postoperative angiography is the only ob-
jective method for conﬁ rming the absence of any 
aneurysmal remnant, the widespread trend is not 
to perform postoperative angiography after micro-
surgical clipping. Since intraoperative techniques 
like checking exact clip location and absence of 
neighbouring perforators under the microscope, 
and needle puncture of the aneurysm are standard 
parts of aneurysm surgery the need of postoperative 
angiography may be questioned. The usefulness vs 
potential complications and costs has to be evalu-
ated and its legitimacy discussed. However, we think 
that postoperative angiography is at least justiﬁ ed in 
all “difﬁ cult” and large aneurysms and in those in 
whom the surgeon is in doubt of leaving a remnant. 
In accordance with our neurosurgeons we routinely 
perform postoperative angiography in all patients 
treated neurosurgically. This is the only way to make 
completely sure that there is no remaining aneu-
rysm or aneurysm remnant. Even opening of the an-
eurysm sac after clipping, a standard procedure in 
many neurosurgical institutions, does not exclude 
residual neck remnants proximal to the clip. Ad-
ditionally, imperfect clip placement or delayed clip 
dislocation may remain unrecognized until postop-
erative angiography is performed. There is another 
perspective that support postoperative angiograms 
in all patients: incomplete clipped aneurysm can 
be ﬁ nally managed very often via endovascular ap-
proach. A broad neck may be pretty small after in-
complete clipping, a giant aneurysm may be turned 
into a just large one or the anatomy may have be-
come clearer after inspection. Few data are avail-
able on angiographic results on clipped aneurysms 
since a lot of groups do not routinely perform DSA 
postoperative. The reported residual aneurysms or 
neck remnants are in the range of 4%–17%; most 
of them report within the range 4%–7% (Byrne et 
al. 1999; Feuerberg et al. 1987; MacDonald et al. 
1993, Lin et al. 1989). Lin et al. (1989) revealed in up 
to 4% of patients on postoperative angiograms an 
expected or unexpected aneurysm residuum due to 
incomplete clipping. In a consecutive series of 305 
clipped aneurysms, Sindou et al. (1998) reported 
an incomplete clipping in 18 out of 305 aneurysms 
(5.9%), with only a neck remnant in 3.9% and neck 
and sac remnant in 1.9%, amenable for complemen-
tary retreatment. A clinical data review of six series 
of clipped aneurysms which were checked by early 
postoperative angiography revealed that 82 aneu-
rysms (5.2%) out of a total of 1397 patients demon-
strated residual ﬁ lling (Thornton et al. 2000b).
Data on cerebral aneurysms treated by an endo-
vascular approach also conﬁ rmed that a signiﬁ cant 
number of cases had either a residual or recurrent 
aneurysm. Vinuela et al. (1997) reported a multi-
centre study on the results of GDC treatment for ce-
rebral aneurysms in 403 patients. They reported an 
aneurysm remnant in an aneurysm-size dependent 
fashion: 25.6% of small aneurysms with a small neck, 
52% of small aneurysms with a wide neck, 62.1% of 
large aneurysms and 50% of giant aneurysms dem-
onstrated a remnant after initial treatment. During 
follow-up to 36 months after treatment, 9 patients 
(2.2%) with incompletely embolized aneurysms 
rebled; in another review by Byrne et al. (1999), 
36% of cases had an aneurysm remnant of variable 
size after initial treatment, and 14.7% of aneurysm 
remnants had enlarged to some degree. Giant an-
eurysms had a 100% recurrence rate. The incidence 
of aneurysm regrowing after incomplete treatment 

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
259
may have been underestimated. Even a small por-
tion of aneurysm neck has the potential to enlarge 
over time. Although small aneurysm remnants mea-
suring from 1 to 2 mm may not justify retreatment, 
the risk of progressive enlargement to a dangerous 
aneurysm should be considered. Long-term angio-
graphic reassessment – preferentially done with MR 
– may be valuable not to miss aneurysm enlargement 
(Sindou et al. 1998). Incomplete treatment of an an-
eurysm, either by clipping or coiling, may result in 
recurrent hemorrhage with serious or devastating 
consequences (Drake and Allcock 1973; Ebina et 
al. 1982; Le Roux et al. 1998; Lin et al. 1989). The 
risk of rebleeding from an aneurysm remnant has 
not been statistically studied in a larger series of pa-
tients. Feuerberg et al. (1987) looked at the natu-
ral history of these remnants and concluded that 
the rebleeding risk is between 0.38% and 0.79% per 
year. Lin et al. (1989) reported 19 patients who had 
an enlargement of a previously documented small 
aneurysm remnant after surgical clipping with 14 of 
these patients presenting with rebleeding.
There are some predisposing factors for postoper-
ative aneurysm remnants such as aneurysm size and 
topographic peculiarities. Large or giant aneurysms 
are associated with a higher frequency of aneurysm 
remnants as well as neurosurgical difﬁ cult anatomic 
localizations such as carotidoophthalmic region, 
which requires removal of the clinoid process. Since 
nowadays endovascular aneurysm therapy is an im-
portant part in the management of SAH, compari-
son of surgical and endovascular methods regarding 
completeness of obliteration is of great importance. 
The reported results with coil embolization are very 
variable according to the series, techniques used 
and aneurysmal size. In the series of Raymond 
and Roy (1997) a neck remnant was present in 37%. 
The study by Vinuela et al. (1997) in 403 patients 
clearly demonstrated that the completeness of aneu-
rysm occlusion is strongly dependent on aneurysm 
size. In small aneurysms the complete occlusion 
rate was 70.8%, whereas in large or giant aneurysms 
it was in the region of 50%. Using the “remodeling 
technique” for wide-necked aneurysms, Moret et 
al. (1997a,b) reported aneurysm remnants in 17% 
of the cases and incomplete occlusion in only 6%. 
This leads to the further question concerning the 
management of the aneurysm remnant or residual 
neck: again surgical, or endovascular, or no ther-
apy? Feuerberg recommended retreatment at least 
in young patients. However, Feuerberg et al. (1987) 
reported that up to 50% of neurosurgeons believe 
that a second surgical approach would not improve 
the situation. Perioperative scarring, the frequent 
need to remove the primary surgical clip, increased 
incidence of intraoperative rupture all add to the in-
creased risk of such a repeat operation (Boet et al. 
2001). In any case, this remains a difﬁ cult ﬁ eld and 
a complex group of patients. However, we recom-
mend performing postoperative angiography in all 
patients after clipping and considering the endovas-
cular route for those patients with aneurysm rem-
nants. For coiled patients it is even more important 
to have follow-up imaging for at least 3 years.
5.4.10.6 
Combined Therapies
Neurosurgery and interventional neuroradiology 
are not competitive therapies, but the complemen-
tary nature of techniques offers the best chance to 
reduce treatment morbidity and improve long-term 
outcome in difﬁ cult aneurysms. The primary mo-
dality of treatment, the anatomy and conﬁ guration 
of the aneurysm, the radiologist’s and the neuro-
surgeon’s opinion and the ease or difﬁ culty of the 
retreatment procedure using either method and the 
risks involved with each all have to be considered in 
the decision making process. However, since ISAT, 
the endovascular modality should clearly be the ﬁ rst 
choice, if – and this should be borne very much 
in mind – the endovascular expertise is available. 
For complex aneurysms a combined approach of 
endovascular and surgical treatment may use the 
strength of both methods in a synergistic way. There 
are different management paradigms of such a com-
bined philosophy available:
Clipping after partial endovascular occlusion
Coiling after partial surgical clipping
Temporary balloon occlusion during clipping
5.4.10.6.1 
Clipping After Partial Endovascular Occlusion
Endovascular therapy does not exclude subsequent 
surgical clipping. Graves et al. (1995) reported two 
patients in whom surgical clipping of incompletely 
embolized aneurysms was performed without signif-
icant problems. However, in some cases clipping after 
coiling might be difﬁ cult, often requiring prolonged 
temporary vessel occlusion. Additionally, opening of 
the aneurysm for coil extraction might become nec-
essary for ﬁ nal clip placement (Asgari et al. 2002; 
Batjer and Samson 1992; Solomon et al. 1996).




260 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
The primary goal of endovascular aneurysm 
therapy is to obliterate the aneurysm completely. 
However, for acutely ruptured and complex aneu-
rysms in poor grade patients, a therapeutic alterna-
tive might be a combined sequential approach: ﬁ rst 
to treat the aneurysm by partial coil embolization 
without the demand of achieving complete aneu-
rysm obliteration. This way one might achieve a 
temporary protection against early rebleeding, give 
the patient the chance for clinical recovery and offer 
the ﬁ nal and deﬁ nite occlusion later on.
5.4.10.6.2 
Coiling After Partial Surgical Clipping
There have been several reports on completion of 
aneurysm occlusion by endovascular technique af-
ter partial clipping (Forsting et al. 1996; Fraser et 
al. 1994). In this setting, the reduced neck size after 
incomplete clipping may represent a technical ad-
vantage for endovascular therapy. Wide-neck aneu-
rysms might thereby be transformed into small-neck 
aneurysms. For complex aneurysms which cannot 
be treated by either modality alone, this staged pro-
cedure of initial partial clipping with narrowing of 
the aneurysm neck and subsequent endovascular 
aneurysm obliteration may be considered as ther-
apy. Entering the aneurysm with the microcatheter 
might sometimes represent a problem, which can 
be overcome in most cases by appropriate shaping 
of the wire and microcatheter. However, there will 
remain some patients in whom the partially clipped 
aneurysm neck may be too small to allow the mi-
crocatheter to enter the sac or too wide to retain 
the coils.
5.4.10.6.3 
Coiling After Coiling
Surgery of a partially coiled or recanalized aneu-
rysm can be difﬁ cult and some authors consider 
it to be associated with increased risk and higher 
Fig. 5.84a–c. Coiling after clipping. Endovascu-
lar treatment of a small Acom aneurysm remnant 
after incomplete clipping
a
c
b

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
261
Fig. 5.85a–g. Retreatment after coil compaction (“coiling after coiling”). Before 
and after endovascular treatment of an Acom aneurysm with complete oblitera-
tion, 6-month follow-up demonstrated partial aneurysm recanalization due to 
coil compaction. Retreatment was successfully performed
b
a
c
g
d
f
e
morbidity (Horowitz et al. 1999). If at all possible, 
our recommendation is, if anatomy is favourable, 
to retreat all previously coiled, but recurrent aneu-
rysms by a second endovascular approach. If the 
remnant or recurrent aneurysm is of a reasonable 
size the second endovascular attempt is possible in 
the majority of patients. The decision to treat (or 
not to treat) is sometimes more difﬁ cult than the 
treatment itself. Is it really necessary to retreat a 
previously unruptured aneurysm with a 3-mm rem-
nant? Probably not, if this remnant is stable during 
follow-up. The situation is different if a previously 
ruptured aneurysm reveals a growing remnant over 
6–12 months. But you can probably imagine that 

262 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
there are a number of patients in the grey area where 
nobody can give a deﬁ nite answer.
5.4.10.7 
Complications of Endovascular Therapy
Endovascular treatment is potentially associated 
with procedural complications induced by the treat-
ment itself. Mainly, there are two categories of com-
plications: thromboembolic events and aneurysm 
rupture.
Ischemic complications are either due to a throm-
bosis of the aneurysm bearing arterial segment or 
due to an embolus either into the aneurysm bearing 
artery or into another artery. Thrombosis of the par-
ent artery probably develops at the interface of the 
platinum coils due to aggregation of platelets. This 
complication is observed more often in broad based 
aneurysms, e.g. in giant aneurysms of the ICA. On 
the other hand, an embolus generates often in the 
guiding catheter system. Since this complication 
can occur in a branch away from the aneurysm, it 
is important to perform control angiograms dur-
ing the intervention using a large ﬁ eld of view to 
cover all relevant vessels. Procedural morbidity of 
endovascular treatment ranges between 3.7% and 
about 10%, mortality between 0% and 2.1%. These 
numbers are well evaluated in patients with unrup-
tured aneurysm to exclude complications due to 
the SAH itself (Cognard et al. 1997; Johnston et 
al. 2000; Qureshi et al. 2000; Wanke et al. 2002). 
Johnston et al. (2000) reported about a very high 
number (10%) of cranial nerve palsies after endo-
vascular therapy. This might be explained by the 
large number of giant aneurysms treated with coils 
resulting in compression of a cranial nerve by the 
coil mass (Johnston et al. 2000). However, throm-
boembolic complications do not necessarily lead to 
neurologic deterioration of the patient. Qureshi et 
al. (2000) had 8.2% thromboembolic events during 
coiling which resulted in neurological deterioration 
in only 5.4% of the patients. While analysing data 
about complications of endovascular therapy aneu-
rysm localization plays an important role. It turns 
out that treating an aneurysm at the site of the MCA 
bifurcation is associated with a higher complication 
rate than treating an aneurysm at another location 
(7% vs 3% for Acom aneurysms) (Cognard et al. 
1997). Probably the complex anatomy of the MCA bi-
furcation might be the reason for this circumstance 
but probably also ﬂ ow related different conditions at 
the MCA bifurcation. To reduce the risk of throm-
boembolic events, most of the neurointerventional 
centres anticoagulate the patient periprocedurally. 
Thereby, most of the groups at least double the ACT 
to 250–300 s. Postprocedural heparinization re-
duces the incidence of thromboembolic events from 
9.3% to 5.9% (Qureshi et al. 2000) and is usually 
maintained for another 24–48 h after intervention. 
Although no evidence based data exist about anti-
platelet therapy and prevention of thromboembolic 
events during or after endovascular treatment, ad-
ministration of aspirin might reduce symptomatic 
ischemic events. If, beside this regimen, clotting 
occurs, elevation of blood pressure (mean arterial 
blood pressure 90–100 mmHg), reassurance of efﬁ -
cient heparinization if administered or administra-
tion of aspirin intravenously and “wait and see” for 
a couple of minutes is the ﬁ rst step. If control angio-
gram reveals growing thrombus or no improvement 
occurs within 10 min and if no retrograde collater-
alization of the occluded vessel is visible, adminis-
tration of a GPIIb/IIIa antagonist, e.g. abciximab, 
might be necessary. Administration should be per-
formed as bolus, either intra-arterial – however, this 
is an off-label use – or intravenously, up to 10 mg 
and if diminishing of the thrombus is noted, low-
dose abciximab infusion should be continued. 
GPIIb/IIIa antagonists may induce thrombocytope-
nia that is probably attributed to an immunological 
phenomenon, therefore, white platelets should be 
monitored. If the thrombus does not resolve local 
intra-arterial lysis might be necessary. In unrup-
tured aneurysms, ﬁ brinolytic agents are an obvious 
option. In ruptured aneurysms, ﬁ brinolytic agents 
are not recommended because rebleeding often oc-
curs and might end in a catastrophic situation even 
if the aneurysm is completely occluded on DSA. In 
these patients mechanical recanalisation should be 
the next step.
Aneurysm rupture is another complication which 
can occur during the intervention. Aneurysm rup-
ture has continued to be one of the most feared com-
plications of endovascular aneurysm therapy. Any 
interventional neuroradiologist treating acutely 
ruptured aneurysms may be faced with this com-
plication. Some data regarding frequency, causes, 
management and outcome of such ruptures during 
endovascular treatment are available and revealed 
that rupture do occur more often in previously rup-
tured aneurysms than in unruptured and if man-
agement is appropriate good clinical outcome is 
often achieved (Halbach et al. 1991; McDougall 
et al. 1998; Ricolﬁ  et al. 1998; Doerﬂ er et al. 

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
263
2001). Aneurysm rupture might be due to perfora-
tion with the guidewire or microcatheter, or might 
occur during coil placement. Clinical sequelae may 
be variable, ranging from slight leakage of contrast 
into the subarachnoid space to massive SAH or in-
traparenchymal hematoma with severe intracranial 
hypertension.
Embolization of the aneurysm can be continued 
in most cases, and the majority of patients with 
treatment-related SAH survive without serious se-
quelae and with a better outcome than anticipated 
(Doerﬂ er et al. 2001). In our experience the degree 
of vasospasms – these can occur immediately – is 
the most important predictor of patient’s outcome: 
immediate severe vasospasms correlate with a bad 
clinical outcome. Anyway, it is extremely helpful 
in this situation to have the external CSF drainage 
in place before endovascular therapy starts. Some 
groups routinely place a microballoon at the neck of 
aneurysms in order to inﬂ ate it in the case of rupture 
and to avoid a devastating bleeding at the same time. 
In our experience a microballoon as an anti-bleed-
ing device is indicated in aneurysms with a high risk 
of intraprocedural rupture: small Pcom aneurysms 
and to a lesser extent small paraophthalmic aneu-
rysms.
5.4.10.8 
Monitoring and Therapy of Vasospasm
Transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD) is a useful 
non-invasive monitoring tool in SAH patients. The 
detection of vasospasm is possible with transcranial 
Doppler, by means of increased blood ﬂ ow velocity 
from arterial narrowing in the middle cerebral ar-
tery and the posterior circulation. However, there is 
uncertainty about the diagnostic speciﬁ city of TCD. 
Only velocities above 120–200 cm/s are highly pre-
dictive for the diagnosis of vasospasm (Vora et al. 
1999). Compared to angiography, the sensitivity and 
speciﬁ city of TCD is good for the middle cerebral ar-
tery. For all other arteries there is a lack of evidence 
of accuracy or of usefulness of TCD. Additionally, 
TCD cannot distinguish symptomatic from asymp-
tomatic vasospasm. The crucial point for the patient 
is to be in the hands of an excellent ICU physician, 
preferentially a neurosurgeon or a neurologist. Both 
are familiar with acute or slow onset of neurological 
deﬁ cits and it is the clinical history that leads to an 
endovascular approach for vasospasm. Quantiﬁ ca-
tion of cerebral tissue perfusion and earlier detec-
tion of ischemic injury would be nice to have in order 
to guide therapy in SAH patients with vasospasm. 
New imaging techniques, such as perfusion (PWI)- 
and diffusion (DWI)-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging might enable very early identiﬁ cation of 
ischemic areas (Minematsu et al. 1992; Moseley 
et al. 1990; Warach et al. 1992). PWI is a non-inva-
sive method often used to demonstrate the perfusion 
reduction in focal ischemia in animal studies and 
stroke patients (de Crespigny et al. 1993; Mose-
ley et al. 1990). DWI provides potentially unique 
information on the viability of brain tissue and has 
been shown to be sensitive to early cerebral ischemia 
(Dardzinski et al. 1993; Moseley et al. 1990; Reith 
et al. 1995).
Since DWI is extremely sensitive to ischemic le-
sions it can be used non-invasively to assess the 
safety and efﬁ cacy of endovascular aneurysm 
therapy. DWI might be of particular help in those 
patients in whom clinical examination is difﬁ cult 
(Biondi et al. 2000). Shimoda et al. (2001) used 
serial magnetic resonance imaging to investigate 
prospectively the incidence of infarction caused by 
vasospasm with or without a delayed ischemic neu-
rological deﬁ cit in 125 patients with subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. The authors deﬁ ned an infarct from 
vasospasm as a new lesion not present on the ini-
tial MRI within 3 days after SAH and therefore not 
attributable to primary brain damage or surgical 
complications. A new infarct on MRI was evident in 
34% (43 patients), whereas 4% (5 patients) showed 
no new lesion but had a delayed ischemic neurologi-
cal deﬁ cit. However, 29 patients (23%) showed a new 
asymptomatic infarct but no delayed ischemic neu-
rological deﬁ cit (Shimoda et al. 2001). Vasospasms 
secondary to subarachnoid hemorrhage are respon-
sible for severe ischemic complications.  Condette-
Auliac et al. (2001) studied asymptomatic vaso-
spasm in seven patients with aneurysmal SAH to 
assess whether DWI provides predictive markers of 
silent ischemic lesions and/or progression toward 
symptomatic ischemia. Additionally, three patients 
with symptomatic vasospasm, and four patients with 
SAH but without vasospasm were studied at regular 
intervals by DWI, and their apparent diffusion co-
efﬁ cients (ADCs) were calculated. All patients with 
vasospasm including those without symptoms pre-
sented abnormalities on DWI with a reduction of 
the ADC prevalently in the white matter. No such 
abnormalities were observed in patients without va-
sospasm. Correlation of abnormalities on DWI with 
parenchymal involvement in asymptomatic patients 
would be of considerable clinical signiﬁ cance. Larger 

264 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.86a–e. The MCA was occluded during 
embolization of an Acom aneurysm. Throm-
bolysis was performed using 10 mg rt-PA
a
c
e
b
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
265
studies might be able to determine whether the ADC 
has a reversibility threshold, because this would fa-
cilitate patient management (Condette-Auliac et 
al. 2001). Monitoring of patients with vasospasm 
after SAH using a combination of serial PWI and 
DWI might yield insight into the hemodynamics 
and temporal evolution of vasospasms and delayed 
cerebral ischemia (Rordorf et al. 1999). DWI and 
PWI might thereby improve our pathophysiologic 
understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Ror-
dorf et al. (1999) tried to identify early ischemic in-
jury with combined diffusion-weighted and perfu-
sion-weighted MRI in patients with vasospasm after 
SAH. In patients with symptomatic vasospasm the 
authors found small, sometimes multiple, ischemic 
lesions on DWI encircled by a large area of decreased 
cerebral blood ﬂ ow and increased mean transit time. 
MR images were normal in asymptomatic patients 
with angiographic vasospasm; and in patients with 
a normal angiogram and no clinical signs of vaso-
Fig. 5.87a–d. During embolization of an unruptured Acom aneurysm perforation occurred while introducing a coil. b, d 
DSA and CT demonstrated extravasation of blood. c Rapid embolization was continued and bleeding stopped immediately 
after complete insertion of the ﬁ rst coil. Patient recovered without clinical sequelae
a
c
b
d

266 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
spasm. This combined technique could become a 
useful tool in the clinical management of patients 
with SAH ( Rordorf et al. 1999). A newer CT-perfu-
sion study using the time to peak map revealed that 
this method is a sensitive and early predictor for sec-
ondary cerebral ischemia. A total of 38 patients were 
examined with Perfusion-CT and TCD on regular 
intervals (an average of 3.5 PCT and 10.7 TCD). How-
ever, data analysis is difﬁ cult in any case of bilateral 
infarctions regularly seen if vasospasm is diffuse. 
The authors state that the time window eligible for 
therapeutic intervention is not necessarily as wide 
as observed and that this study cannot prove effec-
tive treatment of potentially underlying vasospasm 
or prevention of secondary infarction during this 
interval (Pham et al. 2007). However, at the moment 
the application of these techniques in SAH patients 
is a matter of research and not clinical routine. Ce-
rebral vasospasm continues to be the leading cause 
of morbidity and mortality following aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Roughly 40% of patients 
with aneurysmal SAH develop angiographically vis-
ible vasospasm; about 20% have neurologic signs of 
vasospasm and 10% present with vasospasm related 
infarction. If vasospasm is present at the time of 
patient administration and before treatment of the 
aneurysm a combined approach might be necessary 
in order to occlude the aneurysm and to resolve va-
sospasm (Wanke et al. 2000). After treatment of the 
ruptured aneurysm, approaches to treat aneurysmal 
vasospasm currently include medical treatment with 
Ca-antagonists, “triple-H” therapy and endovascu-
lar methods. Nimodipine is recommended prophy-
lactically for all patients. Several randomized trials 
have demonstrated that nimodipine reduces poor 
outcome due to vasospasm in all grades of patients. 
These results are summarized by Feigin et al. (2000) 
who analyzed 8 controlled trials on efﬁ cacy of ni-
modipine with 1574 randomized patients. Aggres-
sive hypertensive, hemodilutional, hypervolemic 
therapy is also recommended prophylactically and 
is – at least – indicated for symptomatic vasospasm. 
Triple-H therapy is an effective modality for elevat-
ing and sustaining CBF after SAH. In combination 
with early and deﬁ nite aneurysm occlusion as a pre-
requisite for this regimen, it can minimize delayed 
cerebral ischemia and lead to an improved overall 
outcome (King and Martin 1994; Origitano et al. 
1990; Seifert 1997). Assessing trial quality there 
exist only studies with optional recommendations 
for this therapy. The efﬁ cacy of triple-H therapy has 
yet not been demonstrated in randomized clinical 
 trials.
The same is valid for the use of the endovascu-
lar methods. The two main endovascular treatment 
methods are balloon angioplasty and intra-arterial 
Fig. 5.88. a Severe vasospasm after rupture of an Acom aneurysm. b After balloon angioplasty and papaverine infusion. 
c Severe vasospasm 1 day later was noted of the previously not dilated vessels
b
a
c

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
267
infusion of spasmolytic agents. If clinical deterio-
ration is progressive despite intravenous medical 
therapy, endovascular methods to treat vasospasm 
should be used.
Balloon angioplasty is superior to papaverine for 
treatment of proximal vessel vasospasm and has a 
more sustained effect on the vessels. To date there 
are no series documenting a signiﬁ cance of cerebral 
blood ﬂ ow increase or improvement of delayed isch-
emic neurologic deﬁ cits induced by vasospasm com-
pared to controls, but our clinical experience and 
single case studies suggest that balloon angioplasty 
does reverse vasospasms and – if performed early 
enough – can improve the patient’s condition.
Song et al. (1997) reported early and aggres-
sive treatment with balloon angioplasty clinical 
improvement in about two-thirds of their patients 
suffering from neurological deﬁ cits attributable to 
vasospasm. In a rabbit model an increase in endo-
thelial proliferation and decrease in the thickness 
of the tunica media was shown suggesting, that an-
gioplasty damages endothelial and smooth-muscle 
cells. This may be the basis for the observation that 
vasospastic arteries do not reconstrict after angio-
plasty (MacDonald et al. 1995).
Papaverine or nimodipine can be useful as an ad-
junct to balloon angioplasty and also for the treat-
ment of distal vessels that are not accessible for bal-
loon angioplasty (Newell et al. 1999). Although 
isolated series documenting clinical successes have 
prompted the increased use of papaverine or ni-
modipine as a treatment for vasospasm after SAH, 
some authors found, as it is currently being used, 
the drug does not provide added beneﬁ ts, compared 
with medical treatment of vasospasm alone but do 
not preclude the possibility that alterations in the 
timing of or indications for drug treatment might 
produce beneﬁ cial effects (Polin et al. 1998).
5.4.10.9 
Follow-Up and Outcome
5.4.10.9.1 
Follow-Up after Endovascular Therapy
The goal of intracranial aneurysm treatment is to 
achieve complete aneurysm occlusion in order to 
avoid rebleeding. The total occlusion rate after clip-
ping is higher than after endovascular therapy. In 
most of the neurosurgical centers control angiogra-
phy after surgery is not performed. However, in the 
literature the range of incompletely clipped aneu-
rysms is between 4% and 17% (Byrne et al. 1999; 
Feuerberg et al. 1987; MacDonald et al. 1993). 
A large series of postoperatively examined patients 
with a total of 837 aneurysms revealed residual an-
eurysms in 7.09% (Suzuki et al. 1980).
Especially for small neck aneurysms, endovascu-
lar coil embolization has become a therapeutic alter-
native to microneurosurgical clipping ( Johnston 
et al. 1999; Koivisto et al. 2000; Murayama et al. 
1999; Raaymakers et al. 1998). However, one prob-
lem that might occur in endovascularly treated 
aneurysms is the relatively high number of sub-
optimal obliterated aneurysms with a tendency to 
recanalize (Byrne et al. 1999; Cognard et al. 1999). 
Therefore, careful follow-up after endovascular 
treatment in order to detect recurrent aneurysm is 
of major importance. Up to now digital subtraction 
angiography (DSA) has been considered the gold 
standard for evaluation of residual or recurrent 
aneurysms. Since it is an expensive procedure and 
carries the risk of a permanent neurologic deﬁ cit 
(Grzyska et al. 1990; Hankey et al. 1990) a non-
invasive and more cost-effective modality would be 
favored to have. Magnetic resonance angiography 
(MRA) using time-of-ﬂ ight (TOF) technique has an 
excellent spatial resolution and is – although not 
routinely – used for detection of both unruptured 
and ruptured intracranial aneurysms (Bosmans et 
al. 1995; Gouliamos et al. 1992; Houkin et al. 1994; 
Jager et al. 2000;  Raaymakers et al. 1999; Ross et 
al. 1990; Sevick et al. 1990). However, in neurosur-
gically clipped patients MRA is clearly not the diag-
nostic tool of choice to determine occlusion rate due 
to severe artefacts of the titanium clips (Grieve et 
al. 1999; Hartman et al. 1997).
However, there are still controversial studies 
about the value of MRA after coiling of aneurysms. 
Some authors report severe artefacts, others re-
port excellent diagnostic results without produc-
ing artefacts (Anzalone et al. 2000; Derdeyn et al. 
1997; Hartman et al. 1997; Brunereau et al. 1999; 
 Kahara et al. 1999; Shellock et al. 1997). In our 
experience MRA is very reliable to detect recurrent 
aneurysms. Platinum coils do of course alter the MR 
signal, but do not produce artefacts interfering with 
the evaluation of aneurysm obliteration. As always, 
the patient should be in a reasonable clinical condi-
tion to cooperate during the time of scanning and 
vasospasm and subarachnoid blood clots should not 
be present. The same is true if platinum coils are 
used in combination with a neuro-stent. Although 
the stent is visible on MRA source images and pro-

268 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Fig. 5.89a–d. Giant broad-based ICA aneurysm: TOF axial source image (a)demonstrating signal loss at the vessel 
wall at the site of the implanted stent (arrows) while the parent artery is patent. Although there is no ﬂ ow after 
coiling the giant aneurysm is partially thrombosed. b DSA demonstrated the broad base of the aneurysm, and 
after (c) stent placement the aneurysm could be (d) embolized through the stent-interstices
a
b
c
d

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
269
duces some signal loss vessel patency and aneurysm 
obliteration can be evaluated.
If there is a good correlation between DSA and 
MRA in the ﬁ rst control after endovascular interven-
tion – usually 6 months later – MRA seems promis-
ing as a sufﬁ cient tool for follow-up of a patient with 
a coiled intracranial aneurysm initially larger than 
2 mm to select those who should undergo further in-
tervention. Nevertheless, pitfalls such as aneurysm 
position in acquisition plane (e.g. at the basilar tip) 
and extraordinary vascular disease should be taken 
into account. To reliably evaluate aneurysmal re-
currence analysis of the MRA-TOF source images is 
mandatory; evaluation of the 3D MIP images alone 
is not sufﬁ cient. However, in a series of more than 
200 patients up to now we never missed an aneu-
rysm remnant or regrowth requiring new therapy. 
Therefore, we consider MRA as a sufﬁ cient tool for 
follow-up patients after endovascular therapy of in-
tracranial aneurysms.
5.4.10.10 
Final Remarks
Aneurysm therapy has changed in recent last years. 
At some centers already before ISAT and in many 
since ISAT, endovascular therapy is the method of 
choice for those aneurysms that are suitable for this 
technique. In specialized centers, more than 80% of 
aneurysms could be treated via the endovascular ap-
proach. The remaining aneurysms are difﬁ cult and 
it will be a major challenge to maintain neurosurgi-
cal expertise for exactly these “non-coilable” aneu-
rysms. However, despite all the technical improve-
ments, occlusion of a ruptured aneurysm is often not 
the most difﬁ cult part of the therapy! The disease is 
the subarachnoid hemorrhage and that determines 
patient outcome. Instead of ﬁ ghting about “who 
should do what” all disciplines should now focus on 
the remaining problems of the disease. There is still 
a long way ahead to overcome these difﬁ culties.
Fig. 5.90. a Broad-based basilar tip 
 aneurysm encroaching the P1 segment. 
TOF axial source images revealed pa-
tency of the basilar artery as well as of 
the P1 segment of the left. The implanted 
stent is producing signal loss at the ves-
sel wall (arrows). b, c DSA delineate 
the position of the proximal and distal 
markers of the stent (arrows) and com-
plete obliteration of the aneurysm
a
c
b

270 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
References
Abrahams JM, Diamond SL, Hurst RW, Zager EL, Grady 
MS (2000) Topic review: surface modiﬁ cations enhanc-
ing biological activity of Guglielmi detachable coils in 
treating intracranial aneurysms. Surg Neurol 54:34–40; 
discussion 40–41
Abrahams JM, Forman MS, Grady MS, Diamond SL (2001a) 
Delivery of human vascular endothelial growth factor 
with platinum coils enhances wall thickening and coil 
impregnation in a rat aneurysm model. AJNR Am J Neu-
roradiol 22:1410–1417
Abrahams JM, Forman MS, Grady MS, Diamond SL (2001b) 
Biodegradable polyglycolide endovascular coils promote 
wall thickening and drug delivery in a rat aneurysm 
model. Neurosurgery 49:1187–1193; discussion 1193–1195
Adams HP Jr, Kassell NF, Torner JC, Sahs AL (1983) CT and 
clinical correlations in recent aneurysmal subarachnoid 
hemorrhage: a preliminary report of the Cooperative An-
eurysm Study. Neurology 33:981–988
Adams WM, Laitt RD, Jackson A (2000) The role of MR an-
giography in the pretreatment assessment of intracranial 
aneurysms: a comparative study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
21:1618–1628
Akpek S, Brunner T, Benndorf G, Strother C (2005) Three-
dimensional imaging and cone beam volume CT in C-
arm angiography with ﬂ at panel detector. Diagn Interv 
Radiol 11(1):10–13
Albuquerque FC, Fiorella DJ, Han PP, Deshmukh VR, Kim 
LJ, McDougall CG (2005) Endovascular management of 
intracranial vertebral artery dissecting aneurysms. Neu-
rosurg Focus 18(2):E3
a
c
b
d
Fig. 5.91a–d. Axial source images and 3D reconstruction of 
TOF-MRA showed a recurrent Acom aneurysm which was 
successfully retreated

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
271
Aletich VA, Debrun GM, Misra M, Charbel F, Ausman JI 
(2000) The remodeling technique of balloon-assisted 
Guglielmi detachable coil placement in wide-necked an-
eurysms: experience at the University of Illinois at Chi-
cago. J Neurosurg 93:388–396
Allison JW, Davis PC, Sato Y, James CA, Haque SS, Angtuaco 
EJ, Glasier CM (1998) Intracranial aneurysms in infants 
and children. Pediatr Radiol 28:223–229
Amirjamshidi A, Rahmat H, Abbassioun K (1996) Traumatic 
aneurysms and arteriovenous ﬁ stulas of intracranial ves-
sels associated with penetrating head injuries occurring 
during war: principles and pitfalls in diagnosis and man-
agement. A survey of 31 cases and review of the literature. 
J Neurosurg 84:769–780
Andrews RJ, Spiegel PK (1979) Intracranial aneurysms. Age, 
sex, blood pressure, and multiplicity in an unselected se-
ries of patients. J Neurosurg 51:27–32
Anson JA, Lawton MT, Spetzler RF (1996) Characteristics 
and surgical treatment of dolichoectatic and fusiform 
aneurysms. J Neurosurg 84:185–193
Anxionnat R, Bracard S, Ducrocq X, Trousset Y, Launay L, 
Kerrien E, Braun M, Vaillant R, Scomazzoni F, Lebedin-
sky A, PicardL (2001) Intracranial aneurysms: clinical 
value of 3D digital subtraction angiography in the thera-
peutic decision and endovascular treatment. Radiology 
218:799–808
Anzalone N, Righi C, Simionato F, Scomazzoni F, Pagani G, 
Calori G, Santino P, Scotti G (2000) Three-dimensional 
time-of-ﬂ ight MR angiography in the evaluation of in-
tracranial aneurysms treated with Guglielmi detachable 
coils. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 21:746–752
Arnold H, Schwachenwald R, Nowak G, Schwachenwald D 
(1994) Aneurysm surgery in poor grade patients. Results, 
and value of external ventricular drainage. Neurol Res 
16:45–48
Asgari S, Doerﬂ er A, Wanke I, Schoch B, Forsting M, Stolke 
D (2002) Complementary management of partially oc-
cluded aneurysms by using surgical or endovascular 
therapy. J Neurosurg 97:843–850
Atlas SW, Sheppard L, Goldberg HI, Hurst RW, Listerud J, 
Flamm E (1997) Intracranial aneurysms: detection and 
characterization with MR angiography with use of an 
advanced postprocessing technique in a blinded-reader 
study. Radiology 203:807–814
Barrow DL, Prats AR (1990) Infectious intracranial aneu-
rysms: comparison of groups with and without endocar-
ditis. Neurosurgery 27:562–572; discussion 572–573
Batjer HH, Samson DS (1992) Reoperation for aneurysms 
and vascular malformations. Clin Neurosurg 39:140–171
Bavinzski G, Killer M, Gruber A, Reinprecht A, Gross CE, 
Richling B (1999) Treatment of basilar artery bifurcation 
aneurysms by using Guglielmi detachable coils: a 6-year 
experience. J Neurosurg 90:843–852
Becker G, Perez J, Krone A, Demufh K, Lindner A, Hofmann 
E, Winkler J, Bogdahn U (1992) Transcranial color-coded 
real-time sonography in the evaluation of intracranial 
neoplasms and arteriovenous malformations. Neurosur-
gery 31:420–428
Bendel P, Koivisto T, Hänninen T, Kolehmainen A, Könönen 
M, Hurskainen H, Pennanen C, Vanninen R (2006) Sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage is followed by temporomesial 
volume loss: MRI volumetric study. Neurology 67(4):575–
582
Benson PJ, Sung JH (1989) Cerebral aneurysms following 
radiotherapy for medulloblastoma. J Neurosurg 70:545–
550
Berenstein A, Ransohoff J, Kupersmith M, Flamm E, Graeb 
D (1984) Transvascular treatment of giant aneurysms of 
the cavernous carotid and vertebral arteries. Functional 
investigation and embolization. Surg Neurol 21:3–12
Berenstein A, Song JK, Niimi Y, Namba K, Heran NS, Bris-
man JL, Nahoum MC, Madrid M, Langer DJ, Kupersmith 
MJ (2006) Treatment of cerebral aneurysms with hydro-
gel-coated platinum coils (HydroCoil): early single-cen-
ter experience. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 27(9):1834–1840
Bigelow NH (1955) Multiple intracranial arterial aneurysms; 
an analysis of their signiﬁ cance. AMA Arch Neurol Psy-
chiatry 73:76–99
Biller J, Godersky JC, Adams HP Jr (1988) Management of 
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. Stroke 19:1300–
1305
Biondi A, Oppenheim C, Vivas E, Casasco A, Lalam T, 
Sourour N, Jean LL, Dormont D, Marsault C (2000) Ce-
rebral aneurysms treated by Guglielmi detachable coils: 
evaluation with diffusion-weighted MR imaging. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 21:957–963
Biondi A, Janardhan V, Katz JM, Salvaggio K, Riina HA, 
Gobin YP (2007) Neuroform stent-assisted coil emboli-
zation of wide-neck intracranial aneurysms: strategies in 
stent deployment and midterm follow-up. Neurosurgery 
61(3):460–468; discussion 468–469
Birchall D, Khangure MS, McAuliffe W (1999) Resolution of 
third nerve paresis after endovascular management of 
aneurysms of the posterior communicating artery. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 20:411–413
Birchall D, Khangure M, McAuliffe W, Apsimon H, Knuckey 
N (2001) Endovascular treatment of posterior circulation 
aneurysms. Br J Neurosurg 15:39–43
Blanc R, Weill A, Piotin M, Ross IB, Moret J (2001) Delayed 
stroke secondary to increasing mass effect after endovas-
cular treatment of a giant aneurysm by parent vessel oc-
clusion. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22:1841–1843
Boet R, Poon WS, Yu SC (2001) The management of residual 
and recurrent intracranial aneurysms after previous en-
dovascular or surgical treatment – a report of eighteen 
cases. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 143:1093–1101
Bohmfalk GL, Story JL, Wissinger JP, Brown WE Jr (1978) 
Bacterial intracranial aneurysm. J Neurosurg 48:369–
382
Bornstein RA, Weir BK, Petruk KC, Disney LB (1987) Neu-
ropsychological function in patients after subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. Neurosurgery 21:651–654
Bosmans H, Wilms G, Marchal G, Demaerel P, Baert AL 
(1995) Characterisation of intracranial aneurysms with 
MR angiography. Neuroradiology 37:262–266
Bossuyt PM, Raaymakers TW, Bonsel GJ, Rinkel GJ (2005) 
Screening families for intracranial aneurysms: anxi-
ety, perceived risk, and informed choice. Prev Med 
41(3/4):795–799
Brilstra EH, Hop JW, Rinkel GJ (1997) Quality of life after 
perimesencephalic haemorrhage. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatr 63:382–384
Brilstra EH, Rinkel GJ, van der Graaf Y, van Rooij WJ, Al-
gra A (1999) Treatment of intracranial aneurysms by 
embolization with coils: a systematic review. Stroke 
30:470–476

272 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Brown JH, Lustrin ES, Lev MH, Ogilvy CS, Taveras JM (1999) 
Reduction of aneurysm clip artifacts on CT angiograms: 
a technical note. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 20:694–696
Brown RD Jr, Wiebers DO, Forbes GS (1990) Unruptured in-
tracranial aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations: 
frequency of intracranial hemorrhage and relationship of 
lesions. J Neurosurg 73:859–863
Brunberg JA, Frey KA, Horton JA, Deveikis JP, Ross DA, Ko-
eppe RA (1994) [150] H2O positron emission tomography 
determination of cerebral blood ﬂ ow during balloon test 
occlusion of the internal carotid artery. AJNR Am J Neu-
roradiol 15:725–732
Brunereau L, Cottier JP, Sonier CB, Medioni B, Bertrand P, 
Rouleau P, Sirinelli D, Herbreteau D (1999) Prospective 
evaluation of time-of-ﬂ ight MR angiography in the fol-
low-up of intracranial saccular aneurysms treated with 
Guglielmi detachable coils. J Comput Assist Tomogr 
23:216–223
Brust JC, Dickinson PC, Hughes JE, Holtzman RN (1990) The 
diagnosis and treatment of cerebral mycotic aneurysms. 
Ann Neurol 27:238–246
Byrne JV, Sohn MJ, Molyneux AJ, Chir B (1999) Five-year 
experience in using coil embolization for ruptured in-
tracranial aneurysms: outcomes and incidence of late 
rebleeding. J Neurosurg 90:656–663
Byrne JV, Bashiri M, Pasco A, Morris JH (2000) A novel ﬂ ex-
ible endovascular stent for use in small and tortuous ves-
sels. Neuroradiology 42:56–61
Canhao P, Ferro JM, Pinto AN, Melo TP, Campos JG (1995) 
Perimesencephalic and nonperimesencephalic subarach-
noid haemorrhages with negative angiograms. Acta Neu-
rochir 132:14–19
Carey J, Numaguchi Y, Nadell J (1990) Subarachnoid hemor-
rhage in sickle cell disease. Childs Nerv Syst 6:47–50
Cekirge HS, Saatci I, Ozturk MH, Cil B, Arat A, Mawad M, 
Ergungor F, Belen D, Er U, Turk S, Bavbek M, Sekerci 
Z, Beskonakli E, Ozcan OE, Ozgen T (2006) Late angio-
graphic and clinical follow-up results of 100 consecutive 
aneurysms treated with Onyx reconstruction: largest 
single-center experience. Neuroradiology 48(2):113–126. 
Epub 2006 Jan 4
Chapot R, Houdart E, Saint-Maurice JP, Aymard A, Mou-
nayer C, Lot G, Merland JJ (2002) Endovascular treatment 
of cerebral mycotic aneurysms. Radiology 222:389–396
Chason J, Hindman W (1958) Berry aneurysms of the circle 
of Willis: results of a planned autopsy study. Neurology 
8:41–44
Church W (1869) Aneurysm of the right cerebral artery in a 
boy of thirteen. Trans Pathol Soc Lond 20:109
Chyatte D, Reilly J, Tilson MD (1990) Morphometric analy-
sis of reticular and elastin ﬁ bers in the cerebral arteries 
of patients with intracranial aneurysms. Neurosurgery 
26:939–943
Ciceri EF, Klucznik RP, Grossman RG, Rose JE, Mawad ME 
(2001) Aneurysms of the posterior cerebral artery: clas-
siﬁ cation and endovascular treatment. AJNR Am J Neu-
roradiol 22:27–34
Clare CE, Barrow DL (1992) Infectious intracranial aneu-
rysms. Neurosurg Clin North Am 3:551–566
Cloft HJ (2007) HEAL Investigators. HydroCoil for Endo-
vascular Aneurysm Occlusion (HEAL) study: 3–6 month 
angiographic follow-up results. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
28(1):152–154
Cognard C, Gobin YP, Pierot L, Bailly AL, Houdart E, Casa-
sco A, Chiras J, Merland JJ (1995) Cerebral dural arte-
riovenous ﬁ stulas: clinical and angiographic correlation 
with a revised classiﬁ cation of venous drainage. Radiol-
ogy 194:671–680
Cognard C, Pierot L, Boulin A, Weill A, Tovi M, Castaings L, 
Rey A, Moret J, Toevi M (1997) Intracranial aneurysms: 
endovascular treatment with mechanical detachable spi-
rals in 60 aneurysms. Radiology 202:783–792
Cognard C, Weill A, Spelle L, Piotin M, Castaings L, Rey A, 
Moret J (1999) Long-term angiographic follow-up of 169 
intracranial berry aneurysms occluded with detachable 
coils. Radiology 212:348–356
Condette-Auliac S, Bracard S, Anxionnat R, Schmitt E, Lacour 
JC, Braun M, Meloneto J, Cordebar A, Yin L, Picard L (2001) 
Vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage: interest in 
diffusion-weighted MR imaging. Stroke 32:1818–1824
Conway JE, Hutchins GM, Tamargo RJ (1999) Marfan syn-
drome is not associated with intracranial aneurysms. 
Stroke 30:1632–1636
Conway JE, Hutchins GM, Tamargo RJ (2001) Lack of evi-
dence for an association between neuroﬁ bromatosis type 
I and intracranial aneurysms: autopsy study and review 
of the literature. Stroke 32:2481–2485
Cottier JP, Bleuzen-Couthon A, Gallas S, Vinikoff-Sonier CB, 
Bertrand P, Domengie F, Barantin L, Herbreteau D (2003) 
Intracranial aneurysms treated with Guglielmi detach-
able coils: is contrast material necessary in the follow-
up with 3D time-of-ﬂ ight MR angiography? AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 24(9):1797–1803
Crompton MR (1966) The comparative pathology of cerebral 
aneurysms. Brain 89:789–796
Dardzinski BJ, Sotak CH, Fisher M, Hasegawa Y, Li L, Mine-
matsu K (1993) Apparent diffusion coefﬁ cient mapping 
of experimental focal cerebral ischemia using diffu-
sion-weighted echo-planar imaging. Magn Reson Med 
30:318–325
Dasika UK, Kanter KR, Vincent R (2003) Nickel allergy to the 
percutaneous patent foramen ovale occluder and subse-
quent systemic nickel allergy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 
126(6):2112
Dawson RC, Krisht AF, Barrow DL, Joseph GJ, Shengelaia 
GG, Bonner G (1995) Treatment of experimental aneu-
rysms using collagen-coated microcoils. Neurosurgery 
36:133–139; discussion 139–140
De Crespigny AJ, Tsuura M, Moseley ME, Kucharczyk J (1993) 
Perfusion and diffusion MR imaging of thromboembolic 
stroke. J Magn Reson Imaging 3:746–754
de Oliveira JG, Beck J, Ulrich C, Rathert J, Raabe A, Seif-
ert V (2007) Comparison between clipping and coiling 
on the incidence of cerebral vasospasm after aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Neurosurg Rev 30(1):22–30; discussion 30–31. 
Epub 2006 Oct 24
Debrun G, Fox A, Drake C, Peerless S, Girvin J, Ferguson G 
(1981) Giant unclippable aneurysms: treatment with de-
tachable balloons. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2:167–173
Derdeyn CP, Graves VB, Turski PA, Masaryk AM, Strother 
CM (1997) MR angiography of saccular aneurysms after 
treatment with Guglielmi detachable coils: preliminary 
experience. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 18:279–286
Derdeyn CP, Barr JD, Berenstein A, Connors JJ, Dion JE, 
Duckwiler GR, Higashida RT, Strother CM, Tomsick TA, 

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
273
Turski P (2003) The International Subarachnoid Aneu-
rysm Trial (ISAT): a position statement from the Executive 
Committee of the American Society of Interventional and 
Therapeutic Neuroradiology and the American Society of 
Neuroradiology. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 24:1404–1408
Doerﬂ er A, Wanke I, Egelhof T, Dietrich U, Asgari S, Stolke 
D, Forsting M (2001) Aneurysmal rupture during embo-
lization with Guglielmi detachable coils: causes, manage-
ment, and outcome. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22:1825–
1832
Doerﬂ er A, Wanke I, Goericke SL, Wiedemayer H, Engelhorn 
T, Gizewski ER, Stolke D, Forsting M (2006) Endovascu-
lar treatment of middle cerebral artery aneurysms with 
electrolytically detachable coils. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
27(3):513–520
Drake CG (1965) On the surgical treatment of ruptured intra-
cranial aneurysms. Clin Neurosurg 13:122–155
Drake CG (1977) Intracranial aneurysms. Acta Neurol Lati-
noam 23:43–68
Drake CG, Allcock JM (1973) Postoperative angiography and 
the “slipped” clip. J Neurosurg 39:683–689
Drake CG, Peerless SJ (1997) Giant fusiform intracranial an-
eurysms: review of 120 patients treated surgically from 
1965 to 1992. J Neurosurg 87:141–162
Ebina K, Suzuki M, Andoh A, Saitoh K, Iwabuchi T (1982) 
Recurrence of cerebral aneurysm after initial neck clip-
ping. Neurosurgery 11:764–768
Eckard DA, Purdy PD, Bonte FJ (1992) Temporary balloon 
occlusion of the carotid artery combined with brain 
blood ﬂ ow imaging as a test to predict tolerance prior 
to permanent carotid sacriﬁ ce. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
13:1565–1569
Egge A, Waterloo K, Sjøholm H, Ingebrigtsen T, Forsdahl 
S, Jacobsen EA, Romner B (2005) Outcome 1 year after 
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: relation between 
cognitive performance and neuroimaging. Acta Neurol 
Scand 112(2):76–80
Ellenbogen BK (1970) Subarachnoid haemorrhage in the el-
derly. Gerontol Clin 12:115–120
Elliott JP, Le Roux PD (1998) Subarachnoid hemorrhage and 
cerebral aneurysms in the elderly. Neurosurg Clin North 
Am 9:587–594
Endo S, Nishijima M, Nomura H, Takaku A, Okada E (1993) 
A pathological study of intracranial posterior circulation 
dissecting aneurysms with subarachnoid hemorrhage: 
report of three autopsied cases and review of the litera-
ture. Neurosurgery 33:732–738
Eskridge JM (1989) Interventional neuroradiology. Radiol-
ogy 172:991–1006
Fahrig R, Moreau M, Holdsworth DW (1997) Three-dimen-
sional computed tomographic reconstruction using a C-
arm mounted XRII: correction of image intensiﬁ er dis-
tortion. Med Phys 24:1097–1106
Feigin VL, Rinkel GJ, Algra A, Vermeulen M, van Gijn J 
(2000) Calcium antagonists for aneurysmal subarach-
noid haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(4):
CD000277
Ferrante L, Fortuna A, Celli P, Santoro A, Fraioli B (1988) 
Intracranial arterial aneurysms in early childhood. Surg 
Neurol 29:39–56
Feuerberg I, Lindquist C, Lindqvist M, Steiner L (1987) Natu-
ral history of postoperative aneurysm rests. J Neurosurg 
66:30–34
Findlay JM, Kassell NF, Weir BK, Haley EC Jr, Kongable G, 
Germanson T, Truskowski L, Alves WM, Holness RO, 
Knuckey NW et al. (1995) A randomized trial of intra-
operative, intracisternal tissue plasminogen activator for 
the prevention of vasospasm. Neurosurgery 37:168–176; 
discussion 177–178
Findlay JM, Hao C, Emery D (2002) Non-atherosclerotic fusi-
form cerebral aneurysms. Can J Neurol Sci 29:41–48
Fiorella D, Albuquerque FC, Deshmukh VR, McDougall CG 
(2005) Usefulness of the Neuroform stent for the treat-
ment of cerebral aneurysms: results at initial (3–6 mo.) 
follow-up. Neurosurgery 56(6):1191–1201; discussion 
1201–1202
Fiorella D, Albuquerque FC, Woo H, Rasmussen PA, Masaryk 
TJ, McDougall CG (2006) Neuroform in-stent stenosis: in-
cidence, natural history, and treatment strategies. Neuro-
surgery 59(1):34–42; discussion 34–42
Fisher CM, Kistler JP, Davis JM (1980) Relation of cerebral 
vasospasm to subarachnoid hemorrhage visualized by 
computerized tomographic scanning. Neurosurgery 
6:1–9
Flemming KD, Wiebers DO, Brown RD Jr, Link MJ, Huston 
J III, McClelland RL, Christianson TJ (2005) The natu-
ral history of radiographically deﬁ ned vertebrobasilar 
nonsaccular intracranial aneurysms. Cerebrovasc Dis 
20(4):270–279. Epub 2005 Aug 22
Forsting M, Albert FK, Jansen O, von Kummer R, Aschoff 
A, Kunze S, Sartor K (1996) Coil placement after clip-
ping: endovascular treatment of incompletely clipped 
cerebral aneurysms. Report of two cases. J Neurosurg 
85:966–969
Fox AJ, Pelz DM, Vinuela F, Barnett HJ, Peerless SJ (1986) 
Results of the international extracranial/intracranial 
bypass study. Implications for neuroradiologists. Acta 
Radiol Suppl 369:77–78
Fox AJ, Vinuela F, Pelz DM, Peerless SJ, Ferguson GG, Drake 
CG, Debrun G (1987) Use of detachable balloons for prox-
imal artery occlusion in the treatment of unclippable ce-
rebral aneurysms. J Neurosurg 66:40–46
Fraser KW, Halbach VV, Teitelbaum GP, Smith TP, Higashida 
RT, Dowd CF, Wilson CB, Hieshima GB (1994) Endovas-
cular platinum coil embolization of incompletely surgi-
cally clipped cerebral aneurysms. Surg Neurol 41:4–8
Fridriksson SM, Hillman J, Saveland H, Brandt L (1995) In-
tracranial aneurysm surgery in the 8th and 9th decades of 
life: impact on population-based management outcome. 
Neurosurgery 37:627–631; discussion 631–632
Friedman WA, Grundy BL (1987) Monitoring of sensory 
evoked potentials is highly reliable and helpful in the 
operating room. J Clin Monit 3:38–44
Friedman WA, Kaplan BL, Day AL, Sypert GW, Curran MT 
(1987) Evoked potential monitoring during aneurysm 
operation: observations after ﬁ fty cases. Neurosurgery 
20:678–687
Friedman WA, Chadwick GM, Verhoeven FJ, Mahla M, Day 
AL (1991) Monitoring of somatosensory evoked poten-
tials during surgery for middle cerebral artery aneu-
rysms. Neurosurgery 29:83–88
Fujii Y, Takeuchi S, Sasaki O, Minakawa T, Koike T, Tanaka 
R (1996) Ultra-early rebleeding in spontaneous subarach-
noid hemorrhage. J Neurosurg 84:35–42
Furuya K, Sasaki T, Yoshimoto Y, Okada Y, Fujimaki T, 
Kirino T (1995) Histologically veriﬁ ed cerebral aneurysm 

274 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
formation secondary to embolism from cardiac myxoma. 
Case report. J Neurosurg 83:170–173
Gaba RC, Ansari SA, Roy SS, Marden FA, Viana MA, Malisch 
TW (2006) Embolization of intracranial aneurysms with 
hydrogel-coated coils versus inert platinum coils: effects 
on packing density, coil length and quantity, procedure 
performance, cost, length of hospital stay, and durability 
of therapy. Stroke 37(6):1443–1450. Epub 2006 May 4.
Gailloud P, Fasel JH, Muster M, de Tribolet N, Rufenacht DA 
(1997) A case in favor of aneurysmographic studies: a 
perforating artery originating from the dome of a basilar 
tip aneurysm. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 18:1691–1694
Gallagher JP (1963) Obliteration of intracranial aneurysms 
bypilojection. JAMA 183:231–236
Gallagher JP (1964) Pilojection for intracranial aneurysms. 
Report of progress. J Neurosurg 21:129–134
Gallagher JP, Baiz T (1964) Pilojection for carotid aneurysm 
in the cavernous sinus. JAMA 188:1156–1158
Giannotta SL, Litofsky NS (1995) Reoperative management 
oﬁ ntracranial aneurysms. J Neurosurg 83:387–393
Giménez-Arnau A, Riambau V, Serra-Baldrich E, Camarasa 
JG (2000) Metal-induced generalized pruriginous der-
matitis and endovascular surgery. Contact Dermatitis 
43(1):35–40
Gobin YP, Vinuela F, Gurian JH, Guglielmi G, Duckwiler GR, 
Massoud TF, Martin NA (1996) Treatment of large and 
giant fusiform  intracranial aneurysms with Guglielmi 
detachable coils. J Neurosurg 84:55–62
Gonner F, Lovblad KO, Heid O, Remonda L, Guzman R, 
Barth A, Schroth G (2002) Magnetic resonance angiog-
raphy with ultrashort echo times reduces the artefact of 
aneurysm clips. Neuroradiology 44:755–758
Gouliamos A, Gotsis E, Vlahos L, Samara C, Kapsalaki E, 
Rologis D, Kapsalakis Z, Papavasiliou C (1992) Magnetic 
resonance angiography compared to intra-arterial digital 
subtraction angiography in patients with subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. Neuroradiology 35:46–49
Graves VB, Strother CM, Duff TA, Perl J II (1995) Early 
treatment of ruptured aneurysms with Guglielmi detach-
able coils: effect on subsequent bleeding. Neurosurgery 
37:640–647; discussion 647–648
Grieve JP, Stacey R, Moore E, Kitchen ND, Jager HR (1999) 
Artefact on MRA following aneurysm clipping: an in vi-
tro study and prospective comparison with conventional 
angiography. Neuroradiology 41:680–686
Griewing B, Motsch L, Piek J, Schminke U, Brassel F, Kes-
sler C (1998) Transcranial power mode Doppler duplex 
sonography of intracranial aneurysms. J Neuroimaging 
8:155–158
Grosset DG, Straiton J, du Trevou M, Bullock R (1992) Pre-
diction of symptomatic vasospasm after subarachnoid 
hemorrhage by rapidly increasing transcranial Doppler 
velocity and cerebral blood ﬂ ow changes. Stroke 23:674–
679
Grote E, Hassler W (1988) The critical ﬁ rst minutes after sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage. Neurosurgery 22:654–661
Grzyska U, Freitag J, Zeumer H (1990) Selective cerebral in-
tra-arterial DSA. Complication rate and control of risk 
factors. Neuroradiology 32:296–299
Guglielmi G, Vinuela F, Sepetka I, Macellari V (1991a) Elec-
trothrombosis of saccular aneurysms via endovascular 
approach, part 1. Electrochemical basis, technique, and 
experimental results. J Neurosurg 75:1–7
Guglielmi G, Vinuela F, Dion J, Duckwiler G (1991b) Elec-
trothrombosis of saccular aneurysms via endovascular 
approach, part 2. Preliminary clinical experience. J Neu-
rosurg 75:8–14
Guglielmi G, Vinuela F, Duckwiler G, Dion J, Lylyk P, Be-
renstein A, Strother C, Graves V, Halbach V, Nichols D 
et al. (1992) Endovascular treatment of posterior circula-
tion aneurysms by electrofhrombosis using electrically 
detachable coils. J Neurosurg 77:515–524
Hademenos GJ, Massoud TF, Turjman F, Sayre JW (1998) 
Anatomical and morphological factors correlating with 
rupture of intracranial aneurysms in patients referred for 
endovascular treatment. Neuroradiology 40:755–760
Halbach VV, Higashida RT, Dowd CF, Barnwell SL, Hieshima 
GB (1991) Management of vascular perforations that oc-
cur during neurointerventional procedures. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 12:319–327
Haley EC Jr, Kassell NF, Apperson-Hansen C, Maile MH, 
Alves WM (1997) A randomized, double-blind, vehicle-
controlled trial of tirilazad mesylate in patients with an-
eurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: a cooperative study 
in North America. J Neurosurg 86:467–474
Hamada J, Morioka M, Miura M, Fujioka S, Marubayashi T, 
Ushio Y (2001) Management outcome for ruptured ante-
rior circulation aneurysms with a Hunt and Hess clini-
cal grade of III in patients in the 9th decade of life. Surg 
Neurol 56:294–300
Hankey GJ, Warlow CP, Sellar RJ (1990) Cerebral angio-
graphic risk in mild cerebrovascular disease. Stroke 
21:209–222
Harrigan MR, Magnano CR, Guterman LR, Hopkins LN 
(2005) Computed tomographic perfusion in the man-
agement of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: new 
application of an existent technique. Neurosurgery 
56(2):304–317; discussion 304–317
Hartman J, Nguyen T, Larsen D, Teitelbaum GP (1997) MR 
artifacts, heat production, and ferromagnetism of Gug-
lielmi detachable coils. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 18:497–
501
Hauerberg J, Andersen BB, Eskesen V, Rosenorn J, Schmidt K 
(1991) Importance of the recognition of a warning leak as 
a sign of a ruptured intracranial aneurysm. Acta Neurol 
Scand 83:61–64
Haug T, Sorteberg A, Sorteberg W, Lindegaard KF, Lundar 
T, Finset A (2007) Cognitive outcome after aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage: time course of recovery and 
relationship to clinical, radiological, and management 
parameters. Neurosurgery 60(4):649–656; discussion 
656–657
Hecht ST, Horton JA, Yonas H (1991) Growth of a throm-
bosed giant vertebral artery aneurysm after parent artery 
occlusion. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 12:449–451
Heiserman JE, Dean BL, Hodak JA, Flom RA, Bird CR, Drayer 
BP, Fram EK (1994) Neurologic complications of cerebral 
angiography. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 15:1401–1407; dis-
cussion 1408–1411
Heiskanen O (1989) Ruptured intracranial arterial aneu-
rysms of children and adolescents. Surgical and total 
management results. Childs Nerv Syst 5:66–70
Henkes H, Fischer S, Mariushi W, Weber W, Liebig T, Mi-
loslavski E, Brew S, Kühne D (2005) Angiographic and 
clinical results in 316 coil-treated basilar artery bifurca-
tion aneurysms. J Neurosurg 103(6):990–999

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
275
Hertel F, Walter C, Bettag M, Mörsdorf M (2005) Perfu-
sion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging in patients 
with vasospasm: a useful new tool in the management of 
patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurosurgery 
56(1):28–35; discussion 35. Comment in: Neurosurgery 
(2006) 58(3):E590; author reply E590
Hieshima GB, Grinnell VS, Mehringer CM (1981) A detach-
able balloon for therapeutic transcatheter occlusions. 
Radiology 138:227–228
Higashida RT, Halbach VV, Cahan LD, Hieshima GB, Koni-
shi Y (1989) Detachable balloon embolization therapy of 
posterior circulation intracranial aneurysms. J Neuro-
surg 71:512–519
Higashida RT, Halbach VV, Barnwell SL, Dowd C, Dormandy 
B, Bell J, Hieshima GB (1990) Treatment of intracranial 
aneurysms with preservation of the parent vessel: results 
of percutaneous balloon embolization in 84 patients. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 11:633–640
Higashida RT, Halbach VV, Dowd CF, Barnwell SL, Hieshima 
GB (1991) Intracranial aneurysms: interventional neuro-
vascular treatment with detachable balloons-results in 
215 cases. Radiology 178:663–670
Higashida RT, Smith W, Gress D, Urwin R, Dowd CF, Ba-
lousek PA, Halbach VV (1997) Intravascular stent and 
endovascular coil placement for a ruptured fusiform an-
eurysm of the basilar artery. Case report and review of 
the literature. J Neurosurg 87:944–949
Hijdra A, VermeulenM, van Gijn J, van Crevel H (1987) Re-
rupture of intracranial aneurysms: a clinicoanatomic 
study. J Neurosurg 67:29–33
Hijdra A, Brouwers PJ, Vermeulen M, van Gijn J (1990) Grad-
ing the amount of blood on computed tomograms after 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Stroke 21:1156–1161
Hoh BL, Rabinov JD, Pryor JC, Carter BS, Barker FG II (2003) 
In-hospital morbidity and mortality after endovascular 
treatment of unruptured intracranial aneurysms in the 
United States, 1996–2000: effect of hospital and physician 
volume. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 24:1409–1420
Hoh BL, Topcuoglu MA, Singhal AB, Pryor JC, Rabinov JD, 
Rordorf GA, Carter BS, Ogilvy CS (2004) Effect of clip-
ping, craniotomy, or intravascular coiling on cerebral 
vasospasm and patient outcome after aneurysmal sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage. Neurosurgery 55(4):779–786; dis-
cussion 786–789
Hohlrieder M, Spiegel M, Hinterhoelzl J, Engelhardt K, 
Pfausler B, Kampﬂ  A, Ulmer H, Waldenberger P, Mohseni-
pour I, Schmutzhard E (2002) Cerebral vasospasm and 
ischaemic infarction in clipped and coiled intracranial 
aneurysm patients. Eur J Neurol 9(4):389–399
Holmes B, Harbaugh RE (1993) Traumatic intracranial aneu-
rysms: a contemporary review. J Trauma 35:855–860
Hop JW, Rinkel GJ, Algra A, van Gijn J (1999) Initial loss of con-
sciousness and risk of delayed cerebral ischemia after aneu-
rysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. Stroke 30:2268–2271
Horikoshi T, Nukui H, Yagishita T, Nishigaya K, Fukasawa 
I, Sasaki H (1999) Oculomotor nerve palsy after sur-
gery for upper basilar artery aneurysms. Neurosurgery 
44:705–710; discussion 710–711
Horowitz M, Purdy P, Kopitnik T, Dutton K, Samson D (1999) 
Aneurysm retreatment after Guglielmi detachable coil 
and nondetachable coil embolization: report of nine cases 
and review of the literature. Neurosurgery 44:712–719; 
discussion 719–720
Horowitz MB, Levy EI, Koebbe CJ, Jungreis CC (2001) Trans-
luminal stent-assisted coil embolization of a vertebral 
conﬂ uence aneurysm: technique report. Surg Neurol 
55:291–296
Houkin K, Aoki T, Takahashi A, Abe H, Koiwa M, Kashiwaba 
T (1994) Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of rup-
tured cerebral aneurysm. Acta Neurochir 128:132–136
Housepian E, Pool J (1958) A systematic analysis of intra-
cranial aneurysms from the autopsy ﬁ le of the Presby-
terian Hospital, 1914 to 1956. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 
17:409–423
Howington JU, Kutz SC, Wilding GE, Awasthi D (2003) Co-
caine use as a predictor of outcome in aneurysmal sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage. J Neurosurg 99(2):271–275
Hughes RL (1992) Identiﬁ cation and treatment of cerebral 
aneurysms after sentinel headache. Neurology 42:1118–
1119
Inagawa T (1991) Surgical treatment of multiple intracranial 
aneurysms. Acta Neurochir 108:22–29
Inagawa T, Hirano A (1990) Autopsy study of unruptured 
incidental intracranial aneurysms. Surg Neurol 34:361–
365
Inagawa T, Hada H, Katoh Y (1992) Unruptured intracranial 
aneurysms in elderly patients. Surg Neurol 38:364–370
Inci S, Erbengi A, Ozgen T (1998) Aneurysms of the distal 
anterior cerebral artery: report of 14 cases and a review 
of the literature. Surg Neurol 50:130–139; discussion 
139–140
International Study of Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms 
Investigators (ISUIA) (1998) Unruptured intracranial an-
eurysms – risk of rupture and risks of surgical interven-
tion. N Engl J Med 339:1725–1733
International Study of Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms 
Investigators (ISUIA) (1998) Unruptured intracranial 
aneurysms: natural history, clinical outcome, and risks 
of surgical and endovascular treatment. Lancet 362:103–
110
Jager HR, Mansmann U, Hausmann O, Partzsch U, Moseley 
IF, Taylor WJ (2000) MRA versus digital subtraction an-
giography in acute subarachnoid haemorrhage: a blinded 
multireader study of prospectively recruited patients. 
Neuroradiology 42:313–326
Jarus-Dziedzic K, Zub W, Wronski J, Juniewicz H, Kasper 
E (2000) The relationship between cerebral blood ﬂ ow 
velocities and the amount of blood clots in computed 
tomography after subarachnoid haemorrhage. Acta Neu-
rochir 142:309–318
Johnston SC, Dudley RA, Gress DR, Ono L (1999a) Surgical 
and endovascular treatment of unruptured cerebral an-
eurysms at university hospitals. Neurology 52:1799–1805
Johnston SC, Gress DR, Kahn JG (1999b) Which unruptured 
cerebral aneurysms should be treated? A cost-utility 
analysis. Neurology 52:1806–1815
Johnston SC, Wilson CB, Halbach VV, Higashida RT, Dowd 
CF, McDermott MW, Applebury CB, Farley TL, Gress 
DR (2000) Endovascular and surgical treatment of un-
ruptured cerebral aneurysms: comparison of risks. Ann 
Neurol 48:11–19
Juvela S, Poussa K, Porras M (2001) Factors affecting forma-
tion and growth of intracranial aneurysms: a long-term 
follow-up study. Stroke 32:485–491
Kahara VJ, Seppanen SK, Ryymin PS, Mattila P, Kuurne T, 
Laasonen EM (1999) MR angiography with three-dimen-

276 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
sional time-of-ﬂ ight and targeted maximum-intensity-
projection reconstructions in the follow-up of intracra-
nial aneurysms embolized with Guglielmi detachable 
coils. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 20:1470–1475
Kallmes DF, Fujiwara NH (2002) New expandable hydrogel-
platinum coil hybrid device for aneurysm embolization. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 23:1580–1588
Kallmes DF, Williams AD, Cloft HJ, Lopes MB, Hankins GR, 
Helm GA (1998) Platinum coil-mediated implantation of 
growth factor-secreting endovascular tissue grafts: an in 
vivo study. Radiology 207:519–523
Kallmes DF, Ding YH, Dai D, Kadirvel R, Lewis DA, Cloft 
HJ (2007) A new endoluminal, ﬂ ow-disrupting device for 
treatment of saccular aneurysms. Stroke 38(8):2346–2352. 
Epub 2007 Jul 5
Kanazawa R, Kato M, Ishikawa K, Eguchi T, Teramoto A 
(2007) Convenience of the computed tomography perfu-
sion method for cerebral vasospasm detection after sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage. Surg Neurol 67(6):604–611. Epub 
2007 Feb 15
Kandel EI (1980) Complete excision of arteriovenous malfor-
mations of the cervical cord. Surg Neurol 13:135–139
Kang HS, Han MH, Lee TH, Shin YS, Roh HG, Kwon OK, 
Kwon BJ, Kim SY, Kim SH, Byun HS (2007) Emboliza-
tion of intracranial aneurysms with hydrogel-coated 
coils: result of a Korean multicenter trial. Neurosurgery 
61(1):51–58; discussion 58–59
Kannoth S, Iyer R, Thomas SV, Furtado SV, Rajesh BJ, Kesa-
vadas C, Radhakrishnan VV, Sarma PS (2007) Intracra-
nial infectious aneurysm: presentation, management and 
outcome. J Neurol Sci 256(1/2):3–9. Epub 2007 Mar 23
Kassell NF, Torner JC (1983) Size of intracranial aneurysms. 
Neurosurgery 12:291–297
Kassell NF, Torner JC, Haley EC Jr, Jane JA, Adams HP, Kong-
able GL (1990a) The International Cooperative Study on 
the Timing of Aneurysm Surgery, part 1. Overall manage-
ment results. J Neurosurg 73:18–36
Kassell NF, Torner JC, Jane JA, Haley EC Jr, Adams HP 
(1990b) The International Cooperative Study on the Tim-
ing of Aneurysm Surgery, part 2. Surgical results. J Neu-
rosurg 73:37–47
Kerr R, Molyneux A (2003) Results from the ISAT study, 
16–19 Febr 2003, Phoenix, AZ
Keston P, White PM, Horribine L, Sellar R (2004) The endo-
vascular management of pericallosal artery aneurysms. 
J Neuroradiol 31(5):384–390
King WA, Martin NA (1994) Critical care of patients with 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurosurg Clin North Am 
5:767–787
Klucznik RP, Carrier DA, Pyka R, Haid RW (1993) Placement 
of a ferromagnetic intracerebral aneurysm clip in a mag-
netic ﬁ eld with a fatal outcome. Radiology 187:855–856
Kocak A, Ates O, Cayli SR, Sarac K (2006) Isolated posterior 
spinal artery aneurysm. Br J Neurosurg 20(4):241–244
Koivisto T, Vanninen R, Hurskainen H, Saari T, Hernesniemi 
J, Vapalahti M (2000) Outcomes of early endovascular ver-
sus surgical treatment of ruptured cerebral aneurysms. A 
prospective randomized study. Stroke 31:2369–2377
Kojima M, Nagasawa S, Lee YE, Takeichi Y, Tsuda E, Mabu-
chi N (1998) Asymptomatic familial cerebral aneurysms. 
Neurosurgery 43:776–781
Korogi Y, Takahashi M, Mabuchi N, Nakagawa T, Fujiwara 
S, Horikawa Y, Miki H, O’Uchi T, Shiga H, Shiokawa Y, 
Watabe T, Furuse M (1996) Intracranial aneurysms: di-
agnostic accuracy of MR angiography with evaluation of 
maximum intensity projection and source images. Radi-
ology 199:199–207
Korogi Y, Takahashi M, Katada K, Ogura Y, Hasuo K, Ochi 
M, Utsunomiya H, Abe T, Imakita S (1999) Intracranial 
aneurysms: detection with three-dimensional CT angi-
ography with volume rendering – comparison with con-
ventional angiographic and surgical ﬁ ndings. Radiology 
211:497–506
Kupersmith MJ, Berenstein A, Choi IS, Ransohoff J, Flamm 
ES (1984) Percutaneous transvascular treatment of gi-
ant carotid aneurysms: neuro-ophthalmologic ﬁ ndings. 
Neurology 34:328–335
Kupersmith MJ, Stiebel-Kalish H, Huna-Baron R, Setton A, 
Niimi Y, Langer D, Berenstein A (2002) Cavernous ca-
rotid aneurysms rarely cause subarachnoid hemorrhage 
or major neurologic morbidity. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 
11(1):9–14
Landtblom AM, Fridriksson S, Boivie J, Hillman J, Johans-
son G, Johansson I (2002) Sudden onset headache: a pro-
spective study of features, incidence and causes. Cepha-
lalgia 22:354–360
Lanzino G, Kassell NF (1999) Double-blind, randomized, ve-
hicle-controlled study of high-dose tirilazad mesylate in 
women with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage, part 
II. A cooperative study in North America. J Neurosurg 
90:1018–1024
Lanzino G, Kassell NF, Dorsch NW, Pasqualin A, Brandt L, 
Schmiedek P, Truskowski LL, Alves WM (1999a) Double-
blind, randomized, vehicle-controlled study of high-dose 
tirilazad mesylate in women with aneurysmal subarach-
noid hemorrhage, part I. A cooperative study in Europe, 
Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. J Neurosurg 
90:1011–1017
Lanzino G, Wakhloo AK, Fessler RD, Hartney ML, Guter-
man LR, Hopkins LN (1999b) Efﬁ cacy and current limi-
tations of intravascular stents for intracranial internal 
carotid, vertebral, and basilar artery aneurysms. J Neu-
rosurg 91:538–546
Larson JJ, Tew JM Jr, Tomsick TA, van Loveren HR (1995) 
Treatment of aneurysms of the internal carotid artery by 
intravascular balloon occlusion: long-term follow-up of 
58 patients. Neurosurgery 36:26–30; discussion 30
Laslo AM, Eastwood JD, Chen FX, Lee TY (2006) Dynamic 
CT perfusion imaging in subarachnoid hemorrhage-
related vasospasm. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 27(3):624–
631
Laslo AM, Eastwood JD, Pakkiri P, Chen F, Lee TY (2007) 
CT perfusion-derived mean transit time predicts early 
mortality and delayed vasospasm after experimental 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 26
Lau AH, Takeshita M, Ishii N (1991) Mycotic (Aspergillus) 
arteritis resulting in fatal subarachnoid hemorrhage: a 
case report. Angiology 42:251–255
Lavoie P, Raymond J, Roy D, Guilbert F, Weill AJ (2007) Se-
lective treatment of an anterior spinal artery aneurysm 
with endosaccular coil therapy. Case report. Neurosurg 
Spine 6(5):460–464
Leblanc R (1996) Familial cerebral aneurysms. A bias for 
women. Stroke 27:1050–1054
Le Roux PD, Winn HR (1998) Management of the ruptured 
aneurysm. Neurosurg Clin North Am 9:525–540

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
277
Le Roux PD, Elliott JP, Eskridge JM, Cohen W, Winn HR 
(1998) Risks and beneﬁ ts of diagnostic angiography af-
ter aneurysm surgery: a retrospective analysis of 597 
studies. Neurosurgery 42:1248–1254; discussion 1254–
1255
Lee EK, Hecht ST, Lie JT (1998) Multiple intracranial and sys-
temic aneurysms associated with infantile- onset arterial 
ﬁ bromuscular dysplasia. Neurology 50:828–829
Lee KC, Joo JY, Lee KS, Shin YS (1999) Recanalization of 
completely thrombosed giant aneurysm: case report. 
Surg Neurol 51:94–98
Levine SR, Brust JC, Futrell N, Ho KL, Blake D, Millikan 
CH, Brass LM, Fayad P, Schultz LR, Selwa JF et al. (1990) 
Cerebrovascular complications of the use of the “crack” 
form of alkaloidal cocaine. N Engl J Med 323:699–704
Levine SR, Brust JC, Futrell N, Brass LM, Blake D, Fayad 
P, Schultz LR, Millikan CH, Ho KL, Welch KM (1991) A 
comparative study of the cerebrovascular complications 
of cocaine: alkaloidal versus hydrochloride – a review. 
Neurology 41:1173–1177
Levy DI (1997) Embolization of wide-necked anterior com-
municating artery aneurysm: technical note. Neurosur-
gery 41:979–982
Liang EY, Chan M, Hsiang JH, Walkden SB, Poon WS, Lam 
WW, Metreweli C (1995) Detection and assessment of 
intracranial aneurysms: value of CT angiography with 
shaded-sur-face display. AJR Am J Roentgenol 165:1497–
1502
Lin T, Fox AJ, Drake CG (1989) Regrowth of aneurysm sac 
from residual neck following aneurysm clipping. J Neu-
rosurg 70:556–560
Linn FH, Rinkel GJ, Algra A, van Gijn J (1998) Headache 
characteristics in subarachnoid haemorrhage and benign 
thunderclap headache. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
65:791–793
Linskey ME, Sekhar LN, Hirsch WL Jr, Yonas H, Horton JA 
(1990) Aneurysms of the intracavernous carotid artery: 
natural history and indications for treatment. Neurosur-
gery 26:933–937; discussion 937–938
Linskey ME, Jungreis CA, Yonas H, Hirsch WL Jr, Sekhar 
LN, Horton JA, Janosky JE (1994) Stroke risk after abrupt 
internal carotid artery sacriﬁ ce: accuracy of preoperative 
assessment with balloon test occlusion and stable xenon-
enhanced CT. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 15:829–843
Locksley HB, Sahs AL, Knowler L (1966) Report on the co-
operative study of intracranial aneurysms and subarach-
noid hemorrhage. Section II. General survey of cases in 
the central registry and characteristics of the sample 
population. J Neurosurg 24:922–932
Longstreth WT Jr, Koepsell TD, Yerby MS, van Belle G 
(1985) Risk factors for subarachnoid hemorrhage. Stroke 
16:377–385
Lownie SP, Pelz DM, Fox AJ (2000) Endovascular therapy of 
a large vertebral artery aneurysm using stent and coils. 
Can J Neurol Sci 27:162–165
Lozano AM, Leblanc R (1987) Familial intracranial aneu-
rysms. J Neurosurg 66:522–528
Luginbuhl M, Remonda L (1999) Interventional neuroradiol-
ogy. Recent developments and anaesthesiologic aspects. 
Minerva Anestesiol 65:445–454
Lussenhop AJ, Spence WT (1960) Artiﬁ cial embolization of 
cerebral arteries. Report of use in a case of arteriovenous 
malformation. JAMA 172:1153–1155
Lusseveld E, Brilstra EH, Nijssen PC, van Rooij WJ, Sluze-
wski M, Tulleken CA, Wijnalda D, Schellens RL, van der 
Graaf Y, Rinkel GJ (2002) Endovascular coiling versus 
neurosurgical clipping in patients with a ruptured basilar 
tip aneurysm. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 73:591–593
Lylyk P, Ceratto R, Hurvitz D, Basso A (1998) Treatment of a 
vertebral dissecting aneurysm with stents and coils: tech-
nical case report. Neurosurgery 43:385–388
Lylyk P, Cohen JE, Ceratto R, Ferrario A, Miranda C (2001) 
Combined endovascular treatment of dissecting verte-
bral artery aneurysms by using stents and coils. J Neu-
rosurg 94:427–432
MacDonald A, Mendelow AD (1988) Xanthochromia revis-
ited: a re-evaluation of lumbar puncture and CT scanning 
in the diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatr 51:342–344
MacDonald RL, Wallace MC, Kestle JR (1993) Role of an-
giography following aneurysm surgery. J Neurosurg 
79:826–832
MacDonald RL, Wallace MC, Montanera WJ, Glen JA (1995) 
Pathological effects of angioplasty on vasospastic carotid 
arteries in a rabbit model. J Neurosurg 83:111–117
MacDonald RL, Mojtahedi S, Johns L, Kowalczuk A (1998) 
Randomized comparison of Guglielmi detachable coils 
and cellulose acetate polymer for treatment of aneurysms 
in dogs. Stroke 29:478–485; discussion 485–486
Malek AM, Halbach VV, Phatouros CC, Lempert TE, Mey-
ers PM, Dowd CF, Higashida RT (2000) Balloon-assist 
technique for endovascular coil embolization of geomet-
rically difﬁ cult intracranial aneurysms. Neurosurgery 
46:1397–1406; discussion 1406–1407
Massoud TF, Turjman F, Ji C, Vinuela F, Guglielmi G, Gobin 
YP, Duckwiler GR (1995) Endovascular treatment of fusi-
form aneurysms with stents and coils: technical feasibility 
in a swine model. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16:1953–1963
Mathis JM, Barr JD, Jungreis CA, Yonas H, Sekhar LN, Vin-
cent D, Pentheny SL, Horton JA (1995) Temporary balloon 
test occlusion of the internal carotid artery: experience in 
500 cases. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16:749–754
Mattle H, Kohler S, Huber P, Rohner M, Steinsiepe KF (1989) 
Anticoagulation-related intracranial extracerebral haem-
orrhage. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 52:829–837
Mawad ME, Klucznik RP (1995) Giant serpentine aneurysms: 
radiographic features and endovascular treatment. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 16:1053–1060
Mayfrank L, Hutter BO, Kohorst Y, Kreitschmann-Ander-
mahr I, Rohde V, Thron A, Gilsbach JM (2001) Inﬂ uence 
of intraventricular hemorrhage on outcome after rupture 
of intracranial aneurysm. Neurosurg Rev 24:185–191
McCormick WF, Acosta-Rua GJ (1970) The size of intracra-
nial saccular aneurysms. An autopsy study. J Neurosurg 
33:422–427
McDougall CG, Halbach VV, Dowd CF, Higashida RT, Larsen 
DW, Hieshima GB (1998) Causes and management of an-
eurysmal hemorrhage occurring during embolization 
with Guglielmi detachable coils. J Neurosurg 89:87–92
McKissock W, Richardson A, Walsh L, Owen E (1964) Mul-
tiple intracranial aneurysms. Lancet 15:623–626
Menovsky T, van Rooij WJ, Sluzewski M, Wijnalda D (2002) 
Coiling of ruptured pericallosal artery aneurysms. Neu-
rosurgery 50:11–14; discussion 14–15
Mericle RA, Wakhloo AK, Rodriguez R, Guterman LR, 
Hopkins LN (1997) Temporary balloon protection as an 

278 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
adjunct to endovascular coiling of wide-necked cerebral 
aneurysms: technical note. Neurosurgery 41:975–978
Mericle RA, Lanzino G, Wakhloo AK, Guterman LR, Hop-
kins LN (1998) Stenting and secondary coiling of intra-
cranial internal carotid artery aneurysm: technical case 
report. Neurosurgery 43:1229–1234
Minematsu K, Li L, Fisher M, Sotak CH, Davis MA, Fian-
daca MS (1992) Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging: rapid and quantitative detection of focal brain 
ischemia. Neurology 42:235–240
Mizoi K, Suzuki J, Yoshimoto T (1989) Surgical treatment of 
multiple aneurysms. Review of experience with 372 cases. 
Acta Neurochir (Wien) 96:8–14
Mizoi K, Yoshimoto T, Nagamine Y, Kayama T, Koshu K 
(1995) How to treat incidental cerebral aneurysms: a re-
view of 139 consecutive cases. Surg Neurol 44:114–120; 
discussion 120–121
Mohsenipour I, Ortler M, Twerdy K, Schmutzhard E, At-
tlmayr G, Aichner F (1994) Isolated aneurysm of a spi-
nal radicular artery presenting as spinal subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 57:767–768
Molyneux A, Kerr R, Stratton I, Sandercock P, Clarke M, 
Shrimpton J, Holman R (2002) International Subarach-
noid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT) of neurosurgical clipping 
versus endovascular coiling in 2143 patients with rup-
tured intracranial aneurysms: a randomised trial. Lancet 
360:1267–1274
Moret J, Pierot L, Boulin A, Castaings L, Rey A (1996) En-
dovascular treatment of anterior communicating artery 
aneurysms using Guglielmi detachable coils. Neuroradi-
ology 38:800–805
Moret J, Cognard C, Weill A, Castaings L, Rey A (1997a) Re-
construction technic in the treatment of wide-neck intra-
cranial aneurysms. Long-term angiographic and clinical 
results. Apropos of 56 cases. J Neuroradiol 24:30–44
Moret J, Cognard C, Weill A, Castaings L, Rey A (1997b) Re-
construction technic in the treatment of wide-neck intra-
cranial aneurysms. Long-term angiographic and clinical 
results. Apropos of 56 cases. J Neuroradiol 24(1):30–44. 
[Article in French]
Morita A, Fujiwara S, Hashi K, Ohtsu H, Kirino T (2005) Risk 
of rupture associated with intact cerebral aneurysms in 
the Japanese population: a systematic review of the litera-
ture from Japan. J Neurosurg 102(4):601–606
Moseley ME, Mintorovitch J, Cohen Y, Asgari HS, Derugin N, 
Norman D, Kucharczyk J (1990) Early detection of isch-
emic injury: comparison of spectroscopy, diffusion-, T2-, 
and magnetic susceptibility-weighted MRI in cats. Acta 
Neurochir (Wien) [Suppl] 51:207–209
Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Suzuki Y, Do HM, Massoud TF, 
Guglielmi G, Ji C, Iwaki M, Kusakabe M, Kamio M, Abe T 
(1997) Ion implantation and protein coating of detachable 
coils for endovascular treatment of cerebral aneurysms: 
concepts and preliminary results in swine models. Neu-
rosurgery 40:1233–1243; discussion 1243–1244
Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Duckwiler GR, Gobin YP, Guglielmi 
G (1999) Embolization of incidental cerebral aneurysms 
by using the Guglielmi detachable coil system. J Neuro-
surg 90:207–214
Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Tateshima S, Vinuela F Jr, Akiba Y 
(2000) Endovascular treatment of experimental aneurysms 
by use of a combination of liquid embolic agents and pro-
tective devices. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 21:1726–1735
Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Tateshima S, Song JK, Gonzalez 
NR, Wallace MP (2001) Bioabsorbable polymeric material 
coils for embolization of intracranial aneurysms: a pre-
liminary experimental study. J Neurosurg 94:454–463
Nakahara I, Taki W, Kikuchi H, Sakai N, Isaka F, Oowaki H, 
Kondo A, Iwasaki K, Nishi S (1999) Endovascular treat-
ment of aneurysms on the feeding arteries of intracranial 
arteriovenous malformations. Neuroradiology 41:60–66
Nanda A, Vannemreddy PS, Polin RS, Willis BK (2000) Intra-
cranial aneurysms and cocaine abuse: analysis of prog-
nostic indicators. Neurosurgery 46:1063–1067; discussion 
1067–1069
Nehls DG, Flom RA, Carter LP, Spetzler RF (1985) Multiple 
intracranial aneurysms: determining the site of rupture. 
J Neurosurg 63:342–348
Nelson PK (1998) Neurointerventional management of intra-
cranial aneurysms. Neurosurg Clin North Am 9:879–895
Nelson PK, Levy DI (2001) Balloon-assisted coil emboliza-
tion of wide-necked aneurysms of the internal carotid 
artery: medium-term angiographic and clinical follow-
up in 22 patients. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22:19–26
Newell DW, Elliott JP, Eskridge JM, Winn HR (1999) Endo-
vascular therapy for aneurysmal vasospasm. Crit Care 
Clin 15:685–699, v
Noguchi K, Ogawa T, Inugami A, Toyoshima H, Sugawara 
S, Hatazawa J, Fujita H, Shimosegawa E, Kanno I, Oku-
dera T et al. (1995) Acute subarachnoid hemorrhage: MR 
imaging with ﬂ uid-attenuated inversion recovery pulse 
sequences. Radiology 196:773–777
Nornes H (1973) The role of intracranial pressure in the ar-
rest of hemorrhage in patients with ruptured intracranial 
aneurysm. J Neurosurg 39:226–234
Nowak G, Schwachenwald R, Arnold H (1994) Early manage-
ment in poor grade aneurysm patients. Acta Neurochir 
(Wien) 126:33–37
Okahara M, Kiyosue H, Yamashita M, Nagatomi H, Hata 
H, Saginoya T, Sagara Y, Mori H (2002) Diagnostic ac-
curacy of magnetic resonance angiography for cerebral 
aneurysms in correlation with 3D-digital subtraction 
angiographic images: a study of 133 aneurysms. Stroke 
33:1803–1808
Okamoto K, Horisawa R, Kawamura T, Asai A, Ogino M, 
Takagi T, Ohno Y (2003) Family history and risk of sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage: a case-control study in Nagoya, 
Japan. Stroke 34:422–426
Oppenheim C, Domigo V, Gauvrit JY, Lamy C, Mackowiak-
Cordoliani MA, Pruvo JP, Méder JF (2005) Subarachnoid 
hemorrhage as the initial presentation of dural sinus 
thrombosis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 26(3):614–617
Origitano TC, Wascher TM, Reichman OH, Anderson DE 
(1990) Sustained increased cerebral blood ﬂ ow with 
prophylactic hypertensive hypervolemic hemodilution 
(“triple-H” therapy) after subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
Neurosurgery 27:729–739; discussion 739–740
Ostergaard JR (1991) Headache as a warning symptom of im-
pending aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. Cepha-
lalgia 11:53–55
Padolecchia R, Guglielmi G, Puglioli M, Castagna M, Nardini 
V, Collavoli P, Guidetti G, Dazzi M, Zucchi V, Narducci 
P (2001) Role of electrothrombosis in aneurysm treat-
ment with Guglielmi detachable coils: an in vitro scan-
ning electron microscopic study. AJNR Am J Neuoradiol 
22:1757–1760

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
279
Park HK, Horowitz M, Jungreis C, Kassam A, Koebbe C, 
Genevro J, Dutton K, Purdy P, Pasqualin A, Battaglia R, 
Scienza R, Da Pian R (1988) Italian cooperative study on 
giant intracranial aneurysms: 3. Modalities of treatment. 
Acta Neurochir (Wien) [Suppl] 42:60–64
Patel AN, Richardson AE (1971) Ruptured intracranial an-
eurysms in the ﬁ rst two decades of life. A study of 58 
patients. J Neurosurg 35:571–576
Peerless SJ, Ferguson GG, Drake CG (1982) Extracranial-in-
tracranial (EC/IC) bypass in the treatment of giant intra-
cranial aneurysms. Neurosurg Rev 5:77–81
Peerless SJ, Nemoto S, Drake CG (1987) Acute surgery for 
ruptured posterior circulation aneurysms. Adv Tech 
Stand Neurosurg 15:115–129
Peerless SJ, Hernesniemi JA, Gutman FB, Drake CG (1994). 
Early surgery for ruptured vertebrobasilar aneurysms. 
J Neurosurg 80:643–649
Perneczky A, Czech T (1984) Prognosis of oculomotor palsy 
following subarachnoid hemorrhage due to aneurysms of 
the posterior communicating artery. Zentralbl Neurochir 
45:189–195
Pham M, Johnson A, Bartsch AJ, Lindner C, Müllges W, 
Roosen K, Solymosi L, Bendszus M (2007) CT perfusion 
predicts secondary cerebral infarction after aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurology 69(8):762–765
Phillips LH II, Whisnant JP, O’Fallon WM, Sundt TM Jr 
(1980) The unchanging pattern of subarachnoid hemor-
rhage in a community. Neurology 30:1034–1040
Phuong LK, Link M, Wijdicks E (2002) Management of intra-
cranial infectious aneurysms: a series of 16 cases. Neuro-
surgery 51:1145–1151; discussion 1151–1152
Pierot L, Boulin A, Castaings L, Rey A, Moret J (1996) Se-
lective occlusion of basilar artery aneurysms using con-
trolled detachable coils: report of 35 cases. Neurosurgery 
38:948–953; discussion 953–954
Pierot L, Boulin A, Castaings L, Rey A, Moret J (1997) The 
endovascular approach in the management of patients 
with multiple intracranial aneurysms. Neuroradiology 
39:361–366
Pierot L, Delcourt C, Bouquigny F, Breidt D, Feuillet B, 
Lanoix O, Gallas S (2006) Follow-up of intracranial an-
eurysms selectively treated with coils: prospective evalu-
ation of contrast-enhanced MR angiography. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 27(4):744–749
Piotin M, Spelle L, Mounayer C, Salles-Rezende MT, 
Giansante-Abud D, Vanzin-Santos R, Moret J (2007) 
Intracranial aneurysms: treatment with bare platinum 
coils-aneurysm packing, complex coils, and angiographic 
recurrence. Radiology 243(2):500–508. Epub 2007 Feb 9
Polin RS, Hansen CA, German P, Chadduck JB, Kassell NF 
(1998) Intra-arterially administered papaverine for the 
treatment of symptomatic cerebral vasospasm. Neuro-
surgery 42:1256–1264; discussion 1264–1267
Powell J, Kitchen N, Heslin J, Greenwood R (2004) Psycho-
social outcomes at 18 months after good neurological 
recovery from aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 75(8):1119–1124
Pradhan S, Yadav R, Diwakar H, Phadke RV (2007) Sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage following chronic dural venous 
sinus thrombosis. Angiology 58(4):498–501
Proust F, Toussaint P, Hannequin D, Rabenenoina C, Le Gars 
D, Freger P (1997) Outcome in 43 patients with distal an-
terior cerebral artery aneurysms. Stroke 28:2405–2409
Qureshi AI, Mohammad Y, Yahia AM, Luft AR, Sharma M, 
Tamargo RJ, Frankel MR (2000a) Ischemic events asso-
ciated with unruptured intracranial aneurysms: multi-
center clinical study and review of the literature. Neuro-
surgery 46:282–289; discussion 289–290
Qureshi AI, Luft AR, Sharma M, Guterman LR, Hopkins 
LN (2000b) Prevention and treatment of thromboem-
bolic and ischemic complications associated with endo-
vascular procedures, part II. Clinical aspects and rec-
ommendations. Neurosurgery 46:1360–1375; discussion 
1375–1376
Qureshi AI, Suri MF, Khan J, Kim SH, Fessler RD, Ringer 
AJ, Guterman LR, Hopkins LN (2001) Endovascular treat-
ment of intracranial aneurysms by using Guglielmi de-
tachable coils in awake patients: safety and feasibility. 
J Neurosurg 94:880–885
Qureshi AI, Janardhan V, Hanel RA, Lanzino G (2007) Com-
parison of endovascular and surgical treatments for in-
tracranial aneurysms: an evidence-based review. Lancet 
Neurol 6(9):816–825
Raaymakers T (1999) Aneurysms in relatives of patients with 
subarachnoid hemorrhage: frequency and risk factors. 
MARS study group. Magnetic resonance angiography 
in relatives of patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
Neurology 53:982–988
Raaymakers T (2000) Functional outcome and quality of life 
after angiography and operation for unruptured intra-
cranial aneurysms. On behalf of the MARS Study Group. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 68:571–576
Raaymakers T, Rinkel G, Limburg M, Algra A (1998a) Mor-
tality and morbidity of surgery for unruptured intracra-
nial aneurysms. Stroke 29:1531–1538
Raaymakers TW, Rinkel GJ, Ramos LM (1998b) Initial and 
follow-up screening for aneurysms in families with fa-
milial subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurology 51:1125–
1130
Raaymakers TW, Buys PC, Verbeeten B Jr, Ramos LM, Wit-
kamp TD, Hulsmans FJ, Mali WP, Algra A, Bonsel GJ, 
Bossuyt PM, Vonk CM, Buskens E, Limburg M, van Gijn 
J, Gorissen A, Greebe P, Albrecht KW, Tulleken CA, Rin-
kel GJ (1999) MR angiography as a screening tool for 
intracranial aneurysms: feasibility, test characteristics, 
and interobserver agreement. AJR Am J Roentgenol 
173:1469–1475
Raymond J, Roy D (1997) Safety and efﬁ cacy of endovascular 
treatment of acutely ruptured aneurysms. Neurosurgery 
41:1235–1245; discussion 1245–1246
Raymond J, Guilbert F, Weill A, Georganos SA, Juravsky L, 
Lambert A, Lamoureux J, Chagnon M, Roy D (2003) Long-
term angiographic recurrences after selective endovascu-
lar treatment of aneurysms with detachable coils. Stroke 
34(6):1398–1403. Epub 2003 May 29
Regli L, Uske A, de Tribolet N (1999) Endovascular coil 
placement compared with surgical clipping for the treat-
ment of unruptured middle cerebral artery aneurysms: 
a consecutive series. J Neurosurg 90:1025–1030
Reith W, Hasegawa Y, Latour LL, Dardzinski BJ, Sotak CH, 
Fisher M (1995) Multislice diffusion mapping for 3-D evo-
lution of cerebral ischemia in a rat stroke model. Neurol-
ogy 45:172–177
Rice BJ, Peerless SJ, Drake CG (1990) Surgical treatment 
of unruptured aneurysms of the posterior circulation. 
J Neurosurg 73:165–173

280 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
Richling B, Gruber A, Bavinzski G, Killer M (1995) GDC-
system embolization for brain aneurysms – location and 
follow-up. Acta Neurochir 134:177–183
Ricolﬁ  F, Le Guerinel C, Blustajn J, Combes C, Brugieres P, 
Melon E, Gaston A (1998) Rupture during treatment of 
recently ruptured aneurysms with Guglielmi electrode-
tachable coils. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 19:1653–1658
Rinkel GJ, Wijdicks EF, Hasan D, Kienstra GE, Franke CL, 
Hageman LM, Vermeulen M, van Gijn J (1991) Outcome 
in patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage and nega-
tive angiography according to pattern of haemorrhage 
on computed tomography. Lancet 338:964–968
Rinkel GJ, Prins NE, Algra A (1997) Outcome of aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage in patients on anticoagulant 
treatment. Stroke 28:6–9
Rinkel GJ, Djibuti M, Algra A, van Gijn J (1998) Prevalence 
and risk of rupture of intracranial aneurysms: a system-
atic review. Stroke 29:251–256
Rinne J, Hernesniemi J, Puranen M, Saari T (1994) Multiple 
intracranial aneurysms in a deﬁ ned population: pro-
spective angiographic and clinical study. Neurosurgery 
35:803–808
Rinne J, Hernesniemi J, Niskanen M, Vapalahti M (1995) 
Management outcome for multiple intracranial aneu-
rysms. Neurosurgery 36:31–37; discussion 37–38
Ronkainen A, Hernesniemi J, Puranen M, Niemitukia L, Van-
ninen R, Ryynanen M, Kuivaniemi H, Tromp G (1997) Fa-
milial intracranial aneurysms. Lancet 349:380–384
Roos YB, Hasan D, Vermeulen M (1995) Outcome in patients 
with large intraventricular haemorrhages: a volumetric 
study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 58:622–624
Roos YB, de Haan RJ, Beenen LF, Groen RJ, Albrecht KW, 
Vermeulen M (2000) Complications and outcome in pa-
tients with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage: a 
prospective hospital based cohort study in the Nether-
lands. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 68:337–341
Rordorf G, Koroshetz WJ, Copen WA, Gonzalez G, Yamada K, 
Schaefer PW, Schwamm LH, Ogilvy CS, Sorensen AG (1999) 
Diffusion- and perfusion-weighted imaging in vasospasm 
after subarachnoid hemorrhage. Stroke 30:599–605
Ross JS, Masaryk TJ, Modic MT, Ruggieri PM, Haacke EM, 
Selman WR (1990) Intracranial aneurysms: evaluation by 
MR angiography. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 11:449–455
Rowe JG, Molyneux AJ, Byrne JV, Renowden S, Aziz TZ (1996) 
Endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms: a 
minimally invasive approach with advantages for elderly 
patients. Age Ageing 25:372–376
Ruigrok YM, Rinkel GJ, Algra A, Raaymakers TW, Van Gijn 
J (2004) Characteristics of intracranial aneurysms in pa-
tients with familial subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurol-
ogy 62(6):891–894
Rumboldt Z, Kalousek M, Castillo M (2003) Hyperacute sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage on T2-weighted MR images. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 24:472–475
Sacco RL, Wolf PA, Bharucha NE, Meeks SL, Kannel WB, 
Charette LJ, McNamara PM, Palmer EP, D’Agostino R 
(1984) Subarachnoid and intracerebral hemorrhage: 
natural history, prognosis, and precursive factors in the 
Framingham study. Neurology 34:847–854
Saitoh H, Hayakawa K, Nishimura K, Okuno Y, Teraura T, 
Yumi-tori K, Okumura A (1995) Rerupture of cerebral 
aneurysms during angiography. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
16:539–542
Sakata S, Fujii K, Matsushima T, Fujiwara S, Fukui M, Mat-
subara T, Nagatomi H, Kuromatsu C, Kamikaseda K 
(1993) Aneurysm of the posterior cerebral artery: report 
of eleven cases – surgical approaches and procedures. 
Neurosurgery 32:163–167; discussion 167–168
Sasaki O, Ogawa H, Koike T, Koizumi T, Tanaka R (1991) A 
clinicopathological study of dissecting aneurysms of the 
intracranial vertebral artery. J Neurosurg 75:874–882
SchievinkWI (1997) Genetics of intracranial aneurysms. 
Neurosurgery 40:651–662; discussion 662–663
Schievink WI (2001) Spontaneous dissection of the carotid 
and vertebral arteries. N Engl J Med 344:898–906
Schievink WI, Wijdicks EF, Piepgras DG, Chu CP, O’Fallon 
WM, Whisnant JP (1995) The poor prognosis of ruptured 
intracranial aneurysms of the posterior circulation. 
J Neurosurg 82:791–795
Schievink WI, Parisi JE, Piepgras DG (1997) Familial in-
tracranial aneurysms: an autopsy study. Neurosurgery 
41:1247–1251; discussion 1251–1252
Schwartz TH, Solomon RA (1996) Perimesencephalic nona-
neurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: review of the lit-
erature. Neurosurgery 39:433–440; discussion 440
Schwartz RB, Tice HM, Hooten SM, Hsu L, Stieg PE (1994) 
Evaluation of cerebral aneurysms with helical CT: cor-
relation with conventional angiography and MR angiog-
raphy. Radiology 192:717–722
Seifert V (1997) Neurosurgical therapy of subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. Wien Med Wochenschr 147:152–158
Sekhon LH, Morgan MK, Sorby W, Grinnell V (1998) Com-
bined endovascular stent implantation and endosaccular 
coil placement for the treatment of a wide-necked verte-
bral artery aneurysm: technical case report. Neurosur-
gery 43:380–383; discussion 384
Serbinenko FA (1974a) Balloon occlusion of saccular aneu-
rysms of the cerebral arteries. Vopr Neirokhir 4:8–15
Serbinenko FA (1974b) Balloon catheterization and occlu-
sion of major cerebral vessels. J Neurosurg 41:125–145
Sethi H, Moore A, Dervin J, Clifton A, MacSweeney JE 
(2000) Hydrocephalus: comparison of clipping and 
embolization in aneurysm treatment. J Neurosurg 
92:991–994
Sevick RJ, Tsuruda JS, Schmalbrock P (1990) Three-dimen-
sional time-of-ﬂ ight MR angiography in the evaluation 
of cerebral aneurysms. J Comput Assist Tomogr 14:874–
881
Shellock FG, Detrick MS, Brant-Zawadski MN (1997) MR 
compatibility of Guglielmi detachable coils. Radiology 
203:568–570
Shimoda M, Takeuchi M, Tominaga J, Oda S, Kumasaka 
A, Tsugane R (2001) Asymptomatic versus symptomatic 
infarcts from vasospasm in patients with subarachnoid 
hemorrhage: serial magnetic resonance imaging. Neuro-
surgery 49:1341–1348; discussion 1348–1350
Sindou M, Pelissou-Guyotat I, Mertens P, Keravel Y, Athayde 
AA (1988) Pericallosal aneurysms. Surg Neurol 30:434–
440
Sindou M, AcevedoJC, TurjmanF( 1998) Aneurysmal rem-
nants after microsurgical clipping: classiﬁ cation and 
results from a prospective angiographic study (in a con-
secutive series of 305 operated intracranial aneurysms). 
Acta Neurochir (Wien) 140:1153–1159
Sluzewski M, van Rooij WJ, Beute GN, Nijssen PC (2006) 
Balloon-assisted coil embolization of intracranial an-

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
281
eurysms: incidence, complications, and angiography re-
sults. J Neurosurg 105(3):396–399
Solander S, Ulhoa A, Vinuela F, Duckwiler GR, Gobin YP, 
Martin NA, Frazee JG, Guglielmi G (1999) Endovascular 
treatment of multiple intracranial aneurysms by using 
Guglielmi detachable coils. J Neurosurg 90:857–864
Solomon RA, Mayer SA, Tarmey JJ (1996) Relationship be-
tween the volume of craniotomies for cerebral aneurysm 
performed at New York state hospitals and in-hospital 
mortality. Stroke 27:13–17
Song JK, Elliott JP, Eskridge JM (1997) Neuroradiologic di-
agnosis and treatment of vasospasm. Neuroimaging Clin 
North Am 7:819–835
Spitzer C, Mull M, Rohde V, Kosinski CM (2005) Non-trau-
matic cortical subarachnoid haemorrhage: diagnostic 
work-up and aetiological background. Neuroradiology 
47(7):525–531. Epub 2005 Jun 22
Standard SC, Ahuja A, Guterman LR, Chavis TD, Gibbons KJ, 
Barth AP, Hopkins LN (1995) Balloon test occlusion of the 
internal carotid artery with hypotensive challenge. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 16:1453–1458
Stapf C, Mohr JP, Pile-Spellman J, Sciacca RR, Hartmann 
A, Schumacher HC, Mast H (2002) Concurrent arterial 
aneurysms in brain arteriovenous malformations with 
haemorrhagic presentation. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychi-
atr 73:294–298
StehbensWE (1989) Etiology of intracranial berry aneu-
rysms. J Neurosurg 70:823–831
Steinberg GK, Guppy KH, Adler JR, Silverberg GD (1992) 
Stereotactic, angiography-guided clipping of a distal, 
mycotic intracranial aneurysm using the Cosman-Rob-
erts-Wells system: technical note. Neurosurgery 30:408–
411
Sugiu K, Tokunaga K, Watanabe K, Sasahara W, Tagawa M, 
Tamesa N, Ono S, Onoda K, Date I (2005) Endovascular 
treatment for elderly patients with ruptured aneurysm. 
Acta Neurochir Suppl 94:7–9
Suzuki J, Komatsu S, Sato T, Sakurai Y (1980a) Correlation 
between CT ﬁ ndings and subsequent development of 
cerebral infarction due to vasospasm in subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 55:63–70
Suzuki J, Kwak R, Katakura R (1980b) Review of incom-
pletely occluded surgically treated cerebral aneurysms. 
Surg Neurol 13:306–310
Sviri GE, Mesiwala AH, Lewis DH, Britz GW, Nemecek A, 
Newell DW, Lam A, Cohen W (2006) Dynamic perfusion 
computerized tomography in cerebral vasospasm follow-
ing aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: a comparison 
with technetium-99m-labeled ethyl cysteinate dimer-sin-
gle-photon emission computerized tomography. J Neuro-
surg 104(3):404–410
Szikora I, Guterman LR, Wells KM, Hopkins LN (1994) Com-
bined use of stents and coils to treat experimental wide-
necked carotid aneurysms: preliminary results. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 15:1091–1102
Tan WS, Jafar JJ, Abejo R, Spigos DG, Crowell RM, Capek V 
(1986) Regional cerebral blood ﬂ ow assessment prior to 
balloon detachment in the treatment of intracranial giant 
aneurysms. Acta Radiol [Suppl] 369:116–119
Tateshima S, Murayama Y, Gobin YP, Duckwiler GR, Gug-
lielmi G, Vinuela F (2000) Endovascular treatment of 
basilar tip aneurysms using Guglielmi detachable coils: 
anatomic and clinical outcomes in 73 patients from a 
single institution. Neurosurgery 47:1332–1339; discus-
sion 1339–1342
Taylor CL, Yuan Z, Selman WR, Ratcheson RA, Rimm AA 
(1995) Cerebral arterial aneurysm formation and rupture 
in 20,767 elderly patients: hypertension and other risk 
factors. J Neurosurg 83:812–819
Teunissen LL, Rinkel GJ, Algra A, van Gijn J (1996) Risk fac-
tors for subarachnoid hemorrhage: a systematic review. 
Stroke 27:544–549
Thielen KR, Nichols DA, Fulgham JR, Piepgras DG (1997) 
Endovascular treatment of cerebral aneurysms following 
incomplete clipping. J Neurosurg 87:184–189
Thompson RC, Steinberg GK, Levy RP, Marks MP (1998) The 
management of patients with arteriovenous malforma-
tions and associated intracranial aneurysms. Neurosur-
gery 43:202–211; discussion 211–212
Thornton J, Aletich VA, Debrun GM, Alazzaz A, Misra M, 
Charbel F, Ausman JI (2000a) Endovascular treatment of 
paraclinoid aneurysms. Surg Neurol 54:288–299
Thornton J, Bashir Q, Aletich VA, Debrun GM, Ausman JI, 
Charbel FT (2000b) What percentage of surgically clipped 
intracranial aneurysms have residual necks? Neurosur-
gery 46:1294–1298; discussion 1298–1300
Timperman PE, Tomsick TA, Tew JM Jr, van LoverenHR 
(1995) Aneurysm formation after carotid occlusion. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 16:329–331
Tokunaga K, Kinugasa K, Mandai S, Handa A, Hirotsune N, 
Ohmoto T (1998) Partial thrombosis of canine carotid 
bifurcation aneurysms with cellulose acetate polymer. 
Neurosurgery 42:1135–1142; discussion 1142–1144
Tong FC, Cloft HJ, Dion JE (2000) Endovascular treatment of 
intracranial aneurysms with Guglielmi detachable coils: 
emphasis on new techniques. J Clin Neurosci 7:244–253
Torner JC, Kassell NF, Wallace RB, Adams HP Jr (1981) Pre-
operative prognostic factors for rebleeding and survival 
in aneurysm patients receiving antiﬁ brinolytic therapy: 
report of the Cooperative Aneurysm Study. Neurosurgery 
9:506–513
Turjman F, Massoud TF, Vinuela F, Sayre JW, Guglielmi G, 
Duckwiler G (1994) Aneurysms related to cerebral arte-
riovenous malformations: superselective angiographic 
assessment in 58 patients. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
15:1601–1605
Uda K, Murayama Y, Gobin YP, Duckwiler GR, Vinuela F (2001) 
Endovascular treatment of basilar artery trunk aneurysms 
with Guglielmi detachable coils: clinical experience with 
41 aneurysms in 39 patients. J Neurosurg 95:624–632
Vajda J (1992) Multiple intracranial aneurysms: a high risk 
condition. Acta Neurochir (Wien) 118:59–75
Vallee JN, Aymard A, Vicaut E, Reis M, Merland JJ (2003) 
Endovascular treatment of basilar tip aneurysms with 
Guglielmi detachable coils: predictors of immediate and 
long-term results with multivariate analysis 6-year expe-
rience. Radiology 226:867–879
Van der Wee N, Rinkel GJ, Hasan D, van Gijn J (1995) Detec-
tion of subarachnoid haemorrhage on early CT: is lumbar 
puncture still needed after a negative scan? J Neurol Neu-
rosurg Psychiatr 58:357–359
Van Gijn J, van Dongen KJ (1982) The time course of aneu-
rysmal haemorrhage on computed tomograms. Neurora-
diology 23:153–156
Van Rooij WJ, Sluzewski M, Metz NH, Nijssen PC, Wijnalda 
D, Rinkel GJ, Tulleken CA (2000) Carotid balloon occlu-

282 
I. Wanke, A. Dörﬂ er, and M. Forsting
sion for large and giant aneurysms: evaluation of a new 
test occlusion protocol. Neurosurgery 47:116–121; discus-
sion 122
Van Rooij WJ, Sluzewski M, Menovsky T, Wijnalda D (2003) 
Coiling of saccular basilar trunk aneurysms. Neuroradi-
ology 45:19–21
Vanzin JR, Mounayer C, Piotin M, Spelle L, Boissonnet H, 
Moret J (2005) Endovascular treatment of unruptured 
middle cerebral artery aneurysms [Article in French]. 
J Neuroradiol 32(2):97–108
Vermeulen M, van Gijn J, Hijdra A, van Crevel H (1984) 
Causes of acute deterioration in patients with a ruptured 
intracranial aneurysm. A prospective study with serial 
CT scanning. J Neurosurg 60:935–939
Vermeulen M, Hasan D, Blijenberg BG, Hijdra A, van Gijn J 
(1989) Xanthochromia after subarachnoid haemorrhage 
needs no revisitation. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 
52:826–828
Vicari P, Choairy AC, Siuﬁ  GC, Arantes AM, Fonseca JR, 
Figueiredo MS (2004) Embolization of intracranial aneu-
rysms and sickle cell disease. Am J Hematol 76(1):83–84
Vieco PT, Shuman WP, Alsofrom GF, Gross CE (1995) Detec-
tion of circle of Willis aneurysms in patients with acute 
subarachnoid hemorrhage: a comparison of CT angiog-
raphy and digital subtraction angiography. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol 165:425–430
Vieco PT, Morin EE III, Gross CE (1996) CT angiography in 
the examination of patients with aneurysm clips. AJNR 
Am J Neuroradiol 17:455–457
Vinuela F, Duckwiler G, Mawad M (1997) Guglielmi detach-
able coil embolization of acute intracranial aneurysm: 
perioperative anatomical and clinical outcome in 403 
patients. J Neurosurg 86:475–482
Vora YY, Suarez-Almazor M, Steinke DE, Martin ML, Find-
lay JM (1999) Role of transcranial Doppler monitoring in 
the diagnosis of cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. Neurosurgery 44:1237–1247; discussion 
1247–1248
Wallace RC, Karis JP, Partovi S, Fiorella D (2007a) Noninva-
sive imaging of treated cerebral aneurysms, part I: MR 
angiographic follow-up of coiled aneurysms. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 28(6):1001–1008
Wallace RC, Karis JP, Partovi S, Fiorella D (2007b) Noninva-
sive imaging of treated cerebral aneurysms, part II: CT 
angiographic follow-up of surgically clipped aneurysms. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 28(7):1207–1212
Wang YF, Fuh JL, Lirng JF, Chang FC, Wang SJ (2007) Spon-
taneous intracranial hypotension with isolated cortical 
vein thrombosis and subarachnoid haemorrhage. Cepha-
lalgia 27(12):1413–1417. Epub 2007 Sep 19
Wanke I, Dorﬂ er A, Dietrich U, Aalders T, Forsting M (2000) 
Combined endovascular therapy of ruptured aneurysms 
and cerebral vasospasm. Neuroradiology 42:926–929
Wanke I, Doerﬂ er A, Dietrich U, Egelhof T, Schoch B, Stolke 
D, Forsting M (2002) Endovascular treatment of unrup-
tured intracranial aneurysms. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
23:756–761
Wanke I, Doerﬂ er A, Schoch B, Stolke D, Forsting M (2003) 
Treatment of wide-necked intracranial aneurysms with 
a self-expanding stent system: initial clinical experience. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 24:1192–1199
Wanke I, Doerﬂ er A, Goericke S, Gizewski ER, Sandalcioglu 
E, Moemken S, Stolke D, Forsting M (2005) Treatment 
of wide-necked intracranial aneurysms with a self-ex-
panding stent: mid-term results. Zentralbl Neurochir 
66(4):163–169
Warach S, Chien D, Li W, Ronthal M, Edelman RR (1992) Fast 
magnetic resonance diffusion-weighted imaging of acute 
human stroke. Neurology 42:1717–1723
Wardlaw JM, Cannon JC (1996) Color transcranial “power” 
Doppler ultrasound of intracranial aneurysms. J Neuro-
surg 84:459–461
Wardlaw JM, White PM (2000) The detection and man-
agement of unruptured intracranial aneurysms. Brain 
123:205–221
Weaver JP, Fisher M (1994) Subarachnoid hemorrhage: an 
update of pathogenesis, diagnosis and management. 
J Neurol Sci 125:119–131
Weber W, Henkes H, Kuhne D (2000) Stent implantation into 
the basilar artery for supporting endovascular aneurysm 
treatment. Nervenarzt 71:843–848
Weber W, Yousry TA, Felber SR, Henkes H, Nahser HC, Roer 
N, Kuhne D (2001) Noninvasive follow-up of GDC-treated 
saccular aneurysms by MR angiography. Eur Radiol 
11:1792–1797
Weir B, MacDonald N, Mielke B (1978) Intracranial vas-
cular complications of choriocarcinoma. Neurosurgery 
2:138–142
Weir BK, Kongable GL, Kassell NF, Schultz JR, Truskowski 
LL, Sigrest A (1998) Cigarette smoking as a cause of 
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage and risk for va-
sospasm: a report of the Cooperative Aneurysm Study. 
J Neurosurg 89:405–411
Weir B, Amidei C, Kongable G, Findlay JM, Kassell NF, Kelly 
J, Dai L, Karrison TG (2003) The aspect ratio (dome/neck) 
of ruptured and unruptured aneurysms. Neurosurgery 
99(3):447–451
Wermer MJ, van der Schaaf IC, Algra A, Rinkel GJ (2007) 
Risk of rupture of unruptured intracranial aneurysms in 
relation to patient and aneurysm characteristics: an up-
dated meta-analysis. Stroke 38(4):1404–1410. Epub 2007 
Mar 1
White PM, Wardlaw JM, Easton V (2000) Can noninvasive 
imaging accurately depict intracranial aneurysms? A sys-
tematic review. Radiology 217:361–370
White PM, Wardlaw JM, Teasdale E, Sloss S, Cannon J, 
Easton V (2001) Power transcranial Doppler ultrasound 
in the detection of intracranial aneurysms. Stroke 
32:1291–1297
Wiebers D (1998) Unruptured intracranial aneurysms – risk 
of rupture and risks of surgical intervention. The inter-
national study of unruptured intracranial aneurysms 
investigators. New Engl J Med 339:1725–1733
Wiebers D, Whisnant JP, O’Fallon WM (1981) The natural 
history of unruptured intracranial aneurysms. N Engl J 
Med 304:696–698
Wiebers D, Torner J, Meissner I (1992) Impact of unruptured 
intracranial aneurysms on public health in the United 
States. Stroke 23:1416–1419
Wiebers D, Whisnant JP, Huston J III, Meissner I, Brown 
RD Jr, Piepgras DG, Forbes GS, Thielen K, Nichols D, 
O’Fallon WM, Peacock J, Jaeger L, Kassell NF, Kongable-
Beckman GL, Torner JC (2003) Unruptured intracranial 
aneurysms: natural history, clinical outcome, and risks 
of surgical and endovascular treatment. Lancet 362:103–
110

 
 
Intracranial Aneurysms  
283
Wiesmann M, Mayer TE, Yousry I, Medele R, Hamann GF, 
Bruckmann H (2002) Detection of hyperacute subarach-
noid hemorrhage of the brain by using magnetic reso-
nance imaging. J Neurosurg 96:684–689
Winn HR, Richardson AE, Jane JA (1977) The long-term 
prognosis in untreated cerebral aneurysms I. The inci-
dence of late hemorrhage in cerebral aneurysm: a 10-year 
evaluation of 364 patients. Ann Neurol 1:358–370
Winn HR, Almaani WS, Berga SL, Jane JA, Richardson AE 
(1983) The long-term outcome in patients with multiple 
aneurysms. Incidence of late hemorrhage and implica-
tions for treatment of incidental aneurysms. J Neurosurg 
59:642–651
Wintermark M, Uske A, Chalaron M, Regli L, Maeder P, Meuli 
R, Schnyder P, Binaghi S (2003) Multislice computerized 
tomography angiography in the evaluation of intracra-
nial aneurysms: a comparison with intraarterial digital 
subtraction angiography. J Neurosurg 98:828–836
Yalamanchili K, Rosenwasser RH, Thomas JE, Liebman K, 
McMorrow C, Gannon P (1998) Frequency of cerebral 
vasospasm in patients treated with endovascular occlu-
sion of intracranial aneurysms. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
19:553–558
Yamaura A, Ono J, Hirai S (2000) Clinical picture of intra-
cranial non-traumatic dissecting aneurysm. Neuropa-
thology 20:85–90
Yasargil MG (1984) Multiple aneurysms in microneurosur-
gery, vol 1. Thieme, Stuttgart, pp 305–328
Yasui N, Suzuki A, Nishimura H, Suzuki K, Abe T (1997) 
Long-term follow-up study of unruptured intracranial 
aneurysms. Neurosurgery 40:1155–1159; discussion 
1159–1160
Yildiz M, Pﬂ üger M, Riecher-Rössler A, Berger G (2007) An-
eurysms of pericallosal cerebral artery haemorrhage with 
consecutive psychosis. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 41(6):554
Yonas H, Linskey M, Johnson DW, Horton JA, Janecka IP, 
Witt JP, Jungreis C, Hirsch WL, Sekhar LN (1992) Internal 
carotid balloon test occlusion does require quantitative 
CBF. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 13:1147–1152
Yong-Zhong G, van Alphen HA (1990) Pathogenesis and 
histo-pathology of saccular aneurysms: review of the lit-
erature. Neurol Res 12:249–255

 
 
Subject Index 
285
Subject Index
A
Allcock test   200
Amytal test   79
anaesthesia   214
anastomoses, dangerous   151, 152
aneurysms   168–270
– angiography, cerebral   200–203
– anterior communicating artery   169, 175, 231–234
– asymptomatic aneurysms   207
– AVM   175, 182, 215, 221
– balloon occlusion, intracranial aneurysms   215, 227, 
259
– – detachable   216
– – undetachable   216
– basilar trunk aneurysms   193, 194, 249, 251
– cardiac myxoma   183
– carotid bifurcation   229
– cavernous ICA   226–229
– cerebral ischemia and infarction   181
– classiﬁ cation
– – Fisher’s grading scale   191
– – Hunt and Hess classiﬁ cation   211
– cocaine abuse   183
– coils   206, 217–220
– CT   189–193
– – angiography   191
– dissecting (see there)   170, 171
– distal anterior cerebral artery   235–237
– distribution   175
– elderly   254, 255
– endovascular treatment (see there)   205, 208, 
210–269
– etiology   178
– familial   175
– false   67, 89, 92, 112, 168
– feeding artery (FAA)   59, 90–92
– fusiform   171, 196
– genetic component   178
– giant aneurysms   224, 251, 252
– incidence/incidental aneurysms   176
– infectious   172–174
– inﬂ ammatory   174
– intracranial (see there)   167–263
– intranidal (INA)   58, 71, 92
– middle cerebral artery   237
– MRA   194
– MRI   194
– – FLAIR sequences   194, 198, 199
– multiple aneurysms   255–258
– mycotic   174, 252
– neoplastic/oncotic   174
– paraclinoid   226
– paraophthalmic   227, 230
– pathogenesis   178
– pediatric aneurysms   252
– pericallosal artery   235–237
– posterior cerebral artery   213–214
– posterior inferior cerebellar artery   192, 246, 247
– prevalence   175, 207
– pseudoaneurysm   92, 168, 170
– radiation-induced   174
– rebleeding   180, 184
– relatives   175, 178, 200, 209
– remnants   258
– remodelling technique   225
– rupture   178–180
– saccular   169, 182
– SAH   180–186
– screening   195, 204, 209
– seizures   182, 185
– serpentine   171
– sickle cell disease   183
– stents   220
– supraclinoid   229
– surgical clipping   205, 259
– tip of the basilar artery   239–243
– transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD)   204
– traumatic (see also false aneurysms)   174
– treatment
– – ruptured cerebral aneurysms   210, 211
– – unruptured cerebral aneurysms   207–210
– true   92
– unidentiﬁ able cause   204
– unrupted aneurysms   187
– vasospasm   263–267
– vertebral aneurysms   196, 243–245
– vertebrobasilar aneurysms   238
angiitis, inﬂ ammatory transmural   174
angiogeneses   59

286 
Subject Index
angiography
– AVM, CT angiography   72
– capillary telangiectasia   42
– cavernoma   25
– DAVM   147–149
– DVA   11
– intracranial aneurysm   200–203
– – rotational angiography   203, 204
– spinal angiogram   182
angiomas
– cavernous (see also cavernomas)   22
– developmental venous angiomas (see also DVA)   1–15
angionecrosis, onyx   108
anterior fossa DAVM   147, 161
APEH (acute postembolization hemorrhage)   87–89
arteriovenous ﬁ stula (see AVF)   52, 92, 182
arteriovenous
– dural arteriovenous malformations (see DAVM)   147–
149
– ﬁ stula (see AVF)   92, 182
– pial arteriovenous malformations (see AVM)   51–112
artery/arterial
– AVM 
– – angioectasia   60
– – stenosis   59, 60, 171
– arteriovenous (see there)
– DAVM, transarterial embolization   151–153
– dissection, arterial (see also dissecting aneurysms)   
170, 171
– feeding artery
– – aneurysm (FAA)   59, 90–92
– – pressure   59, 60
aspergillosis   174
aspirin   210, 214
AVF (arteriovenous ﬁ stula)   52
– direct   92
– dural   182
– SAH   182
AVM, pial arteriovenous malformations   51–112
– aneurysms (see there)   168–260
– arterial
– – angioectasia   60
– – stenosis   59, 60, 171
– arteriovenous ﬁ stula (see AVF)   52
– biology   56
– classiﬁ cations   73, 74
– complete cure   99
– CT angiography   62
– embolization (see there)   79–111
– epidemiology   53, 54
– epilepsy   61
– focal deﬁ cits   61
– genetics/genetic predisposition   55
– headache   61, 76
– – chronic   61
– hemodynamics   55, 59, 60, 77
– hemorrhage   57–61
– incidence   53
– MRI   66, 72
– multiple   54
– natural history   56
– neurosurgery   74
– nidus   58
– pathology   54, 55
– physiopathology   56
– prevalence   54
– radiosurgery (see there)   76–79
– ruptured   72
– screening   55
– seizure   61
– spinal   127, 182
– spontaneous obliteration   57
– therapeutic algorithm   112
– unruptured   73
B
balloon
– angioplasty   260
– occlusion, intracranial aneurysms   220, 221, 228
– – detachable   216
– – undetachable   216
blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome   11
Bonnet-Blanc-Dechaume syndrome   54
Borden classiﬁ cation, DAVMs   140, 141
brain-stem cavernomas   23, 28
C
capillary telangiectasia, cavernomas   19–41
– angiography   42
– contrast enhancement   31
– CT   26
– deoxyhemoglobin   29
– differential diagnosis   31
– incidence   21
– MRI   27, 29
cardiac myxoma   183
catheter, ﬂ ow-guided   216
cavernomas/cavernous hemangioma
– angiography   25
– angiomas, cavernous   22, 29
– brain-stem   23, 28
– capillary telangiectasia (see there)   19–40
– cavernous sinus DAVM, CCCF   124
– classiﬁ cation, pathological   20
– coincidence
– – of cavernous malformation   6
– – with DVA   29
– CT appearance   26
– differential diagnosis   31
– growth   20

 
 
Subject Index 
287
– headache   25
– hemorrhage   23
– imaging protocol   29
– incidence   20
– malformations, cerebral cavernous   20
– MRI   27
– multiple   21
– observation   35
– radiosurgery   35
– relationship with DVA   22
– seizures   24, 25
– sporadic   21
– surgical excision   35
– therapy   35–41
central retinal vein thrombosis   150
cerebral ischemia and infarction   186
classiﬁ cation
– AVM   73, 74
– – Nataf classiﬁ cation   74
– – Spetzler and Martin classiﬁ cation   73
– cavernomas, pathological classiﬁ cation   20
– DAVM   137
– – Borden classiﬁ cation   140, 141
– – Cognard classiﬁ cation   138
– – Djindjan classiﬁ cation   138
cocaine abuse, intracranial aneurysm   183
Cognard classiﬁ cation, DAVM   138
coils, intracranial aneurysm   217–220
– hydrogel-coils   218
– TriSpan (three-dimensional coils)   220
combined malformations   7
complications, endovascular treatment of aneurysms   
262, 263
– ischemic   262
compressions, manual   150
connective tissue disorders   171, 176
crack-like vessels   124
cryptic vascular malformations   19, 22
CT
– aneurysms   189–193
– – CT angiography   191
– AVM, CT angiography   72
– capillary telangiectasia   42
– cavernomas   25
– DAVM   142, 143
– DVA   11
– SAH   189
cyanoacrylate/NBCA embolization (see also histoacryl)   
86, 89
D
dangerous anastomoses   151
DAVMs (dural arteriovenous malformations)   121–160
– angiography   147–149
– anterior fossa DAVM   126, 128, 147
– cavernous sinus DAVMs, CCCF   124, 126, 128
– classiﬁ cations (see there)   137
– CT   142, 143
– embolization   151–159
– – transarterial   151–153
– – transvenous   153–159
– etiology   122, 125
– hemodynamics   127
– location   126, 127
– morphology   126
– MRI   143–146
– myelography   141
– pathogenesis   124, 125
– radiosurgery   149, 160
– sigmoid sinus DAVM   123, 126
– signs and symptoms   127
– sinus recanalization   159
– spinal   125–131, 143, 145–149, 153, 159
– therapy   149
– transverse DAVM   128
deep venous drainage   59, 74
deoxyhemoglobin, capillary telangiectasia   29
dextrose solution   87
diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), MRI   72, 263
diseases (see syndromes)
dissection, arterial / dissecting aneurysms (see also 
aneurysms)   170, 171
– SAH   171
Djindjan classiﬁ cation, DAVMs   138
dolichoectasia   171
Doppler sonography, transcranial (TCD), intracranial 
aneurysm   204
drainage
– deep venous   59, 74
– retrograde venous drainage   137
– ventricular drainage   183, 184
dural arteriovenous
– ﬁ stula   182
– malformation (see DAVM)   121–160
DVA (developmental venous anomaly)   1–15
– angiographic characteristics   13
– cavernomas (see also there)   19–41
– coincidence with cavernoma   29
– CT   11
– headache   5, 7, 9
– hemorrhage/hemorrhage rate   4, 6–9, 15
– hydrocephalus   9
– malformations
– – coincidence of cavernous malformation   6
– – natural history of cerebral developmental venous 
malformations   5
– MRA   11
– MRI   6, 9, 11
– multiple   11
– pregnancy   15
– radiosurgery   15
– scanning protocol   11

288 
Subject Index
DVA (Continued)
– seizures   5, 6, 9
– surgical resection   14
– thrombosis   9
– trigeminal neuralgia   5, 9
DWI (diffusion weighted imaging) MRI   72, 263, 265
E
elderly, aneurysms in   254, 255
electrothrombosis, intracranial aneurysm   211
embolization   79–111
– APEH (acute postembolization hemorrhage)   87, 89
– cyanoacrylate / NBCA embolization (see also histo-
acryl)   86, 89
– DAVM
– – transarterial embolization   151–153
– – transvenous embolization   153–159
– embolic complication   80
– ﬂ ow-guided catheter   216
– intranidal   81
– partial embolization   100
– PVA embolization   104
– Serbinenko balloon embolization   212, 216, 221
endocarditis   172–174
endothelial
– cell disruption, embolization   55
– growth factor   2, 56
endovascular treatment, intracranial aneurysm   205, 
208, 211–269
– complications   262, 263
epilepsy, AVM   61
estradiol levels   124
F
FAA (feeding artery aneurysm)   90, 91
false aneurysms   89, 92, 112, 168, 174
familial occurrence, aneurysms   175–177
feeding
– artery aneurysm (FAA)   90, 91
– artery pressure   59, 60
– pedicles   148, 149, 151
– vessels   57
ﬁ bromuscular dysplasia, intracranial aneurysm   171, 
176
Fisher’s grading scale, intracranial aneurysm   191
ﬁ stula, arteriovenous (see AVF)   52, 92, 182
FLAIR   68, 194
ﬂ ow-guided catheter   216
fMRI (functional MRI), AVM   72
G
GDC (Guglielmi detachable coils)   212, 218, 234
genetic predisposition, AVM   53
glueing, limits of   81
H
headache
– AVM   61
– – chronic   61
– cavernomas   25
– DVA   5, 6, 9
– thunderclap headache   178, 198, 200
hemodynamic stress   169, 175, 229
heparin   80, 184, 212
heretitary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT)   53
heterotopia   9, 11
HHT (heretitary hemorrhagic telangiectasia)   53
histoacryl embolization (cyanoacrylates/NBCA)   86, 89
– catheter rupture   86
– complications   86
– concentration   86
hydrocephalus
– DVA   127, 142
– intracranial aneurysm   183
hydrogel-coils   218
hyperemia syndrome, occlusive   87
hypertension, venous   128, 131, 143, 145
I
imaging protocol, cavernomas   29
INA (intranidal aneurysm)   58, 79, 92
incidence/incidental
– aneurysms   176
– of AVM   53
– of cavernoma   21
infectious intracranial aneurysms   172–174
inﬂ ammatory aneurysms   149
intracranial aneurysms (see also aneurysms)   167–263
– angiography, cerebral   200–203
– anterior communicating artery   169, 175, 231–234
– asymptomatic aneurysms   207
– balloon occlusion, intracranial aneurysms   215, 227, 
259
– – detachable   216
– – undetachable   216
– basilar trunk aneurysms   193, 194, 249, 251
– carotid bifurcation   229
– cavernous ICA   226–229
– cerebral ischemia and infarction   181
– classiﬁ cation
– – Fisher’s grading scale   191
– – Hunt and Hess classiﬁ cation   211
– cocaine abuse   183
– coils   206, 217–220
– CT   189–193
– – angiography   191
– dissecting (see there)   170, 171
– distal anterior cerebral artery   235–237
– distribution   175

 
 
Subject Index 
289
– elderly   254, 255
– endovascular treatment (see there)   205, 208, 210–269
– etiology   178
– familial   175
– fusiform   171, 196
– genetic component   178
– giant aneurysms   224, 251, 252
– incidence/incidental aneurysms   176
– infectious   172–174
– inﬂ ammatory   174
– intranidal (INA)   58, 71, 92
– middle cerebral artery   237
– MRA   194
– MRI   194
– – FLAIR sequences   194, 198, 199
– multiple aneurysms   255–258
– neoplastic/oncotic   174
– paraclinoid   226
– paraophthalmic   227, 230
– pathogenesis   178
– pediatric aneurysms   252
– pericallosal artery   235–237
– posterior cerebral artery   213–214
– posterior inferior cerebellar artery   192, 246, 247
– prevalence   175, 207
– radiation-induced   174
– rebleeding   180, 184
– relatives   175, 178, 200, 209
– remnants   258
– remodelling technique   225
– rupture   178–180
– saccular   169, 182
– screening   195, 204, 209
– seizures   182, 185
– stents   220
– supraclinoid   229
– surgical clipping   205, 259
– tip of the basilar artery   239–243
– transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD)   204
– traumatic (see also false aneurysms)   174
– treatment
– – ruptured cerebral aneurysms   210, 211
– – unruptured cerebral aneurysms   207–210
– unidentiﬁ able cause   204
– unruptured aneurysms   187
– vasospasm   263–267
– vertebral aneurysms   196, 243–245
– vertebrobasilar aneurysms   238
intranidal
– aneurysm (INA)   58, 79, 92
– embolization   81
ISAT study, intracranial aneurysm   185, 206, 207, 214, 
239
ISUIA   180, 187, 207, 208
K
kidney disease, polycystic   176, 200, 204
L
leak, intracranial aneurysm, warning leak   178, 181, 210
limits of gluing   81
lumbar puncture   171, 190, 211
M
malformations
– AVM (arteriovenous malformations)   51–112
– capillary telangiectasia, transitional malformations   
42
– cavernomas   25
– DAVM (dural arteriovenous malformations)   121–160
– DVA   1–15
– – coincidence of cavernous malformation   3
– – natural history of cerebral developmental venous 
malformations   5
malignant transformation   149
Marfan syndrome   176
MARS group study   209
Matas maneuver   150
Medusa head   11, 13
microshunts   122, 124, 125, 151
migration deﬁ cits   9
MRA
– DVA   11
– intracranial aneurysm   194
MRI/MRI sequences
– AVM   66, 72
– capillary telangiectasia   27, 29
– cavernomas   27
– DAVM   143–146
– DVA   11
– DWI (diffusion weighted imaging) MRI   29, 72, 263, 
265
– functional MRI (see fMRI)   72, 79
– intracranial aneurysm   194
– perfusion MRI   72, 266
– T2-weighted   4, 6, 11, 27, 66
mycotic aneurysms   174, 252
N
Nataf classiﬁ cation, AVM   74
natural history of cerebral developmental venous mal-
formations   5
NBCA/cyanoacrylate embolization (see also histoacryl)   
86, 89
neoplastic/oncotic aneurysms   174
neurosurgery, AVM   74
nidus, AVM   58
– intranidal aneurysm   58, 71, 92
– nidus size   58, 81
normal pressure perfusion breakthrough   75

290 
Subject Index
O
obliteration rate   76
occlusive hyperemia syndrome   87
ocular symptoms   137, 150
oligodendroglial aggregation   55
oncotic/neoplastic aneurysms   174
onyx   104–112
– angionecrosis   109
– toxicity   109
– vasospasm   109
P
papaverine   267
pediatric aneurysms   252
perfusion MRI (see also MRI)   72, 266
perimesencephalic hemorrhage, intracranial aneurysm   
182, 186, 204
pheochromocytoma, intracranial aneurysm   176
pial arteriovenous malformations (see AVM)   51–112
polycystic kidney disease   176, 200
pregnancy, DVA   15
pseudoaneurysms   92, 168, 170
PVA embolization   80, 104
R
radiosurgery
– AVM   76–79
– – AVM volume   76
– – complications   77
– – neurologic deﬁ cits   78
– – recurrence   78
– – re-irradiation   78
– – target determination   76
– cavernomas   35
– DAVM   16, 149
– DVA   15
rebleeding, aneurysms   180, 184
relatives of patients with cerebral aneurysms   175, 178
remnants, intracranial aneurysm   258
remodelling technique, intracranial aneurysm   225
Rendu-Osler disease   42
Rendu-Osler-Weber disease   53, 54
retinal vein thrombosis   150
rotational angiography, intracranial aneurysm   203, 204
rupture, aneurysm   178–180
vasospasm, intracranial aneurysm   185, 263
S
saccular aneurysms   169, 182
SAH (subarachnoid hemorrhage)   181–188
– angiography, cerebral   200–203
– arterial dissection   171
– balloon occlusion, intracranial aneurysms   216, 227, 
228
– – detachable   216
– – undetachable   216
– classiﬁ cation
– – Fisher’s grading scale   191
– – Hunt and Hess classiﬁ cation   211
– coils   206, 217–220
– complications   183
– CT   189–193
– – CT angiography   191
– dissecting aneurysms   170, 171
– dural arteriovenous ﬁ stulae   182
– intracranial aneurysm   167–263
– MRA   194
– MRI   194
– recurrent   180
– remodelling technique   225
– rupture   178–180
– saccular aneurysms of spinal arteries   182
– screening   195, 204, 209
– stents   220
– transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD)   204
– treatment
– – of ruptured cerebral aneurysms   210, 211
– – of unruptured cerebral aneurysms   207–211
– unidentiﬁ able cause   204
screening
– AVM   55
– intracranial aneurysm   195, 204, 209
seizures
– AVM   55
– cavernoma   37
– DVA   5, 6, 9
– intracranial aneurysm   195, 204, 209
Serbinenko balloon embolization   221
serpentine aneurysms   171
sickle cell disease, intracranial aneurysm   183
sigmoid sinus DAVM   123, 126
sinus
– DAVM
– – cavernous sinus DAVM, CCCF   124, 126, 128
– – sigmoid sinus DAVM   123, 126
– thrombosis   122–125, 143, 159
– – sinus-venous thrombosis   183, 190
Spetzler and Martin classiﬁ cation, AVM   73
spinal
– angiogram   182
– AVM   127, 182
– DAVM   125–131, 143, 145, 149, 153, 159
stents, intracranial aneurysms   220
subarachnoid hemorrhage (see SAH)   181–188
surgical clipping, aneurysm   205, 259
syndromes/diseases [named only]
– Bonnet-Blanc-Dechaume   54

 
 
Subject Index 
291
– Marfan   176
– Rendu-Osler   42
– Rendu-Osler-Weber   53, 54
– Wyburn-Mason   54
T
T2 gradient echo sequence   11, 27, 194
T2 weighted MRI sequences   4, 6, 11, 27, 66
TCD (transcranial Doppler sonography), intracranial 
aneurysm   204
telangiectasia
– capillary (see capillary telangiectasia)   19–41
– heretitary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT)   53
thrombosis
– central retinal vein thrombosis   150
– DVA   9
– electrothrombosis   211
– sinus thrombosis   122–125, 143, 159
– – sinus-venous thrombosis   183, 190
– venous   87, 122, 150
thunderclap headache, intracranial aneurysm   178, 191, 
200
tinnitus   42, 128, 150
toxicity, onyx   109
transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD), intracranial 
aneurysm   204
transitional malformations, capillary telangiectasia   42
transverse DAVMs   128
traumatic aneurysms (see also false aneurysms)   174
trigeminal neuralgia, DVA   5, 9
TriSpan (three-dimensional coils)   220
true aneurysms   92
twins   204
U
unruptured cerebral aneurysms   186, 205, 207–210
V
vasculogenesis   56
vasospasm   185
– intracranial aneurysm   263–267
– onyx   109
vene/venous
– arteriovenous (see there)
– deep venous drainage   59
– developmental venous anomaly (see DVA)   1–15
– dural arteriovenous malformation (see DAVM)   121–
160
– embolization (see there)   153–159
– hypertension   59, 124, 125
– natural history of cerebral developmental venous 
malformations   5
– occlusion/venous occlusive disease   2, 122–125, 153, 
156
– retrograde venous drainage   137
– thrombosis   87, 122, 125
ventricular drainage, intracranial aneurysm   183, 184
W
Wada test   72, 76, 79
warning leak, intracranial aneurysm   178, 181, 210
wedge position   81, 86, 92
Wyburn-Mason syndrome   54

 
 
List of Contributors 
293
List of Contributors
Christophe Cognard, MD, PhD  
Director Service de Neuroradiologie
Diagnostique et Therapeutique 
Hôpital Purpan
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Place du Docteur-Baylac 
31059 Toulouse Cedex 
France
Email: cognard.c@chu-toulouse.fr
Arnd Dörﬂ er, MD, PhD
Director Department of Neuroradiology 
University of Erlangen Erlangen 
Friedrich-Alexander-University 
Schwabachanlage 6
91054 Erlangen
Germany
Email: Arnd.Doerﬂ er@uk-erlangen.de
Michael Forsting, MD, PhD
Director Institute of Radiology and Neuroradiology
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional
Radiology and Neuroradiology
University of Essen
Hufelandstraße 55
45122 Essen
Germany
Email: michael.forsting@uni-due.de
Wilhelm Küker, MD, PhD
Assistant Director 
The Radcliff Inﬁ rmary
Department of Neuroradiology
Woodstock Road
Oxford, OX2 6 HE
UK
Email: Wilhelm.Kueker@orh.nhs.uk
Laurent Pierot, MD
Professor, Service de Radiologie
Hôpital Maison-Blanche
45 rue Cognacq-Jay
51092 Reims Cedex
France
Email: lpierot@chu-reims.fr
Laurent Spelle, MD
Département de Neuroradiologie interventionelle
et fonctionelle
Fondation A. de Rothschild
25-29 Rue Manin
75940 Paris Cedex
France
Email: lspelle@fo-rothschild.fr
István Szikora, MD, PhD 
National Institute of Neurosurgery 
Director Diagnostic and Therapeutic 
Neuroangiography Services 
Amerikai ut 57 
1145 Budapest 
Hungary 
Email: h13424szi@ella.hu
Isabel Wanke, MD, PhD
Director Interventional Neuroradiology
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional 
Radiology and Neuroradiology
University of Essen
Hufelandstraße 55
45122 Essen
Germany
Email: isabel.wanke@uni-due.de

 
 
Subject Index 
295
Diagnostic Imaging
Innovations in Diagnostic Imaging
Edited by J. H. Anderson
Radiology of the Upper Urinary Tract 
Edited by Erich K. Lang
The Thymus - Diagnostic Imaging, 
Functions, and Pathologic Anatomy 
Edited by E. Walter, E. Willich, 
and W. R. Webb
Interventional Neuroradiology 
Edited by A. Valavanis
Radiology of the Pancreas 
Edited by A. L. Baert. 
Co-edited by G. Delorme
Radiology of the Lower Urinary Tract 
Edited by Erich K. Lang
Magnetic Resonance Angiography 
Edited by I. P. Arlart, G. M. Bongartz, 
and G. Marchal
Contrast-Enhanced MRI of the Breast 
S. Heywang-Köbrunner and R. Beck
Spiral CT of the Chest 
Edited by M. Rémy-Jardin and J. Rémy
Radiological Diagnosis of Breast Diseases 
Edited by M. Friedrich and E. A. Sickles
Radiology of Trauma 
Edited by M. Heller and A. Fink
Biliary Tract Radiology 
Edited by P. Rossi. Co-edited by M. Brezi
Radiological Imaging of Sports Injuries
Edited by C. Masciocchi
Modern Imaging of the Alimentary Tube
Edited by A. R. Margulis
Diagnosis and Therapy of Spinal Tumors
Edited by P. R. Algra, J. Valk, 
and J. J. Heimans
Interventional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Edited by J. F. Debatin and G. Adam
Abdominal and Pelvic MRI
Edited by A. Heuck and M. Reiser
Orthopedic Imaging
Techniques and Applications
Edited by A. M. Davies and H. Pettersson
Radiology of the Female Pelvic Organs
Edited by E. K. Lang
Magnetic Resonance of the Heart 
and Great Vessels
Clinical Applications
Edited by J. Bogaert, A. J. Duerinckx, 
and F. E. Rademakers
Modern Head and Neck Imaging
Edited by S. K. Mukherji and 
J. A. Castelijns
Radiological Imaging of 
Endocrine Diseases
Edited by J. N. Bruneton 
in collaboration with B. Padovani 
and M.-Y. Mourou
Radiology of the Pancreas
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by A. L. Baert. Co-edited by 
G. Delorme and L. Van Hoe
Trends in Contrast Media
Edited by H. S. Thomsen, R. N. Muller,
and R. F. Mattrey
Functional MRI
Edited by C. T. W. Moonen 
and P. A. Bandettini
Emergency Pediatric Radiology
Edited by H. Carty
Liver Malignancies
Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology
Edited by C. Bartolozzi and R. Lencioni
Spiral CT of the Abdomen
Edited by F. Terrier, M. Grossholz,
and C. D. Becker
Medical Imaging of the Spleen
Edited by A. M. De Schepper 
and F. Vanhoenacker
Radiology of Peripheral Vascular Diseases
Edited by E. Zeitler
Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine
Edited by C. Schiepers
Radiology of Blunt Trauma of the Chest
P. Schnyder and M. Wintermark 
Portal Hypertension
Diagnostic Imaging 
and Imaging-Guided Therapy
Edited by P. Rossi.
Co-edited by P. Ricci and L. Broglia
Virtual Endoscopy and 
Related 3D Techniques
Edited by P. Rogalla, J. Terwisscha 
van Scheltinga, and B. Hamm
Recent Advances in
Diagnostic Neuroradiology
Edited by Ph. Demaerel
Multislice CT
Edited by M. F. Reiser, M. Takahashi, 
M. Modic, and R. Bruening
Pediatric Uroradiology
Edited by R. Fotter
Transfontanellar Doppler Imaging 
in Neonates
A. Couture and C. Veyrac
Radiology of AIDS
A Practical Approach
Edited by J. W. A. J. Reeders and
P. C. Goodman
CT of the Peritoneum
Armando Rossi and Giorgio Rossi
Magnetic Resonance Angiography
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by I. P. Arlart, G. M. Bongartz,
and G. Marchal
Pediatric Chest Imaging
Chest imaging in Infants and Children
Edited by Javier Lucaya and Janet L. Strife
Applications of Sonography 
in Head and Neck Pathology
Edited by J. N. Bruneton 
in collaboration with C. Raffaelli 
and O. Dassonville
3D Image Processing
Techniques and Clinical Applications
Edited by D. Caramella and C. Bartolozzi
Imaging of the Larynx
Edited by R. Hermans
Pediatric ENT Radiology
Edited by S. J. King and A. E. Boothroyd
Imaging of Orbital and 
Visual Pathway Pathology
Edited by W. S. Müller-Forell
Radiological Imaging of the Small Intestine
Edited by N. C. Gourtsoyiannis
Imaging of the Knee
Techniques and Applications
Edited by A. M. Davies 
and V. N. Cassar-Pullicino
Perinatal Imaging
From Ultrasound to MR Imaging
Edited by Fred E. Avni
Radiological Imaging of the Neonatal Chest
Edited by V. Donoghue
Diagnostic and Interventional 
Radiology in Liver Transplantation
Edited by E. Bücheler, V. Nicolas, 
C. E. Broelsch, X. Rogiers, 
and G. Krupski
Radiology of Osteoporosis
Edited by S. Grampp
Imaging Pelvic Floor Disorders
Edited by C. I. Bartram and 
J. O. L. DeLancey
Associate Editors: S. Halligan, 
F. M. Kelvin, and J. Stoker
High-Resolution Sonography 
of the Peripheral Nervous System
Edited by S. Peer and G. Bodner
Imaging of the Pancreas
Cystic and Rare Tumors
Edited by C. Procacci and A. J. Megibow
Imaging of the Foot & Ankle
Techniques and Applications
Edited by A. M. Davies, 
R. W. Whitehouse, and J. P. R. Jenkins
Medical Radiology Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology
   
Titles in the series already published

296 
Subject Index
123
Radiological Imaging of the Ureter
Edited by F. Joffre, Ph. Otal, 
and M. Soulie
Radiology of the Petrous Bone
Edited by M. Lemmerling and S. S. Kollias
Imaging of the Shoulder
Techniques and Applications
Edited by A. M. Davies and J. Hodler
Interventional Radiology in Cancer
Edited by A. Adam, R. F. Dondelinger,
and P. R. Mueller
Imaging and Intervention in
Abdominal Trauma
Edited by R. F. Dondelinger
Radiology of the Pharynx 
and the Esophagus
Edited by O. Ekberg
Radiological Imaging 
in Hematological Malignancies
Edited by A. Guermazi
Functional Imaging of the Chest
Edited by H.-U. Kauczor
Duplex and Color Doppler Imaging 
of the Venous System
Edited by G. H. Mostbeck
Multidetector-Row CT of the Thorax
Edited by U. J. Schoepf
Multislice CT
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by M. F. Reiser, M. Takahashi, 
M. Modic, and C. R. Becker
Radiology and Imaging of the Colon
Edited by A. H. Chapman
Intracranial Vascular Malformations 
and Aneurysms
From Diagnostic Work-Up
to Endovascular Therapy
Edited by M. Forsting
Coronary Radiology
Edited by Matthijs Oudkerk
Multidetector-Row CT Angiography
Edited by C. Catalano and 
R. Passariello
Focal Liver Lesions
Detection, Characterization, Ablation
Edited by R. Lencioni, D. Cioni,
and C. Bartolozzi
Imaging in Treatment Planning 
for Sinonasal Diseases
Edited by R. Maroldi and P. Nicolai
Clinical Cardiac MRI
With Interactive CD-ROM
Edited by J. Bogaert, S. Dymarkowski,
and A. M. Taylor
Dynamic Contrast-Enhanced Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging in Oncology
Edited by A. Jackson, D. L. Buckley, 
and G. J. M. Parker
Contrast Media in Ultrasonography
Basic Principles and Clinical Applications
Edited by Emilio Quaia
Paediatric Musculoskeletal Disease
With an Emphasis on Ultrasound
Edited by D. Wilson
MR Imaging in White Matter Diseases of the 
Brain and Spinal Cord
Edited by M. Filippi, N. De Stefano, 
V. Dousset, and J. C. McGowan
Imaging of the Hip & Bony Pelvis
Techniques and Applications
Edited by A. M. Davies, K. Johnson,
and R. W. Whitehouse
Imaging of Kidney Cancer
Edited by Ali Guermazi
Magnetic Resonance Imaging in 
Ischemic Stroke
Edited by R. von Kummer and T. Back
Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by Christiaan Schiepers
Imaging of Occupational and 
Environmental Disorders of the Chest
Edited by P. A. Gevenois and P. De Vuyst
Virtual Colonoscopy
A Practical Guide
Edited by P. Lefere and S. Gryspeerdt
Contrast Media
Safety Issues and ESUR Guidelines
Edited by H. S. Thomsen
Head and Neck Cancer Imaging
Edited by R. Hermans
Vascular Embolotherapy
A Comprehensive Approach
Volume 1: General Principles, Chest,
Abdomen, and Great Vessels
Edited by J. Golzarian. Co-edited by 
S. Sun and M. J. Sharafuddin
Vascular Embolotherapy
A Comprehensive Approach
Volume 2: Oncology, Trauma, Gene 
Therapy, Vascular Malformations, 
and Neck
Edited by J. Golzarian. Co-edited by 
S. Sun and M. J. Sharafuddin
Vascular Interventional Radiology
Current Evidence in Endovascular Surgery
Edited by M. G. Cowling
Ultrasound of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Edited by G. Maconi and 
G. Bianchi Porro
Parallel Imaging in Clinical MR Applications
Edited by S. O. Schoenberg, O. Dietrich, 
and M. F. Reiser
MRI and CT of the Female Pelvis
Edited by B. Hamm and R. Forstner
Imaging of Orthopedic Sports Injuries
Edited by F. M. Vanhoenacker, 
M. Maas, J. L. Gielen
Ultrasound of the Musculoskeletal System
S. Bianchi and C. Martinoli
Clinical Functional MRI
Presurgical Functional Neuroimaging
Edited bei C. Stippich
Radiation Dose from Adult and Pediatric 
Multidetector Computed Tomography
Edited by D. Tack and P. A. Gevenois
Spinal Imaging
Diagnostic Imaging of the Spine and 
Spinal Cord
Edited by J. Van Goethem, 
L. van den Hauwe, and P. M. Parizel
Computed Tomography of the Lung
A Pattern Approach
J. A. Verschakelen and W. De Wever
Imaging in Transplantation
Edited by A. Bankier
Radiological Imaging of the Neonatal Chest
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by V. Donoghue
Radiological Imaging of the Digestive Tract 
in Infants and Children
Edited by A. S. Devos and J. G. Blickman
Pediatric Chest Imaging
Chest Imaging in Infants and Children
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by J. Lucaya and J. L. Strife
Color Doppler US of the Penis
Edited by M. Bertolotto
Radiology of the Stomach and Duodenum
Edited by A. H. Freeman and E. Sala
Imaging in Pediatric Skeletal Trauma
Techniques and Applications
Edited by K. J. Johnson and E. Bache
Image Processing in Radiology
Current Applications
Edited by E. Neri, D. Caramella,
and C. Bartolozzi
Screening and Preventive Diagnosis with 
Radiological Imaging
Edited by M. F. Reiser, G. van Kaick,
C. Fink, and S. O. Schoenberg
Percutaneous Tumor Ablation in
Medical Radiology
Edited by T. J. Vogl, T. K. Helmberger,
M. G. Mack, and M. F. Reiser
Liver Radioembolization 
with 90Y Microspheres
Edited by J. I. Bilbao and M. F. Reiser
Pediatric Uroradiology
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by R. Fotter
Radiology of Osteoporosis
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by S. Grampp
Gastrointestinal Tract Sonography 
in Fetuses and Children
A. Couture, C. Baud, J. L. Ferran, 
M. Saguintaah, and C. Veyrac
Intracranial Vascular Malformations and 
Aneurysms
Edited by M. Forsting and I. Wanke
High-Resolution Sonography of the 
Peripheral Nervous System
Edited by S. Peer and G. Bodner

 
 
Subject Index 
297
Radiation Oncology
Lung Cancer
Edited by C. W. Scarantino
Innovations in Radiation Oncology
Edited by H. R. Withers 
and L. J. Peters
Radiation Therapy 
of Head and Neck Cancer
Edited by G. E. Laramore
Gastrointestinal Cancer – 
Radiation Therapy
Edited by R. R. Dobelbower, Jr.
Radiation Exposure 
and Occupational Risks
Edited by E. Scherer, C. Streffer, 
and K.-R. Trott
Radiation Therapy of Benign Diseases 
Stanley E. Order and Sarah S. Donaldson
Interventional Radiation 
Therapy Techniques – Brachytherapy
Edited by R. Sauer
Radiopathology of Organs and Tissues
Edited by E. Scherer, C. Streffer, 
and K.-R. Trott
Concomitant Continuous Infusion 
Chemotherapy and Radiation
Edited by M. Rotman 
and C. J. Rosenthal
Intraoperative Radiotherapy –
Clinical Experiences and Results
Edited by F. A. Calvo, M. Santos, 
and L. W. Brady
Radiotherapy of Intraocular 
and Orbital Tumors
Edited by W. E. Alberti and 
R. H. Sagerman
Interstitial and Intracavitary 
Thermoradiotherapy
Edited by M. H. Seegenschmiedt 
and R. Sauer
Non-Disseminated Breast Cancer
Controversial Issues in Management
Edited by G. H. Fletcher and S. H. Levitt
Current Topics in 
Clinical Radiobiology of Tumors
Edited by H.-P. Beck-Bornholdt
Practical Approaches to 
Cancer Invasion and Metastases
A Compendium of Radiation 
Oncologists’ Responses to 40 Histories 
Edited by A. R. Kagan with the 
Assistance of R. J. Steckel
Radiation Therapy in Pediatric Oncology
Edited by J. R. Cassady
Radiation Therapy Physics
Edited by A. R. Smith
Late Sequelae in Oncology
Edited by J. Dunst and R. Sauer
Mediastinal Tumors. Update 1995
Edited by D. E. Wood and 
C. R. Thomas, Jr.
Thermoradiotherapy 
and Thermochemotherapy
Volume 1: 
Biology, Physiology, and Physics
Volume 2: 
Clinical Applications
Edited by M. H. Seegenschmiedt, 
P. Fessenden, and C. C. Vernon
Carcinoma of the Prostate
Innovations in Management
Edited by Z. Petrovich, L. Baert, 
and L. W. Brady
Radiation Oncology of Gynecological Cancers
Edited by H. W. Vahrson
Carcinoma of the Bladder 
Innovations in Management
Edited by Z. Petrovich, L. Baert, 
and L. W. Brady
Blood Perfusion and 
Microenvironment of Human Tumors
Implications for 
Clinical Radiooncology
Edited by M. Molls and P. Vaupel
Radiation Therapy of Benign Diseases 
A Clinical Guide
2nd Revised Edition
S. E. Order and S. S. Donaldson
Carcinoma of the Kidney and Testis, 
and Rare Urologic Malignancies
Innovations in Management
Edited by Z. Petrovich, L. Baert, 
and L. W. Brady
Progress and Perspectives in the 
Treatment of Lung Cancer
Edited by P. Van Houtte, 
J. Klastersky, and P. Rocmans
Combined Modality Therapy of 
Central Nervous System Tumors
Edited by Z. Petrovich, L. W. Brady, 
M. L. Apuzzo, and M. Bamberg
Age-Related Macular Degeneration
Current Treatment Concepts
Edited by W. E. Alberti, G. Richard, 
and R. H. Sagerman
Radiotherapy of Intraocular and 
Orbital Tumors
2nd Revised Edition
Edited by R. H. Sagerman, and 
W. E. Alberti
Modifi cation of Radiation Response
Cytokines, Growth Factors, 
and Other Biolgical Targets
Edited by C. Nieder, L. Milas, 
and K. K. Ang
Radiation Oncology for Cure and Palliation
R. G. Parker, N. A. Janjan, 
and M. T. Selch
Clinical Target Volumes in Conformal and 
Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy
A Clinical Guide to Cancer Treatment
Edited by V. Grégoire, P. Scalliet,
and K. K. Ang
Advances in Radiation Oncology 
in Lung Cancer
Edited by B. Jeremi´c
New Technologies in Radiation Oncology
Edited by W. Schlegel, T. Bortfeld, 
and A.-L. Grosu
Multimodal Concepts for Integration of 
Cytotoxic Drugs and Radiation Therapy
Edited by J. M. Brown, M. P. Mehta, 
and C. Nieder
Technical Basis of Radiation Therapy
Practical Clinical Applications
4th Revised Edition
Edited by S. H. Levitt, J. A. Purdy, 
C. A. Perez, and S. Vijayakumar
CURED I • LENT  
Late Eff ects of Cancer Treatment 
on Normal Tissues 
Edited by P. Rubin, L. S. Constine, 
L. B. Marks, and P. Okunieff
Radiotherapy for Non-Malignant Disorders
Contemporary Concepts and Clinical Results
Edited by M. H. Seegenschmiedt, 
H.-B. Makoski, K.-R. Trott, and 
L. W. Brady
123
Medical Radiology Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology
   
Titles in the series already published

