1 
INTRODUCTION: 
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF MANAGERIALISM 
Matthew Eagleton-Pierce and Samuel Knafo 
Review of International Political Economy 
Volume 27, 2020 - Issue 4  
Special Issue on the Political Economy of Managerialism 
Post-Peer Review Revised Copy 
FINAL COPY 
Abstract 
As a set of ideas and practices, managerialism has arguably 
become a powerful behavioural logic shaping a range of 
processes and outcomes of governance in the world economy. 
Yet IPE has yet to directly interrogate managerialism as a 
distinct object of analysis. In this special issue, we bring together 
a range of authors to explore how managerialism reveals a set 
of complex histories, agents, and implications that are not self-
evident and carry direct relevance for how we understand the 
global economy. Our main contention is that managerialism is 
not simply a technical means for the pursuit of policies, but has 
come to shape the very ways in which policy, and governance 
more generally, are conceived and conducted. Across a range 
of cases and fields, we dissect the emergence of the managerial 
logic, along with how it produces uneven mutations, ruptures, 
and forms of resistance. In doing so, we reflect upon the 
requirements 
for 
developing 
a 
political 
economy 
of 
managerialism. 
Keywords 
Managerialism, Governance, History of ideas, Power, Ideology 
This is an original accepted manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in Review of 
International Political Economy, 27 (4). pp. 763-779 (2020) available online: 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09692290.2020.1735478
Accepted version downloaded from SOAS Research Online: http://eprints.soas.ac.uk/33414

 
2 
Strategic Planning. Results-Based Frameworks. Key Performance Indicators. Reputational 
Risk. Public-Private Partnerships. The vocabulary of management speak has become familiar 
to many of us over recent decades. Twenty years ago, the OECD argued that ‘a major cultural 
shift’ was underway, defined by ‘a new paradigm which attempts to combine modern 
management practices with the logic of economics, while still retaining the core public service 
values’ (OECD 1998: 5). Normalised in certain areas, strongly contested in others, 
managerialism has become increasingly common within the organisation of global 
governance. A cluster of expressions, some popular, others more academic, have tried to 
encapsulate this transformation, such as ‘administrative reform’ (Aucoin 1990), ‘national 
competitiveness’ (Porter 1990), ‘new public management’ (Hood 1991, 2007; Lynn 2006), and 
‘entrepreneurial government’ (Osborne and Gaebler 1992; Mazzucato 2013). They reflect the 
ways in which the rise of ‘public management’ has challenged the traditional separation 
established between private and public governance. Among common justifications, the 
managerial vision is claimed to enhance efficiency, expand markets, and provide employment 
opportunities. Today, one can observe how managerialism continues to transform entities 
that have a stake in the world economy, including states, firms, international institutions, and 
non-governmental bodies (Locke and Spencer 2013; Dardot and Laval 2014; Davies 2014; 
Hanlon 2015). In other words, managerialism has arguably become a powerful behavioural 
logic shaping a range of processes and outcomes of governance. 
 
If such debates are visible within a variety of issue areas and complexes, it remains surprising 
that International Political Economy (IPE) has not directly interrogated managerialism as a 
distinct object of analysis. Where IPE authors have discussed themes associated with the 
political economy of managerialism, such engagements have tended to be limited or oblique, 
without any major theoretical or empirical investigation. Three reasons could be offered for 
this distancing or neglect. First, the study of management theory and practice has historically 
been housed within other disciplinary fields, notably management studies, public 
administration, and organisation studies. Within this scholarly division of labour, IPE has been 
seemingly content, consciously or otherwise, to cede academic territory to these adjacent 
areas. Second, one could suggest that some IPE researchers may read management as 
something largely preoccupied with the ‘internal’ and ‘mechanical’ features of organisations, 
particularly corporate enterprises. It has not helped that management is criticised at times as 
a ‘lightweight’ intellectual endeavour. Management studies, and the popular business 
management literature in particular, have often been dismissed for reproducing an uncritical 
discourse on capitalism which, in turn, has arguably suppressed levels of IPE interest. Third, 
even where managerialism has been noted in IPE literature, the subject has often been 
subsumed under what is seen as broader concerns with neoliberalism, neoclassical economics 
or, more abstractly, as an expression of contemporary bureaucratisation (Graeber 2015). 
Managerialism can thus appear as a subordinate theme concerned with the narrower 
question of how specific agendas are implemented or put into practice. In all these ways, 
therefore, the topic has rarely been tackled head on in IPE and tends to pass underexamined. 
 
We argue here, by contrast, that the political economy of managerialism deserves its own 
analytical spotlight and is worthy of serious attention by IPE researchers. Within this special 
issue, we bring together a range of authors, in and around IPE, to explore how managerialism 
reveals a range of complex histories, agents, and implications that are not self-evident and 
carry direct relevance for how we understand the world economy. From tracing the wider 

 
3 
history and rising status of managerial ideas and the promotion of key frameworks, such as 
risk and performance management; to exploring how management consultants shape the 
choices and organisational design of governmental and non-state actors, the articles in this 
special issue showcase the manifold ways in which managerialism carries concrete impacts. 
Our main contention is that managerialism is not simply a technical means for the pursuit of 
policies, but has come to shape the very ways in which policy, and governance more generally, 
are conceived and conducted. Managerialism, we suggest, can be viewed as a connecting 
tissue within the body of the global political economy, one which features particular 
ideational and institutional forms. These forms carry a discernible aura, thus enabling 
empirical identification, but at the same time are enmeshed or clash within institutions that 
have been made by many traditions beyond managerialism. Our aim is therefore to plot and 
explain how the international political economy of managerialism has historically revealed 
itself, along with corresponding attention to how it continues to produce uneven mutations, 
ruptures, and forms of resistance. 
 
To provide the context for this special issue, the following introduction consists of four 
sections. First, we outline the analytical treatment of managerialism in IPE, pointing to the 
limited contributions and insights seen so far in the existing literature. Second, given that 
managerialism is often an unclear and slippery term, with meanings that can be appropriated 
in a variety of ways, we critically unpack and question some core modalities of the concept. 
This initial conceptual mapping will also serve to inform and organise a number of the 
subsequent articles. Third, given the importance we devote to historicising managerialism as 
an object, we also offer a sketch of major phases of management thought and practice. This 
discussion will, in turn, seek to destabilise a tendency to view managerialism as a 
transhistorical category. With this framework in mind, we turn in the fourth section to outline 
the papers that constitute the issue, as well as offering concluding guidance on how the study 
of managerialism can continue to advance and enrich the study of IPE and neighbouring fields. 
 
 
1. 
The Study of Managerialism in IPE 
 
Within early IPE scholarship, particularly where transnational corporations were debated, one 
can find some references to the organisation of management and its political economy 
implications. Although not explicitly interested in managerialism, Stephen Hymer (1970) 
discussed the hierarchy of decision-making within large firms, from Marshallian roots to the 
multidivisional and multinational firm of the modern period. From a different perspective, 
Raymond Vernon explored the notion of business strategy in Storm Over the Multinationals 
(1977). Building on his earlier Sovereignty at Bay (1971), the book examined the wider ties 
between states and firms, notably through the product life cycle model but also in reference 
to leadership issues and national corporate cultures. In both cases, management was 
considered mostly as a means to account for why firms developed transnational networks. 
 
During the 1980s and 1990s, Susan Strange was at times preoccupied with the category of 
managers in the world economy and what she argued was an ‘emerging managerial 
technocracy’ (Stopford and Strange 1991: 22). Her work shed light on the new authority of 
the corporation and their management in the global economy. She pointed to the importance 
of large management consultancy houses, the increasing role of risk management across 

 
4 
different institutions (Strange 1988, 1996), and remarked on how corporate managers 
negotiate cultural complexity across borders (Stopford and Strange 1991: 196-199). 
 
These themes have been explored further by a critical IPE literature, specifically the Marxist 
and neo-Gramscian traditions, where the theme of managerialism has surfaced under 
different guises. Most significantly, Robert Cox (1987: 358-360) helped to open up research 
focused on the so-called ‘transnational managerial class’, a group which he argued includes 
not only corporate elites, but officials in national and international agencies tasked with 
economic policy, along with a wide range of other experts and specialists (including 
management consultants and business educators) (also see Cox 1993; Gill 1995).1 In turn, 
Kees van der Pijl (1998) helped to extend such thinking, both historically and sociologically, 
suggesting that managerial cadres were constituting themselves as an authoritative group 
across private and public institutions. Such players tend to view themselves as thoroughly 
modern subjects, with a fascination towards ‘steering’ change and directing the future, along 
with a corresponding orientation to whatever is the dominant rationality of the period (van 
der Pijl 2005, 2012). Similar to Strange, and with a gesture towards themes examined by 
authors in this special issue (Seabrooke and Sending, Whiteside), van der Pijl anticipated how 
key agents of managerialism were growing in authority: ‘consultancies and their equivalents 
are in effect laying the groundwork for a system of global governance’ (van der Pijl 1998: 162). 
 
These authors gave hints at how managerialism could be considered as an object of interest 
for IPE, but discussions of this managerial disposition in IPE remained limited. Despite alluding 
to the growing influence of managers and agents of managerialism, little was done to reflect 
on and historicise managerial practices and their impact on governance at various levels of 
the global economy. In the past twenty years, this situation has partially improved when 
considering two groups of literature. A first set of authors draw on the lineage of earlier IPE 
debates to explore how private authority configures and constitutes itself in the world 
economy. There is now greater recognition of corporate managers, and their consultants, in 
matters of governance. For instance, Louise Amoore (2002, 2006) argues that consultancy, 
accounting and auditing firms, such as McKinsey & Company, are inherently political actors 
who, in the process of selling their ‘technical’ managerial expertise, became almost 
extensions of states and international organisations. As she suggests, IPE should thus be 
concerned with ‘how the firm itself is being made and remade through pervasive 
management discourses and, in turn, how these represent the global political economy to us 
in particular ways’ (Amoore 2006: 63). Such insights can be coupled with wider IPE accounts 
on business power in global governance (Hall and Biersteker 2002; May 2006, 2015; Fuchs 
2007; Ougaard and Leander 2010; Momani 2013), as well as the field of ‘global private politics’ 
which explores how firms acquire regulatory capacity and shape international standards 
across different policy domains (Perry and Nölke 2006; Büthe 2010; Büthe and Mattli 2011).  
 
A second set encompasses a range of authors who have addressed topics linked to the 
political economy of management, even if such arguments have not been explicitly anchored 
by the concept or history of managerialism. Here, one can highlight research on particular 
 
1 The more widely used concept of ‘transnational capitalist class’ can be treated as synonymous with 
‘transnational managerial class’, but some authors, such as Sklair (2001) and Budd (2013), have 
preferred to retain a distinction, reflecting debates between neo-Gramscianism and Marxism. 

 
5 
notions, themes, and patterns which we suggest carry a managerial imprint, including: 
Fouger’s (2006, 2008) analysis of the norm of competitiveness in the context of Michael 
Porter’s work with the World Economic Forum; the evaluation of risk management, 
particularly in light of financialisation trends (Dannreuther and Lekhi 2000; Lockwood 2015; 
Baines 2017); writing on ‘global benchmarking’ and the political economy of numbers 
(Broome and Quirk 2015); the wider culture of professional networks (Seabrooke and 
Henriksen 2017); as well as references to the rise of New Public Management, particularly 
within the study of neoliberalism (Harrison 2005; Peters 2012; Best 2014; Davies 2014). We 
would suggest that across these diverse research enquiries, managerialism can be proposed 
as a crosscutting problem which carries important ideational and institutional implications for 
the global political economy. However, even within these debates, managerialism is too often 
approached tangentially as a subordinate theme used to illustrate broader issues. IPE scholars 
tend to read managerial phenomena as extensions of more traditional concerns, with the 
result that managerialism is rarely taken as an object of study in its own right.2  
 
The paucity of in-depth thinking on managerialism has thus entrenched a disciplinary divide 
which has seen IPE researchers focus on broader patterns of governance while leaving other 
fields to address questions related to concrete managerial practices. When engaging topics 
that concern managerialism, IPE scholars often privilege other systems of knowledge in order 
to gain perspective on what they study, notably neoliberal theory or neoclassical economics. 
The result is a proclivity to take-for-granted managerial techniques as being somehow 
straightforward extensions of neoliberal forms of governance. In this process, management 
is too often treated as being primarily concerned with the mundane implementation of 
policies, operating at a lower level of organisational activity. By contrast, we argue that one 
can only grasp what is involved politically in these transformation by taking managerialism on 
its own terms. For this notion does not simply constitute a loose pejorative term. It points to 
a more complex socio-politico phenomenon. 
 
 
2. 
Why Managerialism? 
 
This special issue takes managerialism, rather than management, as it main focus. Such an 
orientation stems from our interest in the politics of these practices and the ways they are 
actively promoted in various areas of social life. Management, as a term, has a more general 
connotation tied to modern administration. It covers a broad set of practices and can be 
variously understood as a particular class of individuals who administer organisations; as a 
body of knowledge, skills, and competencies; or as a wider set of behaviours. By contrast, the 
expression managerialism is sometimes invoked to signal the rise of a managerial class and 
the mainstreaming of a related ideology (Locke and Spender 2012; Cunliffe 2014; see for 
instance, Drucker 1973). Managerialism thus refers to programmatic movements 
characterised by the self-awareness of their proponents and what is often a proselytising 
disposition. This involves certain ways of representing the social world which are often 
legitimated by casting concerns in universal terms. When effective, such representations are 
translated into material interventions in particular institutions, potentially reshaping 
behavioural patterns and norms (Grey 2017). In a basic sense, therefore, the concept of 
 
2  For additional, notable exceptions see Schwartz 1994; and Thrift 2002. 

 
6 
managerialism points to the processes through which management ideas and practices 
spread across space and time.  
 
Among the biggest obstacles to the study of managerialism, which in turn this special issue aims 
to address, is a tendency to reify and normalise it as a form of power that one would expect 
from dominant actors in the global economy. The rhetoric that fuels managerialism can often 
reinforce this impression by promoting its practices as the product of common sense. 
Managerialism often appeals to basic universal concerns in order to legitimise its politics in 
seemingly irrefutable terms. Its core discourse lives off a deceptively simple premise: problems 
can be improved or even resolved if they are better managed. In this respect, manageability 
has been built as a normatively desirable form of social action (Grey 1996, 2017). Reduced to 
an elementary sense, managerialism presents itself as a belief that the world should and can be 
managed, involving ideologies informed by instrumental rationality, and techniques directed 
towards the control of organisations and other social outcomes. From this perspective, it is 
difficult not to see management as a somewhat transhistorical practice, a product of 
modernism and its aspiration for a rational ordering of the world. This apparent rational 
grounding of management explains why critiques themselves have often seen this desire as 
emanating from the structural conditions of an expanding capitalist system or the rise of the 
bureaucratic state, even when it is recognised that the ‘orientation to manage’ (Kallinikos 1996: 
37) is a more complex historical phenomenon. 
 
This normalising perspective has therefore reinforced three basic propositions about 
managerialism that can at times appear unassailable. The first is that managerialism is 
grounded in a major call for ordering that appeals to a human desire for ontological security 
and continuity (Giddens 1991). Managerial knowledge claims to promote the reduction of 
ambivalence, ambiguity, and uncertainty, often through treating such conditions as 
inherently threatening (Bauman 1991). In this respect, managerialism appears to tap into a 
latent anxiety by offering the promise that a confusing world should be tamed and, in turn, 
that mastery can be achieved by deploying management ideas and practices. To proponents, 
managerialism becomes ‘an optimistic, almost romantic creed’ (Pollitt 1993: 1). Embedded 
within the epistemic foundations of modernity, this core assumption of manageability often 
has a taken-for-granted quality. It builds on a certain modern conception of agency; that is, 
an autonomous self, detached from the environment, yet able to act on the external world 
(Kallinikos 1996; Townley 2002; also see Roberts 1984; MacIntyre 2014[1981]; Luke 1990).  
 
The second proposition is that managerialism essentially consists of the deployment of 
rational instrumentalism as a means to address this need for ordering. As many scholars have 
argued, managerialism encompasses theories, models, and frameworks which carry a 
Weberian imprint of formal or instrumental rationality (Edwards 1980; Watson 1994). This 
instrumental rationality emphasises calculation, deliberateness, and predictability in order to 
formulate the most efficient relationship between means and ends (Weber 2013[1922]). 
Whether this efficiency is actually accomplished is an empirical question, but the ideological 
consistency of seeking efficiency is a hallmark of managerialism. It often exploits a critique of 
the state, to present itself as a means to get more with less, a practice which fits both with 
the desire to delimit the state under neoliberalism and use market mechanisms to enforce 
greater performance. Such appeals to rationality are often embedded within institutional 

 
7 
policies that include attention to the application of rules, laws, and regulations which are, by 
way of justificaition, often represented as fair or technical.  
 
The third proposition is that managerialism fundamentally boils down to a problematique of 
control (Clegg 1981; Beniger 1989; Chau, Lowe, and Puxty 1989; Reed 1989; Otley, Broadbent, 
and Berry 1995; Berry et al. 2009). The entire history of management thought since the 
nineteenth century can thus be summarised as a process of wrestling with methods of control 
operating at systemic, organisational, and individual levels. In mainstream perspectives, the 
theme of control pivots around how to ensure a degree of internal equilibrium in relation to 
demands and threats from the surrounding environment. Control is subsequently imagined 
and practiced through various interrelated mechanisms and techniques. Such processes are 
often concerned with functional specialisation, compartmentalisation, and the monitoring of 
tasks. In critical perspectives, particularly those shaped by Marxism, the problem of 
managerial control is defined as an effort to stabilise and mystify dehumanising class relations 
between privileged cadres (managers) and an exploited group (workers).  
 
The saliency of these three themes may be partly due to the fact that managerialism has been 
contested at multiple levels. For the attempt to cast managerialism in terms of order, 
instrumental rationality and control arguably reflects the challenges faced by its proponents 
when seeking to legitimate their practices. There have been substantial debates over the 
extent to which these managers succeed in their declared or implicit aspiration for control 
(Ferguson 1994). Protests, miscalculations, accidents, and mundane ignorance inevitably blur 
the deceptively straight lines of managerial reason. Indeed, questioning the presumed 
effectiveness of managerial practices, and thus further opening up the category itself, is a 
theme which is critically probed by a number of authors in this special issue, such as Moore 
and Joyce, Nunn, and Eagleton-Pierce. We would therefore concur with others who have 
argued that managerialism contains tensions and contradictions within itself and is often 
‘perennially failing’ to accomplish its objectified ends (Grey 2017: 27). Despite frequent 
promises and high expectations at the outset of initiatives, managerial practices often 
stumble through cycles of crisis, innovation, and reform (Power 2004). Such patterns may be 
acknowledged by relevant parties and audiences, and can be accompanied by scepticism and 
cynicism, but the need to be seen to be in control, at the very least, serves as a powerful 
underlying motivation for reproducing managerialism and its key discursive modalities. As 
MacIntyre (2014[1981]: 124) suggests, managerial expertise often creates an ‘illusion’ of 
social control. Such problems of legitimation have, in turn, fuelled the self-reflexive nature of 
management in its attempts to lay claims to a given expertise or professionalize its practices.  
 
These analyses point to the fact that one should be careful to not take-for-granted how 
proponents of managerial practice present their activities, even if we are critical of such 
pursuits. The themes of ordering, instrumental rationality, and control may constitute 
important baselines to understand managerialism, but we should be cautious about crafting 
the ideological properties of managerialism into an overly neat package that, in practice, 
encompasses a wide range of concrete experiences and consequences. Thus, our problem 
here is not so much if rationalism or the desire for control are at stake or not – something 
that would be difficult to deny – but rather the problematic framing that results from 
underspecified accounts of managerial processes in IPE. In particular, by appealing to the 
same universal register as the one deployed by the apostles of managerialism, scholars can 

 
8 
risk levelling the field in ways which make it hard to historicise or relativise managerialism as 
a distinct social practice. To this end, we must guard against treating all forms of management 
as expressions of a single phenomenon and often cast as various iterations of scientific 
managerialism or, more specifically, Taylorism.  
 
With this in mind, one of the cross-cutting, intellectual concerns explored by the contributors 
to this special issue is how managerialism can often direct our gaze towards efficiency-based 
concerns yet, at the same time, we see managerial practices that have increasingly come to 
define larger priorities and agendas of governance. As the articles explore, managerialism 
cannot be seen simply as a narrow strategy directed towards mechanical efficiency for the 
purpose of concrete transformation, such as involving the labour process. Rather, its tentacles 
have become intertwined with the design of policy, helping to determine objectives of 
governance or even shaping the very process of decision-making. Thus, as the phenomenon 
of managerialism has spread to a variety of institutional spaces and fields, becoming part of 
how organisations think and act, we are arguably seeing new mutations of managerial reason 
when compared to earlier histories. We therefore see managerialism as something much 
more encompassing and embracing than the internal refinement of organisations under the 
direction of a privileged set of cadres. 
 
In this respect, our concerns with managerialism speak directly to the remaking of global 
governance in ways that are often underestimated in the literature, precisely because 
managerialism is too often cast as a presumed apolitical ‘tool of efficiency’ to pursue a given 
objective. Exploring the deeper political economy implications of these practices in shaping 
the agenda of various forms of governance at a global level, the authors in this special issue 
dissect how managerialism has become vital in reconfiguring economic policy norms (Linsi) 
and development policy programmes (Seabrooke and Sending, Sharma and Soederberg, 
Eagleton-Pierce); the restructuring of welfare states and the wider public sector (Knafo, Nunn, 
Whiteside); the shaping of corporate power and governance arrangements (Baglioni, 
Campling and Hanlon; Moore and Joyce; Sharma and Soederberg), as well as penetrating into 
NGOs that have historically been resistant to such logics (Eagleton-Pierce). By directly 
connecting our analysis with enduring IPE research themes, we therefore argue that 
explaining managerialism does not simply stand on its own but is now interwoven with 
understanding the politics of the world economy.  
 
 
3. 
Developing a Historical Perspective on Managerialism 
 
Conceptualisations of managerialism are often derived from how scholars understand the 
relationship between the particular practices that are claimed to fall under its name and the 
wider social context. Depending upon the way in which we conceive of the lineages of current 
managerial practices and their distinctive development since the 1980s or 1990s, our 
understanding of its nature and significance can change in profound ways. In this respect, 
therefore, a key axis that shapes many of the contributions in this special issue is the way in 
which we conceive of the relationship between managerialism and broader concepts vital for 
political economy analysis, such as capitalism or neoliberalism. For some, managerialism 
constitutes an integral aspect of the development of capitalism, understood as a set of 
practices intended to reinforce the logic of commodification and the creation of new 

 
9 
opportunities for profit, or as part of some wider disciplining process. From this perspective, 
one cannot understand managerialism without a broader conception of modern capitalism 
and its evolution and, in turn, what makes current managerial practices interesting is their 
intimate relationship to specific phases of capitalist development. 
 
The advent of scientific management in the late 19th century (Hoskin and Macve 1994) is often 
a key historical reference point when charting approaches that examine the relationship of 
managerialism to capitalism. Scientific managerialism was most famously associated with 
Frederick Winslow Taylor, who became known for his studies aimed at optimising work 
stations and minimising non-productive time through planning and careful organisation. 
Scientific management was tied to the rapid growth of the American corporation which saw 
the rise of middle managers who often came with applied expertise, notably in engineering 
and accounting (Chandler 1977). These managers were employed to help with logistical and 
workplace organisation. They sought to legitimise their work with the establishment of 
business schools which accredited management as a distinct professional body of expertise 
(Khurana 2007). Taylorism was the origin of a first connotation often associated to 
managerialism: the emphasis on control through standardisation and careful benchmarking 
in order to monitor and ensure efficiency gains. Scientific managerialism became more 
generally understood as the use of science for organising the workplace more efficiently, a 
movement which was also tied to the rise of human resources. In turn, such thinking became 
associated with principles taught to new cadres, and generalised (aspiring to be a ‘science’) 
for how to discipline labour and deal with welfare and democratic forces from an elite 
perspective. It fuelled a critical literature that focused on the power relations that managers 
enforce and the dynamics of domination and alienation they engender (Braverman 1974).  
 
A focus on the legacy of scientific managerialism is important, as various contributors to this 
special issue argue, not only because it helps to bring out the disciplinary nature of 
managerialism but also because it helps us better specify what are the novel features behind 
the current redeployment and reconfiguring of such managerial practices on a global scale. 
Here, it is argued there is much to learn by examining the specific features of accumulation 
under neoliberalism to grasp the new purpose of these managerial practices.  
 
For Moore and Joyce, the practices of managerialism have been intensified by the rise of 
platform capitalism. With the development of new information technologies, managers have 
been able to dissect and rearticulate in more precise and intense ways the practices of 
scientific managerialism and the control over labour. The model of platform work 
managerialism encompasses, among significant features, an algorithmic allocation of work 
and the use of digital tracking technologies to enforce and control the labour process. It 
highlights how new technologies enable practices of scientific management to be refreshed 
and reconfigured for the current era of capitalism.   
 
Baglioni, Campling and Hanlon are keen to characterize managerialism as an entrepreneurial 
function that relates to corporate governance and which should be distinguished from public 
governance. For this reason, they insist on the importance of distinguishing managerialism 
from neoliberalism. While the latter represents a structure of governance that is based on 
intensifying processes of commodification and the intensification of competition, the former 
signals a means by which competition can be delivered within value chains. Distinguishing 

 
10 
between them helps us better grasp the nature of managerialism as a tool of control, but also 
the reason why, in the current context, these practices have fared so well. What was initially 
concerned with organising the division of labour has thus been fleshed out into a broader 
practice of standardisation which helps managers to exert further control over value capture. 
It has fuelled a process of ‘concentration and control’ of knowledge production to the benefit 
of elite actors within the socio-economic class hierarchy. 
 
A second key concept which is related to the notion of capitalism but more historically specific 
is the emphasis on neoliberalism. Although early phases in the development of managerialism 
through the twentieth century are each important on their own, many recent studies have 
focused on developments since the 1980s and 1990s. Scholars have emphasised the turn to 
quality management, benchmarking, the audit culture, performance management, among 
others agendas and tools, as being part of a neoliberal project (Power 1999; Bruno and Didier 
2013). The focus here often revolves around the strong impact of managerialism on the public 
sector and the rise of public management which is often interpreted as a means to promote 
a new forms of corporate empowerment (Fouger 2008; Davies 2014). 
 
In their article, Sharma and Soederberg point to the way in which global risk management has 
promoted new practices of valuation that have been pivotal to justifying the greater 
involvement of transnational corporations in projects of development. These have 
underpinned what they see as a new Davos consensus, aimed at consolidating and 
legitimising ‘the role of business as an active development agent, whilst depoliticizing the 
social and environmental disruptions tied to this arrangement’. Focusing on a different point, 
Whiteside shows, in discussing the rise of public private partnerships, how managerialism has 
played a key role in normalising the involvement of the private sector by recasting public 
sectors from service providers into commodity purchasers. 
 
Examining the growing influence of management consultancies in the making of the global 
development agenda, Seabrooke and Sending’s article explores how the new forms of 
managerialism have been tied to professional practices. As they show, managerialism has 
promoted a distinctive cultural frame which values abstract templates, as well as a kind of 
short-termism, such as seen in the ‘work to contract’ trends in International Governmental 
Organisations (IGOs) they document. These are often crafted to elicit further work by avoiding 
controversial suggestions and generating growing dependency towards consultants.  
 
Others contributors are keen to understand managerialism as a discrete set of ideas, cultural 
frames and technologies that, although operating in a capitalist environment, have a certain 
autonomy and should be analysed on their own terms. This initial differentiation is then often 
used as a means to highlight the counterintuitive nature of managerial practices, which are 
too often normalised in the IPE literature (Knafo et al. 2018). The objective of these 
discussions is, therefore, to problematize the role of specific institutions often neglected in 
IPE, such as business schools (Linsi, Hanlon, Knafo) or management consultants (Seabrooke 
and Ole Jacob; Whiteside; Eagleton-Pierce).  
 
Instead of taking the scientific management of the early 20th century as its benchmark for 
thinking about managerialism, scholars who adopt this focus often turn to the rise of 
management science in the postwar era, a period which featured the profound renovation of 

 
11 
business schools and the dramatic development of new optimisation techniques. From this 
time, we see a more abstract and generalist form of action which focused on strategic 
questions, rather than the more applied concerns of scientific management. It is a 
development often associated with the growth of business schools and management 
consultancy firms. Such trends reflected a growing interest in quantification and 
mathematical modelling and marked, more broadly, an increasing self-awareness of 
management as a general expertise considered independent of any specific field of 
operations. It has been the target of a rich literature criticising ‘management by numbers’ 
which was often seen to be responsible for increasing the gap between top management and 
other workers within firms or organisations (O’Sullivan 2001). 
 
Within the parameters of this perspective, Linsi’s article highlights that the neoliberal era has 
been shaped by ideas that cannot be easily slotted into the classic paradigms of IPE, such as 
Keynesianism and neoliberalism. The political commitment to chasing foreign investors is a 
case in point which, Linsi argues, highlights the specific role of business studies and 
managerial ideas in shaping the agenda of neoliberalism in ways that are not easily captured 
by the focus on neoliberal theory or, more generally, the impact of economics on policy. As 
he suggest, such thinkng enabled a profound shift away from the traditional emphasis on 
national champions towards attracting foreign investors, a priority that went against the 
conventionl emphasis on national industries which had long been characteristic of economics.  
 
For Knafo, this new manargeialism should not be directly read as the product of the growing 
influence of corporations, but rather as the outcome of long lineages that finds their roots in 
the key innovations made by the US defense sector and practices that were borne out of the 
experience of the Second World War. This helps to highlight that current managerial ideas 
and practices depart much more fundamentally from what we would take to be a ‘corporate’ 
or ‘capitalist’ mindset. Having been driven by scientists who often had little prior knowledge 
of military affairs, it framed a distinct dynamic whereby decision makers were empowered 
over specialists or professionals in military matters, just as it would later be the case in the 
public sector with the destitution of professionals in favour of a new managerial class.   
 
Finally, Eagleton-Pierce argues that managerialism can be situated in relation to long-standing 
organisational concerns around instrumental rationality and the desire for control. In respect 
to his particular focus on the origins of performance management or results-based 
management, he suggests that the legacy of this thinking can be found in both corporate and 
public sector environments from the 1960s and 1970s, in the process problematising a 
presumed neat fit between managerialism and neoliberalism. When applied to the case of 
international NGOs in global development, Eagleton-Pierce suggests that performance 
managerial agendas became more prominent from the 1990s onwards. He suggests that 
governments, international organisations, and private consultants were all important players 
who helped to normalise managerialism within major transnational NGOs. 
 
 
4. 
The Political Consequences of Managerialism 
 
This special issue aims to highlight why and how managerialism deserves to be interrogated 
by IPE theorists as a multifaceted object of analysis with important political consequences. 

 
12 
We aim for the issue to constitute a stepping stone for a broader reflection on the ways in 
which managerialism dovetails or clashes with other major systems of ideas in the global 
economy; on how it is appropriated and mobilized by different social forces and agents for 
different ends; on the complex processes of translation as these ideas circulate from one 
social field to the next; as well as the diversity in managerial practices across countries, 
sectors, and institutional spaces. For it is our belief that many of the key political struggles of 
our time are increasingly mediated by managerial institutions and discourses that help shape 
what is politically at stake in the global political economy. The contributions to this special 
issue all build on the idea that coming to terms with managerialism is a vital aspect of politics 
in the neoliberal era. It is increasingly setting the parameters for what is considered to be a 
legitimate political intervention and has helped diffuse corporate ways of doing things which, 
in turn, often close off accountability measures or narrow the policy agenda.  
 
Seabrooke and Sending, for example, point to the way in which consultancy houses have 
fuelled a general trend towards managerialism in IGOs with distinct professional and 
organizational features. The generalization of this abstract managerialism has played an 
important role in a narrowing of the policy or development space, both in terms of the ideas 
that are considered and the processes through which these organizations operate. 
 
Whiteside highlights the ways in which managerialism has helped leverage the public sector 
activities on financial markets in ways which conceal the investments of the public sector and 
the costs of relying on private contractors. She captures how managerialism has thus become 
a key vehicle for the involvement of private firms and organisation in the public sector and 
more generally in the process of policy making.  
 
In Nunn’s research on ALMPs he argues that performance management agendas tend to lead 
to centralised control dynamics within bureaucracies that have a stake in such policy games. 
He suggests that the relative distributional form of the welfare state is being reshaped 
through justifications derived from a managerial sensibility. In this sense, by analysing how 
consultants and public sector managers vie for the authority to shape the performance 
management of labour markets, Nunn argues that managerialism is implicated in ‘significant 
social harm’ for those precarious workers caught up finding work in the such systems.  
 
In the process of mediating social struggles over the global economy, managerialism has 
transformed the nature of political struggles and how agents conceive of what is at stake in 
political struggles over the future of the global economy. In this regard, the study of 
managerialism is particularly relevant in the field of development, as Sharma and Soederberg 
highlight, because this field is too often neglected by work on managerialism. As they point 
out, the global risk management agendas in the World Economic Forum (WEF) has 
empowered major corporations to legitimately participate in international development 
problems. Their article documents how the rise of risk management – with its appearance of 
progress, order, and predictability – offers a vehicle for major firms to downplay their own 
historical role in negative socio-economic trends and outcomes. In short, they argue that the 
WEF discourse on risk management tends to reproduce a harmonious and ahistorical view of 
the subject matter, without adequate attention to how business seeks to replenish its 
particular legitimacy within hierarchical systems of power. 
 

 
13 
For Knafo, the rise of managerial governance should be understood as a means to facilitate 
decision making at the top of organizations, for example in the making of policy, rather than 
in reference to those at the bottom, as was the case with the Taylorist focus on restructuring 
the labor process. This paradigmatic shift has fuelled the rise of a managerial class. In that 
regards, it is important to realise that we may be fighting the wrong battle in assuming that 
governance is currently focused on extending and intensifying market rule in all aspects of 
society (c.f. Peck 2010). As our gaze continues to be transfixed on the market pressures that 
are too said to be driving change, we lose sight of the rise of a managerial class that is 
profoundly transforming the nature of governance and capitalist accumulation. We too often 
take-for-granted the script according to which managers have no real alternative to the 
managerial policies they implement because of growing market pressures. Turning the 
spotlight back on decision makers is therefore key.  
 
In Eagleton-Pierce’s study of NGOs in the field of international development, he charts how 
managerialism rose from being a marginal phenomenon in the 1980s to something that was 
increasingly viewed as ‘fundamental’, or even ‘existential’, from the early 2000s. Through the 
particular case of Oxfam, he argues that the rationale for performance management is 
manifested and concretely operationalized through an agenda on monitoring, evaluation, and 
learning (MEL). Eagleton-Pierce explains how and why the spreading of this form of 
managerialism unfolded via attention to both structural tendencies, such as funding policies 
in donor governments and IOs, as well as internal debates within Oxfam. He documents not 
only the ways in which this normalisation process evolved, but also the critique and resistance 
it provoked from NGO workers and analysts. Eagleton-Pierce argues that the turn to 
managerialism in the case of Oxfam ‘reflects a more pervasive anxiety about institutional 
comportment and how to appear to others as a “modern” organisation’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
14 
REFERENCES 
 
Alvesson, M. and and Willmott, H. (2012). Making Sense of Management: A Critical 
Introduction. London: Sage. 
Amoore, L. (2002). Globalisation Contested: An International Political Economy of Work, 
Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Amoore, L. (2006). Making the Modern Multinational. in May, C. (ed.). Global Corporate 
Power. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. 
Baines, J. (2017). Accumulating Through Food Crisis? Farmers, Commodity Traders and the 
Distributional Politics of Financialization. Review of International Political Economy, 24 
(3). 497-537. 
Bauman, Z. (1991). Modernity and Ambivalence. Cambridge: Polity. 
Beniger, J. (1989). The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the 
Information Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Berry, A. J., Coat, A. F., Harris, E. P., Otley, D. T., and Stringer, C. (2009). Emerging Themes in 
Management Control: A Review of Recent Literature. The British Accounting Review, 
41 (1), 2-20. 
Best, J. (2014). Governing Failure: Professional Expertise and the Transformation of Global 
Development Finance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Braverman, H. (1974). Labor and Monopoly Capital. New York: Monthly Review. 
Broome, A. and Quirk, J. (2015). Governing the World at a Distance: The Practice of Global 
Benchmarking. Review of International Studies, 41 (5), 819-841. 
Bruno, I. and E. Didier (2013). Benchmarking: L'État sous pression statistique. Paris, Zones. 
Budd, A. (2013). Class, States and International Relations: A Critical Appraisal of Robert Cox 
and Neo-Gramscian Theory. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Burnham, J. (1941). The Managerial Revolution: What is Happening in the World. New York: 
John Day. 
Büthe, T. (2010). Global Private Politics: A Research Agenda. Business and Politics, 12 (3), 1-
24. 
Büthe, T. and Mattli, W. (2011). The New Global Rulers: The Privatization of Regulation in the 
World Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Chau, W. F., Lowe, T., Puxty, T. (eds) (1989) Critical Perspectives in Management Control. 
Houndsmills: Macmillan. 
Clegg, S. (1981). Organization and Control. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26 (4), 545-562. 
Cox, R. W. (1987). Production, Power, and World Order: Social Forces in the Making of World 
History. Columbia: Columbia University Press. 
Cox, R. W. (1993). Structural Issues of Global Governance: Implications for Europe. in Gill, S. 
(ed.). Gramsci, Historical Materialism and International Relations. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Cunliffe, A. L. (2014). A Very Short, Fairly Interesting and Reasonably Cheap Book About 
Management. London: Sage. 
Dannreuther, C. and Lekhi, R. (2000). Globalization and the Political Economy of Risk’, Review 
of International Political Economy, 7 (4), 574-594. 
Davies, W. (2014). The Limits of Neoliberalism: Authority, Sovereignty and the Logic of 
Competition. London: Sage. 
Drucker, P. (1973). Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices. New York: Harper & Row. 

 
15 
Edwards, R. (1980). Contested Terrain: The Transformation of the Workplace in the Twentieth 
Century. New York: Basic.  
Ferguson, J. (1994). The Anti-Politics Machine: Development, Depoliticization and 
Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
Fuchs, D. (2007). Business Power in Global Governance. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. 
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Gill, S. (1995). Globalisation, Market Civilisation, and Disciplinary Neoliberalism. Millennium: 
Journal of International Studies, 24 (3), 399-423. 
Graeber, D. (2015). The Utopia of Rules: On Technology, Stupidity and the Secret Joys of 
Bureaucracy. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House. 
Grey, C. (1996). Towards a Critique of Managerialism: The Contribution of Simone Weil. 
Journal of Management Studies, 33 (5), 591-611. 
Grey, C. (2017). A Very Short, Fairly Interesting and Reasonably Cheap Book About Studying 
Organizations. London: Sage. 
Hall, R. B. and Biersteker, T. J. (eds) (2002). The Emergence of Private Authority in Global 
Governance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Harrison, G. (2005). The World Bank, Governance and Theories of Political Action in Africa. 
British Journal of Politics and International Relations, 7,  240-260. 
Hood, C. (2002). The Risk Game and the Blame Game. Government and Opposition, 37 (1), 15-
37. 
Hood, C. (2010). The Blame Game: Spin, Bureaucracy, and Self-Preservation in Government. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Hoskin, K. and Macve R. (1994). Reappraising the Genesis of Managerialism: A Re-
examination of the Role of Accounting at the Springfield Armory, 1815‐1845. 
Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, 7 (2), 4-29. 
Hymer, S. (1970). The Efficiency (Contradictions) of Multinational Corporations. The American 
Economic Review, 60 (2), 441-448. 
Fougner, T. (2006). The State, International Competitiveness and Neoliberal Globalisation: Is 
There a Future Beyond “the Competition State”?’. Review of International Studies, 32 
(1), 165-185. 
Fouger, T. (2008). Neoliberal Governance of States: The Role of Competitiveness Indexing and 
Country Benchmarking. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 37 (2), 303-326. 
Kallinikos, J. (1996). Mapping the Intellectual Terrain of Management Education. in French, R. 
and Grey, C. (eds). Rethinking Management Education. London: Sage. 
Knafo, S. and S. J. Dutta (2016). Patient Capital and the Financialisation of Management. Socio-
Economic Review, 14 (4), 771–788. 
Locke, R. R. and Spender, J-C. (2012). Confronting Managerialism: How the Business Elite and 
their Schools Threw Our Lives Out of Balance. London: Zed Books. 
Lockwood, E. (2015). Predicting the Unpredictable: Value-at-risk, Performativity, and the 
Politics of Financial Uncertainty. Review of International Political Economy, 22 (4), 719-
756. 
Luke, T. W. (1990). Social Theory and Modernity: Critique, Dissent, and Revolution. London: 
Sage. 
MacIntyre, A. (2014[1981]). After Virtue. London: Bloomsbury Academic.  
May, C. (ed.) (2006). Global Corporate Power. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. 

 
16 
May, C. (2015). Who’s in Charge? Corporations as Institutions of Global Governance. Palgrave 
Communications. 15042. http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/palcomms.2015.42. 
Momani, B. (2013). Management Consultants and the United States’ Public Sector. Business 
and Politics, 15 (3), 381-399. 
Niskanen, W. (1971) Bureaucracy & Representative Government, London: Aldine. 
O’Sullivan, M. (2001). Contests for Corporate Control: Corporate Governance and Economic 
Performance in the United States and Germany. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Otley, D., Broadbent, J., and Berry, A. (1995) ‘Research in Management Control: An Overview 
of its Development’. British Journal of Management, 6 (s1), S31-S44. 
Ougaard, M. and Leander, A. (eds) (2010). Business and Global Governance. Abingdon: 
Routledge. 
Parker, M. (2002). Against Management, Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Peters, J. (2012). ‘Neoliberal Convergence in North America and Western Europe: Fiscal 
Austerity, Privatization, and Public Sector Reform’. Review of International Political 
Economy, 19 (2). 208-235. 
Perry, J. and Nölke, A. (2006). The Political Economy of International Accounting Standards. 
Review of International Political Economy, 13 (4), 559-586. 
Pollitt, C. (1993). Managerialism and the Public Services: The Anglo-American Experience. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Power, M. (2004). Counting, Control and Calculation: Reflections on Measuring and 
Management. Human Relations, 57 (6), 765-783. 
Power, M. (2007). Organized Uncertainty: Designing a World of Risk Management. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Reed, M. I. (1989). The Sociology of Management. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf. 
Roberts, J. (1984). The Moral Character of Management Practice. Journal of Management 
Studies, 21 (3), 287-302. 
Schwartz, H. (1994). Small States in Big Trouble: State Reorganization in Australia, Denmark, 
New Zealand, and Sweden in the 1980s. World Politics, 46(4), 527-555. 
Seabrooke, L. and Henriksen, L. F. (eds) (2017). Professional Networks in Transnational 
Governance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Sklair, L. (2001). The Transnational Capitalist Class. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell Publishing. 
Stopford, J. and Strange, S, with Henley, J. S. (1991). Rival States, Rival Firms: Competition for 
World Market Shares. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Strange, S. (1988) States and Markets: An Introduction to International Political Economy. 
London: Pinter. 
Strange, S. (1996). The Retreat of the State: The Diffusion of Power in the World Economy. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Townley, B. (2002). Managing with Modernity. Organization, 9 (4), 549-573. 
Thrift, N.J. (1997a). The Rise of Soft Capitalism. Cultural Values, 1 (1), 29–57. 
van der Pijl, K. (1993). Transnational Classes and International Relations. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
van der Pijl, K. (2005). Gramsci and Left Managerialism. Critical Review of International Social 
and Political Philosophy, 8 (4), 499-511. 
van der Pijl, K. (2012). The Making of an Atlantic Ruling Class. London: Verso. 
Vernon, R. (1971). Sovereignty at Bay: The Multinational Spread of U.S. Enterprises. London: 
Longman. 

 
17 
Vernon, R. (1977). Storm Over the Multinationals: The Real Issues. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Watson, T. (1994). In Search of Management. London: Routledge. 
Weaver, R. K. (1986). The Politics of Blame Avoidance. Journal of Public Policy, 6 (4), 371-398. 
Weber, M. (2013[1922]). Economy and Society. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

