The Beautiful & Virtue 
A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
AN INTRODUCTION 
by Thomas Jockin 
Welcome to the introduction recording for our lecture series; The 
Beautiful and Virtue: A study of Six Platonic Dialogues. Before I begin with my 
prepared introduction essay, I want to thank you for your interest in 
considering beauty. There are many things you could be doing with your time 
— entertainment, hiking, time with loved ones, yet you choose to direct your 
attention to consider what at first seems obvious, but with deeper 
consideration, requires much more rigor. Something about this course 
resonated with you.  I pray my forthcoming writings will be a fair exchange of 
your attention and time. Let us begin. 
One morning not long ago, I had the urge to reread Thomas Aquinas. In 
particular, I read his account of honesty and was shocked at what I found. 
When I recall honesty as taught by my parents or use the term with my 
friends, the term seems synonymous with truth-telling. Yet, Aquinas had a 
 of 
1
11

 
 
Thomas Jockin
completely different understanding of honesty, described in four parts. First, 
honesty is placed under the virtue of temperance. This is unusual because 
temperance is a moral virtue and not an intellectual virtue. Second, honesty is 
convertible to virtue itself. Truth-telling is important but would not seem to 
encompass the entirety of virtue as a concept. Aquinas is directing readers to 
something radically different from just truth-telling. Third, honesty is not the 
same as the useful or the pleasant, but rather something good for its own sake 
— a statement only reserved for human happiness. Lastly, honesty is also 
convertible with beauty, not any beauty of appearances, but the spiritual 
beauty of true reality, A beauty of clarity and perfected existence. All at once, 
as I read Aquainus’ account of honestum, I understood the power of Plato’s 
work. Centuries later, the long shadow of Plato’s writing on the beautiful has 
been cast on this 12th-century Dominican writing;  A shadow that does not 
stop at Aquinas. When I read Heidegger’s account of the authentic existence as 
Care, I continue to sense Plato’s shadow continued to stretch over time into 
the 20th century.  
	
In this lecture series, we are going to consider how, for Plato, beauty 
ascends the beloved from appearances to true realities. This is a shocking 
assertion because, since Kant, beauty has been treated as a personal 
preference on the same level as favorite ice cream flavor. How could a 
subjective preference move a pupil from appearances to true reality? When 
would a preference ever change a person’s entire orientation to life? Consider 
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
2

 
 
Thomas Jockin
how could a preference for ice cream flavor do such a thing? I think not. 
Instead, in this course, we return to the foundations of thought and see what 
other mode of beauty we could consider. Join me in this six-module seminar 
as a journey within the platonic dialogues to approach the Beautiful and 
virtue.  
	
If this is the first time you have encountered me, My name is Thomas 
Jockin. I hold a BFA in communication design from the Parsons School of 
Design. Since 2015 I have worked with corporations such as Starbucks, 
Footlocker, Express, and Google on various design projects. Likewise, I have 
taught or guest lectured at education centers in New York City, such as SVA, 
Pratt Institute, Parsons, Fashion Institute of Technology, and The City 
University of New York. In 2021, I co-authored, with Javier Rivera and O.G. 
Rose, the book “A Philosophy of Glimpses” available on Amazon. I am 
thankful for the opportunity the Halkyon Guild has provided for me to speak 
with you. My time with design students focuses on drawing forth the beauty 
inside their sketches and prototypes. With my students we work with the first 
principles of art and design to draw out the hidden fulfillment lying dormant 
inside a pupil’s work. While such practical work is rewarding, because the first 
principle of design — beauty — is taken for granted, a different context of 
inquiry is required to think about such a first principle. Now with the Halkyon 
Guild, we will explore six platonic dialogues with a particular focus to 
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
3

 
 
Thomas Jockin
contemplate upon the beautiful and virtue.  The six dialogues we will read 
together  are: 
1.  Greater Hippias 
2. Symposium 
3. Phrades 
4. Meno 
5. Cratylus 
6. Parmenides.  
I have structured the course in such a manner so as we read these 
dialogues we will circumscribe the following considerations: We start with 
Greater Hippias with the typical elenchus method of knocking down the 
sophist Hippias’s particular examples of the Beautiful and Socrates’s 
hypothetical replies to what is the definition of the Beautiful. In fact, from the 
exchanges between Hippias and Socrates, the connection between predicates 
and their subjects begin to untether. From Symposium, we explore what love 
is as a predicate and how beauty interacts with love, in words spoken by 
Socrates, “to behold true realities which nourish true virtue.” In Phaedrus, 
Plato presents two shocking notions. First, that predicates are a hierarchy of 
excessive desire. Second, the virtue of temperance is the acquired opinion to 
desire the best. Contending with Meno, we will attempt to thread the concepts 
of beauty, excellence, knowledge, and action into a woven whole. From 
Cratylus, revelations await us; Plato suggests the very instrument of 
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
4

 
 
Thomas Jockin
knowledge, names, is, in fact, images that are nothing like the realities they 
report to depict in transparent reality. If this is the case, the standard critique 
of image-makers by Plato in dialogues such as The Republic seem to extend 
even to words. How could we reconcile this apparent tension? We read 
together to find out. Lastly, we continue to circumscribe the path with 
Parmenides, one of the most enigmatic dialogues of Plato. After demolishing 
the character Socrates’s notion of Forms, images and likeness are explored to 
point the way to a rehabilitated conception of the Beautiful. 
	
When I introduce philosophy to design students, I begin with the topic 
of arete, which can be translated as excellence or virtue. Most of my students 
never heard the term in a design context — this was the case in my own 
education. The collapse of aesthetic deliberation into personal preference is 
my suggestion why excellence is never spoken of in the classroom. Instead, 
what if we reconsider virtue not as a cultural or subjective preference, but 
rather, as a beautiful activity? Then, we begin to see a vantage point of reality 
pregnant in both possibility and energy. As I tell my students, design is like 
writing — both prose and poetry, when done well, present to the viewer actual 
realities, albeit in different modes which complement one another. The 
question is not “does this artifact do a function,” that would be just 
engineering. In design, we instead ask, “does this artifact function with 
beauty.” The answer to such an inquiry is vastly different; not a formulaic dead 
repetition, but instead, a creative living dance.  
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
5

 
 
Thomas Jockin
	
My own experience as a design student is an example. In my sophomore 
typography class, I was instructed by a typeface designer named Joshua 
Darden. I still recall, almost 20 years later, what I thought at the end of the 
first class with Darden; “I want a mind as beautiful as his.” I immediately 
recognized Joshua’s intellectual powers, perceptions, and considerations and 
fell in love with what I was beholding. I was Joshua’s apprentice for three 
years after his inaugural course. To think that one lecture directed my 
understanding of design and how my life has unfolded. At 19 years old, my 
entire orientation to life was reshaped by an encounter with the beautiful.  
	
My life was shaped by that beauty that acted upon me and compelled me 
towards a beloved, A beloved not of a body but of an activity of the soul. This is 
one of the themes we’ll explore together; Plato demonstrates many beauties. 
The bodies of living things such as maidens or horses are beautiful. There is 
the beauty of activities of the soul, such as my master’s thought process in 
typography. But there is even more; there is the beauty of virtues, such as 
fortitude or charity; the beauty of laws and institutions, and even higher still, 
all which abide in some unity named The Beautiful. 
	
I would like you to consider if the Beautiful we encounter in our lives is 
not a conceptual abstraction. Sunsets are not beautiful; this sunset you are 
beholding is beautiful. Maidens are not beautiful; this maiden before you is 
beautiful. This act of charity you witness is beautiful. This law enacted is 
beautiful. In all these examples, beauty seems to direct us to the haecceity or 
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
6

 
 
Thomas Jockin
thingness of entities. Yet, beauty also points us to something universal beyond 
the individual present in front of us. The many and the One is expressed in the 
Beautiful. I ask you to join me in reading these six dialogues of Plato to find 
out the consequences of such a conception of beauty. 
	
Our understanding of images and likeness also requires more profound 
thought if we want to grasp what Plato means by “beauty without figure or 
color” We need another look at the likeness. Likeness as mimicry is the 
standard explanation of beauty in the arts. The drawing of the person is 
beautiful when it best mimics the actual person. I suggest in this lecture series 
that mimicry of nature does not exhaust the beautiful. As Carl Jung states, 
quoting the Alchemists; “What Nature leaves imperfect, Art perfects.” 
Consider, how does a name mimic the thing named? In what manner is a 
written name, “dog,” composed of sounds and marks on a page, anything like 
the actual dog? We have to admit there is no likeness in sound or figure. 
Likeness as mimicry is lacking as an explanation.  
	
Continuing my point, the convertibility of “Goodness” with “Beauty” is a 
puzzle we will attend to this seminar series. In one reading of these dialogues, 
you could conclude — as Tolstoy did — that Goodness and Beauty are one and 
the same concept collapsed into the notion of pleasure. But such a conclusion 
does not exhaust all possible answers. The phrase “Goodness is the same as 
Beauty” entails acknowledging some differences. The difference could be one 
of phonemes or the sounds that make up a name. “Beauty” and “جمال” posit the 
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
7

 
 
Thomas Jockin
same notion, but in different languages, depicted in other graphemes that map 
onto different phonemes. Or, the difference could be one of relation under a 
subject. A good chair is different from a good man sitting on a chair. Most 
enigmatic, the difference could be one of analogy. To explain what I mean, let 
me give an example; What exactly are we saying when we speak of “liquid 
capital” or “cash flow”? When we use the term “liquid,” we tend to think about 
entities such as water. Yet, capital is nothing like water. Capital is a promise 
imposed onto some material, be it paper with ink or zeros and ones on a 
computer. Water is a particular arrangement imposed onto hydrogen and 
oxygen atoms. In both form and material, capital and water are nothing alike. 
Yet the analogy of “liquid” posits a real and common reality to both entities. I 
mean actual reality and not figures of speech because economists deploy fluid 
dynamics, which describes water, to make falsifiable predictions related to 
finance and capital. Whether the difference between “Goodness” and “Beauty” 
is one of phonemes, relation to a subject, or analogy is something we will 
investigate together.  
	
Much of our work together is to help uncover the deeper meaning of 
phrases and words that have been collapsed or buried over the development of 
philosophy. “Form” is such a word. What is translated to “form,” “figure,” or 
“pattern,” in fact, could refer to Paradeigma, Eidos, Morphe, Schemata, or 
Taxis. These are not the same idea but instead a hierarchy of reality. Aristotle 
uses taxis in Rhetoric to refer to the composition of unlike elements arranged 
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
8

 
 
Thomas Jockin
together to make the whole of a persuasive speech. Aristotle also uses 
schemata to reference the shape of unnatural kinds, whereas the term Morphe 
is used for natural types. Eidos, which may be translated as species, can, to our 
ear, be a semantic category, whereas, for the Greeks, Eidos was ontological 
rather than semantic. Within Sufi philosophy, the suggestion that there is a 
form of appearances and a form of reality corresponds to Eidos and Morphe 
distinction. Lastly, Paradeigma points to what later thinkers, such as Aquinas, 
would call the exemplar cause of a thing, the isolated entity, which illustrates 
the first principle within the mind of the maker. Where Aquinas states the 
exemplars are in mind, Plato saw paradeigma as the most authentic and 
singular reality outside of minds. A more rigorous understanding of these 
terms will likewise aid our understanding of The Beautiful for Plato. 
	
The dichotomy between Aristotlean and Platonic thought is due for 
reconsideration. Rather than the top-down rationalist account of Plato, it is 
my hope, as we see in this reading of his dialogues, that the variable-making 
arts at a particular time play a large role in Plato's arguments. This is different 
from the single mildly hunting for the definition of concepts with ignorant 
interlocutors for some inert substance such as “what is piety?” Or “what is 
courage?” Indeed, seeing Plato arrange the dialogues in such a manner so as to 
esteem the making activities that bootstrap knowledge is a very different 
experience of dialectic — much more “inductive” — than the top-down 
rationalist depiction of Plato would permit. If Plato is truly such a top-down 
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
9

 
 
Thomas Jockin
thinker, then why does Plato’s character Socrates repeatedly cite the work of 
doctors, craftsmen, and gymnasts to refute the claims of his speaking partners. 
Something is going on here to counter the stereotype. 
To summarize this section, our inquiry into the Beautiful will instruct us 
in four major topics: First is motivation of pupils under the topic of desire. 
Second, pedagogy under the topic of rhetoric. Followed by epistemology under 
the topic of love. Lastly, the nature of reality is to be studied under the topic of 
images and resemblances. 
	
This course is for several kinds of learners. First, this course is for those 
who come from artistic practice with the wish to explore philosophy. By 
reconsidering what is beauty, artists may deepen their practice. Philosophy 
can be daunting, especially if you attempt to read contemporary thinkers. The 
terms are technical and different from the common meanings in the 
dictionary. But, by starting with Plato under The Beautiful and Virtue, you will 
have a gateway to connect and enliven your professional practice with the 
methods and language of philosophy. The second kind of learner in this course 
are those who wish for a steady footing to an authentic life. As I spoke with 
Johannes in a discussion you can find on Youtube, we cannot simply read the 
past and copy/paste their ways of thinking to today. Our world is different 
from theirs. Our constraints, our dangers, and our opportunities are not alike. 
Instead, we need to reach not for the duplication or mimicry of the past but 
rather to bring forth a new image of how to live well. The Beautiful is how I 
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
10

 
 
Thomas Jockin
believe we can begin to achieve the authentic life of true happiness.  If you are 
such a learner, join me at the Halkyon Guild, meditate on the following 
questions: 
	
1.	
What is the Beautiful?  
	
2.	
Who understands and enacts beauty?  
	
3. 	
When does beauty shape the soul?  
	
4.	
How do we come to know and love beauty in the world?  
	
5.	
Where does a love for virtue come from? 
	
I look forward to our approach toward the mysteries that surround both 
the Beautiful and virtue. I am confident you will be delighted by what springs 
forth in yourself by a sincere inquiry into what is The Beautiful. We begin our 
inquiry with the dialogue Greater Hippias — where our common suggestions 
of what is beauty is to be reconsidered.
  •  The Beautiful and Virtue: A Study of Six Platonic Dialogues 
11

