
Irrational Exuberance

Irrational Exuberance
REVISED AND EXPANDED THIRD EDITION
________________________
Robert J. Shiller
Princeton University Press
Princeton and Oxford

Disclosure: In addition to being a professor at Yale University, the author is currently working
part-time with Standard & Poor’s to produce home price indices; with the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange, which maintains a futures market for the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices, as part
of the Competitive Markets Advisory Council at the CME Group; and with Barclays Bank and its
affiliates in producing various investment products. Nothing in this book constitutes, or should
be construed as, either an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to purchase any securities,
including any securities that may at any time be offered for sale or sold by any of the above-
named persons. In the United States, offers to sell and solicitations of offers to buy any securities
may be made only by a prospectus (as defined in the Securities Act of 1933, as amended)
delivered to the prospective purchasers. Similar regulations apply in other countries. This book
contains various forward-looking statements based on the author’s projections, hypotheses,
forecasts, estimates, beliefs, and prognoses about future events. All forward-looking statements
contained herein reflect solely the author’s opinions about such future events and are subject to
significant uncertainty. Actual events may differ materially from those described in such forward-
looking statements.
Copyright © 2015 Robert J. Shiller
Nobel lecture copyright © 2013 The Nobel Foundation Published by Princeton University Press,
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxfordshire
OX20 1TW
press.princeton.edu
Jacket design by Steve Attardo / NINETYNORTH
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Shiller, Robert J.
Irrational exuberance / Robert J. Shiller.—Revised and expanded third edition.
pages     cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-691-16626-1 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Stocks—United States. 2. Stock exchanges
—United States. 3. Stocks—Prices—United States. 4. Real property—Prices—United States. 5.
Risk. 6. Dow Jones industrial average. I. Title.
HG4910.S457     2015
332.63′2220973—dc23
2014036705
This book has been composed in Adobe Palatino and Berkeley Old Style Book and Black by
Princeton Editorial Associates Inc., Scottsdale, Arizona Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Ben and Derek

Contents
List of Figures and Tables
ix
Preface to the Third Edition
xi
Preface to the Second Edition, 2005
xix
Preface to the First Edition, 2000
xxv
Acknowledgments
xxxi
One
The Stock Market in Historical Perspective
1
Two
The Bond Market in Historical Perspective
11
Three
The Real Estate Market in Historical Perspective
18
 
Part One
Structural Factors
 
Four
Precipitating Factors: The Internet, the Capitalist Explosion, and Other Events
39
Five
Amplification Mechanisms: Naturally Occurring Ponzi Processes
70
 
Part Two
Cultural Factors
 
Six
The News Media
101
Seven
New Era Economic Thinking
123
Eight
New Eras and Bubbles around the World
150
 
Part Three
Psychological Factors
 
Nine
Psychological Anchors for the Market
165
Ten
Herd Behavior and Epidemics
175
 
Part Four
 

Attempts to Rationalize Exuberance
Eleven
Efficient Markets, Random Walks, and Bubbles
195
Twelve
Investor Learning—and Unlearning
214
 
Part Five
A Call to Action
 
Thirteen
Speculative Volatility in a Free Society
225
Appendix
Nobel Prize Lecture: Speculative Asset Prices
239
Notes
281
References
321
Index
339

Figures and Tables
Figures
1.1
U.S. Stock Prices and Earnings, 1871–2014
3
1.2
Real Stock Prices in Ten Countries and the World, January 1995–July 2014
5
1.3
U.S. Cyclically Adjusted Price-Earnings Ratio (CAPE) and Interest Rates, 1881–2014
7
2.1
U.S. Long-Term Rates and Inflation, 1871–2014
14
2.2
Inflation-Indexed Bond Yields for Four Countries, 1985–2014
16
3.1
U.S. Home Prices, Building Costs, Population, and Interest Rates, 1890–2014
20
3.2
Home Prices in a Sample of U.S. Cities, Quarterly, 1983–2014
25
3.3
Home Prices in Some World Cities and for the World, Quarterly, 1985–2014
26
5.1
Stocks as Best Investment, 1996–2014
71
5.2
Real Estate as Best Investment, 2003–2013
72
5.3
Opinion of Aftermath of a Stock Market Crash, 1996–2014
73
5.4
Valuation Confidence Index, 1989–2014
88
11.1 Cyclically Adjusted Price-Earnings Ratio (CAPE) as Predictor of Ten-Year Returns
205
11.2 Stock Prices and Dividend Present Values, 1871–2013
210
A.1 Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index with Two Present Values with Constant Discount Rate
of Subsequent Real Dividends Accruing to the Index, 1871–2013
248
A.2 Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index along with Three Present Values of Subsequent Real
Dividends Accruing to the Index, 1871–2013
252
A.3 Present Values of Future Changes in Dividends Plotted against the Dividend Price Ratio for
Forty-Nine U.S. Individual Stocks, 1926–76
257
A. 4 Two Indices of U.S. Home Prices Divided by the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U), 1987–2013
260
Tables
8.1
Largest Recent One-Year Real Stock Price Index Increases
151
8.2
Largest Recent One-Year Real Stock Price Index Decreases
152
8.3
Largest Recent Five-Year Real Stock Price Index Increases
153

8.4
Largest Recent Five-Year Real Stock Price Index Decreases
154

Preface to the Third Edition
One might think that years after the bursting of the
speculative bubbles that led to the 2007–9 world financial crisis, we
should be living in a distinctly different post-bubble world. One might
think people would have “learned their lesson” and would not again pile
into expanding markets, as so many did before the crisis, thereby
worsening incipient bubbles. But evidence of bubbles has accelerated
since the crisis. Valuations in the stock and bond markets have reached
high levels in the United States and some other countries, and valuations
in the housing market have been increasing rapidly in many countries.
All this has been occurring despite a disappointing world recovery from
the financial crisis, an increasingly tense international situation—with
deadly wars in Gaza, Iraq, Israel, Syria, and Ukraine—and a wave of
potentially disruptive nationalist sentiment and political polarization in
the United States, Europe, and Asia.
As of this writing, the International Monetary Fund has just put out a
warning of overheated housing markets in Asia, Europe, Latin America,
and in Australia, Canada, and Israel.1 A similar warning has been issued
by the Bank for International Settlements.2
The bubbly and apparently unstable situation warrants some concern,
although not yet generally as extreme as when the first edition of this

book issued a warning about the overpriced and vulnerable stock market
(see the reprinted 2000 Preface below), or when the second edition of
this book issued a warning about the overpriced and vulnerable housing
market as well (see the reprinted 2005 Preface below).
By the time this book finds its way into the hands of readers, the
markets may be in a very different situation. Markets can change very
rapidly, and the optimistic pricing we see at the time of this writing (in
October 2014) is hard to predict. Current pricing may not last long when
compared with publication lag and the time needed for an issue to
become part of readers’ agendas. But I am writing for future readers,
years hence, who will read about the markets in the mid–second decade
of the twenty-first century as just one of many examples described in the
book—examples of broader tendencies and uncertainties.
Hence, the themes of the first edition of this book, with some
updating, remain relevant today and probably always will be relevant.
When the first edition of this book came out in 2000, I took pains to
assert that the stock market bubble of that time, while exceptionally
large, was really nothing fundamentally new. Chapter 8 in this edition,
“New Eras and Bubbles around the World,” details how many times we
have had similar, if smaller or more localized, stock market booms and
crashes. There was something relatively new then: the stock market
boom that we now know peaked in early 2000 was worldwide in scope.
In the first edition, I called it the Millennium Boom, because it came just
before the dawn of the new millennium. We might also confidently call
it the Millennium Bubble now, after it is over. But this boom or bubble
was not really bigger in its collapse than its counterpart, which peaked
in 1929. These really large bubbles are rare events, but the Millennium
Bubble was not unique in history.
In the second edition (2005), I made much of the fact that for the
United States as a whole, the boom in home prices nationwide that had
begun in the late 1990s was the biggest ever, or biggest at least since
1890, when my data began. But, at the same time, the new chapter that
was added to that edition also recounted earlier housing bubbles, and, if
you look at centuries past, land price bubbles. Centuries ago, real estate
speculation would have been more likely an investment in land—a farm

or a town lot for building a home. Another big change in the second half
of the twentieth century was a massive decline in lending standards for
home mortgages. That decline, and the magnitude of the housing boom
around the world (which we might now, after the collapse of home
prices in many areas after 2006, confidently call a bubble) was unique.
We might call this the Ownership-Society Boom, associated as it was
with a slogan used by George W. Bush in his 2004 U.S. presidential
campaign to describe his plan to promote widespread ownership of
homes, stocks, and other investments. (I will call the current stock
market boom, from 2009 to the time of this writing in 2014, the New-
Normal Boom, after a term popularized by Bill Gross [then of PIMCO] in
2009.)
But there is really nothing new about these bubbles—not
fundamentally new. They are repeats of approximately the same
phenomenon, of new era stories proliferating by word-of-mouth
contagion, of the distinct feel of mass enthusiasm for one kind of
investment.
Improving information technology may accelerate their dynamics.
Changing patterns of investing are also a factor. The rising impact of
international investors and of institutional investors in single-family
homes has been much noted in recent years. But the basic bubble
phenomenon is the same. In the future, we will surely have even bigger
such bubbles, each built up around its new and different new era story,
and we will have to invent new names for them.
I was not expecting to hear about housing bubbles when I visited
Colombia in mid-2013. Yet over and over again I heard about their
amazing real estate boom. While taking me through the seaside resort
town of Cartagena, my limousine driver pointed out a number of
ordinary-looking homes that had recently sold for millions of U.S.
dollars.
The Banco de la República, Colombia’s central bank, has on their
website a home price index for three major cities: Bogotá, Medellín, and
Cali. The index shows home price increases of 69% in real (inflation-
adjusted) terms since 2004. That rate of price growth recalls the U.S.
experience, with the S&P/Case-Shiller Ten-City Home Price Index for the

United States rising 131% in real terms from its bottom in 1997 to its
peak in 2006.
The vulnerability we have to bubbles in Colombia and all over the
world reveals our continuing lack of understanding of these phenomena.
Just what is a speculative bubble? The Oxford English Dictionary defines a
bubble as “anything fragile, unsubstantial, empty, or worthless; a
deceptive show. From 17th c. onwards often applied to delusive
commercial or financial schemes.” The problem is that words like show
and scheme suggest a deliberate creation, rather than a widespread social
phenomenon that is not directed by any central impresario.
Maybe the word bubble is used too carelessly. Eugene Fama certainly
thinks so. Fama, the most important proponent of the “efficient markets
hypothesis,” denies that speculative bubbles exist. In his 2014 Nobel
lecture, Fama states that the word bubble refers to “an irrational strong
price increase that implies a predictable strong decline.”3 If that is what
bubble means, and if predictable means that we can specify the date when
a bubble bursts, then I agree with him that there may be little solid
evidence that bubbles exist. But that is not my definition of a bubble, for
speculative markets are just not so predictable.
In the second edition of this book, I tried to give a better definition of
a bubble that accords with more enlightened usage of that term. The
definition, given in Chapter 1, describes a situation in which news of
price increases spurs investor enthusiasm, in a sort of psychological
epidemic. That seems to be the core of the meaning of the word as it is
most consistently used.
Implicit in this definition is a suggestion about why it is so difficult for
“smart money” to profit by betting against bubbles: the psychological
contagion promotes a mindset that justifies the price increases, so that
participation in the bubble might be called almost rational. But it is not
rational.
The story in every country is different, reflecting its own news, which
does not always jibe with news in other countries. For example, the
current story in Colombia appears to be that the country’s government,
now under the well-regarded management of President Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón, has brought down inflation and interest rates to

developed-country levels while all but eliminating the threat posed by
the FARC rebels, thereby injecting new vitality into the Colombian
economy. That is a good enough story to drive a housing bubble.
New era stories drive high expectations for investing returns but not
necessarily high confidence. The high expectations during the upswing
of a bubble may be more in the form of a sort of wishful thinking rather
than an expression of confidence. In bubble times, there seems to be a
tendency for complacency, as an aspect of social psychology, even if
people haven’t individually concluded that there is no risk.
Indeed, once you draw their attention to the risks, people are not so
confident during a growing bubble. Figure 5.4, which plots investor
valuation confidence, was actually exceptionally low at the all-time U.S.
stock market peak in early 2000. People were certainly aware at some
level of risks. Moreover, in a survey of homebuyers that Karl Case and I
have been conducting over the years, we pose the following question to
recent homebuyers directly: “Buying a house in this area today involves:
1. A great deal of risk; 2. Some risk; 3. Little or no risk.” The answers are
puzzling. In 2004, when the housing market was showing its fastest
price increases, only 19% said “little or no risk.” It is not as if everyone
thought that “home prices can never fall” during the bubble, though
they are often accused of having thought that. In the 2009 survey, at the
depths of the worst recession since the Great Depression of the 1930s,
the percentage of respondents choosing that option was actually lower,
at 17.2%.4
During bubbles, it seems that the psychological ambience is rather one
of public inattention to the thought that prices could fall, rather than
firm belief that they can never fall. The new era stories are not new
strongly held convictions—they are merely ideas foremost in people’s
minds that serve as justification both for the actions of others and of
themselves.
Because 
bubbles 
are 
essentially 
subtle 
social-psychological
phenomena, they are, by their very nature, difficult to control.
Regulatory action since the financial crisis might diminish bubbles in the
future, but it is yet to be seen whether such actions will be sufficient.
Liquid public markets for home prices do not exist that would allow

skeptics of housing bubbles to take short positions against these bubbles,
which would, if it were possible, have the effect of incorporating their
doubts into the market prices. As we discuss in Chapter 11, if it is
difficult to short the market, then a basic premise of the efficient
markets theory is not met. The so-called “smart money” can stop
investing in homes altogether, but afterward will not be able to take
actions to stop others from bidding prices even further up and up. Any
large group of investors, from anywhere in the world, for example, could
bid local home prices up to crazy levels if they get the idea to do so, or
any large institutional investors, playing some kind of game, could do so
too. There is no reputable theory to say that, in the absence of the
possibility of short sales, they cannot. Many have tried to make such
short sales for single-family homes possible, so far with little success.
In the past few years, some high-tech institutional players, such as the
Blackstone Group, have begun to invest in single-family homes, and the
presence of these players might tend to alter the dynamics of home price
bubbles, reducing month-to-month momentum in these markets. But
high short-term momentum in home prices, as well as the longer-term
real estate bubbles, are surely still with us.
The word bubble creates a mental picture of an expanding soap bubble,
which is destined to pop suddenly and irrevocably. But speculative
bubbles are not so easily ended; indeed, they may deflate somewhat, as
the story changes, and then reflate.
It would seem more accurate to refer to these episodes as speculative
epidemics. We know that a new epidemic can suddenly appear just as an
older one is fading if a new form of the virus appears, or if some
environmental factor increases the contagion rate. Similarly, a new
speculative bubble can appear anywhere if a new story about the
economy appears and if it has enough narrative strength to spark a new
contagion of investor thinking.
This is what happened in the bull market of the 1920s in the United
States, with its peak in 1929. We have distorted that history by thinking
of bubbles as a period of dramatic price growth, followed by a sudden
turning point and a major and definitive crash. In fact, a major boom in
real stock prices in the United States after “Black Tuesday” brought them

halfway back to 1929 levels by 1930. This was followed by a second
crash, another boom from 1932 to 1937, and a third crash.
Since the second edition of this book, there has been much discussion
of the price-earnings ratio that John Campbell of Harvard University and
I had developed and that this book featured from its first edition: real
price divided by the ten-year average of real earnings. The press has
seemed to adopt the name I had sometimes given it, the CAPE (for
Cyclically Adjusted Price-Earnings ratio), so now I regularly call it that,
too. This ratio has appeared as the third figure of the first chapter of this
book in all editions, though the name “CAPE” did not appear in the
earlier editions of this book. The ratio may be regarded as adjusting the
usual price-earnings ratio, which is based on one-year earnings, for the
business cycle, correcting for the sudden spikes in the price-earnings
ratio that occur after business recessions when earnings may be very
low, by averaging earnings over a long period of time.
As of this writing, the CAPE for the United States stands at 26, higher
than ever before except for the times around 1929, 2000, and 2007, all
major market peaks. But this book is not primarily about the current
situation in asset markets but about getting a sense of reality about the
nature and dynamics of these markets.
The current edition of this book is partly motivated by work I did with
George Akerlof for our 2009 book Animal Spirits, a book whose title
correctly suggests some overlap of topics with Irrational Exuberance. The
ancient term “animal spirits” (in Latin, spiritus animalis) refers to the
fluctuations in the basic driving force in human actions; it is a term that
was resurrected by the economist John Maynard Keynes, who gives a
view of the economy as involving fundamental psychological
instabilities. Both fluctuations in irrational exuberance and animal spirits
are still very much a part of our lives. We must still summon our whole
arsenal of social sciences to try to understand them.
Outline of This Book
Reproduced here are the Prefaces for the 2005 and 2000 editions of the

book, to give a sense how this book has evolved over the financial ups
and downs. The 2005 Preface was issued just before the peak of the
Ownership-Society Bubble. The 2000 Preface appeared with the first
edition, just as the market was reaching the peak of the Millennium
Bubble.
The book proper begins with three introductory chapters that place in
historical context the ups and downs of the three major markets for
investors: the stock market, the bond market, and the real estate market.
Chapter 2 is new to this third edition of the book, added in response to
widespread concern about a possible bond market bubble. The three
chapters allow us to see how remarkable fluctuations in these markets
have been, and to gain overall perspectives on trends in the markets.
Part One discusses the structural factors that drive market bubbles.
This part begins, in Chapter 4, with a discussion of the precipitating
factors that cause market fluctuations: events outside the markets, such
as politics, technology, and demography. The chapter lists precipitating
factors that are ultimately, largely through their effects on investor
psychology, behind three recent stock market booms: the Millennium
Boom, 1982–2000; the Ownership-Society Boom, 2003–7; and the New-
Normal Boom, 2009 to the present. It is important even today to go
through the precipitating factors of past booms to help us appreciate the
diverse kinds of things that may drive booms of the future.
Part Two considers cultural factors that further reinforce the structure
of the speculative bubble. The news media, discussed in Chapter 6, are
critical, since they amplify stories that have resonance with investors,
often regardless of their validity. Chapter 7 analyzes the “new era”
theories that tend to arise spontaneously from time to time. In this
edition, the analysis applies to both the stock market and the real estate
market. The popularity of these theories is seen to derive from activity in
the markets themselves, not from disinterested analysis of the true merit
of these stories. Chapter 8 looks at the major stock market booms around
the world in the past half century and describes the kind of new era
theories that arose in association with many of them.
Part Three considers psychological factors that underlie market
behavior. Chapter 9 argues that, with the true value of the markets so

poorly defined by economic and financial theory, and so difficult to
compute, the public relies on some largely psychological anchors for
market value. Chapter 10 describes some important results from social
psychology and sociology that help us understand why so many different
people change their opinions at the same time.
Part Four investigates attempts on the part of academic and popular
thinkers to rationalize market bubbles. Chapter 11 considers the efficient
markets theory. Chapter 12 discusses the theory, often advanced during
a bubble, that the public has just learned some important fact—even
though the “fact” either is questionable or has already been widely
known for some time.
Part Five, Chapter 13, considers the implications of speculative
bubbles for individual investors, institutions, and governments. Several
prescriptions for urgently needed policy changes are offered at this time
of vulnerability in both the stock market and the real estate market, as
are suggestions for ways in which individual investors can lower their
exposure to the consequences of a “burst” bubble.
This edition of the book has also added, as an appendix, the revised
version of the Nobel lecture I gave at the Nobel Prize events in
Stockholm in December 2013. The Nobel lecture puts many of the
arguments of the book into a broader context, with additional references
to academic discussions of some of the basic conclusions here.
I have created a website, irrationalexuberance.com, which will present
new information related to the topics in this book and will provide
regular updates for some of the data and charts shown in this book.

Preface to the Second Edition, 2005
In the preface to the first edition of this book,
reproduced following this one, I described this book as a study of the
millennium stock market boom, the boom that afflicted much of the
world in the years leading up to 2000. A number of those who read the
book have told me they think this book addressed a much broader
subject. They are right: this book is really about the behavior of all
speculative markets, about human vulnerability to error, and about the
instabilities of the capitalist system.
When I was writing the first edition, mostly in 1999, the stock market
boom seemed invincible. The S&P 500 index had gone up 34% in 1995,
20% in 1996, 31% in 1997, 26% in 1998, and 20% in 1999. Similar
strings of stock market price increases had occurred in many other
countries. So many years in a row of such spectacular increases could
not be the result of mere chance, or so it seemed to many people then—
and to the experts who encouraged this view. The stock market boom
was widely viewed as the harbinger of a new economic era. But my book
took a very different, and much dimmer, view of this stock market
boom.
When the book appeared on store shelves in March 2000, I was on
sabbatical from Yale, and I embarked on an extended ten-country book

tour. Obviously, at that point in history, no one knew that March 2000
was to represent the peak of the market. Talking with so many people
about the errors I thought they were making led me to ideas about how
to strengthen the arguments presented in this new edition.
A few memories still strike me today, years later, about the kind of
human errors that I encountered on my tour. I remember appearing on a
radio talk show and hearing a woman tell me that she just knew I was
wrong: the stock market has a pronounced uptrend; it has to go up
generally. The tremor in her voice made me wonder what accounted for
her emotions.
I also recall seeing a man who came to two of my book talks, each
time sitting in the back and looking agitated. Why did he come back a
second time, and what was upsetting him so?
I remember giving a talk presenting my bearish view of the market to
a group of institutional investors, and then listening as a major
institutional portfolio manager told me that he agreed with me, but was
nevertheless going to ignore everything I had just said as he managed his
portfolio. He believed that the views I expressed ultimately did not have
enough authority to be taken seriously by his clients and colleagues, and
that he could not alter his portfolio allocation based solely on what
might seem to be one person’s idiosyncratic opinion—even if he himself
agreed with it.
But most of what I remember is people cheerfully and with apparent
interest listening to my talk and then blithely telling me that they did
not particularly believe me. Some kind of collective conclusion had been
reached about the stock market—and it had a powerful hold on people’s
minds.
After 2000, the stock market boom abruptly ended; the U.S. stock
market, and the markets in the same countries whose stock prices had
also soared, came down substantially from their peaks in 2000. By the
time the S&P 500 reached bottom in March 2003 it had fallen by half in
real (inflation-corrected) terms. This outcome led to a change in investor
psychology.
I remember having breakfast with a woman and her husband at the
very end of 2000, when the market was down substantially from its

peak, the tech stocks down more than 50%. She said she did the
investing for the family, and in the 1990s she had been a genius. He
agreed. Now, she confided, her self-esteem had collapsed. Her perception
of the market was all an illusion, a dream, she said. Her husband did not
disagree.
But, as profound as the psychological reaction to this stock market
drop has been for some people, it appears that collective enthusiasm for
stocks is more enduring than one might think; it seems, in large
measure, that the enthusiasm is still not over. The stock market has not
seen as big a drop as would have been predicted by the extreme
overpricing of the market in 2000—at least not yet—and this intense
psychological correction has not been experienced by most people.
The stock market has not come down to historical levels: the stock
market price-earnings ratio as I define it in this book is still, at this
writing, in the mid-20s, far higher than the historical average. Moreover,
the market for homes has produced a situation in which median home
prices are sometimes ten times buyers’ per capita income or more.
Irrational exuberance really is still with us.
In a broad sense, this book, from its first edition in 2000, has been
about trying to understand the change in thinking of the people whose
actions ultimately drive the markets. It is about the psychology of
speculation, about the feedback mechanism that intensifies this
psychology, about herd behavior that can spread through millions or
even billions of people, and about the implications of such behavior for
the economy and for our lives. Although the book originally focused
directly on current economic events, it was, and is, about how errors of
human judgment can infect even the smartest people, thanks to
overconfidence, lack of attention to details, and excessive trust in the
judgments of others, stemming from a failure to understand that others
are not making independent judgments but are themselves following still
others—the blind leading the blind.
The presumed enlightened opinion that people tend to rely on for
economic judgments is often rather like the “man of smoke” in Aldo
Palazzeschi’s eponymous surrealistic 1911 novel. The protagonist is
made only of smoke; he is virtually nothing at all, but he acquires a

public persona and authority that is a construct of the collective
imagination, until the public changes its mind, deciding he is not the
font of truth, whereupon he disappears completely. Events such as that
represented in Palazzeschi’s novel are a reality: unsubstantiated belief
systems, insubstantial wisps, do create bouts of irrational exuberance for
significant periods of time, and these bouts ultimately drive the world
economy.
I have revised the book in this second edition to try to extend its
argument that variations caused by changing attitudes, irrational beliefs,
and foci of attention are an important factor in our changing economic
lives, and to examine the consequences for our economy and our future.
I have recast the examples of these variations in terms of more recent
events. Notably, I have added a chapter about the enormous home price
boom that many countries have been experiencing since the late 1990s,
and I have broadened the discussion throughout the book to consider
speculation in real estate. Beyond that, this edition extends and improves
the basic arguments in a number of directions. I have been thinking
about the issues in this book for five more years since the first edition,
and the research on behavioral economics, which I closely follow, has
made substantial progress over that interval as well.
The issues that are treated in this book are serious, and of continuing
relevance today. People in much of the world are still overconfident that
the stock market, and in many places the housing market, will do
extremely well, and this overconfidence can lead to instability.
Significant further rises in these markets could lead, eventually, to even
more significant declines. The bad outcome could be that eventual
declines would result in a substantial increase in the rate of personal
bankruptcies, which could lead to a secondary string of bankruptcies of
financial institutions as well. Another long-run consequence could be a
decline in consumer and business confidence, and another, possibly
worldwide, recession. This extreme outcome—like the situation in Japan
since 1990 writ large—is not inevitable, but it is a much more serious
risk than is widely acknowledged.
Lest raising these possibilities seem alarmist, one should note that we
are already living with some of the unpleasant repercussions of past

overconfidence. The stock markets of many countries dropped by half
from their 2000 peak by 2002, and have rebounded only a little.
Overinvestment by corporations, encouraged by the booming stock
market, led to a collapse of investment spending in the early years of the
twenty-first century, and to a worldwide recession.
The boom years of the 1990s created a business atmosphere akin to a
gold rush, and led many people to distort their business decisions, the
results of which will weigh upon us for many years to come. Part of this
change in business atmosphere was a decline in ethical standards, a
decline in the belief in integrity, honesty, patience, and trust in business.
A string of scandals affecting corporate boards, accounting firms, and
mutual funds surfaced after the market dropped.
These extravagant years eventually led to severe budgetary problems
for governments, both national and local. In the 1990s—with the stock
market going up, investors reaping capital gains, and the economy
booming—tax revenues rose, and many governments found it difficult to
restrain increases in expenditures. After the stock market decline, tax
revenues fell, throwing many governments into severe deficit crises. By
2002, the average government deficit among member countries in the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development was 3% of
gross domestic product. The government deficits have in turn led to
troubled attempts to restrain spending, with uneven consequences for
different constituencies.
An additional consequence of the intense stock market boom of the
late 1990s was the home price boom, which began around 1997 or 1998
and then intensified after 2000 throughout many countries of the world.
The home price boom appears to have begun around the time in 1997
that the stock market boom was engendering a proliferation of “new
era” theories about the economy, and it is still going very strongly in
many cities despite a stock market correction. We have yet to see the full
consequences of these price changes.
Speculative instability appears to be increasingly important to the
world economy. We are focusing more intently on the unpredictable
markets. It is not that the existing stock markets are demonstrably
becoming more volatile. There is no obvious long-run trend to greater

stock market volatility. It is rather that the number of people
participating in these markets is increasing, and that the scope of
speculative markets, the kind of risks that are traded, is broadening.
More and more electronic markets are being created every year, trading
a wider and wider range of risks, and more and more people, in both
advanced and emerging countries, are being drawn in to participate in
these markets.
People will increasingly fear that their livelihoods really depend on
their wealth, wealth that is highly unstable because of market changes.
So, over the longer run, people will increasingly pay attention to market
movements. There is an increasing perception that the price of assets
matters very much to our lives. People increasingly believe that they
must defend their private property and doubt that they can depend on
social institutions to save them if things turn out badly. They see
merciless capitalism as the wave of the future.
There is a name for this economic system—“the ownership society”—
and President George W. Bush, among others, likes to use this term.
People must take ownership of their own future, and plan for their
future as property owners in many senses of the word. There is indeed
much to be said for the ownership society in terms of its ability to
promote economic growth. But by its very nature it also invites
speculation, and, filtered through the vagaries of human psychology, it
creates a horde of risks that we must somehow try to manage.
I do not know the future, and I cannot accurately predict the ups and
downs of the markets. But I do know that, despite a significant slip in
confidence since 2000, people still place too much confidence in the
markets and have too strong a belief that paying attention to the
gyrations in their investments will someday make them rich, and so they
do not make conservative preparations for possible bad outcomes.

Preface to the First Edition, 2000
This book is a broad study, drawing on a wide range
of published research and historical evidence, of the enormous recent
stock market boom. Although it takes as its specific starting point the
current situation, it places that situation in the context of stock market
booms generally, and it also makes concrete suggestions regarding policy
changes that should be initiated in response to this and other booms.
The need for such a book is particularly urgent today, in view of the
wide-spread and quite fundamental disagreement about the stock
market. When people disagree at such a basic level, it is usually because
they possess only pieces of the overall picture. Yet meaningful consensus
can only be achieved by laying out all the available facts. I have
therefore tried in this book to present a much broader range of
information than is usually considered in writings on the market, and I
have tried to synthesize this information into a detailed picture of the
market today.
Why did the U.S. stock market reach such high levels by the turn of
the millennium? What changed to cause the market to become so highly
priced? What do these changes mean for the market outlook in the
opening decades of the new millennium? Are powerful fundamental
factors at work to keep the market as high as it is now or to push it even

higher, even if there is a downward correction? Or is the market high
only because of some irrational exuberance—wishful thinking on the part
of investors that blinds us to the truth of our situation?
The answers to these questions are critically important to private and
public interests alike. How we value the stock market now and in the
future influences major economic and social policy decisions that affect
not only investors but also society at large, even the world. If we
exaggerate the present and future value of the stock market, then as a
society we may invest too much in business start-ups and expansions,
and too little in infrastructure, education, and other forms of human
capital. If we think the market is worth more than it really is, we may
become complacent in funding our pension plans, in maintaining our
savings rate, in legislating an improved Social Security system, and in
providing other forms of social insurance. We might also lose the
opportunity to use our expanding financial technology to devise new
solutions to the genuine risks—to our homes, cities, and livelihoods—
that we face.
To answer these questions about today’s stock market, I harvest
relevant information from diverse and, some would say, remote fields of
inquiry. Insights from these fields too often go unnoticed by market
analysts, but they have proved critical in defining similar market
episodes throughout history, as well as in other markets around the
world. These fields include economics, psychology, demography,
sociology, and history. In addition to more conventional modes of
financial analysis, they bring potent insights to bear on the issues at
hand. Much of the evidence is drawn from the emerging field of
behavioral finance, which, as the years go by, is looking less and less like
a minor subfield of finance and more and more like a central pillar of
serious finance theory.
I marshal the most important insights offered by researchers in these
fields. Taken as a whole, they suggest that the present stock market
displays the classic features of a speculative bubble: a situation in which
temporarily high prices are sustained largely by investors’ enthusiasm
rather than by consistent estimation of real value. Under these
conditions, even though the market could possibly maintain or even

substantially increase its price level, the outlook for the stock market
into the next ten or twenty years is likely to be rather poor—and perhaps
even dangerous.
I do not purport to present a wholly new conception of financial
market behavior. This book is a work neither of economic theory nor of
econometrics, although it partakes in both. Rather, it is an attempt to
characterize the complex nature of our real markets today, considering
whether they conform or do not conform to our expectations and
models. By assembling the most relevant evidence, economic and
otherwise, on the state of the market, I hope to correct what I consider
to be the perilous policy paths now being followed by legislators and
economic leaders. I also hope to challenge financial thinkers to improve
their theories by testing them against the impressive evidence that
suggests that the price level is more than merely the sum of the available
economic information, as is now generally thought to be the case.
Within the past generation the branch of financial theory that is
derived from the assumption that all people are thoroughly rational and
calculating has become the most influential analytical device to inform
our mastery of the market. Those financial theorists who consider the
market price to be a cunningly efficient processor of financial
information have had a profound effect on the systematic management
of the world’s wealth, from the corner stockbroker right up to the
Federal Reserve. But most of these scholars of finance and economics
shrink from public statements about the level of the stock market
(although they are often more loose-lipped in expressing their opinions
at lunch and over beers) because they do not want to be caught saying
things in public that they cannot prove. Assuming the mantle of
scientific detachment, these financial economists tend to fall back on the
simple but elegant model of market efficiency to justify their
professional position.
However, there are serious risks inherent in relying too heavily on
such pristine models as the basis for policy discussion, for these models
deal only with problems that can be answered with scientific precision.
If one tries too hard to be precise, one runs the risk of being so narrow
as to be irrelevant. The evidence I present in the following chapters

suggests that the reality of today’s stock market is anything but test-tube
clinical. If the theory of finance is to grow in its usefulness, all
economists eventually will have to grapple with these messier aspects of
market reality. Meanwhile, participants in public debate and economic
policy formation must sort out this tangle of market factors now, before
it is too late.
Among the unanticipated consequences of today’s investment culture
is that many of the tens of millions of adults now invested in the stock
market act as if the price level is simply going to keep rising at its
current rate. Even though the stock market appears based on some
measures to be higher than it has ever been, investors behave as though
it can never be too high, and it can never go down for long. Why would
they behave this way? Their logic is apparently consistent with the free-
rider argument. That is, if millions of researchers and investors are
studying stock prices and confirming their apparent value, why waste
one’s time in trying to figure out reasonable prices? One might as well
take the free ride at the expense of these other diligent investors who
have investigated stock prices and do what they’re doing—buy stocks!
But unknown to most investors is the troubling lack of credibility in
the quality of research being done on the stock market, to say nothing of
the clarity and accuracy with which it is communicated to the public.
Some of this so-called research often seems no more rigorous than the
reading of tea leaves. Arguments that the Dow is going to 36,000 or
40,000 or 100,000 hardly inspire trust. Certainly some researchers are
thinking more realistically about the market’s prospects and reaching
better-informed positions on its future, but these are not the names that
grab the headlines and thus influence public attitudes.
Instead the headlines reflect the news media’s constant attention to
trivial factoids and “celebrity” opinion about the market’s price level.
Driven as their authors are by competition for readers, listeners, and
viewers, media accounts tend to be superficial and thus to encourage
basic misconceptions about the market. A conventional wisdom of sorts,
stressing the seemingly eternal durability of stocks, has emerged from
these media accounts. The public has learned to accept this conventional
—but in my view shallow—wisdom. To be fair to the Wall Street

professionals whose views appear in the media, it is difficult for them to
correct the conventional wisdom because they are limited by the blurbs
and sound bites afforded them. One would need to write books to
straighten these things out. This is such a book.
As noted earlier, the conventional wisdom holds that the stock market
as a whole has always been the best investment, and always will be,
even when the market is overpriced by historical standards. Small
investors, in their retirement funds, are increasingly shifting their
investments toward stocks, and the investment policy of 100% stocks in
retirement funds is increasingly popular. They put their money where
their mantra is. This attitude invites exploitation by companies who have
an unlimited supply of equities to sell. “You want stocks? We’ll give you
stocks.”
Most investors also seem to view the stock market as a force of nature
unto itself. They do not fully realize that they themselves, as a group,
determine the level of the market. And they underestimate how similar
to their own thinking is that of other investors. Many individual
investors think that institutional investors dominate the market and that
these “smart money” investors have sophisticated models to understand
prices—superior knowledge. Little do they know that most institutional
investors are, by and large, equally clueless about the level of the
market. In short, the price level is driven to a certain extent by a self-
fulfilling prophecy based on similar hunches held by a vast cross-section
of large and small investors and reinforced by news media that are often
content to ratify this investor-induced conventional wisdom.
When the Dow Jones Industrial Average first surpassed 10,000 in
March 1999, Merrill Lynch took out a full-page newspaper ad with a
headline saying, “Even those with a disciplined long-term approach like
ours have to sit back and say ‘wow.’” In the bottom left corner of the
page, next to a stock plot ending up at 10,000, appeared the words
“human achievement.” If this is an achievement worth congratulating,
then we should congratulate employees whenever they submit glowing
self-evaluation reports.
At present there is a whiff of extravagant expectation, if not irrational
exuberance, in the air. People are optimistic about the stock market.

There is a lack of sobriety about its downside and the consequences that
would ensue as a result. If the Dow were to drop to 6,000, the loss
would represent something like the equivalent value of the entire
housing stock of the United States. There would be harmful and uneven
effects on individuals, pension funds, college endowments, and
charitable organizations.
We need to know if the price level of the stock market today,
tomorrow, or on any other day is a sensible reflection of economic
reality, just as we need to know as individuals what we have in our bank
accounts. This valuation is the future food on our tables and clothes on
our backs, and nearly every decision to spend money today ought to be
influenced by it. We need a better understanding of the forces that shape
the long-run outlook for the market—and it is such an understanding
that this book is intended to provide.

Acknowledgments
Jeremy Siegel, while clearly not agreeing with me on
all points, urged me to set down my ideas in this book. He is its real
instigator. Jeremy has been a lifelong friend. Our families regularly
vacation together, and I learned a distinctive approach to finance from
him while strolling the beach together or watching our children fish. In
the years since the first edition of this book appeared, he and I have
frequently been cast as antagonists, he the bull and I the bear. But in fact
we share a lot of the same worldview, and his new book The Future for
Investors in many ways complements this book.
John Campbell, my former student, then co-author on a dozen
scholarly papers on financial markets, and for years a close friend, has
been my intellectual other half in formulating many of the ideas that led
to this book. My original work on volatility in financial markets was
refined and significantly advanced with his collaboration. He has also
offered many helpful suggestions for this book and comments on the
manuscript.
Peter Dougherty, my editor at Princeton University Press, has been an
extremely important formative influence on the book, helping to define
the fundamental aspects of its structure. He has been a great colleague
and more—really almost a collaborator. Peter Strupp and his colleagues

at Princeton Editorial Associates have as always been most helpful
throughout the production process.
My assistants Carol Copeland, Minhua Wan, Sumithra Sudhir, and now
Bonnie Blake have kept me going through difficult times with their
stead-fast support. I was fortunate to have a number of excellent student
research assistants to help me during the writing: Eric Bair, Yigit Bora
Bozkurt, Peter Fabrizio, Jon Fougner, Gerardo Garcia Lopez, Michael
Gousgounis, William “Drew” Haluska, Erik Hjalmarsson, Yuanfeng Hou,
Murad Jivraj, Leora Kelman, Alston E. Lambert II, Anthony Ling, Luis
Mancilla, Steven Pawliczek, Stefan Schneeberger, and Kinde Wubneh.
I am also blessed with a number of friends and colleagues who read
drafts of the manuscript and provided extensive comments: Stefano
Athanasoulis, John Geanakoplos, William Konigsberg, Stephen Morris,
Sharon Oster, Jay Ritter, Martin Shubik, and James Tobin.
My colleagues at the Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics at
Yale University—Glena Ames, Donald Brown, Stefan Krieger, Stephen
Morris, and William Nordhaus—have been a great help. I must also take
this occasion to express gratitude to our late founder, Alfred Cowles III,
an investment manager in the early part of this century and patron of
mathematical economics, who tabulated the pre-1926 dividend and
earnings data used in this book.
Help from my colleagues at the Yale International Center for Finance
—its director, William Goetzmann, as well as Zhiwu Chen, Roger
Ibbotson, Eli Levy, Jim Snyder, Ivo Welch, and Jeffrey Wurgler—is also
acknowledged. Roger, who in 2000 was giving talks titled “Dow
100,000” and predicting a brilliant future for the stock market, was a
willing foil for my ideas. The Dow has just surpassed 17,000, and so I
think he will eventually be right.
My research with colleagues at Barclays Bank, who have collaborated
in research on the dynamics of sector stock market indices, is another
source of enlightenment for this book. Among the many collaborators I
would mention Laurence Black, Oliver Bunn, Kenneth Crawford,
Anthony Lazanas, Vytautas Martinaitis, Benedict Redmond, Richa Singh,
Arne Staal, Cenk Ural, and Ji Zhuang.
Support from my colleague Prof. Karl E. Case of Wellesley College has

also been most important. I met him after hearing about an article he
wrote in 1986 that attempted to enumerate the reasons for the surge in
home prices in the Boston area. We first did a questionnaire survey of
attitudes of homebuyers in 1988. He has been working with me ever
since to understand the psychology of real estate markets. Case and I
continue to update the survey data with the support of the Yale School
of Management, our latest work now joint with Anne Kinsella Thompson
of McGraw Hill Construction.
I am grateful to Bracebridge Capital, Fuller and Thaler Asset
Management, LSV Asset Management, and the Russell Sage Foundation
for sponsoring the behavioral finance workshops that Richard Thaler and
I have been organizing since 1991 at the National Bureau of Economic
Research, and to the Russell Sage Foundation and the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston for sponsoring the behavioral macroeconomics
workshops that George Akerlof and I organized there in 1994–2007. The
term behavioral economics refers to research on markets that takes into
account the details of human behavior, including human psychology and
sociology. This book benefits immeasurably from the work of the many
scholars in the emerging field of behavioral economics, which is now
beginning to take a solid place in university economics and finance
departments.
The U.S. National Science Foundation has supported much of my basic
research on financial markets. Their continuing support of my work for
over twenty years enabled me to focus attention on issues independent
of financial pressures. Whitebox Advisors, under the leadership of
Andrew Redleaf, has given a grant to Yale University to support research
on behavioral economics, and this grant also helped support the
revisions of this book for the second edition.
I am also grateful to Brad Barber, Scott Boorman, David Colander,
Robert Ellickson, Ray Fair, Peter Garber, Jeffrey Garten, Christian
Gollier, Sunil Gottipati, Trevor Greetham, Stanley Hamilton, Anne
Laferrere, Jonathan Laing, Ricky Lam, Xindan Li, Yan Li, Justin Yifu Lin,
Benoit Mercereau, John Rey, Colin Robertson, Tsur Somerville, Nassim
Taleb, Philippe Trainar, Mark Warshawsky, Oleg Zamulin, Yong Zhang,
and Ning Zhu for helpful discussions. Yoshiro Tsutsui of Osaka

University and Fumiko Kon-Ya of the Japanese Securities Research
Institute have collaborated with me for many years on questionnaire
survey research exploring investor attitudes in Japan as well as the
United States. Help from Josephine Rinaldi and Walt Smietana at
CompuMail has been much appreciated. I should certainly also thank the
numerous investors who have taken the time to fill out questionnaires
for me.
To my wife, Virginia Shiller, who is a clinical psychologist at the Yale
Child Study Center, I owe fundamental gratitude for getting me really
interested in psychology and convincing me of its importance in
economics. She has given the most careful reading and criticism to the
entire book and has helped me greatly in articulating my ideas. She also
kept the home fires burning while I spent long days and nights working.

One
The Stock Market in Historical Perspective
When Alan Greenspan, then Chair of the Federal
Reserve Board, used the term irrational exuberance to describe the
behavior of stock market investors, the world fixated on those words.1
He spoke at a black-tie dinner in Washington, D.C., on December 5,
1996, and the televised speech was followed the world over. As soon as
he uttered these words, stock markets dropped precipitously. In Japan,
the Nikkei index dropped 3.2%; in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng dropped
2.9%; and in Germany, the DAX dropped 4%. In London, the FTSE 100
was down 4% at one point during the day, and in the United States, the
next morning, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down 2.3% near
the beginning of trading. The sharp reaction of the markets all over the
world to those two words in the middle of a staid and unremarkable
speech seemed absurd. This event made for an amusing story about the
craziness of markets, a story that was told for a time around the world.
The amusing story was forgotten as time went by, but not the words
irrational exuberance, which were referred to again and again. Greenspan
did not coin the phrase irrational exuberance, but he did cause it to be
attached to a view about the instability of speculative markets. The
chain of stock market events caused by his uttering these words made
the words seem descriptive of essential reality. Gradually they became

Greenspan’s most famous quote—a catch phrase for everyone who
follows the market.
Why do people still refer so much to irrational exuberance years later? I
believe that the words have become a useful name for the kind of social
phenomenon that perceptive people saw with their own eyes happening
in the 1990s, and that in fact, it appears, has happened again and again
in history, when markets have been bid up to unusually high and
unsustainable levels under the influence of market psychology.
Many perceptive people were remarking, as the great surge in the
stock market of the 1990s continued, that there was something palpably
irrational in the air, and yet the nature of the irrationality was subtle.
There was not the kind of investor euphoria or madness described by
some storytellers, who chronicled earlier speculative excesses like the
stock market boom of the 1920s. Perhaps those storytellers were
embellishing the story. Irrational exuberance is not that crazy. The once-
popular terms speculative mania or speculative orgy seemed too strong to
describe what we were going through in the 1990s. It was more like the
kind of bad judgment we all remember having made at some point in
our lives when our enthusiasm got the best of us. Irrational exuberance
seems a very descriptive term for what happens in markets when they
get out of line.
Irrational exuberance is the psychological basis of a speculative
bubble. I define a speculative bubble as a situation in which news of
price 
increases 
spurs 
investor 
enthusiasm, 
which 
spreads 
by
psychological contagion from person to person, and, in the process,
amplifies stories that might justify the price increase and brings in a
larger and larger class of investors, who, despite doubts about the real
value of the investment, are drawn to it partly through envy of others’
successes and partly through a gambler’s excitement. We will explore the
various elements of this definition of a bubble throughout this book.
Greenspan’s “irrational exuberance” speech in 1996 came during the
biggest historical example to date of a speculative upsurge in the U.S.
stock market. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (from here on, the Dow
for short) stood at around 3,600 in early 1994. By March 1999, it passed
10,000 for the first time. The Dow peaked at 11,722.98 in January 14,

2000, just two weeks after the start of the new millennium. The market
had tripled in five years. Other stock price indices peaked a couple of
months later. The real (inflation-corrected) Dow did not reach this level
again until 2014, and, as of this writing, the real Standard & Poor’s 500
index has still not quite returned to its 2000 level. It is curious that this
peak of the Dow (as well as other indices) occurred in close proximity to
the end of the celebration of the new millennium—it was as if the
celebration itself was part of what had propelled the market, and the
hangover afterward had brought it back down.
Figure 1.1 shows the monthly real (corrected for inflation using the
Consumer Price Index) Standard and Poor’s (S&P) Composite Stock Price
Index, a more comprehensive index of stock market prices than the Dow,
based, since 1957, on 500 stocks rather than just the 30 stocks that are
used to compute the Dow.2 Inflation correction was used here because
the overall level of prices has been very unstable over parts of this
period (the government printed a lot of money, which pushed all prices
up) so that the uncorrected numbers would give a misleading impression
of the real increase in the stock market. The stock prices are shown from
1871 through 2014 (upper curve), along with the total earnings
(corporate profits per share) that the corporations that comprise the
index made in doing their businesses (lower curve) for the same years.3
Figure 1.1
U.S. Stock Prices and Earnings, 1871–2014

Real (inflation-corrected) S&P Composite Stock Price Index, monthly,
January 1871 through June 2014 (upper curve), and real S&P Composite
earnings (lower curve), January 1871 to March 2014. Source: Author’s
calculations using data from S&P Statistical Service; U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics; Cowles and associates, Common Stock Indexes; and Warren and
Pearson, Gold and Prices. See also note 3.
This stock market chart is unusual: most long-term plots of stock
prices are not this long term, and most are done in nominal terms,
without inflation correction. On this chart, the magnitude of the boom
beginning in 1982 and peaking in 2000 stands out especially well. It is a
unique event in history.
The 2000 Millennium Boom peak in world stock prices was followed
by the Ownership-Society Boom, 2003–7, which I have named after a
slogan used by George Bush in his 2004 presidential campaign. This
peak was followed by the world financial crisis in 2008–9. Starting in
2009, after the crisis lessened, there was another major upswing in
world stock markets, which I will call the New-Normal Boom, after a
phrase popularized by Bill Gross, then of PIMCO, in 2009.4 The news
media have shown a tendency since 2000 to dramatize the “new
records” set in stock markets in 2007 and 2014. But, in fact, these post-
2000 booms were not record setting. The biggest-ever upswing in the
real (inflation-corrected) U.S. stock market was from July 1982 to
August 2000, when the market went up 7.7-fold, dwarfing the 5.2-fold
upswing from December 1920 to September 1929, and also dwarfing the
5.1-fold upswing from June 1949 to December 1968. The upswings from
2003 to 2007 (1.5-fold) and from 2009 to 2014 (2.3-fold) are mild by
comparison. For the purpose of understanding irrational exuberance, I
will emphasize the 1982–2000 Millennium Boom, particularly its later
years, when this exuberance became most palpable.
The stock market increase from 1994 (when the real stock market had
already more than doubled since 1982) to 2000 could not obviously be
justified in any reasonable terms. Basic economic indicators did not
come close to tripling. Over the same interval, U.S. gross domestic

product rose less than 40%, and corporate profits rose less than 60%,
and that from a temporary recession-depressed base. Viewed in the light
of these figures, the stock price increase appears unwarranted.
Large stock price increases occurred in many countries at around the
same time, and the peaks in the stock markets were often roughly
simultaneous in many countries in early 2000. Figure 1.2 shows the
paths of stock prices for ten countries and for the world as a whole from
1995 to 2014. As can be seen from Figure 1.2, between 1995 and 2000
the real stock market valuations of Brazil, France, China, and Germany
roughly tripled, while that of the United Kingdom roughly doubled. In
1999, the year before the peak, real stock price increases averaged 58%
over the ten countries shown in Figure 1.2. The prices of all countries
went up sharply in 1999; in fact, the smallest increase, occurring in the
United Kingdom, was still an impressive 16%. Stock markets in Asia
(Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, and South Korea)
and Latin America (Chile and Mexico) also made astounding gains in
1999. It was a truly spectacular worldwide stock market boom.
The end of the 2000 boom brought stock markets down across much
of the world by 2003, as can be seen in Figure 1.2. Once again, the next
boom, peaking in late 2007 or early 2008, had huge impacts over much
of the world. After that, the world slipped into the most serious recession
since the Great Depression of the 1930s, economic growth rates faltered,
and the post-bubble weakness of the world economy continued for years
after. Despite the weakness of the world economy, the third stock market
boom that began around 2009 affected many countries.
Looking back to Figure 1.1, which shows a longer history for the S&P
Index, we can see how differently the market behaved up to 2000
compared with the long past. The spiking of prices in the years 1982
through 2000 was most remarkable: the price index looks like a rocket
taking off through the top of the chart, only to sputter and crash. This—
the largest stock market boom ever—may be referred to as the
Millennium Boom or, now that it is over, the Millennium Bubble.5

Figure 1.2
Real Stock Prices in Ten Countries and the World, January 1995–July
2014
Monthly closing prices in Brazil (Bovespa), China (SE Shang Composite),
France (CAC), Germany (DAX), India (Sensex), Japan (Nikkei), Korea
(KOSPI), Mexico (Mexbol), United Kingdom (FTSE 100), the United
States 
(NASDAQ 
Composite), 
and 
the 
Morgan-Stanley 
Capital
International All Country World Index, all deflated by the monthly
Consumer Price Index for the currency, all rescaled to January 1995 =
100. Source: Bloomberg and International Monetary Fund International
Financial Statistics (1999).
The boom and crash in the stock market in the years after 1994 are
clearly related to the behavior of earnings. As can be seen in Figure 1.1,
S&P Composite earnings grew very fast in the late 1990s before they
crashed after 2000, rose again until 2007, utterly crashed in 2009, and
then rose with the market. Earnings seem to have been oscillating
around a slow, steady growth path that has persisted for over a century.
Inspection of Figure 1.1 should make it clear that nothing like the
Millennium Boom had ever happened before in the entire stock market
history since 1871. There was of course the famous stock run-up of the
1920s, culminating in the 1929 crash. Figure 1.1 reveals this boom as a
cusp-shaped price pattern for those years. If one corrects for the market’s

smaller scale then, one recognizes that this episode in the 1920s does
somewhat resemble the recent stock market increase, but it is the only
historical episode that comes even close to being comparable.
Price Relative to Earnings
Figure 1.3 shows the cyclically adjusted price-earnings ratio (CAPE), that
is, the real (inflation-corrected) S&P Composite Index divided by the ten-
year moving average of real earnings on the index. The points shown
reflect monthly data from January 1881 to June 2014.6 The price-
earnings ratio is a measure of how expensive the market is relative to an
objective measure of the ability of corporations to earn profits. John
Campbell and I originally defined CAPE using the ten-year average,
along lines proposed by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd in 1934.7
The ten-year average smooths out such events as the temporary burst
of earnings during World War I, the temporary decline in earnings
during World War II, and the frequent boosts and declines that we see
due to the business cycle.8 Note again that there was an enormous spike
after 1997, when the ratio rose until it hit 47.2 intraday on March 24,
2000. Price-earnings ratios by this measure had never been so high. The
closest parallel was September 1929, when the ratio hit 32.6.
In 2000 earnings were quite high in comparison with the Graham and
Dodd measure of long-run earnings, but nothing here was startlingly out
of the ordinary. What was extraordinary in 2000 was the behavior of
price (as also seen in Figure 1.1), not earnings.
Part of the explanation for the remarkable price behavior between
1990 and 2000 may have to do with the unusual behavior of
corporations’ profits as reflected in their earnings reports. Many
observers remarked then that earnings growth in the five-year period
ending in 1997 was extraordinary: real S&P Composite earnings more
than doubled over this interval, and such a rapid five-year growth of real
earnings had not occurred for nearly half a century. But 1992 marked
the end of a recession during which earnings were temporarily
depressed.9 Similar increases in earnings growth following periods of

depressed earnings from recession or depression have happened before.
In fact, there was more than a quadrupling of real earnings from 1921 to
1926 as the economy emerged from the severe recession of 1921 into the
prosperous Roaring Twenties. Real earnings doubled during the five-year
periods following the depression of the 1890s, the Great Depression of
the 1930s, and World War II.
It was tempting for observers in 2000, at the peak of the market, to
extrapolate this earnings growth and to believe that some fundamental
changes in the economy had produced a new higher growth trend in
earnings. Certainly, expansive talk about the new millennium at the time
encouraged such a story. But it would have been more reasonable,
judging from the cyclical behavior of earnings throughout history, to
predict a reversal of such earnings growth.
Figure 1.3
U.S. Cyclically Adjusted Price-Earnings Ratio (CAPE) and Interest
Rates, 1881–2014
Price-earnings ratio, monthly, January 1881 to June 2014. Numerator:
real 
(inflation-corrected) 
S&P 
Composite 
Stock 
Price 
Index.
Denominator: moving average over preceding ten years of real S&P
Composite earnings. Years of peaks are indicated. Source: Author’s
calculations using data shown in Figure 1.1. Interest rate is the yield of
long-term U.S. government bonds (nominal), January 1881 to June 2014

(author’s splicing of two historical long-term interest rate series). See
also note 7.
The bust in corporate profits between 2000 and 2001, the biggest drop
in profits in percentage terms since 1920–21, is certainly part of the
story about the drop in the market. This drop certainly diminished
support for the notion that the new high-tech economy was infallible.
But there is a question of how to interpret the drop in earnings. As we
shall discuss in Chapter 5, the drop in earnings could be seen in many
dimensions, and in part, as just an indirect consequence of the changes
in investor psychology that produced the decline in the market. Part of
the crash in earnings after 2000 was also just a technical accounting
reaction to the stock price decline, since companies were required by
accounting rules to deduct from earnings the impairment in value of
some of their stock market holdings, holdings that were far reduced in
value after the crash in the stock market.
Other Periods of High Price Relative to Earnings
There have been three earlier times when the price-earnings ratio as
shown in Figure 1.3 attained high values, though never as high as the
2000 value. The first time was in June 1901, when the price-earnings
ratio reached a high of 25.2. This might be called the “Twentieth
Century Peak,” since it came around the time of the celebration of the
new century. (The advent of the twentieth century was celebrated on
January 1, 1901, not January 1, 1900.)10 This peak occurred as the
aftermath of a doubling of real earnings within five years, following the
U.S. economy’s emergence from the depression of the 1890s.11 The 1901
peak in the price-earnings ratio occurred after a sudden spike in the
ratio, which took place between July 1900 and June 1901, an increase
of 43% in eleven months. A turn-of-the-century optimism appeared—
associated with expansive talk about a prosperous and high-tech future.
After 1901, there was no pronounced immediate downtrend in real

prices, but for the next decade, prices bounced around or just below the
1901 level and then fell. By June 1920, the stock market had lost 67% of
its June 1901 real value. The average real return in the stock market
(including dividends) was 3.4% a year in the five years following June
1901, barely above the real interest rate. The average real return
(including dividends) was 4.4% a year in the ten years following June
1901, 3.1% a year in the fifteen years following June 1901, and −0.2%
a year in the twenty years following June 1901.12 These returns are
lower than we generally expect from the stock market, though had one
held on into the 1920s, returns would have improved dramatically.
The second instance of a high price-earnings ratio occurred in
September 1929, the high point of the market in the 1920s and the
second-highest ratio of all time. After the spectacular bull market of the
1920s, the ratio attained a value of 32.6. As we all know, the market
tumbled from this high, with a real drop in the S&P Index of 80.6% by
June 1932. The decline in real value was profound and long-lasting. The
real S&P Composite Index did not return to its September 1929 value
until December 1958. The average real return in the stock market
(including dividends) was −13.1% a year for the five years following
September 1929, −1.4% a year for the next ten years, −0.5% a year for
the next fifteen years, and 0.4% a year for the next twenty years.13
The third instance of a high price-earnings ratio occurred in January
1966, when the ratio as shown in Figure 1.3 reached a local maximum
of 24.1. We might call this the “Kennedy-Johnson Peak,” drawing as it
did on the prestige and charisma of President John Kennedy and the
help of his vice-president and successor, Lyndon Johnson. This peak
came after a dramatic bull market and after a five-year real price surge
of 52% from May 1960. This surge, which took the price-earnings ratio
to its local maximum, corresponded to a surge in real earnings of 36%.
The market reacted to this earnings growth as if it expected the growth
to continue, but of course it did not. Real earnings increased little in the
next decade. Real prices bounced around near their January 1966 peak,
surpassing it somewhat in 1968, then falling sharply back after 1973.
Real stock prices were down 56% from their January 1966 value by
December 1974 and would not be back up to the January 1966 level

until May 1992. The average real return in the stock market (including
dividends) was −2.6% a year for the five years following January 1966,
−1.8% a year for the next ten years, −0.5% a year for the next fifteen
years, and 1.9% a year for the next twenty years.
We see evidence in these past episodes of temporarily high price that
irrational exuberance is not a new thing, and that such episodes do not
end well. The high CAPE—higher than any peaks save 1929, 2000, and
2007 as of this writing in 2014—warrants some concern, though we do
not yet know the aftermath of this time. We will return to a discussion of
the predictive power of the price-earnings ratio in Chapter 11.
Worries about Irrational Exuberance
As reflected in the first edition of this book, in 2000 I thought that most
people I met, from all walks of life, were puzzled over the apparently
high levels of the stock market. It seemed that they were unsure whether
the market levels made any sense, or whether they were indeed the
result of some human tendency that might be called irrational
exuberance. They wondered whether the high levels of the stock market
might have reflected unjustified optimism, an optimism that might have
pervaded our thinking and affected many of our life decisions. They
seemed unsure what to make of any small market down-turn, wondering
whether the previous market psychology could ever return.
Even Alan Greenspan seemed unsure. He made his “irrational
exuberance” speech two days after I had testified before him and the
Federal Reserve Board that market levels were irrational, but a mere
seven months later he reportedly took an optimistic “new era” position
on the economy and the stock market. In fact, Greenspan has always
been very cautious in his public statements, and did not commit himself
to either view. A modern version of the prophets who spoke in riddles,
Greenspan likes to pose questions rather than make pronouncements. In
the public exegesis of his remarks it was often forgotten that, when it
comes to such questions, even he did not know the answers.
Years after its 2000 peak, the market is back up near its peak levels in

real terms. The news media in 2007 and 2014 seemed to relish
trumpeting new records set (in nominal terms) by the stock market. And
yet, deep down, people know that the market was then and is now
highly priced, and they are uncomfortable with this fact.
Lacking answers from our wisest experts, many are inclined to turn to
the wisdom of the markets to answer our questions, to use the turns of
the stock market as fortune tellers use tea leaves. But before we begin
assuming that the market is revealing some truth about this new era, it
behooves us to reflect on the real determinants of market moves and
how these market moves, in their effects, filter through the economy and
our lives.
Many of those real determinants are in our minds. They are the
“animal spirits” that John Maynard Keynes thought drove the economy,
and that were the subject of my 2009 book Animal Spirits with George
Akerlof.14 These same animal spirits drive other markets, such as the
bond market and the real estate market, to which we now turn as other
case studies of speculative behavior, before we begin our analysis of the
causes of such behavior in Part One of this book.

Two
The Bond Market in Historical Perspective
The path of interest rates through time has been a
matter of intense public concern, for interest rates are viewed as central
to everything in the economy. Interest rates are viewed as something
abstract and fundamental, the price of time itself. And yet they show
fluctuations through time that reveal a speculative and human
component, not entirely unlike that of the stock market, discussed in the
previous chapter.
There are both short-term interest rates, rates on loans or bills for a
year or less, and longterm interest rates, rates on bonds, mortgages, or
loans extending over decades. Prices of longterm bonds, once issued in
the marketplace, move opposite the general level of longterm interest
rates: when longterm interest rates fall, prices of still-outstanding
longterm bonds previously issued rise, since, unless their price increases,
investors would prefer those older bonds bearing higher interest to the
newer ones. Thus, changes in the outlook for future interest rates can
cause booms or crashes in the longterm bond market.
For over a century, central banks (in the United States, the Federal
Reserve) have exerted control over short-term rates. It is well known
that these rates are easily set, at least approximately, by central banks.
Longterm interest rates, however, are more speculative and more

difficult to control, since, just as with the stock market, the public’s
demand for them depends on comparisons with the outlook for the
distant future, which is dependent on things central banks cannot
control today. Since the 2007–9 financial crisis, central banks have
adopted important new policies to influence longterm interest rates, with
names like “quantitative easing,” “operation twist,” and “forward
guidance,” but they still today do not really control this market.1
Discussions over the past century have sometimes used the phrase
“bond bubble” to describe upswings in the bond market. Certainly, the
bond market has something akin to bubbles in it from time to time,
occurring when long rates are falling and so people are excited by the
rise in bond prices, just as they are by stock prices in a stock market
bubble. And bubbles in these two markets might sometimes be related to
each other.
Interest Rates and CAPE
Interest rates are one of the most discussed terms relating to the level of
the stock market. During the stock market boom of the 1990s, it was
widely noted that longterm interest rates were falling. This can be seen
from Figure 1.3 in the previous chapter, which includes, along with the
CAPE, a plot of interest rates, longterm government bond yields. The
idea that the decline in interest rates can explain the rise in the stock
market was widely expressed during the 1990s.
The Monetary Policy Report that was submitted in conjunction with
Alan Greenspan’s testimony before Congress in July 19972 showed
evidence of a noticeable negative correlation between the ten-year bond
yield and the price-earnings ratio since 1982. Indeed, there did appear to
be a relation between interest rates and the price-earnings ratio at that
time. In fact, between the mid-1960s and the early 1980s, interest rates
were rising and the price-earnings ratio was declining. Between the early
1980s and the late 1990s, when Greenspan spoke, interest rates were
falling and stock prices were rising. This relation between the stock
market and the ten-year interest rate came to be known as the “Fed

Model.” In the late 1990s and the early 2000s, it became fashionable to
use the Fed Model to justify the level of the market. Indeed, with
declining interest rates, one might well think that stock prices should be
rising relative to earnings, since the prospective longterm return on a
competing asset, bonds, was declining, making stocks look more
attractive in comparison. In the late 1990s, it sometimes seemed that
one heard reference to the Fed Model almost ad nauseam on the
television business shows.
However, the evidence for the Fed Model is rather weak.3 Over the
whole period shown in Figure 1.3, no strong relation is seen between
interest rates and the price-earnings ratio. In the Great Depression,
interest rates were unusually low, which, by the Fed Model, would imply
that the stock market should have been very high relative to earnings;
that was not the case.
Interest rates continued to decrease after the peak in the market after
2000, and then we saw the opposite of the predictions of the Fed Model:
both the price-earnings ratio and the interest rates were declining. Since
this happened, one has heard a lot less about the Fed Model.
Although interest rates must have some effect on the market, stock
prices do not show any simple or consistent relation with interest rates.
Still, investors looking at a very high CAPE when longterm government
bond yields are very low, as they have been especially since the financial
crisis of 2008, will not be as discouraged from investing in stocks
because of the poor alternative.
The CAPE has come under some criticism since the second edition of
this book. Bill Gross, founder of PIMCO and now at Janus Capital,
complained that discussions of the ratio often do not take into account
the very low interest rates since the crisis. Indeed, the ten-year U.S.
Treasury yield to maturity in July 2012 fell to a historical low of 1.43%
per year, and while higher today, remains very low by historical
standards. In such circumstances, perhaps investors will not want to
switch from stocks to bonds even if the CAPE is high. Moreover, the U.S.
bond market, showing such low yields, looks as if it may have been
going through something of a bubble, too, and may collapse further
eventually, especially given the imminent withdrawal of the support of

quantitative easing from the Federal Reserve and a likely increase in
inflation. Gross, with his “new normal” or “new neutral” pessimistic
view of the economy, gives lower probability to such a collapse than I
would, but he is right that the apparent overpricing of the stock market
—whenever it occurs—has to be compared with the possible overpricing
of other markets as well.4
Inflation and Interest Rates
Figure 2.1 shows a plot of U.S. government longterm interest rates (the
ten-year Treasury rate since 1953) and inflation rates since 1881. Two
inflation rates are shown. One is the annual rate of increase of a price
index (Consumer Price Index since 1913) for the preceding ten years.
The other is the annual rate of increase of the same price index for the
succeeding ten years. The two inflation rate curves are the same, but one
is shifted relative to the other by ten years. Both are plotted here to
make a point. It is easy to see a positive contemporaneous relation
between interest rates and preceding longterm inflation rates for much of
the time—especially the most recent half century—but there appears to
be practically no relation between longterm interest rates and future
longterm inflation. It is the future inflation that ought to matter more if
investors successfully priced longterm bonds to protect their real returns
from inflation over the future life of the bond they are investing in, just
the opposite of what we see. Jeremy Siegel and I documented this in
1977, and linked this observation to descriptions of earlier observers A.
H. Gibson in 1923 and John Maynard Keynes in 1930.5
The relation between longterm interest rates and longterm inflation
that can be seen in Figure 2.1 for the last half century is not the kind
that a simple assumption of human rationality would lead one to expect.
If investors are rational (have rational expectations), they should be
employing past data on inflation in such a way as to adjust nominal
bond yields to successful predictions of the future. We see that they did
seem to respond to past data, but in a way that was very unsuccessful in
predicting the future.

Figure 2.1
U.S. LongTerm Rates and Inflation, 1871–2014
U.S. government longterm interest rate (thick dark solid line), average
inflation rate over preceding ten years (thin solid line), and average
inflation rate over the succeeding ten years (thin gray line). Source:
Author’s calculations from same data used in Figure 1.3.
The fluctuations in yields that we do see in the longterm bond market
cannot be well described as resulting from information about future
inflation, nor are they well described as resulting from information
about future short-term interest rates. They have a speculative
component that is hard to pin down in terms of objectively rational
behavior.6
Real Interest Rates
Over most of the period shown in Figure 2.1, many investors perhaps
had no idea about what the relation between nominal interest rates and
inflation rates should be. It was not until 1895 that Columbia University
economics professor John Bates Clark introduced to the world the
concept of real interest rates.7 He wrote about this then-new concept,
because he discerned widespread public confusion about interest rates at

the time of the national debate on the proposed bimetallic standard. The
real interest rate on any debt instrument, he said, is the interest rate
minus the inflation rate over the life until maturity of the instrument. If
the inflation rate is greater than the interest rate, the bond would be
producing less than nothing in real terms for the investor, since the
buying power of money would be reduced by more than the increase in
the money the instrument provides to its investor. A search on Google
Ngrams shows that the phrase “real interest rate” was never used before
1895, began to appear incrementally from that time, and did not really
become common until after 1960—after a very long gestation period for
Clark’s idea.
One might think, if investors have good information, are rational, and
are interested in the real interest that they will receive, that market-
determined bond yields would stay just a steady amount above the
subsequent inflation rate. One can see from Figure 2.1 that this has
never been true for the United States, although, since around 1960, it
became somewhat true for backward-looking rather than forward-looking
inflation.
The significance of movements in longterm interest rates over time, as
seen for the United States since 1871 in Figure 2.1, is not clear. Clearly,
people were not pricing bonds as if they were just reacting to rational
expectations about future inflation rates. Theorists often say that ratios
like the price-earnings ratio in the stock market ought to be more closely
related to expected real (inflation-corrected) longterm interest rates,
which have been largely unknown, than to nominal rates. But that is
based on the assumption that investors routinely see through nominal
rates to real rates.
Inflation-indexed bond markets, which directly reveal real interest
rates, did not exist in any major country in the early 1980s, but since
then they have begun to appear. These bonds promise to pay a constant
real return. Figure 2.2 shows the behavior over time of inflation-indexed
longterm government bond yields for four countries that have had these
markets for a long time.
All these countries show a longterm downtrend in real interest rates—
down to amazingly low levels by 2012. As can be seen in Figure 2.2, in

some of the most recent data, in both the United States and the United
Kingdom the real bond yields have reached negative values. It is quite
striking that in 2012 in the United States, people were willing to tie up
their money for thirty years at an essentially guaranteed negative real
return.8 This fact would certainly seem to have implications for the stock
market, impelling it toward higher valuation. Financial theorists, such as
John Campbell and Luis Viceira, have spoken of the longterm indexed
bond yield as the true riskless rate, against which all risky asset returns
should be compared, and which should figure into every longterm
investor’s most fundamental calculations.9
But most investors just do not seem to see the centrality of the indexed
bond yield that theorists often seem to attribute to it. They often do not
even seem to understand that inflation indexation protects them from
price-level risks, and sometimes seem to think that indexation introduces
a risk, the risk that their nominal values will be lower. The path
downward does not reflect the ups and downs of the stock market any
more than does the downward path of nominal interest rates over this
interval.
Figure 2.2
Inflation-Indexed Bond Yields for Four Countries, 1985–2014
United Kingdom: twenty-year inflation-indexed bond yield January
1985–June 2014; Australia: ten-year inflation-indexed bond yield July

1985–July 2014; Chile: ten-year inflation-indexed bond yield, April
1992–May 2014; United States: thirty-year inflation-indexed bond yield,
April 
1998–August 
2014. 
Source: 
Global 
Financial 
Data
(https://www.globalfinancialdata.com/index.html).
Unfortunately, even with these data, especially in the earlier years of
inflation-indexed bonds, it has not been completely clear what the broad
investing public likely thought over these years about expected real
returns on safe assets. When each of these countries in Figure 2.2
introduced their inflation-indexed bond markets, they did so in the face
of widespread public indifference. The market for inflation-indexed
bonds has grown somewhat over the decades but is only gradually
becoming important enough compared to the market for nonindexed
conventional bonds to pervade public thinking as some theorists
assume.10 And so a few government officials in charge of the auctions
could in principle, by adjusting the amount offered, influence the prices
of inflation-indexed bonds.11 It is one of the puzzles of behavioral
economics that people mostly just ignore inflation-indexed markets—
that they have so much trouble appreciating the importance of inflation
indexation.12
Still, it is clear that prices in both the market for nominal bonds and
the market for inflation-indexed bonds have reached very high levels,
and that this fact ought to be part of our thinking about the stock
market. It remains unclear what this situation implies for the future.
Some observers refer to a “bond market bubble” at the time of this
writing in 2014 that might burst, though it seems that this is not a
classic bubble as defined in this book, since expectations for longterm
return are apparently very low—not high, as one would expect during a
bubble. But these trends in the bond market might in some sense be
bubble-like.
Jeremy Stein of Harvard University, in one of the last speeches he
gave as Governor of the Federal Reserve System, in 2014, discussed
concerns about a bond market bubble, though he did not adopt that
term. He spoke of “overheating” in the credit markets and warned of

economic consequences if the bond yields were to suddenly correct
upward (bond prices correct downward); he worried about the economic
consequences of such a correction.13
There must be some hard-to-pin-down cultural factors driving people
to invest in bonds at a time when their yield is very low or negative and
the stock market has been soaring. Some of the same precipitating
factors for the stock market and housing market booms discussed in
Chapter 4 might apply somewhat to the bond market. Also, falling bond
yields have produced capital gains for bond investors over the decades,
making bonds look successful even if they are guaranteed not to do well
in real terms over their time to maturity.14 The extreme low or negative
yields after the financial crisis of 2007–9 might also have something to
do with a kind of a flight response, at times of financial turmoil, that
does not fit our usual theoretical paradigms. Where that response goes in
future years remains to be seen. There is indeed reason to be concerned
about the possible widespread economic effects of an end to this
decades-long downtrend in real longterm interest rates, and of a
corresponding drop in longterm bond prices.
We turn now to the third of our three major asset classes, the real
estate market, and will see once again the importance of human
speculative behavior in determining market prices.

Three
The Real Estate Market in Historical
Perspective
The same forces of human psychology that have
driven the stock market and the bond market over the years have the
potential to affect other markets. The market for real estate, particularly
individual homes, would seem likely to display speculative booms from
time to time, since the psychological salience of the price of the places
we see every day and the homes we live in must be strong, and because
home prices are such a popular topic of conversation. Yet the market for
real estate is different from the stock and bond markets in important
ways.
Home prices increased sharply in the first five years of the twenty-first
century in cities in Australia, Canada, China, France, Hong Kong,
Ireland, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Spain, the
United Kingdom, and the United States.1 There has been a breathtaking
real estate construction boom in China.2 These real estate booms have
not taken place everywhere, but they have occurred in a variety of
places. Many of these booms were followed by crashes. These crashes
gave impetus to the financial crisis whose intensity peaked in 2009, and
from which the world is still damaged as of this writing in 2014.

Real estate booms seem just as mysterious and hard to understand as
stock market booms. When they happen, there are always popular
explanations for them—explanations that are not necessarily correct.
A number of glib explanations have been offered for the run-up in
prices in many places since the late 1990s. One such explanation is that
population pressures have built up to the point that we have run out of
land, and that home prices have shot up as a result. But we didn’t just
run out of land since the late 1990s: population growth has been steady
and gradual. Another theory is that the things that go into houses—the
labor, the lumber, the concrete, the steel—are in such heavy demand
that they have become very expensive. But construction costs are not out
of line with long-term trends. Another glib explanation is that the boom
was due to the interest rate cuts implemented in many countries in an
effort to deal with a weak global economy. But while low interest rates
are certainly a contributing factor, central banks have cut interest rates
many times in history, and such actions never produced such concerted
booms.
So what did cause this real estate boom and crash to occur in so many
parts of the world? It is important to understand this phenomenon. Many
people are worrying that the boom in home prices in these places will
end as badly as the dramatic 1980s boom in urban land prices in Japan,
with prices declining in real terms for well over a decade after the peak.
But understanding any such price movements, and what they might
portend, is a difficult problem—a problem to which solutions will be
offered in various parts of this book.
For starters I want to try to put these recent events into a longer
historical perspective. Is the current situation new, or do we have scads
of examples of such events? Is there really a strong and steady long-run
uptrend in home prices as so many people with a boom mentality say, or
are they just imagining this? What does history tell us about the genesis
of real estate booms? An important conclusion of this chapter is that
home price speculation is more entrenched on a national or international
scale than ever before.

The Long History of Home Prices
I constructed an index of U.S. home prices all the way back to 1890 by
linking together various available series that were designed to provide
estimates of the price of a standard, unchanging, house, and by creating
another index that my research assistants completed under my direction,
to close the gap from 1934 to 1953. Figure 3.1 shows the home price
index along with building costs, the population of the United States, and
the long-term interest rate, all since 1890.3
The home price index we constructed, plotted in the figure, is
imperfect, and I hope to improve it someday, but for now it appears to
be the best that can be found for this long time period. Oddly, when this
chart was first published in 2005, no such long series of home prices for
any country had ever been released. At the time, no real estate
professional I spoke with could refer me to one. So the unusually rapid
appreciation of home prices up to the time of publication of the second
edition of this book in 2005 attracted notice.
The reader must notice the striking recent behavior of home prices
since the late 1990s. Home prices took off sharply between the late
1990s and 2006. There was a “rocket taking off” here, just as in the
stock market in the Millennium Boom. As with the stock market, this
rocket eventually crashed after 2006, and the disaster brought down the
government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac;
mortgage lending giants Countrywide Financial and Washington Mutual;
and financial firms Bear Stearns, Merrill Lynch, and Lehman Brothers.
And by 2008 it had caused the most severe financial crisis since the
Great Depression of the 1930s.

Figure 3.1
U.S. Home Prices, Building Costs, Population, and Interest Rates,
1890–2014
Heavy solid line (left scale): real (inflation-corrected) home price index,
1890 = 100, for the United States, constructed by the author from
various existing indices and raw data on home prices; top thin line (left
scale): real (inflation-corrected) building cost index, 1979 = 100,
constructed by the author from two published construction cost indices;
middle thin line (right scale): U.S. population in millions, from the U.S.
Census; lowest thin line (left scale): long-term interest rate constructed
by the author from two sources. See note 3.
The upswing in home prices during 1998–2006 (along with the stock
market Ownership-Society Boom) that preceded the financial crisis may
be regarded as its ultimate cause. Real home prices for the United States
as a whole increased 85% between 1997 and 2006. The increase was
higher in some areas of the United States and lower in others, but the
fact that it was an 85% increase overall is remarkable. This is nothing
like the tripling of the stock market between 1995 and 2000, but, when
viewed in comparison with long-run historical patterns in home prices, it
is still striking. We could not appreciate this pattern of home prices by
looking at recent years alone; one could not appreciate how anomalous
the early 2000s home boom was. There was only one other period of
similarly large price increases in U.S. history: the period after World War

II. The subsequent decline in the most recent boom, however, was
substantially more precipitous.
The ascent in home prices after 1998 was much faster than the
increase in incomes, and this raised concerns about the long-run stability
of home prices, especially in the most volatile states. According to
Standard & Poor’s and the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices, the cost
of buying a house relative to renting doubled in the United States from
1997 to 2006 and then fell almost all the way back down from 2006 to
2013.4
Looking at the figure before the 2006 peak, however, one got the
impression that the end was not near and that the ascent of home prices
since 1997 had been so robust and steady that one would expect it to
continue for years. The steadiness of the path, up for each year between
1997 and 2006, and up at an increasing rate for almost each successive
year, suggested that home prices could be forecasted to continue to rise.
How can prices be so forecastable? Isn’t it supposed to be very hard to
forecast speculative prices, and aren’t such prices supposed to at least
approximate a random walk? Actually, home prices are somewhat
forecastable, as statistical analysis confirms.5 Their forecastability is not
well exploited by “smart money” as it would be in the stock market. The
forays into the single-family house market made by The Blackstone
Group and other investment funds are still, as of this writing, only a tiny
part of the market. So no forces operate to prevent forecastability. The
profit opportunities for buying at the right time are just not available to
the smart money that operates in the stock market because of the costs
of getting in and out of the housing market. It is not easy for most
people to time the purchase of their homes to take advantage of trends.
But let us not exaggerate the forecastability of home prices either. Our
statistical studies of forecasting models for home prices show that
roughly half of the variability of home prices can be predicted one year
ahead. Half of the variability may seem like a lot, but it still leaves much
to be explained. Looking back at the figure, one would have to say, if
one took a pencil to extrapolate judgmentally the recent trend in U.S.
home prices, that there is still substantial uncertainty about where the
price level will be in a year’s time. It is difficult to judge whether the

trend is building up or slowing down, and when it might eventually stop
completely and then reverse itself. Moreover, if one extends a forecast to
five or ten years out, one is likely to have virtually no idea where prices
will be. And it is these longer-horizon forecasts that are most relevant to
homebuyers who will expect to live in their home for many years.
Ultimately, we learn how to forecast by looking at past episodes.
Unfortunately, there are not really any past episodes of national home
price booms in the United States to look at, except for the period just
after World War II, and that episode appears to have been fundamentally
different from the recent home price boom. We have only one
observation of the spectacular crash of U.S. home prices after 2006, so it
is hard to know how to generalize from this experience. This presents a
dilemma for statisticians who want a scientific basis for their forecasts.
Obviously, there is no hope of explaining home prices in the United
States solely in terms of building costs, population, or interest rates, all
shown in Figure 3.1. The pattern of change from year to year in home
prices bears no consistent relation with any of these factors. None of
these can explain the “rocket-taking-off” effect starting around 1998.
Building costs have been mostly level or declining all the way back to
1980, with no major break in the trend.6 Population growth has been
very steady. While interest rates have been declining, the decline in long
rates has been fairly steady, all the way back to the early 1980s.7
It is equally obvious, from comparing the home price path shown in
Figure 3.1 with the stock price path shown in Figure 1.1, that in the
United States, the booms in the stock market bear virtually no relation to
booms in the housing market. A possible exception is the most recent
boom in the housing market, which began around 1998, a few years
after the sharp stock market takeoff that began around 1995. There may
well be at least some tendency for home prices to respond to the stock
market: a recent Bank of International Settlements study of house prices
in thirteen industrialized countries concluded that peaks in the housing
market tend to follow peaks in the stock market with an average lag of
about two years.8
To understand how different the recent home price behavior has been,
it is important to compare the recent behavior with that of long ago.

Figure 3.1 shows that real home prices were generally declining from
1890 to 1940. The chart shows a number of wiggles in home prices
before World War I, but our efforts to find confirming evidence of such
sharp price movements in old newspapers for those dates turned up
nothing significant. We suspect that some of the wiggles in the earliest
years plotted in Figure 3.1 are just the result of sampling error and so do
not reflect actual home price changes. I will return in Chapter 7 to the
stories of some price movements from that era that we can begin to
understand. But for now, we should note the downtrend in real prices
and the absence of any major real estate boom before 1940.
The late nineteenth century and early twentieth century saw many
local bubbles surrounding the building of highways, canals, and
railroads, bubbles that do not show up in the national numbers on our
chart. Obviously, it is plausible that the land surrounding such
construction projects would suddenly become valuable. Even in days
gone by, when land was so abundant that one could buy it, in some
places, for a dollar an acre, there could be real estate booms. If land
prices were to go up to two dollars an acre near a new rail line, an
investment could double in value, and this prospect could be quite
exciting to investors. Regional real estate booms are nothing new.
The sharp fall in home prices after World War I probably had
something to do with the great influenza pandemic of 1918–19, which
infected 28% of Americans and killed 675,000 of them. This epidemic
caused people to stay at home and not look for new homes. It must have
damaged the economy and also distracted attention and conversation
away from the housing market. There was also an unusually severe
recession in 1920–21.9
It is notable that there was no boom in home prices to accompany the
sharply rising stock market of the Roaring Twenties. The famous Florida
land bubble of the 1920s was not big enough to show up in these
national numbers. Home prices were not carried along by the stock
market and did not overshoot, nor did they drop when the stock market
crashed starting in 1929. There was, however, a drop in nominal home
prices after 1929; that is, home prices fell at just about the same rate as
the Consumer Price Index fell. The drop in nominal home prices, when

mortgage debt was not indexed to inflation, gave many homeowners
negative equity in their homes and an incentive to default on their
mortgages. In addition, the high unemployment rates during the Great
Depression meant that many could not renew their short-term mortgages
and so were forced to default on them and thus lost their homes. But we
should not mistake the housing crisis of the early 1930s for a decline in
real home prices. Real home prices showed remarkable stability over the
whole boom-and-bust cycle of the stock market surrounding 1929.
This brings us to the most significant episode in the national home
market until recent times: the sharp home price increases associated
with the end of World War II. It is clear that there were large real home
price increases at least in the big cities at this time, although the exact
magnitude of the increases may not have been well measured.10
This does not appear to have been a runaway speculative boom. Home
prices did not overshoot their new postwar equilibrium, and they did not
have to come crashing back down. Newspaper accounts of the housing
market did not use the term housing bubble, nor did they feature stories
of crazy homebuyers buying just about anything to stay ahead of the
curve, like those we were reading about in the early 2000s. The story
that one gleans from the newspapers just after World War II is quite
different.
Government restrictions had severely limited the supply of new homes
during World War II. After the war, returning soldiers wanted to start
families; they were about to launch the Baby Boom. Prices of existing
homes actually started increasing after 1942, before the war was over,
probably because people anticipated the shortage of housing that was to
follow. But, even though demand soared after the war, there was no real
buying panic, as the conventional wisdom of the time was that
construction would soon greatly increase the stock of available homes.
The Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, also called the GI Bill of
Rights, immediately introduced the subsidization of home purchase for
seventeen million people. This major government subsidy did not go
away, and it helped lead to permanently higher home prices. But it did
so in the context of the solidarity of the American people, and it never
ignited a speculative atmosphere. President Franklin Roosevelt said that

the GI Bill of Rights gave “emphatic notice to the men and women of our
Armed Forces that the American people do not intend to let them
down.”11 The people who bought at the high prices right after the war
were those who felt that they could not wait to get settled in their new
homes, not people who were speculating that prices would go up even
higher. Other people simply found a temporary place to live and waited
for the expected decline in home prices (which never came) or for their
savings to increase to the point that they could afford housing. The fact
that, after World War I, real home prices had gone through a protracted
period of decline must also have served to diffuse any speculative
worries. People must have remembered that episode in the aftermath of
World War II. A widespread worry then that the Great Depression of the
1930s would reappear after the stimulus of the war ended further
deflected any worries that home prices would soar.
It appears that people were for the most part not afraid of being priced
out of the market, and that they did not fully anticipate the home price
increases to come. They counted on new construction to prevent any
severe price rise—and indeed, construction of new homes rose from
142,000 homes built in the United States in 1944 to 1,952,000 homes
built in 1950. Even though this massive increase in supply did not stop
price increases, the popular understanding seems to have been that it
would.
It has been different in this century. We are increasingly feeling
worried and vulnerable, and the market volatility that flares up from
time to time, in both the stock market and the housing market, reflects
this. Before the post-1997 boom, there were a couple of false starts
(failed launches, so to speak), one in the late 1970s and one in the late
1980s. These were actually regional booms that did not extend so much
to the nation as a whole. The 1970s boom was mostly confined to
California, and the 1980s boom occurred on both the west coast and the
east coast.
Figure 3.2 shows the path of real home prices for four U.S. cities.
Prices in Boston and Los Angeles have gone through two dramatic
swings, and at the end of the sample period shown, prices were soaring.
But, in sharp contrast, prices in Miami and Phoenix completely missed

the first of these two booms. Boston held much of its value increase—in
2014, remaining over twice its 1983 real value—but Miami and Phoenix
hardly changed at all in real value between 1983 and 2014.
Figure 3.2
Home Prices in a Sample of U.S. Cities, Quarterly, 1983–2014
Source: Fiserv/S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices Inc., deflated by the
U.S. Consumer Price Index, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, and rescaled
to 1983 = 100.
It is commonly said that there is no national home market in the
United States, only regional markets. There is something to that
statement, but it is not completely true and appears to be getting less
true. While many markets in the United States had been highly stable
and trendy, there were enough markets that were moving rapidly by the
mid-2000s that the national series began to show signs of life, and it
continues to be lively.
The period of home price increase starting in 1998 in the United
States was concentrated in some states and metropolitan areas, and
where it was concentrated, there were many stories about the
psychological correlates of the boom. Stories abounded in the U.S.
during the bubble years 2000–2006 of aggressive, even desperate,
bidding on homes, of homes selling the first day on the market for well

above the asking price, of people buying homes in a rush to beat the
market—homes that they had sometimes hardly even had a chance to
look at. People were afraid that the price of housing would soon rise
beyond their means and that they might never be able to afford a house,
and so they rushed to bid on homes. But, in other cities, where there was
not a history of home price volatility, there were few such stories, and
investors were relatively less reactive to home price changes.
Figure 3.3
Home Prices in Some World Cities and for the World, Quarterly, 1985–
2014
Source: Boston (1983-1 = 100, heavy line) and New York (1983-1 =
100, dashed line): S&P/Case-Shiller (Fiserv, CoreLogic); London (1983-1
= 100, heavy line): Halifax; Paris (1983-1 = 100, dashed line) price per
square meter of existing apartments in Paris: Indice Notaire INSEE since
1991, before 1991 Chambre des Notaires de Paris, data courtesy Philippe
Trainar, Fédération Française des Sociétés d’Assurances; Shanghai (1995-
1 = 100, solid thin line): China Real Estate Index System through 2003
linked to eHomeday second-hand home price index starting 2003;
Sydney (1986-2 = 100, solid line): Australian Bureau of Statistics;
Vancouver (1983-1 = 100, dot-dash line): index through 2004 courtesy
of Tsur Somerville, University of British Columbia, linked to Teranet
series starting 2004; Equally-Weighted Global House Price Index (2000-2
= 100, gray line) from the International Monetary Fund (52 countries).

Each home price index is deflated by a Consumer Price Index of the
respective country. Each index was multiplied by a constant to be 100 in
1983-1 where possible.
It is in the big glamorous cities (and associated regions) of the world
that these bubbles tend to happen. Taken together, these regions can
experience a massive boom. It appears that for these cities, there is
indeed more than a national market for real estate. There is an
international market, as Figure 3.3 illustrates.
This figure shows real home prices up to 2014 in Boston, London, New
York, Paris, Shanghai, Sydney, and Vancouver, all of them glamorous
international cities, and for the entire world. The similarity among the
price paths for these cities is striking (really stunning price increases
both in the late 1980s and after the late 1990s, with stagnant or falling
prices in between), as is the similarity of popular stories of exaggerated
excitement about and speculation in homes. And these were not the only
prominent cities undergoing spectacular housing booms in the early
2000s. Others include Bombay, Copenhagen, Dublin, Hangzhou,
Istanbul, Las Vegas, Madrid, Melbourne, Rome, San Diego, Tianjin, and
Washington, D.C. Whatever it was that drove this excitement, it could
cross vast oceans. This notable trend was part of what prompted my
warning in 2005 that we were in the midst of a housing bubble of
unprecedented proportions.
Since 2005, the picture has become more mixed. Some cities
continued their upward trend, with only small retrenchments. Others fell
from their lofty heights and have yet to return. Many have seen a
leveling-off in price increases.
The cities shown in the figure were selected for this plot based on
their newsworthiness and volatility in price movements. The Global
House Price Index, produced by the International Monetary Fund for 52
countries around the world, shows much less volatility, and indeed,
some other world cities showed a very different pattern. For example,
real residential urban land prices in Tokyo more than doubled between
1985 and 1990, at the same time as the 1980s boom in the cities shown

in the figure, but then embarked on a steady downtrend, showing no
signs of the boom after 2000, and falling by nearly half by 2004.12 Prime
residential property in central Delhi doubled in real terms in the period
from 1991 to 1995, when prices in the cities shown in Figure 3.2 were
falling, and then fell by half by 2003, when prices in the cities shown in
Figure 3.2 were rising.13 Still, it is a puzzle that home prices in so many
cities, such as those shown in Figure 3.3, among the most glamorous
cities of the world, are so strikingly similar. We will try to understand
this similarity later in this book.
The Absence of a Substantial Long-Run Uptrend in
Real Home Prices
The reader may find it striking, in looking over the series of home prices
since 1890 in Figure 3.1, that there appears to be no overall continuing
uptrend in real home prices. It is true that for the United States as a
whole, real home prices were almost twice as high in 2006 as in 1890,
but all of that increase occurred in two brief periods: the time right after
World War II (with the first increases occurring in the early 1940s, just
before the war ended) and a period that appears to reflect a lagged
response to the 1990s stock market boom (or a response to its boom and
crash), with the first signs of increase occurring in 1998. Other than
those two periods, real home prices overall have been mostly flat or
declining. Moreover, the overall increase (with real prices up 48% in the
124 years from 1890 to 2014, or 0.3% a year) was not impressive.
Why then do so many people have the impression that home prices
have done so well? I think that, since homes are relatively infrequent
purchases, people still remember the prior purchase price of a home
from long ago and are surprised at the difference between then (when
prices, including consumer prices in general, were lower) and now. The
same thing does not happen with stocks, since companies periodically
authorize splits to keep the price of the stock, in the United States,
around the conventional $30-a-share level. Thus, people do not have
long-run comparisons thrust upon them for stocks as they do for houses.

For example, in closing out the estate of an elderly couple in the early
2000s, one may have been surprised to see that they purchased a house
in 1948 for only $16,000 and that the estate sold that same house in
2004 for $190,000. The appearance is that the investment in the house
did extremely well. But, in fact, the Consumer Price Index rose eightfold
between 1948 and 2004, and so in fact the real increase in value was
only 48%, an increase of less than 1% a year. Moreover, part of the
increase should be attributed to a sequence of investments in the house
or the neighborhood that improved its quality. Even if the house sold in
2004 for twice as much as the median then, $360,000, it still does not
imply great returns on the investment, for that price would imply only a
tripling of real value in over fifty years, a real annual rate of increase of
a little less than 2% a year. About the only time that our attention is
called to such long-term changes in asset value is when we hear stories
about houses, and we may be over-impressed; most of us are not good at
evaluating such stories.
To try to check further whether these data, showing so little real
appreciation of homes, might be in error, I asked economists I know to
direct me to other very long-term home price indices that might provide
some independent evidence about the long-term behavior of such prices.
I was able to locate a few other long-term home price indices, and, even
though they are not for the full time period or for an entire country, they
may provide some more clues about long-term trends.
The U.S. Census has asked, in its decennial censuses since 1940, for
homeowners’ estimates of the value of their homes. Their median
reported value in real (inflation-corrected) terms increased by 2.0% a
year from 1940 to 2000, considerably more than the 0.7% real increase
over the same interval revealed by the home price index shown in Figure
3.1. A growth rate of 2.0% cumulated over 60 years implies twice the
total appreciation in home value that the 0.7% growth rate implies.
However, the Census data take no account of the increased quality and
size of homes as does the index shown in Figure 3.1. There have been
big changes in homes since 1940. Note, for example, that in 1940,
according to the U.S. census, 31% of U.S. dwelling units did not have
running water, and 38% did not have a bathtub or shower. The standard

of living has improved massively since then, and surely homes are a lot
better now. With the U.S. population doubling and real per capita
income quadrupling since 1940, a great many more substantial homes
have been built. The smaller and lower quality homes of 1940 have
largely been torn down over the years, and so we are likely to have a
mistaken impression from the older homes we observe today that homes
of long ago were comparable to homes of today. Much of the Census’
reported 2.0% per year increase in value must really reflect this, not the
appreciation of individual unchanged homes.
There is a remarkable high-quality index from 1628 to 1973 of prices
of houses along the Herengracht, one of the old canals of Amsterdam.
According to Professor Piet Eichholtz of the University of Amsterdam,
this area is a good place to construct a home price index, since the
houses there have remained remarkably unchanged over the centuries
and since home price sale data have been meticulously recorded and
preserved. The index shows quite a number of ups and downs in home
prices over this period—as one might expect from the city that gave us
the tulip mania, the remarkable boom in the price of tulips in the early
1600s. According to Eichholtz’s data, Herengracht home prices doubled
between 1628–29 and 1632–33, just before the peak of the tulip mania,
and home prices fell almost back to their 1628–29 level before tulips
peaked in 1637. The market for these homes was certainly volatile. But
when this index is corrected for inflation over this whole period, we see
that there was not much overall home price increase. From 1628 to 1973
the Herengracht annual real price increase was only 0.2%. Real home
prices did roughly double, but took nearly 350 years to do so.14
My colleague Karl Case produced a long historical index of land values
in the Boston area by searching the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds for
sales of property described in words such as “a certain parcel of pure
land” or “a certain tract of land” and with no mention of buildings or
improvements. This way he was able to purge the price index of the
effects of quality change. He found that, from 1900 to 1997, the real
increase in the price per square foot of land was 3.9% per year. This is a
much higher rate of price increase than is suggested by the price index
shown in the plot, exceeding the growth rate of real GDP.15

There is a famous study of land prices in Chicago by economist Homer
Hoyt, One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago, published in 1933.
Hoyt too found dramatic increases in land prices. For example, his data
show that prices of lots per front foot on State Street and Michigan
Avenue (major downtown addresses) rose 5.9% a year in real (inflation-
corrected) terms from 1877 to 1931, for a twenty-two-fold increase
overall.16
But, of course, these figures for Boston and Chicago are hardly reliable
estimates of the increase in prices of real estate in the United States
overall. Boston and Chicago are not typical of U.S. real estate, any more
than Microsoft was typical of start-up companies. The success of these
cities was a local surprise that people could not have predicted with
confidence. Hoyt himself was quite clear about the surprising growth of
Chicago, for he noted, “The growth of Chicago in the nineteenth century
has been paralleled by no other city of a million population or over in
either ancient or modern times…. It compressed within a single century
the population growth of Paris for twenty centuries.”17
Moreover, land prices are not a good proxy for home prices, which
involve a structure as well as land. Land values long ago accounted for
only a tiny fraction of a home’s value, and so land prices could
appreciate at a relatively high rate in successful cities without making
home prices climb rapidly.
Reflections from casual observation ought to convince us that homes
have not appreciated significantly over the decades. People are living in
larger homes than they were decades ago and are spread out over more
properties; more people are living in a house by themselves over the
decades, if not during the slow years just after the 2007–9 financial
crisis; more children have been moving out and starting their own
homes rather than living with their parents until marriage.18 How could
they afford this if home prices were rising steeply? This suggests that in
the United States, real home price growth must have been less than real
per capita disposable income growth, which was 2.0% a year from 1929
to 2013.
The bottom line appears to be that, while there is some uncertainty
about the actual path of home prices, most of the evidence points to

disappointingly low average rates of real appreciation of most homes.
Why Has There Not Been a Strong Uptrend in Real
Home Prices?
The reader may be puzzled that these data show so little evidence of an
increase in real home prices in the United States over so long a period.
The popular notion that real estate prices always go up is very strong, so
strong that in Japan, Korea, and China there is a name for this notion:
“the real estate myth.” Isn’t land scarce, and isn’t its price going to go up
steadily as population increases and as the level of prosperity increases?
Actually, the theoretical argument that home prices can be expected to
appreciate faster than consumer prices in general is not strong.
Technological progress in the increasingly mechanized construction
industry may proceed faster than technological progress in other sectors,
such as the important service sector. Barbers and teachers and lawyers
and counselors are doing things more or less as they always have, but
new materials, new construction equipment, and prefabrication, as well
as new technology for building high-rise apartment buildings, help make
housing cheaper. If new homes can be built more cheaply, then the price
of homes should tend to fall relative to other prices to reflect that.
Public attention seems to focus most on congested big cities that have
little land available for building, and where land prices can get very
high. But most cities have abundant land. Developers who eye these
abundant-land cities for prospective sites do sometimes complain about
the shortage of land there, and about barriers erected by conservationists
and neighborhood associations, but what they are really talking about is
a shortage of lots in the prime areas where they would most like to
build.
These abundant-land cities show long-run price paths that never
deviate too far from building costs. This should come as no surprise. If
ever home prices were to far exceed the cost of construction, there
would be an incentive for builders to supply more houses, and a steady
increase in supply would continue until the extra supply depressed price

back down to cost.
The situation in these stable cities ought to be considered typical of
much of the United States. The land on which homes are built is of
course limited: except for a few projects to reclaim land from the sea,
they are not making any more land. But almost all of the country’s land
is still in agriculture, forestry, or other non-intensive uses; this is land
whose price is very low per buildable lot, and so there is still plenty of
room to spread out. According to the 2010 census, urban land area was
only 3.1% of total land area in the United States.
However, there is little empty land available to build on in Los
Angeles or Boston or, for that matter, in London or Sydney. And yet the
same safety valve ought to operate there to prevent home prices from
rising too far, at least if people were rational and far-seeing. When home
prices rise to the point that mortgage payments take up a large share of
family income, there is a powerful incentive to move to a lower-cost
area. This safety valve tends, in the long term, to prevent the price of
homes from rising too much in real (inflation-corrected) terms and to
burst bubbles that have inflated too far. The safety valve is more
effective in cities where buildable land is abundant nearby, but it is also
effective in cities far from buildable land, because people and businesses
will, if home prices rise high enough, move far away, even leaving an
area completely.
The problem is that people in glamorous regions often tend to believe
that land prices, already a significant component of home value there,
will keep going up and up. Surely, they think, there is some advantage to
living in those areas. People do enjoy the prestige of living in an area
where celebrities live, and they also benefit from the business
opportunities there. It is easy for residents there to imagine that more
and more people are thinking similarly, and that they will continue to
bid up real estate prices in their city. This is irrational exuberance in the
context of real estate.
But, in reality, if home prices get sufficiently high in a city relative to
the income of the people who live there, and thus make it difficult to
afford a decent home, people start taking a hard look at these
assumptions. The fact is that the prestige one derives from simply living

in a glamorous city is not very significant. And although individual cities
may have reputations tied up with specific businesses, with a little
imagination one sees that other centers in the same businesses are
constantly being set up, like the North Carolina Research Triangle set up
in former tobacco fields. These centers eventually cause corporate
relocators to draw population away from older centers to these new
centers, thereby relieving upward pressure on real estate prices in the
older centers.
Beyond this, very high home prices create political pressures for the
easing of land-use restrictions. Eventually there is an increase in supply
of homes (as for example in high-rise apartments) in the glamorous cities
themselves.
Thus, in glamorous speculative cities, there has been a tendency for
home prices to rise and to crash, but to show little long-term trend.
Prices rise while people are optimistic, but forces are set in motion for
them to crash when they get too high. It is striking to note from Figure
3.2 that the increase in real home prices over the three decades from
1983 to 2013 in Miami and Phoenix was just about zero overall, though
they had both doubled along the way. Based on these trends, owner-
occupied housing is looking like a bad long-term investment relative to
the stock market: despite the occasional volatility of real estate,
nationally it has offered practically no capital gains for long-term
investors. But one must remember the implicit dividends that one
receives from living in a home, that is, the value of the shelter and other
services provided by a home. These dividends are untaxed. It is often
said (correctly) that there is a tax advantage to owning rather than
renting. If one swapped houses with one’s neighbor living in an identical
house and each paid rent to the other (so that the rent received would
cancel out the rent paid), the transaction would be virtually meaningless
from an economic standpoint, but it would incur taxes, since the rent
received would be taxable, while the rent paid would not be deductible.
For this reason, most people are well advised to buy rather than rent the
homes they live in.
Another reason to buy rather than rent is that the rental contract
carries with it intrinsic moral hazard problems: the renter cannot be

given proper incentives to maintain the property as would a homeowner.
The moral hazard problem is reflected both in higher rents and in
restrictions on the homeowner’s rights to engage in certain activities or
to remodel the property to taste.
There is no accurate measure of the tax-free implicit dividends in the
form of housing benefits that housing provides to compare with the
(usually taxable) dividends paid on stocks, nor of the costs of
maintenance that must be offset against the dividends homes provide.
There actually can be no accurate measure of the implicit dividends on
homes, since there is no way to put a dollar value on the psychic benefit
one gets by owning and living in one’s own home, as against the psychic
costs one incurs by having to take care of it. This psychic benefit is not
the same as the rent one can charge on a home, since renters are people
in substantially different circumstances. Homeowners can change their
minds from one day to the next about these psychic benefits. Moreover,
these psychic dividends are not directly proportional to the amount one
invested in the home, as are the dividends on stocks; if one buys more
house than one needs, one may realize a negative psychic dividend from
maintaining too much property.
Thus, there is really no way that one can say authoritatively which has
been the better investment historically, homes or stocks. The answer
differs across individuals, and is ultimately a matter of taste and
circumstance. But individual homeowners have no clarity on this point
and can change their opinions from time to time about the advantages of
investing in housing. We will see evidence of such changes later in this
book.
Irrational Exuberance Then and Now
My research assistants and I have seen some clues to the changing nature
of public thinking regarding real estate speculation over the years. Our
reading of contemporary English-language newspaper and magazine
accounts of real estate markets since the late nineteenth century has
confirmed such changes. We have found relatively little talk about

anything that could be considered national bubbles in home prices until
the last decades of the twentieth century. There seemed to be only
occasional mentions of “irrational exuberance.” The word boom was
frequently used to describe situations in the housing market throughout
the twentieth century, but in earlier years it tended to refer to a boom in
the construction industry (as measured by the number of new homes
built). Accounts by economists of the situation in the national housing
market did not often mention bubbles or speculation. Instead there was a
tendency to stress that building costs were the ultimate determinant of
home prices. Articles often tended to talk about shortages of homes for
sale rather than price increases.
Before the last decades of the twentieth century, it is striking that
there was relatively little public discussion of home prices. As evidence
for this, or as part of the reason for this, note that there was no regularly
published and regularly cited price index for existing homes in the
United States until 1968, when the National Association of Real Estate
Boards median price of existing homes first began to be cited in major
newspapers.19 There was no high-quality existing home price index until
Karl Case and I developed the weighted repeat sales method, used it to
estimate price indices for major U.S. cities, and published these in a
couple of articles in the late 1980s. The method was later adopted by
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and by the U.S. Office of Housing
Enterprise Oversight and its successor (after it was shut down in 2009
after the failures of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) the Federal Housing
Finance Agency and others. Data on the price-rental ratio (akin to the
price-earnings ratio that is used by investors to test for over-or
underpricing in the stock market) did not begin to be stressed in the
news media until the Economist began publishing them for various
countries after 2000.
Therefore, good public information about prices, information that
might help generate irrational exuberance, was not really available until
the close of the twentieth century. Before then, newspaper accounts
would sometimes talk of price changes, but they usually cited either
anecdotal evidence or the opinions of real estate brokers about what was
happening. Even those stories were infrequent, apparently reflecting lack

of public interest in national home price trends.20
Before 1960 general public attention to the housing market often
tended to take the form of outrage at the exorbitant rents that landlords
were able to extract from their tenants, rather than concern about the
course of prices of single-family homes. People were living in a less
avowedly capitalist economy, and they were not primed to believe that
their well-being depended in large measure on their property.
Prior to the last decades of the twentieth century, public attention
focused instead on rent control and on a housing cooperative movement,
whereby groups of people would buy interest in an apartment building
that they controlled as a group. From these conspicuous examples of
government and collective intervention in markets, people might
plausibly have imagined that something would be done by authorities to
prevent home prices from getting out of control.
While rent control and housing cooperatives still exist, the idealistic
ideology that created them is mostly gone. In recent decades, our
increasing public commitment to market solutions to economic
problems, rather than interventions and controls, has led people to
worry more about the possible instability in home prices and hence to
make them more prone to the kind of feedback that generates bubbles.
A Proquest search since 1740 and a Lexis-Nexis search since the 1970s
for the term housing bubble or home price bubble in English-language
newspapers around the world shows that these terms were hardly used
at all until just after the 1987 stock market crash (a time when people
were already talking about bubbles, and many countries were showing
very rapid price increases), but those terms died out soon after 1987.
The terms reappeared in the late 1990s, and their use took off
dramatically after 2000.
Appearance in newspapers does not necessarily imply penetration into
public awareness. On paper questionnaires that Karl Case and I have
been distributing to recent U.S. homebuyers annually since 2003, we
have a number of open-ended questions that asked for written sentence
answers about interpretations of recent market phenomena. The printed
questionnaires do not mention bubbles, nor do they ask directly about
them. In 2003 and 2004 there was virtually no respondent who brought

up the words “housing bubble.” The respondents’ use of the words
surged in 2005, stayed high for several years surrounding the market
peak, and then fell. News stories referring to a housing bubble were
especially frequent then. This then suggests that the concept is not a
natural one for most people, but that the idea had been planted in their
minds by circumstances, media attention, and public talk, for a while.
Life was simpler once; one saved and then bought a home when the
time was right. One expected to buy a home as part of normal living and
didn’t think to worry about what would happen to the price of homes.
The increasingly large role of speculative markets for homes, as well as
of other markets, has fundamentally changed our lives. The price activity
that was once very local and confined to such events as the building of
highways, canals, and railroads has become national and even
international, and it is now connected to popular stories of new
economic eras. The changing behavior of home prices is a sign of
changing public impressions of the value of property, a heightening of
attention to speculative price movements.
The Role of Lending Institutions in Housing
Bubbles
During a bubble, attentional anomalies tend to affect lenders as well as
buyers. They, too, focus their attention on the same investing
opportunities. They, too, are not attentive to—are complacent about—
the risk of a collapse in the market.
The effects of the housing bubble in the early 2000s on lenders in the
United States are aptly described by Vermont Law School professor
Jennifer Taub in her 2014 book Other People’s Houses: How Decades of
Bailouts, Captive Regulators, and Toxic Bankers Made Home Mortgages a
Thrilling Business.21 She describes the atmosphere at major mortgage
lenders during the housing boom just before its peak around 2006 as one
of excitement at their apparent new successes, in an atmosphere of
flagrant disregard of the risks they were creating.
One of these lenders was Washington Mutual, Inc. (WaMu), a savings

bank holding company whose origins go back to the Washington
National Building and Loan Investment Association in 1889, which was
renamed in the early twentieth century as the Washington Mutual
Savings Bank. It was a mutual (a sort of cooperative, not for profit), but
dropped its mutual status in 1983 during the Reagan years of
deregulation and became for-profit. It was unfortunately allowed to keep
the word “mutual” in its name anyway, as if the word “mutual” was a
mere historical anachronism that no longer had meaning for the public.
It lost its ideological roots and became a go-go success story by ignoring
risks. It became the biggest savings and loan in the United States by
aggressively pursuing borrowers. In fact, under WaMu’s aggressive CEO
Kerry Killinger, it adopted and publicized the motto “The Power of Yes”
to trumpet to potential borrowers with poor credit histories that their
mortgage applications would not be turned down. After the crisis, it
became the biggest bank failure in U.S. history. But during the boom
years, the mood in the firm was that of tantalizing success and
inattention to the possibility of a housing crisis that had not happened
since the Great Depression.
Countrywide Financial, under Angelo Mozilo, another mortgage lender
whose boom and collapse figured largely in the financial crisis, had a
similar corporate culture. They had the motto “Price Any Loan.”
Atif Mian of Princeton University and Amir Sufi of the University of
Chicago have shown that in regions where lending standards were more
relaxed, home prices rose more before the bubble and fell more after it
burst.22 Part of this phenomenon is regulatory complacency, allowing
the “success-oriented” lenders to do their thing with little constraint.
Many people have complained to me after the post-2006 collapse:
“why aren’t more of these mortgage lenders in jail?” But it is hard to
place such punishment on them, because it is not easy to demonstrate to
everyone’s satisfaction that they have broken any laws. Kerry Killinger
was in fact sued by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in 2011
for “reckless lending,” but the suit ended with merely a financial
settlement.23 Angelo Mozilo was charged in 2009 by the Securities and
Exchange Commission for insider trading and securities fraud, but again,
this ended merely in a settlement, and all criminal investigations were

stopped in 2010 without any admission of wrongdoing by Mozilo.24
Whatever the details of their actions, and whatever their culpability in
a court of law, from the standpoint of our trying to understand bubbles,
we should view their actions here as essentially a consequence of the
same broader sense of excitement about investing opportunities and
complacency about risks that infected the broader public.
The Path from Here
In the next part of the book, I develop carefully a theory of bubbles, a
theory that applies both to the stock market and to the housing market,
and in fact to any speculative market. The theory acknowledges multiple
causes for these phenomena; they have no simple, one-liner
explanations. And yet the theory also has a basic theoretical model, a
model of feedback that is simple and indispensable for understanding
how prices move. In later parts of this book I turn over and reexamine
the theory of bubbles from a number of directions.

Part One
Structural Factors

Four
Precipitating Factors: The Internet, the
Capitalist Explosion, and Other Events
What ultimately caused the values of the stock
markets in so many countries to rise dramatically from 1982 to the
remarkable peak around 2000? Why, after two major corrections, are the
values of these markets returning again at the time of this writing to
those elevated levels? What accounts for the long downtrend in real
longterm interest rates in many countries over the past couple of
decades? What ultimately caused the boom in real estate markets in so
many cities around the world to follow the stock market boom? To
answer these questions, and questions like them that will surely be
generated in the future, it is not enough to say that the markets in
general are vulnerable to bouts of irrational exuberance. We must specify
what precipitating factors from outside the markets themselves caused
the markets to behave so dramatically.
Most historical events, from wars to revolutions, do not have simple
causes. When these events move in extreme directions, it is usually
because of a confluence of factors, none of which is by itself large
enough to explain these events.
Rome wasn’t built in a day, nor was it destroyed by one sudden bolt of
bad fortune. More likely, it owed its fall to a plurality of factors—some

large and some small, some remote and some immediate—that conspired
together. This ambiguity is unsatisfying to those of us seeking scientific
certitude, especially given that it is so hard to identify and isolate the
precipitating factors to begin with. But that is the nature of history, and
such ambiguity justifies the constant search for new and better
information to expose at least the overall contours of causation.
In Chapter 1, we saw some factors that have seemed, at certain times,
to “explain” movements in the stock market, notably, longterm interest
rates; these might help explain home prices as well. But one of the first
lessons of economics should be that there are many factors that seem
sometimes to “explain” speculative prices, too many for us to analyze
them comfortably. We have to resist the temptation to oversimplify by
singling out only one. Anyway, longterm interest rates are not really
exogenous factors. They are market phenomena determined by many of
the same supply and demand factors that determine the level of prices in
the stock market, and their behavior is part of the same market
psychology that drives the stock market. We have to try to understand
the origins of market psychology itself.
Understanding the factors that precipitate market moves is doubly
difficult because the timing of the major market events tends not to be
lined up well with the timing of the precipitating factors. The
precipitating factors often tend to be medium-term trends that catch the
public’s attention only after they have been in place for a long time. The
timing of specific market events is, as we shall discuss in the next
chapter, directly determined by people’s reactions to the market and to
one another, which impart to the market complex internal dynamics. But
we must look at the precipitating factors if we are to understand why the
market moves.
Those who predict avalanches look at snowfall patterns and
temperature patterns over long periods of time before an actual
avalanche event, even though they know that there may be no sudden
change in these patterns at the time of an avalanche. It may never be
possible to say why an actual avalanche occurred at the precise moment
that it did. It is the same with the dramatic movements of stock markets
and other speculative markets.

Recognizing these limitations, let us look at a list of factors that might
be offered to help explain the increase in the value over the past twenty
years of worldwide stock prices—and in some cases, of bond and real
estate prices as well—as an exercise to help us understand what the
future may hold.
These factors make up the skin of the bubble, if you will. I concentrate
here mostly on factors that have had an effect on the markets not warranted
by rational analysis of economic fundamentals. The list omits consideration
of all the small variations in fundamental factors (for example, the
growth in earnings, the change in real interest rates) that should
rationally have an impact on financial markets. In more normal times or
in markets for individual stocks, such rational factors would assume
relatively greater prominence in any discussion of changes in prices.
Indeed it is thanks to a market’s ability to respond appropriately to such
factors, for a variety of investments, that well-functioning financial
markets generally promote, rather than hinder, economic efficiency.1
The list of factors here was constructed specifically to help us understand
the extraordinary situations that have occurred recently (and, arguably,
are ongoing) in the stock markets and the housing markets, and so it
concentrates on less rational influences.
In detailing these factors, I describe the reaction of the general public,
not just of professional investment managers. Some observers believe
that professional investment managers are more sensible and work to
offset the irrational exuberance of the nonprofessional investing public.
Therefore, these observers might argue that a sharp distinction should be
drawn between the behavior of the professionals and that of the
nonprofessionals.2 Professional investors, however, are not immune to
the effects of the popular investing culture that we observe in individual
investors, and many of the factors described here no doubt influence
their thinking as well. There is in fact no clear distinction between
professional institutional investors and individual investors, since the
professionals routinely give advice to the individual investors.
Some of these factors exist in the background of the market, including
the advance of capitalism, the increased emphasis on business success,
the revolution in information technology, the demographics of the Baby

Boom, the decline of inflation and the economics of money illusion, and
the rise of gambling and pleasure in risk taking in general. Others
operate in the fore-ground and shape the changing culture of investment.
These include greatly increased media coverage of business, the
aggressively optimistic forecasts of stock analysts, the rise of 401(k)
plans, the mutual funds explosion, and the expanding volume of trade in
the stock market.
Twelve Precipitating Factors That Propelled the
Late Stages of the Millennium Boom, 1982–2000
In the first edition of this book, published in 2000—just before the stock
market peak of that year—I listed twelve precipitating factors for the
build-up of bullish psychology and of stock prices to enormous levels by
the beginning of the year. Here is the list as it was presented then, from
the point of view of the zeitgeist of that time; some of these factors are
still operative today, others less so.
The Arrival of the Internet at a Time of Solid Earnings
Growth
The Internet and the World Wide Web invaded our homes during the
second half of the 1990s, making us intimately conscious of the pace of
technological change. The World Wide Web first appeared in the news in
November 1993. The Mosaic web browser first became available to the
public in February 1994. These dates mark the very beginning of the
general public’s exposure to the Internet, when only a few people had
access to it. Significantly large numbers of users did not discover the
web until 1997 and later, marking the very years when the NASDAQ
stock price index (which was then even more heavily weighted toward
startup high-tech stocks than it is today) soared, tripling to the end of
1999, and the price-earnings ratios took off into unprecedented territory.
Internet technology is unusual in that it is a source of entertainment

and preoccupation for us all, indeed for the whole family. In this sense,
it is comparable in importance to the personal computer or, before that,
to television. In fact, the impression it conveys of a changed future is
even more vivid than that produced when televisions or personal
computers entered the home. Using the Internet gives people a sense of
mastery of the world. They can electronically roam the world and
accomplish tasks that would have been impossible before. They can even
put up a website and become a factor in the world economy themselves.
In contrast, the advent of television made them passive receivers of
entertainment, and personal computers were used by most people before
the Internet mainly as typewriters and high-tech pinball machines.
Because of the vivid and immediate personal impression the Internet
makes, people find it plausible to assume that it also has great economic
importance. It is much easier to imagine the consequences of advances
in this technology than the consequences of, say, improved shipbuilding
technology or new developments in materials science. Most of us simply
do not hear much about research in those areas.
Spectacular U.S. corporate earnings growth in 1994, up 36% in real
terms as measured by the S&P Composite real earnings, followed by real
earnings growth of 8% in 1995 and 10% in 1996, coincided roughly
with the Internet’s birth but in fact had little to do with the Internet.
Instead the earnings growth was attributed by analysts to a continuation
of the slow recovery from the 1990–91 recession, coupled with a weak
dollar and strong foreign demand for U.S. capital and technology
exports, as well as with cost-cutting initiatives by U.S. companies. It
could not have been the Internet that caused the growth in profits: the
fledgling Internet companies were not making much of a profit yet. But
the occurrence of profit growth coincident with the appearance of a new
technology as dramatic as the Internet created an impression among the
general public that the two events were somehow connected. Publicity
linking these twin factors, the Internet boom and the profit growth, was
especially strong because of the advent of the year 2000 and the new
millennium, a time of much optimistic discussion of the future.
The Internet is, of course, an important technological advance in its
own right, and it, as well as other developments in computer technology

and robotics, does promise to have an unpredictable and powerful
impact on our future. But one should question what impact the Internet
and the computer revolution should have on the valuation of existing
U.S. corporations. New technology will always affect the market, but
should it really raise the value of existing companies, given that those
existing companies do not have a monopoly on the new technology?3
Should the advent of the Internet have raised the valuation of the Dow—
which at the time contained no Internet stocks?4
The notion that existing companies would benefit from the Internet
revolution was belied by the stories of E*Trade.com, Amazon.com, and
other upstarts, which did not even exist just a few years before 2000.
People might well have thought that still more new companies would
appear in the future, in the United States and abroad, and these would
compete with the companies in which they invested in the late 1990s.
Simply put, the effect of new technology on existing companies can go
either way: it can boost or depress their profits.
What matters for a stock market boom is not, however, the reality of
the Internet revolution, which is hard to quantify, but rather the public
impressions that the revolution has created. Public reaction is influenced
by the intuitive plausibility of Internet lore, and this plausibility is
ultimately influenced by the ease with which examples or arguments
come to mind. If we are regularly spending time on the Internet, then
these examples will come to mind very easily.
Triumphalism and the Decline of Foreign Economic
Rivals
In the late 1990s, before the 2000 peak in the stock markets, most other
countries seemed to be imitating the Western economic system.
Communist China has been embracing market forces since the late
1970s. Increasing tolerance of free markets in the Soviet Union
culminated with the breakup of that nation in 1991 into smaller, market-
oriented states. The world seemed to be swinging our way, and therefore
it started to seem only natural that the U.S. stock market should be most

highly valued in the world.
These political events unfolded gradually after the bull market began
in 1982. And the years after the start of the bull market witnessed the
decline in the Japanese market after 1989, the prolonged economic
slump in Japan, and the Asian financial crisis of 1997–98, which
coincided roughly with the dramatic burst of the U.S. stock market into
uncharted territory at the beginning of the new millennium. These
foreign events might have been viewed as bad for the U.S. stock market
—as the harbinger of bad things to come here—but instead they were
seen by many as the weakening of major rivals. The relation between the
United States and its economic rivals was often described in the media as
a competition in which there can only be one winner, as in a sports
event. The weakening of a rival was thus viewed simplistically as good
news.
Cultural and Political Changes Favoring Business
Success
The soaring of the stock market during 1982–2000 was accompanied by
a significant rise in materialistic values. A Roper-Starch questionnaire
given to survey participants in both 1975 and 1994 asked, “When you
think of the good life—the life you’d like to have, which of the things on
this list, if any, are part of that good life, as far as you personally are
concerned?” In 1975, 38% picked the option “a lot of money,” whereas
in 1994, fully 63% picked that option.5
Such feelings transformed our culture into one that reveres the
successful businessperson as much as or even more than the
accomplished scientist, artist, or revolutionary. The idea that investing in
stocks is a road to quick riches developed a certain appeal to born-again
materialists.
Stay-at-home mothers, who devote their lives to their families, become
less admired, and this is part of the reason women joined the work force
in increasing numbers. This then also increased the availability of credit
and home financing—starting around the 1970s, mortgage lenders began

to count the spouse’s income in qualifying a mortgage, expanding
available mortgage credit. This helped propel home prices.
A decline in crime rates also, on the flip side, encouraged materialistic
values by making people feel more secure, less worried that they would
be robbed or physically harmed. In the United States, the rate of
property crimes per 1,000 people fell 49% between 1993 and 2003, and
the rate of violent crimes per 1,000 people fell 55%.6 One could then
more comfortably flaunt wealth, and so wealth became more attractive.
Living in an ostentatious home was now more appealing. Fear of
terrorism increased, but terrorists did not seem to strike wealthy people
preferentially, and generally not in their homes. The declining crime
rates in the U.S. made a capitalist lifestyle seem a better model for the
entire world.
Note that materialistic values do not by themselves have any logical
bearing on the level of the stock market. Whether or not people are
materialistic, it is still reasonable to expect them to save for the future
and to seek out the best vehicles for their savings. But it is plausible that
such feelings would influence their demand for stocks, which have long
held out at least the possibility of amassing substantial riches quickly.
Moreover, such feelings have an unmistakable political impact, which in
turn affects the success of corporate investments.
A Republican Congress and Capital Gains Tax Cuts
When Ronald Reagan was elected in 1980, so too was a Republican
Senate, the first since 1948. In 1994, both houses became Republican
(though with a Democratic president, just as happened again in 2014).
Sensing the changed public attitudes that had elected them, these
lawmakers were much more pro-business than their Democratic
predecessors had been. This change in Congress boosted public
confidence in the stock market because of a variety of controls that the
legislature can exert over corporate profits and investor returns.
Consider taxation. No sooner had the Republican Congress been seated
in 1995 than proposals to cut the capital gains tax became prominent. In

1997, the top capital gains tax rate was cut from 28% to 20%. As soon as
this cut was enacted, Congress talked of cutting rates further. A 1999 tax
bill would have cut capital gains taxes still further, but President Clinton
vetoed it.
Anticipation of possible future capital gains tax cuts can have a
favorable impact on the stock market, even when tax rates actually
remain unchanged. From 1994 to 1997, investors were widely advised to
hold on to their longterm capital gains, not to realize them, until after
the capital gains tax cut. This had a strengthening effect on the market.
At the time of the 1997 capital gains tax cut, there was fear that
investors who had been waiting to sell would do so and bring the market
down, as had apparently happened after capital gains tax cuts in 1978
and 1980. But this did not happen in 1997. Of course, many investors
must have thought there could be an even more favorable capital gains
tax rate in their future, and if so, there would have been no reason to
sell right after the 1997 cut took effect.
It is likely that the general atmosphere of public talk of future capital
gains tax cuts, of possible indexing of capital gains taxes to inflation, and
of analogous tax cuts (for example, estate tax cuts) had created among
investors a reluctance to sell their appreciated stocks. If capital gains tax
rates may be cut sharply in the future, why sell when the rates are as
high as 20%? Having been advised by experts to wait and see about
capital gains tax cuts, many investors could be expected to defer sales of
appreciated assets until they were more clearly at a historic low in
capital gains tax rates. Such an atmosphere of holding, not folding,
naturally placed upward pressure on stock prices.
The Baby Boom and Its Perceived Effects on the
Markets
Following World War II, a substantial increase in the birth rate took
place in the United States. Peacetime prosperity encouraged those who
had postponed families because of the depression and the war to have
children. There were also postwar birth rate increases in the United

Kingdom, France, and Japan, but they were not as protracted or strong
as that in the United States, no doubt at least in part because the
economies of those nations were in such disarray after the war. Then,
around 1966, the growth of U.S. and world population showed a
dramatic decline, one that continues to this day. This decline was
unusual, if not unique, by historical standards: it did not occur because
of famine or war, but rather because of an endogenous decline in the
fertility rate.7
Advances in birth control technology (the pill was invented in 1959
and became widely available by the mid-1960s in the United States and
many other countries) and social changes that accepted the legality of
contraception and abortion were instrumental in lowering the rate of
population growth, as were growing urbanization and advances in
education and economic aspiration levels. The Baby Boom and the
subsequent Baby Bust have created a looming social security crisis in
many countries of the world: they understood then that when the
Boomers grew old and finally retired, the number of young working
people available to support the elderly population would decline
worldwide (as today we see it has indeed begun to do).8
The Baby Boom in the United States was marked by very high birth
rates during the years 1946–66, and so there were, at the peak of the
market in 2000, an unusually large number of people between the ages
of 35 and 55. Two theories suggested then that the presence of so many
middle-aged people ought to boost the stock market. One theory justified
the high price-earnings ratios we saw in the Millennium Boom as the
result of those Boomers competing against one another to buy stocks to
save for their eventual retirement and bidding share prices up relative to
the earnings they generate. According to the other theory, spending on
current goods and services boosts stock prices, through a generalized
positive effect on the economy: high expenditures mean high profits for
companies.
These simple Baby Boom stories were just a bit too simple. For one
thing, they neglected to consider when the Baby Boom should affect the
stock market. Maybe the effect of the Baby Boom was already factored
into stock prices by investors even before 1982. They also neglected such

factors as the emergence of new capitalist economies worldwide and
their demand, in another twenty years, for U.S. stocks. The theory that
the Baby Boom drove the market up owing to Boomers’ demand for
goods would seem to imply that the market was high because earnings
were high; it would not explain the high price-earnings ratios that were
reached at the peak of the market.
If life-cycle savings patterns (the first effect) alone were to be the
dominant force in the markets for savings vehicles, there would tend to
be strong correlations in price behavior across alternative asset classes,
and 
strong 
correlations 
over 
time 
between 
asset 
prices 
and
demographics. When the most numerous generation feels they need to
save, they would tend to bid up all savings vehicles: stocks, bonds, and
real estate. When the most numerous generation feels they need to draw
down their savings, their selling would tend to force down the prices of
all these vehicles. But when one looks at longterm data on stocks, bonds,
and real estate, one finds that there has in fact been relatively little
relation between their real values.9
Another theory that was popular in the 1990s as to why Boomers may
have had a positive impact on the market is that the Boomers, who have
no memory of the Great Depression of the 1930s or of World War II,
have less anxiety about the market and the world. There is indeed some
evidence that shared experiences in formative years leave a mark forever
on a generation’s attitudes.10 Over the course of the bull market since
1982, Boomers have gradually replaced as prime investors those who
were teens or young adults during the depression and the war.
Although there is no doubt at least some truth to these theories of the
Baby Boom’s effects on the stock market, it may be public perceptions of
the Baby Boom and its presumed effects that were most responsible for
the surge in the market. The impact of the Baby Boom was one of the
most talked-about issues relating to both the stock market and the
housing market, and all this talk in and of itself had the potential to
affect stock market value. People believed that the Baby Boom
represented an important source of strength for the markets, and they
did not see this strength faltering any time soon. These public
perceptions contributed to a feeling that there was a good reason for the

market to be high and a confidence that it would stay that way for some
time. Congratulating themselves on their cleverness in understanding
and betting on these population trends in their stock market
investments, many investors failed to appreciate just how common their
thinking really was. Their perceptions fueled continuing upward spirals
in market valuations.
The most prominent exponent of the Baby Boom theory of the stock
market and the housing market was Harry S. Dent. He began with a
1992 book titled The Great Boom Ahead: Your Comprehensive Guide to
Personal and Business Profit in the New Era of Prosperity, which was so
successful that he wrote several sequels. His 1998 book, The Roaring
2000s: Building the Wealth & Lifestyle You Desire in the Greatest Boom in
History, was on the New York Times best-seller list for four weeks in
1998. His 1999 book, The Roaring 2000s Investor: Strategies for the Life
You Want, was ranked in 1999 within the top 100 in sales among all
books, according to Amazon.com. This book predicted that the stock
market would continue to boom until 2009, when the number of people
who are 46 will start to decline, and then the market would drop.
Dent’s success with the Baby Boom theme during the bull market
predictably spawned a number of imitators—all extolling the wonderful
opportunities to get rich from the Baby Boom’s effects on investments—
with titles like Boomernomics: The Future of Your Money in the Upcoming
Generational Warfare by William Sterling and Stephen Waite (1998) and
Boom, Bust & Echo: How to Profit from the Coming Demographic Shift by
David K. Foot and Daniel Stoffman (1996). Discussions of the Baby
Boom and its effects on the markets were everywhere, and their general
tone was that the Boom was good for the stock market and would
continue to be for years to come.
An Expansion in Media Reporting of Business News
The first all-news television network, the Cable News Network (CNN),
appeared in 1980 and gradually grew, with viewership boosted by such
events as the Gulf War in 1991 and the O. J. Simpson trial in 1995—

stories that fueled great demand for uninterrupted coverage. The public
acquired the habit of watching the news on television throughout the
day (and night), not simply at the dinner hour. CNN was followed by the
business networks. The Financial News Network, founded in 1983, was
later absorbed into CNBC. Then CNNfn and Bloomberg Television
appeared. Together, these networks produced an uninterrupted stream of
financial news, much of it devoted to the stock market. So pervasive was
their influence that traditional brokerage firms found it necessary to
keep CNBC running in the lower corners of their brokers’ computer
screens. So many clients would call to ask about something they had just
heard on the networks that brokers (who were supposed to be too busy
working to watch television!) began to seem behind the curve.
Not merely the scope, but also the nature, of business reporting
changed in those years. According to a study by Richard Parker, a senior
fellow at Harvard University’s Shorenstein Center, newspapers in the last
two decades of the twentieth century gradually transformed their
formerly staid business sections into enhanced “Money” sections, which
dispensed useful tips about personal investing. Articles about individual
corporations that used to be written as if they would be of interest only
to those involved in the industry or the corporations themselves were
then written with a slant toward profit opportunities for individual
investors; these articles regularly included analysts’ opinions of the
implications of the news for investors.11
According to a 2004 study by James Hamilton there had been a
gradual decline over the preceding several decades in the “hard news”
content of the U.S. television evening news in favor of news that is either
of story quality or of immediate use to the viewer. Hamilton attributed
this change to the increasing competitiveness of the news media
business, 
and 
competitive 
advantage 
increasingly 
depends 
on
maintaining marginal customers who are less interested in depth of
understanding.12 News about investing tips naturally prospers in such an
environment.
Enhanced reporting of investing options led to increased demand for
stocks, just as advertisements for a consumer product make people more
familiar with the product, remind them of the option to buy, and

ultimately motivate them to buy. Most advertising is really not the
presentation of important facts about a product but merely a reminder of
the product and its image. Given the heightened media coverage of
investments, a stock market boom should come as no greater surprise
than increased sales of the latest sports utility vehicle after a major ad
campaign.
As further evidence that the media growth was boosting the stock
market, we now know that after the peak in the market in 2000,
business reporting took a major hit in reaction to declining public
interest. Hip business magazines like Red Herring, the Industry Standard,
and others went out of business. Viewership of major business television
networks also took a hit. Sales of business books fell sharply after 2000.
Attention to the stock market by surviving newspapers also declined
after 2000. According to a Lexis-Nexis search, the number of articles
mentioning the stock market in major U.S. newspapers more than tripled
from 1990 to 1998, buoyed for a while by news about various financial
scandals. But by 2004, the number had fallen by more than 50% from
the peak.
Analysts’ Increasingly Optimistic Forecasts
According to data from Zacks Investment Research about analysts’
recommendations 
on 
some 
6,000 
companies, 
only 
1.0% 
of
recommendations were “sells” in late 1999 (while 69.5% were “buys”
and 29.9% were “holds”). This situation stood in striking contrast to that
indicated by previous data. Ten years earlier, the percentage of sells, at
9.1%, was nine times higher.13
Analysts were especially reluctant to make sell recommendations near
the peak of the stock market for a couple of reasons. One reason often
given for this reluctance is that a sell recommendation might have
incurred the wrath of the company involved, and companies could
retaliate by refusing to talk with analysts whom they viewed as
submitting negative reports, excluding them from information sessions,
and not offering them access to key executives as they prepared earnings

forecasts. This situation, occurring in the lead-up to the peak of the
market, represented a fundamental change in the culture of the
investment 
industry 
and 
in 
the 
tacit 
understanding 
that
recommendations are as objective as the analyst can make them.
Another reason that many analysts were reluctant to issue sell
recommendations was that an increasing number of them were
employed by firms that underwrote securities, and these firms did not
want their analysts to do anything that might jeopardize this lucrative
side of the business. Analysts affiliated with investment banks gave
significantly more favorable recommendations on firms for which their
employer was the co-or lead underwriter than did unaffiliated analysts,
even though their earnings forecasts usually were not stronger.14
Those who knew the ropes realized that hold recommendations were
more like the sell recommendations of earlier years. In 1999 James
Grant, a well-known market commentator, wrote, “Honesty was never a
profit center on Wall Street, but the brokers used to keep up
appearances. Now they have stopped pretending. More than ever,
securities research, as it is called, is a branch of sales. Investor,
beware.”15
Analysts’ recommendations were transformed by something analogous
to grade inflation in our schools: C used to be an average grade, yet now
it is considered as bordering on failure. Many of us know that such
inflation happens, and we try to correct for it when interpreting our
children’s grades. Similarly, in the stock market we factor inflation into
analysts’ recommendations. But not everyone was able to make adequate
corrections for analysts’ newly hyperbolic language, and so the general
effect of their changed standards was to encourage the higher valuation
of stocks.
Moreover, it was not just a change in the units of measurement that
infected analysts’ reports. Even their quantitative forecasts of earnings
growth showed an upward bias. According to a study by Steven Sharpe
of the Federal Reserve Board, analysts’ expectations of growth in the
S&P 500 earnings per share exceeded actual growth in nineteen of the
twenty-one years between 1979 and 1999. The average difference
between the projected and actual growth rate of earnings was 9

percentage points. The analysts breezed through both the steep recession
of 1980–81 and the recession of 1990–91, making forecasts of earnings
growth in the 10% range.16 Since Sharpe’s study, analysts failed to
predict the magnitude of the sharp drop in earnings around 2001.
This bias in analysts’ forecasts was a characteristic of their one-year
forecasts; they were usually more sober in predicting the next earnings
announcement just before it was released. Analysts tended to comply
with firms’ wishes to see positive earnings surprises each quarter, by
issuing estimates that fell slightly short of the actual number. Then
firms, just before making earnings announcements, talked with analysts
whose forecasts were on the high side, urging them down, while
neglecting to talk with analysts whose forecasts were on the low side,
thereby creating a downward bias in the average earnings forecast
without being blatantly untruthful.17 Casual evaluation of analysts’
forecasts by clients would most naturally take the form of comparing the
latest earnings announcement with the latest forecast, and therefore
analysts did not sharply overestimate earnings just before they were
announced, which would have been an obvious embarrassment to them.
Analysts’ upward bias came to the fore when predicting the vague,
undifferentiated future, not immediate quarterly or yearly outcomes.
And it was expectations for the vague, undifferentiated future, even far
beyond one-year forecasts, that lay behind the high market valuations
we saw at the peak of the millennium stock market. According to
another study by Steven Sharpe, a 1 percentage point difference in
analysts’ industry-forecasted earnings growth caused a 5–8% boost in the
industry’s price-earnings ratio. Thus, Sharpe concluded that the rise in
analysts’ longterm growth expectations would “appear to have been a
key factor driving equity market valuations skyward during the latter
half of the 1990s.”18
Analysts had few worries about being uniformly optimistic regarding
the distant future; they apparently concluded that such generalized
optimism was simply good for business. Certainly they perceived that
their fellow analysts were demonstrating such long-run optimism, and
there was, after all, safety in numbers. Glibly and routinely offering
“great-outlook-for-the-U.S.” patter to the investing public, they perhaps

gave little thought to its accuracy.
The problems afflicting analysts’ recommendations were reduced
somewhat after the stock market had peaked. Some firms voluntarily
instituted new rules requiring that their analysts really make sell
recommendations. Because of Regulation FD, imposed by the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission in October 2000, analysts who had
been critical of a company could no longer be excluded from
information meetings, which now had to be open to the general public.
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 mandated, among other things, that
research reports by analysts not be subjected to prepublication clearance
by persons involved with investment banking, that there not be any
retaliation against analysts whose research reports conflicted with an
investment banking business, and that firms set up informational
partitions between their investment banking and securities analysis
divisions. In 2003, the Securities and Exchange Commission announced
a $1.4 billion Global Analyst Research Settlement for ten of the top
investment firms in the United States, which were accused of offering
their customers deliberately biased analysis with the aim of promoting
their investment banking business. Of this sum, $80 million was
earmarked for an investor education program. Analyst reports also
started to disclose the percentage of sell-neutral-buy recommendations to
provide context for investors reading the reports. This settlement
appears to have reduced the optimistic bias in earnings forecasts that
existed during the Millennium Boom, not only in the United States, but
also, because of legal spillovers, in many countries.19
The Expansion of Defined Contribution Pension Plans
Changes over time in the nature of employee pension plans during the
Millennium Boom encouraged people to learn about, and eventually
accept, stocks as investments. Although these changes did not inherently
favor stocks over other investments for retirement, they did—by forcing
people to make explicit choices among their retirement investments,
choices that previously were made for them—work in the direction of

encouraging investment in stocks. Making such choices taught people
about stocks and increased their level of familiarity with them.
The most revolutionary change in these institutions in the United
States was the expansion of defined contribution pension plans at the
expense of defined benefit plans. An important milestone came in 1981,
when the first 401(k) plan was created; it was soon ratified by a
landmark ruling by the Internal Revenue Service.20 Prior to that date,
employer pension plans had usually been of the defined benefit type, in
which the employer merely promised a fixed pension to its employees
when they retired. Reserves to pay the defined benefit were managed by
the employer. With 401(k) plans (as well as such analogues as 403(b)
plans), employees are offered the opportunity to have contributions to a
tax-deferred retirement account deducted from their paychecks. They
then own the investments in their 401(k) accounts and must allocate
them among stocks, bonds, and money market accounts. The tax law
began to encourage employers to make matching contributions to their
employees’ 401(k) accounts, so there came to be a powerful incentive for
employees to participate.
Various factors also encouraged the growth of defined contribution
pension plans since the bottom of the U.S. market in 1982. Labor unions
traditionally sought defined benefit plans for their members as a way of
ensuring their welfare in retirement, and the decline of unions meant
diminishing support for these 
plans. 
The 
importance of 
the
manufacturing sector, long a stronghold of labor unions and defined
benefit pensions, was shrinking. Defined benefit plans became less
popular with management, because so-called overfunded plans
sometimes make companies vulnerable to takeovers. On the flip side,
defined benefit plans could leave companies on the hook for growing
and uncertain obligations as workers live longer. Defined contribution
plans came to be seen as less costly to administer than defined benefit
plans. Moreover, defined contribution plans became more popular with
those employees who liked to monitor their investments, and therefore
companies began to offer the plans to all employees.
Through these tax incentives for participation in plans offering choices
between stocks and bonds, the government forced working people to

learn about the advantages of stocks versus bonds or money market
investments. Any incentive to learn about an investment vehicle is likely
to boost demand for it. In 1954, when the New York Stock Exchange
carried out a marketing study to understand how to promote public
interest in the stock market, it concluded that most people did not know
very much about stocks: only 23% of the public even knew enough to
define what a share is. Moreover, the survey revealed a vague public
distrust of the stock market.21 So the exchange held a series of public
information seminars to try to remedy this lack of knowledge and this
prejudice against stocks as an investment. But no set of seminars that the
exchange could ever afford could compare with the learning-by-doing
effects of the defined contribution plan in encouraging public knowledge
about and interest in stocks.
If one’s attention to the stock market is filtered through the lens of a
pension plan, it may encourage longer-term thinking. The stated purpose
of a 401(k) plan is to prepare for retirement, which is, for most workers,
many years away. A 401(k) plan sponsor does not call participants with
tips about short-run investment opportunities, and statements about
portfolio value are mailed out only infrequently. The participant cannot
check his or her portfolio value every day in the newspaper. This longer-
term thinking may boost stock market valuations by diverting investors
from preoccupation with short-term fluctuations.
Encouraging longer-term thinking among investors is probably, all in
all, a good thing. But an additional effect of 401(k) plans as they came,
in the Millennium Boom, to be structured may have been to boost
demand for stocks further through another psychological mechanism. By
offering multiple stock market investment categories for employees to
choose among, employers can create demand for stocks. An effect of
categories on ultimate investment choices was demonstrated by
economists Shlomo Benartzi and Richard Thaler. They found, using both
experimental data and data on actual pension fund allocations, that
people tend to spread their allocations evenly over the available options,
without regard to the contents of the options. For example, if a 401(k)
plan offers a choice of a stock fund and a bond fund, many people will
put 50% of their contributions into each. If the plan instead offers a

choice between a stock fund and a balanced fund (with, say, 50% stocks
and 50% bonds in it), people will still tend to put 50% into each, even
though they are now really putting 75% of their portfolio into stocks.22
The options offered as part of 401(k) plans tended to be heavily
weighted in favor of stocks. In contrast, most 401(k) plans did not have
any real estate options. In this way the growth of 401(k) plans
encouraged the growth of public interest in the stock market relative to
the real estate market. Indeed the typical 401(k) plan in the 1990s
offered choices among a stock fund, a balanced fund (typically 60%
stocks and 40% bonds), company stock (investments in the employer
itself), possibly a specialized stock fund (for example, a growth fund), a
bond fund, and a money market fund, as well as fixed-income
guaranteed investment contracts. It is not surprising, from the findings of
the Benartzi and Thaler study, that people put proportionately more into
the stock funds, given that so many stock-related choices were laid out
before them. Moreover, since there were more interesting “flavors” of
stocks—just as, in the corner liquor store, there are more varieties of
wine than of vodka—more attention is likely to be drawn to them.
It is in such subtle ways that the interest value or curiosity value of
stocks, not any kind of rational decision-making process, encouraged
investors during the Millennium Boom to want to buy more of them than
they otherwise would. And this seemingly unconscious interest has
helped bid up the price of the stock market.
The Growth of Mutual Funds
The Millennium Boom also coincided with a peculiar growth spurt in the
mutual fund industry and a proliferation of advertising for mutual funds.
In 1982, at the beginning of the recent longterm bull market, there were
only 340 equity mutual funds in the United States. By 1998, there were
3,513—more equity mutual funds than stocks listed on the New York
Stock Exchange. In 1984, there were 8.9 million domestic equity mutual
fund shareholder accounts in the United States, about one for every ten
U.S. households. By 2007, there were 145 million such shareholder

accounts, or well over one account per household.23 After the 2007 peak
in the stock market, the growth in the number of accounts stalled, and
by 2013 the number had fallen to 121.6 million accounts, well below the
number at the 2007 peak.
Mutual funds are a relatively new name for a very old idea.
Investment companies arose in the United States as early as the 1820s,
though these were not then called mutual funds.24 The Massachusetts
Investors Trust, generally regarded as the first mutual fund, was created
in 1924. It was different from the other investment trusts in that it
published its portfolio, promised prudent investment policies, and was
self-liquidating when investors demanded cash for their investments. But
this first mutual fund got off to a slow start: investors were not quick to
appreciate its advantages. The 1920s bull market instead saw the
proliferation of many other investment trusts: investment companies
without the safeguards we associate with mutual funds today, many of
them dishonest operations, and some of them even, effectively, Ponzi
schemes (see Chapter 5).
After the stock market crash of 1929, many of these became even
more worthless than the market as a whole, and the public soured on
investment trusts. In particular, they felt betrayed by the managers of
the trusts, who were often pursuing their own interests in flagrant
conflict with those of their investors. The Investment Company Act of
1940, which established regulations for investment companies, helped
restore a measure of public confidence. But people needed more than
just government regulations; they needed a new name, one that did not
carry the unsavory associations of investment trusts. The term mutual
fund, with its similarity to the mutual savings bank and the mutual
insurance company—venerable institutions that had survived the stock
market crash largely untouched by scandal—was much more reassuring
and attractive to investors.25
The mutual fund industry was given new impetus by the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, which created Individual
Retirement Accounts. But the industry really took off after the bull
market began in 1982.
Part of the reason that equity mutual funds proliferated so rapidly

after that date is that they are used as part of 401(k) pension plans. As
people invest their plan balances directly in mutual funds, they develop
greater familiarity with the concept; they are thus more inclined to
invest their non-401(k) savings in mutual funds as well.
Another reason for the funds’ explosive growth is that they have paid
for a great deal of advertising. During the Millennium Boom, television
shows, magazines, and newspapers frequently carried advertisements for
them, and active investors received unsolicited ads in the mail. Mutual
funds encouraged more naive investors to participate in the market by
leading them to think that the experts managing the funds would steer
them away from pitfalls.
The proliferation of equity mutual funds therefore focused public
attention on the market, with the effect of encouraging speculative price
movements in stock market aggregates rather than in individual
stocks.26 The emerging popular concept that mutual fund investing is
sound, convenient, and safe has encouraged many investors who were
once afraid of the market to want to enter it, thereby contributing to an
upward thrust in the market. (See Chapter 12 for a further discussion of
public attitudes toward mutual funds.)
The Decline of Inflation and the Effects of Money
Illusion
The outlook for U.S. inflation, as measured by the percentage change in
the Consumer Price Index, gradually improved over the course of the
Millennium Boom. In 1982, even though U.S. inflation was then around
4% a year, there was still considerable uncertainty as to whether it
would return to the high level (nearly 15% for the year) experienced in
1980. The most dramatic stock price increases of this bull market
occurred once the inflation rate had settled down into the 2–3% range in
the mid-1990s, and then it dropped below 2%.
The general public paid a lot of attention then to inflation, as late
1990s interview studies of public attitudes toward it revealed.27 People
widely believed that the inflation rate was a barometer of the economic

and social health of a nation. High inflation was perceived to signify
economic disarray, loss of basic values, and national disgrace before
foreigners. Low inflation was viewed as a sign of economic prosperity,
social justice, and good government. Many of these attitudes are still
with us today, though probably not as strongly after twenty years of less-
worrisome inflation. It is not surprising, therefore, that a falling inflation
rate over the span of the Millennium Boom boosted public confidence
and hence stock market valuation.
But from a purely rational standpoint, this stock market reaction to
inflation is inappropriate. In 1979 economists Franco Modigliani and
Richard Cohn published an article arguing that the stock market reacts
inappropriately to inflation because people do not fully understand the
effect of inflation on interest rates.28 When inflation is high—as it was
when they wrote, near the bottom of the stock market in 1982—nominal
interest rates (the usual interest rates we see quoted every day) are high,
because they must compensate investors for the inflation that is eroding
the value of their dollars. Yet expected real longterm interest rates
(interest rates as corrected for the expected effects of future longterm
inflation) did not appear to be high then, and therefore there should not
have been any stock market reaction to the high nominal rates.
Modigliani and Cohn suggested that the market tends to be depressed
when nominal rates are high even when real rates are not high because
of a sort of “money illusion,” or public confusion about the effects of a
changing monetary standard. When there is inflation, we are changing
the value of the dollar, and therefore changing the yardstick by which
we measure values. Faced with a changing yardstick, it is not surprising
that many people become confused.29
Public misunderstanding about inflation near the climax of the
Millennium Boom may have encouraged high expectations for real
(inflation-corrected) returns. Most data on past long-run stock market
returns is reported in the media in nominal terms, without correction for
inflation, and people might naturally be encouraged to expect that such
nominal returns would continue in the future. The (lagged ten-year
average) inflation rate at the end of 1982 was over 8%; by the end of the
Millennium Boom it was down to less than 3%. Therefore, expecting the

same nominal returns in the late stages of that boom was the equivalent
of expecting a lot more in real terms.
Plots of historical stock price indices in the media are almost
invariably shown in nominal terms, not the real (inflation-corrected)
terms shown in the figures in this book. By 2000, U.S. consumer prices
had almost doubled since 1982. This inflation imparted a strong upward
trend to long-run historical plots of stock price indices. Thus, the
extraordinary behavior of the real stock market at the turn of the
millennium, the spike up in stock prices that was visible in Figure 1.1,
does not stand out in the long historical plots we see in the media. In
fact, viewing these plots encourages us to think that nothing at all
unusual was going on during the Millennium Boom in the stock market.
The reason news writers generally do not make corrections for
inflation is probably that they think such adjustments are esoteric and
would not be widely appreciated by their readers. And they are probably
right. The general public has not by and large taken Economics 101, and
those who did sit through it have probably forgotten much of what they
learned. Thus, they have not assimilated the basic lesson that there is
nothing natural about measuring prices in dollars when the quantity,
and value, of those dollars has been highly unstable. The public at large
does not fully appreciate that the more meaningful measure of the stock
market level is in terms of some broad basket of goods, as it is when
corrected for consumer price inflation.30
Expansion of the Volume of Trade: Discount Brokers,
Day Traders, and Twenty-Four-Hour Trading
The turnover rate (the total shares sold in a year divided by the total
number of shares) for New York Stock Exchange stocks nearly doubled
between 1982 and 1999, from 42% to 78%.31 The NASDAQ market,
which emphasizes high-tech stocks, showed an even greater turnover
rate increase, from 88% in 1990 to 221% in 1999.32 The higher turnover
rate may have been symptomatic of increased interest in the market as a
result of other factors mentioned here. But another reason for the rise in

turnover rate in the stock market was the declining cost of making a
trade. After competitive brokerage commissions were mandated by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in 1975, there was an
immediate drop in commission rates, and discount brokers came into
being. Technological and organizational changes were also set in motion.
Such innovations as the Small Order Execution System, introduced by
NASDAQ in 1985, and new order-handling rules issued by the SEC in
1997 have resulted in ever lower trading costs. SEC regulations
encouraging equal access to the markets spawned a growing number of
amateur investors who can “day trade,” that is, try to make profits by
rapidly trading stocks using the same order execution systems used by
professionals.
The significant growth of online trading services coincides roughly
with the most spectacular increases in the stock market between 1997
and 2001. According to a study by the SEC, there were 3.7 million
online accounts in the United States in 1997; by 1999 there were 9.7
million such accounts.33 The growth of online trading, as well as the
associated Internet-based information and communication services, may
well have encouraged minute-by-minute attention to the market. After-
hours trading on the exchanges also had the potential to increase the
level of attention paid to the market, as investors could track changing
prices in their living rooms during their leisure time.
Speculative prices seem to get a volatility nudge whenever markets are
open. The magnitude of price changes tends to be lower over two-day
intervals that include a day when markets are closed (as, for example,
during a time when the New York Stock Exchange closed on
Wednesdays).34 It is therefore plausible to expect that the expansion of
online trading and the opening of markets for longer hours raised their
volatility. Whether it should have raised or lowered the level of prices is
somewhat less certain.
There is, however, some evidence suggesting that more frequent
exposure to price quotes might in fact diminish demand for stocks.
Economists Shlomo Benartzi and Richard Thaler have shown that the
time pattern of attention to market prices can have important effects on
the demand for stocks. In experimental situations, if people are shown

daily data on stock prices, they express much less interest in investing in
stocks than if they are shown only longer-run returns.35 Witnessing the
day-to-day noise in stock prices apparently encourages more fear about
the inherent risk of investing in stocks. Thus, institutional innovations
that encourage viewing the market price more frequently might tend to
depress the price level of the market.
In contrast, the increased frequency of reporting of stock prices caused
by recent institutional and technological changes may have just the
opposite effect to that observed in the experimental situation crafted by
Benartzi and Thaler. In a non-experimental setting, where people’s focus
of attention is not controlled by an experimenter, the increased
frequency of price observations may tend to increase the demand for
stocks by attracting attention to them. And changing public attention is a
critical factor in the valuation of investments, a point that will be
elaborated in Chapter 10.
The Rise of Gambling Opportunities
The prevalence of commercial and government-supported gambling was
rising around the world during the Millennium Boom.36 This increasing
prevalence parallels an increasing respect for markets and private
property, as well as an increasing admiration for “winners” and
contempt for “losers.”
In the United States, commercial gambling, both legal and illegal,
experienced about a sixty-fold increase in real (inflation-corrected) terms
between 1962 and 2000.37 According to a 2000 telephone survey, 82%
of adults in the United States gambled in the preceding year, up from
61% in a 1975 study.38 The amount lost on gambling by people in the
United States in 2000 was more than they spent on movie tickets,
recorded music, theme parks, spectator sports, and video games
combined.39
Most forms of gambling and lotteries were outlawed by the states of
this country in the 1870s after a scandal in the Louisiana lottery, and the
Louisiana national lottery itself was effectively shut down by an 1890

act of Congress prohibiting the sale of lottery tickets by mail. From then
until 1970, opportunities to gamble legally were confined largely to
racetracks, a form of gambling that has limited public appeal and which,
at the time, required travel to a racetrack. But by 1975, there were
thirteen state lotteries, and by 1999, there were thirty-seven, offering
very convenient and easy means of wagering. Until 1990, legalized
casinos operated only in Nevada and Atlantic City. By 1999, there were
nearly 100 riverboat and dockside casinos and 260 casinos on Indian
reservations. During the same interval, betting at racetracks also
expanded dramatically, with the development of off-track betting relying
on satellite broadcasts of the races. Cable and Internet wagering on races
was possible from home. There was also a proliferation of electronic
gambling devices, including slot machines, video poker, video keno, and
other stand-alone devices. In some states, these could even be found at
truck stops, convenience stores, and lottery outlets. The ubiquity and
convenience of gambling opportunities, and the strength of the
marketing 
campaign 
undertaken 
to 
promote 
gambling, 
were
unprecedented in history.
The rise of gambling institutions, and the increased frequency of
actual gambling, had potentially important effects on our culture and on
changed attitudes toward risk taking in other areas, such as investing in
the stock market. The legalization of gambling in the form of state
lotteries has sometimes been observed to help the illegal numbers
business, rather than replace it,40 and thus it might also have promoted
other capricious risk-taking activities. Gambling suppresses natural
inhibitions against taking risks, and some of the gambling contracts, in
particular the lotteries, superficially resemble financial markets: one
deals with a computer, one receives a certificate (the lottery ticket), and,
in the case of the so-called mega-lottos, one participates in a much-
talked-about national phenomenon. Having established a habit of
participating in such gambling, it would be natural to graduate to its
more upscale form, speculation in securities.
The highest U.S. stock market volatility occurred between 1929 and
1933—when it was more than twice as high as had ever been previously
recorded. This period of volatility occurred during a “gambling craze”

that was brought on not by legalization, but by the organized crime that
was inadvertently created by the prohibition of alcoholic beverages from
1920 to 1933.41 The criminal gangs that grew after 1920 to satisfy the
nation’s thirst for alcohol found it natural to branch out into numbers
games or speakeasy versions of craps and roulette. Organized crime
developed a modern and efficient distribution, marketing, and retail
system to supply the nation at large with liquor, going far beyond its
traditional neighborhood strongholds, and this same infrastructure
served to facilitate illegal gambling activities on a much larger scale.
Certainly the widespread disrespect for the law fostered by Prohibition
helped legitimize gambling.
A spillover from gambling to financial volatility may come about
because gambling, and the institutions that promote it, yield an inflated
estimate of one’s own ultimate potential for good luck, a heightened
interest in how one performs compared with others, and a new way to
stimulate oneself out of a feeling of boredom or monotony. At the end of
the 1990s, people were constantly subjected to highly professional
advertisements that tried to foster such attitudes, even radio and
television advertisements that depict typical gamblers’ self-justifications
as expressed by professional actors. These marketing efforts, and the
experience of gambling or seeing others gamble, may well have the
effect of encouraging frivolous risk-taking behavior in the stock market
as well. Such ads were sometimes startlingly explicit. In 1999, near the
peak of the stock market, a Connecticut billboard advertising off-track
betting touted it, in big letters, as being “Like the Stock Market, Only
Faster.”
Precipitating Factors That Propelled the
Ownership-Society Boom, 2003–7
When the second edition of this book came out in 2005, five years after I
compiled the above list, I felt that some of the twelve precipitating
factors whose psychological impacts were driving the market had gone
away or had diminished. The Internet boom was still going strong, but

the most optimistic inferences had become discredited by the bursting of
the dot-com bubble. The Republican majority in both chambers in
Congress, with its highly pro-business predilections, was gone. The 2006
election created a Democratic majority in both chambers. The triumph
of capitalism in the former Soviet Union and China was now no longer
news. But many of the precipitating factors were still operative. These
factors need not have changed for the market to have turned down
between 2000 and 2003—as we shall see in the next chapter, on
amplification mechanisms—and these precipitating factors may still
have been around to help with the upturn from 2003 to 2007.
Other boosts to the market, other precipitating factors, also appeared
after 2003, as described in the second edition of this book. These
additional factors also revved up both the stock market and the housing
market.
The Ownership Society
The capitalist ideal at the beginning of the twenty-first century seemed
to be evolving into an even more extreme ideal, one in which the value
of our private property has a bigger influence on our lives. We had
witnessed the demise of traditional communism and socialism, the
decline in labor unions, and the end of the cooperative movement and
other communal social movements. But now we witnessed such
capitalist innovations as online auctions and brokerages.
President George W. Bush named this new society the “ownership
society” and featured this phrase prominently in his successful 2004
presidential reelection campaign: “And there is a source of upward
mobility in America that comes with ownership. When a woman owns
her own business she’s upwardly mobile. When a Latino or an African
American starts his or her own business they become upwardly mobile.
Ownership is a powerful part of the American Dream.”42
Bush wanted to see homeownership extended to a larger portion of
our society, and he tried (and failed) to alter the structure of Social
Security to encourage people to invest in the stock market through

individual retirement savings accounts. This model saw private property
extending far beyond its traditional realm, into health savings accounts
and school vouchers. Economists have extolled the virtues of private
property in aligning incentives and creating committed citizens, and
these ideas shaped public policy then.43
This political philosophy did not emphasize the importance of
government monitoring of mortgage lending practices. Regulators in the
years leading up to the financial crisis of 2007–9 left the rapidly growing
subprime lenders in the United States to their own ambitious devices,
allowing them to take great risks to make it possible for more people to
own homes, by giving mortgages to borrowers having poor credit ratings
or poorly documented mortgage applications.
Feeling that they had increasingly to rely on their own resources,
people felt themselves less secure. They felt increasingly thrust into a
rapidly changing world job market that might make them rich—or might
suddenly dump them. In a survey of homebuyers in 2004, Karl Case and
I asked: “Do you worry that your (or your household’s) ability to earn as
much income in future years as you expect might be in danger because
of changes in the economy (someone in China competing for your job, a
computer replacing your job, etc.)?” Nearly half of our 442 respondents
(48%) said they were worried. Some of them said that one motivation
for buying their house was the sense of security that homeownership
provides in the face of the other insecurities.44
Paradoxically, the fears that drove people to look to investments for
security in an increasingly capitalist economy may actually have lowered
the personal savings rate, since the demand-induced increase in the price
of their investments may have given them an illusion that they were
saving through the appreciation of their assets. The increases in home
values in the early 2000s far exceeded the amounts people were saving
from their paychecks. The appreciation in households’ real estate
holdings from 2001 to 2003 increased U.S. household wealth on average
ten times as much as personal savings did in that period.45 For
homeowners, actually saving from one’s paycheck for the future seemed
almost irrelevant in view of the increase in asset values that came from
doing nothing more than just buying and holding.

Supportive Monetary Policy
Alan Greenspan continued to be Chair of the Federal Reserve until 2006,
thus guiding the economy for most of the 2003–7 expansion. His
reputation for believing in free markets thus remained as one of the
reasons for thinking that the stock market, or the housing boom, would
not be stifled by the Fed, even as the price-earnings ratio grew
alarmingly high. His reputation increasingly encouraged optimism for
the markets.
During the boom years of the late 1990s, Alan Greenspan and his
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) had done nothing to stop the
growth of the stock market until the very end, watching the dramatic
bull market charge for over four years without any effort to rein it in. On
the contrary, it appeared to many people during the Ownership-Society
Boom that the Fed would act only to prevent a drop in the market,
because of the fears Greenspan had mentioned that such a drop would
impair the real economy.
Greenspan talked repeatedly of the “flexibility” of the U.S. economy.
“The more flexible an economy,” he said in a 2005 speech, “the greater
its 
ability 
to self-correct 
after 
inevitable, 
often 
unanticipated
disturbances.”46 The implication was that he would do nothing as Fed
Chair to stop the Ownership-Society Boom.
Many thought that Greenspan was so supportive of the stock market
that his presence as Fed chair was as good as having a put on the stock
market to protect us from stock market declines. The rationale behind
this talk of the Greenspan put was that Greenspan had used his power to
prevent a stock market debacle: in 1987, after the stock market crash; in
1998, after the Russian debt crisis and the collapse of Long Term Capital
Management, the flagship hedge fund; and on the eve of the millennium,
when he took steps to prevent the “Y2K crisis.” It was thought that he
had proven through his actions that he would never let the market fall
sharply.
Later, of course, some people would also credit him for cutting interest
rates very aggressively on January 3, 2001, when the evidence of a

recession on the horizon was only rather weak. In fact, the rate cut came
two months before the beginning of the recession of 2001. The stock
market was indeed significantly buoyed by the news that the Fed would
cut rates so aggressively, and the NASDAQ index experienced its largest
one-day increase ever: 14%. Ultimately, the Fed cut interest rates as the
stock market fell, to a low of 1% by 2003. This aggressive rate cut,
which put real (inflation-corrected) interest rates well into negative
territory, was probably a significant contributing factor to the housing
boom after 2001.
Expansionary monetary policy has not been a consistent factor in asset
price booms. A 2003 study by Adam Posen of the Institute for
International Economics concluded that of twenty-four stock market
booms around the world since 1970, only six were accompanied by
monetary easing, and of eighteen property price booms, again only six.47
But his conclusion in no way contradicts my conclusion that the
generally supportive stance of Alan Greenspan and other central bankers
was a contributing factor both to the Millennium Boom and to the
Ownership-Society Boom that came on its heels.
Precipitating Factors That Propelled the New-
Normal Boom
After the 2007–9 stock market crash, stock markets around the world
began another dizzy climb upward. The puzzle in understanding this is
that the climb upward occurred while the world economy was still
depressed from the financial crisis, and nations were increasingly
troubled by political impasses and, after the Arab Spring revolts in 2011,
roiled by heightened tensions internationally. The new precipitating
factors this time had to do particularly with the decline in fears of an
acute financial crisis and with the government policies to try to cure it,
as well as with some new impressions of the technological revolution
and the insecurity of our jobs. The new precipitating factors seem less
starry-eyed-everything-is-wonderful than was the case for the events
leading up to the 2000 peak.

From Depression Scare to New Normal
At the height of the 2007–9 financial crisis, national leaders across the
world talked of the risk of a repeat of the Great Depression of the 1930s.
They did so because they needed to get support for their controversial
economic stimulus policies and efforts to bail out failing financial
institutions. But by 2009, this talk had quite a serious effect on public
confidence, and there was genuine anxiety that, despite the
governments’ efforts, there would indeed be another Great Depression
and another 1929-style stock market crash.
In 2009, the University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment survey found
a sharp increase in the percentage of Americans who worried about a
repeat of the Great Depression. Their question was: “Looking ahead,
which would you say is more likely—that in the country as a whole we’ll
have continuous good times during the next five years or so, or that we
will have periods of widespread unemployment or recession, or what?”48
The confidence index that the Michigan survey administrators derive
from answers to this question fell in 2009 to its lowest value since the
recession of 1990–91 and then followed an irregular trend upward for
the next five years.
Under the auspices of the International Center for Finance at the Yale
School of Management, I have constructed a number of indices of high-
income investor confidence from our questionnaire surveys. We
regularly survey both high-income individual and institutional investors
in the United States. One of the indices is a “crash confidence” index,
which is based on the question: “What do you think is the probability of
a catastrophic stock market crash in the U.S., like that of October 28,
1929 or October 19, 1987, in the next six months, including the case
that a crash occurs in the other countries and spreads to the U.S.?”49
In 2009, crash confidence set a record low (the surveys began in
1989), both for individual and institutional investors, and then started
an irregular trend upward for the next five years. The market may have
been low in 2009, but people were temporarily really worried then in
the heat of the most extreme moments of the financial crisis that it could

fall much lower.
The U.S. Federal Reserve launched a series of “stress tests” of financial
institutions, starting with the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program in
2009. Miraculously, these tests concluded that many bank holding
companies had adequate capital to survive even an adverse economic
scenario, and others were given an estimated amount of capital to raise
so that they, too, could survive. The stress tests reassured markets.
U.S. corporate earnings, which had almost hit zero for the S&P 500 in
2009, rebounded quickly as companies instituted policies of cost cutting
to restore earnings and investor confidence. Massive layoffs of their
employees helped restore profits but led to high unemployment and a
loss of consumer confidence. The cost cutting may also have lowered
profits in the longer run, if the companies lost the help of these
employees in preserving longterm value, but only time will tell if this
has happened. However, the cost cutting did restore accounting earnings
quickly, which was interpreted as a favorable sign by many investors
who were looking for signs of hope at a fearful time.
In 2009 Bill Gross, founder of the investment management firm
PIMCO, now at Janus Capital, summed up this weak optimism, which he
called the “new normal”: “it’s time to recognize that things have
changed and that they will continue to change for the next—yes, the
next 10 years and maybe even the next 20 years. We are heading into
what we call the New Normal, which is a period of time in which
economies grow very slowly as opposed to growing like weeds, the way
children do.”50
The same moderately optimistic situation did not prevail in Europe,
where the sovereign debt crisis intervened in 2010, leading to great
worries of longterm stagnation there. Hence, the rebound in the stock
markets after 2009 was not uniform around the world, and European
stock markets still tend to be less highly priced as of this writing.
Extremely Loose Monetary Policy and Quantitative
Easing

Short-term interest rates were driven to virtually zero in the New
Normal by the Federal Reserve and other central banks through open
market policy in response to the 2007–9 financial crisis. Longterm
interest rates began to follow them down. In 2008, the Fed announced
the first of its three quantitative easing programs, which had the Fed
buying mortgage securities and treasury securities. Ultimately, through
such purchases, the Fed increased its assets from less than one trillion
dollars to over four trillion dollars, a radical departure from past
practice.
In 2008, the Fed began a policy of “forward guidance,” of
preannouncing that it would not raise interest rates for some time to
come, thereby encouraging longterm interest rates to fall more than they
otherwise would. Ten-year Treasury yields fell to an all-time record low
of 1.43% in July 2012, from over 5% before the crisis in 2007–9. The
result was a situation in which most investors felt very disappointed
with their return on bond investments, leading to a “reach for yield”
attitude after the crisis. Even though the stock market was still perceived
as risky, many thought that at least it had some real upside potential,
encouraging them to buy stocks at higher and higher earnings multiples.
The very fact that U.S. longterm home mortgage rates in the fall of
2012 were at all-time record lows created an unprecedented demand for
housing, despite a still-weak economy, since prospective homebuyers did
not want to lose out on an opportunity that was perceived as once-in-a-
lifetime.
End-of-Career Anxieties
The 2007–9 financial crisis spawned a massive decline in the labor force
participation rate in the United States, from 66.4% in January 2007 to
62.8% in June 2014, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The anxieties of being out of the labor force (or suspecting that one
might soon be) may help further propel the “reaching for yield” in
investing that low interest rates have already encouraged: people may
take greater risks with their investments to keep alive a hope of living

comfortably for years into the future without employment. The meaning
of the term “reaching for yield” seems to have shifted somewhat around
the time of the New-Normal Boom. It was most often used to describe
investing in high-interest-rate bonds or mortgages with diminished
regard for their risk. Now, with real interest rates near zero, it is more
often used to describe aggressive investing in risky stocks or complicated
new investment products.
Part of this decline in the percentage of the population working is due
to the long-expected retirement of Baby Boomers. But there is another,
more worrisome component. Those laid off during or after the 2007–9
financial crisis may have viewed the experience as the end of an era,
because many layoffs have been described as longterm cost cutting—the
corporation becoming leaner and meaner—not as jobs that are likely to
come back when the crisis recedes. Those losing jobs may have felt that
in the current economy it would be pointless to start retraining for a
different job. They may have retired earlier than they planned,
sometimes much earlier, perhaps by claiming disabilities. The U.S. Social
Security Administration has documented a significant increase in
disability benefit applications since the financial crisis.
Even for young people, there are vivid, psychologically salient, new
career risks that are apparently increasing a desire to save, and a
wishful-thinking bias toward speculative investments like stocks. New
job-replacing technology has been highly visible. Particularly noticeable
is the rapid expansion of mobile connections to computers and the
Internet, with tablet computers, smart phones, and soon even Google
Glass. These are vivid new images in our minds, because everywhere one
goes in 2014 one sees people fiddling with these devices, which were not
so prominent before 2009. One now even hears people talking to their
devices. Apple introduced their automated assistant “Siri” for the iPhone
in 2011. I now can talk to my mobile phone in my pocket and ask, “OK:
what is the traffic to work like right now?” and a voice comes out from
my pocket, providing the estimated driving time to work (it already
knows where I am and where I work and the best route to work). One
naturally wonders: where is all this technology going, and what jobs will
it replace?

Other technological talk since the Ownership-Society Boom has raised
further existential angst about employment. Testing of driverless cars on
public streets began in 2011. The Massachusetts Institute of
Technology’s Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
has more recently unveiled a BakeBot robot that can bake a cake in a
conventional kitchen, and the lab is working on a robot that will change
a baby’s diapers.51
Most people have some new worries about their jobs since the New-
Normal Boom began in 2009, and that increased worry probably should
be on the list of precipitating factors for the stock market boom (as well
as being considered as a source of weakness for the aggregate economy).
Many people are accustomed to thinking that bad news about
projected future employment income, or bad news about its uncertainty,
should tend to push stock prices down rather than up, but economic
theory (as explicated by Robert E. Lucas, for example) suggests just the
opposite.52 One might call this a “life preservers on the Titanic theory.”
When passengers on a ship think the vessel is in danger of sinking, a life
preserver, a table, or anything that floats may suddenly become
extremely valuable, and not because these assets have changed their
physical attributes. Similarly, at a time when people are worried about
the sustainability of their labor income, and there are not enough really
good investment opportunities, they may tend to bid up prices of all
manner of existing longterm assets in their efforts to save for the
dangerous lean years seen ahead. They may not manage to save more in
real terms. They may hold such assets even if they now believe the assets
are overpriced and in danger of losing value in the future.
The actual effects of changes in perceived risk further depend on
psychological and sociological factors. The perceived increase in risks in
the employment market—the perceptions of rapid technological and
industrial change—have broad cultural effects that are sometimes
blamed for other problems as well, such as the rise of nationalism
around the world and a tendency to aggression between nations, as
exemplified by the 2014 conflict in Ukraine and tensions in many other
places.53

Rising Inequality
Quite apart from the effect of the general fear people have of losing out
in the economy of the future, there is a related effect of the rising
inequality that may be directly connected to rising asset prices. The
current trend, which started in the United States and other countries
around the time of the Ronald Reagan presidency in 1981 and of the
beginning of the Millennium Bubble in 1982, is that of a steady increase
in labor income inequality. As shown by Thomas Piketty in his 2014
book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, there was a clear turning point
upward at that time in the earnings of the top 1% of incomes in the
United States, and the trend was closely related to an uptrend in the
share of the top wage percentile in the total wage bill.54 According to
Piketty’s data, the last time such an increase occurred in the share of
income going to the top 1% was in the 1920s, which corresponded
roughly to the bull market of the Roaring Twenties, and inequality of
total income and of labor income peaked around the peak of the market
in 1929.
There are a number of mechanisms by which a rise in the share of
income going to the top 1% could give an upward impulse to asset
prices. Higher income people tend to save more, as Piketty emphasized,
and if there are not enough available opportunities for new investments,
then as time goes on and there are more and more such people, they
could bid up the value of the existing capital stock. The advent of a new
rich class could change the politics—or the perceived politics—of the
future, to incent regulators to favor business, making the outlook for
after-tax profit higher. The higher inequality may be related to lower
business moral standards and greater willingness of businesses to play
games with their earnings statements. The perceptions of inequality may
favor people with modest incomes “reaching for yield” with a wishful-
thinking bias in their investments.
But the effect of income inequality on asset prices is not entirely clear.
Public awareness of rising inequality increased dramatically during the
New-Normal Boom after 2009. Notably, the Occupy Wall Street
movement of 2011–13, in the United States and other countries, with its

slogan “We are the ninety-nine percent,” may mark the beginning of a
time when the repugnance toward inequality is more important in
politics, and when government policy will be less favorable to investors.
The prospect of government policy hurting asset values in the future
may adversely affect their prices today. On the other hand—surprisingly
to some—the capture of both houses of the U.S. Congress by Republicans
seems to suggest a shift in public policy against redistributive policies
and toward a policy of protecting wealth and thus supporting asset
prices.
The Rise of Nationalism and War Stirrings
A final precipitating factor for the New-Normal Boom should also be
mentioned, though it too has ambiguous effects on the pricing of asset
markets. To the alarm of many people, we see now, in a number of
countries, the rise of nationalistic and xenophobic political parties. In
some cases exaggerated stories of abuses of nationals in foreign countries
is a new source of anger and conflict, and in other cases weakly
controlled immigration is increasingly resented.
This change may be indirectly caused by the effects on popular
psychology of some of the precipitating factors listed above: the 2007–9
financial crisis with the economic crisis that has continued after it, the
end-of-career fears associated with globalization and advancing
technology, and the rising inequality.
As Benjamin Friedman documented in his 2005 book The Moral
Consequences of Economic Growth, prolonged periods of disappointing
economic growth seem to be periods of public anger and increasing
intolerance toward minority groups or other countries. These periods can
then descend into unrest, terrorism, or war. Rising inequality associated
with rapid economic growth may be bearable, he argues, but may
become unbearable as growth slows.
At the time of this writing we have now recently seen an outbreak of
wars in Gaza, Iraq, Israel, Syria, and Ukraine, the establishment of a
terrorist Islamic State, and an associated rise in terrorist threats around

the world. We can only hope that we do not see more of these events in
the future.
Such events have already created anxieties that may have propelled
asset prices up even further, as people have tried to find a safety net for
themselves, bidding prices of existing assets up rather than successfully
saving. But it is also possible that this sense of unrest may have had the
net effect of encouraging people to hold their assets in more liquid form.
Some may even have feared confiscation or wartime taxation, and
longterm asset prices might have been adversely affected.
The stock markets of the world collapsed in the summer of 1914,
when World War I broke out in Europe. In contrast, some of the world
stock markets soared on the day when World War II officially began.55
On Sunday, September 3, 1939, Great Britain, France, India (which
included today’s Bangladesh and Pakistan), Australia, and New Zealand
declared war on Germany, which was defying demands to evacuate its
forces from Poland. When U.S. markets opened after Labor Day, on
Tuesday, September 5, the S&P Composite Stock Price Index rose 9.63%,
one of its biggest one-trading-day increases in history.
We can only hope that nothing as dramatic as those events is in store
for us. But we will have just to wait and see how evolving conflicts
develop and play out in public imagination and then later, through
amplification mechanisms, have their effects on markets.
Summing Up
Looking back at the list of potential precipitating factors for the three
recent booms, in the stock market, bond market, and real estate, one
may be struck by the sheer multiplicity of factors that appear to have
been at work. It is worth remembering that there is no air-tight science
of speculative market pricing. We have certainly made progress in
understanding these markets, but the complexity of real life continues to
prevail.
Many of the factors that led to these booms had a self-fulfilling aspect
to them, and they are thus difficult, if not impossible, to capture in

predictive scientific explanations. Yet many of them also have
indisputable markers. The Internet boom, the rise of online trading, the
Republican Congress, and the proposed capital gains tax cuts occurred
just as the stock market started its most breathtaking ascent in the
1990s. Other factors—including the rise of defined contribution pension
plans, the growth of mutual funds, the decline of inflation, and the
expansion of the volume of trade—were clearly associated with events
that had unfolded since the bottom of the market in 1982. Beyond these,
our culture clearly reflects further developments that accompanied the
surge in stocks and in real estate. For example, studies reveal that the
degree of materialism rose steadily in the past generation, that the belief
in markets following the demise of communism contributed to
confidence in the capitalist system, and perhaps most interestingly, that
gambling was on the rise around the world. Many of these factors were
present in Europe and in other countries as well as the United States,
and so a theory that they are responsible for the stock market and real
estate market booms in the United States is not inconsistent with the fact
that the boom is shared substantially by these other countries.56
But it was never my intent to argue that one can explain the ups and
downs of the markets in terms of the precipitating factors alone. The
markets have lives of their own due to feedback, the amplification
mechanism that spreads the actions of the precipitating factors through
time and that sometimes makes the effects of these factors so big and so
important as to take our breath away. It is to these amplifying
mechanisms that we turn in the next chapter.

Five
Amplification Mechanisms: Naturally
Occurring Ponzi Processes
In the previous chapter, we examined a number of
precipitating factors that have helped drive the stock market and the
market for homes. In this chapter, we consider how the effect of these
factors is amplified by mechanisms involving investor confidence,
investor expectations for future market performance, and related
influences on investor demand. To provide context and concreteness, we
shall first examine evidence about investor confidence and expectations.
The amplification mechanisms work through a sort of feedback loop;
later in this chapter, they will also be described as a type of naturally
occurring Ponzi process. Investors, their confidence and expectations
buoyed by past price increases, bid up speculative prices further, thereby
enticing more investors to do the same, so that the cycle repeats again
and again, resulting in an amplified response to the original precipitating
factors. The feedback mechanism is widely suggested in popular
discourse and is one of the oldest financial theories.1 But it is not usually
mentioned in contemporary finance textbooks.
The feedback theory is often described as merely a hypothesis,
unproven. In fact, there is some evidence in support of such a feedback
mechanism, as we shall see.

Changes in Investor Confidence
A striking feature of the bull stock market of the 1990s and the bear
stock market after 2000 has been their relation to changes in investor
confidence in stocks. It appears that by the late 1990s a very simple
notion had taken over investors’ thinking: the notion that stocks are the
“best investment” and investors cannot go wrong with them over the
long run. This idea appears in sharp contrast to the notion that seemed
to prevail in the late 1970s, after the stock market crash of 1973–74,
when most people appear to have thought that real estate was the “best
investment.” But I was not doing questionnaire surveys then, so I do not
have evidence of what they thought then.
Figure 5.1
Stocks as Best Investment, 1996–2014
Percentage of U.S. high-income individuals who said they agreed with
the statement, “The stock market is the best investment for long-term
holders, who can just buy and hold through the ups and downs of the
market,” along with the real S&P 500 Stock Price Index. Source: Author’s
calculations using surveys conducted at Yale International Center for
Finance, Standard & Poor’s, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Starting in 1996, after concluding that the belief that stocks are the
best investment and cannot fail had become a real staple of popular
culture, it occurred to me that I ought to tabulate how belief in this
simple notion has changed through time. I added a question to my high-
income individual investor questionnaire, asking whether the respondent
agreed with the statement, “The stock market is the best investment for
long-term holders, who can just buy and hold through the ups and
downs of the market.” The data I collected, and that are now being
updated by the Yale School of Management, are shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.2
Real Estate as Best Investment, 2003–2013
Percentage of recent U.S. homebuyers who said they agreed with the
statement, “Real estate is the best investment for long-term holders, who
can just buy and hold through the ups and downs of the market,” along
with the real Case-Shiller/S&P Home Price Indices. Source: Author’s
calculations using surveys conducted at Yale International Center for
Finance, Standard & Poor’s, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Agreement that stocks are the best investment during the boom years
leading to 2000 was obviously very strong. Fully 97% of the respondents
agreed in the peak year of the market, 2000. A 97% level of agreement
with just about any statement put forth in a survey question is

remarkable, and it is all the more so when the statement is about
something as personal as investing strategy.2 After the market started to
sag, the strength of agreement with this statement also started to sag.
The percentage of respondents who agreed fell from 97% in 2000 to
72% in 2011. Belief in the stock market is still strong (I would conclude
that irrational exuberance is still here), though it is eroding. But the
point here that stock price changes feed back into corresponding changes
in long-term optimism is well supported by this evidence.
During the recent housing boom, my colleague Karl Case and I asked
essentially the same question about real estate as we had about stocks as
a part of a survey of a random sample of recent homebuyers in each of
four cities—Boston, Los Angeles, Milwaukee, and San Francisco.
Figure 5.3
Opinion of Aftermath of a Stock Market Crash, 1996–2014
Percentage of high-income U.S. investors who agree “If there is another
crash like October 19, 1987, the market will surely be back up to its
former levels in a couple years or so,” along with the real S&P 500 Stock
Price Index. Source: Author’s calculations using surveys conducted at
Yale International Center for Finance, Standard & Poor’s, U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics.
As shown in Figure 5.2, we find the same striking correlation between

prices and opinions about best investment: generally when home prices
are going up, the percentage who think real estate is the best investment
also goes up. When home prices are going down, the percentage who
think real estate is the best investment goes down too. This is feedback.3
Associated with these “best investment” views is a feeling that prices
always go up in the longer run, if not immediately, and this belief varies
through time and across markets. As part of our survey of high-income
investors, we asked the following question: “How much do you agree
with this statement? ‘If there is another crash like October 19, 1987, the
market will surely be back up to its former levels in a couple years or
so.’” Figure 5.3 shows the responses.
The agreement with this statement roughly tracks the market. When
the market was near its peak in 1999, near the end of the Millennium
Boom, 88% agreed with this statement. After 2000, when the stock
market started sliding, the percentage who agreed also started sliding, to
69%, by 2004. When the stock market rose with the Ownership-Society
Boom, the percentage who agreed started increasing as well, to 76% in
2007. When the market corrected down after 2007, so did the
percentage agreeing, though it was not until 2012 that agreement fell to
its lowest point of 56%. Eventually, with the New-Normal Boom, the
percentage agreement recovered to 68% in 2014. A rising market seems
indeed to foster a sort of complacency: there may be drops in the
market, but there is an increase in the blithe assurance that any such
downturns do not matter in the longer run. Falling markets seem to
damage this complacency, even though the falling markets themselves
do not add observations about how the market will behave after a major
crash.
It is curious that people do not seem to believe the converse of the
premise stated in our question: they do not believe that the market will
surely go back down in a couple of years if it goes up dramatically.4
Their belief in the resilience of the market seems to stem from a
generalized feeling of optimism and assurance, rather than a belief in the
long-run stability of prices.
There is some evidence suggesting that in 1929—the peak of the bull
stock market of the 1920s—many people felt as certain about the long-

run success of the stock market as did people in the late 1990s. Although
we do not have survey data from the time, we do have contemporary
accounts of investor confidence. In his 1931 history of the 1920s, Only
Yesterday, Frederick Lewis Allen wrote:
As people in the summer of 1929 looked back for precedents, they
were comforted by the recollection that every crash of the past few
years had ultimately brought prices to a new high point. Two steps
up, one step down, two steps up again—that was how the market
went. If you sold, you had only to wait for the next crash (they
came every few months) and buy in again. And there was really no
reason to sell at all: you were bound to win in the end if your stock
was sound. The really wise man, it appeared, was he who “bought
and held on.”5
Some Reflections on Investor Confidence
It is important to consider the nature, and likely sources, of the changes
we have observed in investor confidence, not only to understand the
present situation but also to lead us into a discussion, later in this
chapter, of feedback loops. We will see that the feedback that reinforces
investor confidence occurs in the context of a complex social and
psychological environment.
Where did people get the idea that, if there is ever a stock market
crash, the market is sure to rise to past levels within a couple of years or
so? History certainly does not suggest this. There are many examples of
markets that have done poorly over long intervals of time. To pick just
one from recent memory, the Nikkei index in Japan is still selling at less
than half its peak value in 1989. Other examples are the periods after
the 1929 and 1966 stock market peaks discussed in Chapter 1. However,
during a booming market, these examples of persistent bad performance
in the stock market are not prominent in the public mind.
One reason that the recent domestic market performance is more
prominent in investors’ minds is simply that they have experienced these

domestic stock prices every day. During the bull stock market of the
1990s, they watched and reacted to a U.S. market that had been rising
since 1982. U.S. investors of the 1990s did not have the same experience
with Japanese stocks, or with the U.S. market of decades past. Many
people fixed their attention on plots of rising stock prices in newspapers
every day, and they seemed to come away with an intuitive feeling that
every decline is reversed, to be followed swiftly by new highs. The same
human pattern-recognition faculty that we used when we learned to ride
a bike or to drive a car, giving us an intuitive sense of what to expect
next, shapes our expectations for the market. For investors in the middle
years of their lives in the 1990s, this upward trend characterized most of
the years they had been observing or investing in the market.
The subjective experience over the years of seeing stock market
declines consistently reverse themselves has a psychological impact on
our thinking that is hard to appreciate, or reconstruct, after the fact.
Those who thought the market would go down and stay down became
sensitized to their bad feelings from being repeatedly wrong, year after
year. Those who consistently predicted a decline became painfully aware
of a loss of reputation from being so wrong so often. Since our
satisfaction with our views of the world is part of our self-esteem and
personal identity, it is natural for the formerly pessimistic to want to
settle on a different view, or at least to present themselves to the public
with a different theme. Thus, the changed emotional environment will
have an impact on their views—or certainly the expression of them—
that is independent of any objective evidence supporting or refuting
those views.
Even if they had not personally paid attention to the stock market
since 1982, the investors of the booming stock market of the 1990s were
living in a time and place where recitations of the feelings of others who
had experienced the market were heard regularly. To appreciate this
sense, it is helpful to quote one person’s argument against market
timing, from the 1999 book Dow 40,000 by David Elias:
An example of what can happen when an individual waits for the
Dow to indicate “the perfect time” to invest is the saga of Joe, a

friend of mine. Joe started calling me in 1982 when the Dow was
just over 1000, looking for the right time to get into equities. Over
the years, he continued to seek a pullback that would be his perfect
moment. Today, at age 62, Joe still has his money parked in bank
CDs. He has missed the entire bull market and all its thousand-point
milestones. Even now, Joe does not realize that there never is a
perfect time. When the market recovers from a pullback, it generally
goes to new highs.6
There is something superficially convincing about this passage,
especially when it is combined, as in the next paragraph in Elias’s book,
with illustrations of the power of compound interest when returns are
high (as they had recently been in the stock market when that book was
written), suggesting that the stock market is your chance to become
really and truly rich. The tale has emotional immediacy, as would a
story about a driving mistake that led to a serious accident or a story
about the advantages of asking the boss for a raise.
A related reason why an argument built around such a story has such
appeal is that by presenting successful investing as a process of
mastering one’s own internal impulses rather than taking account of our
present situation in history, it invites the reader to forget what is special
about the present time in terms of the level of the market. Normal
people think a lot about controlling their own impulses—for example,
about disciplining themselves to perform good work rather than wasting
time, about staying slim rather than getting fat—and so arguments that
appeal to such self-control have more resonance than articles about the
history of price-earnings ratios. The appeal of Elias’s argument is also
that it calls to mind the pain of regret, the emotional reasons we have
for investing now, a point to which I will return later in this chapter.
When arguments become so detached from an analysis of historical data,
the only impact on people’s thinking made by actual data is a vague
sense, from casual inspection of very recent data, that the market has
always reversed declines.
Many media accounts routinely tell stories about the satisfaction felt
by those who have invested in stocks in years past, with the clear

suggestion to the reader that “you can do it too.” To cite only one among
numerous examples, a 1999 article in USA Weekend, a national Sunday
magazine insert for newspapers, carried an article titled “How to
(Really) Get Rich in America.” The article gave examples of investor
successes and offered the hypothetical story of a twenty-two-year-old
college graduate earning $30,000 a year with annual real income raises
of 1%. “If she saved only 10% of her income and invested the savings in
an S&P index fund she’d have a net worth of $1.4 million on retirement
at age 67, in today’s dollars.”7 These calculations assume that the S&P
index fund earns a risk-free 8% real (inflation-corrected) return. There is
no mention of the possibility that the return might not be so high over
time, and that the investor might not end up a millionaire. An article
with a very similar title, “Everybody Ought to Be Rich,” appeared in the
Ladies’ Home Journal in 1929.8 It performed comparable calculations, yet
similarly omitted to describe the possibility that anything could go
wrong in the long term. The article became notorious after the 1929
crash.
These seemingly convincing discussions of potential increases in the
stock market are rarely offered in the abstract, but instead in the context
of stories about successful or unsuccessful investors, and often with an
undertone suggesting the moral superiority of those who invested well.
A strong public admiration for those who make money patiently and
slowly, unfazed by market fluctuations, has evolved. It is a theme
developed in many popular books. Notable among these is The
Millionaire Next Door: The Surprising Secrets of America’s Wealthy by
Thomas Stanley and William Danko, which was on the New York Times
hardcover best-seller list for eighty-eight weeks after its publication in
1996 and continued on the Times paperback best-seller list until May
2001, that is, until after the peak of the stock market. The book, which
extolled the virtues of patience and frugality, sold over a million copies
in its heyday.9
Indeed, such stories of patient investing transcended U.S. borders. In
Germany, the 1999 best-seller The Road to Financial Freedom: A
Millionaire in Seven Years by Bodo Schäfer set a seven-year horizon for
investors and gave as the first of ten “golden rules” the dictum that any

stock market decline must soon be reversed. A new edition of this book
was issued in 2003, but this time without the subtitle, A Millionaire in
Seven Years, apparently because four years had gone by and readers were
generally a lot less close to becoming millionaires. Another German book
from 1999, No Fear of the Next Crash: Why Stocks Are Unbeatable as Long-
Term Investments by Bernd Niquet, devoted itself entirely to the theme
that patient investing in stocks always wins.10
In viewing the popular expressions of confidence in the market,
whether from the 1990s or the 1920s, and in trying to understand how
people felt about them at the time, it is important to bear in mind that in
most cases the statements of confidence in the stock market that we see
are not the focal point of attention in the contexts in which they appear.
Thus, for example, Suze Orman has built a remarkable reputation for
herself by stressing the emotional and spiritual steps one should take to
acquire a fortune. Since the 1990s, Orman has been a highly successful
investment adviser and a best-selling author, with books like The 9 Steps
to Financial Freedom (1997) and The Courage to Be Rich: Creating a Life of
Material and Spiritual Abundance (1999) and, after 2002, following the
peak of the stock market, with her own cable TV show, The Suze Orman
Show. Her concrete advice is to get out of debt and into stocks, and her
example of the power of compound interest with a rate of return of 10%
is never the focus of attention. Most of her audience is apparently
interested in her spiritual message, and her confronting their difficulty
with saving is on target and attention-grabbing for them. Her assumption
that the market will surely produce a return of 10% a year is mere
background information that her viewers and readers do not have the
time or the inclination to examine. The repetition that she and others
like her give to this assumption nonetheless promotes it to the status of
conventional wisdom.
Survey Evidence about Expectations
In my surveys of U.S. high-income individuals and institutional
investors, we have found some evidence of changes in expectations for

the stock market. We ask investors, in open-ended questions, about their
expectations for the Dow for various horizons. We do not ask them to
select from categories or ranges of price increase; they have to come up
with a number on their own, without our suggesting anything. In the
1989 survey of individual investors, the average expected one-year-
ahead change in the Dow was 0.0%. In 1996, it was 4.1%, in 2000 it was
6.7%, and in 2001 it was 8.4%. Thus, average expectations for stock
market appreciation rose quite substantially from 1989 to just after the
peak of the stock market in 2000. After that, the individual one-year-
ahead expectations fell somewhat—to 6.4% in 2004. Institutional
investors did not show this pattern of changing expectations, perhaps
because their greater professionalism inclines them to rely on
authoritative analysis for the expectations they report to others.
Some might be surprised at how modest the average reported
expectations among individuals were, no expectation of an increase at
all in 1989, and only 8.4% even just after the peak of the market. This
does not fit the usual assumptions about irrational exuberance. But,
looking at the individual answers, it seems obvious why the averages
were so low. In 1989, 34% of the individuals said they thought the
market would go down in the next year, and many of them predicted
major declines. The individuals who thought it would not fall reported
average expectations for an increase of 10.0%. The large number of
pessimists brought the average expectation for all respondents down to
zero.
In 1996, the percentage of individuals who said they thought that the
market would decline fell somewhat, to 29%. But, among those who said
they thought that the market would not fall, the average one-year
expectation was about the same as in 1989, 9.3%. Fewer pessimists
meant that the average expectation for all respondents rose from 1989.
By 2001, the percentage of individuals who thought that the market
would decline fell much further, to 7.4%. Among those who said they
thought that the market would not fall, the average expectation was still
about the same: 10.1%. The sharply reduced number of pessimists
caused the average expectation to increase to 8.4%.
By 2004, the percentage of individuals who thought that the market

would decline was even lower than in 2001, at 7.1%. Now, the average
expectation was brought down from its 2001 level by a decline in
expectations of those who thought that the market would not fall, to
7.3%.
It seems that most of the expectations for an increase have stayed
roughly the same, near what experts would say is the historical average
return, but that there has been a major change in the percentage of
respondents reporting that they expect declines. What this survey
demonstrates is that growing irrational exuberance until the peak of the
market in 2000 just took the form of declining fears of market drops.
It is not surprising that few people answered that they expected the
market to go up 20% or 30% in the following year. At a gut level, near
the peak of the market some of them no doubt anticipated such
increases. But that was just not a respectable answer, not something one
would expect to see validated in media accounts of what experts think.
The respectable thing to say was that the market would continue to post
the same impressive returns it had on average over the previous thirty
years or more. It was equally respectable to venture that there could be a
correction—one hears that in the media, too—hence the predictions of a
decline by some respondents. Did people in fact believe the answers they
wrote on the questionnaire? Probably most of them did not know what
to believe, and probably they considered their own answers as good as
anything else to believe, but harbored other suspicions or hopes that are
not captured on the surveys.
The UBS Index of Investor Optimism (formerly called the
PaineWebber/Gallup index, before UBS took over PaineWebber in 2000
and then after 2007 replaced the index with the Wells Fargo/Gallup
Investor and Retirement Income Optimism Index) reported much more
optimistic average expectations among individual investors around the
peak of the stock market. Their July 1999 surveys showed that these
investors expected on average a 15.0% return on the stock market over
the next twelve months. This sounds like quite an optimistic expectation,
much higher than that in our surveys. The difference in results may have
to do with subtle differences in wording. Their question was: “Thinking
about the stock market more generally, what overall rate of return do

you think the stock market will provide investors during the coming
twelve months?” Ours was: “How much of a change in percentage terms
do you expect in the following (use a + before your number to indicate
an expected increase, a – to indicate an expected decrease; leave blanks
where you do not know),” and the questionnaire then provided spaces to
give answers for the Dow for one month, three months, six months, one
year, and ten years. Note the different tone of the two questions.
UBS/Gallup asked respondents for a percentage return. We asked for a
percentage change in price. The significant difference between the two
questions is probably more than just that return includes dividend while
price change does not. Asking respondents what return the market will
provide suggests a positive number for an answer. Our question
mentioned the possibility that the answer could be negative.
Answers to survey questions can be sensitive to the wording of the
questions. But if the wording is kept unchanged over time on the
questionnaires, the changes in the answers over time should still be
indicative of the direction of changes in expectations. The UBS Index of
Investor Optimism confirms the conclusion from our survey that people
were getting more optimistic about the stock market until its peak, then
less optimistic.
Some Reflections on Investor Expectations and
Emotions
Economists usually like to model people as calculating optimally their
investment decisions based on expectations of future price changes and
estimates of the risk in alternative investments. However, in fact, the
typical investor’s actual decision about how much to allocate to the
stock market overall and to other asset classes, such as bonds, real
estate, or other investments, tends not to be based on careful
calculations. Investors are not often assembling forecasts for the returns
on these different asset classes and weighting these with estimated
probabilities.
Part of the reason they are not is that investors more often feel that

experts have little or no idea what to expect of future price changes for
these asset classes, or how much risk there is in each. After all, experts
disagree all the time, and one might easily conclude that there is no
great loss in ignoring what they are currently saying about the outlook
for any given asset class. Investors must therefore base their judgments
on basic principles on which most experts seem always to agree.
The evidence used by experts to predict the relative returns on broad
asset classes has little immediacy for most people. Experts talk about the
potential actions of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, about
shifts in the Phillips curve, or about distortions on aggregate earnings
caused by inflation and conventional accounting procedures. Most
individuals have little interest in such esoterica.
And yet investors must make some decisions. What factors might then
enter into one’s mind when making a decision about how much to put
into the stock market? The feeling that the stock market is “the only
game in town,” in some emotional sense, might play a pivotal role at this
point in the decision making.
One knows that the stock market could repeat the performance of
recent years. That possibility seems quite real, just as real as the
possibility of a major correction in the market. But how does one feel
about the decision at this point? How does one feel, for example, when
one knows, late at night, that it is time to fill out the 401(k) allocation
form, and one is tired and annoyed by the necessity to make such an
important decision based on so little solid information?
How one feels certainly depends on one’s recent experience in
investing. If one has been out of the market and has not participated in
the profits that others have recently enjoyed, one may be feeling a sharp
pain of regret. And regret is an emotion that, psychologists have found,
provides considerable motivation.11
Envy of others who may have made more in the stock market than one
earned at work in the past year is a related painful feeling, especially so
in that it diminishes one’s own ego. If these people who made so much
in the market were really smarter and knew better, then one really feels
like a laggard. Even if they were not smarter, just lucky—smiled on by
God—it may not feel much better. One can always seek emotional refuge

in the thought that it was just luck that made others more successful,
and bad luck that accounts for one’s own lack of success. But, as Nassim
Taleb argued so eloquently in his book Fooled by Randomness, our
emotions make it difficult for us to benefit from such rationalizations of
our failure, and the envy of others’ successes just continues to haunt
us.12
One may feel that if one can participate in just one more year of an
advancing stock market—assuming it advances for another year—that
will help assuage the pain. Of course, one also thinks that the market
may well go down. But how does one weigh the potential emotional
expense of such a possible loss at the time that one is making the asset
allocation decision?
Perhaps one feels that the potential loss will not be much more
damaging to one’s ego than the failure to participate has already been.
Of course, one likely realizes that one takes the risk of entering the
market just as it begins a downward turn. But the psychological cost of
such a potential future loss may not be so much greater than the very
real regret at having been out of the market in the past. Therefore,
although there are many other ways to deal with the thought that one is
a “loser,” such as rediscovering the importance of being a good friend,
spouse, or parent, or pursuing the simple things in life, it may well end
up that the only truly emotionally satisfying decision to make now is to
get into the stock market.
Of course if one has been in the stock market and is deciding after a
boom has gone on for a while whether to stay in the market, one has a
very different emotional frame of mind. One feels satisfaction and
probably some pride in one’s past successes, and one certainly feels
wealthier. One may feel as gamblers do after they have raked in
winnings: that one is “playing with the house money” and therefore has
nothing to lose emotionally by wagering again.13
The emotional state of investors when they decide on their
investments is no doubt one of the most important factors behind the
bull market. Although their emotional state may be in part a
consequence of the factors described in the previous chapter, such as the
rise of materialistic sentiment and individualism, it is also amplified by

the psychological impact of the increasingly strong uptrend observed in
the market.
Public Attention to the Market
The level of public interest in and attention to the market changes
significantly over time, just as the public’s interest jumps from one
newsworthy topic to another. Attention shifts from news stories about
Jacqueline Kennedy to stories about Princess Diana to stories about Kim
Kardashian. Interest in the stock market goes through fads in just the
same way, depending on the story quality of the precipitating events.
Some writers have indicated that 1929 was a time of dramatically
heightened investor attention to the stock market. John Kenneth
Galbraith, in his 1961 book The Great Crash: 1929, wrote:
By the summer of 1929 the market not only dominated the news. It
also dominated the culture. That recherché minority which at other
times has acknowledged its interest in Saint Thomas Aquinas,
Proust, psychoanalysis and psychosomatic medicine then spoke of
United Corporation, United Founders and Steel. Only the most
aggressive of the eccentrics maintained their detachment from the
market and their interest in autosuggestion or communism. Main
Street had always had one citizen who could speak knowingly about
buying or selling stocks. Now he became an oracle.14
That public attention was focused on the stock market in the late 1920s
is supported by many other such commentaries. One should bear in
mind that Galbraith’s 1961 argument contains some journalistic
overstatement that he no doubt could not have gotten away with had he
been writing in the 1920s. But Galbraith was on the right track in terms
of the direction of change over the 1920s.
If one looks at the Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature year by year
throughout the 1920s, one sees that only a tiny percentage of the articles
in periodicals, always less than 0.1%, were about the stock market in
any given year. People were thinking about plenty of other things

besides the market. However, the percentage of articles concerning the
stock market grew markedly over the course of the decade. There were
29 articles about the stock market in 1922–24, or 0.025% of all articles
listed; 67 articles in 1925–28, or 0.035% of all articles listed; and 182
articles in 1929–32, or 0.093% of all articles listed. Thus, over the 1920s
the percentage of articles about the stock market almost quadrupled.
We see a similar pattern of changed interest in the stock market from
an identical study of the Reader’s Guide in the Millennium Boom market,
although the percentage of articles that were about the stock market was
higher throughout this period than in the 1920s. In 1982, at the bottom
of the stock market, there were 242 articles about the stock market, or
0.194% of all articles. In 1987, the year of the crash, there were 592
articles, or 0.364% of all articles, almost twice as many. After the crash,
interest waned again, and there were only 255 articles, or 0.171% of all
articles, in 1990. Over the 1990s, the number of articles rose again,
somewhat irregularly. There were 451 articles in 2000, or 0.254% of all
articles. After 2000, the peak of the market, the number of articles fell.
In 2003, there were only 327 articles, or 0.175% of all articles, close to
the percentage in 1990.
Another source of evidence on investor attention to the market is the
number of investment clubs, as reported by the National Association of
Investors Corporation (NAIC), now BetterInvesting. Investment clubs are
small social groups, typically meeting at members’ homes in the evening,
that together invest small sums of money for fun and for the purpose of
learning about investments. The NAIC was founded in 1951 by four
investor clubs at the beginning of the 1950s bull market; the number of
clubs grew to 953 by 1954, reached a peak of 14,102 in 1970 (near the
top of the market), and fell with the market to 3,642 in 1980 (near the
bottom of the market), a drop of 74%. By 1999, the number of clubs rose
up well beyond its prior peak, to 37,129.15 But by 2004, the number of
clubs fell to 23,360, a drop of 37%. The crude conformity of the number
of investment clubs to the performance of the market is noteworthy,
confirming that investors’ attention is indeed attracted by bull markets
and deflected by bear markets. The drop in the number of clubs after
2000 was smaller than between 1970 and 1980, suggesting that as of

2004 investor interest in the market had not yet fallen as far yet, and
this fact might be considered consistent with the smaller decline since
2000 in the price-earnings ratio as well.
Investment clubs did not recover after the Millennium Bubble.
Membership in these clubs have fallen every year since 1998, despite
major upswings in the market in 2003–7 and 2009–14. As of 2013,
memberships are down over 90% from the peak in 1998. This decline
suggests that the resurgences of the stock market in 2003–7 and 2009–
14 are fundamentally different, less entertaining or social, from the
Millennium Bubble, just as the real estate boom of 2012–14 appears less
so when compared with the huge boom in 1997–2006.16
When people first experience success in any area, there is of course a
natural tendency for them to take new initiatives and develop their skills
in hopes of achieving more such success. In a study of investors who
switched from phone to online trading, comparing them with investors
who continued to use telephones to make their trades, economists Brad
Barber and Terrance Odean found that the switchers on average had
been beating the market by over 2% a year. After they went on line,
these switchers traded more speculatively and actively, and then
proceeded to lag the market by more than 3% annually.17 This finding
may be interpreted as showing that overconfidence from past success
encourages people to expend the fixed cost of learning about online
trading. Having acquired these capabilities and interests, they are likely
to pay greater attention to the market for a sustained period, measured
in years, in order to see that their skills in investment “pay off.”
Near the peak of the market, around 1999, it seemed that
conversations about the stock market were everywhere. I used to play a
game then with my wife: when we went out to a restaurant to eat, I
would predict that someone at an adjacent table would be talking about
the stock market. I did not listen to others’ conversations, but I
developed an ability to hear the word “stock market.” Usually I was able
to catch it. Bringing up the stock market was seen then as an accepted,
even mildly exciting, conversational gambit. The market was an
agreeable topic. Five years later, bringing up the stock market at a social
occasion no longer seemed so appealing; it might have seemed like an

intrusion, a faux pas, a poorly judged attempt to mix business with
pleasure. By 2004, one was more likely to hear about the housing
market. The difference between 1999 and 2004 is subtle, but
nevertheless revelatory of the fundamental change in investor
enthusiasm for the market.
Feedback Theories of Bubbles
In feedback loop theory, initial price increases (caused, for example, by
the kinds of precipitating factors described in the previous chapter) lead
to more price increases as the effects of the initial price increases feed
back into yet higher prices through increased investor demand. This
second round of price increases feeds back again into a third round, and
then into a fourth, and so on. Thus, the initial impact of the precipitating
factors is amplified, resulting in much larger price increases than the
factors themselves would have suggested. Such feedback loops may be a
factor not only in the historic bull and bear markets for the aggregate
stock market but also, with some differences in details, in the ups and
downs of the housing market and of individual investments as well.
Feedback is a familiar term for engineers, who are aware of the many
occurrences and effects of feedback. A familiar example of feedback
occurs when one brings a microphone (which receives sound and sends
the electronically encoded sound) close to a loudspeaker (which
translates the electronically encoded sound into actual sound). The result
can be an eerie whistle, which varies through time. The whistle occurs
because the sound feeds back from microphone to speaker to
microphone to speaker, and on and on in a long sequence of loops. The
variations in the whistle are the natural consequence of feedback
systems, which have inherently complicated dynamics. This feedback
operates in the same way as feedback that produces stock market
bubbles, though of course the loudspeaker-microphone feedback is much
faster, occurring in milliseconds, than that in the stock market, which
occurs in days, months, and years.
To better understand feedback, one can try an experiment. If one

brings a microphone before a speaker in total silence, there is no whistle.
If there is no sound to begin with, there is nothing to feed back. But if
one claps one’s hands once, the whistling sound begins, and takes its
own course through time after that. The whistling sound may build up
for a while and then die out. Obviously, all this sound has been the
result of the handclap, and yet the actual sound may have lasted for a
substantial time after the handclap. The ups and downs of the sound
were ultimately caused by the precipitating factor, the handclap, but the
timing of these ups and downs was caused by the feedback mechanism
itself, not the original sound.
When we observe the variations in feedback output from a
loudspeaker in a normal room setting, with various small noises
disturbing equilibrium, we are likely to be puzzled about their source.
The precipitating sounds do not occur at the same time as the feedback
variation, and so their causal role is easy to miss. It is the same in
speculative markets, but here the feedback lasts for years. The
disturbances that have begun the feedback may be so remote in time
that it seems hardly possible that they could have been the cause of the
price movements.
The theory of feedback is, as I have noted, widely known, but most
people do not use the term feedback loop to describe it. The phrase is a
scientist’s term for what might popularly be called a vicious circle, a self-
fulfilling prophecy, a bandwagon effect. Although the term speculative
bubble has more than one meaning in common discourse, it usually
appears to refer to such feedback.
In the most popular version of the feedback theory, one that relies on
adaptive expectations, feedback takes place because past price increases
generate expectations of further price increases.18 In another version of
the feedback theory, feedback takes place because of increased investor
confidence in response to past price increases. Usually such feedback is
thought to occur in response not so much to a sudden price increase as
to a pattern of consistency in price increases.
The evidence discussed earlier in this chapter is consistent with both
adaptive expectation and investor confidence feedback playing a role in
the current stock market situation. The feedback can also occur for

emotional reasons, reasons unconnected with either expectations or
confidence. The effect of “playing with the house money,” as discussed
previously, can result in a sort of feedback: this frame of mind may
reduce investors’ inclination to sell after a price increase, thus
amplifying the effects of the precipitating factors on price.19 The past
behavior of prices can have a wide range of emotional impacts,
depending on their contexts.
Ultimately, there are a number of different kinds of feedback. Price-to-
price feedback is the most basic: price increases, via investor enthusiasm,
feed back directly into further price increases. Price-to-GDP-to-price
feedback is another form: as the value of the stock market or the housing
market increases, the resulting wealth and optimism encourages
expenditures: consumption and investment in such things as new houses,
factories, and equipment. The reaction to higher investment values is
called the “wealth effect”; the wealth effect has been shown to operate
both from the stock market and from the housing market.20 When these
higher expenditures have their impact on GDP, the appearance of
economic success encourages people to bid up the markets more. The
higher GDP is interpreted by the public as evidence of a healthier and
stronger economy rather than of a bubble, which is its ultimate cause.
Price–to–corporate earnings–to–price feedback is yet another form.
When stock market prices increase, people spend more, and this boosts
corporate profits, which is interpreted as fundamental good news about
the corporations themselves, encouraging people to have higher
expectations for the stock market and therefore to bid up prices even
more.
Underlying this feedback is a widespread public misperception about
the importance of speculative thinking in our economy. People are
accustomed to thinking that there is a basic state of “health” of the
economy, and that when the stock market goes up, or when GDP goes
up, or when corporate profits go up, it means that the economy is
healthier, no more and no less. It seems as if people often think that the
economy is struck by some exogenous maladies, akin to earthquakes or
meteor impacts, or exogenous breakthroughs, such as sudden advances
in technology, and that the movements in the stock market, in GDP or in

profits, are just a reflection of such shocks. It is true that the economy is
sometimes struck by such shocks. But people do not seem to perceive
how often it is that their own psychology, as part of a complex pattern of
feedback, is driving the economy.
Regardless of which feedback theory applies, the speculative bubble
cannot grow forever. Investors’ demand for speculative assets cannot
grow forever, and when it stops growing, price increases will stop.
According to the popular version of the expectation feedback theory, at
that point we would expect a drop in the market, a bursting of the
bubble, since investors no longer think prices will continue to rise and
therefore no longer see a good reason to hold the stock. However, other
versions of the feedback theory do not suggest a sudden bursting of the
bubble, since they are not predicated on continually increasing prices.
Indeed, even according to the most popular versions of the feedback
theory, there is actually no reason to think that there should be sudden
bursts of bubbles. There must be some noise in investor demand, some
unpredictability of response to past price changes, some lack of
synchrony across investors. Moreover, the enticement to enter or exit the
market that past price changes creates is not likely to be determined
only by the most recent change in price. It is plausible that investors will
look back over many days, weeks, or months of price changes in
deciding whether they find recent market performance enticing. Thus,
the simple feedback theory is consistent with a price pattern that shows
many interruptions and jiggles.21
With any of these feedback theories, we can also expect that negative
bubbles should occur, in which feedback occurs in a downward
direction, as initial price declines discourage some investors, causing
further price declines, and so on.22 (The term negative bubble always
reminds me of watching a sealed plastic soda bottle filled with warm air
gradually implode as it cools, and seeing it pop back into shape when
the cap is loosened—though this metaphor is really no more apt than the
soap bubble metaphor for positive speculative events.) Price continues to
decline until further price decreases begin to seem unlikely, at which
point there is no reason for people to want to stay away from the stock
and the negative bubble fills back up—even though, as with positive

bubbles, the burst will probably not be sudden.
Feedback loop dynamics can generate complex and even apparently
random behavior. The so-called random number generators in some
types of computer software are really just simple nonlinear feedback
loops, and even some quite simple feedback loops have been
demonstrated to yield behavior that looks so complicated as to suggest
randomness. If we suppose that there are many kinds of feedback loops
operating in the economy and many kinds of precipitating factors, then
we may conclude that the apparent randomness of the stock market, the
tendency it has to create sudden moves for no apparent reason, might
not be so inexplicable after all. The branch of mathematics that studies
nonlinear feedback loops, called chaos theory, may be applicable to
understanding the complexity of stock market behavior.23
Perceptions of Feedback and Bubbles among
Investors
The feedback theory of speculative bubbles is so widely known as to be
considered part of our popular culture. It is natural to wonder, therefore,
whether public perceptions of a bubble might play a role in a bubble.
Conceivably, a bubble might exist only because people think that there is
a temporary bubble and want to ride with it for a while.
A Barron’s Big Money Poll of professional money managers in April
1999, less than a year before the 2000 peak of the market, asked, “Is the
stock market in a speculative bubble?” Seventy-two percent of the
respondents said yes, only 28% said no.24 That is pretty solid evidence
that some people thought they were in a bubble.
One of the indices we compute at the International Center for Finance
at Yale, which we call a “valuation confidence” index, indicates the
percentage of respondents who think that the stock market is not
overvalued. The question that we pose to our respondents is this: “Stock
prices in the United States, when compared with measures of true
fundamental value or sensible investment value, are: (1) Too low, (2)
Too high, (3) About right, (4) Do not know.”

The valuation confidence index indicates the number of respondents
who choose 1 (Too low) or 3 (About right) as a percentage of those who
choose 1, 2, or 3. I have been asking this question, unchanged, and as
the very first question on the questionnaire, since 1989. A plot of the
valuation confidence index for both individual and institutional investors
since 1989 is shown in Figure 5.4.25
Valuation confidence declined throughout the 1990s for both
individual and institutional investors and hit bottom just before the peak
in the stock market in 2000. Valuation confidence soared right back,
almost to its 1989 levels, as the stock market declined after 2000. This
behavior of valuation confidence is further evidence that the stock
market went through a bubble around 2000. Notably, people just did not
believe in the market in 2000. As of this writing, in 2014, individual
investors have been rapidly losing confidence again, though we are not
back to 1999 levels in this measure.
Figure 5.4
Valuation Confidence Index, 1989–2014
Percentage of respondents who think that the stock market is not
overvalued, 1989–2014: Institutional investors (heavy line), high-income
individual investors (light line). Source: Author’s surveys through 2000,
Yale International Center for Finance surveys thereafter.

That said, it would still be inaccurate to think that most people have
firmly in mind that a feedback process is under way, operating through
investor psychology, and that they are knowingly participating in the
bubble but hoping to get out before it collapses. The investment
professionals that Barron’s surveyed are, by their training, likely to be a
little more savvy about these things than are the general public. The
general public is likely to think that the market might be overvalued, and
might be unstable, but does not have a clear picture of the dynamics of a
bubble.
In our questionnaire surveys of homebuyers in boom cities, we gave
people ample space to write in what they thought was going on in the
real estate market in which they had just participated. Some did indeed
say that they thought market psychology was driving events, and some
even used the word bubble. But in our 2004 survey, the word bubble was
volunteered in reference to the real estate boom by only 1% of our
respondents. Five times as many volunteered the term supply and
demand, and much of what respondents in boom cities offered was about
the shortage of houses on the market and the high demand. The
overwhelming impression that one gets in reading their answers is that
they believed there was good reason for the real estate boom to happen
and to continue.
As part of our homebuyer surveys in 2003 and 2004, when the
housing boom was going at its fastest pace, we asked:
Which of the following better describes your theory about recent
trends in [name of city] home prices?
1.  It is a theory about the psychology of homebuyers and sellers
2.  It is a theory about economic or demographic conditions such as
population changes, changes in interest rates or employment
growth (or decline)
Only 13% (of 771 respondents) chose 1 (psychology); 87% chose 2
(economic or demographic conditions).
As these answers reflect, the idea that some kind of psychological
feedback drives market prices is not a natural one that informs a lot of

thinking among the general public. Indeed, the very enthusiasm that one
senses during a bubble seems inconsistent with a widespread awareness
of the presence of a bubble. If one thought that the price increases were
just another instance of herd behavior that was going to come to an
abrupt end at some unpredictable date, it would be hard to imagine
being so excited.
Ponzi Schemes as Models of Feedback and
Speculative Bubbles
It is hard to prove that a simple mechanical price feedback model,
producing heightened investor attention and enthusiasm, is actually a
factor in financial markets. We may have a casual impression that
investors are showing enthusiasm for investments in response to past
price increases, but we do not see any concrete evidence that such
feedback actually affects their decisions.
To provide evidence that such feedback mechanisms do play a role in
financial markets, it is helpful to look at the example of Ponzi schemes,
or pyramid schemes, by means of which hoaxers create positive feedback
from putative current investment returns to future investment returns.
These schemes have been perpetrated so many times that governments
have had to outlaw them, yet they still keep popping up. They are
particularly interesting since they are, in a way, controlled experiments
(controlled by the hoaxer!) that demonstrate characteristics of the
feedback that cannot be seen so plainly either in normal markets or in
the experimental psychologist’s laboratory.
In a Ponzi scheme, the manager of the scheme promises to make large
profits for investors by investing their money. But little or no investment
of contributors’ funds in any real assets is actually made. Instead, the
manager pays off the initial investors with the proceeds of a sale to a
second round of investors, and the second round with the proceeds from
a sale to a third, and so on. The name of the scheme derives from a
particularly famous (though certainly not the first) example, perpetrated
by one Charles Ponzi in the United States in 1920. A Ponzi scheme

entices initial investors, after they have made a lot of money, to tell their
success stories to another round of investors, who then invest even more
in the scheme, allowing the hoaxer to pay off the second round of
investors, whose success story entices an even larger round of investors,
and so on. This scheme must end eventually, since the supply of
investors cannot increase forever, and the perpetrator of the scheme no
doubt knows this. The perpetrator may hope to exit, not having paid off
the last and largest round of investors, and then hide from the law. (Or,
possibly, he or she may imagine that with luck, fantastic investment
opportunities will be found later, thereby saving the scheme.)
We know that Ponzi schemes have been successful in making their
perpetrators rich, at least until they were apprehended. Charles Ponzi
attracted 30,000 investors in 1920 and issued notes totaling $15 million,
all within seven months.26 The recent Bernie Madoff Ponzi scheme,
carried on from the 1970s until its collapse in 2008, is considered to be
the largest financial fraud in U.S. history, estimated at almost $65
billion. Neither experience nor sophistication seems to effectively
immunize investors against falling victim to this type of fraud.
Bubbles can appear in the unlikeliest of places and can entrap even
small rural investors. In a recent celebrated story, a former housewife,
Raejean Bonham, set up an enormous Ponzi scheme on her own in the
tiny town of Fox in rural Alaska. She promised to pay 50% returns in
two months and enticed 1,200 investors in forty-two states to pay her a
total of between $10 and $15 million between 1989 and 1995.27
A particularly dramatic story emerged in Albania in 1996 and 1997
when a number of Ponzi schemes promising fantastic rates of return
enticed a good share of the people of that country. Seven Ponzi schemes
accumulated some $2 billion, or 30% of Albania’s annual GDP.28
Enthusiasm for the schemes was so intense that in the 1996 local
elections, members of the ruling government party included symbols of
the Ponzi scheme funds on their campaign posters, apparently wanting
to gain some credit for the new wealth sources. When the schemes failed
in 1997, enraged protesters looted banks and burned buildings, and the
government was forced to call out the army to restore peace; a number
of rioters were killed. The collapse of the schemes forced the

resignations of Prime Minister Aleksander Meksi and his cabinet.29
As part of their strategy, successful Ponzi schemes present to investors
a plausible story about how great profits can be made. Charles Ponzi told
investors that he was able to make money for them by exploiting an
arbitrage profit opportunity involving international postage reply
coupons. These coupons were sold by postal services so that the
purchaser could enclose the coupon in a letter to another country and
thereby prepay a reply. There were apparently some genuine potential
profit opportunities in buying postage reply coupons in Europe and
selling them in the United States, because the currency exchange rate
did not correspond exactly to the rate implicit in the coupons. Ponzi’s
story of profit opportunities from trading the coupons, eventually
published in newspapers during the scheme, sounded plausible to some
influential people. But the actual profit opportunities were not realizable
since there was no easy way to sell the coupons, and the hoax began to
unravel when the New York postmaster declared that the world’s supply
of international postage reply coupons was not enough to make the
fortune Ponzi claimed to have made.
Raejean Bonham in Alaska claimed she was buying unused frequent-
flier miles from large companies, repackaging them as discount tickets,
and then selling them at a large profit. The Albanian investment
company VEFA was supposedly making a number of conventional
investments in a reviving economy. (There was also a rumor in Albania
at the time that VEFA was a front for money-laundering, an activity that
also sounded like a plausible source of big money to many investors.)30
A critical observation to be made about these examples of Ponzi
schemes is that initial investors were reportedly very skeptical about the
schemes and would invest only small amounts. A story about an
arbitrage profit opportunity in postage reply coupons, if merely told
directly, without the evidence that it had made others a lot of money,
would not sound credible enough to entice many investors. Investors do
not become truly confident in the scheme until they see others achieving
large returns.
The possibility that the so-called investment payoffs are in fact coming
only from new money is typically raised repeatedly and publicly well

before the collapse of these schemes, and the hoaxers must of course
deny the claim publicly. This was the case both for the original Ponzi
scheme and for the Albanian example. The fact that many people
continue to believe in the scheme afterward seems puzzling, and to
outside observers the believers in the scheme may seem quite foolish.31
But this only shows the powerful effect on people’s thinking of seeing
others having made substantial sums of money. That others have made a
lot of money appears to many people as the most persuasive evidence in
support of the investment story associated with the Ponzi scheme—
evidence that outweighs even the most carefully reasoned argument
against the story.
Fraud, Manipulation, and White Lies
The process that generates a speculative boom is in some dimensions
analogous to these Ponzi schemes. Also part of a boom is activity
expressly designed to deceive people, deliberate attempts by many
people to exploit thinking errors among general investors. Doing this
effectively often requires breaking the law. But, given the slowness of
our justice process, the perpetrators of such schemes may be able to get
away with deception for many years. This, too, is part of the process of a
speculative bubble.
My erstwhile professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Charles Kindleberger, was a great influence on my thinking. He lived to
be 92 years old, and I corresponded with him last just before he died in
2003. In his 1989 book Manias, Panics and Crashes, he wrote: “We
believe that swindling is demand determined…. In a boom, fortunes are
made, individuals wax greedy, and swindlers come forward to exploit
the demand.”32
The value of most investments depends on expectations for the near to
distant future, something that cannot be seen clearly today, and so a
public focusing of attention on investments creates an opportunity for
deception and misrepresentation. During a boom, opportunists try to
find some ways of profiting from the public’s speculative attention by

pretending to be the epitome of capitalistic success, and also pretending,
one way or the other, to be the advance guard of the great new
economy.
One of the reasons we are so deceived by bubbles is the same reason
that we are deceived by professional magicians. When clever persons
become professionals at deceiving people and devote years to perfecting
an act, they can put seemingly impossible feats before our eyes and fool
us, at least for a while. They only need to fool us for long enough to
collect our money and leave the scene. A public preoccupation with
investments generates an immense incentive for such professionals to
advance their careers in the realms of finance and management. When
we have the equivalent of professional magicians running some of our
companies or acting as some of our real estate brokers, we have to
expect that what we see is not reality.
The extreme cases are those of outright criminal behavior, like that of
the Enrons and the Parmalats. In the aftermath of a boom, the political
environment changes, the public who lost money is outraged, offenders
are prosecuted, and regulation is tightened. We saw that happen again in
the United States and other countries after the market peaked in 2000.
We saw another round of prosecutions after the runaway securitization
that led to the 2008 crash. It is an important job that the regulators and
prosecutors do, and the aftermath of a speculative boom is a sort of
cleansing of our financial markets that makes it possible for them to
function even more effectively in the aftermath of the bubble.
More common than the examples of criminal behavior, however, are
examples of people who stayed entirely within the law and exploited a
boom, building businesses that they did not themselves believe in. These
are cases of disingenuity rather than fraud.
Some of these people have already taken their money and gone home.
Since 2000, many top managers of tech companies that were built
promoting a fundamentally flawed business concept have made their
initial public offerings and have retired to their estates, and they hardly
care that the price of their stocks has dropped so far. Some business
magazines that prospered not so much because readers demanded them,
but because companies wanted to advertise in them as part of their act,

have shut down their operations. But more such ventures are still
appearing, if at a lower rate, and the story is by no means over.
I remember vividly an experience I had in 1998 when I became
involved in an attempt to sell a small firm. The small firm made a
presentation to some investment bankers to help them decide whether
they could market the firm privately to potential corporate buyers. The
scene lingers in my memory. The president of the small firm was
describing a sound business model to these bankers, I thought. The
investment bankers seemed a little sleepy. At one point in his
presentation, the president mentioned that the firm sells its product over
the Internet, and so one could say it was an Internet firm. At this point
one of the investment bankers sprang to life. He said that the market was
hungry for Internet firms, and if they could present the small firm as one
of these, his bank could raise serious millions of dollars for the sale. But,
he said, the firm would have to come up with a story of a grand future
trajectory for the firm, a plausible story that might conceivably lead to
hundreds of millions of revenue in a few years, and the management
would have to start living that story, taking business initiatives that
signaled belief in the story. Later, the president of the small firm told me
he toyed with the idea of changing the firm’s name to something ending
in .com. But, on further reflection, he said that the story was not real: “I
just couldn’t do it,” he concluded.
Others could and did do that sort of thing. In fact, there was a trend
over 
the 
1990s 
toward 
installing 
showmen 
and 
media-savvy
personalities as heads of corporations, to lure investors and boost stock
prices. In his 2002 book Searching for a Corporate Savior, Rakesh Khurana
documented a pattern of hiring expensive celebrities from the outside to
run companies with an eye on the stock market. Those who had a
genuine and deep knowledge of the business, who felt a loyalty to the
others who worked there, and who were willing to take the steps that
would ensure long-term success, were often pushed aside.33
Speculative Bubbles as Naturally Occurring Ponzi
Processes

It would appear, by extrapolation from examples like those given earlier,
that speculative feedback loops that are in effect naturally occurring
Ponzi schemes do arise from time to time without the contrivance of a
fraudulent manager. Even if there is no manipulator fabricating false
stories and deliberately deceiving investors in the aggregate stock
market, tales about the market are everywhere. When prices go up a
number of times, investors are rewarded sequentially by price
movements in these markets, just as they are in Ponzi schemes. There
are still many people (indeed, the stock brokerage and mutual fund
industries as a whole) who benefit from telling stories that suggest that
the market will go up further. There is no reason for these stories to be
fraudulent; they need only emphasize the positive news and give less
emphasis to the negative. The path of a naturally occurring Ponzi
scheme—if we may call speculative bubbles that—will be more irregular
and less dramatic, since there is no direct manipulation, but the path
may sometimes resemble that of a Ponzi scheme when it is supported by
naturally occurring stories. The extension from Ponzi schemes to
naturally occurring speculative bubbles appears so natural that one must
conclude, if there is to be debate about speculative bubbles, that the
burden of proof is on skeptics to provide evidence as to why Ponzi-like
speculative bubbles cannot occur.
Recently, many of the major finance textbooks, which have promoted
a view of financial markets as working rationally and efficiently, have
not provided arguments as to why feedback loops supporting speculative
bubbles cannot occur. In fact, at least until recently they may not even
mention bubbles or Ponzi schemes.34 These books convey a sense of
orderly progression in financial markets, of markets that work with
mathematical precision. If the phenomena are not mentioned at all, then
students are not given any way to judge for themselves whether they are
in fact influencing the market.
Feedback and Cross Feedback between the Stock
Market and the Housing Market

We noted in previous chapters that in the United States, there has been
very little relation historically between price changes in the stock market
and price changes in the housing market, but that the housing market
boom that began in 1998 appeared several years after the beginning of
the sharpest ascent of the stock market starting in 1995. We also noted
that, internationally, home price booms show some tendency to peak a
couple years after stock market booms. This raises the possibility that
there is sometimes cross feedback, that is, feedback from one market to
another, between the stock market and the housing market. While the
housing market grows more speculative as our society changes, it is also
possible that the feedback will intensify in the future.
It does not seem surprising that a home price boom would begin a few
years after a stock market boom. The stock market boom produces
perceived wealth, and the greater wealth ought to encourage people to
spend more on their homes and thus bid up the price of homes. This
effect could easily operate with a lag of years, since it takes people years
to make decisions to change their housing arrangements. But it is
challenging to envision a feedback model that has home prices rising
rapidly even after stock prices are sharply falling. It may seem unlikely
that we will ever understand such a phenomenon.
It could be that the home price boom, which began in the United
States and other countries before the peak of the market, started in 1998
in response to the stock market boom and just fed on itself through its
own internal feedback after the stock market fizzled. It could also be that
the home price boom was a sort of long-lagged response to stock market
increases that had built up since 1982, because the decline in the market
after 2000 only brought the market partway back down and left people
feeling a lot wealthier even after the post-2000 stock market drop than
they had felt in 1982. Or perhaps the stock market boom produced some
cultural changes that continued on their own after the corporate
earnings drop that is so closely tied to the stock market drop, an
earnings drop that did not directly affect housing.
But we should add to these possibilities another that would help
explain rapidly increasing home prices concurrent with the post-2000
stock market drops: that the drops in the stock market after 2000 had

the perverse effect of further intensifying the demand for housing by
transferring investor enthusiasm from the stock market to the housing
market. This may seem like a theory contrived to fit the facts, but we
have evidence for it. In our questionnaire surveys of recent homebuyers
in 2003 and 2004, Karl Case and I asked homeowners directly about
possible feedback from the stock market to the housing market. We
asked the following question, with the results indicated:
The experience with the stock market in the past few years
[Please circle one number]
 
1. Much encouraged me to buy my house
12%   
2. Somewhat encouraged me to buy my house
14%   
3. Had no effect on my decision to buy my house
72%   
4. Somewhat discouraged me from buying my house
2%   
5. Much discouraged me from buying my house
1%   
 
[n = 1,146]
At the time of these surveys, respondents’ experiences with the stock
market in the past few years would of course usually have been very
bad, since the aggregate market had fallen so sharply after 2000. The
great majority of respondents said the stock market had no effect on
their decision to buy a house. This is actually not at all surprising, since
most people have a multitude of personal reasons to buy a house that
must figure more prominently in their minds. But the interesting thing
about these answers is that, of those who replied that the experience did
affect their decision to buy a house, an overwhelming percentage said
that it encouraged them. In fact (taking account of the rounding error in
the percentages given), more than ten times as many said that the stock
market encouraged them than said it discouraged them.
Right after this question on the questionnaire, we had a follow-up
question: “Please explain your thinking here.” The respondents wrote
some substantial answers explaining their answers to the previous
question, and it is in reading so many of these answers that one gets a
real sense of the cross feedback from stock prices to home prices. Here is
a sampling of some of these answers from people who said the stock
market encouraged them to buy a house:

I watched my IRAs & 401Ks decline. I decided I would invest in real
estate instead.
Housing does not lose as much as stocks.
Stock market shares are too volatile in values, making the risk
higher. Buying a house & land retain better investment value
because land will not be depleted over times.
Diminishing returns & huge losses. Looked for alternative use of
capital. Home ownership is the number one investment for personal
financial security. Everything else is second.
Housing is inherently safer investment. You can always just live in
it.
We lost a high percentage of 401K & Roth IRA funds during
2000/2002. We’ve never lost money on real estate.
Real estate is safer. At least you own the property. With stocks, if
you lose, you have nothing.
After we read many such answers, some clear patterns seem to
emerge. The drops in the stock market in 2000–2003 had just gotten
people increasingly fed up with the stock market and ready to transfer
their affections to another market, one that they increasingly believed
was the best investment for them. It is as simple as that; what they wrote
seems plain and easily understood. There was a sort of cross feedback
from the stock market to the housing market, and that must account for
a good part of the housing boom that we saw.35 This cross feedback also
helps account for the international nature of the housing boom, as the
stock market collapse was experienced in all of the advanced countries
that had seen booming markets since the late 1990s.
This seeming evidence of cross feedback from the stock market to the
housing market may seem fragile, since such feedback does not always
occur, but one must remember that we are dealing with social science,
not theoretical physics. We do not fully understand why feedback
between markets has the form it does and why it changes through time,
but we have learned something about it.

Irrational Exuberance and Feedback Loops: The
Argument So Far
There are many precipitating factors ultimately causing irrational
exuberance, as detailed in the previous chapter, and the effects of these
causes can be amplified by a feedback loop, a speculative bubble, as we
have seen in this chapter. As prices continue to rise, the level of
exuberance is enhanced by the price rise itself.
In this chapter, we have only begun to describe the process of
feedback. We have seen that feedback does not merely come about as
individuals look at past price increases and make arithmetical
calculations to adjust for individual levels of confidence and
expectations. The changes in thought patterns infect the entire culture,
and they operate not only directly from past price increases but also
from auxiliary cultural changes that the past price increases helped
generate. For a better understanding of how precipitating factors exert
their effects and how they are amplified, we turn, in the next part, to a
discussion of the cultural changes that have accompanied the recent
stock market and other speculative booms.

Part Two
Cultural Factors

Six
The News Media
The history of speculative bubbles begins roughly
with the advent of newspapers.1 One can assume that, although the
record of these early newspapers is mostly lost, they, or their pamphlet
analogues, reported on the first bubble of any consequence: the Dutch
tulip mania of the 1630s.2
Although the news media—newspapers, magazines, and broadcast
media, along with their new outlets on the Internet—present themselves
as detached observers of market events, they are themselves an integral
part of these events. Significant market events generally occur only if
there is similar thinking among large groups of people, and the news
media are essential vehicles for the spread of ideas.
In this chapter, I consider the complexity of the media’s impact on
market events. As we shall see, news stories rarely have a simple,
predictable effect on the market. Indeed, in some respects, they have less
impact than is commonly believed. However, a careful analysis reveals
that the news media do play an important role both in setting the stage
for market moves and in instigating the moves themselves.
The Role of the Media in Setting the Stage for

Market Moves
The news media are in constant competition to capture the public
attention they need to survive. Survival for them requires finding and
defining interesting news, focusing attention on news that has word-of-
mouth potential (so as to broaden their audience), and, whenever
possible, defining an ongoing story that encourages their audience to
remain steady customers.
The competition is by no means haphazard. Those charged with
disseminating the news cultivate a creative process, learning from one
anothers’ successes and failures, that aims to provide emotional color to
news, to invest news stories with human interest appeal, and to create
familiar figures in the news. Years of experience in a competitive
environment has made the media professions quite skillful at claiming
public attention.
The news media are naturally attracted to financial markets, because,
at the very least, the markets provide constant news in the form of daily
price changes. Nothing beats the stock market for sheer frequency of
potentially interesting news items.
The stock market has star quality. The public considers it the Big
Casino, the market for major players, and believes that on any given day
it serves as a barometer of the status of the nation—impressions that the
media can foster and benefit from. Financial news may have great
human interest potential to the extent that it deals with the making or
breaking of fortunes. And the financial media can present their perennial
lead, the market’s performance, as an ongoing story—one that brings in
the most loyal repeat customers. The only other regular generator of
news on a comparable scale is sporting events. It is no accident that
financial news and sports news together account for roughly half of the
editorial content of many newspapers today.
Housing has also been a source of endless fascination for the general
public, because we live in houses, we work on them every day, and our
sense of our individual social position is tied to the kind of houses we
live in. The fascination increased for a while with the housing bubble.
Newspapers launched whole sections devoted to homes or real estate,

and in the United States, the housing boom led to the creation of an
entire TV channel devoted to housing: HGTV. In the United Kingdom,
the reality TV show Property Ladder, launched in 2001, was initially a
great success, with spinoffs in the Netherlands and the United States.
The show depicted the adventures of property flippers who buy homes,
fix them up, and quickly sell them with hope of an impressive profit.
After the housing crash, the U.K. version relaunched as Property Snakes
and Ladders, reflecting the increased awareness of the potential for both
ups and downs in the housing market, and refocusing on making your
own house nice rather than fixing it for resale.3 The U.S. TV show Flip
that House, launched in the time of the housing bubble, 2005, was shut
down in 2008 after the bubble burst.
Media Cultivation of Debate
In an attempt to attract audiences, the news media try to present debate
about issues on the public mind. This may mean creating a debate on
topics that experts would not otherwise consider deserving of such
discussion. The resulting media event may convey the impression that
there are experts on all sides of the issue, thereby suggesting a lack of
expert agreement on the very issues that people are most confused
about.
Over the years, I have been called by news people asking me whether
I would be willing to make a statement in support of some extreme view.
When I declined, the next request would sometimes be to recommend
another expert who would go on record in support of the position.
Five days before the 1987 stock market crash, the MacNeil/Lehrer
NewsHour featured Ravi Batra, author of The Great Depression of 1990:
Why It’s Got to Happen, How to Protect Yourself. This book took as its
basic premise a theory that history tends to repeat itself in exact detail,
so that the 1929 crash and the subsequent depression had to repeat
themselves. Despite Batra’s significant scholarly reputation, this
particular book of his is not one that would be viewed with any
seriousness by most reputable scholars of the market. But it had been on

the New York Times best-seller list for fifteen weeks by the time of the
crash. On the NewsHour, Batra confidently predicted a stock market
crash in 1989 that would “spread to the whole world”; after it, he
declared, “there will be a depression.”4 Batra’s statements, made as they
were on a highly respected show, may—even though they predicted a
crash two years thence—have contributed in some small measure to an
atmosphere of vulnerability that brought us the crash of 1987. Although
Batra’s appearance on the NewsHour just before the crash might be
considered a coincidence, one must keep in mind that predictions of
stock market crashes are actually quite rare on national news shows. The
proximity of his appearance to the actual crash is at the very least highly
suggestive.
Should the media be faulted for presenting debates on topics of little
merit? One can argue that they ought to focus on a variety of topics of
interest to general audiences, so that the public can refine their views.
Yet in doing so, the media seem often to disseminate and reinforce ideas
that are not supported by real evidence. If news directors followed only
their highest intellectual interests in judging which views to present, the
public might indeed find its consciousness constructively broadened. But
that is apparently not how the media see their mission—nor do
competitive pressures encourage them to rethink the matter.
Reporting on the Market Outlook
There is no shortage of media accounts that try to answer our questions
about the market today, but there is a shortage in these accounts of
relevant facts or considered interpretations of them. Many news stories
in fact seem to have been written under a deadline to produce something
—anything—to go along with the numbers from the market. The typical
such story, after noting the remarkable bull market, focuses on very
short-run statistics. It generally states which groups of stocks have risen
more than others in recent months. Although these stocks are described
as leaders, there is no good reason to think that their performance has
caused the bull market. The news story may talk about the “usual”

factors behind economic growth, such as the Internet boom, in glowing
terms and with at least a hint of patriotic congratulation to our powerful
economic engine. The article then finishes with quotes from a few well-
chosen “celebrity” sources, offering their outlook for the future.
Sometimes the article is so completely devoid of genuine thought about
the reasons for the bull market and the context for considering its
outlook that it is hard to believe that the writer was other than cynical
in his or her approach.
What are the celebrity sources quoted as saying in these articles? They
typically give numerical forecasts for the Dow in the near future, tell
stories or jokes, and dispense their personal opinions. For example, when
Abby Joseph Cohen of Goldman Sachs & Co. coined a quotable phrase—
as with her warnings against “FUDD” (fear, uncertainty, doubt, and
despair) or her phrase “Silly Putty Economy”—it was disseminated
widely. Beyond that, the media quote her opinions but pay no critical
attention to her analysis. In fact, although she no doubt has access to a
formidable research department and performs extensive data analysis
before forming her opinions, they are ultimately reported as just that—
her opinions. Of course, she should not be faulted for this, for it is the
nature of the sound-bite-driven media that superficial opinions are
preferred to in-depth analyses.
Record Overload
The media often seem to thrive on superlatives, and we, their audience,
are confused as to whether the price increases we have recently seen in
the stock market are all that unusual. Data suggesting that we are setting
some new record (or are at least close to doing so) are regularly stressed
in the media, and if reporters look at the data in enough different ways,
they will often find something that is close to setting a record on any
given day. In covering the stock market, many writers mention “record
one-day price changes”—measured in points on the Dow rather than
percentage terms, so that records are much more likely. Although the
media have become increasingly enlightened about reporting in terms of

points on the Dow in recent years, the practice still persists among some
writers.
This record overload—the impression that new and significant records
are constantly being set—only adds to the confusion people have about
the economy. It makes it hard for people to recognize when something
truly and importantly new really is happening. It also, with its deluge of
different indicators, encourages an avoidance of individual assessment of
quantitative data—a preference for seeing the data interpreted for us by
celebrity sources.
Do Big Stock Price Changes Really Follow Big
News Days?
Many people seem to think that it is the reporting of specific news
events, the serious content of news, that affects financial markets. But
research offers far less support for this view than one would imagine.
Victor Niederhoffer, while he was still an assistant professor at
Berkeley in 1971 (before he became a legendary hedge fund manager),
published an article that sought to establish whether days with news of
significant world events corresponded to days that saw big stock price
movements. He tabulated all very large headlines in the New York Times
(large type size being taken as a crude indicator of relative importance)
from 1950 to 1966; there were 432 such headlines. Did these significant-
world-event days correspond to big movements in stock prices? As the
standard of comparison, Niederhoffer noted that the S&P Composite
Index over this period showed substantial one-day increases (of more
than 0.78%) on only 10% of the trading days, and substantial one-day
decreases (of more than 0.71%) on only another 10% of the trading
days. Of the 432 significant-world-event days, 78 (or 18%) showed big
price increases, and 56 (or 13%) showed big decreases. Thus such days
were only slightly more likely to show large price movements than other
days.5
Niederhoffer claimed that, on reading the stories under these
headlines, he thought it unlikely that many of the world events reported

would have had much impact on the fundamental value represented by
the stock market. Perhaps what the media thought was big national news
was not what was really important to the stock market. He speculated
that news events that represented crises were more likely to influence
the stock market.
Defining a crisis as a time when five or more large headlines occurred
within a seven-day period, Niederhoffer found eleven crises in the
sample interval. These were the beginning of the Korean war in 1950,
the capture of Seoul by the Communists in 1951, the Democratic
National Convention of 1952, Russian troops’ threatening Hungary and
Poland in 1956, the Suez crisis of 1956, Charles de Gaulle’s taking office
as French premier in 1958, the entry of U.S. marines into Lebanon in
1958, Russian premier Nikita Khrushchev’s appearance at the United
Nations in 1959, Cuban tensions in 1960, the Cuban arms blockade in
1962, and President John Kennedy’s assassination in 1963. During these
crises, so defined, 42% of the daily price changes were “big” changes,
compared with 20% for other, “normal,” time periods. Thus, the crisis
periods were somewhat, but not dramatically, more likely to be
accompanied by big stock price changes.
Note that there were only eleven such weeks of “crisis” in the whole
seventeen years of Niederhoffer’s sample. Very few of the aggregate
price movements in the stock market show any meaningful association
with headlines.
Tag-Along News
News stories occurring on days of big price swings that are cited as the
causes of the changes often cannot, one suspects, plausibly account for
the changes—or at least not for their full magnitude. On Friday, October
13, 1989, there was a stock market crash that was clearly identified by
the media as a reaction to a news story. A leveraged buyout deal for UAL
Corporation, the parent company of United Airlines, had fallen through.
The crash, which resulted in a 6.91% drop in the Dow for the day, had
begun just minutes after this announcement, and so it at first seemed

highly likely that it was the cause of the crash.
The first problem with this interpretation is that UAL is just one firm,
accounting for but a fraction of 1% of the stock market’s total value.
Why should the collapse of the UAL buyout have such an impact on the
entire market? One interpretation at the time was that the deal’s failure
was viewed by the market as a watershed event, portending that many
other similar pending buyouts would also fail. But no concrete
arguments were given in support of this view; rather, dubbing it a
watershed seemed to have been nothing more than an effort to make
sense after the fact of the market’s move in response to the news.
To try to discover the reasons for the October 13, 1989, crash, survey
researcher William Feltus and I carried out a telephone survey of 101
market professionals on the Monday and Tuesday following the crash.
We asked: “Did you hear about the UAL news before you heard about
the market drop on Friday afternoon, or did you hear about the UAL
news later as an explanation for the drop in the stock market?” Only
36% said they had heard about the news before the crash; 53% said they
had heard about it afterward as an explanation for the drop; the rest
were unsure when they had heard about it. Thus it appears that the news
story may have tagged along after the crash, rather than directly caused
it, and therefore, it was not as prominent as the media accounts
suggested.
We also asked the market professionals to interpret the news story. We
queried:
Which of the following two statements better represents the view
you held last Friday:
1.  The UAL news of Friday afternoon will reduce future takeovers,
and so the UAL news is a sensible reason for the sudden drop in
stock prices.
2.  The UAL news of Friday afternoon should be viewed as a focal
point or attention grabber, which prompted investors to express
their doubts about the market.
Of the respondents, 30% chose 1 and 50% chose 2; the rest were unsure.

Thus, they were mostly reacting to the news as an interpretation of the
behavior of investors.6 It may be correct to say that the news event was
fundamental to this stock market crash, in that it represented a “story”
that enhanced the feedback from stock price drops to further stock price
drops, thereby preserving the feedback effect for a longer period than
would otherwise have been the case. Yet it was unlikely to have been its
cause.
The Absence of News on Days of Big Price Changes
We can also look at days of unusually large price movements and ask
whether there were exceptionally important items of news on those
days. Following up on Niederhoffer’s work, in 1989, David Cutler, James
Poterba, and Lawrence Summers compiled a list of the fifty largest U.S.
stock market movements, as measured by the S&P Index, since World
War II, and for each, they tabulated the explanations offered in the news
media. Most of the so-called explanations do not correspond to any
unusual news, and some of them could not possibly be considered
serious news. For example, the reasons given for large price movements
included such relatively innocuous statements as: “Eisenhower urges
confidence in the economy,” “further reaction to Truman victory over
Dewey,” and “replacement buying after earlier fall.”7
Some would argue that perhaps we should not expect to see prominent
news on days of big price changes, even if markets are working
perfectly. Price changes in a so-called efficient market occur, so the
argument goes, as soon as the information becomes public; they do not
wait until the information is reported in the media. (This is a topic to
which I return in Chapter 11.) Thus, it is not surprising, according to this
line of reasoning, that we often do not find new information in the
newspaper on the day of a price change: earlier information, appearing
to the casual observer as tangential or irrelevant, has already been
interpreted by perceptive investors as significant to the fundamentals
that should determine share prices.
Another argument advanced to explain why days of unusually large

stock price movements have often not been found to coincide with
important news is that a confluence of factors may cause a significant
market change, even if the individual factors themselves are not
particularly newsworthy. For example, suppose certain investors are
informally using a particular statistical model that forecasts fundamental
value using a number of economic indicators. If all or most of these
particular indicators point the same way on a given day, even if no
single one of them is of any substantive importance by itself, their
combined effect will be noteworthy.
Both of these interpretations of the tenuous relationship between news
and market movements assume that the public is paying continuous
attention to the news—reacting sensitively to the slightest clues about
market fundamentals, constantly and carefully adding up all the
disparate pieces of evidence. But that is just not the way public attention
works. Our attention is much more quixotic and capricious. Instead,
news functions more often as an initiator of a chain of events that
fundamentally change the public’s thinking about the market.
News as the Precipitator of Attention Cascades
The role of news events in affecting the market seems often to be
delayed, and to have the effect of setting in motion a sequence of public
attentions. These attentions may be to images or stories, or to facts that
may already have been well known. The facts may previously have been
ignored or judged inconsequential, but they can attain newfound
prominence in the wake of breaking news. These sequences of attention
may be called cascades as one focus of attention leads to attention to
another, and then another.
At 5:46 A.M. on Tuesday, January 17, 1995, an earthquake measuring
7.2 on the Richter scale struck Kobe, Japan; it was the worst earthquake
to hit urban Japan since 1923. The reaction of the stock markets of the
world to this event provides an interesting case study, since in this case
we know without doubt that the precipitating event, the earthquake, was
truly exogenous and not itself generated by human activity or business

conditions—not a response to a subtle hint of economic change nor the
result of a confluence of unusual values of conventional economic
indicators. In the Cutler-Poterba-Summers list of media explanations for
the fifty largest postwar movements in the S&P Index in the United
States, discussed earlier, not a single one of the explanations referred to
any substantial cause that was definitely exogenous to the economy.8
The earthquake took 6,425 lives. According to estimates by the Center
for Industrial Renovation of Kansai, the total damage caused by the
earthquake was about $100 billion. The reaction in financial markets
was strong, but delayed. The Tokyo stock market fell only slightly that
day, and prices of construction-related companies generally rose,
reflecting the expected increased demand for their products and services.
Analysts reported at that time that the probable effects of the earthquake
on corporate value were as yet ambiguous, since the wave of rebuilding
after the quake might stimulate the Japanese economy.
The biggest reaction to the earthquake did not come until a week
later. On January 23, the Japanese Nikkei index fell 5.6% on no
apparent news except the gradual unfolding of numerous news accounts
of earthquake damage. Over the ten days following the earthquake, the
Nikkei lost over 8% of its value. If viewed as the direct result of the
earthquake damage alone, the loss of value would be an overreaction.
What was going on in investors’ minds over the ten days following the
earthquake? Of course, there is no rigorous way to find out. We know
only that during this period, the Kobe earthquake dominated the news,
created new and different images of Japan, and may have led to very
different impressions about the Japanese economy. Moreover, the quake
sparked discussions about the risk of an earthquake centered in Tokyo.
Despite the fact that geological evidence suggesting that Tokyo is at risk
for a major earthquake was already known, greater attention was now
focused on this potential problem. The damage that an earthquake of the
severity of the 1923 quake could cause to modern-day Tokyo was put at
$1.25 trillion by Tokai Research and Consulting, Inc.9
Even more puzzling than the direct effect of the Kobe earthquake on
the domestic Japanese markets was its effect on foreign stock markets.
On the day that the Nikkei fell 5.6%, the FTSE 100 index in London fell

1.4%, the CAC-40 in Paris fell 2.2%, and the DAX in Germany fell 1.4%.
The Brazilian and Argentine stock markets both fell about 3%. These
diverse countries around the world suffered no earthquake damage on
this occasion.
The best interpretation of the effects of the Kobe earthquake on the
stock markets of the world is that news coverage of the earthquake, and
of the accompanying stock market declines, engaged the attention of
investors, prompting a cascade of attentions that brought to the fore
some more pessimistic factors.
Another market reaction to news illustrates how media attention may,
through a cascade of attentions, lead many investors to eventually take
seriously news that would normally be considered nonsense and
irrelevant. A sequence of news stories about Joseph Granville, a
flamboyant market forecaster, appears to have caused a couple of major
market moves. The only substantive content of these media stories was
that Granville was telling his clients to buy or sell, and that Granville
himself was influential.
Granville’s behavior easily attracted public attention. His investment
seminars were bizarre extravaganzas, sometimes featuring a trained
chimpanzee playing Granville’s theme song, “The Bagholder’s Blues,” on
a piano. He once showed up at an investment seminar dressed as Moses,
wearing a crown and carrying tablets. Granville made extravagant
claims for his forecasting ability. He said he could forecast earthquakes
and once claimed to have predicted six of the past seven major world
quakes. He was quoted by Time magazine as saying, “I don’t think that I
will ever make a serious mistake in the stock market for the rest of my
life,” and he predicted that he would win the Nobel Prize in
economics.10
The first Granville episode took place on Tuesday, April 22, 1980.
With the news that he had changed his recommendation from short to
long, the Dow rose 30.72 points, or 4.05%. This was the biggest increase
in the Dow since November 1, 1978, a year and a half earlier. The
second episode occurred on January 6, 1981, after Granville’s investor
service 
changed 
from 
a 
long 
recommendation 
to 
a 
short
recommendation. The Dow took its biggest dive since October 9, 1979,

over a year earlier. There was no other news on either of these occasions
that might appear responsible for the market change, and on the second
occasion, both the Wall Street Journal and Barron’s squarely attributed
the drop to Granville’s recommendation.
Can we be sure that media reporting of Granville and his supposed
powers of prognostication caused these changes? Many people wondered
whether the Granville effect was not just a coincidence that the news
media exaggerated. We can be sure that a sequence of news stories about
Granville’s pronouncements, with their substantial word-of-mouth
potential, had a cumulative effect on national attention, and that public
reactions to his pronouncements and to market declines at the time of
his announcements were fundamentally altered by this cascade.11
News during the Crash of 1929
The role of the news media in causing the stock market crash of 1929
has been debated almost since the crash itself. In fact, the puzzle facing
historians and economists has been, by some interpretations, that just
before the crash there was no significant news at all. Ever since,
however, people have wondered how this record stock market crash
could get under way with no news. What common concerns were on the
minds of sellers that caused so many of them to try to sell at the same
time?
The Monday, October 28, 1929, stock market crash was the biggest
single-day drop (measured between the closing price the previous
trading day and the closing price on the day) in the Dow until the
October 19, 1987, crash. On October 28, 1929, the Dow fell 12.8% in
one day (13.01% measured from the high to the low on that day). The
second-biggest drop in history (until 1987) occurred the following day,
when the Dow dropped 11.7% (15.9% measured from the high to the
low on that day). The combined close-to-close drop in those two days in
1929 was 23.1%. What news had arisen that might rationally account
for such a sizable stock market decline?
On reading the major newspapers over that weekend and on the

morning of Tuesday, October 29, one is easily led to conclude that
nothing of any consequence for the fundamentals of the market was
happening. Indeed, that was the conclusion reported in the newspapers
themselves. On the morning of October 29, newspapers around the
country carried an Associated Press story that said in part, “In the
absence of any adverse news developments over the weekend, and in the
face of the optimistic comments on business forthcoming from President
Hoover and leading industrial and banking executives, Wall Street’s only
explanation of today’s decline was that a careful checking up of accounts
over the weekend disclosed numerous weak spots, which had been
overlooked in the hectic sessions of last week.” The New York Times
attributed the drop only to a “general loss of confidence.” The Wall Street
Journal reported that “business in general shows no signs of
disintegration” and that the decline was due to “necessitous liquidation
of impaired accounts.”12
What else was in the news on those days? As of Monday morning,
there was news that the Interstate Commerce Commission would
proceed with its plan to recapture some excess railroad income. There
was a favorable report on the earnings of U.S. Steel. New information
was reported on charges that the Connecticut Manufacturer’s Association
had succeeded in introducing into a tariff bill provisions favoring
Connecticut. Mussolini had made a speech saying that the “men and
institutions of fascism can face any crisis, even if it is sudden.” A new
aspirant to the French premiership, Edouard Daladier, had announced
the foreign minister of his prospective cabinet. A British airliner was lost
at sea with seven aboard. The Graf Zeppelin planned a trip to explore the
Arctic. Richard Byrd’s party was making progress toward the South Pole.
After Black Monday, early on Tuesday morning, the second day of the
crash, it was reported that prominent financiers had asserted that heavy
banking support would come into the market that day, in search of
bargains. If this was significant news at all, one would think it was good
news. Other news on Tuesday morning was that two senators had called
on President Hoover to declare his position on duties on agricultural and
industrial products, that Senator Hiram Bingham had complained that
the Lobby Inquiry had treated him unfairly, that a Hungarian count and

countess had been given the right to enter the country, and that another
airliner had been lost with five aboard.
All of these stories sound very typical. If there really was a good
reason for the drop in the market, then certainly there must have been
something happening at the time that people knew about. And one would
think that such concerns would have made it into the news in some
form. Perhaps one must read the papers more carefully. One author,
Jude Wanniski, indeed claimed that there was a story in the New York
Times on the morning of Monday, October 28, 1929, that might
conceivably account for such a decline. This front-page story was an
optimistic report on the likelihood of passage of the Smoot-Hawley tariff,
then still in committee. The story was picked up by the Associated Press
and United News the following day and given front-page treatment
around the country on Tuesday, October 29.13
It has been argued by some that the Smoot-Hawley tariff might have
been expected to hurt the outlook for U.S. corporate profits. This may
seem surprising: one might have thought that it would generally benefit
corporations, since so many of them actively sought the tariff. But it has
been argued by historians of the 1929 crash that the tariff might have
been expected to have the opposite effect, given the retaliation from
other countries that it would engender. Allan Meltzer in fact argued that
the tariff could be the reason “why the 1929 recession did not follow the
path of previous monetary contractions but became the Great
Depression.”14 However, other economists, including Rudiger Dornbusch
and Stanley Fischer, pointed out that exports were only 7% of the gross
national product (GNP) in 1929 and that between 1929 and 1931 they
fell by only 1.5% of 1929 GNP. This hardly seems like the cause of the
Great Depression. Moreover, they pointed out that it is not clear that the
Smoot-Hawley tariff was responsible for the decline in exports. The
depression itself might be held responsible for part of the decline.
Dornbusch and Fischer showed that the 1922 Fordney-McCumber tariff
increased tariff rates as much as the Smoot-Hawley tariff, and the
Fordney-McCumber tariff was of course followed by no such recession.15
Even if we were to allow that the possibility of passage of the Smoot-
Hawley tariff was important enough to account for a decline in share

values of this magnitude, one must still ask whether there was any news
over the weekend that would substantially alter one’s estimation of the
likelihood that the tariff would be passed. Just what was the content of
the story in the New York Times? On Saturday, October 26, Senator
David Reed declared that the Smoot-Hawley tariff bill was “dead” in
committee. This provoked denials by Senators Reed Smoot and William
Borah. The Times quoted Senator Smoot as saying, “If that is Senator
Reed’s opinion, I suppose he has a right to express it. But it isn’t the view
of the Finance Committee.” Senator Borah said, “My opinion is that the
tariff bill is not going to die.” The next morning, October 29, the Times
reported that Senator Reed had reiterated his conviction that the bill was
dead and went on to cite other opinions on both sides of the issue.
Although the original Times story had sounded optimistic for the bill, the
United News version of the story published on October 29 was
pessimistic. The Atlanta Constitution, when it ran the story on October
29, carried the headline “Senate Gives Up Hope of Enacting New Tariff
Bill.”
Nonetheless, it is hard to see that this interchange among senators, so
typical of political wrangling, amounts to important news. The same sort
of news accounts had been coming out all along with regard to the tariff
bill. A week earlier, on October 21, the Times had quoted Senator James
Watson, Republican leader of the Senate, offering his view that the
Senate would pass the bill within another month. On October 13,
Senator Smoot was reported as telling President Hoover that there was a
chance the bill would pass by November 20. Alternately optimistic and
pessimistic news on the tariff bill had been coming in since Hoover’s
election.
Far more significant than news about fundamentals among the
newspaper stories on Monday, October 28, 1929, are clues to the
importance attached in people’s minds to the events of just a few days
earlier, when the stock exchange had seen a record decline in share
prices. That was the so-called Black Thursday, October 24, 1929, when
the Dow had fallen 12.9% within the day but recovered substantially
before the end of trading, so that the closing average was down only
2.1% from the preceding close. This event was no longer news, but the

memory of the emotions it had generated was very much part of the
ambience on Monday. The New York Times noted in its Monday morning
edition that Wall Street, “normally deserted and quiet on Sunday as a
country graveyard, hummed with activity as bankers and brokers strove
to put their houses in order after the most strenuous week in history….
When the bell clangs at 10 o’clock this morning for the resumption of
trading, most houses will be abreast of their work and ready for what
may come.” The atmosphere of that Sunday on Wall Street was
described: “Sightseers strolled from street to street, gazing curiously at
the Stock Exchange Building and the Morgan banking offices across the
way, centers of last week’s dramatic financial happenings. Here and
there a sightseer picked up from the street a vagrant slip of ticker tape,
as visitors seize upon spent bullets on a battlefield as souvenirs.
Sightseeing buses made special trips through the district.”16
Indeed, on that Monday morning of the crash, the Wall Street Journal
saw fit to run a front-page editorial stating that “everybody in
responsible positions says that business conditions are sound.”17 The
editorial staff of the Journal must have had reasons to suspect that
reassurance was needed if the market was to remain stable. Presumably
they had heard snippets of popular conversation, or could at least guess
how people might react following the weekend, given the huge debacle
on Thursday.
So perhaps what happened on Monday, October 28, 1929, was just an
echo, albeit a very exaggerated one, of what had happened the previous
week. What had the media said about this? Again, the newspapers
seemed to think that there was no important news. The Chicago Tribune
wrote, on Sunday, October 27, 1929, “It has been the collapse of a vastly
inflated bubble of speculation, with little or no cause in the country’s
general situation. A top-heavy structure has collapsed of its own weight
—there has been no earthquake.” The New York Times said, “The market
smash has been caused by technical rather than fundamental
considerations.” The Guaranty Survey, published by the Guaranty Trust
Company, remarked that “to suppose that the selling wave of the last
few weeks was due to adverse developments of corresponding
importance in the general business situation would be a fundamental

error.”18
Let us go back in time and look at the news on the morning of Black
Thursday, October 24, 1929. Once again, the news does not seem to
have been very significant. President Hoover had announced a plan to
develop inland waterways. Atlantic Refinings’ earnings for the year were
reported to be its highest ever. The president of a sugar company had
told a Senate committee investigating lobbying that $75,000 had been
spent by the sugar lobby since December in a campaign to reduce duties
on sugar. Negotiators had reported a setback in efforts to establish the
Bank for International Settlements. A Carnegie Fund report decried the
subsidization of college athletes. The America’s Cup committee had
announced the rules for the next running of the yacht race. An amateur
pilot attempting a solo flight across the Atlantic was reported lost.
President Hoover had taken a trip on a picturesque river boat down the
Ohio River.
Nothing here seems remotely to suggest anything fundamental about
the outlook for the stock market. But let us look back yet another day.
There was news on the Wednesday before Black Thursday of a major
drop in the market (the Dow closed on Wednesday down 6.3% from
Tuesday’s close) and that total transactions had had their second highest
day in history. Should we then look for the cause in the news of October
23, 1929? Again there was no national news of any apparent
significance, but again there were references to past market moves. The
most significant concrete news stories in the newspapers seem
consistently to have been about previous moves of the market itself. The
most prominent content in the news appears to have been
interpretations of the reasons for these previous moves, often in terms of
investor psychology.
There is no way that the events of the stock market crash of 1929 can
be considered a response to any real news stories. We see instead a
negative bubble, operating through feedback effects of price changes, and
an attention cascade, with a series of heightened public fixations on the
market. This sequence of events appears to be fundamentally no
different from those of other market debacles—including the notorious
crash of 1987, to which we now turn.

News during the Crash of 1987
When the stock market crashed on October 19, 1987—setting a new
record one-day decline that nearly doubled that of either October 28 or
October 29, 1929 (to this day it is the all-time record one-day price
drop)—I considered it a unique opportunity to inquire directly of
investors what they considered to be the significant news on that day. It
was no longer necessary, as it had been for those who studied the 1929
crash, to rely on media interpretations suggesting what was the
important news on investors’ minds. As far as I have been able to
determine, no one else took advantage of this opportunity. The results of
my questionnaire survey, sent out to a sample of institutional investors
and a sample of individual investors the week of the crash, were the only
published findings of a survey asking investors what they were thinking
on the day of the crash.19
In my 1987 survey, I listed all the news stories published in the few
days preceding the crash that seemed at all relevant to the changing
opinions of the market, ending with news that had appeared in the
papers on the morning of the crash. I asked the investors:
Please tell us how important each of the following news items was
to you personally on October 19, 1987, in your evaluation of stock
market prospects. Please rate them on a one-to-seven scale, with 1
indicating that the news item was completely unimportant, 4
indicating that it was of moderate importance, 7 indicating that it
was very important. Please tell how important you then felt these
were, and not how others thought about them.
I included ten news stories, and, in the eleventh position, a space
marked “Other” where respondents could write in their own choices.
The results were broadly similar between institutional and individual
investors, and between those who had actually bought or sold on
October 19. Respondents rated everything as relevant. They thought that
most of the news stories rated at least a 4, that is, they were of moderate
importance. The only news story that merited an average score less than

3 was the sell signal that investment guru Robert Prechter was reported
to have given on October 14, and even that received a score of around 2.
Even the news that the United States had attacked an Iranian oil station,
a minor skirmish reported on October 19, received a rating of over 3.
Respondents were not very forthcoming with other news stories in the
“Other” category. They tended to mention concerns, rather than news
stories that broke at the time of the crash. The most common write-in
answer was a concern about too much indebtedness, referring variously
to the federal deficit, the national debt, or taxes. Such a response was
offered by a third of the individual investors who wrote in answers and a
fifth of the institutional investors.
But the striking result was that the most highly rated news stories
among those I listed were those about past price declines themselves. The
most important news story, according to the respondents, was the 200-
point drop in the Dow on the morning of October 19, a news story that
yielded an average score of 6.54 among individual sellers on October 19
and of 6.05 among institutional sellers on October 19. The preceding
week’s news of the record (in terms of points lost) stock market declines
was considered the second most important story.
One of the questions asked respondents to give their recollections of
the interpretations they had attached to the price declines on the day of
the crash: “Can you remember any specific theory you had about the
causes for the price declines October 14–19, 1987?” Respondents were
given space to write answers in their own words, which I read and
categorized. The most common theme in the 1987 answers to this open-
ended question was that the market had been overpriced before the
crash. Overpricing was mentioned by 33.9% of the individual investors
and 32.6% of the institutional investors. Although this response accounts
for fewer than half the answers, it is noteworthy that so many thought to
mention this in answer to an open-ended question. (I also asked them
directly elsewhere on the questionnaire whether they thought, just
before the crash, that the market was overpriced, and 71.7% of the
individual investors [91.0% of those who had sold on October 19] and
84.3% of the institutional investors [88.5% of those who had sold on
October 19] said yes.)20 Another important theme in answer to the open-

ended question was one of institutional stop-loss, identified by the
presence of the words institutional selling, program trading, stop-loss, or
computer trading: 22.8% of the individuals and 33.1% of the institutional
investors mentioned such a theme. There was also an investor
irrationality theme, identified by statements to the effect that investors
were crazy or that the fall was due to investor panic or capricious
changes in opinion: 25.4% of the individuals and 24.4% of the
institutional investors touched on this theme. None of these major
themes had anything to do with breaking news events other than the
crash itself.
Immediately after this question, I asked on the questionnaire, “Which
of the following better describes your theory about the declines: a theory
about investor psychology [or] a theory about fundamentals such as
profits or interest rates?” Most—67.5% of the institutional investors and
64.0% of the individual investors—picked a theory about investor
psychology.
Thus, it appears that the stock market crash had substantially to do
with a psychological feedback loop among the general investing public
from price declines to selling and thus to further price declines, along
the lines of a negative bubble, as discussed in Chapter 5. The crash
apparently had nothing in particular to do with any news story other
than that of the crash itself, but rather with theories about other
investors’ reasons for selling and about their psychology.
President Ronald Reagan, reacting to the crash, set up a study
commission headed by former Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady. He
asked the Brady Commission to tell him what had caused the crash and
what should be done about it. Investment professionals are generally
uncomfortable going on record to explain the causes of such events, and
many reports about the crash tended to focus the inquiry away from its
ultimate causes. But the members of the Brady Commission were under
orders from the president of the United States to face the matter head
on. As a result, we have in their report the only major effort to collect all
the relevant facts and explain the crash of 1987. They wrote in their
summary the following explanation for the crash:

The precipitous market decline of mid-October was “triggered” by
specific events: an unexpectedly high merchandise trade deficit
which pushed interest rates to new high levels, and proposed tax
legislation which led to the collapse of the stocks of a number of
takeover candidates. This initial decline ignited mechanical, price-
insensitive selling by a number of institutions employing portfolio
insurance strategies and a small number of mutual fund groups
reacting to redemptions. The selling by these investors, and the
prospect of further selling by them, encouraged a number of
aggressive trading-oriented institutions to sell in anticipation of
further market declines. These institutions included, in addition to
hedge funds, a small number of pension and endowment funds,
money management firms and investment banking houses. This
selling, in turn, stimulated further reactive selling by portfolio
insurers and mutual funds.21
This conclusion by the Brady Commission sounds in some ways very
much like the one I drew from my own survey-based study of the crash.
By “price-insensitive selling” they mean selling that comes in response to
a price drop but is insensitive to how low the price goes before the sale
is concluded—selling at any price. The commission was saying here,
most prominently, that the crash was caused by what I have called a
feedback loop, with initial price declines influencing more investors to
exit the market, thereby creating further price declines. The Brady
Commission was saying, in effect, that the crash of 1987 was a negative
bubble.
A strength of the Brady Commission’s study of the crash relative to my
own was their unparalleled access to major investing institutions. Their
study complements my own in reaching the conclusion that a feedback
loop was at work in the crash. However, their conclusion sounds a bit
different from mine in that it gives prominence to the substantive
content of news stories. In addition, theirs suggests that much of the
selling was “mechanical” or “reactive,” rather than psychological or
herd-like.
Based on the results of my study, the news stories that the Brady

Commission mentions about the merchandise trade deficit and about
new highs in interest rates cannot be considered central to investors’
thinking. In my survey, I included these in my list of news stories and
got a lukewarm response from respondents (mostly 4s). Moreover, if one
looks at long-term plots of both the trade deficit and interest rates, it is
very clear that there was no sudden break in either of these series that
could possibly be seen as standing out in a historical perspective.
Virtually nothing happened to either the trade deficit or interest rates.
The proposed tax legislation that the Brady Commission mentions had
completely escaped my notice as an important news story to include on
my list. The news had broken on October 14, five days before the crash,
and it had not seemed to me to be the subject of significant public
comment in the days leading up to the crash. Representative Dan
Rostenkowski’s House Ways and Means Committee was considering tax
changes that would have had the effect of discouraging corporate
takeovers. Changing capital gains tax provisions struck many would-be
interpreters of the crash after the fact as having fundamental importance
for stock prices in an efficient market.
When I learned of the potential importance of this news story, I went
back over the questionnaires I had received to see how many
respondents had mentioned it in their answers under “Other.” I found no
mention at all among the 605 individual responses, and only three
mentions among the 284 institutional responses. Clearly, this news story
does not deserve to be singled out as a major cause of the crash.22
The Brady Commission put quite a bit of stress on a tool of
institutional investors called “portfolio insurance.” Portfolio insurance is
a strategy for limiting losses that was invented by Professors Hayne
Leland and Mark Rubinstein at the University of California at Berkeley
and was successfully marketed by them to many institutional investors
in the 1980s. Portfolio insurance is really a misnomer; the strategy is
merely a plan for selling stocks. It involves impressive mathematical
models, but in fact it is nothing more than a formalized procedure for
getting out of the market by selling stocks when they start to go down.
Leland himself, in his classic 1980 article on portfolio insurance, admits
as much: “Some ‘rules of thumb’ such as ‘run with your winners, cut

your losses’ and ‘sell at a new high, buy at a new low,’ will be shown to
approximate the optimal dynamic trading strategies for certain types of
investors.”23 So, by using portfolio insurance, investors are merely doing
what has always come naturally, only with a little more mathematical
precision and careful planning. But with the fancy new name “portfolio
insurance,” which suggests that the strategy is prudent and sensible, and
with its high-tech image, the advent of this strategy quite likely made
many investors more reactive to past price changes.
The adoption of portfolio insurance by many institutional investors
was a sort of fad—a sophisticated fad, but a fad nonetheless. Since it has
a distinctive name (the term portfolio insurance had essentially not been
used before 1980), it is possible to trace the course of this investor fad
by means of word counts in the press. I performed such a count on
ABI/INFORM, a database of business periodicals, and found no more
than one reference to portfolio insurance in each of the years 1980–83,
four in 1984, six in 1985, forty-one in 1986, and seventy-five in 1987.
References to portfolio insurance were growing along the type of steady
growth path that characterizes simple word-of-mouth epidemic models,
which will be discussed in Chapter 10.24
So the development of portfolio insurance changed the way some
investors reacted to past price changes just before the crash of 1987.
There were probably other changes in the nature of the feedback loop
that, because they were not so concretely programmed as portfolio
insurance, we could not observe directly. But the important point is that
it was the changed nature of the feedback loop, not the news stories that
broke around the time of the crash, that was the essential cause of the
crash.
Feedback can be modified by many factors, and the news media
themselves can certainly have an impact on it. The Wall Street Journal,
on the morning of the 1987 crash, ran a plot showing the Dow in the
1980s and, just below it, a plot showing the Dow in the 1920s up to and
for a month after the crash of 1929.25 The two plots were aligned so that
the current date lined up with the date of the 1929 crash, and so the plot
suggested that the crash of 1929 might be about to repeat itself.
Investors had the opportunity to see this plot at breakfast a matter of

minutes before the crash of 1987 actually started. The Journal was
openly suggesting the possibility of a crash starting that day. True, this
was not a front-page story, and no one story by itself is decisive in
causing a crash. But this little story and the accompanying plot,
appearing as they did on the morning of the crash, probably did help
prime investors to be more alert to suggestions of a crash.
When the big price declines on the morning of October 19, 1987,
began, the archetype that was the 1929 crash encouraged many people
to question whether “it” was happening again—the “it” being the Great
Crash as illustrated in the Journal, not the crash of 1907, nor the up-
crash of 1932, nor any of the numerous other historical stock market
events that by then had been almost completely forgotten. The mental
image of the biggest crash in history possibly happening on that very
day had the potential to enhance the feedback from initial price declines
to later price declines. The image also provided a suggestion of how far
the market would decline before it rebounded, a crucial factor in
determining how far the market actually did fall. In fact, in the crash of
October 19, 1987, the Dow actually fell in one day almost the same
amount as it did on October 28–29, 1929—22.6% in 1987 versus 23.1%
in 1929. That it fell roughly the same amount on both occasions might
be regarded as just a coincidence, especially since the 1987 crash took
two days rather than one, and few investors in 1987 even knew exactly
how far the market fell in 1929. However, many did have a rough
impression of the extent of the 1929 plunge, and there was little other
concrete information available to investors on October 19, 1987, to
suggest when the market should stop falling.
The changed feedback that occurred at the time of the 1987 crash
should be thought of as just one example of continually changing price-
to-price feedback, as investors’ theories and methods change over time.
It would be a mistake to describe the changed feedback as the result
solely of the technological innovation represented by portfolio insurance.
Despite the use of computers in executing portfolio insurance strategies,
it is still people who decide to deploy the tool and who decide how
quickly it will take effect in a declining market. And there are of course
many other people who, aware that portfolio insurance is being used,

adjust their own informal responses to past price changes depending on
their perceptions of other investors’ use of the strategy. Portfolio
insurance is of interest to us in this context only because it shows us
concretely how people’s thinking can change in ways that alter the
manner in which feedback from stock price changes affects further stock
price changes, thereby creating possible price instabilities.
A Global Media Culture
We noted in Chapter 1 that there is a striking similarity in the behavior
of stock markets over many countries, and in Chapter 3 that there is also
a striking similarity in the behavior of the markets for homes in many
cities around the world. This similarity stands as a sort of puzzle, since
the usual economic variables do not suggest strong reasons for such
similarity. It would not seem plausible that the similarity occurs directly
as a result of cross feedback from the prices in one country to the prices
in another. Most people rarely, if ever, look directly at data from another
country. One of the reasons for this similarity must be the presence of
the news media as a supporter of a global culture, and as a supporter of
a speculative global culture worried that certain prices will soar or crash.
People in Paris do not watch British television and rarely read British
newspapers, and people in London do not watch French television and
rarely read French newspapers. And yet the people who write for these
media outlets certainly do keep an eye on each others’ stories. That is
one of the tricks that they learn as professionals. Of course, reporters of
the news, especially the serious news, feel an obligation to read the news
from other countries, so as not to miss an important piece of news. But,
beyond this, reporters learn from experience that an excellent way to
produce good copy is to piggyback on others’ successes. A sequence of
stories in foreign news media is a sign of a successful story, and such a
success can probably easily be replicated at home if the story is copied
with only a few tweaks and adjustments for local tastes and associations.
Economists rarely talk of the news media as a force of similarity across
countries; the public’s expectations of economists is that they should be

calculating the effects of such things as interest rates and exchange rates,
not that they should be interpreting the stories that appear in
newspapers around the world. We have noted that the general public
does not generally think that culture and psychology are important
influences on the markets, and so economists, particularly business
economists who largely have to present their case to the broad public
rather than to other professional economists, naturally find it to their
advantage to try to live up to the public’s expectations of them. The
economists’ behavior then only reinforces the public’s impressions about
the sources of market fluctuations.
One of the reasons the U.S. stock market appears to have a
disproportionate effect on markets of other countries is that the United
States uses the English language, which has emerged as a world
language. It is much easier for foreign reporters, who invariably know
English, to respond to stories from the United States or the United
Kingdom than to stories from Germany or Brazil. Producing news stories
is a business with tight deadlines, and it requires fast action. A lot of
reporters have the ability to pick up a story from another country in
English and turn it into a local story in a pinch. It’s a sure-fire strategy.
Even though the original story was in English, practically no viewers or
readers will ever know that the reporters took the story from abroad. But
trying this in a less commonly studied language would entail a
significant challenge for most reporters.
One of the reasons that a housing boom in Boston in the mid-1980s
moved to London and then to Paris and then to Sydney (as Figure 3.3
shows) is that the story that appeared in the earlier booms was market
tested in the first countries to experience a boom and was just copied in
the other countries. The story did not spread to Berlin, or to Tokyo,
perhaps because the story did not have the same credibility in those
countries, which have been undergoing some soul searching about the
weakness of their economies. The story associated with the housing
booms was one of spectacular economic success, and that kind of story
just does not fly everywhere. Media professionals know instinctively
when a story is ripe for copying in their country and when it is not.
Stories of foreign provenance may be especially resonant in media

outlets (such as intellectual newspapers) favored by people who live in
glamorous international cities. The sociologist Robert K. Merton argued
that there are really two kinds of people in the world: cosmopolitans
(who orient themselves to the whole world) and locals (who orient
themselves to their village or town).26 The cosmopolitans have a culture
shared over the whole world. The people who inhabit the glamorous
international cities of the world may, aided by the news media, become
culturally closer to others in such distant cities (despite language
barriers) than to rural people in their own country. It is not so surprising
then that the home prices in these cities often move together.
The Role of News Media in Propagating
Speculative Bubbles
The role of the news media in the stock market is not, as commonly
believed, simply as a convenient tool for investors who are reacting
directly to the economically significant news itself. The media actively
shape public attention and categories of thought, and they create the
environment in which the speculative market events we see are played
out.
The examples given in this chapter illustrate that the news media are
fundamental propagators of speculative price movements through their
efforts to make news interesting to their audience. They sometimes strive
to enhance such interest by attaching news stories to price movements
that the public has already observed, thereby enhancing the salience of
these movements and focusing greater attention on them. Or they may
remind the public of past market episodes, or of the likely trading
strategies of others. Thus, the media can sometimes foster stronger
feedback from past price changes to further price changes, and they can
also foster another sequence of events, referred to here as an attention
cascade. This is not to say that the news media are a monolithic force
pushing ideas onto a purely passive audience. The media represent a
channel for mass communication and the interpretation of popular
culture, but popular culture has an inherent logic and process of its own.

We turn next to a study of some of the basic ideas in our culture, whose
transformation over time bears a relation to the changing speculative
situation in speculative markets.

Seven
New Era Economic Thinking
Speculative market expansions have often been
associated with popular perceptions that the future is brighter or less
uncertain than it was in the past. The term new era has periodically been
used to describe these times.
Of course, there is some obvious validity to the new era notion. The
general trend over the past century was a rise in the standard of living
and a decline in the impact of economic risks on individuals. By many
measures the world has indeed been gradually growing into a new and
better era. But the most salient characteristic of popular new era
thinking is that it is not continuously in evidence; rather, it occurs in
pulses.
In contrast to the irregular references to a new era in popular culture,
economists or other influential commentators who have proclaimed a
new era at various times in history have usually been quite cautious in
their choice of words. Often, they merely seem to be betting on the
continuation of long-term trends.
Sometimes the economists may be missing things by focusing too
much on the data and not on what is uniquely new about the latest
changes in technology or institutions many people see as heralding a
new era. But, more often, it is the general public that is missing

something by overreacting to the new era stories that become suddenly
popular—missing the basic similarity between the latest stories and
similar stories that appeared many times in the past.
For example, the arrival of the Internet in the mid-1990s was
interpreted by many casual observers as a fundamental change that
would boost the productivity of the economy, since the Internet is a
communications and distribution system of fundamental importance.
But, if we wish to consider whether the Internet is a communications
and distribution system that will produce faster economic growth than in
the past, we have to compare it with similar systems of the past, such as
those represented by postal services, railroads, telegraph, telephones,
automobiles, aircraft, radio, and express highways. All of these networks
had profound effects on the economies of their days, helping transform
their economies from a much more primitive state. It is difficult to argue
that the Internet is more important to the growth of our economy today
than these were to the growth of economies of the past, and so there is
no reason to expect faster growth than in the past. But the general public
is not usually thinking of these past historical episodes for the purpose of
comparison.
Impressions that the public is affected in different ways at different
times by new era thinking—or, for that matter, by any other popular
economic theory—are hard to pin down. For example, it is difficult to
trace the evolution of ideas through questionnaire survey work, because
one only knows to question the public about specific ideas after those
ideas have attracted a good deal of attention.
We can do word counts of publications using computerized databases,
and thereby get some idea of the changing frequency with which certain
economic terms are used, but such searches are crude and miss the often
subtle ways in which the use of the terms changes over time. When I
tried to establish how often the phrase new era was used in the years
leading up to the 2000 peak in the stock market, I found that the term
was used in so many different contexts that a search on this phrase alone
is not meaningful for our purposes. In contrast, I have established from
the Lexis-Nexis database that in the English language the term new era
economy did not have any currency until a Business Week cover story in

July 1997 attributed this term to Alan Greenspan, marking an alleged
turning point in his thinking since the “irrational exuberance” speech
some months earlier.1 The term new era economy remained in regular use
on the way to the peak of the stock market in 2000. (The association of
this term with one powerful figure provides yet another striking example
of how individual actors or media events can change public thinking.)
The use of the term new era in this context actually preceded the
Business Week article; in June 1997 the Boston Globe published a pair of
articles that used the terms new era thesis, new era theorists, and new era
school and identified Ralph Acampora, technical research director at
Prudential Securities, as a member of the so-called school. In August
1997, a much-talked-about article by Paul Krugman in the Harvard
Business Review attacked the newly prominent new era theory, and this
of course gave the term even greater currency.2 In the decade before
1997, the Nexis search reveals that the term new era was used only
rarely to denote optimistic economic outlooks; in those years, the term
apparently had little currency.
It is a curious fact that the development of the “new era” stories
around 1997 corresponds to the approximate date when the real estate
boom began in the United States and other countries. The beginning of
this boom (visible in Figure 3.3) started quite sharply around 1997 in
Boston, Los Angeles, Paris, and Sydney; it appears that London’s
increases had begun more than a year earlier.
The popularity of the term new era to describe the economy took hold
after the 1990s stock market had advanced far enough that it was
beginning to amaze people, and all the new era stories featured the stock
market.3 It was not as if some economists proclaimed a new era after
looking at national income data or other data relevant to the real
economic outlook. The new era theory emerged principally as an after-
the-fact interpretation of a stock market boom. This is surely no surprise.
A stock market boom is a dramatic event that calls for an equally
dramatic interpretation. In contrast, an increase in the growth rate of the
gross domestic product—from, say, 2% to 3%—although perhaps
exciting to economists, does not make the same impression on the
general public. It is insubstantial, esoteric, and simply cannot hold its

own against the flashier news offerings bombarding the public.
Whenever the market reaches a new high, public speakers, writers,
and other prominent people suddenly appear, armed with explanations
for the apparent optimism seen in the market. Reporters may not always
get the timing right, and they may suggest that it was the words spoken
by these great men and women that caused the market shifts. Although
prominent people can certainly move markets, often their wisdom
merely tags along with market moves. Nevertheless, the new era
thinking they promote is part of the process by which a boom may be
sustained and amplified—part of the feedback mechanism that, as we
have seen, can create speculative bubbles.
A defender of markets’ rationality might point out that even if
discussions of a new era really are the cause of the boom, it does not
follow that news accounts of these discussions must precede the boom.
Technically, of course, it is possible—in spite of the fact that most media
discussions of new era theories seem to coincide with or come after stock
market booms—that the word-of-mouth discussions did in fact precede
and cause the booms. The news media might have been late to recognize
the discussions.
But that defense of markets’ rationality is not very plausible if we
consider the nature of the thought patterns observed among the general
investing public. There is such a lack of interest among the public in
reasoned arguments about the future course of the corporate sector that
it is highly unlikely that the public could have been harboring secret
thoughts of a new era in corporate profits unrelated to past stock price
increases.
It appears that most people are not interested in long-run economic
growth forecasts for the aggregate economy. Economic theory would
suggest that they should be interested, if they are behaving rationally.
But in fact the topic is too abstract, boring, or technical. The public is
interested in expansive descriptions of future technology—for example,
in what amazing new capabilities computers will soon have—not in
gauging the level of U.S. corporate earnings in coming years. In fact, it is
doubtful that more than a small percentage of the populace today could
give an estimate of aggregate U.S. corporate earnings accurate to within

an order of magnitude. They are hardly likely to be interested in
predicting changes in those same earnings.
History does show that there are at times strong unseen forces acting
on public opinion that are not revealed in the media or in public
discussions until some key event brings them out of the woodwork. But
such currents in public opinion typically relate to naive theories based
on personal observations or ill-founded prejudices against minority
groups or foreign countries. The public simply does not harbor secret
opinions about the economic growth rate.4
Conventional wisdom interprets the stock market as reacting to new
era theories. In fact, it appears that the stock market often creates new
era theories, as reporters scramble to justify stock market price moves.
The situation reminds one of the Ouija board, where players are
encouraged to interpret the meaning of movements in their trembling
hands and to distill forecasts from them. Or the stock market is seen as
an oracle, issuing mysterious and meaningless pronouncements, which
we then ask our leaders to interpret, mistakenly investing their
interpretations with authority.
In this chapter, I analyze the “new era” thinking that accompanied
previous stock market and real estate market booms in the United States.
I also offer some indications of the public’s thinking in the times when
the “new eras” had run their course. I make liberal use of contemporary
quotations, since these provide the most direct evidence of people’s
thoughts and concerns.
The 1901 Optimism: The Twentieth-Century Peak
As noted in Chapter 1, the first of the three major peaks in the price-
earnings ratio since 1881 occurred in June 1901, right at the dawn of
the twentieth century. Prices had achieved spectacular increases over the
preceding twelve months, and in mid-1901, observers reported real
speculative fervor: “The outburst of speculation during April, 1901, was
something rarely paralleled in the history of speculative manias…. The
newspapers were full of stories of hotel waiters, clerks in business

offices, even doorkeepers and dressmakers, who had won considerable
fortunes in their speculations. The effect on the public mind may be
imagined.”5
With the beginning of the century in January 1901, there was much
talk of the future and of technological progress to come: “trains [will be]
running at 150 miles per hour, … newspaper publishers will press the
buttons and automotive machinery will do the rest, … phonographs as
salesmen will sell goods in the big stores while automatic hands will
make change.”6 Guglielmo Marconi made the first transatlantic radio
transmission in 1901, and there were predictions that we would soon be
in radio communication with the planet Mars.
The Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York, from May 1 to
November 1, 1901, emphasized high technology. It had as its
centerpiece the 375-foot Electric Tower, illuminated by 44,000 light
bulbs powered by faraway generators at Niagara Falls. The tower was
“indescribably 
brilliant” 
and 
held 
visitors 
“spellbound.”7 
The
exposition’s Electricity Building featured exhibits about the wonders of
electricity. There was an electrograph, a machine that transmitted
pictures by wire (forerunner of the fax machine), and a tel-autograph, a
machine that enabled one to transmit one’s signature over long distances
(forerunner of credit card signature-verification devices). The exposition
even offered a simulated trip to the moon on the airship Luna: the visitor
could take a stroll through the streets and shops of the moon before
returning to earth.
In a sense, the high-tech age, the computer age, and the space age
seemed just around the corner in 1901, though the concepts were
expressed in different words than we would use today. People were
upbeat, and in later years the first decade of the twentieth century came
to be called the Age of Optimism, the Age of Confidence, or the Cocksure
Era. The mood was perhaps similar to that of a century later, just past
the dawn of the twenty-first century. Given the modern media’s
exploitation of anniversary or threshold events, and the human tendency
to consider such events as symbolic new beginnings, investing them with
exaggerated hopes and expectations, the transitions to new centuries
may tend to be optimistic times. The 1901 example suggests that today

our new-century optimism might in fact extend for years into the new
millennium, at least in some forms and assuming it is not too impacted
by unfavorable world events. Whether the events of 9/11, the global
financial crisis of 2008, wars and revolutions in the Middle East, and
political tensions elsewhere in the world will be enough to shake our
confidence in a lasting way remains to be seen.
But there was another reason people in 1901 thought that the stock
market ought to be highly valued. The most prominent business news in
the papers in recent years had been about the formation of numerous
combinations, trusts, and mergers in a wide variety of businesses, stories
such as the formation of U.S. Steel out of a number of smaller steel
companies. Many stock market forecasters in 1901 saw these
developments as momentous, and the term community of interest was
commonly used to describe the new economy dominated by them. An
April 1901 editorial in the New York Daily Tribune explained:
But a new era has come, the era of “community of interest,”
whereby it is hoped to avoid ruinous price cutting and to avert the
destruction which has in the past, when business depression
occurred, overtaken so many of the competing concerns in every
branch of industry. In the great iron and steel industry, for example,
which, as Andrew Carnegie has said, has been the prince and the
pauper of the industrial world, now highly prosperous again and
again deeply depressed, consolidations of scores of scattered
concerns into a dozen larger ones within the last two years have
now been followed by the combination of the latter into the most
gigantic combination the world has ever known, a combination
which, if the expectations of its projectors are fulfilled, will result in
the avoiding of much economic waste through eliminating the
possibility of the erection of unnecessary plants for competitive
reasons, in the effecting of many economies through the abolishing
of duplicate official positions and establishment of a uniform price
list, and in the enlargement of export trade by reason of the lower
prices which can be fixed in consequence of the various economies
coincident to consolidation.

In the railroad field, too, combination is the ruling idea, and for
the same reasons. Competing roads are being consolidated or leased,
with resulting economy of operation and permanent cessation of
rate cutting, and representatives of powerful roads are going into
the boards of heretofore incorrigible rate cutting lines, in which
bodies they have an influence potent, if not controlling.8
These reasons for optimism for the stock market are certainly plausible.
It is easily believable that elimination of competition might create
monopoly profits for corporations, thus boosting their share prices.
But the editorial does not mention the potential for antitrust law to
end the “community of interest” era. In September 1901, the pro-
business president William McKinley was assassinated while visiting the
Pan-American Exposition; he was succeeded by his “cowboy” vice-
president, Teddy Roosevelt. It was only six months later, in March 1902,
that Roosevelt dusted off the almost-forgotten Sherman Antitrust Act of
1890 and used it against the Northern Securities Company. Over the
next seven years, he embarked on a vigorous antitrust policy. When the
defects of the Sherman Act became apparent, the Clayton Antitrust Act
of 1914 furthered the government’s assault on corporate combinations.
The premise of the “community of interest” theory of stock prices
turned out to be wrong; those who expressed high optimism for stocks
on this basis were not thinking of all that could go wrong. People were
not considering the possibility that society would not tolerate this shift
of wealth toward stockholders. Presumably they did not consider this
because there had not yet been any concrete antitrust activity. Yet in
thinking about the level of the stock market, one must of course consider
the long-run earnings, spread over future decades, that the market
represents, and the potential for society to make adjustments, positive or
negative, to control this earnings stream.
Rarely do discussions of the level of the stock market consider the
possibility of government reaction to the level of profits, even though
government policy toward corporations has changed substantially and
dramatically over time. The U.S. Federal statutory corporate profits tax
alone has been adjusted many times, from 0% in 1901, to 1% in 1911, to

10% in 1921, to 14% in 1931, to 31% in 1941, to 50.75% with a 30%
excess-profits tax in 1951, to 35% today. Despite the fact that the U.S.
government’s past actions raised the corporate profits tax from 0% to
50.75%, effectively nationalizing something on the order of half the
stock market (to the extent that they actually enforced and sustained the
tax), potential future adjustments in this tax are rarely mentioned in
discussing the outlook for the market.
The 1901 example illustrates one way in which new era thinking can
go wrong: such thinking concentrates attention on the effects of events
currently prominent in the news. Little attention is paid to “what-ifs,”
even if they have substantial probability.
There was another important theme in 1901—that stocks were now
being held in “strong hands”: “The ownership of stocks has changed
hands. The public speculators do not now own them. They are owned by
people who are capable of protecting them under any circumstances,
such as the Standard Oil, Morgan, Kuhn Loeb, Gould and Harriman
Interests. These people who are the foremost financiers of the country
evidently know when they go into a proposition what ultimate results
may be expected.”9 This theory, like theories expressed at other market
peaks, finds it inconceivable that there could be a selling panic. In the
shortest run, perhaps this theory was right. But those strong hands did
not stop the stock market crash of 1907 or the dramatic slide of stock
values between 1907 and 1920.
The 1920s Optimism
The bull market of the 1920s was apparently a time of relatively great
public enthusiasm for and interest in the stock market, and the
enthusiasm seemed to peak in 1929 with the market. In his 1931 book
Only Yesterday, Frederick Lewis Allen wrote of 1929:
The rich man’s chauffeur drove with his ears laid back to catch the
news of an impending move in Bethlehem Steel; he held 50 shares
himself on a twenty-point margin. The window cleaner at the

broker’s office paused to watch the ticker, for he was thinking of
converting his laboriously accumulated savings into a few shares of
Simmons. Edwin Lefevre (an articulate reporter on the market at
this time who could claim a considerable personal experience) told
of a broker’s valet who made nearly a quarter of a million in the
market; of a trained nurse who cleaned up thirty thousand following
the tips given her by grateful patients; of a Wyoming cattleman,
thirty miles from the nearest railroad, who bought or sold a
thousand shares a day.10
Although this account may create an exaggerated impression of the level
of public attention to the stock market, there is no question that
attention was much keener in the 1920s than at other times, and that
enthusiastic investors were not hard to find.
The 1920s were a time of rapid economic growth and, in particular, of
the widespread dissemination of some technological innovations that
had formerly been available only to the wealthy. The automobile came
into common use at roughly this time. In 1914, only 1.7 million
automobiles were registered in the United States, but by 1920 there
were 8.1 million, and by 1929, there were 23.1 million. The automobile
brought with it a new sense of freedom and possibility and a widespread
awareness that these personal values could be attained by new
technology.
The 1920s were also the time when the electrification of the country
was extended beyond the major cities, which had already been
electrified. By 1929, twenty million U.S. homes were wired. Kerosene
lamps were out; electric light bulbs were in. By 1929, nearly half of all
wired homes had vacuum cleaners, and a third had washing machines.
Moreover, the 1920s saw the expansion of radio broadcasting and the
development of radio as a mature national entertainment medium. In
1920, there were only three radio stations in the entire United States; by
1923, there were over five hundred. Nationally known radio stars like
Rudy Vallee and nationally popular shows like Amos ’n’ Andy appeared
in the 1920s. The National Broadcasting Company formed the first
national network in 1926, and regular shows created a sense of national

culture previously unknown. Sound also invaded our movies. Lee De
Forest invented the sound-on-film system in 1923, and talkies had
completely displaced silent movies by the end of the decade. Because
these innovations had such an impact on everyday lives, affecting people
in their homes and in their hours of leisure, the 1920s were a time when
massive technological progress was unusually apparent to even the most
casual observer.
There were, at the time of the 1920s stock market boom, many clear
statements proclaiming a new era for the economy. For example, as
early as 1925 we hear, “There is nothing now to be foreseen which can
prevent the United States from enjoying an era of business prosperity
which is entirely without equal in the pages of trade history.”11
John Moody, head of Moody’s Investors Service, a rating agency, said
in an article about the stock market in 1928, “In fact, a new age is taking
form throughout the entire civilized world; civilization is taking on new
aspects. We are only now beginning to realize, perhaps, that this
modern, mechanistic civilization in which we live is now in the process
of perfecting itself.”12
Given the public enthusiasm for stocks and the enormous run-up in
the market, there was a corresponding demand for books that
interpreted and justified the market boom. In 1929, Charles Amos Dice,
in New Levels in the Stock Market, gave a number of reasons to expect the
increase to continue. He preferred the term new world to new era, but the
idea was the same. He wrote of a “new world of industry,” referring to
techniques of mass production, large research departments, the
beginning of the electrical age, the industrialization of the South, the
emergence of large-scale production, and the mechanization of
agriculture. Furthermore, Dice wrote of a “new world of distribution,”
predicting the proliferation of installment credit, the chain-store
movement, new techniques of advertising that would stimulate demand,
and new market research techniques. He also spoke of a “new world of
finance,” referring to the expansion of investment banking to provide
new sources of funds for corporations, the rise of the holding company
as a tool to make financing more flexible, and advances in the Federal
Reserve System’s understanding of how to stabilize business. Dice

described the Federal Reserve as analogous to the governor on a steam
engine, regulating the speed of the economy.13
The Dice book, curiously, was printed in August 1929, a month before
the peak of the market prior to the onset of the Great Depression. The
timing of the book’s appearance seems even more remarkable when one
finds attached at page 69 a small slip of paper titled “Errata.” The slip,
apparently added after the text was printed but before the book was
bound, notes that the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose on September
3, 1929, to over 20 points above the level indicated in the book. The slip
of paper instructs the reader to adjust upward the projections for the
Dow given in the printed book by 15 to 20 points. Thus Dice managed to
time his book for the exact peak of the market, and thus managed to
make the most catastrophic error possible in forecasting the market.
Professor Irving Fisher at Yale, who has been described as one of
America’s most eminent economists of his day, argued that the U.S. stock
market was not at all overvalued. He was quoted as saying just before
the peak in 1929 that “stock prices have reached what looks like a
permanently high plateau.” He wrote a book titled The Stock Market
Crash—and After, with a preface dated less than two months after Black
Thursday. Fisher must have been working on this book at the same time
as Dice was writing his, but his timing was not so bad. The 1929 crash
came while he was still at work on the book. Yet Fisher was still able to
be optimistic after the crash, especially since the market had gone down
only a fraction of the distance it ultimately would by 1932, and the
crash did not yet seem to signal anything like the end of an era.
Fisher argued in his book that the outlook was for rapidly increasing
earnings for a number of reasons, some of them parallel to those cited by
Dice. First, he pointed out that the merger movement of the 1920s
allowed economies of large-scale production. He noted that “the
economies from mergers take time to develop, while the effect on the
stock market of their formation is instant.” Scientific research and
invention were proceeding at a faster pace than before. The advantages
of the automobile were only just beginning to be exploited, with the
development of a rapidly widening network of surfaced highways. Much
was being learned about the efficient use of waste products. In

agriculture, recent inventions included subsoil plowing, better fertilizers,
enhanced breeds of farm animals, and new and improved crops. As all of
these inventions gradually came to be applied, further earnings increases
could be anticipated from them. Fisher also maintained that the
management of American corporations was improving, thanks to the
application of “scientific” methods, improved layouts of manufacturing
facilities, and more sophisticated management techniques. Businesses
were able to plan better for the future, he claimed, partly because of his
own invention of “master-charting,” a pencil-and-paper method of
priority planning for executives. Fisher also was encouraged by his
perception that labor unions were now accepting joint responsibility for
the solution of industrial problems.14
Others argued that the market valuations of the 1920s were sound
because we were in a more sober time—and not just figuratively. The
prohibition of alcoholic beverages was thought to be a sign of greater
steadiness and intelligence: “Many different things contributed to this
happy result…. [including] the elimination from our national life of the
saloon and its destructive elements, and consequent comparative
sobriety among the population as a whole. Most of the money formerly
spent in the saloon has since gone into continually higher standards of
living, investments and savings banks.”15
Of course, optimistic sentiments for the market were not the only
sentiments expressed at the time. The high price of the market relative
to rough measures of fundamental value did not go unnoticed in 1929.
The New York Times and the Commercial and Financial Chronicle
consistently pointed out what they interpreted as speculative excess.
Paul M. Warburg of the International Acceptance Bank decried the
“unrestrained speculation.”16 Yet we know, from the level of the stock
market itself, that the weight of public sentiment was overwhelmingly
positive in the 1920s.
New Era Thinking of the 1950s and 1960s
New era thinking also seemed, judging from media accounts, to undergo

a sudden surge in the mid-1950s, when the market increased 94.3% in
real (inflation-corrected) terms between September 1953 and December
1955. The market had been stalled during most of the early 1950s, amid
lingering fears that the economy might sink back into a depression now
that the stimulus of increased World War II production was absent. But
the sudden near-doubling in the stock market, supported by a solid
growth in earnings, apparently caused the investing public to forget such
fears and to indulge in genuine new era thinking. In May 1955, U.S.
News and World Report wrote:
Once again the feel of a “new era” is in the air. Confidence is high,
optimism almost universal, worry largely absent.
War is receding as a threat. Peace is a growing prospect. Jobs are
quite plentiful. Pay never was so good. The promise is that taxes
will be cut. Everywhere things are in a rising trend.
Three times in 10 years a depression scare has come and gone
without amounting to much. The first scare came in 1946, right
after World War II. Military spending was cut drastically with
scarcely a ripple. The second scare came in 1949. The public went
right on buying, oblivious to the worries of businessmen, and this
scare faded. The third scare began in mid-1953. It now is little more
than a memory.17
The sense that investors were terribly optimistic and confident of the
market was in and of itself part of the new era thinking. Newsweek wrote
in December 1955 that “basic to the upsurge [in the stock market] was
an investor faith in the overwhelming strength of the economy—and the
fact that corporations were cashing in on this prosperity.”18
In a development strongly paralleling the evolution of radio in the
1920s as the vehicle for a mass national culture, the early 1950s had
seen the widespread introduction of television. In 1948, only 3% of U.S.
families owned television sets; by 1955, 76% did. Like the Internet,
television was a vivid technological innovation that captured the
imagination of almost everyone. It was evidence for technological
progress that could not be overlooked; within a few short years the

majority of Americans began regularly spending hours watching an
electronic device.
Inflation was very low at the time, and people credited this to newly
enlightened Fed policy. Treasury Secretary George Humphrey boasted in
1955:
In the past 2¾ years, the value of the dollar has changed only one-
half of one cent. We have kept inflation’s hand out of your savings
almost entirely.
We regard inflation as a public enemy of the worst type. But we
have not hesitated, either, to ease or restrict the basis of credit when
need was indicated. The full force of monetary policy has been
made effective more promptly than ever before to respond to
natural demands. This has been done by the timely use of monetary
policy and credit; by the return to the public of purchasing power
through the biggest tax cut in the history of the nation; by cutting
unjustified Government spending; by timely encouragement to
construction, home building and needed improvements.19
Something analogous to the “strong hands” theme seen in the 1900s—
the idea that the demand for stocks was stable enough to prevent any
downturn—was present in the 1950s as well. Newsweek wrote in 1955:
Many financial men like to think that the nation has developed a
“new capitalism” with an ever-broadening base. Some 7.5 million
people hold stock in publicly owned corporations, compared with
6.5 million three years ago. Assets of mutual funds, which give the
small investor a chance to spread his risk, have soared from $1.3
billion in 1946 to $7.2 billion. Thousands of workers have become
owners of the firms they work for via employee stock-purchase
plans.
All this may not add up to an absolute guarantee against another
’29, but most experts are confident that it goes a long way.20
The idea that Irving Fisher had presented in the 1920s as a reason for
optimism, that businesses were able to plan better for the future, was

floated again as a new idea in the 1950s: “There is a new attitude of
business itself that promises to avoid deep depressions in the future.
Business firms today make long-term plans and appear to be less
influenced than in the past by short-term fluctuations in activity.”21
The Baby Boom was seen as another important factor driving
prosperity and the market, because people needed to spend money on
their babies (just as the grown-up babies themselves, despite having
fewer children, are now perceived as bidding up stock prices as they
save for their retirement): “It is this boom in babies that is being counted
on now to make the latest ‘new era’ different from the last one. Families
are growing bigger. Good roads and fine automobiles are opening the
countryside. The urge is toward suburban living and for houses with
three or four bedrooms instead of one or two.”22
The increase in the use of consumer credit was also cited, as it had
been in the 1920s, as a reason to expect prosperity: “This willingness to
lay out cash amounted, in the opinion of one influential Washington
individual, to a ‘consumer spending revolution.’ … In spending his
money, the average individual’s wants have gradually been upgraded.”23
With the election of John Kennedy as president in 1960, and given his
advocacy of economic stimulus measures, it was generally thought that
the economy ought to do especially well. Kennedy inspired confidence
beginning with his initial State of the Union message in 1961. He was
perceived as showing vision and optimism, and he hit upon a dramatic
symbol for that vision by promising, in a special message to Congress in
May 1961, that the United States would land men on the moon before
1970. Americans expected that such an achievement would be
remembered for centuries, marking as it would humankind’s first escape
from its planet of origin. Kennedy was viewed as the incarnation of the
national optimism and of the strength of the stock market: “Wall Street
has a simple description for the phenomenal strength of stock prices,
‘The Kennedy Market.’” The confidence inspired by the Kennedy
economic program led some to conclude that the country was entering a
“new economy” in which “businessmen can enjoy reasonably continuous
prosperity indefinitely” and that there was “more justification for
confidence” in monetary policy than in times past.24 The Kennedy

initiatives were expanded by the “Great Society” program of his
successor, Lyndon Johnson, beginning in 1964; Johnson’s program set as
its primary goals nothing less than an end to poverty and urban decay.
In the 1960s, the theory that the stock market is the “best investment”
was prominent: “Investors feel that stocks are the best investment
medium—as a hedge against possible inflation, as a means of
participating in the future growth of business.” “Investors seem to be
betting that inflation will accompany recovery—and that common
stocks, even at present prices, represent the only real hedge.”25 At that
time, investors believed that if inflation broke out, the stock market
would go up, rather than down, as is now commonly thought; therefore,
the prospect of inflation was a reason to own stocks. There was concern
in the early 1960s that, even though there was virtually no inflation, the
Kennedy-Johnson economic programs could become inflationary.
A possibly significant factor behind the 1960s market peak was the
Dow’s approach to 1,000. That the approach of a new milestone such as
a four-digit Dow would have an impact on the public imagination may
seem silly, but, given the lack of any other solid basis for the market’s
valuation, talk of such an arbitrary level provided a solid anchor for
people’s expectations.
Even before the Dow got close to 1,000, the press was counting the
milestones. A 1965 Business Week article noted, “Like the four-minute
mile, psychological barriers are made to be cracked. It’s no less so in
Wall Street, where the 900 ‘magic’ mark on the Dow-Jones industrial
average (as the 600, 700, and 800 marks before it) will probably
crumble sooner or later.” Newsweek wrote that the 900 barrier had
reached “almost mystical significance in the minds of many observers.”
In 1966, when the 1,000 level loomed, Time wrote, “At week’s end the
average had reached 986.13, less than 14 points from the 1000 mark
that the Street considers a mystical number. Even though that number
may be more mystical than meaningful, the date of the breakthrough
will appear in history books of decades, or perhaps even centuries, to
come—and the date is not far off.”26 The market appears to have raced
to just under 1,000, but it would not pass the magic number for a long
time. Although the Dow was not then computed on a minute-by-minute

basis, it finally rose above 1,000 (if computed using the highs for the
day) in January 1966. It was not until 1972, the eve of the stock market
crash, that the Dow closed above 1,000, and even then, it stayed above
1,000 only briefly.
The Dow did not rise solidly above 1,000 until 1982, and, if one
computes a real stock price, it did not rise above the 1966 high in real
terms—and stay above it—until January 1992, twenty-six years later.27
The period from January 1966 to January 1992 was one of low returns,
confined as it was (with no capital gain) to income from dividends; the
average annual real stock market return was only 4.1% per year.28 These
are signs consistent with a notion that the market was in some sense
“reaching” toward 1,000 in 1966, and that it became relatively
overpriced.
New Era Thinking during the Bull Market of the
1990s
I have already described some of the new era thinking that characterized
the 1990s in Chapter 4. Here I make just a few additional observations
and then contrast the new era thinking of the more recent Millennium
Boom and the Ownership-Society Boom with that during the new eras
described in this chapter.
As with all major stock market booms, there were writers during the
1990s who offered new era theories to justify the market. Michael
Mandel, writing in Business Week in 1996 in an article titled “The
Triumph of the New Economy,” listed five reasons for his belief that the
market was not crazy: increased globalization, the boom in high-tech
industries, moderating inflation, falling interest rates, and surging
profits.29
A prominent theory during this boom was that low inflation makes for
a strong market outlook. In the 1990s, theories about inflation
dominated discussion of the market outlook just as they did in the
1960s, but now the prevalent theory had been reversed. In the 1990s, it
was thought that if inflation were to break out, the market would go

down rather than up. The idea that the stock market is a good
investment because it is a hedge against inflation (that is, it will go up if
there is an outbreak of inflation) was dead.
Why did people in the 1990s think that inflation would push the
market down, whereas in the 1960s they thought it would push it up? In
the 1990s, investors may have been reacting to literature published by
economists showing that economies do more poorly during sudden
outbursts of very high inflation. In fact, these studies do not show much
of a relation between moderate or long-run inflation and real economic
performance; over the relevant range, they would suggest that the
1960s-era theory was right—that the real value of the stock market
should be relatively immune to news of inflation, and that the stock
market should move with consumer prices, not against them.30 More
likely, people in the 1990s were reacting to the fact that the stock
market had in recent years moved against inflation, rather than with it.
Many of the same themes that appeared in the 1920s, 1950s, and
1960s after stock market booms were repeated in the 1990s.
Roger Bootle, in his 1998 book The Death of Inflation, argued that the
“inflationary era,” during which “managed capitalism” and strong labor
unions had induced an inflationary spiral, was drawing to a close. In
“managed capitalism,” “prices were decided, not determined by the
interplay of interpersonal supply and demand.” Now, Bootle declared,
we were entering the “zero era,” brought on by global capitalism,
privatization, and the decline of labor unions, all of which made it
impossible for prices to be decided by committee.31
Steven Weber, with his 1997 article “The End of the Business Cycle” in
the public policy journal Foreign Affairs, argued that macroeconomic
risks were lower now: “Changes in technology, ideology, employment
and finance, along with the globalization of production and
consumption, have reduced the volatility of economic activity in the
industrialized world. For both empirical and theoretical reasons in
advanced industrial economies the waves of the business cycle may be
becoming more like ripples.” Weber presented a number of reasonable-
sounding arguments. For instance, he noted that the economy has come
to be dominated by the service sector in a way that it was not thirty

years ago, and he pointed out that service employment has always been
more stable than industrial production.32
Downsizing and restructuring—terms describing so-called managerial
revolutions in the 1980s—were thought then to be important reasons for
the growth of profits since 1982. The thought that they are still sources
of profit growth lingers in some people’s minds today. Yet there has also
been substantial skepticism about these managerial revolutions, as
exemplified by the comic strip Dilbert, which dwells on petty labor-
management conflicts in the new era economy.
The statistics on the growth of labor productivity made some
impressive gains in the United States in the late 1990s. This helped
confirm, in many people’s minds, the advantages that the Internet and
other new forms of high technology were offering to the economy, and
was seen as justifying the appreciation in the stock market. And yet the
high productivity growth in the late 1990s was partly a data error: the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics revised the 1998–2000 growth figures
substantially downward in 2001, well after the stock market boom.33
Moreover, even to the extent that the productivity growth numbers were
good, people read far too much into them. The numbers became a
justification for admiring the Internet, when in fact the growth of
productivity then had nothing to do with the fledgling new Internet,
which was not yet a significant factor in the overall economy. Even
beyond this, people didn’t realize how tenuous the historical relation
between productivity growth and stock market gains really is.34
Productivity growth hasn’t been a reason to expect the stock market to
do well. But the story in the 1990s that the reported productivity growth
justified and explained the spectacular stock market appreciation was
too good for stock market boosters and the news media to pass up.
It should be noted that not all stories in the media in the 1990s were
slanted toward new era thinking compared with stories during earlier
episodes of high pricing. I could not find 1990s accounts that were as
expansively and breathlessly optimistic as some in 1901 or 1929, and
although there was much optimism in the media in the 1990s, it was
usually a matter of background presumption rather than bold assertion.
There appears to have been a media attitude change, and optimistic

hyperbole was out in the 1990s, just as it is still out of fashion today in
the second decade of the twenty-first century.
If anything, many writers in the 1990s seemed rather more influenced
by concerns about market overpricing and speculative mania. In fact,
many media accounts in the mid-to late 1990s focused on what they
considered the craziness of investors. For example, a Fortune story in
April 1996 told of reporters stopping random people on the street and
asking them for stock tips. They stopped a policeman, a Starbucks
barista, a carpenter on a billboard crew, and an ID checker at a fitness
club, and all of them offered expansive stock recommendations. They
could not find a shoeshine boy, but otherwise their experience mirrored
that of Bernard Baruch before the crash of 1929, who remarked that he
had received stock tips from the shoeshine boy and interpreted that as a
sign of market excess.35 Articles with titles like “Gamblers High: Is This a
Market Where Yesterday’s Yardsticks Don’t Apply?” or “It’s Tulip Time
on Wall Street” or “Say Goodbye to the Last Bear” abounded. The
possibility that the stock market boom was a speculative bubble was
certainly thrust before the minds of readers in the 1990s. But the
evidence in the markets is that the public in the 1990s found these
possibilities at best mildly amusing; they were far more swept up in the
new era thinking symbolized for them by the coming of the new
millennium.
Some New Era Thinking in Real Estate Booms
Real estate booms are driven by new era thinking just as much as are
stock market booms. Price-to-price feedback may be in a sense the
primary driver of a real estate boom, but a new era story contributes as
well, or may appear as part of the feedback. As we have noted, national
booms in large countries appear to be a new thing, but there are plenty
of examples from long ago of regional real estate booms, and these have
their regional new era stories.
A real estate boom covering a substantial area of California occurred
in the 1880s, peaking in 1887. The boom was primarily in Los Angeles,

San Diego, and Santa Barbara, sparsely populated then and so of little
significance to the United States as a whole. This boom appears to have
been connected with the rapid development at the time of railroads,
which were just making much of this land more accessible. The boom
was apparently precipitated by a rate war between the Santa Fe and the
Union Pacific railroads, which made it suddenly very cheap to travel to
and from Southern California. The railroads also, with hopes of
recouping their investment in trackage, financed a legion of promoters
who attracted people to migrate to the region by extolling the wonderful
climate and brilliant future of southern California. They were a success:
“Los Angeles was a crowded, seething city of promoters, amateur and
professional; hotels bulged with occupants, prices soared to astronomic
levels, and everywhere—on the streets, in print, in homes and clubs—the
incessant topic was land, the land of southern California.”36 The boom
was followed by a collapse in prices in 1888–89: “Persons who had been
talking ‘land and climate’ for two years now regretted intensely the lack
of a stable industrial basis for southern California’s economy. Worried
citizens looked back upon their frenzied existence during 1887 and
began to realize that ‘never, perhaps, did a community more completely
lose its sense of values and proportion.’”37 The story of the boom of the
1880s serves to remind us that people were capable of worrying that
available land was getting scarce even more than 100 years ago. The
difference then was only that the story didn’t spread nationally.
California already had circumstances then that set it apart, and
apparently no one thought the boom would spread nationwide.
In the early twentieth century, another remarkable regional home
price bubble occurred in Florida, especially in the Miami area, peaking
in 1925. It seemed to be driven by a new era story that after World War
I people with the new wealth and automobiles of the Roaring Twenties
were just discovering the possibility of commuting to Florida for the
winter, and the land was selling fast. People who believed this story
might feel some urgency to buy. Another precipitating factor for this
bubble was the 1924 Florida constitutional amendment prohibiting
income and inheritance taxes, a factor encouraging wealthy retirees to
relocate to Florida, as well as an extensive advertising campaign by the

Miami Chamber of Commerce. There was also the story, for fun-loving
people, of the “Florida lifestyle” with so many speakeasies and gambling
casinos. The fact that many celebrities were making the area their home,
including 
even 
gangster 
Al 
Capone, 
gave 
this 
story 
some
newsworthiness, as well as credibility. This bubble is famous for the
“binder boys” who persuaded would-be homebuyers all over the country
to pay a binder fee to buy Florida land, and who then were able to sell
the binders. The bubble ended abruptly after a 1926 hurricane reminded
people of some Florida dangers, and when newspapers around the
country turned on the bubble and recounted stories of gullible people
who had been persuaded to buy land they had not even seen that later
turned out to be unusable, even under water.38
Like the 1880s land boom in southern California, the 1925 Florida
boom was intrinsically regional. There were stories that genuinely
excited people, but they did not, could not, extend to the country as a
whole.
In the closing decades of the twentieth century, we began to see rather
strong regional real estate booms in the United States, as well as other
countries, and these covered a large enough part of their respective
countries that they began to affect the national home price indices. The
causes of these movements are harder to see. In the last decades of the
twentieth century, the booms appear to have been broader in
geographical scope and tied up with broader sentiment, political issues,
or issues about the economic base of the area.
In the United States, there were two major regional home price booms
that were big enough that they had an effect on the national home price
index that was plotted in Figure 3.1, a boom in California in 1975–80
and a boom in the northeastern United States in 1984–88, which
eventually carried over into California in 1986–89.
Real (inflation-corrected) home prices in the entire state of California
rose 60% between 1975 and 1980, before falling in the mid-1980s.39 A
factor driving this boom was a relatively sudden appearance of a
political movement advancing environmental interests in California,
which created more stringent zoning laws and building restrictions.
California had grown with relatively few zoning restrictions, but,

starting around in the 1960s, Californians decided collectively to do
something about this. The effect was to make California, around the
1970s, one of the most difficult places in the country to build new
houses.40
This political change limited the supply of new homes, so that the
safety valve that had prevented price increases from taking place was no
longer so effective. It was viewed by some critics as a victory for the
haves versus the have-nots, the people who already owned homes versus
those who did not. This victory was widely appreciated and served to
boost the value of existing homes.
Another factor driving this bubble was Proposition 13, a voter
referendum in June 1978 that produced a change in the California
constitution that had the immediate effect of cutting property taxes by
more than half and guaranteed that property taxes would remain lower.
This was another political move that was viewed as increasing the value
of property by cutting taxes on it. The fact that voters had put
Proposition 13 in place despite dire warnings about the consequences of
lower tax revenues from established political figures was viewed as the
harbinger of a new economic era.
Both the enhanced zoning standards and Proposition 13 were signals
of a new era when existing individual property rights would be more
respected, and when one might imagine that one’s real estate
investments would become more valuable. It was one of the beginnings
of the ownership society—one that, along with the election of Margaret
Thatcher in the United Kingdom, boosted the career of California
governor Ronald Reagan, soon to become president of the United States
based on his new message, and would later spread to much of the world.
One wonders, though, how the California boom of the 1970s could
have happened then, given that mortgage rates were setting new record
highs, reaching over 10% in the same year as the fastest home price
increase: 1978. Such high mortgage rates would certainly seem to have
the effect of putting a damper on a bubble, because they would mean
that homebuyers would have to make very large mortgage payments if
they bought an expensive house. In 1978, with such high interest rates,
purchasing a house worth four years’ income would result in interest

payments alone amounting to over 40% of one’s income, very difficult
for most families to budget. But this boom should dispel any notions that
real estate booms are always stopped by high interest rates.
One of the explanations of how this could have happened in the 1970s
is that homeowners, upset with the high interest rates, used the political
process to challenge due-on-sale clauses in mortgages with lower interest
rates and thereby avoid paying the higher interest rates.41 During the
1970s boom, and for a couple of years thereafter, assumable mortgages
shielded the housing market from the effects of high interest rates. Also,
during the late 1970s, a new institution called “creative financing”
appeared and flourished.42
This resulted in the first U.S. regional real estate boom large enough to
have a real impact on the national home price numbers. It was
interrupted by the severe recessions of the early 1980s.
Another home price boom appeared in the northeastern United States
in the mid-1980s, with its epicenter in Boston. In 1985 alone, home
prices in the Boston metropolitan area went up 38%.
It is hard to identify any local factor that explains the Boston real
estate boom. In a 1986 study, Karl Case reviewed all of the fundamental
factors that might be driving a boom in Boston home prices and
concluded that nothing had changed very much in Boston in recent
years: “While the economy is healthy and income is growing, market
‘fundamentals’ do not seem to offer an adequate explanation for the very
rapid increase in home prices in the Boston area since 1983.”43
Low interest rates were often cited by the media as responsible for
producing the boom. Indeed, interest rates were lower in the late 1980s
than they had been in the early 1980s. But lower interest rates cannot
directly account for the boom in Boston, since the boom was regional,
not national, and the interest rates were lower everywhere. The best one
can say about lower interest rates as a factor leading to the Boston boom
is that they were permissive, reducing the barriers to a bubble that was
precipitated by something else. By the way, mortgage rates were even
lower in the mid-1990s, when Boston prices were falling, than they were
during the boom of the 1980s.

The remarkable home price boom in Boston in the mid-1980s had a
new era story connected with it as well, but again not a suddenly new
story. It is true that in the 1980s, Boston was emerging as a high-tech
powerhouse, but it had apparently been doing that for decades. It
appears, though, that a story of Boston as a high-tech center was
emerging that had word-of-mouth potential that was contagious. The
personal computer revolution that was just then putting a computer on
everyone’s desk would increase the contagion of any stories relating to
computers. Wang Laboratories, Digital Equipment Company, Data
General Corporation, and Lotus Corporation made Boston a world center
for computers.44
What matters most for the contagion is how the story looked to people
who lived in Boston, who bought the property. Local people saw the
construction in 1985 of the massive new Lotus Corporation headquarters
in East Cambridge and a boom in construction along Route 128. A story
developed that Boston was a rival to Silicon Valley in California. Boston
would even beat Silicon Valley. One Boston observer remarked in 1985:
“In Boston, there’s a great deal of history and variety of cultural roots
that shape people’s view of the world. There was nothing in Silicon
Valley before Silicon Valley except for orchards.”45 The story mixed
local pride with some facts about the new industry in the area to tell a
new era story. The economic success came to be called the
“Massachusetts Miracle,” and the story had sufficient resonance that
Michael Dukakis, the governor of Massachusetts who tried to claim
credit for this boom, was nominated by the Democratic Party in 1988 to
run for president of the United States.
The story has substantial plausibility to it, for indeed the trend for the
last decades of the twentieth century had been for cities with highly
skilled or educated populations to grow somewhat faster.46 The
precipitating factor for the Boston boom of the 1980s indeed did
substantially affect fundamental value in that city, although the feedback
generated by this boom apparently overshot fundamental value,
resulting in a fallback in home prices in the 1990s.
The 1980s boom in Boston was not confined to Boston, but to some
extent covered the entire northeastern United States. In fact, it went far

beyond the United States, for a similar boom was happening across the
Atlantic from Boston, in London, and in other cities around the world. It
is plausible that the same kind of new era story that drove Boston, tied
as it is to the emerging idea that a city with a highly educated and
sophisticated populace has a unique future in today’s world, may be
transposed to other glamor cities as well.
We have already covered, in Chapter 4, a number of precipitating
factors that have contributed to the home price boom since the late
1990s, and some of these could be classified as “new era” theories. It
should also be noted that there is a sort of new era theory that is
becoming attached specifically to vacation or second-home properties,
which may account for the rapid price increases for these properties in
many places around the world since 2000.
It is widely thought that the advent of the Internet, the cell phone, and
the mobile office has made it easy for working people to travel to some
rather remote sanctuaries and continue to do their work. There has been
a presumption that once Baby Boomers started retiring around 2008,
they would want to move out of the city to beautiful places. It is
sometimes also said that, as standards of living continue to rise, the
increasingly large number of newly wealthy people will want to buy
second homes in scenic places, such as ocean fronts or mountain tops,
which are inherently scarce, because the supply of such properties
cannot be increased. Flaunting one’s wealth by building bigger and
bigger first homes perhaps has become increasingly passé. Because so
many people were doing this during the housing boom that crashed after
2006, it may have started to seem pointless—uniquely beautiful rather
than big may seem better in the future.
There appears to be an element of truth to such new era stories about
second homes. But such stories, reminiscent of the stories that fed the
Florida land bubble in the 1920s, may have increased acceptance during
real estate bubbles, because the feedback that is driving home prices
increases the contagion of such stories. There are some disquieting
similarities between new era stories around 2003 or 2004 about vacation
and second homes and those of the 1920s Florida bubble. For example,
in Florida in 1925, the boom was supposed to be driven by the advent of

the automobile; more recently, the second home boom is supposed to be
driven by the advent of the Internet. In both cases, a rush of retirees was
supposed to drive the market. The housing crash once again particularly
affected those markets, like Florida, driven by speculative and unreliable
new era stories.
The Ends of New Eras
Despite the suggestion inherent in the phrase speculative bubble that there
may be a dramatic burst—a stock market crash—speculative bubbles and
their associated new era thinking do not end definitively with a sudden,
final crash. On reflection, this is not surprising, given that speculative
prices are essentially formed in the minds of the millions of investors
who buy and sell, and it is unlikely that so many people would
simultaneously arrive at sudden and enduring changes in their long-run
perceptions.
People today remember the stock market crash of 1929 as occurring in
one or two days. In fact, after that crash, the market recovered almost all
of its lost ground by early 1930. The significance of 1929 is not the one-
day drops in October, but the fact that the year marked the beginning of
the end: the beginning of the three-year period that reversed much of
the stock market gains of the 1920s. The same is true of other stock
market drops. One-day events do not figure prominently, except as
symbols of the malaise in the markets.
I noted in Chapter 1 that the high pricing of the market in 1901 was
not followed by any immediate or dramatic price decline, but rather that
prices ceased to increase and that eventually, after some twenty years
had elapsed, the market had lost most of the real value it had had in
1901. The change took so long to work itself out that it is rather more
generational in character, and therefore it is hard to find comment about
it in the media.
If we look at 1920–21, when the real stock market was at its lowest
since 1901, discussions of the stock market centered on what had gone
wrong; the glowing descriptions of future prosperity seen in 1901 were

no longer to be found. The biggest factor in most commentary of the
period centers on the 1920–21 recession, which was unusually severe.
Coverage focused on recent losses by businessmen and on paper fortunes
that had disappeared. In place of the “community of interest” keeping
prices up, there was instead discussion of hostility from farmers and
shippers toward railroads, of customers demanding reductions in rates.
The cancellation of government contracts following the world war was
thought to have revealed weakness in existing businesses. Strained
political conditions abroad following the war were also viewed as a
negative factor for the U.S. economy. The actions of “conscienceless”
short sellers or bear raiders were considered negative influences on the
market, as were the effects of tax-loss selling for income tax purposes.
There is some evidence that investors in 1921 had learned not to be
influenced by exaggerated claims and inflated schemes. A 1921 article in
the Saturday Evening Post by Albert Atwood describes highly speculative
prices as a thing of the past and quotes a stockbroker as saying that “the
promotions of the last few years have been neither as wild nor as
fantastic as those of the boom period of 1900 and 1901.”
Another theme running through accounts of the period is that market
psychology somehow mysteriously changes, and that it had, at that time,
become inexplicably negative. Atwood quotes a banker in 1921: “All the
world got together to drive down prices, and when the whole world
makes up its mind, when everyone thinks alike and is determined that
prices shall go lower, nothing can resist the movement.”47
The end of the 1929 new era thinking was more dramatic and was
directly tied to the Great Depression that followed; by 1932, it was
already plain that the United States was into the deepest depression it
had ever experienced, and there seemed to be prima facie evidence that
the new era was over. The optimists who had been extolling a bright
future for the economy were silenced by events that deviated so
markedly from their forecasts that it seemed they could not be explained
by any convenient adjustments in theories. Economic forecasters
demonstrated extreme uncertainty about the future, and observers of
consumer behavior claimed that consumer uncertainty had stalled
demand.48

The depression of the 1930s was a time of widespread concern that
our economic system was failing. Oscar Lange, a University of Chicago
professor of economics, wrote in the American Economic Review in 1939
that “the view is widely held that the American economy has lost its
momentum of expansion and reached a stage of more or less permanent
stagnation.”49
The perceived failure of capitalism ushered in the heyday of
communism in the United States. Communism seemed to many to be the
wave of the future, even inevitable. Many of the best writers of the era
became openly sympathetic to communism in the 1930s, including
Kenneth Burke, Erskine Caldwell, Robert Cantwell, Jack Conroy, Edward
Dahlberg, John Dos Passos, James Farrell, Langston Hughes, and William
Saroyan.50
Further evidence of the loss of hope for the uncontrolled capitalist
economy can be seen in the ascendance of radical political movements
abroad. The rise of Nazism in Germany is itself a telling symptom of the
widespread despair that took hold of many people’s thinking after 1929.
The change in mindset of the German public within the space of a few
years seems astonishing, and it is a useful reminder of how changeable
any public mood may be.
The end of 1965 new era thinking was associated with suddenly
magnified fears of the consequences of world population growth,
exhaustion of natural resources, and the appearance of high inflation.
These fears inhibited further stock price growth, and promoted
commodity price growth.
The great population scare began quite abruptly in the early 1960s. A
Proquest search of historical databases of the Los Angeles Times, New
York Times, and Washington Post for articles containing the word
“population explosion” found no articles during 1945–49, one article
during 1950–54, 169 articles during 1955–59, and 1,319 articles during
1960–64. Paul Ehrlich’s 1968 book The Population Bomb, which
predicted devastating economic problems to come within a decade, was
a symptom of the public discourse generated by this great public fear.
The number of articles with the words “population explosion” fell
steadily after its early 1960s peak, down to only 177 in 1985–86.

Over the course of the 1960s, inflation fears began to reignite. The
Kennedy administration’s claim that it could lower unemployment
through high-pressure economics without kindling inflation was found to
be false; in fact we entered a period of “stagflation,” with both high
unemployment and high inflation. In 1974, Arthur Okun, who had been
a staff member of the Council of Economic Advisors under President
Kennedy and later was its chairman, called the attempt at high-pressure
economics “one of the greatest failures of economic analysis in modern
times.” Inflation began to be seen as a significant brake on the economic
outlook. Arthur Burns, the Chair of the Federal Reserve Board, said, “No
country that I know of has been able to maintain widespread economic
prosperity once inflation got out of hand.”51 Even though this fact is
unsupported by economic analysis, there was a general perception that it
was true.52
By the early 1980s, there was a widespread feeling that the United
States was losing its preeminence to Japan. In a USA Today article titled
“How Japan Is Taking Over Our Markets,” an expert is quoted as saying,
“The only problem is that no targeted industry in history—not autos, not
steel, ball bearings, televisions, motorcycles—has been able to cope with
the onslaught from the Japanese.” Japan was seen then as especially
strong in the high-tech fields, in which our past successes had always
been integral to our national self-esteem and identity.
The California real estate boom of the 1970s was interrupted, due at
least in part to the most severe economic recessions since the Great
Depression of the 1930s: a pair of back-to-back recessions in 1980 and
1981–82. These recessions produced small declines in real California
home prices and a quiescent period in the markets until the late 1980s,
when the boom resumed. Here is an example of a speculative boom that
took a breather and then resumed in even greater force a few years later.
The twin recessions and the real price declines in the early 1980s did
nothing to hamper the stories that had propelled the first bubble.
Indeed, in the 1980s, the free-market tax-cutting former California
governor Ronald Reagan was president of the United States, and many
Californians no doubt continued to believe that their economy was in the
vanguard of the world.

Another economic recession occurred in 1990–91, and this helped
bring the real estate booms of the 1980s to an end. This time, price
declines were severe. In Los Angeles, after peaking at the end of 1989,
real home prices declined 41% by 1997. However, it is not clear that the
recession caused the ends of the booms. The price declines in Boston
began in 1988, two years before the recession. The price declines in Los
Angeles began in 1990, before the recession, and did not end until long
after the recession. The recession lasted much longer in California, as
measured by employment numbers, but it is hard to say whether that
was an exogenous cause of the price declines or was caused by them.
Once again, the change in thinking that represented the end of the new
era had no clear alignment with any precipitating factor, but had rather
more to do with the feedback from price movements themselves.
Any interpretation of the end of the stock market bubble in 2000 has
to confront what was different about the stock market when compared
with the housing market, which continued to flourish for years after the
stock market crashed.
The recession of 2001 was part of the reason for the sharp drop in
corporate earnings in 2001, which of course affected the stock market,
and not the housing market. In the United States, the only major
metropolitan areas that suffered a drop in home prices between 2000
and 2001 were those near the technology center, Silicon Valley—San
Jose and San Francisco.
As a matter of history, the first stocks to go after 2000 were the
Internet or dot-com stocks. The downturn in these stocks from their peak
in March 2000 was extremely sudden. The Dow had its all-time peak on
March 9, 2000. In a little more than a month, by April 14, it had lost
more than half its value.53 What happened in that month-long interval?
Except for the price declines themselves, there was nothing so dramatic,
nothing that one could point to, that should have reduced the outlook
for these stocks by half in such a short time.
In a Financial Times article dated April 29, 2000, the interpretation
given was this: “People are beginning to recognize that the basic
fundamentals are still true and just adding a dotcom (to the company
name) is an indication of nothing.”54 That is what the article itself was: a

public recognition, not a concrete news story. The fascination with the
Internet stocks suddenly appeared to have been a silly, in fact
embarrassing, fad. It was basically a change in perception.
Behind this change in public perception was a lot of talk. According to
a count of news stories from Lexis-Nexis, the number of newspaper
stories about Internet stocks had already started to pick up dramatically
by late 1999, often reporting dramatic successes of initial public
offerings, but often also expressing skepticism. By the beginning of 2000,
the number of stories using the words Internet and stock had surpassed
1,000 a week; that number peaked the week of April 16, 2000, at over
1,400 stories. After this extended period of media attention, the number
of stories with these two words began to decline gradually, with a half-
life of about a year.
The stories right at the turning point in the stock market may have
been especially significant. One, a March 14, 2000, article in the Wall
Street Journal by Jeremy J. Siegel, “Big-Cap Tech Stocks Are a Sucker
Bet,” showed price-earnings ratios for large market capitalization stocks
that were over 100. In this article, Siegel asserted that history shows
“the failure of any large-cap stock ever to justify, by its subsequent
record, a P/E ratio anywhere near 100.” This statement was very
quotable, and was often quoted.
Another article, in Barron’s, “Burning Up” by Jack Willoughby,
included a ranking of Internet companies that were losing money, by the
number of months it took until they had burned through all their cash.55
Willoughby’s idea of ranking Internet companies this way made these
companies’ problems suddenly vivid and clear, and was eminently
quotable. His article was a bombshell that led to the kind of skeptical
talk that can in turn lead to the undoing of stocks.
Given the many thousands of newspaper articles and other media
accounts about stocks that appeared at the peak of the market, there are
many more that one could mention as influential. In this context, it
might be noted that my own first edition of Irrational Exuberance saw a
lot of coverage right at the peak of the market, between late February
2000 and the beginning of April 2000, by Paul Krugman in the New York
Times, David Henry in USA Today, and John Cassidy in the New Yorker,

as well as by The Economist, Newsweek, and Business Week. All these
stories, occurring as they did in rapid succession at the very time that
Internet stocks were collapsing, might have added to the effect of the
other market skeptics who were suddenly proliferating.
But none of these publications seems to have been so influential by
itself as to do something like break the upward stock market trajectory.
Probably some of the more influential of them had some role in
stimulating a public dialogue that led to the change in public opinion;
probably they played a role much like that of the innocent child in Hans
Christian Andersen’s story “The Emperor’s New Clothes,” whose remark,
“The emperor has no clothes,” set everyone whispering to one another
what the child had said, until, observing each other, they realized how
much everyone else was harboring doubts as well.56 Possibly, too, the
attention these various stories got was just a symptom of the beginnings
of public doubts that would have broken the bubble one way or another
whether these stories had been written or not. In that sense, the public
interest in these publications was mostly a symptom of a feedback
mechanism’s working its way out in the downside direction.
The subsequent massive decline in the entire market appears to have
been related to the break in confidence about stocks in general that
came about first for the Internet stocks. The decline in Internet stocks
became a symbol of a malaise that gradually became diffused
throughout the stock market. The stock market decline after 2000 did
not extend to housing at the same time, perhaps in part because the
analogy to Internet stocks did not seem to extend to housing.
The stock market decline was certainly related as well to the recession
of 2001, and to the sharp decline in reported corporate earnings between
2000 and 2001. But these cannot be considered exogenous causes of the
decline in the market, since they may be regarded as part of the same
feedback mechanism that led to the decline in stock prices. Probably the
whole decline in the market could be attributed to the natural process of
feedback and correction, not to any events completely exogenous to the
market.
We have already seen that, as the years went by after the peak in the
market, public opinion became gradually less sanguine about the stock

market and the economy. Consumer confidence had declined sharply
from its peak in 2000 to levels fairly typical of prior decades, and, as we
have seen, confidence in the stock market as an investment had fallen as
well. By 2004, while the market still remained at high levels, the
excitement of the late 1990s seemed very remote.
But the decline in confidence toward more normal levels after 2000
seemed actually to stimulate the demand for housing, and, in fact, to
strengthen its upward momentum. Recall that in Chapter 4, we saw
some evidence that uncertainty about jobs encouraged people to invest
in real estate, and in Chapter 5, we saw that the decline in the stock
market encouraged people to think that real estate was a better
investment than stocks. Thus, with the help of feedback, we were able to
have a real estate boom even in an economy that was less upbeat than it
was a few years earlier. When the feedback that was causing the upward
thrust in real estate came to an end, and the stock market took another
tumble after the global financial crisis, we found ourselves in post-
bubble situations in both the stock market and the housing market.
The end of the boom in the stock market of 2003–7 seems to roughly
correspond with the end of the housing boom of 1997–2006. In our
minds, we may imagine that both were ended by the financial crisis that
followed. However, there is actually a considerable gap between these
two endings, and between their end and the first real signs of the
financial crisis. These events must surely have some relationship, but it
is not an obvious one. Indeed, even after these two booms were well on
their way to correction, economic forecasters still did not see the
financial crisis coming. Hites Ahir and Prakash Loungani of the
International Monetary Fund point out that in 2008–9, sixty-two
countries had slipped into recession, but as of September of the year
before, not a single one of these recessions had been predicted by
prominent economic analysts polled by Consensus Forecasts.57
It was noted in Chapter 3 that around 2005, public attention to the
concept of a housing bubble increased in the United States. Indeed,
public thinking changed from glamorous new era thinking to “I was a
fool to believe this” thinking. Magazines and newspapers gave
prominent cover stories about housing bubbles in mid-2005. Google

Trends, a website that produces counts through time of search queries on
the Internet beginning in 2004, shows a huge spike in searches for the
term “housing bubble” in 2005, and these searches gradually trailed off
to almost nothing by 2014. It appears that people had to learn the
meaning of, or get comfortable with, the idea of a housing bubble. The
sudden new vocabulary and view that what we had experienced was not
a new era but a bubble led to what was effectively a run on the shadow
banking system that was making the most aggressive loans and a
collapse of confidence in the whole financial sector.
Ends of new eras seem to be periods when the focus of debate can no
longer be so upbeat. At such times, a public speaker may still think that
it would be good business to extol a vision of a brilliant future for the
economy, but it is simply not credible to do so. One can, at such times,
present a case that the economy must recover, as it always has, and that
the stock market should go up, as it historically has, but public speakers
who make such a case cannot achieve the command of public attention
they do after a major speculative market run-up and economic boom.
There are times when an audience is highly receptive to optimistic
statements and times when it is not.

Eight
New Eras and Bubbles around the World
Large stock market moves like the U.S. examples I
discussed in the previous chapter have also occurred in many other
countries over the years, affording us numerous other observations.
These suggest that speculative bubbles—periods of exaggerated but
temporary investor enthusiasm, often associated with “new era” theories
—are in fact commonplace.
In this chapter, I examine the largest stock market moves around the
world that preceded the peak of the Millennium Bubble in 2000. For
some of these, I rely on accounts by the news media. Of course, media
accounts are not always reliable, and I cannot claim to have done
exhaustive research on any of these examples. However, they illustrate
the significance in these countries of factors I have identified in previous
chapters as important in U.S. stock market moves. I show that prices in
these countries have tended to reverse after making exceptionally large
increases, as one would expect if bubbles were common among them.
The Largest Stock Market Events
Table 8.1 shows the twenty-five largest recent one-year real stock price
index increases before 2000 for thirty-six selected countries, and Table

8.2 shows the twenty-five largest decreases for the same countries. Table
8.3 shows the twenty-five largest recent five-year real stock price
increases, and Table 8.4 shows the twenty-five largest decreases. The
tables are based on monthly data starting at varying dates for the
different countries, but for over half the thirty-six countries, the data
begin in or before 1960.1
Table 8.1
Largest Recent One-Year Real Stock Price Index Increases
It is clear that very large stock price movements are commonplace by
world standards. Many are much larger, in the percentage terms shown,
than those we have recently experienced in the United States. Indeed, no
example from the United States even appears in any of the tables. (We
should bear in mind that the U.S. market is the largest in the world, and

there are a few near misses even in percentage terms. For example, the
184.8% real U.S. stock market increase from April 1994 to April 1999
almost makes the list of the biggest five-year price increases. In addition,
the U.S. stock market fell 44.1% in real terms from October 1973 to
October 1974, which almost puts it on the list of biggest one-year drops.
And the real 113.9% rise from June 1932 to June 1933 would qualify for
the list of biggest one-year increases, except that this period, from the
depths of the Great Depression to the beginnings of recovery, occurred
much earlier than the sample period used to construct the tables.)
Table 8.2
Largest Recent One-Year Real Stock Price Index Decreases
Table 8.3
Largest Recent Five-Year Real Stock Price Index Increases

The rightmost column in each of the tables also shows, whenever
possible, what happened during the twelve months or five years after
each of these periods of dramatic price change.2 As can be seen, there is
considerable variability across these countries as to whether the market
continued in the same direction over the subsequent interval or reversed
itself. At the end of this chapter, I describe what we know about the
sequelae of the large price changes tabulated here.
Table 8.4
Largest Recent Five-Year Real Stock Price Index Decreases

Stories Associated with the Largest Price Changes
It is easier to find stories associated with one-year price changes than
with five-year price changes. Five years is such a long time that factors
underlying the rise or decline in stock markets are often lost from public
consciousness—seen as underlying trends rather than salient events.
Fortunately for our purposes, fourteen of the twenty-five five-year
intervals of real price increase shown in Table 8.3 contain twelve-month
intervals, shown in Table 8.1, and eleven of the twenty-five five-year
intervals of real price decline shown in Table 8.4 contain twelve-month
intervals, shown in Table 8.2.
Some of the twelve-month price increases seem to be associated with
good reasons for a rational price change. This is especially so for the

very largest one-year changes: typically something very unusual was
going on. But even in these cases, there often seems to be a suggestion of
some market overreaction to events.
The biggest one-year real stock market increase of all, in the
Philippines from December 1985 to December 1986, was an amazing
683.4%. The biggest five-year real price change, of 1,253%, also
occurred in the Philippines. The five-year period, from November 1984
to November 1989, included the record one-year period.
During the twelve-month period from December 1985 to December
1986, the regime of Ferdinand Marcos collapsed, Marcos fled the
country, and a new government led by Corazon Aquino took charge of
the country. In the period just before the price increase, a communist
insurgency had threatened to turn the country into another Vietnam.
The Marcos government had assassinated Corazon Aquino’s husband.
With demonstrations in the streets, it was in general a time of enormous
uncertainty about the future. Once the new government was in place,
the country developed renewed hope: a “new era” certainly seemed at
hand. Moreover, the price changes were not reversed during the
subsequent one-or five-year intervals, as can be seen from the tables.
One might suspect that the very low values for the Philippine stock
market in December 1985, at the beginning of the record twelve-month
period, were the result of a sort of negative bubble. Indeed, three of the
top twenty five-year price decreases shown in Table 8.4 occurred in the
Philippines by 1985. The Philippine stock market had a truly dismal
record prior to its spectacular increase. Newspaper accounts in 1985 and
earlier puzzled over the unusually low price-earnings ratios, often
around 4. When viewed from this perspective, the largest stock increase
in our tables was but a reversal of a series of decreases.
The second biggest one-year increase (October 1986 to October 1987)
and the biggest one-year decrease (October 1989 to October 1990) both
occurred in Taiwan. Taiwan is also the home of the seventh-largest five-
year increase, from May 1986 to May 1991, and to the twenty-seventh-
largest five-year decrease, from October 1988 to October 1993.
During the year of the highest speculative increase in Taiwan, October
1986 to October 1987, there were some impressive “new era” reasons

for optimism. Booming exports had pushed economic growth rates into
the double-digit range, and it was widely predicted that with this steep
growth trajectory, the economy would soon be producing such high-tech
items as computer chips. The new affluence was visible everywhere:
expensive foreign cars cruised the streets of Taipei, and businessmen
freely downed $100 bottles of wine at glamorous new restaurants. Even
so, the savings rate was very high, and the country was investing heavily
in its future.
In the fall of 1987, after a series of antigovernment street
demonstrations, the government finally lifted the martial law that had
been in force since 1949 and also allowed the formation of opposition
parties for the first time. Later in that twelve-month period, September
1987, the government made two historic and highly visible
announcements: permitting foreign investors to establish companies in
Taiwan and allowing Taiwanese citizens to visit their relatives on the
mainland for the first time since 1949.
Despite these good reasons to anticipate the dawning of a “new era” in
the Taiwanese economy, many observers still believed there was an air
of speculative excess to the Taiwan stock market of 1986–87. Volume of
trade soared, increasing sevenfold from January to September 1987, to
exceed the combined volume of all Asian markets excluding Japan.3
Price-earnings ratios reached 45, compared with 16 at the beginning of
the year.
Taiwan was in the grip of a gambling fever that expressed itself in
other venues besides the stock market. An illegal numbers game, called
Ta Chia Le or Happiness for All, unknown until 1986, suddenly became a
national obsession. It was so popular that “on days when winning
numbers are announced, peasants neglect their fields and workers fail to
report to their factories.”4
A Taiwanese student of mine at Yale later confided to me that, while
he was still a teenager in Taiwan in 1987, his mother had forced him to
go regularly to the stock exchange, observe the trading, and report back
to her if something significant should happen. It was while carrying out
these surveillance missions that he became convinced, he told me, of the
utter madness of the speculative situation.

The Taiwan stock market increase was not reversed right away:
following the year of most rapid price increase, there was yet another
year of price increase. But starting a year later, we see the 74.9% decline
in the Taiwan stock market, the biggest one-year decline on our list.
The third-largest one-year price increase, of 384.6%, occurred in
Venezuela between January 1990 and January 1991. This price surge
came on the heels of a severe economic slump that had produced an
economic growth rate of −8%, an unemployment rate of 10%, and
inflation of 85% in 1989.5 Then the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait (from
August 1990 to February 1991) resulted in an interruption of Persian
Gulf oil supplies, a rapid rise in international oil prices, and increased
demand for Venezuelan oil. The stage was set for a period of sudden
prosperity in Venezuela. The Kuwaiti experience supposedly convinced
investors of the importance of Venezuela as an alternate oil supplier
outside the unstable Persian Gulf. But this seems unlikely as a rational
explanation for the run-up in the Venezuelan stock market, because the
potential for disruptions of Persian Gulf oil supplies was already known
long before the invasion. President Carlos Andres Perez warned that
“Venezuela is living with a totally artificial economy” supported only by
the oil price increase; nevertheless, the stock market soared.6 The price
increase was not reversed in the subsequent year, but by January 1993,
Venezuelan real stock prices had lost 60.3% of their January 1991 value,
and by January 1999, they had lost 82.0% of that value.
The fourth-largest one-year price increase, at 360.9%, took place in
Peru from August 1992 to August 1993. The increase occurred after a
stock market plunge in April 1992, when Alberto Fujimori seized
dictatorial powers, dissolving congress and suspending the constitution
amid a protracted civil war with the Shining Path guerrillas. But in
September 1992, the Shining Path leadership was captured, and by April
1993, democracy had been restored in Peru, ending fourteen years of
guerrilla violence that had killed 27,000 people. Inflation had reached
7,000% and economic growth was negative in 1990, but by 1993
inflation was being brought under control and economic growth was
positive. A wonderful sense of a “new era” was certainly in evidence—
but a quadrupling of stock prices within a year left many wondering

whether the increase was excessive. The market did go up a bit more the
following year, and then it lost a little of its value. By January 1999, the
real level of the market was lower, but only by 8%; it then crashed in
2000 and went through some wild gyrations.
The stock market increase in India from April 1991 to April 1992,
eleventh on the list in Table 8.1, began just as the assassination of Rajiv
Gandhi in May 1991 ended the thirty-eight-year Nehru family dynasty.
Gandhi’s 
successor 
immediately 
appointed 
as 
finance 
minister
Manmohan Singh, then a former professor at the Delhi School of
Economics (later, in 2004, he would become prime minister). The new
government announced a deregulation plan that was viewed as a
substantial turn away from socialism. Foreign investment was now
invited. Singh presented a budget plan that exempted financial assets
from the calculation of the wealth tax. Previously, managers had tried to
keep their companies’ share prices as low as possible to avoid taxation;
now they took steps to encourage high prices. The budget plan also
reduced regulations on the pricing and timing of new stock issues. These
reforms were certainly plausible reasons for a stock market increase, but
the actual increase was widely described as excessive, and authorities
warned the nation of the potential for speculative excess. This was also a
time of widespread attempts at stock price manipulation. The
machinations of Harshad “Big Bull” Mehta, a Mumbai stockbroker, set
off a national scandal in 1992, after the market peak had been reached.
He was described as creating a “vortex effect” in individual stocks by
buying in the market, selling at depressed prices to friendly institutions,
and then buying again in the now-diminished pool of available shares,
thereby pushing prices up.7 The 1992 rise in Indian stock prices is now
referred to as the “Mehta Peak.” It was indeed a peak, since the market
fell 50.3% during the following year.
In these examples, there was always some event, or series of events,
outside the market itself that suggested the start of a genuine new era.
Even if the market was believed to be overreacting to the event, it is hard
to argue with any certainty that this was the case. In some of the other
large price increases, in contrast, there are no such plausible
explanations for the magnitude of the price changes, and media

interpretations therefore center on reinterpretations of long-term
processes or on market psychology.
For example, in the Italian stock market boom of May 1985 to May
1986, when the market rose 166.4% in real terms, it was noted that
economic growth was solid, that inflation remained low, and that the
government of Prime Minister Bettino Craxi was stable and well liked.
But none of this was really news. One Italian newspaper quoted an
analyst as saying, “There are no explanations…. Everyone has gone
crazy and that’s it. This is a collective madness; total. It is useless to try
to understand, to stop or to guide.”8 The Financial Times of London said,
“A fever has gripped Italy: hundreds of first-time small investors are
pouring money into the stock market as though they were buying lottery
tickets.”9 The real level of the Italian market fell by 15.7% the following
year. By September 1992, the Italian market had lost 68.0% of its May
1986 real value.
In France at around the same time, investors’ “love affair with the
market”10 surprised observers by its intensity and lack of good
explanation, and the French stock market makes our list, increasing
262.6% in real terms from March 1982 to March 1987. The “new era”
story that the French government under François Mitterrand was
departing from its socialist rigidity seemed inadequate to explain the
market surge. Rather, if there was a new era, it seemed to many
observers to be only in terms of market psychology, with French
investors embracing free markets with renewed ardor. This period of
enthusiasm was followed by the worldwide stock market crash of 1987,
which set the French stock market back as well, although it still
managed to gain another 10.2% over the succeeding five years: March
1987 to March 1992. Curiously, the French market went upward from
there, with the growth of French real stock prices between 1992 and the
turn of the millennium almost as dramatic, and as mystifying, as that in
the United States.11
Ends of New Eras and Financial Crises

The sequelae of the extraordinary price increases described in the
previous section were highly variable. They were frequently followed by
dramatic reversals, but this is by no means always the case. Do the
increases carry the seeds of their own destruction, or are the
interruptions due to other causes?
Often the ends of bull markets appear to be caused by concrete events
unrelated to any irrational exuberance in the stock market. Notable
among these are financial crises, such as banking or exchange rate crises.
These other events then become the focus of analysis, since their causes
appear more definite than those of the stock market crisis. According to
such an analysis, the ends of the “new eras” have a narrow technical
origin, rather than a psychological or social origin.
The 1994 Mexican crisis appears as the aftermath of the sixth most
spectacular five-year stock price increase in Table 8.3. The anatomy of
this crisis is a complicated one. Analysts stress an investor run on the
peso, followed by investors’ refusal to accept again the tesobono, the
dollar-denominated short-term debt of the Mexican government. The
investing public knew that the Mexican government did not have enough
dollars in reserve to support the peso exchange rate if many people were
to sell pesos, and although this knowledge alone need not have caused a
currency devaluation, in combination with a belief that the devaluation
of the peso was imminent, it in fact forced the devaluation. A
devaluation of the peso, of course, is not itself a bad thing, and in fact it
might have been the boost that the Mexican economy needed. But then
investors were mistrustful and decided not to reinvest in the tesobono
debt. Since the Mexican government could not sell new debt, as its old
debt came due, it was unable to repay. Fortunately, the government was
saved by an international loan that enabled it to make good on this debt
after all, and an economic crisis was resolved.
However, note—despite having identified the source of the problem as
related to the peso, despite the short duration of the Mexican economic
crisis, and despite the international loans to Mexico to fix the problem—
that the real Mexican stock market was still, as of 1999, 50% below its
1994 peak; it did not pass the 1994 peak in real (inflation-corrected)
terms until ten years later. The period after 1994 saw a fundamental

change in the public’s attitude toward the Mexican stock market. Before
the 1994 crisis, under the Salinas government, with the advent of the
North American Free Trade Agreement and with Mexico’s admission into
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, there
seems to have been an exaggerated “new era” sense of invulnerability
and of a great future ahead for Mexico, which faded after the crisis.
The Asian financial crisis of 1997–98 was also much more than a stock
market crisis. It included exchange rate and banking crises, and again
these tended to attract the attention of analysts. But, as can be seen from
Table 8.3, the Asian crisis was preceded by a good number of the largest
five-year price increases, and these came substantially before the
exchange rate and banking crises. Japan had had a 275.6% five-year real
stock price increase from August 1982 to August 1987; Hong Kong, a
230.9% stock price increase from October 1982 to October 1987; Korea,
a 518.3% stock price increase from March 1984 to March 1989; Taiwan,
a 468.1% stock price increase from May 1986 to May 1991; and
Thailand, a 430.7% stock price increase over the same period. Most of
these price increases came during 1982–87, as the world experienced a
recovery from the Great Recession of 1981. In all of these countries, the
stock market was already down from its peak by December 1996, before
there was any hint of the Asian financial crisis. It appears that the
collapse of a speculative bubble in these countries preceded the crisis
and was part of the ambience that produced the crisis. Yet when the
crisis finally came, the stock market stories, as well as stories of public
confidence, appeared only vaguely in the background, as attention
centered on changes in currency exchange rates, the sudden withdrawal
of foreign investors, banking problems, inflation, and labor difficulties.
These financial crisis stories illustrate the complicated factors that
sometimes capture the attention of economic and financial analysts.
Each of them may seem to be “the” technical story that explains events.
Discussions may focus on these factors and pull attention away from the
large changes in public opinion that are reflected in speculative prices.
Therefore, the underlying story of investors overreacting to news and of
the feedback of price increases leading to further price increases often
tends to get lost.

What Went Up (Down) Usually Came Back Down
(Up)
It is impossible to prove the assertion that some speculative excesses
were behind many of these events. One can always argue that the
fundamental reasons offered by investors to justify them were valid in
terms of the evidence that was available when the market was going up,
and that “new era” stories are never completely without merit as
theories of what might happen. But one can also ask whether these price
movements have tended to be reversed. If the price increases are, on
average, reversed, then we have some evidence that the fundamental
reasons were not sound.
The data on which these tables are based confirm for countries the
result first discovered by Werner De Bondt and Richard Thaler: that
winner stocks—if winner status is measured over long intervals of time
such as five years—tend to do poorly in subsequent intervals of the same
length, and that loser stocks—if loser status is measured over equally
long intervals—tend to do well in subsequent intervals of the same
length.12
From the data used to produce the tables, we find that of the twenty-
five winning countries shown in Table 8.3, seventeen (68%) experienced
a decrease in real stock prices in the five-year periods after large five-
year real price increases, and the average price change for the seventeen
countries was a decrease of 14.7%.13 Similarly, of the twenty-five losing
countries shown in Table 8.4, twenty (80%) experienced an increase in
real stock prices in the five-year periods after large five-year price
decreases, and the average price change was an increase of 119.7%. We
thus see quite a substantial, though imperfect, tendency for major five-
year stock price movement to be reversed in another five years, both for
up movements and down movements.
When we look at one-year real price changes in Tables 8.1 and 8.2, we
find that the tendency toward reversals is less pronounced, as we would
expect from past literature, on prices of individual stocks. We find that
of the twenty-five winning countries shown in Table 8.1, fifteen (60%)

experienced a decrease of real stock prices in the twelve-month period
after large twelve-month price increases, so that the direction of change
was more equally split between up and down, and the average change
was a decrease of 4.2%. Of the twenty-five losing countries shown in
Table 8.2, eighteen (72%) experienced an increase in real stock prices in
the twelve-month periods after large twelve-month price decreases, and
the average real price change was an increase of 36.3%. Twelve months
does not appear to be long enough to begin to see as strong a tendency
for extreme price movements to reverse themselves.
Quite possibly, the tendency for individual countries’ stock market
valuations to grow dramatically and then to be reversed will diminish in
the future. With freer capital movements than were possible during the
periods covered by the examples in the tables, and with more and more
global investors seeking profit opportunities buying undervalued
countries or shorting overvalued countries, markets may become more
stable. Even so, it is unlikely that these forces will soon eliminate the
potential for such movements, particularly infrequent and slow large-
country events or worldwide events, for which the attendant profit
opportunities are slow and hard to diversify. The possibility of major
speculative bubbles, now and in the future, cannot be ignored.
In this part on cultural factors, we have explored the justifications
people have given, at various points in history, for changing market
valuations, and we have seen evidence of the transitory nature of these
cultural factors. Ultimately, however, the conclusions we draw from
such evidence depend on our view of human nature and the extent of
human abilities to produce consistent and independent judgments. To
consolidate our understanding of the argument, we turn, in the next
part, to a study of fundamental psychological factors—human tendencies
to act independently or to acquiesce, to believe others or to disbelieve
them, to feel confidence or self-doubt, to be attentive or inattentive.
These tendencies bear on the plausibility of our view of speculative
bubbles.

Part Three
Psychological Factors

Nine
Psychological Anchors for the Market
We have seen that the market is not well anchored
by fundamentals. People do not even know to any degree of accuracy
what the “right” level of the market is: not many of them spend much
time thinking about what its level should be or whether it is over-or
underpriced today. So what is it that ties down the market’s level on any
given day? What anchors the market? What is it that determines
whether the Dow is at 4,000 or 14,000? What ultimately limits the
feedback from price changes to further price changes that amplifies
speculative price movements? Why does the market stay within a certain
region for days at a time, only to break out suddenly? We have already
seen some partial answers to these questions, but to understand the true
nature of the anchors at work here, we must also turn to psychology.
In considering lessons from psychology, it must be noted that many
popular accounts of the psychology of investing are simply not credible.
Investors are said to be euphoric or frenzied during booms or panic-
stricken during market crashes. In both booms and crashes, investors are
described as blindly following the herd like so many sheep, with no
minds of their own. Belief in the rationality of markets starts to sound a
lot better when the only alternatives are such pop-psychological
theories.

We all know that most people are more sensible during such financial
episodes than these accounts suggest. Financial booms and crashes are,
for most of us, not emotion-laden events on a par with victories in battle
or volcanic eruptions. In fact, during the most significant financial
events, most people are preoccupied with other personal matters, not
with the financial markets at all. So it is hard to imagine that the market
as a whole reflects the emotions described by these psychological
theories.
However, solid psychological research does show that there are
patterns of human behavior that suggest anchors for the market that
would not be expected if markets worked entirely rationally. These
patterns of human behavior are not the result of extreme human
ignorance, but rather of the character of human intelligence, reflecting
its limitations as well as its strengths. Investors are striving to do the
right thing, but they have limited abilities and certain natural modes of
behavior that decide their actions when an unambiguous prescription for
action is lacking.1
Two kinds of psychological anchors will be considered here:
quantitative anchors, which themselves give indications for the
appropriate levels of the market that some people use as indications of
whether the market is over-or underpriced and whether it is a good time
to buy, and moral anchors, which operate by determining the strength of
the reason that compels people to buy stocks, a reason that they must
weigh against their other uses for the wealth they already have (or could
have) invested in the market. With quantitative anchors, people are
weighing numbers against prices when they decide whether stocks (or
other assets) are priced right. With moral anchors, people compare the
intuitive or emotional strength of the argument for investing in the
market against their wealth and their perceived need for money to spend
now.
Quantitative Anchors for the Market
Designers of questionnaires have learned that the answers people give

can be heavily influenced by suggestions that are given on the
questionnaires themselves. For example, when people are asked to state
within which of a number of ranges their income falls, their answers are
influenced by the ranges given. The ranges serve as “anchors” to which
they make their answers conform.
Psychologists have shown that people’s decisions in ambiguous
situations are influenced by whatever available anchor is at hand. When
you must come up with an estimate, and you are unsure what to say,
you take whatever number is before you. Psychologists Amos Tversky
and Daniel Kahneman demonstrated this tendency clearly in an
experiment involving a wheel of fortune: a large wheel with the numbers
from 1 to 100 on it, similar to those used in television game shows, that
is designed to stop at a random number when it is spun. Subjects were
asked questions whose answers were numbers between 1 and 100,
difficult questions such as the percentage of African nations in the
United Nations. They were asked first to say whether the answer they
would give was above or below the number just produced by the wheel
of fortune. Then they were asked to give their answer. The
experimenters found that the answer was quite substantially influenced
by the random number on the wheel. For example, if the wheel stopped
at 10, the median percentage of African nations according to their
subjects was 25, whereas if the wheel stopped at 65, the median
percentage was 45. This experiment was particularly interesting, because
it was designed so that the subject clearly knew that the number
produced by the wheel was purely random and, moreover, because the
number produced by the wheel should have had no emotional
significance for the subject.2
In making judgments about the level of stock prices, the most likely
anchor is the most recently remembered price. The tendency of investors
to use this anchor enforces the similarity of stock prices from one day to
the next. Other possible anchors are remembered past prices, and the
tendency of past prices to serve as anchors may be part of the reason for
the observed tendency for trends in individual stock prices to be
reversed. Another anchor may be the nearest milestone of a prominent
index such as the Dow, the nearest round-number level, and investors’

use of this anchor may help explain unusual market behavior
surrounding such levels. Past price changes may also provide an anchor,
if attention is suitably drawn to them. Recall from Chapter 6 that the
drop in the market in the October 19, 1987, crash was nearly the same
in percentage terms as that in the October 28–29, 1929, crash that was
so much discussed at the time of the 1987 crash.
For individual stocks, price changes may tend to be anchored to the
price changes of other stocks, and price-earnings ratios may be anchored
to other firms’ price-earnings levels. This kind of anchoring may help to
explain why individual stock prices move together as much as they do,
and thus, ultimately, why stock price indices are as volatile as they are—
why the averaging across stocks that is inherent in the construction of
the index doesn’t more solidly dampen its volatility.3 It may also explain
why stocks of companies that are in different industries but are
headquartered in the same country tend to have more similar price
movements than stocks of companies that are in the same industry but
are headquartered in different countries, contrary to one’s expectation
that the industry would define the fundamentals of the company better
than the location of its headquarters.4 And it may explain why real
estate investment trusts traded on stock exchanges tend to behave more
like stocks than like the appraised value of their underlying commercial
real estate.5 Indeed, all of these anomalies noted in financial markets
have a simple explanation in terms of quantitative anchoring to
convenient numbers.
Moral Anchors for the Market
With moral anchoring, the market is tied down by people’s comparisons
of the intuitive force of stories and reasons to hold their investments
against their perceived need to consume the wealth that these
investments represent. The market is not prevented from going up to
arbitrarily high levels because people have any idea what its intrinsically
“right” level is or what level would be too high. Rather, if the market
were to get too high, the discrepancy between the wealth many people

would then have in the market and their current living standards would,
when compared with their reasons for holding stocks, encourage them to
sell. One can appreciate the nature of this anchor with an extreme
example. Suppose, counterfactually, that the psychology of the market
caused the level of the stock market to rise so as to make most holders of
stocks multimillionaires—on paper. Then, unless the reason these people
have to continue holding every single share is perceived to be extremely
strong, they would want to start living a little more like multimillionaires
and sell some of their stocks to be able to spend the money. Such selling
would obviously bring stock prices down, since there would be no
buyers, and obviously there just isn’t sufficient current national income
available to sustain anything like this many multimillionaires. The stock
market can reach fantastic levels only if people think that they have
good reasons not to test it by trying to enjoy their newfound wealth.
Underlying this notion of moral anchors is the psychological principle
that much of the human thinking that results in action is not
quantitative, but instead takes the form of storytelling and justification.
That is why, in the case of moral anchors, people are weighing a story,
which has no quantitative dimension, against the observed quantity of
financial wealth that they have available for consumption. Such
reasoning is not well described by the usual kind of economic theory,
but there is a large amount of evidence in support of the assertion that
investor reasoning does take this form.
Psychologists Nancy Pennington and Reid Hastie have shown the
importance of stories in decision making by studying how jurors reached
decisions in difficult cases. They found that jurors’ approach to reasoning
through the complicated issues of the trial tended to take the form of
constructing a story, filling out the details that were provided to them
about the case into a coherent narrative of the chain of events. In
describing their verdict, they tended not to speak of quantities or
probabilities, or of summing up the weight of the evidence, but rather
merely to tell a story of the case, typically a chronology of events, and to
remark how well their story fit together and how internally consistent it
was.6
By analogy, those who sell stocks to the general public often tend to

tell a story about the stock, a vivid story describing the history of the
company, the nature of the product, and how the public is using the
product. The sales call does not as often engage in discussions of
quantities or probabilities, or of whether the price is at the right level in
terms of quantitative evidence about future dividends or earnings. These
quantitative factors are not as congenial to the narrative-based decision
making that comes naturally to people.
There is a basic human interest in gambling, seen in one form or
another in all cultures,7 an interest that also expresses itself in
speculative markets. Some of the attraction to gambling, despite odds
that are often openly stacked against gamblers, apparently has to do
with narrative-based thinking. When gamblers are heard talking, they
are usually telling stories, not evaluating probabilities, and the
possibilities suggested by the stories often seem to have more
substantive reality than any quantitative concepts. In these stories,
gamblers use a different vocabulary than do probability theorists,
preferring the words luck or lucky day, and rarely uttering the words
probability or likelihood. There are stories of their winnings and losses, of
the chains of events that preceded their best or worst luck, of the
strength of their intuition that yielded good bets. These stories can
convey a sense of meaning and significance to events that are in fact
purely random.8
It has been noted that employees have a tendency to invest in
company stock (that is, stock issued by the firm that employs them),
even though it would appear to be more in their interest to diversify
away from the source of their own livelihood. As of 2003, eleven million
participants in U.S. 401(k) plans invested more than 20% of their assets
in company stock, and in some companies, such as Coca-Cola, company
stock has reached 90% of assets.9 This tendency to invest in company
stock can be interpreted as consistent with investors’ being influenced by
stories: they know many more stories about their own companies and so
invest in those companies’ stocks.
People also appear to want to construct simple reasons for their
decisions, as if they feel the need to justify those decisions in simple
terms—if not to others, then to themselves. The need to have a simple

reason to explain a decision is similar to the need to have a story behind
a decision; both the stories and the reasons are simple rationales that can
be conveyed verbally to others.
Psychologists Eldar Shafir, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky
demonstrated experimentally an effect that appears to represent decision
biases caused by people’s search for simple reasons to justify decisions.
They presented their subjects with a simple choice between two options:
one option was “impoverished,” with no striking positive or negative
features. The other was “enriched,” displaying both distinctly positive
and distinctly negative features. In one of their experiments, subjects
were asked to choose to which parent they would award sole custody of
a child. Parent A, the impoverished option, was described with the
words “average income, average health, average working hours,
reasonable rapport with the child, and relatively stable social life.”
Parent B, the enriched option, was described with the words “above-
average income, very close relationship with the child, extremely active
social life, lots of work-related travel, minor health problems.” The
experimenters found that the subjects’ choices depended on how they
were asked about the two choices. When a group of subjects was asked
to select the parent to whom they would award custody, 64% chose
Parent B. When a second group was asked to pick the parent to whom
they would deny custody, 55% again chose Parent B. The predominant
answers given by the two groups are logically inconsistent, but they are
consistent with a feeling that one must have a solid reason to justify a
decision. The psychologists found that the same tendency occurs even
for purely personal decisions that will never need to be explained to
others.10
Reasons to hold stocks or other investments can take on ethical as well
as practical dimensions. Our culture may supply reasons to hold stocks
and other savings vehicles that are related to our sense of identity as
responsible people, as good or levelheaded people. Recall the 1996 book
The Millionaire Next Door, which was a best-seller throughout the stock
market boom of the 1990s. It made the point that most millionaires in
the United States are not exceptional income earners, but merely frugal
savers: average folks who are not enticed by a new car every year, an

extravagant house, or other such money pits.11 This book was not only
an interesting study of millionaires; it also projected a subtle message
suggesting the moral superiority of those who hold and gradually
accumulate wealth over a lifetime. It therefore provided an attractive
reason to save and invest. The book offered no analyses of price-earnings
ratios or anything remotely like specific investment advice, thus subtly
reinforcing the impression that these are irrelevant. Instead, it offered
lots of stories of successful, frugal people, many of whom prospered
during the 1980s and 1990s bull market—stories with vivid details and
great immediacy for readers. The book’s enticing story about investing
millionaires who do not test the market by trying to cash out and
consume their wealth was just the kind of moral anchor needed to help
sustain an unusual bull market.
Overconfidence and Intuitive Judgment
In judging the significance of these psychological anchors for the market,
it is important to bear in mind that there appears to be a pervasive
human tendency toward overconfidence in one’s beliefs. People are ready
to act on stories or reasons that one might think they should have little
confidence in.
People think they know more than they do. They like to express
opinions on matters they know little about, and they often act on these
opinions. We have all observed at one time or another that there are a
lot of know-it-alls out there. But psychologists have described the
tendency toward overconfidence with some care and indications of its
generality.
Psychologists Baruch Fischhof, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein
showed that if people are asked simple factual questions (such as which
of two popular magazines has the higher circulation or which of two
common causes of death is the more frequent) and are then asked to give
the probability that their answer is right, they tend to overestimate the
probability that they are right. In fact, when people said they were
certain they were right they were in fact right only about 80% of the

time.12
This result has been the subject of controversy among psychologists,
and the overconfidence phenomenon has not been found to be universal.
It has been shown that people can sometimes be trained out of their
overconfidence in the experimental setting.13 Yet some basic tendency
toward overconfidence appears to be a robust human character trait: the
bias is definitely toward overconfidence rather than underconfidence. I
find that overconfidence is apparent when I interview investors; they
seem to express overly strong opinions and rush to summary judgments.
Psychologists have long wondered why it is that people seem to be
overconfident. One theory has been that, in evaluating the soundness of
their conclusions, people tend to evaluate the probability that they are
right on only the last step of their reasoning, forgetting how many other
elements of their reasoning could be wrong.14 Another theory is that
people make probability judgments by looking for similarities to other
known observations, and they forget that there are many other possible
observations with which they could compare.15 The reason for
overconfidence may also have to do with hindsight bias, a tendency to
think that one would have known actual events were coming before they
happened, had one been present then or had reason to pay attention.16
Hindsight bias encourages a view of the world as more predictable than
it really is.
Another factor in overconfidence as it relates to speculative markets is
magical thinking. When we speak of people’s intuition about the
likelihood that investments will do well or poorly and their own
decisions to invest, we are speaking of their innermost thoughts—
thoughts that they do not have to explain or justify to others. Patterns of
thought referred to as “magical thinking” or “quasi-magical thinking” by
psychologists are likely to play a role. People have occasional feelings
that certain actions will make them lucky even if they know logically
that the actions cannot have an effect on their fortunes.
People will make serious decisions based on thinking that they would,
if pressed, admit was illogical. It has been shown that people will place
larger bets on a coin that has not yet been tossed than on a coin that has

already been tossed (and for which the outcome has been concealed).
And people will, if asked how much money they would demand to part
with a lottery ticket they already hold, give a figure over four times
greater if they themselves chose the lottery number on the ticket.
Apparently, at some magical level people think that they can influence a
coin that has not yet been tossed and influence the likelihood of winning
the lottery by choosing the number.17
Based on such experimental results, it seems clear that people are
capable of thinking, at least at some intuitive level, “If I buy a stock,
then it will go up afterward” or “If I buy a stock, then others will
probably want to buy the stock, too, because they are like me” or “I have
a hot hand lately; my luck is with me.” Such thinking is likely, in a
subtle way, to contribute to the overconfidence that may help the
propagation of speculative bubbles.
Another aspect of overconfidence is that people tend to make
judgments in uncertain situations by looking for familiar patterns and
assuming that future patterns will resemble past ones, often without
sufficient consideration of the reasons for the pattern or the probability
of the pattern repeating itself. This anomaly of human judgment, called
the representativeness heuristic, was demonstrated in a number of
experiments by behavioral economists Tversky and Kahneman.
For example, these researchers asked people to guess the occupation,
from a list of occupations, of people with a given personality description.
If the description given was that the person was artistic and sensitive,
they tended to choose conductor or sculptress, rather than laborer or
secretary, disregarding entirely the fact that the former occupations are
extremely rare and thus that the answers are much less likely to be
right.18 It would be wiser, in answering such questions, almost never to
guess the occupation conductor or sculptress, since the base rate
probabilities are so low. But people look for the best-fit occupation,
disregarding the base rate probabilities.19
Overconfidence, however generated, appears to be a fundamental
factor promoting the high volume of trade we observe in speculative
markets. Without such overconfidence, one would think that there
would be little trading in financial markets. If people were completely

rational, then, roughly speaking, half the investors should think that
they are below average in their trading ability and should therefore be
unwilling to do speculative trades with the other half, who they think
will probably dominate them in trading. Thus, the above-average half
would have no one to trade with, and there should ideally be no trading
for speculative reasons.20
Overconfidence in judgments can at times influence people to believe
that they know when a market move will take place, even if they
generally believe as an intellectual matter that stock prices are not
forecastable. In the survey that I conducted with investors right after the
crash of October 19, 1987, I asked, “Did you think at any point on
October 19, 1987, that you had a pretty good idea when a rebound was
to occur?” Of individual investors who had bought on that day, 47.1%
said yes; of institutional investors, 47.9% said yes. Thus, nearly half of
those trading that day thought they knew what the market would do
that day. I find this remarkable. Even among all individual investors,
most of whom did not buy or sell at all on that day, 29.2% answered yes
to this question; among all institutional investors, 28.0% answered yes.
Why would anyone think that they knew what the market would do
on any given day, and especially on such a tumultuous day? The idea
that one would know such things stands contrary to the most elementary
observations about markets’ forecastability, and contrary to the
conventional wisdom that accurate market timing is very difficult. Quite
a few people apparently do not consistently believe that the market is
never very forecastable.
The next question on the questionnaire was, “If yes, what made you
think you knew when a rebound would occur?” There was a striking
absence of solid grounding for the answers. References were made to
“intuition,” “gut feeling,” “historical evidence and common sense,” or
“market psychology.” Mentions of concrete facts or references to explicit
theories were rare, even among the institutional investors.
These intuitive feelings about the future course of the market were
extremely important for the course of the stock market crash, for
apparently it was these intuitive judgments that set the anchors that
stopped the price decline. To understand speculative bubbles, positive or

negative, we must appreciate that overconfidence in one’s own intuitive
judgments plays a fundamental role.
The Fragility of Anchors: Difficulty Thinking
Ahead to Contingent Future Decisions
The anchors discussed here account for the stability of the market from
day to day, but we must also account for the ability of these anchors to
let loose occasionally—sometimes suddenly. Markets do make dramatic
shifts. Part of the reason for the surprises the market hands us from time
to time is that news events have an effect on people’s reasons that even
they could not have expected.
Psychologists Eldar Shafir and Amos Tversky have described a
phenomenon they call nonconsequentialist reasoning: reasoning that is
characterized by an inability to think through the elementary
conclusions one would draw in the future if hypothetical events were to
occur. According to Shafir and Tversky, people cannot decide until the
events actually occur. When we learn to play games of logic (chess, for
example), we must practice thinking ahead to the decisions we will
make in the future in response to the other player’s decisions. One learns
to think, “If I move here, then she might move either here or there, and
if she moves here I will be fine, but if she moves there I will be faced
with a difficult situation….” That is, one learns to think through the
ramifications of all relevant branches of a decision tree. In everyday life,
we to some extent practice the same modes of thinking that we learned
in playing these games. But real-world decisions are clouded by
emotions and a lack of clearly defined objectives, and people do not
generally behave as if they have thought things through well in advance.
Shafir and Tversky give an example of students’ decision making about
whether to take a vacation in Hawaii after learning whether they had
passed or failed an important exam. Faced with such a choice, they look
into their own minds for their feelings about the choice. Some students
who have passed the exam will think, “I should take the vacation as a
celebration and a reward.” Some students who have failed the exam will

think, “I should take the vacation as a consolation, to improve my mood
after having failed.” Some students will decide to take a vacation
whether or not they pass the exam. Those students who would take the
vacation in either case should be able, if they were fully logical, to book
the vacation well in advance of the exam, knowing that the information
about the outcome of the exam is not really relevant to their decision.
But these people sometimes have great difficulty making such a choice
before they know the outcome of the exam. Before the exam, they
cannot fully anticipate the emotional reason for taking the vacation, and
so they cannot feel good about committing themselves to it.21
Although this example presents a situation in which the difficulty
people face is in deciding how they themselves will feel in the future,
rather than in deciding on questions of simple fact as in the game of
chess, in reality decisions about investments are likely to have as much
of an emotional component as decisions about whether to go on a
vacation.
For this reason, the effects of news stories on the stock market
sometimes have more to do with discovery of how we feel about the
news than with any logical reaction to the news. We can make decisions
then that would have been impossible before the news was known. It is
partly for this reason that the breaking off of a psychological anchor can
be so unpredictable: people discover things about themselves, about
their own emotions and inclinations, only after price changes occur.
Psychological anchors for the market hook themselves on the strangest
things along the muddy bottom of our consciousness. The anchor can
skip and drag, only to snag again on some object whose strength would
surprise us if we saw it at the surface. We have considered in this
chapter some of the psychological factors that explain the nature of such
anchors. But the anchors can have significance for the market as a whole
only if the same thoughts enter the minds of many. In the next chapter,
we turn to the social basis of thinking: the tendencies toward herd
behavior and the contagion of ideas.

Ten
Herd Behavior and Epidemics
A fundamental observation about human society is
that people who communicate regularly with one another think
similarly. There is at any place and in any time a zeitgeist, a spirit of the
times. It is important to understand the origins of this similar thinking,
so that we can judge the plausibility of theories of speculative
fluctuations that ascribe price changes to faulty thinking. If the millions
of people who invest were all truly independent of one another, any
faulty thinking would tend to average out, and such thinking would have
no effect on prices. But if less-than-mechanistic or irrational thinking is
in fact similar over large numbers of people, then such thinking can
indeed be the source of stock market booms and busts.
Part of the reason people’s judgments are similar at similar times is
that they are reacting to the same information—the information that was
publicly available at that time. But, as we shall see in this chapter,
rational response to public information is not the only reason that people
think similarly, nor is the use of that public information always
appropriate or well reasoned.
Social Influence and Information

Acclaimed social psychologist Solomon Asch reported an experiment in
1952 that he interpreted—and that was widely interpreted by others—as
showing the immense power of social pressure on individual judgment.
His paper was published at a time of widespread public concern with the
effects of communist propaganda, alarm at the apparently successful
brainwashing techniques of Chinese communists, and continuing
puzzlement over the ability of the Nazis in Germany to obtain an
obedient response when ordering mass exterminations of Jews and other
“undesirables.” Asch’s findings were widely cited in the media as
providing a scientific basis for claims that people do not have fully
independent judgment. His results are still cited today; those who found
serious flaws in his interpretation of those results are not nearly as well
remembered.
In his famous experiment, Asch placed the subject in a group of seven
to nine other people who were, unbeknownst to the subject,
confederates who had been coached by Asch. The entire group was
asked to answer a sequence of twelve questions about the lengths of line
segments shown to them on cards, and the subject would hear most of
the others’ answers before giving his own answer before the group. The
correct answers to the questions were obvious, but the confederates
deliberately gave wrong answers to seven of the twelve questions. Faced
with a group of people who were unanimously giving what seemed to be
obviously wrong answers to the questions, a third of the time the
subjects caved in and gave the same wrong answers as had been given
by the confederates. Furthermore, the subjects often showed signs of
anxiety or distress, suggesting that fear of being seen as different or
foolish before the group had swayed their judgment.1
Asch explained his results as due to social pressure. There is probably
some validity to this interpretation, but it turns out that the subjects’
wrong answers were not primarily due to such pressure. Three years
after Asch published his findings, psychologists Morton Deutsch and
Harold Gerard reported a variant of Asch’s experiment in which the
subjects were told that they had been placed anonymously into a group of
people, people that they never saw and never would see, and whose
answers they could observe only indirectly through an electronic signal.

(In fact there was really no group at all.) Subjects could give their
answers to the questions merely by pressing a button, unobserved by
others, so that there was no need to stand up to a group face to face.
Otherwise, the experiment proceeded as it had under Asch—and the
subjects gave nearly as many wrong answers as they had before.2
Deutsch and Gerard concluded that the wrong answers in the Asch
experiment had been given in large part because people simply thought
that all the other people could not be wrong. They were reacting to the
information that a large group of people had reached a judgment different
from theirs, rather than merely the fear of expressing a contrary opinion
in front of a group. This behavior is a matter of rational calculation: in
everyday living, we have learned that when a large group of people is
unanimous in its judgment on a question of simple fact, the members of
that group are almost certainly right. The anxiety and distress that
Asch’s subjects expressed may have come partly from their conclusion
that their own senses were somehow not reliable.
Another widely cited series of experiments relevant to herd behavior is
Stanley Milgram’s investigations of the power of authority. In Milgram’s
experiments, the subject was asked to administer electric shocks to
another person sitting close by, who was, again unbeknownst to the
subject, a confederate. There really were no electric shocks, but the
confederate pretended to be experiencing them, feigning pain and
suffering. The confederate asserted that he was in great distress and
asked that the experiment be stopped. But when the experimenter told
the subjects to continue administering the shocks, insisting that the
shocks would cause no permanent tissue damage, many did so.3
These results were widely interpreted as demonstrating the enormous
power of authority over the human mind. Indeed, the results may be
understood partly on those terms. But there is another interpretation:
that people have learned that when experts tell them something is all
right, it probably is, even if it does not seem so. (In fact, it is worth
noting that in this case the experimenter was indeed correct: it was all
right to continue giving the “shocks”—even though most of the subjects
did not suspect the reason.) Thus, the results of Milgram’s experiment
can also be interpreted as springing from people’s past learning about

the reliability of authorities.4
Asch’s and Milgram’s studies are as interesting as ever when viewed
from the standpoint of this information-based interpretation. The
experiments demonstrate that people are ready to believe the majority
view or to believe authorities even when they plainly contradict matter-
of-fact judgment. And their behavior is in fact largely rational and
intelligent. Most people have had many prior experiences of making
errors when they contradicted the judgments of a larger group or of an
authority figure, and they have learned from these experiences. Thus,
the Asch and Milgram experiments give us a different perspective on the
overconfidence phenomenon: people are respectful of authorities in
formulating the opinions about which they will later be so
overconfident, transferring their confidence in authorities to their own
judgments based upon them.
Given the kind of behavior observed by Asch and Milgram, it is not at
all surprising that many people are accepting of the perceived authority
of others on such matters as stock market valuation. Most must certainly
trust their own judgment in this area even less than the experimental
subjects trusted the evidence of their own eyes about the lengths of lines
on cards or the pain and suffering that a person sitting next to them was
experiencing.
Economic Theories of Herd Behavior and
Information Cascades
Even completely rational people can participate in herd behavior when
they take into account the judgments of others, and even if they know
that everyone else is behaving in a herd-like manner. The behavior,
although individually rational, produces group behavior that is, in a
well-defined sense, irrational. This herd-like behavior is said to arise
from an information cascade.5
A simple story will illustrate how such an information cascade could
get started. Suppose two restaurants open next door to each other. Each
potential customer must choose between the two. Would-be customers

may be able to make some judgments about the quality of each of the
restaurants when viewing it through the front window, but such
judgments will not be very accurate. The first customer who arrives must
choose based only on viewing the two empty restaurants and makes a
choice. However, the next potential customer can rely not only on his or
her own information, based on the appearance of the restaurants, but
also—by seeing the first customer eating in one or the other of the
restaurants—on information about the choice made by the first
customer. If the second customer chooses to go to the same restaurant as
the first, the third customer will see two people eating in that restaurant.
The end result may be that all customers wind up eating at the same
restaurant—and it could well be the poorer restaurant, since there was
no real consideration of the combined evidence inherent in all their
observations about the two restaurants. If all of them had been able to
pool their first impressions and discuss these as a group, they might have
been able to deduce which restaurant was likely to be the better one. But
in this scenario, they cannot make use of each other’s information, since
they do not reveal their own information to others when they merely
follow them.
The restaurant story, and the economic theory that underlies it, is not
in itself a theory of stock market bubbles. However, it has clear
relevance to stock market behavior, and it can provide a foundation for a
theory about how rational investors may be led astray.6 According to
such a theory, the popular notion that the level of market prices is the
outcome of a sort of vote by all investors about the true value of the
market is just plain wrong. Hardly anyone is really voting. Instead
people are rationally choosing not to, as they see it, waste their time and
effort in exercising their judgment about the market, and thus choosing
not to exert any independent impact on the market. Ultimately, all such
information cascade theories are theories of the failure of information
about true fundamental value to be disseminated and evaluated.
It is important to emphasize that this failure to disseminate
information to others can be modeled in economic theory in terms of
purely rational behavior with no limitations of intelligence, only
limitations of revealed information. But to achieve a better

understanding of the issues relevant to financial market mispricing, one
must also understand some parameters of human behavior, of limitations
of human information processing, that are relevant to the transmission
of information and the potential for speculative bubbles.
Human Information Processing and Word of
Mouth
The human mind is the product of evolution almost entirely in the
absence of the printed word, e-mail, the Internet, or any other artificial
means of communication. Human society has been able to conquer
almost all habitats of this planet primarily because of its own innate
information processing ability. A fundamental component of this
information processing ability is effective communication of important
facts from one person to another.
This superior ability to communicate knowledge has been made
possible over the past few million years by evolutionary changes in the
human brain that have optimized the channels of communication and
created an emotional drive to communicate effectively. It is because of
this emotional drive that most people’s favorite activity is conversation.
Look around you. Everywhere you go, when two or more people are not
working or playing or sleeping (and, in some cases, even when they are
doing these things), they are talking. The incessant exchange of
information is a fundamental characteristic of our species. The
information that tends to flow most rapidly is the kind that would have
helped society in centuries past in its everyday living: information about
such things as food sources, dangers, or other members of society.
For this reason, in modern society there is likely to be rapidly
spreading conversation about a buying opportunity for a hot stock, or
about immediate threats to personal wealth, or about the story of the
people who run a company. These topics resemble the kinds of things
our ancestors have talked about since time immemorial. But
conversation seems to flow less well about abstract topics, such as the
mathematics of finance, or statistics about asset returns, or optimal

levels of saving for retirement. Transmission of such knowledge is of
course effortful, infrequent, and imperfect.
Face-to-Face Communications versus Media
Communications
The conventional media—print media, television, and radio—have a
profound capability for spreading ideas, but their ability to generate
active behaviors is still limited. Interpersonal and interactive
communications, 
particularly 
face-to-face 
or 
word-of-mouth
communications, still have the most powerful impact on our behavior.
In a 1986 study of individual investors, John Pound and I sought to
determine how their attention was first drawn to a stock. We mailed a
questionnaire to a random sample of individual investors and asked
them to consider the company whose stock they had purchased most
recently. We asked, “What first drew your attention to the company?”
Only 6% specified periodicals or newspapers. The majority of the
answers named sources that would involve direct interpersonal
communication.7 Even if people read a lot, their attention and actions
appear to be more stimulated by interpersonal communications.
The power of interpersonal, word-of-mouth communication about
investments has been amply illustrated by the work of the market
surveillance units at the exchanges and in the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Their brief is to detect insider trading, and to that end they
carefully follow the trail of communications among individual investors.
Court documents reveal, for example, that a sequence of word-of-mouth
communications was touched off in May 1995, when a secretary at IBM
was asked to photocopy documents that included references to IBM’s
top-secret takeover of Lotus Development Corporation, a deal scheduled
to be announced on June 5 of that year. She apparently told only her
husband, a beeper salesman. On June 2, he told another person, a co-
worker, who bought shares eighteen minutes later, and another friend, a
computer technician, who initiated a sequence of phone calls. By the
time of the June 5 announcement, twenty-five people connected to this

core group had spent half a million dollars on the investment based on
this tip. They included a pizza chef, an electrical engineer, a bank
executive, a dairy wholesaler, a former schoolteacher, a gynecologist, an
attorney, and four stockbrokers.8 Clearly word-of-mouth communication
can proceed with great speed and across disparate social groups.
Word-of-mouth transmission of ideas appears to be an important
contributor to day-to-day or hour-to-hour stock market fluctuations,
even though direct word-of-mouth transmission cannot proceed across
the nation quite as fast as markets move. In the questionnaire survey of
investors that I sent out during the week of the stock market crash of
1987 (described in detail in Chapter 6), I asked them about word-of-
mouth communications. Of the individual investor respondents, 81.6%
said that they had learned of the crash before 5 P.M. on the same day.
Thus, they had learned of the crash from sources other than the next
day’s morning newspaper or that day’s evening news. The average time
of day that these investors heard of the crash was 1:56 P.M. Eastern
Daylight Time (EDT). For institutional investors, the average time that
they heard of the crash was 10:32 A.M. EDT. Individual investors
reported talking on average to 7.4 other people about the market
situation on the day of the crash; institutional investors reported talking
on average to 19.7 other people.
The channels of human communication that we know today seem to
favor the interpersonal face-to-face and word-of-mouth communication
that developed over millions of years of evolution, during times when
such communication was virtually the only form of interpersonal
communication. The patterns of communication hard-wired into our
brains rely on there being another person’s voice, another person’s facial
expressions, another person’s emotions, and an associated environment
of trust, loyalty, and cooperation. Because these elements are missing
from the written or electronic word, people find it somewhat more
difficult to react to these sources of information. They cannot give these
other sources the same emotional weight, nor can they remember or use
information from these other sources as well. This is an important reason
why we still have teachers—why we cannot tell our children to simply
sit down and read books or rely on computer-aided instruction.

It is also for this reason that television is such a powerful medium, in
that it mimics much of the appearance of direct interpersonal
conversation. Watching television simulates the very stimuli—the voices,
faces, and emotions—that we experience in conversation. Indeed,
television advertisers often recreate images of everyday conversation
about their products. Television today has become more interactive, now
that viewers will chat on social media while watching it, but the
communication it offers is primarily one-way, and so it is still not as
effective as direct person-to-person communication.
The telephone, invented well over a hundred years ago, may still be
the most important artificial medium for interpersonal communication
today, because it so closely simulates face-to-face communications,
lacking 
only 
the 
visual 
stimuli. 
Studies 
by 
sociologists 
and
communications researchers have found that telephone conversations
come very close to face-to-face communications in information
transmission and problem-solving functions, though they still fall
somewhat short in conflict-resolution and person-perception functions.9
The impact of the telephone appears to have been a factor behind the
volatile stock market of the 1920s. Although the telephone was invented
in 1876, it was slow to be adopted. Clarence Day, in his book Life with
Father, recalled why his family did not get a telephone in the 1890s:
“Since almost nobody had them but brokers, there was no one to talk to
… though people saw vaguely that a telephone might be a convenience
if everyone had one, they decided to wait in a body until everyone
did.”10 The telephone did not become widely used until a number of
improvements brought the cost down and made the case for a telephone
more compelling—improvements such as the invention in 1915 of
vacuum tube amplification of longer-distance telephone calls. By the
mid-1920s, the average person was making over two hundred telephone
calls per year in the United States. The 1920s saw the spread of “boiler
rooms” and “bucket shops” that actively sold stocks to the public using
the telephone, employing questionable tactics that easily slipped past
ineffective “blue-sky” legislation at the level of the states. The
proliferation of telephones undoubtedly made it easier to sell stocks to
the public, and the resulting impetus to fraud helped bring the country

to the point of enacting the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, which created the Securities and Exchange
Commission.11
During the 1990s stock market boom, we were witnessing another
explosion of technological innovations that facilitate interpersonal
communication, consisting of e-mail and chat rooms, and after 2000
these led to social media. Like the telephone, many people were slow to
use these innovations at first, but as time went by, it became
increasingly clear that it was inevitable that virtually everyone would be
making them part of their daily lives.
These new and effective media for interactive (if not face-to-face)
communication may have the effect of expanding yet again the
interpersonal contagion of ideas. They may have allowed enthusiasm for
the market to spread much more widely than it would otherwise have.
Certainly we are still learning how to regulate the use of these new
media in the public interest.
Although e-mail and other Internet platforms were significant changes
in the technology of communications, it is not clear that their advent
was more significant than that of the telephone many decades ago.
Because the telephone allows communication of emotions as expressed
vocally, it may yet be a better simulator of effective communication than
those that rely on the written word, like e-mail, Twitter, or Weibo.
However, the advances in video interaction, like Skype, Facetime, or
Google Hangouts, may further enhance the potency of long-distance
communication by more nearly mimicking human interaction.
Epidemic Models Applied to Word-of-Mouth
Communication
The mathematical theory of the spread of disease has been used by
epidemiologists to predict the course of infection and mortality.12 These
models can be used to better understand the transmission of attitudes
and the nature of the feedback mechanism supporting speculative
bubbles.

In the simplest epidemic model, it is assumed that the disease has a
given infection rate (the rate at which the disease spreads from
contagious people to susceptible people) and a given removal rate (the
rate at which infected people become no longer contagious, through
recovery or death).
If the removal rate is zero, the graphical plot of the number of infected
people after the introduction of one contagious person follows a
mathematical curve called the logistic curve.13 With the logistic curve, the
percentage of the population that is infected rises initially at the
infection rate. Although the rate of increase is nearly constant at first,
the absolute number of people recorded as contracting the disease rises
faster and faster: as more and more people become contagious, more and
more people become infected and are seen in doctors’ offices
complaining of the first symptoms of the disease. But the rate of increase
starts to decline as the pool of yet-to-be-infected susceptibles begins to
be depleted. Even though the intrinsic infection rate of the disease is
unchanged, the rate at which new infected people are being produced
declines, because those who are infected meet fewer people who have
yet to become infected. Eventually the entire population is infected and
the logistic curve becomes flat, at 100%; then of course there are no new
cases.
If the removal rate is greater than zero but less than the infection rate,
the model predicts instead that the course of the epidemic will be bell
shaped: the number of infectives will at first rise from zero, peak, and
then drop back to zero. The peak can occur before 100% of the
population is ever infected.
If the removal rate is greater than the infection rate, then the epidemic
will never get started and will never even be observed.
Epidemiologists use these models constructively to understand the
pattern of disease outbreaks. Using such models they can infer, for
example, that if the removal rate is just above the infection rate, then a
nearly healthy population is in danger of an epidemic, for any small
uptick in the infection rate or downtick in the removal rate can tip the
balance toward a new epidemic. Thus, epidemiologists can infer that a
change in weather patterns that will tend to keep people indoors

together (where they are more likely to infect one another) may cause
the infection rate to increase above the removal rate. The epidemic will
then begin, but the absolute number of infectives will grow slowly at
first. If, in this example, the weather changes fairly soon again in such a
way that the infection rate is brought back down, so that the number of
infectives never becomes very large, then the epidemic will fail to be
noticed by the general public. But if the bad weather lingers long enough
relative to the difference between the bad-weather-infection rate and the
removal rate, then the epidemic will become large and noticeable in the
population at large. Epidemiologists can use this model to predict,
according to this example, how long a spell of bad weather is necessary
to produce a serious epidemic.
The same type of epidemic models has been applied to other
biological phenomena that may have relevance to financial markets.
Economist Alan Kirman has used them to model the behavior of ants in
exploiting food sources, and he notes that the models also seem relevant
to stock market price changes.14 It has been found experimentally that
ants, when presented with two identical food sources near their nest,
tend to exploit both sources, but one more intensively than another.
Over time (and as the experimenter constantly replenishes the food
sources so that they remain exactly equal), the primary attention of the
ants may switch from one source to the other. Why should they not
exploit the two equally, and what causes them to switch their attention?
Kirman notes that ants individually recruit other ants to food sources;
there is no central direction for the nest as a whole. Recruitment is done
by contact and following (tandem recruitment) or by laying a chemical
trail (pheromone recruitment). Both of these processes are the ant
equivalent of word-of-mouth communication. Kirman shows that if there
is randomness in the recruitment process, the experimentally observed
phenomena can be explained in terms of a simple epidemic model.
Although disease spread and ant behavior are of theoretical interest in
our consideration of stock market bubbles, of greatest practical relevance
is the fact that epidemic models have been applied by sociologists to
predict the course of word-of-mouth transmission of ideas.15 Here, the
infection rate is the rate of communication of ideas, and the removal

rate is the rate of forgetting or of losing interest. The dynamics of such
transmission may mimic that of disease. The formal mathematical theory
of epidemics appears, however, to be less accurate for modeling social
processes than for modeling disease spread or ant behavior, and it has
yet to spawn an influential and successful literature by social scientists.
This lack of success may be explained by the fact that the basic
parameters of these models are not as constant in the social sciences as
in biological applications.
One reason for the lack of success in applying epidemic models to the
spread of ideas may be that the mutation rate, the rate of transmission
errors, is much higher for ideas than for disease or other biological
processes. Many of us recall the children’s game of telephone, in which
the first person selects a simple story and whispers it into the ear of the
second person, who then whispers it into the ear of the third, and so on.
When the story is finally told to the group by the last person in the
chain, the distortion of the original story is often so dramatic as to
provoke laughter. The person-to-person transmission of stories of any
complexity is just not very reliable.
For this reason, pure word-of-mouth transmission of ideas, even if
abetted by the telephone, is not likely to extend widely enough to infect
an entire nation all by itself. The accuracy of transmission will falter
long 
before 
that 
happens. 
In 
contrast, 
computer-to-computer
transmission is unerring. Computer viruses can spread nationally and
internationally with no alteration whatsoever. But viruses do not have
the ability to change people’s thinking; they do not get beyond the
machine. The ability of users of e-mail to forward others’ messages or to
provide web links effectively permits word of mouth to spread
unerringly. And new technology that makes it possible and natural to
forward word-of-mouth messages from others as part of a telephone
conversation or a video conference or the social media would again
dramatically improve the accuracy and persistence of interpersonal
communications.
Although 
the 
imprecision 
and 
variability 
of 
interpersonal
communications as they currently occur prevent formal mathematics
from predicting with any reliability how ideas spread, epidemic models

are still helpful in understanding the kinds of things that can bring about
changes in market prices. For example, it is useful to consider that any
change in the infection rate or removal rate will change the rate of
spread of new ideas.
Thus, for example, a major national news story unrelated to
speculative markets may lower the infection rate of ideas related to
speculative 
markets 
by 
deflecting 
attention 
from 
them. 
This
phenomenon may help explain why, as noted in Chapter 6, stock price
movements are not notoriously volatile at times of national crisis despite
the potential importance of such crises for the nation’s businesses and
why most large stock market movements occur when there is not much
other news. In contrast, national news that ties in with or encourages
discussion of the stock market may raise the infection rate. This may be
part of the explanation for the Internet’s apparently exaggerated effect
on the stock market: attention being paid to the Net promotes
conversation about technology stocks in general, thereby raising the
infection rate for theories about these stocks.
The word-of-mouth transmission of ideas does not have to infect the
entire nation to affect national prices in the stock market or the market
for homes. Moreover, word of mouth may function to amplify public
reaction to news events or to media accounts of such events. It is still
necessary to consider the infection rate relative to the removal rate in
order to understand the public impact of any new idea or concept, since
most people’s awareness of any of these is still socially mediated. Thus,
the likelihood of any event affecting market prices is enhanced if there is
a good, vivid, tellable story about the event.
The importance of a tellable story for keeping the infection rate of
ideas high can be seen in many examples drawn from new-product
marketing, such as the promotion of motion pictures. Marketers launch
an ad campaign as the movie is first screened, to attract the attention of
especially receptive people. Only a small fraction of the population
responds directly to the initial advertisements. Yet the success of the
movie ultimately depends on the reaction of these people to the film—
and the opinions they pass on to others. It is well known that the advice
of movie critics has less impact than the mass effect of such word of

mouth. Producers have learned over the years the importance of
including set pieces in movies. These are scenes that in and of
themselves have story quality, scenes that, either during a screening or
even as part of a trailer, pack word-of-mouth potential analogous to that
of popular jokes or tall tales—or stories linked to high-flying companies
on the nation’s exchanges.
The effect of story quality on the contagion of ideas can have a real
impact on market value. Why are certain paintings valued so highly
among others? When I took my older son to the Louvre and we viewed
the Mona Lisa, he expressed puzzlement that this painting should be
considered so much more valuable than the others. He said it was
undeniably good, but it did not stand out among all the other
remarkable paintings. We then found ourselves betting that many people
in the crowd viewing the painting were saying to each other—in
whatever language—much the same thing.
To understand the exaggerated value of the Mona Lisa, we must
consider the powerful word-of-mouth potential of a certain story about
Mona Lisa’s smile, apparently created by embellishment in word-of-
mouth transmission from a story that first appears in Giorgio Vasari’s
biography of Leonardo written shortly after Leonardo’s death. The story,
which now appears in many forms, is that the artist had difficulty
capturing her smile and worked four years on it but never felt he had
fully succeeded. In his original biography, Vasari reported that Leonardo
tried musicians, singers, and jesters to get the model to show the right
expression. Vasari said that the smile in the painting “was a thing more
divine than human, and it was held to be a marvel.”16 Vasari’s
description of the painting does not match the Mona Lisa that we see
today, and so there may be some confusion; the story might actually be
from a different painting. But no matter—the story is attached to that
painting in the Louvre today.
That story has real currency; why it does is hard to pin down. The
story seems to attach to many other thoughts. Mona Lisa’s smile was
used as a theme by poets and essayists over the centuries. Public
attention could never have fixated on this painting without the story of
Leonardo’s long struggle to capture the smile, a story with powerful

word-of-mouth potential.
The story of Mona Lisa’s smile gained further impetus from two events
that occurred in the year 1910. Both events enriched the story of her
smile and provided immense publicity for it.
The first was the publication in 1910 of a provocative book by
Sigmund Freud that undertook to examine Leonardo’s subconscious and
that dwelled on the Mona Lisa. Freud thought that for Leonardo, Mona
Lisa’s smile was a suppressed memory of his birth mother, from whom
he was separated at age four, and who had expressed an unnatural
affection for her son.
The second was the story of the theft of the Mona Lisa from the
Louvre in 1910 and the continuing saga of the law authorities’ attempts
to recover it, then the story of the return of the painting and the trial of
the thief. Of course the newspaper writers mentioned the smile: good
writers covering the theft would not miss it. The theft story evolved over
a period of years, a period long enough to reinforce the smile story
firmly in the public consciousness. The smile story was ubiquitous in the
press coverage. Even a 1914 story about the thief’s final sentencing
concluded with the ridiculous assertion, “He listened to his sentence
with a facial expression somewhat akin to ‘Mona Lisa’s’ enigmatic
smile.”17 The reporter just had to get that smile story in.
According to a Proquest search of English language publications, the
number of references to Mona Lisa during 1915–25 (after the theft story
was completed) was twenty times greater than during 1899–1909, that
is, before 1910. The legacy of the news coverage during 1910–14 is still
with us today, since it amplified a media and word-of-mouth feedback
about that smile, reinforced by continuing news mentions and parodies
of the painting, that continue to this day. The 1910 events are forgotten
in themselves by most people today, but the enhanced smile story is not,
and the events are thus an important cause of the extraordinary value
placed on the Mona Lisa today.
By analogy, news events that are more likely to be transmitted in
informal conversations are in turn more likely to contribute to the
contagion of ideas. The dry, analytical outlook an expert may offer for
the nation’s economy is very unlikely to be transmitted by word of

mouth. In contrast, news that the stock market or the housing market
has made a sudden move is vastly more likely to be communicated. To
be sure, experts’ opinions sometimes tag along with news stories about
price movements, but they are seldom vivid enough to become the focus
of word-of-mouth communications by themselves.
Word-of-mouth communications, either positive or negative, are an
essential part of the propagation of speculative bubbles, and the word-of-
mouth potential of any event must be weighed in judging the likelihood
of that event to lead to a speculative bubble. Thus, for example, the
predictions of widespread computer problems after the beginning of the
new year in 2000 due to the so-called Y2K bug was a classic word-of-
mouth story because of its association with both the world’s fascination
with computers and the new millennium. Thus—although fears
ultimately proved groundless—it was likely to have an exaggerated
impact on the markets compared with other, less vivid stories.
A Pool of Conflicting Ideas Coexisting in the
Human Mind
One reason the contagion of ideas can sometimes happen rapidly, and
public thinking can experience such abrupt turnarounds, is that the ideas
in question are already in our minds. Even conflicting ideas can coexist
at the same time in our minds, and a shift in supporting facts or public
attentions may suddenly bring to the fore an apparent belief that
contradicts formerly stated beliefs.
For example, people widely believe that the stock market is
unforecastable and that market timing is futile. But they also believe (as
we saw in Chapter 5) that if the stock market were to crash, it would
surely come back up. Such views are clearly inconsistent.
One explanation for the fact that people are able to hold such
conflicting views simultaneously is that they think they have heard both
views endorsed by experts. The culture transmits a number of supposed
facts, often attributed only to “them,” as in: “They say that….” When
stories are casually accepted on some imagined authority, conflicts are

likely.
Sometimes, stories achieve currency even though they can be traced to
no competent authority whatsoever. One hears again and again, for
example, that “they say” that only 10% of the human brain is actually
used by most people—a myth that extends back to the nineteenth
century, when neurological science was clearly incapable of either
establishing or disproving such a fact. “They say” also that the birth rate
in New York City jumped nine months after a 1965 power blackout left
New Yorkers with nothing to do for a while: but there was no jump in
the birth rate.18 And, more apropos, “they say” that there were an
unusually high number of suicides at the time of the crash of 1929, but
there were not.19 Stories that are useful in conversations, and in media
presentations, have a currency often unrelated to the facts.
Given this tendency to attribute views to real or imagined experts,
people do not worry much about apparent contradictions among the
views they hold. There is a willingness to free-ride here—to suppose that
the experts have thought through the apparent contradictions and
therefore to assume that the experts know why they are not in fact
contradictions at all. It is certainly true that sometimes theories that
appear to be contradictory really are not. And from there it is but a short
step to the supposition that the experts could explain away most
apparent contradictions—if one asked.
People’s thinking about the arcane field of investments is surely
clouded with many half-thought-through ideas that may be mutually
contradictory, or at least have not been put into any coherent analytical
framework. It is a real challenge to try to infer what these ideas will
mean for concrete investment decisions.
The significance of the fact that contradictory views are held
simultaneously is that people may have no clear attachment to many of
their views. Therefore, we cannot attach too much credence to investors’
stated belief that the market will surely come back up after a crash, for
the circumstances of the actual crash could bring to the forefront other,
contradictory, views that were only dimly remembered before the crash.
Investors would then react in ways that could not have been foreseen
based on their previously expressed confidence.

Socially Based Variations in Attention
The human brain is structured to have essentially a single focus of
conscious attention at a time and to move rapidly from one focus to
another. The sensory experience that comes to us from our environment
is vastly complicated, and the brain manages to filter out almost all of
this complexity to produce a sense of the here and now—an
interpretation of what is most important at present—and a sequence of
thoughts that weave in this interpretation. Thus, for example, when one
is sitting in an airport waiting to board one’s plane, one’s attention
constantly returns to the theme “waiting to board” and organizes many
thoughts and observations around it, as if it were the essence of current
reality. One usually does not study the weave of the carpet or the
smudges of dirt on the windows, or ponder the shape of the letters on
the information screen, though in principle one could. These details are
typically beyond our consciousness, even though we are receiving, and
processing, sensory information about them.
The ability to focus attention on important things is one of the
defining characteristics of intelligence, and no one really understands
how the brain does it. Failure to focus attention on the proper things is
also one of the most characteristic of human judgment errors. The
mechanism for focusing attention that has evolved in the human brain,
although remarkable, is still far from perfect.
If one looks back on some of the most significant errors one has made
in life, one is likely to find that these often arose from a failure to pay
attention to details. One would have responded instantly and changed
one’s actions had someone repeatedly demanded attention and pointed
out certain key facts. Thus, in understanding errors that people have
made in the past, it is important to consider what it was that they were
not paying attention to.
One of the mechanisms that the brain has evolved to direct attention
properly is a socially based selectivity. We pay attention to many of the
same things that others around us are paying attention to. This social
basis for attention allows individuals who recognize the importance of
some information to bring it to the attention of other members of the

community, and it creates a view of the world and an information set
that are common to the community. Such a view and information set
allow the community to act well in concert. At the same time, the social
component of attention does not work perfectly, and it may cause errors
to be made in common by the entire group, because the common focus
of attention pushes aside attention to details that individuals might
otherwise notice. As with individual attention, the phenomenon of social
attention is one of the great creations of behavioral evolution and is
critical for the functioning of human society, but it is also an imperfect
creation.
The social attention mechanism generates a sudden focus of the
attention of the entire community on matters that appear to be
emergencies. Thus, to return to the epidemic model, the infection rate
may suddenly and dramatically increase. A sudden major move in the
stock market is one of those events that pushes aside all other
conversation.
This social basis for attention, operating by word of mouth and
facilitated by media transmission of ideas, can generate attention focuses
that spread rapidly across much of the world. With a substantial fraction
of the human minds on the planet suddenly grabbed by the market, it
should not be at all surprising that markets on opposite sides of the
globe move together, even if the fundamentals in different countries do
not suggest any reason for such co-movement.
People Cannot Explain Changes in Their Attention
Furthermore, people often find it very difficult to explain what made
them decide to take a certain course of action; the original attentional
trigger may not be remembered. This is a principal reason why changes
in speculative asset prices, which very quickly reflect changes in
attention, often seem so inexplicable.
Price changes themselves may be an attention grabber, even among
professional investors. In a study of institutional investors’ choice of
individual stocks, John Pound and I produced a list of stocks whose

prices had increased rapidly within the preceding year and that also had
high price-earnings ratios. We then obtained a list of institutional
investors who had reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission
that they had bought one of the stocks (the experimental group) and
compared this with a list of institutional investors in a random sample of
stocks (the control group). We asked respondents on both lists if they
agreed with the following statement regarding their stock (the rapid-
price-increase stock for the experimental group or the random stock for
the control group): “My initial interest was the result of my, or someone
else’s, systematic search over a large number of stocks (using a
computerized or similar search procedure) for a stock with certain
characteristics.”20 Since these were investment professionals, it is
perhaps not surprising that 67% of the random sample, the control
group, said they agreed with this statement. But, among the
experimental group, the investors in the rapid-price-increase stocks, only
25% agreed. Since attentional triggers are often poorly remembered, we
cannot expect them to tell us that the price increase stimulated their
interest, but our experimental design shows that the price increase, or
associated events, did play a role in attracting their attention. The
important point is that most of the investors in rapid-price-increase
stocks themselves say that they were unsystematic in their decision
making.
When variations in attention are important causes of changing
behavior, we cannot expect people to tell us the reasons for their
changed behavior. People usually cannot easily explain what drew their
attention to something, and so they cannot explain their own behavior.
A 1931 experiment by psychologist N.R.F. Maier will illustrate. Maier
presented his subjects with the challenge of tying two cords together:
cords that were suspended from the ceiling far enough apart that one
could not reach them both at the same time unless they were somehow
brought together. Subjects were given a number of tools with which to
attempt this task and were asked to see how many different ways they
could invent to tie the two cords together. One way to complete the task
was to tie a weight to the end of one of the cords, set it swinging like a
pendulum, grab the end of the other cord with one hand, and then catch

the swinging cord with the other hand. When the experimenter himself
set one of the cords swinging, many subjects quickly came up with this
idea. But when asked how they had hit upon the idea, only a third of
them mentioned having seen the swinging cord. The swinging cord
merely changed the focus of their attention, and most subjects could not
see the connection between their actions and the stimulus that had given
them the idea.21
By analogy, a stock market boom can start for no better reason than
that some factor, like the swinging cord, calls attention to the market. In
the context of the present stock market situation, such events as spotting
an ad for a mutual fund or the receipt of election forms for an
employer’s 401(k) plan may be the swinging cord. But we will never
learn about the importance of these stimuli from most of our subjects by
simply asking them. Even if people recall the stimuli, they will not be
able to tell us how they affected them.
The Story So Far
This chapter concludes the essence of my argument that irrational
exuberance is at work in producing the ups and downs of the stock and
real estate markets. We began in Part One with lists of precipitating
factors that gave rise to recent booms in the stock market, the bond
market, and the market for homes. We saw that the effect of these
factors is sometimes amplified via feedback loops and naturally
occurring Ponzi schemes, aided by the lubricant of the news media as
sometime promoter of market exuberance. We saw evidence of strangely
high investor confidence and undiminished expectations for the market
at the time of the Millennium Peak in the stock market in 2000,
confidence that faded or only partly persisted despite the bursting of the
Ownership-Society Bubble.
We then considered, in Part Two, the cultural components of
exuberance, the varying degrees of social attention to new era theories,
and the tendencies of these new era theories both to react to the market
and to stimulate it temporarily. In Part Three, we have stepped back and

examined some of the basic psychological factors that allowed the
changes described in the earlier parts to exert their effects. Chapter 9
showed how trivial and barely visible psycho logical anchors may
ultimately determine market levels, and how investor overconfidence
can strengthen the pull of these anchors. The present chapter has
attempted to resolve the essential puzzle of the current market situation:
that we see newly high valuations but cannot detect a cause for those
valuations that is associated with rational public thinking.
In the remainder of the book, I place the theory of irrational
exuberance into a broader context. In the next part, I consider some
influential arguments against the notion that anything irrational is going
on. In the concluding chapter, I turn to the ultimate questions that this
exuberance poses for policy: individual, institutional, and governmental.

Part Four
Attempts to Rationalize Exuberance

Eleven
Efficient Markets, Random Walks, and Bubbles
The theory that financial markets are efficient forms
the leading intellectual basis for arguments against the idea that markets
are vulnerable to excessive exuberance or bubbles. Extensive academic
research has been widely seen as supporting this theory.
The efficient markets theory asserts that all financial prices accurately
reflect all public information at all times. In other words, financial assets
are always priced correctly, given what is publicly known, at all times.
Price may appear to be too high or too low at times, but, according to
the efficient markets theory, this appearance must be an illusion.
Stock prices, by this theory, approximately describe “random walks”
through time: the price changes are unpredictable, since they occur only
in response to genuinely new information, which by the very fact that it
is new is unpredictable. The efficient markets theory and the random
walk hypothesis have been subjected to many tests using data on stock
markets, in studies published in scholarly journals of finance and
economics. Although the theory has been statistically rejected many
times in these publications, by some interpretations it may nevertheless
be described as approximately true. The literature on the evidence for
this theory is well developed and includes work of the highest quality.
Therefore, whether or not we ultimately agree with it, we must at least

take the efficient markets theory seriously.
Basic Arguments That Markets Are Efficient and
That Prices Are Random Walks
The idea of efficient markets is so natural that it has probably been with
us for centuries. Although the term efficient markets apparently first
became widely known through the work of University of Chicago
professor Eugene Fama (who was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in
Economic Sciences with me in 2013, despite our different views on some
basic issues) in the late 1960s, the theory itself preceded this name by
many years.1 It was clearly mentioned in 1889 in a book by George
Gibson titled The Stock Markets of London, Paris and New York. Gibson
wrote that when “shares become publicly known in an open market, the
value which they acquire may be regarded as the judgment of the best
intelligence concerning them.”2
The efficient markets theory has been a fixture in university
economics and finance departments ever since the 1970s. The theory has
commonly been offered to justify what seem to be elevated market
valuations, such as the 1929 stock market peak. Professor Joseph
Lawrence of Princeton concluded in 1929 that “the consensus of
judgment of the millions whose valuations function on that admirable
market, the Stock Exchange, is that stocks are not at present
overvalued…. Where is that group of men with all-embracing wisdom
which will entitle them to veto the judgment of the intelligent
multitude?”3
The most simple and direct argument for efficient markets theory
comes from the observation that it seems to be difficult to make a lot of
money by buying low and selling high in the stock market. Many
seemingly capable people try but fail to do this with any consistent
degree of success. Moreover, one observes that in order to make money
one must compete against some of the smartest investors, the so-called
“smart money,” who trade in financial markets looking for the same
opportunities. If one thinks that an asset is either under-or overpriced,

one must then reflect on why it remains so despite the efforts of the
smart money to make a profitable trade.
If the smart money were able to find ways to make profits by buying
low and selling high, then the effect of such smart money would be,
according to the efficient markets theory, to drive asset prices to their
true values. They would be buying underpriced stocks and thereby
tending to bid their prices up. They would be selling overpriced stocks
and thereby tending to bid their prices down. Moreover, if there were
substantial mispricing of securities, then their profits doing this trading
would tend to make the smart money into rich people, thereby
increasing their influence on the market and increasing their power to
eliminate mispricing.
Unfortunately, this argument for the efficient markets hypothesis does
not tell us that the stock market cannot go through periods of significant
mispricing lasting years or even decades. The smart money could not
make money rapidly by exploiting such a profit opportunity, and there
would be considerable uncertainty about when the mispricing would
end. If indeed one knew today that the market would do poorly over the
next ten or twenty years, but did not know exactly when it would begin
to do poorly and could not prove one’s knowledge to a broad audience,
then there would be no way to profit significantly from this knowledge.
There is therefore no substantial reason to think that the smart money
must necessarily eliminate such stock mispricing.
But this limitation of the efficient markets theory is often overlooked.
The assumption is made that the same efficient markets theory that says
that it is difficult to predict day-to-day changes implies that one cannot
predict any changes.
Reflections on “Smart Money”
At its root, the efficient markets theory holds that differing abilities do
not produce differing investment performance. The theory claims that
the smartest people will not be able to do better than the least intelligent
people in terms of investment performance. They can do no better,

because their superior understanding is already completely incorporated
into share prices.
If we accept the premise of efficient markets, not only is being smart
no advantage, but it also follows immediately that being not so smart is
not a disadvantage either. If not-so-smart people could lose money
systematically in their trades, then this would suggest a profit
opportunity for the smart money: just do the opposite of what the not-
so-smart money does. Yet according to the efficient markets theory,
there can be no such profit opportunity for the smart money.
Thus, according to this theory, effort and intelligence mean nothing in
investing. In terms of expected investment returns, one might as well
pick stocks at random—the common metaphor of throwing darts at the
stock market listings to choose investments. It is ultimately for this
reason that so many people have thought that they do not need to pay
any attention at all to whether any given stock is or is not overpriced,
and why they have felt they could ignore the unusual valuation of the
market at the time of this writing, or at the height of the stock market
boom in 2000.
But why should the very smartest people set all prices, as efficient
markets theory implies? Many apparently less-intelligent or less well-
informed people are buying and selling—why should they not have an
impact on prices?
One notion, referred to previously, is that the smartest money has
already mostly taken over the market through its profitable trading and
has now set prices correctly; the less-intelligent investors are holding so
little as to be insignificant forces in the market. This is an easy argument
to dismiss. First of all, if this is the reason the smart money dominates,
then it must have been the case that there were profitable trades for
them; otherwise, they could not have used their intelligence to take over
the market. But if there were profitable trades, then there must still be
profitable trades, since smart money investors retire from the business
and must be replaced. One cannot argue that smart money took over the
market 100 years ago and that ever since they have dominated the
market, since those smart traders of yore are all dead now.
Another piece of evidence that has been offered in support of the

efficient markets theory is that professional investors, institutional
money managers, or securities analysts do not seem to have any reliable
ability to outperform the market as a whole, and indeed they often seem
to underperform the market once account is taken of transactions costs
and management fees. This result may seem puzzling, since one would
think that professional investors are more educated about investing and
more systematic than individual investors. But perhaps the result is not
as puzzling as it at first seems. Individual investors get advice from
professional investors, and they can also observe (albeit with some time
lag) what professional investors are doing. So there may be no
significant difference between the success of professional investors and
the market as a whole, even if their analysis is very valuable to others.
Individual investors with substantial resources tend to be educated and
intelligent people, too. Moreover, some studies have documented that
professional analysts’ advice is indeed worth something, if it is acted
upon swiftly enough.4
Ultimately the reason that studies have not found stronger evidence
that people who are smarter tend to make more money is that there is no
good way to measure how smart investors are. Institutional investors as
a group are not necessarily smarter than individual investors as a group.
We do not have databases giving the IQ scores of investment managers
to enable us to compare their performances with their scores, and even if
we did, it is not clear that the available intelligence tests would measure
the right abilities.
One study, by Judith Chevalier and Glenn Ellison, did come close to
acquiring data about investment managers’ intelligence, even though
they did not have access to their individual test scores, by tabulating the
average Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores of the colleges the
investment managers attended. They did indeed find some evidence that
firms whose managers attended higher-SAT colleges performed
somewhat better, even after controlling for other factors.5
Another approach to testing whether smarter people can make money
by trading stocks relies on persistence of investing success. If we have
data on individual trades, and if some people are smarter than others at
trading, then we should find that some people persistently lose money,

while others persistently make money. In effect, we can measure a
trader’s investing intelligence by his or her own past successes, and then
see how this compares with subsequent successes.
It has been found that mutual funds trading success is only moderately
persistent through time.6 But mutual funds are organizations, not
individuals. The problem has been that, at least until recently,
comprehensive databases of trades that identify individual traders
through time have not been available.
One recent study, however, was able to use data on all day traders on
the Taiwan Stock Exchange that consistently identified individuals for a
five-year period. The study found substantial persistence of trading
success.7 It also found that most day traders did not make enough money
from their trades to offset their trading costs, but a small number of
them consistently did. Unsuccessful day traders tended to drop out
through time; successful ones tended to trade very heavily.
These studies do not settle the issue of intelligence and investing
success. Yet, from the available evidence, I see no reason to doubt the
thesis that smarter and more hard-working people will, in the long run,
tend to do better at investing.
Examples of “Obvious” Mispricing
Despite the general authority of the efficient markets theory in popular
thinking, one often hears examples that seem to offer flagrant evidence
against it. There are in fact many examples of financial prices that, it
seems, cannot possibly be right. They are regularly reported in the
media. In the 1990s stock market boom, many of these examples were
Internet stocks; judging from their prices, the public appears to have
held an exaggerated view of their potential.
For example, consider eToys, a firm established in 1997 to sell toys
over the Internet. Shortly after its initial public offering in 1999, eToys’
stock value was $8 billion, exceeding the $6 billion value of the long-
established “brick and mortar” retailer Toys “R” Us. And yet, in fiscal
1998, eToys’ sales were $30 million, while the sales of Toys “R” Us were

$11.2 billion, almost 400 times larger. And eToys’ profits were a
negative $28.6 million, while the profits of Toys “R” Us were a positive
$376 million.8 In fact, Toys “R” Us, like other established toy retailers,
had already created its own website. Despite some initial difficulties
getting its site launched, Toys “R” Us was seen by many as having a
longer-run advantage over eToys in that dissatisfied purchasers of toys
on the Internet could go to one of its numerous retail outlets for returns
or advice. In addition, customers who were already shopping at one of
those outlets would naturally gravitate to the Toys “R” Us website when
making online purchases. Despite these publicly aired doubts, investors
loved eToys. But it didn’t take long for the doubters to be proven right:
eToys.com filed for bankruptcy and was delisted from NASDAQ in March
2001. The final step was the May 2001 sale of the eToys.com web
address to KB Toys, which in turn filed for bankruptcy in January 2004.
The valuation the market placed on such stocks as eToys at the peak
of the market in 1999 and 2000 appears absurd to many observers, and
yet the influence of these observers on market prices does not seem to
correct the mispricing. What could they do that would have the effect of
correcting it? Those who doubt the value of these stocks could try to sell
them short, and some do, but their willingness to do so is limited, partly
since there is always a possibility that the stock will be bid up even
further by enthusiastic investors. We will see other reasons later. Absurd
prices sometimes last a long time.
It seems obvious that investors in these stocks are not thinking very
clearly about long-run investment potential, and also that there are no
forces in the market to prevent these investors from causing substantial
overpricing. Doesn’t such evidence clearly speak against market
efficiency, at least for some stocks? And if some stocks can be
overpriced, then does it not follow that the market as a whole can be
overpriced, given that those stocks are part of the market?
Short-Sales Constraints and the Persistence of
Obvious Mispricing

There is reason to think that obvious mispricing really ought to occur,
even in a world with huge quantities of smart money searching for
mispriced assets. That reason: there are often obstacles to short sales, to
borrowing the assets and selling them, thereby in effect holding negative
quantities of the assets. Edward Miller, an eccentric professor at the
University of New Orleans who has written provocative papers on a wide
range of academic disciplines, first pointed this out in a 1977 article in
the Journal of Finance that seemed to take efficient markets theorists by
surprise.9
Miller’s argument was actually very simple. Suppose a particular
stock, or a particular tulip, or whatever, comes into great demand by a
small group of zealots, who bid eagerly against one another to buy as
much of this investment as they can. Efficient markets theory does not
say that there are no zealots, which would be an absurd claim; it says
only that somehow the smart money ultimately sets market prices. But if
these zealots have really lost their sense, and if they buy so aggressively
that they end up being the only people holding these assets, who is to
say that these assets won’t become wildly overpriced? The smart money,
who are not crazy, would like to short the overpriced assets, to profit
from the eventual fall in price, but if they cannot find any of the assets
to borrow, the only way they can participate is by buying. As a result,
they must just sit on the sidelines. The market with short-sales
constraints can be wildly overpriced, and the smart money knows it, but
there is no way for the smart money to use that knowledge.10
Short-sales constraints are very real. Some countries’ governments do
not allow short sales at all. Even in countries where short sales are
allowed, the institutions supporting them may not work very well. Part
of the reason is that even in these countries, there is a widespread
antipathy to short sellers. Short sellers are blamed for all sorts of bad
things. The New York Stock Exchange used to have an orderly market
for the borrowing and lending of shares, the “loan crowd” on the floor of
the exchange, but shut this market down some years after the stock
market crash of 1929—a move that was widely blamed on short
sellers.11 Short sellers are commonly targeted as “boogeymen” for
fluctuating or falling equity prices, a position echoed by regulators—

short sales of financial stocks were temporarily banned in the United
States and Europe after the market crash of 2008 in an attempt to stem
market declines.
The difficulty of making short sales has played a real role in the
mispricing of securities. A good example is the mispricing of the shares
sold during the 3Com sale of Palm near the peak of the stock market in
March 2000. In this initial public offering, 3Com sold 5% of its
subsidiary Palm, a maker of personal digital assistants, to the general
public, and announced at the same time that the rest of Palm would be
sold later. This initial 5% of Palm went for such a high price in the
market that, if one assumed that the other 95% of the Palm shares were
worth as much, these shares exceeded the market value of their owner,
3Com. This is obvious mispricing if there ever was such a thing. But the
interest cost of borrowing Palm shares grew to extraordinary levels, 35%
per year by July 2000, high enough to make it impractical for smart
money to profit from knowledge of this mispricing by shorting Palm and
buying 3Com.12
The Palm example is extreme, but it illustrates the effects of
restrictions on short sales. There are many barriers to short selling, not
just the explicit interest cost; some of these barriers are bureaucratic,
psychological, and social.
Statistical Evidence of Mispricings
It is difficult to make any solid judgments about market efficiency based
on a few anecdotes about alleged extreme mispricing of assets. But, in
fact, there is no shortage of systematic evidence that firms that are
“overpriced” by conventional measures have indeed tended to do poorly
afterward. Many articles in academic finance journals show this, not by
colorful examples, but by systematic evaluation of large amounts of data
on many firms.
Stocks that are difficult to short tend to do relatively poorly as
investments, as was shown by Stephen Figlewski in 1981.13 More
generally, stocks that are just overpriced by various measures tend to do

poorly relative to stocks that are underpriced. Sanjoy Basu found in
1977 that firms with high price-earnings ratios tend to underperform,
and in 1992, Eugene Fama and Kenneth French found the same for
stocks with high price–to–book value.14 Werner De Bondt and Richard
Thaler reported in 1985 that firms whose price had risen a great deal
over five years tend to go down in price in the next five years, and that
firms whose price had declined a great deal over five years tend to go up
in price in the succeeding five years.15 (In Chapter 8 we saw that a
similar tendency has held for national stock markets around the world.)
Jay Ritter found in 1991 that initial public offerings tend to occur at the
peak of industry-specific investor fads and then to show gradual but
substantial price declines relative to the market over the subsequent
three years.16 Thus, there is a sort of regression to the mean (or to
longer-run past values) for stock prices: what goes up a lot tends to come
back down, and what goes down a lot tends to come back up.
These findings, and similar findings by many other researchers, have
encouraged an approach to the market called value investing, that of
picking portfolios of stocks that are underpriced by conventional
measures, on the theory that they have been overlooked only
temporarily by investors and will appreciate eventually. The other side
of this strategy is to sell overpriced stocks short. One might think that
the effect on the market of so many value investors would be to reduce,
and even possibly eliminate for a time, the relation across stocks
between value and subsequent returns. Value investors are after all
buying the underpriced assets and bidding up their prices, and also
diverting demand away from overpriced assets.
Sometimes value investing strategies will probably cease to work as
investors flock to exploit them, yet it certainly does not follow that value
investing as a whole will ever be out for good. Certainly avoiding
investments that have become so overpriced that only the zealots own
them is a sensible strategy. There are many different ways to define
value, and the market as a whole is not going to find it easy to eliminate
all such profit opportunities.
Moreover, even if the effect of value on return across stocks disappears,
it does not follow that the effect of value on return over time for the

market as a whole must also disappear. The characteristic strategy of
value investors is to pull out of overvalued individual stocks but not to
pull out of the market as a whole when it appears to be overvalued.
Earnings Changes and Price Changes
Another argument that markets are basically efficient, in the most global
sense, is merely that stock prices roughly track earnings over time—that
despite great fluctuations in earnings, price-earnings ratios have stayed
within a comparatively narrow range.
Peter Lynch, an investment analyst who appeared frequently in the
media during the bull market of the 1990s, was quoted in banner red
letters in a 1999 advertisement for Fidelity Investments featuring a full-
page photograph of him: “Despite 9 recessions since WWII, the stock
market’s up 63-fold because earnings are up 54-fold. Earnings drive the
market.” The ad, first seen just before the peak of the market, appeared
to be designed to sell Fidelity’s stock mutual funds by convincing readers
that price growth is approximately justified by earnings growth. But in
fact the numbers were deceptive. When such a long time interval is
chosen for comparison, when no inflation correction is made, and since
earnings were very low right after World War II, it is not surprising that
Lynch could find such a correspondence. But if other examples are
chosen, price changes may seem far less justified by earnings growth.17
Lynch’s statement was indicative of a common view that stock price
changes are generally justified by earnings changes, and that this proves
that stock market price movements are not due to any irrational
behavior on the part of investors.
As we have noted, there have been only three great bull markets,
periods of sustained and dramatic stock price increase, in U.S. history:
the bull market of the 1920s, culminating in 1929; the bull market of the
1950s; and the long bull market running from 1982 to 2000. (One might
also add the bull market leading to the peak in 1901, but it was not so
dramatic. The Ownership-Society Boom 2003–7 and the New-Normal
Boom 2009–14 are even less dramatic in comparison.)

The first great bull market, from 1920 to 1929, was a period of rapid
earnings growth. Real S&P Composite earnings doubled over this period,
and real stock prices increased five-fold. The market change might be
viewed as a reaction to the earnings change, albeit an overreaction.
But in the second great bull market, the correspondence between price
growth and earnings growth is not so clear. Most of the price growth
then occurred in the 1950s, and from January 1950 to December 1959
the real S&P Composite Index almost tripled. But real S&P earnings grew
only 16% in total over this entire decade, an earnings performance that
was below average by historical standards. In terms of overall economic
growth, the 1950s were a little above average, though not as strong as
either the 1940s or the 1960s: average real gross domestic product
growth was 3.3% a year from 1950 to 1960.
In the third great bull market, real stock prices rose more or less
continually from 1982 to 2000, but earnings did not grow at all
uniformly. Real S&P Composite earnings were actually lower at the
bottom of the recession of 1991 than they were at the bottom of the
recession of 1982, but the real S&P Composite Index was almost two and
a half times as high. So, for this bull market, price increases cannot be
viewed as a simple reaction to earnings increases.
These examples show that earnings growth and price growth do not
correspond well at all. One cannot criticize bubble theories by claiming
that they do.
A Historical Relation between Price-Earnings
Ratios and Subsequent Long-Term Returns
In fact, price movements tend to be large relative to earnings, and price
swings relative to the long-trend of earnings have tended, historically, to
be reversed later. Figure 11.1 is a scatter diagram showing, on the
horizontal axis, for January of each year from 1881 to 2003, the CAPE
price-earnings ratio (as discussed in Chapter 1 and plotted in Figure 1.3)
for that month, and, on the vertical axis, the annualized real (inflation-
corrected) stock market return over the ten years following that month.

This scatter diagram allows us to see visually how well price-earnings
ratios forecast subsequent long-term (ten-year) returns. Only January
data are shown: if all twelve months of each year were shown, there
would be so many points that the scatter would be unreadable. The
downside of this plotting method, of course, is that by showing only
January data, we miss most of the peaks and troughs of the market. For
example, we miss the peak of the market in 1929 and also miss the
negative returns that followed it.
Figure 11.1 shows how CAPE values have forecast returns, since each
CAPE shown on the horizontal axis was known at the beginning of the
ten-year period. This scatter diagram was developed by fellow economist
John Campbell and me. Plots like it, for various countries, were the
centerpiece of our testimony before the board of governors of the
Federal Reserve on December 3, 1996, just before Alan Greenspan’s
irrational exuberance speech.18 Figure 11.1 differs from a chart we
distributed at that meeting only in that we now have data from 17 more
years, 1987 through 2003 (endpoints 1997 through 2013), and so 17
new points have been added to the 106 that were on the chart then.
The swarm of points in the scatter shows a definite tilt, sloping down
from the upper left to the lower right. The scatter shows that for some
dates near the left of the scatter (such as January 1920, January 1949,
or January 1982) subsequent long-term returns have been very high. In
some years near the right of the scatter (such as January 1929, January
1937, or January 1966) subsequent returns have been very low. There
are also some important exceptions, such as January 1899, which still
managed to have subsequent ten-year returns as high as 5.5% a year
despite a high CAPE of 22.9, and January 1922, which managed to have
subsequent ten-year returns of only 8.7% a year despite a low CAPE of
7.4. But the point of this scatter diagram is that, as a rule and on
average, years with low CAPEs have been followed by high returns, and
years with high CAPEs have been followed by low or negative returns.
The relation between price-earnings ratios and subsequent returns
appears to be moderately strong, though there are questions about its
statistical significance, since there are only a dozen non-overlapping ten-
year intervals in the 123 years’ worth of data. There has been substantial

academic debate about the statistical significance of relationships like
this one, and some difficult questions of statistical methodology are still
being addressed.19 We believe, however, that the relation should be
regarded as statistically significant. Figure 11.1 confirms that long-term
investors—investors who could commit their money to an investment for
ten full years—did do well when prices were low relative to earnings at
the beginning of the ten years and did do poorly when prices were high
at the beginning of the ten years. Long-term investors would be well
advised, individually, to lower their exposure to the stock market when
it is high, other things equal, and get into the market when it is low.20
Of course, other things are not always equal. At the time of this writing,
in 2014, the CAPE is very high, but so too are the prices of alternative
investments and long-term bond prices, and short-term interest rates are
virtually zero.
Figure 11.1
Cyclically Adjusted Price-Earnings Ratio (CAPE) as Predictor of Ten-
Year Returns
Scatter diagram of annualized ten-year returns against price-earnings
ratios. Horizontal axis shows the CAPE (as plotted in Figure 1.3) for
January of the year. Vertical axis shows the geometric average real
annual return per year on investing in the S&P Composite Index in

January of the year shown, reinvesting dividends, and selling ten years
later. Source: Author’s calculations using data from sources given in
Figure 1.3. See also Chapter 1, note 3.
The value of the CAPE at the peak of the stock market in 2000, over
40, was far outside the normal historical range of price-earnings ratios,
and bond prices and short-term interest rates were not at such extremes.
That same year, when the first edition of this book was published, I was
careful never to use this chart as a basis for forecasting the stock market.
The forecast would have been too extremely pessimistic to be believable.
If one were to fit a straight line or a curve to the scatter, and since the
2000 price-earnings ratio was outside the historical range, the shape of
the curve would matter a lot. Suffice it to say that the diagram suggested
that, measuring from 2000, the forecast would have been for
substantially negative returns, on average, to 2010. Measuring from
2014, with a price-earnings ratio in the mid-20s, the figure suggests low
positive real returns, a few percent a year, from holding stocks for the
ten years ending in 2024, though again that forecast should not be taken
as very reliable at all.
Part of the reason to suspect that the relation shown in Figure 11.1 is
real, if not highly reliable, is that, historically, when prices have been
high relative to earnings as computed here (using a ten-year moving
average of earnings), the return in terms of dividends has been low, and
when prices have been low relative to earnings, the return in terms of
dividends has been high.21 The year-2000 record-high price-earnings
ratios were matched by record-low dividend yields. In January 2000,
S&P dividends were 1.2% of prices, far below the 4.7% that was the
historical average. By 2004, the market decline and some increases in
dividends brought dividends up to 1.7%, higher, but still low, and by
2014, they were up a bit more to 1.9%. It is natural to suppose that
when one is getting so much lower dividends from the shares one owns,
one ought to expect to earn lower investing returns overall. The dividend
is, after all, part of the total return one gets from holding stocks (the
other part being the capital gain), and dividends historically represent

the dominant part of the average return on stocks. The reliable return
attributable to dividends, not the less predictable portion arising from
capital gains, is the main reason stocks have on average been such good
investments historically.
Returns from holding stocks must therefore be low when dividends are
low—unless low dividends themselves are somehow predictors of stock
market price increases, so that one can at times of low dividends actually
expect stock prices to rise more than usual to offset the effects of the low
dividends on returns. As a matter of historical fact, times when
dividends have been low relative to stock prices have not tended to be
followed by higher stock price increases in the subsequent five or ten
years. Quite the contrary: times of low dividends relative to stock prices
in the stock market as a whole tend to be followed by price decreases (or
smaller-than-usual increases) over long horizons, and so returns have
tended to take a double hit at such times, from both low dividend yields
and price decreases. Thus, the simple wisdom—that when one is not
getting much in dividends relative to the prices one pays for stocks, it is
not a good time to buy stocks—turns out to have been right historically.
Interest Rates as Forecasters of Excess Returns of
Stocks over Bonds
When interest rates are very low (as they are at the time of this writing),
it would seem that the attractiveness of the stock market is enhanced,
even if the stock market is looking highly priced by the CAPE, since the
alternative to stocks is not looking so good either. Indeed, if long-term
interest rates are very low (as when they hit an all-time record low in
2012, around the time that the Fed announced its third round of
quantitative easing—see Figure 1.3), then investors in bonds need to
have some doubts as to their worthiness as alternatives to the stock
market, even if the CAPE is high.
Since the CAPE negatively predicts long-term returns, one might
suspect that the excess real return between stocks and bonds (that is, the
real return on stocks minus the real return on bonds) would be

influenced negatively both by the CAPE and by an estimated real long-
term interest rate. Indeed, this is what we find, with the data shown in
Figure 1.1.22 A strong signal to replace stocks with bonds would be a
time with high CAPE and high long-term real interest rates. Such a time
was September 1929, when the CAPE was 32.6, when the long-term
interest rate was 3.4%, and when, because of deflation in the 1920s, an
estimated real interest rate was even higher, 3.7%. The predicted excess
returns of stocks over bonds was −2.3% a year for 1929–39. (The actual
annualized excess return was −6.3% a year for 1929–39.) It was not so
at the time of this writing, in 2014, when the CAPE was around 25, long-
term interest rates were around 2.5%, and estimated real long-term
interest rates were around a quarter of 1%. The predicted annualized
excess return for U.S. stocks over bonds from this simple analysis as of
July 2014 for July 2014–July 2024 is 2.4% per year. Any such
predictions have to be taken with a good deal of caution, of course.
Dividend Changes and Price Changes
Some economists have claimed that there is a good relation between real
stock price movements and, if not real earnings movements, at least real
dividend movements.23 Dividend movements may be regarded as
indicators of fundamental value, and so, these economists suggest, there
is evidence that stock prices are driven by real fundamentals, not
investor attitudes.
I think that these economists overstate their case for co-movements
between dividends and prices. The wiggles in stock prices do not in fact
correspond very closely to wiggles in dividends. Recall that between the
stock market peak in September 1929 and the bottom in June 1932,
when the stock market fell 81% as measured by the real S&P Index, real
dividends fell only 11%. Between the stock market peak in January 1973
and the bottom in December 1974, when the stock market fell 54% as
measured by the real S&P Index, real dividends fell only 6%. And there
are many other such examples.
It is also likely that part of the reason for the observed co-movement

between real prices and real dividends is the response of dividends to the
same factors—possibly including speculative bubbles—that irrationally
influence prices. Managers set dividends, and in so doing, they may vary
over time the dividend-earnings ratio, that is, the payout rate. The
managers are part of the same culture as the investing public, and are
therefore probably influenced often enough by the same varying sense of
optimism and pessimism that infects the public; they may allow this
feeling to influence their decisions on how much of a dividend to pay
out. Thus, the mere fact that prices and dividends show some substantial
similarity is not inconsistent with the possibility that they are both
influenced by fashions and fads.
In sum, stock prices clearly have a life of their own; they are not
simply responding to earnings or dividends. Nor does it appear that they
are determined only by information about future earnings or dividends.
In seeking explanations of stock price movements, we must look
elsewhere.
Excess Volatility and the Big Picture
There is indeed a good deal of evidence about market efficiency in
academic finance journals, but it is hard to say that it is evidence for
efficiency rather than against it. A great many anomalies have been
discovered over the years within the efficient markets theory. These
anomalies include the January effect (stock prices tend to go up between
December and January), the small-firm effect (small firms’ stocks tend to
have higher returns), the day-of-the-week effect (the stock market tends
to do poorly on Mondays), and others. How then can we summarize this
literature as supporting market efficiency?
One way of arguing that the literature nevertheless supports market
efficiency is to claim that many of these have been small effects, not the
stuff of bull or bear markets. Another way is to note that many of these
effects diminished after they were discovered, as indeed the January
effect weakened after 1995 and the small-firm effect disappeared during
the Millennium Boom.24 This makes it tricky to summarize the literature.

On the one hand, the fact that these anomalies persisted for a long time
shows that markets are inefficient. On the other hand, the fact that many
of them have weakened suggests that there is a basic truth to the
theory.25
Merton Miller, who was a leading advocate of efficient markets
theory, recognized that there are indeed many little anomalies, but he
argued that they are inconsequential: “That we abstract from all these
stories in building our models is not because the stories are uninteresting
but because they may be too interesting and thereby distract us from the
pervasive market forces that should be our principal concern.”26 But he
did not explain his presumption that the pervasive market forces are
rational ones.
Abstracting (as Miller urged us to do) from the little details about day-
of-the-week effects and the like, what is the basic evidence that stock
markets are efficient in the big-picture sense? Do large changes in stock
prices over the years really reflect information about important changes
in the underlying companies?
The evidence that there is not much short-run momentum or inertia—
that there is not much predictability of day-to-day or month-to-month
changes in stock price indices—does not tell us anything about efficiency
in the big-picture sense. We already know from simple economic
reasoning that day-to-day changes in stock prices cannot be very
forecastable, since such forecastability would be too good a profit
opportunity to be true; it would be too easy to get rich.
One method for judging whether there is evidence in support of the
basic validity of the efficient markets theory, which I published in an
article in the American Economic Review in 1981 (at the same time as a
similar paper by Stephen LeRoy and Richard Porter appeared), is to see
whether the very volatility of speculative prices, such as stock prices,
can be justified by the variability of dividends over long intervals of
time. If the stock price movements are to be justified in terms of the
future dividends that firms pay out, as the basic version of the efficient
markets theory would imply, then under efficient markets we cannot
have volatile prices without subsequently volatile dividends.27
In fact, my article concluded, no movement of U.S. aggregate stock

prices beyond the trend growth of prices has ever been subsequently
justified by dividend movements, as the dividend present value with
constant discount rate has shown an extraordinarily smooth growth
path. This conclusion, coming at a time when the finance profession was
much more attached to the efficient markets theory than it is now,
produced a strong reaction. I received more attacks on this work than I
could hope to answer. No one questioned the observation that stock
prices have been more volatile than the dividend present value—only
whether the difference between the two was statistically significant or
whether my interpretation of this difference was on target.
Figure 11.2
Stock Prices and Dividend Present Values, 1871–2013
Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index, 1871–2013 (heavy irregular
curve), and present values, 1871–2013, of subsequent real dividends
calculated using a constant discount rate (dashed smooth curve). Source:
Author’s calculations using data from sources given in Figure 1.1 and
described in Chapter 1, note 3. See text and note 28 of this chapter for a
description of the calculations. The vertical axis uses a log scale, in
contrast to earlier figures in this book, and also shows only January of
each year; hence the real stock price curve, which is otherwise the same
as in Figure 1.1, looks different here.

Included in my article was a figure showing the real (inflation-
corrected) S&P Composite Stock Price Index for 1871–1979 and, on the
same figure, the dividend present value, the present value for each year of
real dividends paid subsequent to that year on the shares making up the
index, computed by making an assumption about dividends after the last
year. An updated version of that figure, showing both the stock price
and the dividend present value through 2003, is shown in Figure 11.2.28
The dividend present value is not known with certainty in the year to
which it corresponds, since it is determined entirely by dividends after
the year, which have yet to be paid. According to the efficient markets
model, the dividend present value subsequent to any given year is the
(as yet unknown) true fundamental value of the stock market in that
year. The actual level of the real stock market in that same year, the
stock price shown in Figure 11.2, is supposed to be the optimal
prediction, using information available in that year, of one of the
dividend present values shown for the same year.
Looking at this figure, we can get a sense of the extent of big-picture,
important evidence for the efficiency of the aggregate stock market in
the United States. If the dividend present value moved up and down
massively over time, and if the actual stock price appeared to move with
these movements as if it were successfully forecasting the changes in the
dividend present value, then we could say that there was evidence that
stock prices were behaving in accordance with the tenets of the efficient
markets theory. But we see that the present-value series has not been
more volatile than the price series itself. Moreover, there is little
tendency of the stock prices to forecast the dividend present values.29
The dividend present value is extremely steady and trend-like, partly
because the calculations for present value use data over a range far into
the future and partly because dividends have not moved very
dramatically. Now that one sees present value plotted over a long range
of time, it seems obvious from what some of us (who have thought about
it and have good intuitive grasp of quantities) have always known at gut
level: the big stock market movements in history were not in fact
justified by what actually happened to the businesses of the various
companies later. One might try to argue that a little over a century is not

a long enough time period to be confident that one would expect to see
such justification, but the fact still remains that there has been no such
justification.
The point I made in 1981 was that stock prices appear to be too
volatile to be considered in accord with efficient markets. Assuming that
stock prices are supposed to be an optimal predictor of the dividend
present value, then they should not jump around erratically if the true
fundamental value is growing along a smooth trend. Only if the public
could predict the future perfectly should the price be as volatile as the
present value, and in that case it should match up perfectly with the
present value. If the public cannot predict well, then the forecast should
move around a lot less than the present value. But that’s not what we see
in Figure 11.2.
We learn by considering Figure 11.2 that the common interpretation
given in the media for stock market fluctuations in terms of the outlook
for the short-run business cycle is generally misguided. The prospect that
a temporary recession is on the horizon that will lower future dividends
should have virtually no impact on stock prices, if the efficient markets
theory is correct. Recessions have just been too short and too small
historically to justify the stock price movements that are associated with
them. Fluctuations in stock prices, if they are to be interpretable in terms
of the efficient markets theory, must instead be due to new information
about the longer-run outlook for real dividends. Yet in the entire history
of the U.S. stock market, we have never seen such longer-run
fluctuations, since dividends have closely followed a steady growth path.
As I argued in my 1981 paper, the only way to reconcile the volatility
of stock prices with the efficient markets model without relying on ad
hoc assumptions about changing stock market discount rates is to
suppose that, one way or the other, the historical fluctuations of
dividends around their growth path are not representative of the
potential fluctuations. That is, one would have to say that the
fluctuations observed in market prices were the result of people’s
legitimate concerns with possible major and lasting dividend movements
that just did not chance to happen in the century of data we observe. For
example, people might have been concerned about a big, rare event,

such as a complete nationali zation and confiscation of the stock market
by the government, or an enormous technological breakthrough that
would make existing companies able to pay many times more dividends.
They could also be concerned, in pricing stocks, with the movements of
future interest rates or of movements in the aggregate economy,
possibilities that are considered in the Nobel Lecture in the appendix.30
As noted earlier, my work invited the attention of an army of critics.
Most notable among them was Robert C. Merton, a brilliant financial
theorist who also was to suffer a major financial loss as a principal in the
Long Term Capital Management hedge fund. Merton, with Terry Marsh,
wrote an article in the American Economic Review in 1986 that argued
against my results and concluded, ironically, that speculative markets
were not too volatile.31
John Campbell and I wrote a number of papers attempting to put
these claims of excess volatility on a more secure footing, and we
developed statistical models to study the issue and deal with some of the
problems emphasized by the critics.32 We felt that we had established in
a fairly convincing way that stock markets do violate the efficient
markets model.
Our research has not completely settled the matter, however. There
are just too many possible statistical issues that can be raised, and the
sample provided by only a little over a century of data cannot prove
anything conclusively.
It should also be noted that some substantial fraction of the volatility
in financial markets is justified by news about future dividends or
earnings. The very trend-like behavior of U.S. corporate dividends over
the past century was probably partly due to luck, not a law saying that
dividends must hug a trend. Taking account of uncertainty about the
trend, Campbell and I, in interpreting the results of one of our statistical
studies, estimated that 27% of the annual return volatility of the U.S.
stock market might be justified in terms of genuine information about
future dividends.33 Campbell and John Ammer, using similar
methodology and a more recent (postwar) data set, found that 15% of
the variability in monthly returns in the U.S. stock market could be

attributed to genuine information about future dividends.34
There appears to be less evidence of excess volatility in long-term
interest rates and little evidence of excess volatility in the spread
between stock price indices.35 Individual stocks, for which the present
value of future dividends is much more volatile than with the aggregate
market, show less excess volatility than the market as a whole.36 Excess
volatility due to speculative bubbles is probably just one of the factors
that drive speculative markets, and the prominence of this factor varies
across markets and over time. We are not always in an excess volatility
situation.
But we are in such a situation, or recently have been, in many of our
stock markets, housing markets, and even commodity markets.
Defenders of the recent high price levels of these markets have had a
difficult time making an inspiring case that the sudden increases we
have seen in these markets can be interpreted as the rational efficient-
markets response to genuine new information.
Some of the defenders have therefore moved to a very different
explanation of the sudden price increases. To justify the sudden
upswings in the market, these defenders abandon the idea that markets
have always been efficient. Instead, they say that the markets are only
just now becoming efficient. They say that people have suddenly learned
the truth, after lifetimes of ignorance. This argument is in sharp
contradiction to the theory that markets are intrinsically efficient—and
yet we cannot dismiss this argument out of hand, given the large number
of people who have been advancing it. We turn to an evaluation of this
argument in the next chapter.

Twelve
Investor Learning—and Unlearning
At times of apparent speculative overpricing, such as
the time of this writing, a rationalization for the exuberance in the stock
market, as well as other speculative markets, is that the public at large
has learned that the long-term value of the market is really greater than
they had thought it was and is greater than conventional indicators
would have suggested it should be. According to this rationalization, the
price-earnings ratio in the stock market is higher today than the
historical average because the public has now learned some simple facts,
facts about historical returns and diversification or about the world
situation. This argument differs from the efficient markets argument in
supposing that the market was previously priced too low because of
public ignorance. The argument is essentially: “The stock market was not
efficient for most of its history; it was too low; but (maybe) it is efficient
now.”
It is potentially plausible, at least at first look, that society may have
learned that the market is much more valuable than it once was thought
to be. Society as a whole does learn, and the cumulative effect of such
learning is the reason that modern society has made such progress when
compared with former centuries. But the question remains whether
society has really learned something important about the stock market:

Is this really true? If so, what have we learned?
“Learning” about Risk
It is commonly said that people have recently learned that the stock
market is much less risky than they once thought it was, and that the
stock market has always outperformed other investments. Their
“learning” is allegedly the result of widespread media coverage over
recent years of the historical superiority of stocks as investments. For
example, there was the publication in 1994 of the first edition of Jeremy
Siegel’s book Stocks for the Long Run. According to this view, people have
realized that, in light of historical statistics, they have been too fearful of
stocks. Armed with this new knowledge, investors have now bid stock
prices up to a higher level, to their rational or true level, where the
stocks would have been all along had there not been excessive fear of
them. Stocks, selling now at a higher price, will pay a correspondingly
lower yield—but that is all right with investors, since they now know
that stocks are not all that risky. In other words, the equity premium, the
extra return that people require to be compensated for the risk of
investing in the stock market, has gone down, because investors have
suddenly come to appreciate the historical record of stock market risk.1
It is true that the public at times does not appear to perceive much
risk in the stock market. In Chapter 5, we saw survey results that showed
that, while popular support for the notion that “if there is another stock
market crash like October 19, 1987, the market will surely be back up
within a couple of years or so” has faded substantially since the peak of
the stock market in 2000, most people still believe this. So it is clear that
the possibility of major stock market declines does not worry most
people very much. But is this because people have acquired some
genuinely new knowledge? Or are the new public opinions caused by
something altogether different—and ephemeral?
A problem with this “new learning” theory is that the historical fact
that investors have supposedly learned is not a new revelation. The
observation that the stock market has largely outperformed other

investments was made as long ago as 1924 by a best-selling book by
Edgar Lawrence Smith. This book made a number of historical
comparisons of investments in stocks versus bonds and found that stocks
always came out ahead over long holding periods, in both periods of
rising general prices (inflation) and periods of declining general prices
(deflation).2 Smith emphasized—as did another author at the time,
Kenneth Van Strum—that investing in bonds was risky, too, because,
even though the nominal values of bond payments are fixed, their real
value fluctuates with the general price level.3
According to Professor Irving Fisher, writing in 1929, “These writings
threw a bombshell into the investing world.” Fisher thought that the bull
market of the 1920s had occurred because the public had learned from
these books: “It was only as the public came to realize, largely through
the writing of Edgar Lawrence Smith, that stocks were to be preferred to
bonds during a period of dollar depreciation, that the bull market began
in good earnest to cause a proper valuation of common shares.”4
Others shared Fisher’s belief about public learning. Charles Amos Dice
wrote in 1929 that “the old prejudice against security markets and the
fear of them have been largely dispelled by public education regarding
stocks and bonds.”5 A writer for the New York Herald Tribune asserted in
1929: “It is gratifying to observe the growth of business…. But there is a
much larger significance in the growth of understanding among the
people who make the growth of business possible…. There is nothing to
retard the progress of any sound industry when an increasing number of
people believe in it, become part owners in the business, and are
regularly and reliably informed.”6
If people did learn during the 1920s that stocks dominated bonds at
1920s prices, they seem to have forgotten the information later, or at
least changed their feelings about it. The question before us now is this:
Observing the recent stock market, have they really “learned” this time
that stocks always outperform bonds, and will they continue to “know”
this in the future?
The “fact” that Jeremy Siegel pointed out in his book Stocks for the
Long Run in 1994, is that in the United States there has been no thirty-

year period over which bonds have outperformed stocks. The supposed
fact is not really true, since, as Jeremy Siegel himself pointed out in his
book, stocks underperformed bonds in the period 1831–61.7 That may
seem like a long time ago until one realizes that there have not been that
many non-overlapping thirty-year periods in U.S. stock market history:
only five such periods since 1861. There have been many overlapping
thirty-year periods, but of course these are not independent pieces of
evidence. Given the relatively short history of thirty-year periods of
stock market returns, we must recognize that there is little evidence that
stocks cannot underperform in the future. Siegel himself acknowledges
this in the 2014 fifth edition of Stocks for the Long Run, published after
the post-2000 correction, which brought more thirty-year intervals of
U.S. stock market underperformance. The Moody’s Aaa Corporate Bond
Total Return Index outperformed the S&P 500 Total Return Index in
thirty-year periods ending in 2010 and 2011.
I have identified in this book three major peaks of the price-earnings
ratio before the 2000 height: peaks in June 1901, September 1929, and
January 1966. Note that we are again up around the levels of the price-
earnings ratio of the 1966 market. In each of the ten-year periods
following the 1929 and 1966 peaks, the stock market return
underperformed short-term interest rates.8 If we take twenty-year
periods as our standard, then it is true that, of these three time periods,
only in the 1901–21 period did stocks really underperform short-term
interest rates.9 But in each of the twenty-year periods following these
peaks, the stock market did badly in real (inflation-corrected) terms. The
(geometric) average real return on the S&P Composite Index was −0.2%
a year from June 1901 to June 1921, 0.4% a year from September 1929
to September 1949, and 1.9% a year from January 1966 to January
1986. Despite these puny returns, the stock market still outperformed
short-term interest rates during 1929–49 and 1966–86, because inflation
brought real average short-term interest rates to very low levels, in fact
to negative territory in 1929–49. The inflationary periods associated
with World War I, World War II, and the Vietnam War all had the effect
of depleting the purchasing power of money earning interest.
Moreover, the United States may itself be the exception rather than

the rule in terms of real returns on the stock market. Philippe Jorion and
William Goetzmann have studied the real stock market appreciation
rates (excluding dividends) for thirty-nine countries for the period 1926–
96 and found that the median real appreciation rate was only 0.8% per
year for these countries (compared to 4.3% per year for the United
States).10 Thus, if we take the experience of other countries as relevant
to our own, we might expect a much poorer performance of the stock
market in the future.
The evidence that stocks will always outperform bonds over long time
intervals simply does not exist. Moreover, even if history supported this
view, we should recognize (and at some level most people must
recognize) that the future will not necessarily be like the past. For
example, it could be that, with investors buoyed by past successes in the
stock market, there is now widespread over-investment. Companies may
have hatched too many ambitious plans and spent too much on product
development and promotion; therefore, they may not do as well as they
have in the past. There was indeed substantial over-investment in the
1990s and 2000s, and this was a major factor in the world economic
slowdowns starting in 2001 and 2007.
It could also be that some of the very technological changes that are
widely touted as reasons for optimism for existing businesses are in fact
reasons their prospects are more uncertain. New technology may
diminish the advantage enjoyed by existing companies and cause them
to be replaced by upstart newer companies. Thus, these changes could
raise, not lower, the probability that stocks will underperform in the
next thirty years.
So the “fact” of the superiority of stocks over bonds is not a fact at all.
The public has not learned a fundamental truth. Instead, their attention
has shifted away from some fundamental truths. They seem not to be so
attentive to at least one genuine fundamental truth about stocks: that
they are residual claims on corporate cash flow, available to
stockholders only after everyone else has been paid. Stocks are,
therefore, by their very definition, risky. Investors have also lost sight of
another truth: that no one is guaranteeing that stocks will do well. There
is no welfare plan for people who lose in the stock market.

The “Stocks Have Always Outperformed Bonds”
Theme in Investing Culture
By the early 1990s, I was already so struck by the ubiquity of the
observation that stocks have historically outperformed bonds that I
decided to try to learn how common the observation really was. I asked
the following in a questionnaire survey of U.S. institutional investors in
1991:
Consider the following argument:
“Over the past 65 years, stocks have earned much higher returns
than bonds and there has been no 20-year period since 1926 that
bonds have outperformed stocks. Therefore, anyone with a time
horizon of 20 years or more should be investing primarily in
stocks.” [Circle one number]
1.  I agree with this statement.
2.  I disagree with this statement.
Of the 172 respondents, 84% chose 1, and only 16% chose 2. This is
indeed very solid agreement on a strongly worded statement.
The question as worded did not make it clear how often the
respondents had heard that stocks have always outperformed bonds. To
clarify this, in the fall of 1993, I asked institutional investors a similar
but differently worded question:
Consider the following claim:
“There is no 30-year period since 1860 in which U.S. government
bonds have outperformed stocks.” Have you heard roughly this
claim (even if the details, such as the use of 30 years, are different)?
1.  Yes, often
2.  Yes, once or twice
3.  No
Of the 125 respondents, 52% chose “Yes, often,” 22% chose “Yes, once
or twice,” and 26% chose “No.” Thus 74% say they remember hearing

this statement. Clearly statements like this were already part of our
investing culture then.
Knowledge about the long-run historical record, knowledge that dates
back at least to 1924 and that clearly was widely remembered in 1991
or 1993, cannot be held directly responsible for the sudden upsurge in
stock prices to record levels in the late 1990s. The knowledge was
apparently in investors’ faces all along. The public confidence that any
downturn in the market will be reversed indeed gained remarkable
strength in the late 1990s boom years, but this confidence did not derive
from a sudden news flash about the historical record. As I have argued,
it derives from such things as a feedback mechanism from past price
increases (discussed in Chapter 5), driven ultimately by various
precipitating factors (discussed in Chapter 4)—not from a sudden
discovery of the lessons from long-run historical data.
Learning about Mutual Funds, Diversification, and
Holding for the Long Run
James Glassman and Kevin Hassett, in a pair of influential Wall Street
Journal articles in 1998 and 1999, argued that “investors have become
better educated about stocks, thanks in large part to mutual funds and
the media. They have learned to hold for the long term and to see price
declines as transitory—and as buying opportunities.” Thus, Glassman
and Hassett concluded that investors have learned that diversified
portfolios of stocks are not risky, that stocks are much more valuable as
investments than they had formerly thought. Therefore, investors are
now willing to pay much more for stocks. Because of this increased
investor demand for stocks, the stock market will perpetually remain at
a higher level in the future.11
Glassman and Hassett followed up these articles in 1999 with a book,
Dow 36,000: The New Strategy for Profiting from the Coming Rise in the
Stock Market. In it they stressed that investors have not finished learning
that diversified holdings of stocks are not risky and that they will
continue to bid up stock prices in coming years as the lesson really sinks

in. They wrote that “a sensible target date for Dow 36,000 is early 2005,
but it could be reached much earlier.”12 Any reader who believed this
when the book came out in 1999 would have had to conclude that there
was an opportunity to make a lot of money between 1999 and 2005, or
even sooner, by investing in stocks while other investors at large were
still gradually learning about the true long-term value of stocks. Despite
the ostensible theme of the book—that stocks are so risk-free that they
should be thought of as interchangeable with government bonds—the
sales pitch for the book (as can be seen in its title) was actually that one
could get rich quick on the transition by investing in stocks in 1999,
while other people would learn later that stocks are risk-free.
We now know that Glassman and Hassett were really totally wrong in
their forecast for the market. Glassman and Hassett were, however, right
when they said that people were considering the advantages of mutual
funds, investing for the long run, and coming to believe the concept that
stock price declines are transitory. But one should not infer from this
that people had learned or were in the process of learning some essential
truths. We have already seen that stock price declines have not been that
transitory, that they can persist for decades, and thus that even long-run
investors should see risk in stock market investments. There is also
reason to believe that much of the enthusiasm for mutual funds is a sort
of investor fad that was not caused by any real learning.
Investors show great interest in choosing the right mutual fund, and
their interest in mutual funds often takes the form of switching from one
to the next. In response to this heightened investor interest, the mutual
fund industry has spawned thousands of new funds, with a
corresponding proliferation of ads and mailings. Yet studies of mutual
fund performance have found that although there has been some
tendency for mutual funds that have done well to continue to do so, the
tendency is weak and short-lived. People appear to believe that it is
smart to pore over rankings of mutual fund performance and constantly
shift their investments to the current top performers, but in fact they
gain relatively little by doing so.13
To assess investors’ feelings that they can make money in the stock
market, and the role that mutual funds play in this process, I included in

a 1996 questionnaire survey of individual investors a sequence of
questions about their confidence levels for both investing in general and
investing in mutual funds. The questions, along with the percentage
responses and the number of respondents n for each answer, were as
follows:
Trying to time the stock market, to get out before it goes down and
to get in before it goes up, is:
1. A smart thing to try to do; I can reasonably expect to be a success at it.
 
11%
2. Not a smart thing to try to do; I can’t reasonably expect to be a success at
it.
 
83%
3. No opinion.
 
5%
  
 [n = 131]
Trying to pick individual stocks, trying to predict, for example, if
and when Ford Motor stock will go up or IBM stock will go up, is:
1. A smart thing to try to do; I can reasonably expect to be a success at it.
 
40%
2. Not a smart thing to try to do; I can’t reasonably expect to be a success at
it.
 
51%
3. No opinion.
 
8%
  
 [n = 131]
Trying to pick mutual funds, trying to figure out which funds have
experts who can themselves pick stocks that will go up, is:
1. A smart thing to try to do; I can reasonably expect to be a success at it.
 
50%
2. Not a smart thing to try to do; I can’t reasonably expect to be a success at
it.
 
27%
3. No opinion.
 
23%
  
 [n = 131]
From these results, we see that people effectively believe in the
efficiency of the aggregate market and so have given up on timing it; but
they often think that they can still pick individual stocks and
(particularly) mutual funds. Only 27% say that trying to pick mutual
funds that will do well is not a smart thing to do to, compared with 51%
who say that trying to pick individual stocks and 83% who say that

trying to time the market are not smart things to do.
If one truly believed in efficient markets, then one would reply “not a
smart thing to try to do” to all these questions. If stock prices are a
random walk, then one cannot pick times to enter the market, one
cannot pick individual stocks, and one cannot pick others who will pick
them.
Since there is only modest evidence that one can in fact be a success at
picking mutual funds, what investors have “learned” has little support in
fact. And in any case, should it really be easier to pick managers of
mutual funds than managers of individual companies?
It is often said that people have learned about the importance of
portfolio diversification and are using mutual funds to achieve this.14
Given well-managed funds with low management fees, this argument
makes some sense. But many funds charge such high fees that investors
might be better off trying to achieve diversification themselves, if
diversification is the primary investment motive. Moreover, when they
are investing outside a tax-free environment, by holding stocks directly,
investors can avoid capital gains taxes on the gains the mutual fund
managers realize when they sell stocks in the funds’ portfolios, an
important issue with higher-turnover funds. Investors can instead
realize, for tax purposes, the losses on the stocks that go down. Mutual
funds clearly have their limitations.
Learning and Unlearning
The public is said to have learned that stocks always go right back up
after they go down. We have seen evidence that people do largely think
this, but that they have gotten their facts wrong. Stocks can go down and
stay down for many years. They can become overpriced and
underperform for long periods of time.
The public is said to have learned that stocks must always outperform
other investments, such as bonds, over the long run, and so long-run
investors will always do better in stocks. We have seen evidence that
people do largely think this. But again they have gotten their facts

wrong. Stocks have not always outperformed other investments over
decades-long intervals, and there is certainly no reason to think they
must in the future.
And the public is said to have learned about the wisdom of investing
in stocks via mutual funds whose management teams have proven track
records. We find that people do largely think this, and once more they
are wrong. Picking mutual funds that have done well has much smaller
benefits than investors imagine.
When the facts are wrong, it can’t be called learning. We saw in Figure
5.1 that market events associated with the 2007–9 financial crisis caused
investors to unlearn the “fact” that stocks are the “best investment.” As
high valuations reappear in subsequent peaks, they will relearn this
“fact” again. Much of this is not learning at all, but a process of
reassessing intuitive ideas about the future based on recent experience,
as part of a bubble feedback.
A similar process of investor “learning” appears also to have been
going on in connection with other markets besides just the stock market.
People spent the aftermath of the 2001 crash “learning” that investments
in homes are really not risky, that homes are the “best” investment, as
we saw in Figure 5.2. The perception that the public has just learned
some important facts lends support to massive market price increases by
encouraging the belief that they may be permanent.
The sense that we are all suddenly learning important facts and have
arrived at a new enlightenment has appeared so many times in history
that it may be regarded as a predictable component of irrational
exuberance. We must consider how to deal with the change in thinking
that leads people to think we have entered a new enlightenment,
changes that, through their effects on market prices, impinge on all our
lives.
We have to consider what we as individuals and as a society should be
doing to offset some of the ill effects of this exuberance. Let us turn to
this in the final chapter.

Part Five
A Call to Action

Thirteen
Speculative Volatility in a Free Society
The high valuations that the U.S. and other stock
markets attained at the peak in 2000, the relatively high valuations that
it showed again in 2007 and once more in 2014, came about for no good
reasons. The high valuations that the prices of homes attained in many
markets by the opening years of the twenty-first century, peaking around
2006, and then again in many countries after the financial crisis, came
about for no better reasons.
The high stock market levels did not, as so many imagine, represent
the consensus judgment of experts who have carefully weighed the long-
term evidence. The markets have been high because of the combined
effect of indifferent thinking by millions of people, very few of whom
have felt the need to perform careful research on long-term investment
value, and who are motivated substantially by their own emotions,
random attentions, and perceptions of conventional wisdom. Their all-
too-human behavior has been heavily influenced by news media that are
interested in attracting viewers or readers, with limited incentive to
discipline their viewers or readers with the type of quantitative analysis
that might give them a correct impression of fundamental value.
The housing market levels we saw at the 2006 peak were not, as so
many imagined, the outcome only of fundamental forces affecting the

rational demand for and supply of housing. Of course, home prices are
set by the forces of supply and demand, as homebuyers so often say. The
prices have to clear the market. But the factors influencing supply and
demand include a lot of social and emotional factors, notably attention
to the price increases themselves, a public impression that the experts
know they will continue, and a predisposition to believe that they will
continue. These factors will change with our changing culture.
Understanding how social forces cause speculative market moves has
been the major theme of this book. It is so difficult for most of us to
figure out which moves are caused by sensible good reasons and expert
opinions and which are caused by human imagination and social
psychology. I hope that the argument to this point has made it clear that,
as these major markets go, it is often largely the latter that drives prices.
In both the stock market and the housing market, people have only
the fuzziest idea what these investments are really worth, what their
prices ought to be. They may be able to judge whether one stock is
overpriced relative to another, or whether one house is overpriced
relative to another, but they just do not know how to judge the overall
level of prices. Much more salient in their minds is the rate of increase of
the prices, something that they talk and hear about a lot in a time of
rapid price change, and that has subtle effects on their demand for
speculative assets.
As the price increase during a bubble goes on through time, people
constantly reassess their opinions. People who thought there was a
bubble, and that prices were too high, find themselves questioning their
own earlier judgments, and start to wonder whether fundamentals are
indeed driving the price increase. Many people seem to think that if the
price increase goes on for years after some experts have called the price
increase a bubble, then maybe the experts were wrong. And they then
feel that there is no alternative to thinking that it is really fundamentals
that are driving the increase, and that these fundamentals will go on
forever. These are the phases that individuals who watch these markets
go through—different individuals at different times.
The feedback theory that price increases excite investors and lead
them to cause more price increases has always been on some people’s

minds, and most people have at least vaguely heard of the idea, but we
have seen that public attention to this theory is on the whole quite weak.
The feedback theory stands dimly in the background as a sort of folklore.
There are regular newspaper articles that resurrect this theory, but they
are not convincing to most people.
People seem to be reassured by the widely cited once-presumed “fact”
that there has never been a thirty-year period when stock prices
underperformed bonds, and by the “fact” that there has never been a
major price decline in homes that has not been quickly reversed. These
factoids were part of the psychology that drove bubbles, at least for a
while. This psychology has in the past caused dramatic and
unsustainable price increases, and it may well continue to do so in the
future.
When prices stop increasing for a long while, there is a gradually
increasing discontent with this view. This gradually increasing
discontent may cause stagnant or declining markets even when
fundamentals are increasing. Markets may disappoint for stretches of
years or even decades, as the post-bubble dynamics gradually play
themselves out.
As of this writing in 2014, we are going through another stock market
boom in the United States. This might quite plausibly be followed by
another major downward correction, though there is no way to be sure.
Historical evidence suggests that stock market prices might also go up a
great deal more.
We now have, after the financial crisis, new government agencies to
deal with systemic risk, such as the Financial Stability Board created by
the G-20 nations in 2009, the Financial Stability Oversight Council
created by the Dodd-Frank Act in the United States in 2010, and the
European Systemic Risk Board created by the European Parliament in
2010. Still, the problems posed by potential new bubbles and financial
crises are not automatically solved by these new agencies. The problems
are difficult. Bureaucratic organizations may find it hard to muster the
courage and conviction to deal with them. Indeed, even before the
recent crisis, every major country of the world had a central bank whose
function generally included some form of stabilization mandate, yet they

did not prevent the crisis from happening.1
When we see any bubble events happening, what should be done
about it? Watching bubbles in the stock market, in the housing market,
in the oil market, or in any speculative market is like watching an
automobile accident happening in slow motion. It sometimes seems that
there is nothing at all that can be done. Actually, there are quite a
number of things to do.
It is a serious mistake for public figures to acquiesce in the ups and
downs of market valuations, to remain silent about the implications of
valuations, and to leave all commentary to the market analysts who
specialize in the nearly impossible task of forecasting the market over
the short term and who may share interests with investment banks,
broker-dealers, home builders, or realtors.
Some think that professionals should not talk about the possible
overpricing or underpricing of speculative markets, or ever try to predict
the markets, since they cannot predict reliably. But that way lies
madness, for the efficient markets theory itself, to the extent that it has
validity, depends on the aggregate of investors responding to reasoned
opinion, and that opinion must be publicly stated if many of them are to
hear it. Indeed, it is this kind of madness that probably contributed to
the overpricing of the markets at the end of the Millennium Boom, when
efficient markets theory was at its highest tide ever.
The valuation of the markets is an important national—indeed,
international—issue. All of our plans for the future, as individuals and as
a society, hinge on our perceived wealth, and plans can be thrown into
disarray if much of that wealth evaporates tomorrow. The tendency for
speculative bubbles to grow and then contract can make for a very
uneven distribution of wealth. It may even cause many of us, at times, to
question the very viability of our capitalist and free market institutions,
as many did after the global financial crisis of 2007–9 and as was
manifested a little later in the “Occupy Wall Street” movements of 2011–
12 and their variants. It is for such reasons that we must be clear on the
prospect for such contractions and on what our individual and national
policy regarding this prospect should be.
The trouble with the exercise of moral authority by opinion leaders is

that, although views that the market is either very overpriced or very
underpriced may become commonplace among some experts, such views
are never universally held. The leaders who state such views find
themselves doing so based on personal opinion: an intuitive judgment
about the state of market fundamentals and psychology, a judgment that
is so hard to prove that they probably feel it is an act of courage to make
such a statement in the first place.
Of course public figures incur a substantial risk of embarrassment if
they go on record saying that stock market or housing market returns
might be low or negative in coming years. We have seen in this book
that although the markets appear to have substantial long-term
forecastability when they are very overpriced, or, alternatively, when
they are very underpriced, there is always considerable uncertainty
about their outlook. But an observer who remains silent about public
over-reliance on the market and overconfidence in future returns
because he or she could be wrong about the outlook is no better than a
doctor who, having diagnosed high blood pressure in a patient, says
nothing because he thinks the patient might be lucky and show no ill
effects.
Monetary Policy Should Gently Lean against
Bubbles
There have been occasions on which tightened monetary policy was
associated with the bursting of stock market bubbles. For example, on
February 14, 1929, the Federal Reserve raised the rediscount rate from
5% to 6% for the ostensible purpose of checking speculation. In the early
1930s, the Fed continued the tight monetary policy and saw the initial
stock market downturn evolve into the deepest stock market decline
ever, and a recession evolve into the most serious U.S. depression ever.
In Japan, at the peak of the Japanese stock market between May 1989
and August 1990, the Bank of Japan raised the discount rate from 2.5%
to 6%, seemingly to stabilize financial markets (which were thought to
have become overpriced because of easy monetary policy) and also to

stabilize the yen. It is hard to dismiss the possibility that this action by
the bank played some role in the stock market crash and severe
recession that followed.2
Although the precise causal links are hard to disentangle even in these
dramatic episodes, one thing we do know about interest rate policy is
that it affects the entire economy in fundamental ways, and that it is not
focused exclusively on the speculative bubble it might be used to correct.
It is whole-body irradiation, not a surgical laser. Moreover, the genesis
of a speculative bubble is a long, slow process, involving gradual
changes in people’s thinking. Small changes in interest rates will not
have any predictable effect on such thinking—big changes might, but
only because they have the potential to exert a devastating impact on
the economy as a whole.
The onset of the Great Depression of the 1930s was in fact
substantially due to monetary authorities’ trying to stabilize speculative
markets through interest rate policies, although the markets they were
focusing on most were not the stock markets but the markets for their
own currencies. Countries attempted to preserve the fixed exchange rate
system, represented by the gold standard, against attacks. The countries
that gave up earliest and abandoned their efforts to defend their
currencies were the ones to emerge from the depression the soonest.3
A small, but symbolic, increase in interest rates by monetary
authorities at a time when markets are perceived by them to be
overpriced is a useful step, if the increase is accompanied by a public
statement that it is intended to restrain speculation. But authorities
should not generally try to burst a bubble through aggressive tightening
of monetary policy.
At the time of this writing, in 2014, central bankers may find
themselves in a dilemma. After the financial crisis, economies in many
places are still weak, calling for low interest rates and more stimulus.
However, these low interest rates may continue to support excessively
high valuations in these markets. Such dilemmas will surely occur again
in the future.

Opinion Leaders Should Offer Stabilizing Opinions
A time-honored way of restraining speculation in financial markets is for
intellectual and moral leaders to try to call the attention of the public to
over-and underpricing errors when they occur. This method is purely
verbal, and does not require aggressive monetary or fiscal expansion or
contraction. This approach has been used repeatedly in the history of
our financial markets, albeit with a degree of success that is not always
impressive.
During the 1907 stock market crash, which coincided with a banking
panic in October, national financial leaders made public statements
expressing their confidence in the markets and stating that they would
risk their own wealth in them. John D. Rockefeller said, “Personally, I
have absolute faith in the future of the value of our securities and the
soundness of underlying conditions.” He and J. P. Morgan set up a
bankers’ pool to lend money to support the banks. On Black Thursday,
October 24, 1929, five of the country’s most influential bankers met at
the late J. P. Morgan’s company and issued a statement that they
believed “the foundations of the market to be sound.”4 Although they
did not announce specific plans to buy stocks, their statement was
interpreted as suggesting they would. This attempt at stabilizing the
market was not successful. The stock market crash of October 28–29,
1929, occurred just a few days later.
On the way to each of the three major market peaks identified here
that follow the founding of the Federal Reserve—that is, the peaks of
1929, 1966, and 2000—the head of the Federal Reserve System issued
warnings that the stock market was overpriced. The 1929 interest rate
increase, discussed earlier, was announced as being directed against
speculation. The 1966 peak of the U.S. stock market coincided roughly
with a statement by Federal Reserve Chair William McChesney Martin in
1965 that he found “disquieting similarities” between the economy then
and the economy during the 1920s prelude to the Great Depression. He
listed, as one of the similarities, the spreading conviction among the
public that “a new economic era” had begun.5 A statement warning
against stock market excesses by a Federal Reserve Chair was not made

again until Alan Greenspan’s “irrational exuberance” speech in
December 1996, that is, until the beginning of the next period of very
high market levels. It appears that Fed Chairs reserve public statements
about market pricing for periods of extreme mispricing. There is no way
to judge the success of such rare statements in calming the markets, and
we do not know how volatile they would have been otherwise.
There probably is a role for such actions by monetary authorities,
though it is only a minor one. If they are genuinely disinterested in their
pronouncements and are perceived as true moral leaders, their
pronouncements should have a small stabilizing effect on the market.
Institutions Should Encourage Constructive
Trading
An often-tried method for reducing market volatility has been to shut
down markets in times of rapid price change. The “circuit breakers”
adopted by the stock exchanges are examples of this approach. Under
the New York Stock Exchange’s Rule 80B, whenever the Dow drops by
7% from the previous daily close before 3:25 p.m., the market is to be
shut down for fifteen minutes; by 13% before 3:25 p.m., for fifteen
minutes again; and by 20% at any time of day, for the rest of the day.
Such market closings might have the effect of giving investors a chance
to unwind, to allow them to find time for reflection, and thereby
stemming panic. But it is not clear that these relatively short closings do
very much to restrain one-day price changes. After all, the two biggest
stock market crashes in history, the crashes of October 1929 and October
1987, occurred on Mondays, after the large price declines of the
previous trading day had been interrupted by an entire weekend.
These circuit breakers do not directly address the longer-term price
movements—movements that take place over years—that represent the
really big stock price shifts. It is plausible that by concealing a large
short-term price change from the public eye, we can head off public
overreaction to that price change, and so prevent a longer-term price
trend from developing in response to the vivid memory of a really large

one-day change. Dramatic one-day changes are attention grabbers, are
given tremendous hype by the media, and are remembered long
afterward, especially if they set some kind of record. However, we really
have very little information about the effects of a policy of closing
markets for short periods of time on longer-term price changes. What if
an especially large price change is corrected soon after by the market
itself, as was the October 1987 price change? Perhaps the public’s
experience of seeing a crash followed by a correction would have a more
stabilizing effect than the experience of having a potential crash
concealed from it by a market closing.
Another example of a deliberate restraint of trade to prevent bubbles
and their bursting are rules regarding short sales. Allowing short sales
permits those with negative opinions to express them in the market, thus
presumably helping prevent bubbles from ever starting, but such
investors also can hasten the collapse of bubbles as they try to short in a
falling market. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has long
required of exchanges that short sales be allowed only on an uptick, that
is, only if the preceding trade was on an increasing price. The uptick rule
in the U.S. was eliminated in 2007, on the eve of the financial crisis,
then partially reinstated in 2010. Other countries have had complicated
histories about the legality of short sales. We have already noted that a
number of countries imposed temporary short-sale restrictions on stocks
in 2008 and 2009 to try to dampen the falls in their stock markets.
China did not allow short sales at all, making its stock markets especially
vulnerable to incipient bubbles, until some short selling began to be
allowed in 2010.
In the interest of longer-run economic stability, it may be that the best
stabilizing influence on markets is to broaden them to allow as many
people as possible to trade as often as possible. This will broaden the
scope of risks traded on markets.
Given that speculative bubbles are heavily influenced by word-of-
mouth effects, by locally perceived values and information, and by
patriotic feeling, foreign investors are generally less likely to go along
with a bubble than are local investors, and they may even trade in a way
that would tend to offset it. For example, in 1989, when the Japanese

Nikkei index was at its peak, our questionnaire surveys found that the
average Japanese institutional investor expected a 9.5% increase in the
Nikkei in the following year, while U.S. institutional investors expected a
7.7% decrease in the Nikkei. Something about living in Japan
encouraged very different feelings about the market. Had U.S. investors,
or other foreign investors, been more prominent in Japanese markets all
along, the Japanese stock market overpricing might never have
happened.6 Thus, more generally, broadening of markets by encouraging
global participation in them should often have the effect of averaging
over these disparate expectations and producing more stable market
prices.
We should not assume that any policy that stabilizes markets from day
to day is a good policy. Sudden price changes are probably not as bad, in
terms of their impact on economic welfare, as long-term continuation of
mispricing or, even worse, as the development of a speculative bubble
that results in a worse crash in the future.
Given that speculative bubbles tend to occur, their eventual bursting
may indeed be on balance a good thing. The Asian financial crisis of
1997–98, sparked by the withdrawal of world investors from Asian
markets, may be viewed not as a crisis in the long-term sense but as a
sanity check that prevented what might have turned out to be a more
disastrous speculative bubble from ever developing. To the extent that
this crisis encouraged Asian peoples to rethink their businesses and their
economies in light of the criticism they received from abroad, the crisis
may have been helpful for the countries.
The expansion of markets can, if done correctly, add salience to
information about fundamentals, that is, encourage public attention to
long-run fundamentals and deflect attention away from short-run
speculation.
Karl Case and I have created home price indices that could be the
basis of trade in futures markets. In 2006, Standard & Poor’s, working
with David Stiff and Linda Ladner at Fiserv, Inc., improved and adopted
these as the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices; and in 2006, the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME Group) started futures markets in
these indices for ten U.S. cities and for the United States as a whole (see

John Dolan’s homepricefutures.com). These markets continue today,
now with the collaboration of CoreLogic, Inc. Trade in these markets
should allow skeptics of home price bubbles to express their views in the
markets, and this might tend to stabilize home prices, or at least to
prevent the strong momentum we see in these markets. However, as of
this date, there has been a disappointing volume of trade in these futures
markets.
Michael Brennan has proposed that new markets should be set up for
“S&P 500 Strips,” that is, a market for the future annual total dividends
of the aggregate S&P 500 firms for each year in the future up to some
distant horizon. There should thus be, for example, in the year 2005, a
market for the 2006 aggregate S&P dividends, another market for the
2007 aggregate S&P dividends, yet another market for the 2008
aggregate S&P dividends, and in fact markets for all subsequent
aggregate dividends up to the horizon, say twenty years, and then a
market for the terminal index value (say, in 2025). Brennan argued that
such markets would “provide an incentive for analysts to concentrate on
forecasting those fundamentals [future dividends] … rather than to
concentrate on simply forecasting the level of the market itself. In
addition, since the level of the market index must be consistent with the
prices of the future dividend flows, the relation between these will serve
to reveal the implicit assumptions the market is making in arriving at its
valuation. These assumptions will then be the focus of attention and
debate.”7 In recent years, a number of dividend futures have appeared
on European markets, though they are not yet influential enough to
satisfy Brennan’s objectives.
Progress in financial technology may seem at times to be slow, but in
fact history shows that major new economic institutions do eventually
develop from seemingly slow beginnings. A process of experimentation
with new institutional forms encounters many obstacles and setbacks,
but we should not interpret these as problems for the long run.
Eventually, we learn how to deal with them. The rate of experimentation
with, and research on, financial institutions has been increasing over the
decades, and advanced information technology that exploits broader
databases and reduces the cost of new financial services is being used

more extensively.
The Public Should Be Helped to Hedge Risks
To encourage proper risk management, the advice given by public
authorities should stress more effective hedging of risks. I have argued in
this book that people are ultimately highly influenced by the perceived
wisdom of experts—the “they say that …” authorities—and they will not
carry out risk management well unless experts encourage them to do so.
While financial experts today are typically extolling diversification,
they do not stress what genuine risk management really means. Many
people still think that they have done all they can if they hold stock in a
good number of companies in their own country’s stock market. They
must invest more broadly than that, and, in fact, to achieve true
diversification, they must also pay attention to other existing risks.
In addition, new institutions should be created that would make it
easier for individuals to get out of their exposure to the stock market or
the housing market. The institutions we have—such as short sales, stock
index futures, put options, as well as home price futures—are not
particularly user friendly, and most investors do not avail themselves of
these. Many investors today feel themselves locked into their holdings
because of the capital-gains-tax consequences of selling and their
inability to find other ways of reducing their exposure.
People have to be encouraged by experts to understand that true
diversification largely means offsetting the risks that they are already
locked into.8 This means investing in assets that help insure their labor
incomes, in assets that tend to rise in value when their labor income
declines, or at least that do not tend to move in the same direction. This
objective can be fulfilled today by taking positions in existing assets that
are found to correlate negatively (or at least less positively) with specific
labor incomes.9 It also means investing in assets that help insure the
equity in their homes, in assets that tend to rise in value when their
home value declines. Since labor income and home equity account for
the great bulk of most people’s wealth, offsetting the risks to these is the

critical function of risk management.
For example, in my 2008 book Subprime Solution, I proposed that there
should be an alternative mortgage type, that I called a Continuous
Workout Mortgage, offering homeowners a preplanned workout
(reduction in the principal they owe if home prices fall) that is not one-
time-only, but that adapts continuously to changing housing market
conditions.10 Further work with my colleagues Rafał M. Wojakowski, M.
Shahid Ebrahim, and Mark B. Shackleton is ironing out some of the
details of these possible new mortgages. Issuers of such mortgages can
hedge the risks they incur writing them in the home price futures
market.11
Although hedging is a time-honored practice in business risk
management, it is still today foreign to most people’s thinking. Few
nonprofessionals could even define the term today. Discussion of how
investment returns correlate with incomes or with home prices is almost
totally absent from public discourse on investments.
It is difficult to change this mindset, since the public has so much
invested in the conventional wisdom today and in the notion that one
can amass great wealth through stock market or real estate investments.
The personal investment media typically feature the opinions of celebrity
sources who are apparently already rich and who subtly suggest that
their advice might make one rich too. It would be inconsistent with this
fantasy to start talking about the mundane task of defending the value of
the assets one already has. Those in the media and the investment
community often do not want to risk disturbing the get-rich fantasy,
which they have learned to exploit to their own advantage. But attitudes
can be changed if public opinion leaders take it upon themselves to
stress the changes in thinking that must be made. Once it becomes a
“they say that …” item, people will routinely take proper steps to hedge
their existing wealth, much as they routinely buy homeowners insurance
today.
Policy Addressing Saving and Retirement Planning

Should Be Realistic about Bubbles
There has been an unfortunate tendency for financial advisers to assume
that expected returns in major asset classes are constant through time, in
accordance with simple efficient markets models, and hence to issue no
warnings to those who make saving and retirement plans at times of
overvalued markets.
Over much of the course of the Millennium Boom of 1982–2000 and
the Ownership-Society Boom from 2003 to 2007, the personal saving
rate in the United States declined as the stock market rose, and as, after
1997, the housing market rose, giving people the spurious impression
that they did not need to save. The personal saving rate was 12.0% of
income at the bottom of the U.S. stock market in July 1982. By
November 1996, when the housing boom first showed signs of picking
up, it had fallen to 5.8% of income. At the top of the stock market before
the financial crisis (near the top of the housing market as well), October
2007, it had fallen to 2.9% of income. Of course, when both stock and
housing prices fell sharply, people increased their saving rate sharply,
even though, with lower incomes and higher unemployment, it was
harder to save. The personal saving rate rose back up to 8.1% by the
worst of the financial crisis, May 2009.12
Moreover, those in charge of defined benefit pension plans
underfunded their plans, thinking that fabulous stock market returns on
their investments would provide generously for the retirees they would
be responsible for in the future. During the complacency of a boom, it is
easy to get away with underfunding pension plans.
We saw the painful consequences of this play out in the years after the
bursting of the Millennium Bubble in 2000 and after the bursting of the
Ownership-Society Bubble in 2007. Defined benefit pension funds had
been grossly underfunded with the blithe assumption that financial
markets would do as well as expected despite a very high price-earnings
ratio (especially as measured by the CAPE). At a time of complacency
during the booms, state and local politicians did not want to address the
need to raise taxes to better fund their pension plans. With this
complacency, labor unions as well did not bargain aggressively for better

funding. The assumption was that further stock market price increases
would provide generously for the retiring Baby Boomers, so provisions to
fund them well were not needed. The result was disastrous, as state and
local governments, facing the need to bolster their retirement funds, cut
back on teachers and police officers, and contributed to the depth of the
recession by increasing their saving at the worst possible time.
The U.S. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), which had
been created by an act of Congress in 1974 to accumulate a trust fund to
insure workers with private pension plans against losing their pension
income when their plan sponsors run out of money, was looking at
imminent failure after the Ownership-Society Boom ended, until it was
at least temporarily saved by the New-Normal Boom of 2009–2014. But
their problems remain unsolved unless the stock market continues to
boom. The PBGC, as of its fiscal 2013 Projections Report issued in 2014,
was using a Pension Insurance Modeling System (PIMS) with an assumed
geometric average rate of return for pension plans of 6.1%, which
appears unrealistically high, given the high pricing in the stock market
and low bond yields. Even with this optimistic PIMS assumption, in their
own 2013 report, the PGBC warned of a likely bankruptcy of their
support for multi-employer plans at current premium levels by 2019,
and with a 90% probability by 2025.13
At the time of this writing, in 2014, with very high stock market
valuations and rising real estate valuations, we run the risk of repeating
these mistakes again. The U.S. personal saving rate, benefiting from
stimulus that is trying to boost it to stimulate the economy, is, at 4.8%
with the latest data, still low. It will have to be increased once the
economy recovers more fully. Even today, the U.S. government can
contribute indirectly to saving by launching public infrastructure
investment stimulus programs, which would be very timely, as it can
borrow at virtually zero real interest rates to fund them.
Currently (2014), most people are not saving enough for their future,
and pension funds are likely not building up enough new funds. The
lesson for individual investors at this point of time from very high
valuation of the stock market is not to pull investments massively out of
the market in favor of bonds, for bond yields are also very low. Rather,

the lesson for individuals is to not be lulled into more complacency by
past investment successes, to remember that the level of returns we have
seen in the past few years is unlikely to continue. The lesson for
governments is to promote economic stimulus and infrastructure
investments in public goods, taking advantage of their ability to borrow
at low rates to invest in the future.
Promoting Good Policy toward Speculative
Volatility
The problems posed for policy makers by the tendency for speculative
markets to show occasional bubbles are deep ones. They will have to
take full account of our evolving understanding of the nature of these
bubbles when formulating measures to deal with the problems these
bubbles cause. Unfortunately, the nature of the bubbles is sufficiently
complex and changeable that experts can never expect to prove the
particular role of any given policy in bringing about our objective of
long-term economic welfare.
Policies that interfere with markets by shutting them down or limiting
them, although under some very specific circumstances apparently
useful, probably should not be high on our list of solutions to the
problems caused by speculative bubbles. Speculative markets perform
critical resource-allocation functions (a point I have taken for granted
and have not focused on in this book), and any interference with
markets to tame bubbles interferes with these functions as well.
Ultimately, in a free society, the government cannot protect people
from all the consequences of their own errors. The government cannot
protect people completely without denying them the possibility of
achieving their own fulfillment. And, the government cannot completely
protect society from the effects of waves of irrational exuberance or
irrational pessimism—emotional reactions that are themselves part of
the human condition.
Policies to deal with speculative volatility are a little like policies to
deal with political instability. We worry that a political party appealing

to baser instincts or rash judgments will gain control. But we do not deal
with this risk by shutting down certain political parties in times of unrest
or by taxing their activities. Instead, we rely on the complete freedom of
all political parties to express themselves, and we expect that common
sense will ultimately prevail among voters. This good outcome is
achieved by designing, and continually improving, rules for campaigns
and elections.
By analogy, most of the thrust of our national policies to deal with
speculative bubbles should take the form of facilitating more free trade,
as well as greater opportunities for people to take positions in more and
freer markets. A good outcome can be achieved by designing better
forms of social insurance and creating better financial institutions to
allow the real risks to be managed more effectively. The most important
thing to keep in mind whenever we experience tumult in the markets is
that we should not let it distract us from such important tasks.14

Appendix
Nobel Prize Lecture: Speculative Asset Prices
I will start this lecture with some general thoughts on
the determinants of long-term asset prices, such as stock prices or home
prices: what, ultimately, drives these prices to change as they do from
time to time, and how can we interpret these changes? I will consider
the discourse in the profession about the role of rationality in the
formation of these prices and the growing trend toward behavioral
finance and, more broadly, behavioral economics, the increasing
acceptance of the importance of alternative psychological, sociological,
and epidemiological factors as affecting prices. I will focus on the
statistical methods that allow us to learn about the sources of price
volatility in the stock market and the housing market, and evidence that
has led to the behavioral finance revolution in financial thought in
recent decades.
The broader purpose here is to appreciate the promise of financial
technology. There is a great deal of popular skepticism about financial
institutions afoot these days, after the financial and economic crisis that
has dragged on ever since the severest days in 2008. I want to consider
the possibilities for the future of finance in general terms, rather than
focusing on current stopgap measures to deal opportunistically with
symptoms of our current economic crisis. The talk about the rationality
of markets is a precursor to this talk of financial technology, for it

underpins our notions of the possibilities that new technology offers.
I will conclude that the markets have already been “human-factors-
engineered” to function remarkably well, and that as we improve our
understanding of the kind of psychology that leads to bubbles and
related problems, we can further innovate to improve the functioning of
these markets.
Price Volatility, Rational Expectations, and
Bubbles
The history of thought in financial markets has shown a surprising lack
of consensus about a very fundamental question: what ultimately causes
all those fluctuations in the price of speculative assets like corporate
stocks, commodities, or real estate? One might think that so basic a
question would long ago have been confidently answered. But the
answer to this question is not so easily found.1
At the same time, there has been an equally widespread acceptance in
other quarters of the idea that markets are substantially driven by
psychology. Indeed, since 1991 Richard Thaler and I have been directors
of the National Bureau of Economic Research program in behavioral
economics, which has featured hundreds of papers that seem mostly at
odds with a general sense of rationality in the markets.2
The term “speculative bubble” is often used and applied carelessly.
The word “bubble” first became popular at the time of the Mississippi
Bubble in European stock markets that came to an end in 1720, a time
often mentioned as one of craziness, but whether that period is best
described as one of wild irrationality still remains controversial; see
Garber (2000) and Goetzmann et al. (2013). I would say that a
speculative bubble is a peculiar kind of fad or social epidemic that is
regularly seen in speculative markets: not a wild orgy of delusions but a
natural consequence of the principles of social psychology coupled with
imperfect news media and information channels. In the second edition of
my book Irrational Exuberance I offered a definition of “bubble” that I
thought represents the term’s best use:

A situation in which news of price increases spurs investor
enthusiasm, which spreads by psychological contagion from person
to person, in the process amplifying stories that might justify the
price increases and bringing in a larger and larger class of investors,
who, despite doubts about the real value of an investment, are
drawn to it partly through envy of others’ successes and partly
through a gambler’s excitement.
At the center of my definition are the epidemic spread, the emotions of
investors, and the nature of the news and information media. Bubbles
are not, to my mind, about the craziness of investors. They are rather
about how investors are buffeted en masse from one superficially
plausible theory about conventional valuation to another. One thinks of
how a good debater can take either side of many disputes and, if the
debater on the other side has weak skills, can substantially convince the
audience of either side. College debate teams demonstrate this
phenomenon regularly, and they do it by suppressing certain facts and
amplifying and embellishing others. In the case of bubbles, the sides are
changed from time to time by the feedback of price changes, with the
proliferation, caused by price increases, of reminders of basic facts that a
debater might use to defend the bubble. The news media are even better
at presenting cases than are typical college debaters.
Investing ideas can spread like epidemics. Economists traditionally
have not shown much interest in epidemiology, sociology, social
psychology, or communications and journalism, and it takes some effort
for them to consider such alien academic traditions.
There is a troublesome split between efficient markets enthusiasts
(who believe that market prices accurately incorporate all public
information, and so doubt that bubbles even exist) and those who
believe in behavioral finance (who tend to believe that bubbles and
other such contradictions to efficient markets can be understood only
with reference to other social sciences, such as psychology). I suspect
that some of the apparent split is illusory, deriving from the problem
that there is no widely accepted definition of the term “bubble.” The
metaphor might suggest that speculative bubbles always burst suddenly

and irrevocably, as soap bubbles seem to do, without exception. That
would be silly, for history does not generally support the catastrophic
burst notion. Though the abrupt ends of stock market booms in 1929,
2000, and 2007 might seem consonant with such a metaphor, these
booms were reflated again before long (1933–37, 2003–7, and 2009–
present, respectively).
I think that the eventuality of a sudden irrevocable burst is not
essential to the general term “speculative bubble” as the phrase is
appropriately used. The metaphor may be misleading: it suggests more
drama than there in fact is, imparting a sense of uniqueness to current
events, which might help explain the popularity of the term with news
reporters vying for the attention of readers. Just as reporters like to stir
people up by reporting that an index has hit another record high
(disregarding the fact that record highs occur quite often, especially
since reporters hardly ever correct for inflation), so too they like to
suggest the possibility of a collapse in the offing that will be
remembered many years later.
I sometimes wish we had a different metaphor. One might consider
substituting the term “wind trade” (Dutch Windhandel), a term that was
used during the tulip mania, the famous boom and bust in tulip prices in
the early 1600s. The reference to trading in mere air seems more apt
than the evocation of a fragile bubble.
Curiously, in his Nobel Lecture in Medicine during the 2013 Nobel
Week in Stockholm, James E. Rothman (2013) invoked soap bubbles too,
for their analogy to the cell vesicles that were the focus of his Nobel
Prize research. He showed a movie of two soap bubbles being pressed
together, and, surprisingly to most of us, they did not burst but merged
into a single larger bubble. That’s analogous to what cell vesicles can do,
he said. It led me to wonder whether we could say that the stock market
bubble and the housing bubble of the early 2000s somehow merged into
a larger bubble that burst around 2008, touching off widespread
financial crisis. Imaginative thinking is fun, and maybe even
inspirational, but we cannot let the bubble metaphor, or any simple
analogy, guide our models beyond the very beginnings, for any
metaphor will break down if we carry it to its absurd conclusions.

Efficient Markets Theory
From the very beginning, in his 1964 PhD dissertation, written under the
supervision of Merton Miller and Harry Roberts, Eugene Fama found
that stock prices are not very forecastable. He found then that the
average correlation coefficient between successive days’ log price
changes over the thirty Dow Jones Industrial Average stocks between
1957 and 1962 was only 0.03, which he described as “probably
unimportant for both the statistician and the investor.”3 The same year
saw the appearance of Paul Cootner’s The Random Character of Stock
Market Prices, which reached similar conclusions about market
efficiency.
The “efficient markets theory,” widely attributed to Fama (1970) and
the academic work that he stimulated, maintains that prices have a
rational basis in terms of fundamentals like the optimal forecast of
earnings, or assessments of the standard deviation of risk factors facing
corporations. As the theory went, because they are rationally
determined, they are changed from day to day primarily by genuine
news, which is by its very nature essentially unforecastable. Fama’s work
propelled an efficient markets revolution in finance. I was part of the
movement then, less than a decade later, with my PhD dissertation
(1972) about the efficiency of the long-term bond market.
Alternative Views and Forecastability of Returns
These conclusions came against a backdrop of public interest at the time
in speculative bubbles encouraged by the strong bull market in the
United States: real stock prices more than quadrupled in the sixteen
years from 1948 to 1964. John Kenneth Galbraith’s best-selling 1954
book The Great Crash: 1929 vividly described the follies of the boom of
the 1920s and subsequent collapse, concluding that “the chances for a
recurrence of a speculative orgy are rather good.”4
His book was followed up by another popular work, Charles Poor
Kindleberger’s Manias, Panics and Crashes (1978), which used a similar

method, providing an account of human events laced with descriptions
of human foolishness. Neither author, writing many years before the
behavioral finance revolution, made much use of academic research in
psychology or sociology, and so their work came across to some as
insubstantial. While both Galbraith and Kindleberger were respected
academics, and the stories in their books were often compelling, many
felt that their books did not have the scientific credibility of the careful
data analysis that was widely taken to support market efficiency—
though they were indeed provocative.
Ultimately, reconciling the apparently conflicting views is a matter of
constructing the right statistical tests. It turns out that the apparently
impressive evidence for market efficiency was not unimpeachable.
Expected Present Value Models and Excess
Volatility
The simplest version of the efficient markets model—which maintains
that stock price movements can be interpreted entirely as reflecting
information about future payouts of dividends, and hence that there is
never a good or a bad time to enter the market—has, ever since the
efficient markets revolution began, maintained a powerful hold on
scholarly imaginations as a worthy approximation to more complex
models. This form sets price equal to the expectation, conditional on
publicly available information at the time of the present value, of future
dividends, discounted at a constant rate through time:
One way to test this efficient markets model is to regress the return
between t and t + 1, t = 1, …, n onto information variables known at
time t, It, t = 1, …, n. Often, these tests can be described approximately
as tests of the “random walk hypothesis,” that price changes are purely
random and unforecastable. One accepts the efficient markets model if

the coefficients of the information variables used to forecast future
returns or price changes are not significantly different from zero.
Moreover, even if the model is rejected, if the predicted proportion of
variance in returns is small, one concludes that the model is a good
approximation to reality.
These tests, and various analogues of them, are the kinds of tests of
market efficiency that abounded in the literature. But the power of such
tests of perpetual unforecastability of returns against an alternative that
represents the world as driven entirely by temporary fads and fashions—
with no fundamental reason for any change in prices—can be very low,
since plausible alternatives of this kind also imply that only a tiny
fraction of month-to-month returns is forecastable (Shiller 1984, 1989;
Summers 1986).
Many tests of market efficiency use daily observations of prices, and
because the observations come so frequently, there may be thousands of
observations, even if the span of the data is only a few decades. There is
a tendency for many people to think that hundreds of observations must
be a lot of data, but it is not necessarily a lot of data from the standpoint
of distinguishing an efficient markets model from a relevant alternative.
We might, for example, be trying to determine whether some price
time series data is a random walk as against the alternative of a
continuous-time first-order autoregressive process.5 In the former,
whether prices are too high or too low has no ability to predict future
changes. In the latter, when prices are too high relative to the mean,
they should tend eventually to fall (a sort of bursting of the bubble,
though not a sudden catastrophic one). But tests may have very little
power to distinguish the two models, if the autoregressive parameter is
close enough to one, even with a large number of observations, even
with day-to-day or minute-to-minute observations. With a fixed span of
data, increasing the frequency of observation, even to the limit of
continuous observation, does not bring power to one (Shiller and Perron
1985, Phillips and Perron 1988).
The Scientific Background for the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economics
(Economic Sciences Prize Committee of the Royal Swedish Academy of
Sciences 2013) emphasized the results of this year’s laureates as

confirming that there is better forecastability (in terms of R-squared) of
speculative asset returns for longer time horizons. This accords with
long-standing advice that investors should be patient, that they cannot
expect to see solid returns over short time intervals. But this is just the
opposite of what one would expect in weather forecasting, where experts
can forecast tomorrow’s temperature fairly well but certainly cannot
forecast accurately a year into the future.
It is easy to see why short-term forecastability of price changes in
investable assets should in some sense be unlikely: if investment returns
were substantially forecastable from day to day, it would be too easy to
get rich in a year or so by trading on these forecasts, and we know it
cannot be easy to make a lot of money trading. This notion was
formalized in a continuous-time framework by Sims (1984), who defined
“instantaneous unpredictability” of a speculative asset price by the
requirement that the R-squared of the prediction from time t to time t +
s goes to zero as s goes to zero. He showed under certain regularity
conditions that if prices are not instantaneously unpredictable, then
simple rapid-trading schemes could achieve unbounded profits, which of
course cannot match reality.
Taking into account these primal reasons to doubt that returns are
forecastable over short horizons, we cannot find the low R-squared in
many tests of short-run market efficiency either surprising or interesting.
The tests tell us only the obvious, and do not tell us about the rationality
of markets beyond the fact that people are not missing easy
opportunities to get rich very fast.
I proposed that an alternative class of tests, based on the estimated
volatility of returns—tests for “excess volatility”—would have more
power against the important alternatives to efficient markets theory: first
for the bond market, rejecting the expectations model of the term
structure of interest rates with U.S. and UK data (Shiller 1979), and then
rejecting the simplest efficient markets model for the U.S. stock market
(Shiller 1981a).6 Independent work by Kenneth Singleton (1980) used a
variance bounds test to reject the expectations model of the term
structure of interest rates with U.S. data, and Stephen LeRoy and Richard
Porter (1981) rejected the simple efficient markets theory for the U.S.

stock market. Variance bounds tests were also used to test consumption-
discount-based efficient markets models (Shiller 1982, Hansen and
Jagannathan 1991). Efficient markets models also imply bounds on the
covariance between asset prices (Beltratti and Shiller 1993).
These tests may be more powerful than regression tests of the basic
efficient markets notions against important alternatives. It is true that
under the conventional assumptions of the regression model, the usual t-
test for the coefficient of a forecasting variable in a regression with
excess return as the dependent variable has well-known optimality
properties.7 But testing market efficiency by regressing excess returns on
information variables makes no use of the terminal condition that
requires that all movements in prices need to be justified by information
about subsequent movements in fundamentals. I showed (1981b) that if
we broaden the maintained hypothesis for this condition, then a
regression test is not optimal. In fact, under certain extreme assumptions
about data alignment, a simple variance ratio test, instead of a
regression test, may be uniformly most powerful.8
Another kind of test of market efficiency is the event study, which is
an analysis of the effects of a specified event (such as a stock split) on
the price of an asset in the days before and after the event, taking many
different examples of a kind of event and showing the average price
performance. It is analogous to a test of the significance of coefficients in
a regression of a panel of time series of daily returns of many stocks on a
dummy variable representing the day of a certain kind of event, and on
dummies representing the days after the event became public. The test
of market efficiency is a test for significance of the coefficients of the
dummies corresponding to days after the event. The first event study in
the academic literature has been taken to be Dolley (1933), but, as the
Scientific Background for the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economics notes, it
was not until the impressive 1969 paper by Eugene Fama, Lawrence
Fisher, Michael Jensen, and Richard Roll that it was demonstrated that,
conditioning on an event, one tends to see a lack of any consistent and
important further price response after the event is public knowledge.
Dolley, in his 1933 article, was immersed in all the details of stock splits
and of course did not mention efficient markets theory. Fama, Fisher,

Jensen, and Roll instead showed evidence for this newly developed and
expanded theory, evidence that could be seen visually impressively in a
plot of stock returns before and after the event.
But, again, the efficient markets tests, which are essentially the same
as regression tests, do not have the power to tell us whether there are
also bubbles affecting prices, or even whether the major component of
stock price movements comes from bubbles.
The variance bounds test rejections of market efficiency could not be
dismissed as correct but unimportant, as were the inefficiencies that the
efficient markets literature had discovered, for they suggested that most
of the variability of the aggregate stock market was not explainable as
related to information about future fundamentals.
Critics of the variance bounds tests became abundant, and I
endeavored at first to answer some of them, responding to Marsh and
Merton (1986) and Kleidon (1986) (Shiller 1986, 1988). But the volume
of the literature expanded beyond my abilities to respond, and
significantly changed its direction as well. Sometimes the disagreements
turned abstract and seemed to raise deep issues about epistemology or
the philosophy of logic.9 I must leave the outcome of this debate to a
broader professional consensus.
I collected my papers on the subject and summarized the literatures in
my book Market Volatility (1989), at which point I largely abandoned my
econometric work on excess volatility. Others continued this line of
work, and much more has happened since.
Visual Portrayals of Excess Volatility and of the Stock
Market as Forecaster
Just as event studies visually convinced many readers of some merits of
efficient markets theory by presenting event study plots, showing stock
prices before and after an event, so too other simple plots seem to have
been convincing, in a different way, that stock markets are really not so
efficient.
Figure A.1 is an updated version of one that I showed in my 1981a

paper, a third of a century ago, of the real level of the stock market since
1871, as well as the behavior through time of the actual present value of
future real dividends discounted at a constant rate. The real stock price
series is one published by Standard & Poor’s, called the S&P Composite
(after 1957 the S&P 500), deflated by the U.S. Consumer Price Index.
The earlier version of this plot turned out to be the centerpiece of that
paper, judging from the attention that it drew. Sometimes a simple plot
seems to be more disturbing than a formal analysis. Looking at the data
is like seeing a photojournalist’s account of a historical event rather than
reading a chronology: it is more immediate and invites intuitive
comparisons.
To produce this figure, the present value of dividends for each date
1871–2013 was computed from the actual subsequent real dividends
using a constant real discount rate r = 7.6% per year, equal to the
historical average real return on the market since 1871. For this figure, I
was able to make use of the actual dividends, as published by Standard
& Poor’s since 1926, and extended back to 1871 by Alfred Cowles (1939)
as I described in my book (1989). We did not know dividends after 1979
when I published the original version of this figure, and at this writing
we do not know dividends after 2013.
For this lecture, in 2013, as I did in 1981, I made some simple
assumptions about the as-yet-unseen future dividends, beyond 2013.
This time I employed a conventional dividend discount model, the
Gordon Model, using the most recent 2013 S&P 500 real dividend as a
base for forecasts of dividends after 2013, showing two alternative
assumptions about dividends after 2013. In one, I assumed that real
dividends will grow forever from the last observed dividend, in 2013, at
the same average growth rate as over the most recent ten years, 5.1%
per year, which gives a 2013 value of 1,292 for P*. In another, the
calculations are the same, but the growth rate of dividends after 2013 is
taken as the geometric average growth rate over the last thirty years,
2.5% a year. This gives a 2013 value of 669 for P*. Both of these may be
contrasted with real market values of the S&P 500 index over the year
2013 ranging from 1,494 to 1,802.10

Figure A.1
Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index with Two Present Values with
Constant Discount Rate of Subsequent Real Dividends Accruing to the
Index, 1871–2013
The two present values differ in their assumption about dividend growth
after 2013.
Should we take the latest ten years’ real dividend growth as a guide to
the future, rather than the last thirty years or some other interval? The
ten-year data are more recent, but ten years is a short time historically
speaking, and the years 2003 to 2013 were unusual, starting with the
aftermath of the 2001 recession, and encompassing the biggest financial
crisis, and government stimulus packages, since the Great Depression.
Reasonable people will certainly find reasons to differ. Worse than that,
there is no objective way to forecast dividends out for decades, which is
why I showed both here, as a crude indication of uncertainty today
about future dividends, and why it is hard to imagine that the market
somehow “knows” the correct optimal forecast.
The point of showing the two different P* series is that, clearly, there
is substantial uncertainty about the present value of dividends after
2013, but there is not so much variability from year to year, as seen
today, about the present value of subsequent dividends for earlier years.

For earlier years, say before 1980, 2013 is so far in the future, and is
discounted so heavily, that over a wide range of possible 2013 dividend
values there is not much difference in P*
The striking fact is that by either assumption the present value of
dividends (on the log scale used in the figure) looks pretty much like a
steady exponential growth line, while the stock market oscillates a great
deal around it. I asked this question in 1981: If, as efficient markets
theory asserts, the actual price is the optimal forecast as of any date of
the present value as of that date, why is the stock market so volatile?
Different people have different reactions to this figure, but a common
response is that the efficient markets model 
 looks implausible
here. Why is price jumping around so much if the value it is tracking is
just such a simple trend? It is not that Pt should always look smoother
through time than 
, for it is consistent with the model that there can
be sudden shifts in price when there is important new information about
subtle changes in trend. But it would seem that important new
information should emerge only rarely, given the smooth nature of
dividends.
To see the problem for efficient markets here, imagine that the series
labeled 
 is not price but air temperature, and that Pt is a
meteorologist’s forecast of the temperature for that day t. We might be
inclined to label this weather forecaster as insane. Even though in the
stock market there isn’t immediate feedback to forecasters about forecast
errors, still they should avoid adjusting forecasts up and down
frequently, unless there is actual new information, and clearly there
wasn’t, not information about something that actually happened in stock
market history.
One very basic thing that this figure reveals is that the model that
people essentially know the future, a model that is often suggested as an
approximation, is wildly wrong in all periods. Sometimes people have
suggested that the low stock prices seen in the Great Depression of the
1930s were justified because people rationally saw the damage to future
real dividends caused by the Depression. But, in fact, at the worst of the
stock market depression, in 1932, subsequent dividends just weren’t low

enough for long enough to depress P*1932 by much at all. Nothing has
ever deflected real dividends for very long from a long-run growth trend
of a couple percent a year.
In my original paper (1981a), I detrended the data—as is shown in a
reproduction of that plot in the Scientific Background document, posted
on the Nobel Foundation website—thinking that it is reasonable to
assume that people know the trend. Under that assumption, the efficient
markets model implies that the variance around trend should be less for
P than for P*, which is plainly not the case in Figure A.1. But many
critics of my paper reacted negatively to the assumption that the trend is
essentially known.
Generally, these criticisms held that there was always some reason to
think that the path of dividends might eventually depart markedly from
its historical growth path, that investors were evaluating constant new
information about that possibility, and that they were rational to do so
even if the dividend growth path never deviated far for long from a
trend. This assumes that all the fluctuations result from genuine
information about those “black swan” outlier events that might have
happened during a period of more than a century but just didn’t happen.
Some of the criticism had to do with the possibility that the dividend
series might have a unit root, and so the apparent smooth trend was just
a chance outcome, one that might not be continued into the future.11
The uncertainty about the present value of dividends after 2013 as
shown in Figure A.1 does highlight an important problem. At every point
in history there must have been some such uncertainty about future
dividends. There are always factors or prominent theories that creative
minds can invoke that would suggest a higher or lower rate of growth of
dividends in the future.
For example, can we tell an efficient markets story about why the
stock market was so low in the Great Depression? The present value of
actual future dividends was not particularly low in the Depression, but
maybe people thought that they would be low, given the extant theories
of the time. Or maybe they thought that the government would
eventually nationalize the stock market without compensation. One
might say that it would not be manifestly irrational, not crazy, to believe

such stories. But why, then, do these stories come and go through time,
causing the fluctuations in the market?
Variations on the Present Value Model
Of course, as we have noted, the basic notion of efficient markets does
not necessarily require that discount rates be constant or that returns not
be forecastable. A more general form of efficient markets would allow
discount rates to depend on the time-varying one-period rate of interest:
Or, in a model proposed by LeRoy (1973) and Lucas (1978) and
developed by Grossman and Shiller (1981) and Hansen and Singleton
(1983), it could depend on consumption, using the marginal rate of
substitution between consumption in successive periods as a discount
rate:
where Mt is the marginal rate of substitution in consumption between t
and t + 1 which is (assuming constant relative risk aversion A),
ρ(Ct/Ct+1)A and Ct is real per capita consumption at time t.
Figure A.2 shows the actual stock price in the United States and the
perfect foresight stock price corresponding to each of the three
measures.12 One again, the figure reveals that there is little
correspondence between any of these measures of ex post rational price
and actual stock price. People did not behave, in setting stock prices, as
if they knew the future of these variables and reacted rationally to this
knowledge. Moreover, if we assume that they did not actually have
knowledge of the future, then one is led to wonder why the actual stock
prices varied through time as much as, or more than, the perfect
foresight prices did.

There are continuing attempts to modify the consumption-based
model to improve its fit—see Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Lars
Peter Hansen, in his Nobel Lecture (2013)—but not yet any model that
could be set alongside Figure A.2 here as an inspiring vindication of
efficient markets theory.
John Campbell and John Ammer (1993) did a variation decomposition
(along lines developed in Campbell 1991) of unexpected excess returns
using time series methods and U.S. postwar data. The decomposition is
based on the log linearization of the present value relation used in
Campbell and Shiller (1988b). The time-t + 1 innovation Et + 1 − Et in
the excess return over the risk-free rate et + 1 can be shown, with a
terminal stationarity condition, as a tautology, to be the sum of three
innovations:
Figure A.2
Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index along with Three Present Values
of Subsequent Real Dividends Accruing to the Index, 1871–2013
All three present values assume real dividend growth 2003–13 will
continue forever after 2013. The three present values differ from each
other only in the assumed time series of discount rates.

Using this decomposition and a vector-autoregressive model in
difference form, with post–World War II stock market returns, Campbell
and Ammer found that excess returns innovations have a standard
deviation that is two or three times greater than the standard deviation
of innovations in future dividend growth. Aggregate stock market
fluctuations have therefore been dominated by fluctuations in predicted
future returns, not by news about future dividends paid to investors.13
Interpretations of Return Predictability
Sociologists offer a possible interpretation of these results, an
interpretation reflecting a body of thought that goes back more than a
hundred years. The market fluctuates as the sweep of history produces
different mindsets at different points of time, different zeitgeists. Émile
Durkheim (1893) spoke of the “collective consciousness” that represents
the shared beliefs, attitudes, and moral judgments characterizing a
historical period. Maurice Halbwachs (1925) spoke of the “collective
memory,” the set of facts that are widely remembered at any point of
time but that are forgotten eventually if word of mouth and active news
media do not perpetuate their memory. News media tend to slant their
stories toward ideas of current interest, rather than useful facts that
readers no longer find interesting.14 Surely simple forgetting of past
experiences affects popular judgments. How many people today could
give any account of the financial panic of 1907, or of the housing boom
of the late 1940s? One could stop anyone on the street in those times
and get a ready account; now almost everyone would betray blank
ignorance. When a bubble is building, the suppression of some facts and
embellishment of others (as in the strategy of victorious college
debaters) occurs naturally through the decay of collective memory, when
media and popular talk are no longer reinforcing memories of them, and

the amplification of other facts through the stories generated by market
events.
It is hardly plausible that speculative prices make effective use of all
information about probabilities of future dividends. It is far more
plausible that the aggregate stock market price changes reflect
inconstant perceptions: changes to which Keynes referred with the term
“animal spirits,” changes that infect the thinking even of most of the so-
called smart money in the market. Keynes anticipated this in his 1921
Treatise on Probability, which asserted that probabilities are not precisely
measurable in the sense that decision theory supposes, that there are
always ambiguities. He said that because of these fundamental
ambiguities, there is, in financial transactions, inevitably an “element of
caprice.”15 Critical decisions are made on impulse rather than
calculation. One may have done calculations of probabilities, but one
usually does not fully believe one’s own calculations and proceeds on gut
feeling.
In an early behavioral finance paper of mine, “Stock Prices and Social
Dynamics” (1984), I proposed yet another expected present value model
for consideration as a model of stock prices, though it is one that we
cannot plot back to 1871 as we did with the three expected present
models shown and plotted above, because it depends on a time-varying
factor that is not objectively quantifiable, at least for now. I have been
attempting to measure a stock market factor like this with survey
techniques, of individual and institutional investors, but only since 1989.
There are other surveys of investor sentiment as well, but the results are
hardly definitive. My surveys of individual and institutional investors
starting in 1989,16 as well as my surveys with Karl E. Case of
homebuyers starting in 1988,17 are being continued by the Yale School
of Management.
Thirty years ago I called this as-yet-unmeasured factor the “demand
for stocks by ordinary investors,” but today let us call it animal spirits,
At. At represents the demand for stocks per outstanding share at time t
on the part of everyone who is not smart money, people not really
paying attention, not systematic, not engaged in research, buffeted by
casually encountered information. They are certainly the majority of

investors, and suppose, to take this model to an extreme, that their
opinions reflect nothing more than changing fashions and fads, idle talk,
and overreaction to irrelevant news stories. At is likely to be sluggish
through time (usually people don’t all change their naive opinions en
masse on a dime).
The core idea here was that there are also smart money investors, who
are not subject to illusion but have to be wary of investing in the stock
market. They must be wary not only because future dividends are not
known with certainty, but also because the ordinary investors are
somewhat unpredictable, and their erratic behavior could cause price
changes that might produce losses in the market for the smart money if
they invest too much in it. For these smart money investors, information
is constantly coming in about the likely future values of At, and, as with
all genuinely new information, this new information is uncorrelated and
unpredictable through time. I supposed that the demand per share for
stocks by the smart money equals their rationally expected excess return
on the stock market over and above an alternative riskless return r,
which I took for simplicity’s sake to be constant through time, the
difference divided by a constant risk factor φ. The two demands, the
demand of the ordinary investors plus the demand of the smart money,
must add up to one for the markets to clear. Solving the resulting
rational expectations model forward leaves us with our fourth present
value model:18
If φ = 0, smart money dominates; this collapses to equation (1)
above. As φ goes to infinity, smart money drops out, it collapses to Pt =
At, and ordinary investors completely determine the price. It is the
intermediate case that is interesting. In this intermediate case, price may
have low predictability from day to day or month to month, consistent
with efficient markets theory, even if animal spirits dominate the broad
movements in Pt. Long slow swings in At may produce long slow swings
in stock prices (perhaps the so-called multiyear “bull” and “bear”

markets) even though day-to-day movements in stock prices are nearly
uncorrelated through time. The price is responding to news about animal
spirits, not just news about future dividends. Event study tests, described
above, testing market reaction over time to news about, and
subsequently the reality of, such events as stock splits, may come out as
beautifully supporting efficient markets, for much of the effect of the
event on both dividends and animal spirits will be incorporated into
price as soon as the event becomes news to the smart money, not when
the event actually happens.
There is another important argument widely used for efficient
markets, the argument that a model like (4) with an intermediate φ
cannot represent a stable equilibrium because the smart money would
get richer and richer and eventually take over the market, and φ would
go to zero. In fact this will not generally happen, for there is a natural
recycling of investor abilities: the smart money people usually do not
start out with a lot of money, and it takes them many years to acquire
enough wealth to influence the market; meanwhile they get old and
retire, or they rationally lose interest in doing the work to pursue their
advantage after they have acquired sufficient wealth to live comfortably
on. The market will be efficient enough that advantages to beating the
market are sufficiently small, uncertain, and slow to repay one’s efforts
that most smart people will devote their time to more personally
meaningful things, like managing a company, getting a PhD in finance,
or some other more enjoyable activity, leaving the market substantially
to ordinary investors. Genuinely smart money investors cannot in their
normal life cycle amass enough success experience to prove to ordinary
investors that they can manage their money effectively: it takes too
many years and there is too much fundamental uncertainty for them to
be able to do that assuredly, and by the time they prove themselves, they
may have lost the will or ability to continue (Shiller 1984, Shleifer and
Vishny 1997).
Individual Stocks

These conclusions about the aggregate stock market, however, do not
carry over fully to individual stocks. Paul Samuelson has asserted that
the market is
micro efficient but macro inefficient. That is, individual stock price
variations are dominated by actual new information about
subsequent dividends, but aggregate stock market variations are
dominated by bubbles.19
Tuomo Vuolteenaho (2002), using methodology analogous to that of
Campbell and Ammer, concluded that for individual stocks the variance
of expected return news is approximately one-half of the variance of
cash-flow news. For market-adjusted individual stock log returns (log
return minus cross-sectional average log return) the variance of the
expected return news is only one-fifth of the variance of cash-flow news.
Thus bubbles and their bursts cannot have more than a minority impact
on the returns of individual stocks, and most of the variation in their
returns comes from news about the future payouts the firms will make.
In a 2005 paper I wrote with Jeeman Jung, which looked at long-span
data sets of stocks that had survived without significant capital changes
for over half a century, we reached similar conclusions. To give a visual
impression of how well the efficient markets theory works for individual
firms, we felt that we could display how successfully dividend growth
could be predicted from the dividend-price ratio. Simple efficient
markets theory suggests that firms with relatively low dividend price
ratios should eventually, in future years, show higher dividend increases
as a fraction of today’s price. To make such a visual diagram in such
simple terms, we sought out long-lived firms (though such a procedure
risks a selection bias).
We found all firms on the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) tape that remained alive and for which there was uninterrupted
data from 1926 to 1976. There were only forty-nine such firms, giving us
2,499 firm-year observations 1926–76. Each point on the scatter in
Figure A.3 shows 
 the present value of future changes in
dividends for the next twenty-five years (measured in dollars, and

discounted by the historical average stock market return) divided by
current dollar price, against 
 the current dividend divided by current
price. Efficient markets with a constant discount rate, equation (1),
implies, if there is not a problem with our truncation of the present
value at twenty-five years, that a regression line through these points
should have a slope of minus one and a constant term equal to the
constant discount rate. In other words, if markets are efficient, then a
high dividend price yield for a particular stock today occurs only if
people have a real reason to expect dividends to decline, and so demand
to be compensated today for that future loss if they are to hold the stock
today. Similarly, low dividend yield stocks must be those for which there
is genuine evidence that dividends will rise in the future, eventually
compensating today’s investors for the low dividend return they are
receiving.
Figure A.3 Present Values of Future Changes in Dividends Plotted
against the Dividend Price Ratio for Forty-Nine U.S. Individual Stocks,
1926–76
Source: Jung and Shiller (2005).
The estimated slope of a line fitted through this scatter is −0.5, far

from the ideal −1.0 but negative as expected. The dividend-price ratio
predicts subsequent dividend changes in the right direction for these
firms. Zero-dividend firms (which one can see strung out along the
vertical axis) tended to have appropriately high subsequent dividend
growth relative to price. The rightmost observation, which corresponds
to the firm Schlumberger in 1931—a firm that had tried to maintain its
dividend despite falling fortunes in the Great Depression—had a
dividend payment that was 40% of its current price. People in the
market then apparently figured out that the firm could not continue to
pay such a dividend, that there would not be another significant
dividend for a very long time, and reflected that knowledge in the
approximately 40% dividend-price ratio. They were right to do this, as
we see after the fact. In individual firms there is sometimes a lot of
action in the ratios, and the action in fact often reflects real knowledge
about future cash flows. That is an example of the kind of idiosyncratic
knowledge about individual firms that makes the efficient markets
model a useful approximation of reality for individual firms.20
Real Estate Prices
The market for real estate is larger in valuation than that of the entire
stock market. According to the Financial Accounts of the United States,
in 2013 the value of real estate owned by households and nonprofit
organizations was $21.6 trillion, while their holdings of corporate equity
shares, whether directly or indirectly, had a market value of only $20.3
trillion.21
And yet, when I first collaborated with Karl Case in joint work on real
estate prices, in the 1980s, we found that hardly any scholarly research
had been done on the efficiency of real estate markets. The state of
knowledge about these markets was abysmal. Under the influence of a
widely held presumption at that time that all markets must be efficient,
many economists, at least in their popular pronouncements, seemed then
to assume that real estate markets must be efficient too. This
presumption seemed to us quite probably wrong, based on anecdotal

evidence suggesting that real estate prices are not at all well
approximated by a random walk, as is the case for stocks, but often tend
to go in the same direction, whether up or down, again and again for
years and years.
Case and I decided to try to test the efficiency of this market for
single-family homes, but quickly discovered the importance of a
stumbling block that had inhibited research: individual homes sell
extremely infrequently, with the interval between sales for individual
homes measured not in minutes, as with stocks, but in years or decades.
One cannot do any of the most popular tests of efficiency with such data.
No runs tests or event studies would ever be possible with individual
homes, and so tests of market efficiency would have to be based on
indices.
There were some home price indices of sorts available then, but they
had serious problems. There was a median sales price of existing homes,
published by the National Association of Realtors, but it often appeared
to jump around erratically. It was just the median price of whatever
homes were selling at the moment, and it was not controlled for any
change in the composition of sales. Moreover, it appeared that different
kinds of homes sold in different months. It had a very strong seasonal
component, which we suspected arose because people who sold in the
summer, in phase with the academic year and the job market, typically
had bigger or higher-quality homes, which had higher prices.
There was also at that time a “Price of New Homes Sold,” also called
“Constant Quality Index,” produced by the U.S. Census Bureau, that was
a more sophisticated hedonic index, holding constant such things as
square feet of floor space and number of bedrooms, but again it was
obviously not trustworthy for testing market efficiency through time,
since it was based on different homes every quarter, whatever and
wherever homes had just been built that quarter.
So Case and I constructed our own “repeat sales” home price index
based on an inspiration of his (Case 1986) and then on a method we
devised that inferred price changes only from the change in prices of
individual existing homes (Case and Shiller 1987, 1989, 1990). We
showed how a quarterly index could be computed even if homes sell

much less frequently than quarterly. We discovered that Case’s
inspiration was largely anticipated by Bailey, Muth, and Nourse (1963),
but we had a number of improvements, taking better account of
heteroscedasticity. Later, I made the index arithmetic and value
weighted, as are the most prominent stock price indices (Shiller 1991).
With my former student Allan Weiss we founded Case Shiller Weiss, Inc.,
in 1991, and we were the first to produce repeat sales indices in real
time for regular publication, and we applied these indices to produce
automated valuation models for single-family homes (Shiller and Weiss
1999a). Our indices are now produced by CoreLogic, Inc., and the major
indices are managed by Standard & Poor’s Corporation.
A plot of our quarterly national index corrected for CPI inflation is
shown in Figure A.4, along with the Census Constant Quality Index, also
converted to real terms.
Simply producing these data and looking at a plot, as shown in Figure
A.4, yields some surprises. First of all, the home price data are generally
extremely smooth through time, except for a small amount of seasonality.
Home prices do indeed go through years of price increases and then
years of price decreases. So the random walk model of home price
behavior is just not even close to being true for home prices (Case and
Shiller 1988). Home prices might seem to be described as in accordance
with model (4) above, with the parameter φ extremely large, so that the
smart money, who might go in and out of the market quickly in response
to news, is hardly a factor.
Second, while it was not apparent when we first computed these
indices, these data make clear from today’s vantage point that there was
a huge boom in home prices after 2000 that was not very visible from
the Census Constant Quality Index. That boom was unprecedented in
scope and magnitude in over one hundred years of U.S. history (Shiller
2005). Why is the boom and bust in home prices after 2000 so much
more prominent in our repeat sales index? New homes are built where it
is possible and profitable to build them, typically outside congested
urban areas where price swings may be most pronounced, and so their
level through time may be more nearly determined by simple
construction costs. Thus our data collection revealed not only market

inefficiencies, but much bigger price swings as well.
Figure A.4
Two Indices of U.S. Home Prices Divided by the Consumer Price Index
(CPI-U), 1987–2013
Both indices are scaled to 1987 = 100.
The inefficiency that we documented in single-family home prices
must be related to market conditions, and so efficiency must be
improvable with changes in market institutions. The inefficiency of the
market for single-family homes relative to that of the stock market must
be partly traced to the relatively much higher cost of trading in that
market. It is much more costly for professional traders to trade in and
out of the market for single-family homes to profit from predictable
price movements. It is difficult to do short sales of overpriced individual
homes. Buying and selling individual homes may not work well for
professionals for additional reasons: high carrying costs; low rental
income; moral hazard of the renters, who have relatively little incentive
to care for the property; and difficulty keeping up with all the local
factors that might change the demand for individual houses, so that
remote institutional investors would risk being picked off as ignorant

losers. Some institutional investors are in the news recently, thinking
they can survive and make money in this market. We will see whether
they succeed.
We thought that the market efficiency could be improved if an index
of home prices could be made tradable (Case, Shiller, and Weiss 1993).
Working with Standard & Poor’s, and with the people in our company
MacroMarkets LLC, we helped the Chicago Mercantile Exchange with
plans to set up futures markets based on our indices for ten U.S. cities.
These markets were launched in 2006 and are still trading today, albeit
with nothing close to the volume of trade that we hoped to see in these
markets.22 We hoped that the creation of these new markets would
change the nature of prices in real estate markets, with price discovery
that made the price of homes behave more like the random walk that
efficient markets theory suggests.
Real estate markets remain wildly inefficient all over the world. We
can only look forward to the day when liquid markets support more
trade that might permit something rather closer to the efficient markets
that theorists have expected.
If we are to achieve such improvements in efficiency, in real estate
markets, in stock markets, or in any speculative markets, it is most
helpful to understand the causes of market inefficiency, and that requires
serious study from the broad perspective afforded by an array of other
sciences outside economics.
Behavioral Finance and Behavioral Economics
The behavioral economics revolution, which brings psychology and
other social sciences into economics, saw its first beginnings in the
1980s but did not attract public attention until the 1990s. Richard
Thaler and I started our behavioral economics workshops at the National
Bureau of Economic Research in 1991, and from that beginning
behavioral finance played the dominant role.23 There are a number of
surveys of the behavioral finance literature, notably Shleifer (2000),
Barberis and Thaler (2003), Shiller (2003), Shef rin (2008), and Baker

and Wurgler (2011).
The behavioral finance revolution seemed to take its beginnings from
the evidence of market inefficiency that was by then starting to look
significant. Once we acknowledge that the efficient markets theory has
no special claim to priority for price determination, we can look more
sympathetically to other factors to understand market fluctuations. The
anomalies literature points indeed to some oddball factors as playing a
role. Benos and Jochec (2013) showed that patriotism affects stock
prices, in that U.S. stocks with the words “America(n)” or “USA” in their
names earn an abnormal return of 6% a year during wartime. Saunders
(1993) found that the weather in New York affects stock prices. If such
irrelevant things as these affect stock prices, it should be no surprise if
more plausible but half-baked theories (about the central bank, fiscal
policy, energy prices, the future of capitalism, and on and on) would
also affect market prices.
Most stock market investors do not pay much attention to
fundamental indicators of value. We might argue that their inattention is
in some sense rational, since there is a cost to collecting information.
Christopher Sims (2003) has devised a model of rational inattention. But
it is hard to believe that their inattention is systematic and thoughtful.
Early History of Behavioral Finance
Behavioral finance until the 1980s was mostly relegated to the
community of investment analysts who did not generally attract notice
in academia, and who did not generally draw on research from the social
sciences. There were, however, some gems from this period. Notable
among these analysts were Benjamin Graham and David Dodd, who, in
the 1940 edition of their book Security Analysis, based their investing
method on their observations of “ignorance, of human greed, of mob
psychology, of trading costs, of weighting of the dice by insiders and
manipulators.”24
Keynes gave a view of speculative markets that was ahead of its time.
In his 1936 book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,

Keynes described speculative markets as akin to a competition he saw
offered by a local newspaper to its readers. His metaphor is widely
referred to as Keynes’s “beauty contest” theory of the stock market. Each
reader was invited to peruse one hundred photos of pretty faces and
submit a list of the six he or she thought prettiest. The winner would be
the one whose list most closely corresponded to the most popular faces
among all the lists of six that readers sent in. Of course, to win this
contest a rational person would not choose to be guided by personal
preference. Instead one should pick the six faces that one thinks others
will think prettiest. Even better, one should pick the faces one thinks
that others think that others think prettiest, or one should pick the faces
one thinks that others think that others think that others think prettiest.
The same is true with stock market investing. According to Keynes,
“there are some, I believe, who practice the fourth, fifth and higher
degrees,”25 further degrees of removal from reality than were embodied
in equation (4) above. That is how speculative markets function, Keynes
said. Active participants are trying to buy into their predictions of the
conventional valuation of assets in the near future, not the true value.
A key Keynesian idea is that the valuation of long-term assets is
substantially a matter of convention, just as it is with judgments of facial
beauty. Whatever price people generally have come to accept as the
conventional 
value, 
and 
that 
is 
embedded 
in 
the 
collective
consciousness, will stick as the true value for a long time, even if the
actual returns fail for some time to live up to expectations. If an asset’s
returns are carefully tabulated and disappoint for long enough, people
will eventually learn to change their views, but it may take the better
part of a lifetime. And many assets, such as owner-occupied homes, do
not 
have 
unambiguously 
measured 
returns, 
and 
a 
mistaken
“conventional valuation” based on a faulty popular theory can persist
indefinitely. The presumed investment advantages of, say, living in an
expensive, land-intensive single-family home near a big city, rather than
renting a cheaper and more convenient apartment in an urban high-rise,
may just not exist, and most people will never figure that out.
Conventional valuation can be a very subtle phenomenon at any point
of time, reflecting popular theories of the time that are perceived by

many, who have never studied the theories, to reflect professional
wisdom. In a beauty contest, people have even less incentive to consider
the validity of this wisdom, since they view it as substantially
entrenched in others’ thinking. I am reminded, for example, of
Modigliani and Cohn’s (1979) study showing that inflation-induced
biases in conventional accounting practices caused a massive
understatement of earnings, a study that allowed them to call roughly,
within a few years, the historic bottom of the stock market in 1982. The
absence of immediate reaction to their study was just the kind of thing
one might expect to see in a beauty contest world, since no one expected
anyone else to react much to their paper.
The Blossoming of Behavioral Finance after 1980
The idea that speculative prices are somehow uniquely authoritative, as
the best possible judgment of true value, still has its popular appeal even
today. But it has lost its unique claim on the attention of economic
theorists. Theoretical models of speculative markets that are analogous
to Keynes’s beauty contest theory, and that stress the expectation of
reselling to other people who may have optimistic beliefs, have been
offered by Harrison and Kreps (1978), Morris (1996), Scheinkman and
Xiong (2003), Wu and Guo (2004), Allen, Morris, and Shin (2006),
Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006), Hong and Sraer (2011), Kubler
and Schmedders (2012), and Barberis et al. (2013). There are also
models that represent bubbles as related to leverage cycles tied in with
heterogeneous beliefs: Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008), Geanakoplos
(2009), Cao (2010), and He and Xiong (2012). Noise trader models (Kyle
1985, De Long et al. 1990, Campbell and Kyle 1993) have begun to
replace models with all rational agents.
Moreover, there are models of financial markets that replace the
assumption 
of 
rational 
expected-utility-maximizing 
agents 
with
alternative models of human behavior, such as prospect theory
(Kahneman and Tversky 1979, 2000). Prospect theory, which is a theory
of human choice in the face of risk that is based on experimental

evidence in the psychology laboratory, is not a theory of rationality in
the traditional sense, for it recognizes violations of the basic axioms of
rational behavior (Savage 1954). The human behavior that prospect
theory describes is vulnerable to the arbitrariness of psychological
framing; insignificant changes in context or suggestion can produce
profound differences in human behavior.
Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001) showed that prospect theory with
investors who derive direct utility from fluctuations in the value of their
wealth can help explain the excess volatility of stock market returns. A
“house money effect” can help make bubbles grow even bigger, in
analogy to gamblers at casinos, who, after they have won some money,
become very risk tolerant with that money because they frame it as
somebody else’s money that they can afford to lose (Thaler and Johnson
1990). Investors’ “narrow framing” (Barberis, Huang, and Thaler 2006)
and the disposition to sell winners and hold losers (Shefrin and Statman
1985) can explain other evidence against efficient markets.
The field of psychology offers many other principles of human
behavior that have been shown to be relevant for evaluating the efficient
markets theory. For example, there is evidence that a general human
tendency toward overconfidence causes investors to trade too much
(Odean 2000) and CEOs to squander internally generated funds on pet
projects (Malmendier and Tate 2005). There is a tendency for investors
to be overly distracted by news stories (Barber and Odean 2008) and to
overreact to cash dividends (Shefrin and Statman 1984).
Financial theory has also advanced to allow us a better understanding
of the effects of the ambiguity regarding probabilities, the fundamental
difficulties in placing numerical values for probabilities, that Keynes
spoke of (Bew ley 2002, Bracha and Brown 2013).
Psychologists have documented a tendency for people to anchor their
opinions in ambiguous situations on arbitrary signals that are
psychologically salient even if they are obviously irrelevant (Tversky and
Kahneman 1974).
Neuroscience has begun to understand how the human brain handles
ambiguity. Hsu et al. (2005) and Huettel et al. (2006) use functional
magnetic resonance imaging to study brain reactions to situations with

clear versus ambiguous probabilities. Huettel et al. concluded that
“decision making under ambiguity does not represent a special, more
complex case of risky decision making; instead, these two forms of
uncertainty are supported by distinct mechanisms.”26 The rapid progress
we are now seeing in neuroscience will likely yield new insights into the
ambiguity, animal spirits, and caprice that Keynes and others since him
have stressed.
Implications for Financial Innovation
The financial institutions that we have today are the product of centuries
of experience with the volatility of speculative asset prices, with the
important information discovery that these market prices can reveal, as
well as the potential for erratic behavior in these markets.27 The
reliability of these markets in revealing genuine information about
fundamentals is not terrific, but it is certainly not negligible either, and
the reliability might be improved through time with better financial
institutions. Efficient markets should be considered a goal, not an
established fact. Our present financial institutions are the results of
experimentation that has helped people design around this experience;
the institutions we will have in the future depend on our continuing
experimentation and redesign.
Like mechanical engineering, financial engineering should pay
attention to human factors, to make devices that serve people well, with
full consideration of human talents and foibles. As this experience
accumulates, 
with 
each 
successive 
financial 
crisis, 
and 
each
improvement in information technology, financial innovation can make
these institutions work better for humankind.
For example, the very invention, centuries ago, of stock markets, has
created an atmosphere for investing that, while it regularly produces the
excesses of bubbles, creates an incentive for people to launch exciting
new enterprises, to keep up to date on relevant information, and to
protect themselves, if they wish, from the inevitable risks of those very
bubbles.

As David Moss (2002) has chronicled, a general limited liability
statute covering all stock market investors was not such an obviously
good idea when the world’s first such law was passed in New York in
1811, but it turned out to be of fundamental importance for investors’
psychology. By clearly forbidding suits against shareholders for a
company’s sins, it limited the downside risk of investing to
psychologically manageable proportions (no more worries that any one
of your investments could explode and land you in debtors’ prison), and
it permitted portfolio diversification to proceed without exhaustive
investigation of each company’s management.28 The stock market
became an exciting place, like a gambling casino, but tied to business
reality rather than mere amusement, and it was a place where investors
could diversify and limit their risks. It therefore was highly effective in
attracting capital for enterprise.
More recently, people have been experimenting with other details of
the stock markets, such as insider trader rules, risk retention rules,
capital requirements, and other factors. These interact with human
psychology in ways that can improve market functioning, but their
effects cannot be accurately foretold on the basis of any received theory.
Much of my work has been involved in considering how both financial
theory and human factors need to be considered in the design of new
financial structures. I have written a number of books devoted to this:
Who’s Minding the Store? (1992), Macro Markets (1993), The New
Financial Order (2003), The Subprime Solution (2008), and Finance and the
Good Society (2012). Most of the ideas I have expressed in those books
are calls for experimentation, not finished ideas. The ideas I discussed
are mostly as yet untested, and their final forms, if and when they ever
do get implemented—perhaps in the distant future, and with far better
information technology—are hard to see in advance.
The ideas in these books, and associated articles, are diverse, go in
many directions, and have to be judged as beginnings of ideas. They may
look awkward, just as the earliest designs of aircraft did; their later
incarnations may look less so.
The overarching theme of this work of mine is that we need to
democratize and humanize finance in light of research on human behavior

and the functioning of markets (Shiller 2011). Democratizing finance
means making financial institutions work better for real people, dealing
with the risks that are most important to them individually, and
providing opportunities for inspiration and personal development.
Humanizing finance means making financial institutions interact well
with actual human behavior, taking account of how people really think
and act.
Lionel Robbins, with his 1932 book An Essay on the Nature and
Significance of Economic Science, has the honor of having invented the
most common definition today of economic science, articulating the
unifying core idea that defines this science. He wrote then:
The economist studies the disposal of scarce means. He is interested
in the way different degrees of scarcity of different goods give rise
to different ratios of valuation of them, and he is interested in the
way in which changes in conditions of scarcity, whether coming
from changes in ends or changes in means—from the demand side
or the supply side—affect these ratios.29
The importance of prices in allocating scarce resources is an idea
whose beginnings go back at least to Adam Smith in the eighteenth
century, with his “invisible hand,” and there was a certain wisdom in
Robbins’s framing of the entire field of economics around this idea. Even
today, this wisdom is not yet fully apparent to the untrained public.
Most people do not appreciate that all of our economic activities and all
of our pleasures and satisfactions, and those of subsequent generations,
are ultimately guided by prices of scarce resources as formed in the
markets.
There is a problem, however, with the interpretation of economics
that Robbins so persuasively gave. For his definition appeared to cast the
economic problem as being exclusively about scarcity of production
resources, like energy and food, rather than also about scarcity of human
intellectual and psychological resources. He casts the problem as humans
against nature, when in fact much of the economic problem is dealing
with humans against themselves.30

Long-term asset prices as they are observed today, prices of stocks,
bonds, real estate, and commodities, and prices of derivative products
such as futures, swaps, and options, and of other institutions like long-
term insurance, are especially significant for economics, and especially
problematic, since the scarcity that these prices represent is one that is
never really objective and directly revealed today. Their levels are
influenced by expectations of the distant, and generally nebulous, future.
The market prices of speculative assets at any given time reflect, as is
commonly asserted, both tastes and technology of that time. But they
also reflect expected tastes and technology of the future, the likeli-hood
of discovery of new wellsprings of resources or the technology to
develop them. They also reflect sociology and social psychology, and
anticipated future changes in these; in government policy such as
taxation; and in other primary forces, such as changes in the inequality
of incomes and likely social and governmental reactions to these; the
potential threat of wars and other catastrophes; and the likely use of,
and policy toward, the assets in such times.
Fischer Black, in his 1984 presidential address before the American
Finance Association, offered a new definition of market efficiency. He
redefined an “efficient market” as “one in which price is within a factor
of 2 of value, i.e., the price is more than half of value and less than twice
value…. By this definition, I think almost all markets are efficient almost
all of the time.”31
And yet, even assuming he is somehow right, the existing efficient
markets theory remains the fundamental framework from which many
economic policy decisions, and decisions to innovate or not, are made.
No one would seriously propose the elimination of stock markets even if
we all accepted Fischer Black’s impression as fact. So why should we not
consider other risk markets, markets that have not come into being yet,
merely through accidents of history and timing of associated
technological breakthroughs?
Institutions can be redesigned so that they reframe people’s thinking
to the longer term and to things that are better subjects for their
attention, by making markets for risks that are better tied to
fundamentals people should be thinking about. Institutions that change

framing might sometimes qualify as institutions providing a “nudge,” as
Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein (2009) have put it, suggesting the
right direction for people without being coercive. These authors base
their thinking on a philosophy they call “libertarian paternalism,”
emphasizing the government’s providing incentives for appropriate
behavior without coercion. Though our groundings in behavioral
economics are similar, I wouldn’t stress that term, perhaps because it
seems to suggest a top-down structure for society, with government at
the top. The development of financial capitalism seems to be, or can be,
a matter of the voluntary organization of most of society, integrating the
activities of people in all walks of life in fulfillment of their diverse
purposes. A vision for a better financial capitalism should not be top-
down at all.
Some recent examples of financial innovation, examples of new
experiments, can help clarify how innovation might help in an imperfect
financial world. Consider first the social policy bonds proposed by
Ronnie Horesh (2000), which have recently been realized in the social
impact bonds first issued with the help of the nonprofit Social Finance,
Ltd., in 2010 in the United Kingdom. These redirect speculative impulses
into solving social problems over a meaningful horizon that is chosen by
the issuer to be neither too short nor too long to allow effective
solutions.
Consider also the new crowdfunding initiatives to create websites that
allow large numbers of dispersed people each to share information and
each to invest a small amount of money directly into new enterprises,
without the usual financial intermediaries. These have sprouted in many
places around the world, with websites like kiva.org or kickstarter.com.
They are poised, after the U.S. Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of
2012, to transform venture capital. Such innovations can and certainly
will cause some runaway bubbles and abuse of ignorant investors. On
the other hand, if designed and regulated right, they could create a new
way of arousing animal spirits and focusing informed attention on
venture investments. Crowdfunding may be more effective in funding
ideas that are hard to prove; whose payoff is not immediate; that have a
subtle social, environmental, or inspirational purpose beyond mere

profits; and that only a small percentage of the population is equipped to
understand.
Consider also the new benefit corporations that are now offered in
twenty U.S. states. They are amalgams of for-profit and nonprofit
corporations, fundamentally changing the mental framing that investors
are likely to have of their investments in them, and encouraging both
investors’ excitement and more idealistic thinking about these
investments.32 The participation nonprofit business form that I
advocated (2012), which makes nonprofits psychologically more similar
to equity-financed business, would, if it is ever implemented, increase
philanthropy and make it more effective.
These are only the beginning of the financial innovations that we
might expect to see in our future, helped along by our improved
understanding of behavioral finance and of mathematical economics,
and by steadily improving information technology. In particular, it
would seem that we can derive great benefit by expanding the scope of
our financial markets to allow trading of risks that really matter.
We might further democratize finance from the expansion of trading
to include trading of other indices that have only recently come to be
measured, but that reflect real and important risks that matter to people.
I have already alluded to the futures market for single-family homes that
was started at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in 2006; if that market
becomes more successful, it will eventually provide price discovery for a
value of great personal importance to individuals, and might lead to a
cash market for real estate that is not so woefully inefficient. The home
futures market, if it became more successful, would facilitate the
creation of many more risk management products, such as home equity
insurance (Shiller and Weiss 1999b) or mortgages with preplanned
workouts (Shiller 2012, 2014; Shiller et al. 2013).
Had there been a well-developed real estate market before the
financial crisis of 2008, it would plausibly have reduced the severity of
the financial crisis, because it would have allowed, even encouraged,
people to hedge their real estate risks. The severity of that crisis was
substantially due to the leveraged undiversified positions people were
taking in the housing market, sending mortgages underwater for over

fifteen million U.S. households, and thus reducing their spending. There
is no contradiction at all in saying that bubbles occur in the housing
market and yet saying that we ought to create better and more liquid
markets for housing.
Even further, I along with others have argued that a market for claims
on the flow of gross domestic product, or other large macroeconomic
aggregates, should be developed to help countries share their risks
(Shiller 1993, 2003, 2008; Athanasoulis and Shiller 2000, 2001; Kamstra
and Shiller 2009); or that markets should be developed for other
significant economic variables, like occupational incomes, to share their
livelihood risks (Shiller 1993, Shiller and Schneider 1998, Shiller 2003).
Had the government debts of European countries taken the form of
GDP shares, then most likely we would not have had the severe
European sovereign debt crisis that started in 2009, for the countries
would not have as big a short-run refinancing problem and would find
their government obligations cushioned by declining obligations due to
declining GDP. Had people sought protection for their own welfare by
hedging themselves in occupational income markets, many of them
would have suffered less in this crisis.
Examples of innovations that might reframe into better and longer-
term thinking about fundamentals include the “perpetual futures” that I
have proposed (1993),33 or the application of the concept of index
participations developed by the American Stock Exchange in 1989 to
flow indices,34 or the long-term MacroShares my colleagues and I once
strove to launch based on various indices,35 or the markets for individual
future dividend dates on stock price indices that Michael Brennan (1999)
argued might “focus investor attention on the fundamentals that
determine the value of the index rather than simply on the future resale
value of the index.”36
The development of inflation-indexed bonds, which have gradually
grown in importance over the last half century worldwide, are an
important past success but as yet an incomplete one. Such markets, and
other indexing institutions, might be enhanced by further deliberate
changes in psychological framing. If inflation-indexed units of account,
which create an easier way in our language to refer to indexed

quantities, were created and widely used, they would help people
around their money illusion that inhibits intelligent design of contracts
around the real outcomes that really matter. I have been advocating the
proliferation of these units of account where they first began in Chile
(Shiller 2002), in the United States (Shiller 2003), and in the United
Kingdom (Shiller 2009).37 Their widespread use might have helped
prevent the real estate bubble that preceded the current financial woes, a
bubble that was likely helped along by the widely held impression that
single-family homes have historically shown high real capital gains when
in fact over the last century the gains overall have been only nominal
and hence illusory (Shiller 2005).
We want such innovations, if not exactly the ones I and others have
been advocating to date, because their predecessor innovations, the
financial institutions we already have today, have brought such
prosperity, despite the occasional big disruptions caused by bubbles and
financial crises. No economic system other than financial capitalism has
brought the level of prosperity that we see in much of the world today,
and there is every reason to believe that further expansion of this system
will yield even more prosperity.
The patterns of behavior that have been observed in speculative asset
prices are consistent with a view of market efficiency as a half-truth
today and at the same time with a view that there are behavioral
complexities in these markets that need to be met with properly
engineered financial innovations and financial regulations.
Changes in our financial institutions that take the form of creative
reinventions in the kinds of risks traded, that change the psychological
framing of the things traded, and that change our social relations with
business partners and adversaries, can make financial markets less
vulnerable to excesses and crashes, and more effective in helping us
achieve our ultimate goals.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Nicholas C. Barberis, John Y. Campbell, Peter J.

Dougherty, and Bengt Holmstrom for help on interpretation of the
literature and comments on drafts of this lecture.
This is a substantial revision (February 19, 2014) of the lecture I gave for the Sveriges Riksbank
Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, on December 8, 2013,
www.nobelprize.org/mediaplayer/index.php?id=1996.
1 There is a similarly disconcerting lack of consensus in the economics profession over what
drives fluctuations from quarter to quarter in aggregate economic activity, as measured by gross
domestic product; see Shiller (1987), Akerlof and Shiller (2009).
2 http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/behfin/index.htm.
3 Fama (1964: table 10 and p. 70).
4 Galbraith (1954: 194).
5 In continuous time, we are speaking of distinguishing a Wiener process from an Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck process.
6 The volatility tests were partly inspired by the work Jeremy Siegel and I did (Shiller and Siegel
1977) involving calculation of ex post rational price series.
7 Regression tests have pitfalls as well, as when ratios involving price are used in regressions
explaining future change in price, creating an endogenous variables problem; see Campbell and
Shiller (1989).
8 John Cochrane, in his review of my volatility tests (1991, 1992), stressed a sense in which
there is an equivalence of volatility tests and regression tests. But this is about the equivalence of
null hypotheses, not equivalence of test power. Cochrane later followed this up with a paper
(2007) recognizing the importance of the terminal condition; see also Lewellen (2004) and
Campbell and Yogo (2006).
9 Some examples include Flavin (1983), Buiter (1987), and Cochrane (1991).
10 Jeremy Siegel (2005, 2008) has made the point that since the dividend payout rate for
earnings has been trending down since World War II, dividend growth should be higher in the
future than it was. If companies reinvest earnings rather than pay them out, they should have
more dividends to pay in the future. The validity of this theory is not without doubters. Arnott
and Asness (2003) point out that perhaps lower dividend payouts may reflect managers’
decisions in the face of evidence they have that earnings growth will be lower.
11 Unit root problems pose potentially serious problems for financial econometrics; see Campbell
and Shiller (1987, 1988a); Shiller and Beltratti (1992); Torous, Valkanov, and Yan (2004);
Campbell and Yogo (2006); and Cochrane (2007). Campbell and I (1988c) proposed log-
differencing to recast excess volatility tests in more robust terms. Fama and French (1988) and
Poterba and Summers (1988) showed tests of simple efficient markets models based on ratios of
variance of returns of different horizons. West (1988) showed an inequality in terms of variances
of innovations in price and present values, which strengthened the evidence for excess volatility.
12 The parameter φ was estimated to make the average rt + φ equal the average real return on
the stock market 1871–2013. The parameter A was set at four and ρ at one. The one-year interest
rate is pieced together from various sources as described in Shiller (1989, 2005) and real per
capita consumption is from the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts.
13 These results have been criticized by Goyal and Welch (2003, 2008); Chen and Zhao (2009);
and Chen, Da, and Zhao (2013). They have been rebutted by Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho
(2010) and Engsted, Pedersen, and Tanggaard (2012).

14 See Shiller (2000) and Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005).
15 Keynes (1921: 23).
16 
http://som.yale.edu/faculty-research/our-centers-initiatives/international-center-
finance/data/stock-market-confidence. Greenwood and Shleifer (2013) examine the relation to
stock price data of investor sentiment indices from six different survey sources, including mine.
17 Case and Shiller (1988, 2003); Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012).
18 This is equation (3) in Shiller (1984), with slight changes in notation.
19 Samuelson went on to say, “Modern markets show considerable micro efficiency for the reason
that the minority who spot aberrations from micro efficiency can make money from those
occurrences and, in doing so, tend to wipe out any persistent inefficiencies. In no contradiction to
the previous sentence, I had hypothesized considerable macro inefficiency, in the sense of long
waves in the time series of aggregate indexes of security prices below and above various
definitions of fundamental values” (from a private letter from Paul Samuelson to John Campbell
and Robert Shiller).
20 Ang and Bekaert (2007) conclude that the dividend yield’s ability to predict dividends is not
robust over sample periods or countries, but do not include individual stock data in their study.
21 U.S. Federal Reserve Board, Z.1, Financial Accounts of the United States, table B.100 (Balance
Sheet of Households and Nonprofit Organizations) and table B.100.e (Balance Sheet of
Households and Nonprofit Organizations with Equity Detail), December 9, 2013.
22 See Fabozzi, Shiller, and Tunaru (2009). The market maker John Dolan has a website with up-
to-date information about this market, http://homepricefutures.com. Our firm MacroMarkets LLC
led by Allan Weiss and Sam Masucci also created paired long and short securities, MacroShares,
with ticker symbols UMM (for up major metro) and DMM (for down major metro) based on the
S&P/Case-Shiller TenCity Index that traded on the New York Stock Exchange from August to
December 2010.
23 See http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/behfin/index.htm.
24 Graham and Dodd (2002: 276).
25 Keynes (1936: chap. 12, p. 156, Harbinger 1965 edition).
26 Huettel et al. (2006: 765).
27 For the long history of financial innovation, see Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (2005).
28 Moss (2002) documents much discussion and experimentation with liability rules in the early
nineteenth century, as with “double liability” that limits shareholders’ liability to twice their
initial investment, or liability that ends when the shares are sold.
29 Robbins (1932: 15).
30 See, for example, Mullainathan and Shafir (2013).
31 Black (1986: 533).
32 See http://benefitcorp.net/.
33 These are defined in Shiller (1993) in terms of a daily settlement formula involving both the
change in settle price and another index representing a cash flow.
34 See Shiller (1993: 40).
35 In 2006, our firm MacroMarkets LLC launched paired long and short twenty-year oil
MacroShares on the American Stock Exchange, with ticker symbols UCR for Up-Crude and DCR
for Down-Crude. The securities traded from November 2006 to June 2008, and at one point
reached US$1.6 billion in total value, but were not ultimately a success.

36 Brennan (1999: 12). Since 2008, dividend futures markets for stock price indices have
appeared on a number of European and Asian exchanges, though it is not clear that these new
markets have had much of the desired effect of reframing investors’ thinking.
37 Chile created its Unidad de Fomento (UF) in 1967; it is still in use there today,
http://valoruf.cl/. This innovation helps deal with public resistance to indexation (Shiller 1997).

References
Akerlof, George A., and Robert J. Shiller. 2009. Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the
Economy and Why This Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin. 2006. “Beauty Contests, Bubbles and
Iterated Expectations in Financial Markets.” Review of Financial Studies 19:719–52.
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert. 2007. “Stock Return Predictability: Is It There?” Review of
Financial Studies 20:651–757.
Arnott, Robert D., and Clifford S. Asness. 2003. “Surprise! Higher Dividends = Higher Earnings
Growth.” Financial Analysts Journal 59(1):70–87.
Athanasoulis, Stefano, and Robert J. Shiller. 2000. “The Significance of the Market Portfolio.”
Review of Financial Studies 13(2):301–29.
———. 2001. “World Income Components: Measuring and Exploiting Risk Sharing
Opportunities.” American Economic Review 91(4):1031–54.
Bailey, Martin J., Richard F. Muth, and Hugh O. Nourse. 1963. “A Regression Method for Real
Estate Price Index Construction.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 58:933–42.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler. 2011. “Behavioral Corporate Finance: An Updated Survey.”
NBER Working Paper No. 17333.
Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean. 2008. “All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention on the Buying
Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors.” Review of Financial Studies 21(2):785–818.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard H. Thaler. 2003. “A Survey of Behavioral Finance.” In Handbook
of the Economics of Finance, edited by George M. Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René M.
Stulz. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “X-CAPM: An
Extrapolative Capital Asset Pricing Model.” Working paper, Yale University.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos. 2001. “Prospect Theory and Asset Prices.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(1):1–53.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard H. Thaler. 2006. “Individual Preferences, Monetary
Gambles, and Stock Market Participation: A Case for Narrow Framing.” American Economic
Review 96(4):1069–90.
Beltratti, Andrea, and Robert J. Shiller. 1993. “Actual and Warranted Movements in Asset
Prices.” Oxford Economic Papers 45:387–402.
Benos, Evangelos, and Marek Jochec. 2013. “Patriotic Name Bias and Stock Returns.” Journal of
Financial Markets 16(3): 550–70.
Bewley, Truman. 2002. “Knightian Decision Theory. Part I.” Decisions in Economics and Finance
25(2):79–110.
Black, Fischer. 1986. “Noise.” Journal of Finance 41:529–43.
Bracha, Anat, and Donald J. Brown. 2013. “(IR)Rational Exuberance: Optimism, Ambiguity and
Risk.” New Haven, Conn.: Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1898.
Brennan, Michael. 1999. “Stripping the S&P 500 Index.” Financial Analysts Journal 54(1):12–22.

Buiter, Willem. 1987. “Efficient ‘Myopic’ Asset Pricing in General Equilibrium: A Potential Pitfall
in Excess Volatility Tests.” Economics Letters 25(2):143–48. Campbell, John Y. 1991. “A
Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns.” Economic Journal 101:57–179.
Campbell, John Y., and John Ammer. 1993. “What Moves the Stock and Bond Markets? A
Variance Decomposition for Long-Term Asset Returns.” Journal of Finance 48:3–37.
Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane. 1999. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 107: 205–51.
Campbell, John Y., and Albert S. Kyle. 1993. “Smart Money, Noise Trading, and Stock Market
Behavior.” Review of Economic Studies 60(1):1–34.
Campbell, John Y., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. 2010. “Growth or Glamor?
Fundamentals and Systematic Risk in Stock Returns.” Review of Financial Studies 23:305–44.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1987. “Cointegration and Tests of Present Value
Models.” Journal of Political Economy 95:1062–88.
———. 1988a. “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount
Factors.” Review of Financial Studies 1(3):195–228.
———. 1988b. “Interpreting Cointegrated Models.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
12(2–3):505–22.
———. 1988c. “Stock Prices, Earnings and Expected Dividends.” Journal of Finance 43(3):661–
76.
———. 1989. “The Dividend Ratio Model and Small Sample Bias: A Monte Carlo Study.”
Economics Letters 29:325–31.
Campbell, John Y., and Motohiro Yogo. 2006. “Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability.”
Journal of Financial Economics 81(1):27–60.
Cao, Dan. 2010. “Collateral Shortages, Asset Price and Investment Volatility with Heterogeneous
Beliefs.” Unpublished paper, Department of Economics, George-town University.
Case, Karl E. 1986. “The Market for Single Family Homes in Boston.” New England Economic
Review, May/June, 38–48.
Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller. 1987. “Prices of Single-Family Homes since 1970: New
Indexes for Four Cities.” New England Economic Review, September/October, 46–56.
———. 1988. “The Behavior of Home Buyers in Boom and Post-Boom Markets.” New England
Economic Review, November/December, 29–46.
———. 1989. “The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family Homes.” American Economic Review
79(1):125–37.
———. 1990. “Forecasting Prices and Excess Returns in the Housing Market.” AREUEA Journal
18(3):253–73.
———. 2003. “Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
2003(2):299–362.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Kinsella Thompson. 2012. “What Have They Been
Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2:265–98.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Allan N. Weiss. 1993. “Index-Based Futures and Options
Trading in Real Estate,” Journal of Portfolio Management 19:83–92.
Chen, Long, and Xinlei Zhao. 2009. “Return Decomposition.” Review of Financial Studies
22(12):5212–49.
Chen, Long, Zhi Da, and Xinlei Zhao. 2013. “What Drives Stock Price Movements?” Review of
Financial Studies 26(4):841–76.

Cochrane, John H. 1991. “Volatility Tests and Efficient Markets Theory: A Review Essay.” Journal
of Monetary Economics 27:463–85.
———. 1992. “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios.” Review of Financial Studies
5:243–280.
———. 2007. “The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictability.” Review of
Financial Studies 21(4):1533–75.
Cootner, Paul. 1964. The Random Character of Stock Market Prices. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Cowles, Alfred III, and associates. 1939. Common Stock Indexes. 2nd ed. Bloomington, Ind.:
Principia Press.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert Waldmann. 1990. “Noise
Trader Risk in Financial Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 98(4):703–38. Dolley, James C.
1933. “Common Stock Split-Ups—Motives and Effects.” Harvard Business Review 12(1):70–81.
Durkheim, Émile. 1893. De la division du travail social. Paris: Alcan.
Economic Sciences Prize Committee of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. 2013. Scientific
Background on the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Eco nomic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel.
2013. 
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economicsciences/laureates/2013/advanced-
economicsciences2013.pdf.
Engsted, Tom, Thomas Q. Pedersen, and Carsten Tanggaard. 2012. “Pitfalls in VAR Based Return
Decompositions: A Clarification.” Journal of Banking and Finance 36(5):1255–65.
Fabozzi, Frank, Robert J. Shiller, and Radu Tunaru. 2009. “Hedging Real Estate Risk.” Journal of
Portfolio Management 35(5):92–103.
Fama, Eugene. 1964. “The Distribution of the Daily Differences of the Logarithms of Stock
Prices.” PhD diss., University of Chicago. Reprinted in the Journal of Business as “The Behavior
of Stock Market Prices,” 38(1):34–105.
———. 1970. “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review.” Journal of Finance 25(2):383–417.
Fama, Eugene F., Lawrence Fisher, Michael Jensen, and Richard Roll. 1969. “The Adjustment of
Stock Prices to New Information.” International Economic Review 10:1–21.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth R. French. 1988. “Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock
Prices.” Journal of Political Economy 96:(2):246–67.
Flavin, Marjorie. 1983. “Excess Volatility in the Financial Markets: A Reassessment of the
Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 96:246–73.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2008. “Leverage Cycles in an Anxious Economy.” American
Economic Review 93: 1211–44.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1954. The Great Crash: 1929. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Garber, Peter M. 2000. Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Geanakoplos, John. 2009. “The Leverage Cycle.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24:1–65.
Goetzmann, William N., Catherine Labio, K. Geert Rouwenhorst, and Timothy G. Young, eds.
2013. The Great Mirror of Folly: Finance, Culture, and the Crash of 1720. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press.
Goetzmann, William N., and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, eds. 2005. The Origins of Value: The Financial
Innovations That Created Modern Capital Markets. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch. 2003. “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios.”
Management Science 49:639–54.
———. 2008. “A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of Equity Premium

Prediction.” Review of Financial Studies 21:1455–1508.
Graham, David, and David Dodd. 2002. Security Analysis: The Classic 1940 Edition. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns.”
NBER Working Paper No. 18686.
Grossman, Sanford, and Robert J. Shiller. 1981.“The Determinants of the Variability of Stock
Market Prices.” American Economic Review 71:222–27.
Halbwachs, Maurice. 1925. “Les Cadres Sociaux de la Mémoire.” In Les Travaux de L’Année
Sociologique. Paris: Alcan.
Hansen, Lars Peter. 2013. “Uncertainty Outside and Inside Economics Models.” Prize Lecture for
2013 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences. http://www.nobelprize.org/mediaplayer/index.php?
id=1994.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan. 1991. “Implications of Security Market Data for
Models of Dynamic Economies.” Journal of Political Economy 99(2):225–92. Hansen, Lars Peter,
and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1983. “Stochastic Consumption, RiskAversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Asset Returns.” Journal of Political Economy 91(6):929–56.
Harrison, Michael, and David Kreps. 1978. “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock Market with
Heterogeneous Expectations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 92:323–36.
He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong. 2012. “Rollover Risk and Credit Risk.” Journal of Finance 67(2):391–
429.
Hong, Harrison, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong. 2006. “Asset Float and Speculative Bubbles.”
Journal of Finance 61:1073–1117.
Hong, Harrison, and David Sraer. 2011. “Quiet Bubbles.” Working paper, Princeton University.
Horesh, Ronnie. 2000. “Injecting Incentives into the Solution of Social Problems: Social Policy
Bonds.” Economic Affairs 20(3):39–42.
Hsu, Ming, Meghana Batt, Ralph Adolphs, Daniel Tranel, and Colin F. Camerer. 2005. “Neural
Systems Responding to Degrees of Uncertainty in Human Decision-Making.” Science 310:1680–
83.
Huettel, Scott A., C. Jill Stowe, Evan M. Gordon, Brent T. Warner, and Michael L. Platt. 2006.
“Neural Signatures of Economic Preferences for Risk and Ambiguity.” Neuron 49(5):765–75.
Jung, Jeeman, and Robert Shiller. 2005. “Samuelson’s Dictum and the Stock Market.” Economic
Inquiry 43(2):221–28.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Uncertainty.” Econometrica 47:236–91.
———. 2000. Choices, Values and Frames. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kamstra, Mark, and Robert J. Shiller. 2009. “The Case for Trills: Giving the People and Their
Pension Funds a Stake in the Wealth of the Nation.” New Haven, Conn.: Cowles Foundation,
Working Paper No. 1717.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1921. A Treatise on Probability. London: Macmillan.
———. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London: Macmillan.
Kindleberger, Charles Poor. 1978. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.
London: Macmillan.
Kleidon, Allan W. 1986. “Variance Bounds Tests and Stock Price Valuation Models.” Journal of
Political Economy 94:953–1001.
Kubler, Felix, and Karl Schmedders. 2012. “Financial Innovation and Asset Price Volatility.”

American Economic Review 102(3):147–51.
Kyle, Albert. 1985. “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading.” Econometrica 53(6):1315–35.
LeRoy, Stephen F. 1973. “Risk Aversion and the Martingale Property of Stock Prices.”
International Economic Review 14(2):436–66.
LeRoy, Stephen F., and Richard D. Porter. 1981. “Stock Price Volatility: Tests Based on Implied
Variance Bounds.” Econometrica 49:97–113.
Lewellen, Jonathan. 2004. “Predicting Returns with Financial Ratios.” Journal of Financial
Economics 74(2):209–35.
Lucas, Robert E. 1978. “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy.” Econometrica 46(6):1429–45.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate. 2005. “CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment.”
Journal of Finance 60(6):2661–2700.
Marsh, Terry A., and Robert C. Merton. 1986. “Dividend Variability and Variance Bound Tests for
the Rationality of Stock Market Prices.” American Economic Review 76:483–98.
Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Cohn. 1979. “Inflation, Rational Valuation and the Market.”
Financial Analysts Journal 35(2):24–44.
Morris, Stephen. 1996. “Speculative Investor Behavior and Learning.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 62:1327–47.
Moss, David A. 2002. When All Else Fails: The Government as Ultimate Risk Manager. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Eldar Shafir. 2013. Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means So Much.
New York: Times Books.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer. 2005. “The Market for News.” American Economic
Review 95(4):1031–53.
Odean, Terrance. 2000. “Do Investors Trade Too Much?” in Behavioral Finance, edited by Hersh
Shefrin. Northhampton, Mass.: Edward Elgar.
Phillips, Peter C. B., and Pierre Perron. 1988. “Testing for a Unit Root in Time Series Regression.”
Biometrika 75(2):335–46.
Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. “Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence
and Implications.” Journal of Financial Economics 22:26–59.
Robbins, Lionel. 1932. An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science. London:
Macmillan.
Rothman, James E. 2013. “The Principle of Membrane Fusion in the Cell.” Prize Lecture for 2013
Nobel Prize in Medicine. http://www.nobelprize.org/mediaplayer/index.php?id=1975.
Saunders, Edward M. 1993. “Stock Prices and Wall Street Weather.” American Economic Review
83(5):1337–45.
Savage, Leonard J. 1954. Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley.
Scheinkman, Jose, and Wei Xiong. 2003. “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles.” Journal of
Political Economy 111:1133–1219.
Shefrin, Hersh M. 2008. A Behavioral Approach to Asset Pricing. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Shefrin, Hersh M., and Meir Statman. 1984. “Explaining Investor Preference for Cash Dividends.”
Journal of Financial Economics 13(2):253–82.
———. 1985. “The Disposition to Sell Losers Too Early and Ride Losers Too Long: Theory and
Evidence.” Journal of Finance 40(3):777–90.
Shiller, Robert J. 1972. “Rational Expectations and the Term Structure of Interest Rates.” PhD
diss., Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

———. 1979. “The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates and Expectations Models of the Term
Structure.” Journal of Political Economy 87(6):1190–1219.
———. 1981a. “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subsequent Changes in
Dividends?” American Economic Review 71(3):421–36.
———. 1981b. “The Uses of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market Efficiency.” Journal of
Finance 36:291–304.
———. 1982. “Consumption, Asset Markets and Macro economic Fluctuations.” Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 17:203–38.
———. 1984. “Stock Prices and Social Dynamics.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
1984(2):457–98.
———. 1986. “The Marsh-Merton Model of Managers’ Smoothing of Dividends.” American
Economic Review 76(3):499–503.
———. 1987. “Ultimate Sources of Aggregate Variability.” American Economic Review 77(2):87–
92.
———. 1988. “Portfolio Insurance and Other Investor Fashions as Factors in the 1987 Stock
Market Crash.” NBER Macro economics Annual 3:287–97.
Shiller, Robert J. 1989. Market Volatility. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
———. 1991. “Arithmetic Repeat Sales Price Estimators.” Journal of Housing Economics 1:110–26.
———. 1992. Who’s Minding the Store? The Report of the Twentieth Century Fund Task Force on
Market Speculation and Corporate Governance. New York: The Twentieth Century Fund.
———. 1993. Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s Largest Economic Risks.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.
———. 1997. “Public Resistance to Indexation: A Puzzle.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
1997(1):159–211.
———. 2000. Irrational Exuberance, 1st ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
———. 2002. “Indexed Units of Account: Theory and Analysis of Historical Experience.” In
Indexation, Inflation, and Monetary Policy, edited by Fernando Lefort and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel.
Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile.
———. 2003. The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
———. 2005. Irrational Exuberance, 2nd ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
———. 2008. The Subprime Solution: How Today’s Global Financial Crisis Happened and What to Do
about It. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
———. 2009. The Case for a Basket: A New Way of Showing the True Value of Money. London:
Policy Exchange.
———. 2011. “Democratizing and Humanizing Finance.” In Reforming U.S. Financial Markets:
Reflections before and beyond Dodd-Frank, edited by Randall S. Kroszner and Robert J. Shiller.
Alvin Hansen Symposium on Public Policy at Harvard University. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
———. 2012. Finance and the Good Society. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
———. 2014. “Why Is Housing Finance Still Stuck in Such a Primitive Stage?” American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
Shiller, Robert J., and Andrea Beltratti. 1992. “Stock Prices and Bond Yields: Can Their
Comovements Be Explained in Terms of Present Value Models?” Journal of Monetary Economics
30(1):25–46.

Shiller, Robert J., and Pierre Perron. 1985. “Testing the Random Walk Hypothesis: Power versus
Frequency of Observation.” Economics Letters 18:381–86.
Shiller, Robert J., and Ryan Schneider. 1998. “Labor Income Indices Designed for Use in
Contracts Promoting Income Risk Management.” Review of Income and Wealth 44(2):163–82.
Shiller, Robert J., and Jeremy J. Siegel. 1977. “The Gibson Paradox and Historical Movements in
Real Long Term Interest Rates.” Journal of Political Economy 85(5):891–98.
Shiller, Robert J., and Allan N. Weiss. 1999a. “Evaluating Real Estate Valuation Systems.” Journal
of Real Estate Finance and Economics 18(2):147–61.
———. 1999b. “Home Equity Insurance.” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 19(1):21–
47.
Shiller, Robert J., Rafal Wojakowski, M. Shahid Ebrahim, and Mark B. Shackleton. 2013.
“Mitigating Financial Fragility with Continuous Workout Mortgages.” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 85:269–85.
Shleifer, Andrei. 2000. Inefficient Markets: A Survey of Behavioral Finance. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1997. “Limits to Arbitrage.” Journal of Finance 52(1):35–55.
Siegel, Jeremy J. 2005. The Future for Investors: The Tried and True Beats the Bold and New. New
York: Crown Business.
———. 2008. Stocks for the Long Run, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sims, Christopher A. 1984. “Martingale-Like Behavior of Prices and Interest Rates.” Discussion
Paper No. 205, Center for Economic Research, Department of Eco nomics, University of
Minnesota.
———. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50:665–90.
Singleton, Kenneth J. 1980. “Expectations Models of the Term Structure and Implied Variance
Bounds.” Journal of Political Economy 88:1159–76.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1986. “Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental Values?”
Econometrica 41:591–601.
Thaler, Richard H., and Eric J. Johnson. 1990. “Gambling with the House Money and Trying to
Break Even: The Effects of Prior Outcomes on Risky Choice.” Management Science 36(6):343–
60.
Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth
and Happiness. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Torous, Walter, Rossen Valkanov, and Shu Yan. 2004. “On Predicting Stock Returns with Nearly
Integrated Explanatory Variables.” Journal of Business 77:937–66.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases.” Science 185:1124–31.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo. 2002. “What Drives Firm-Level Stock Returns?” Journal of Finance
57(1):233–64.
West, Kenneth D. 1988. “Dividend Innovations and Stock Price Volatility.” Econometrica 56:37–
61.
Wu, Ho-Mou, and Wen-Chung Guo. 2004. “Asset Price Volatility and Trading Volume with
Rational Beliefs.” Economic Theory 23:795–829.

Notes
Preface to the Third Edition
1. Min Zhu (Deputy Managing Director, International Monetary Fund), “Housing Markets,
Financial 
Stability 
and 
the 
Economy”
(http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2014/060514.htm), June 5, 2014.
2. “In the countries that have been experiencing outsize financial booms, the risk is that these
will turn to bust and possibly inflict financial distress…. Based on leading indicators that have
proved useful in the past, such as the behaviour of credit and property prices, the signs are
worrying.” (http://www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2014e1.htm).
3. Eugene Fama, “Two Pillars of Asset Pricing” (Nobel Lecture), American Economic Review,
104(6) (2014), p. 1475.
4. Karl E. Case, Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Kinsella Thompson, “What Have They Been
Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
2 (2012): 265–98.
Chapter One    The Stock Market in Historical Perspective
1. Alan Greenspan, “The Challenge of Central Banking in a Democratic Society,”
http://www.federalreserve.gov/BOARDDOCS/SPEECHES/19961205.htm.
2. The Standard & Poor’s Composite Index is now called the Standard & Poor’s 500; however, I
use the older name here, since the historical index did not always contain 500 stocks. The
changing composition of the index reflects ongoing choices made by Standard & Poor’s. Of
course, they have to change the list as companies come and go. Jeremy Siegel reports that of the
500 firms in 1957, only 125 remained in the same corporate form in 2003. An index of the 125
firms surviving since 1957 shows somewhat higher returns than shown by the Standard & Poor’s
500 index itself. See Jeremy J. Siegel, The Future for Investors (New York: Crown Business, 2005).
3. The price, dividend, and earnings series are from the same sources as described in Chapter

26 of my earlier book Market Volatility (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989), although now I use
monthly data, rather than annual data. Monthly dividend and earnings data are computed from
the S&P four-quarter totals for the quarter since 1926, with linear interpolation to monthly
figures. Dividend and earnings data before 1926 are from Cowles and associates (Common Stock
Indexes, 2nd ed. [Bloomington, Ind.: Principia Press, 1939]), interpolated from annual data. Stock
price data are monthly averages of daily closing prices. The CPI-U (Consumer Price Index—All
Urban Consumers) published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics begins in 1913; for years
before 1913 I spliced to the CPI Warren and Pearson‘s price index, by multiplying it by the ratio
of the indices in January 1913. December 1999 and January 2000 values for the CPI-U are
extrapolated. See George F. Warren and Frank A. Pearson, Gold and Prices (New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 1935). Data are from their Table 1, pp. 11–14. For the plots, I have multiplied the
inflation-corrected series by a constant so that their value in June 2014 equals their nominal
value (that is, so that all prices are effectively in June 2014 dollars).
In my older work on stock prices (much of it done jointly with John Campbell), I had used the
Producer Price Index (PPI), All Commodities, rather than the CPI, to deflate. In the past, there
was not much difference between the PPI and the CPI, except for short-run oscillations, but since
the mid-1980s the levels of the series have diverged substantially. Unless otherwise noted, any
statistics reported in this book for the U.S. stock market are from the data set described in this
endnote. The data used here (as well as Chapter 26 from Market Volatility) are currently available
on my website, http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller.
4. 
See 
William 
H. 
Gross, 
“On 
the 
‘Course’ 
to 
a 
New 
Normal,”
http://www.pimco.com/EN/Insights/Pages/Gross%20Sept%20On%20the%20Course%20to%20a%
5. Some have urged that I use a log or ratio scale for the plot, so that the apparent price
growth at the end is not “misleading.” I do not believe that plotting in levels is misleading. One
could as well argue that plots on log scales are misleading. The spike of prices at the end is not
an artifact of the plotting procedure. We are not seeing in this figure the “hockey stick” curve of
exponential growth with constant high rate of growth. A plot of the same stock price series as in
Figure 1.1 also appears on a log scale in Figure 11.2, in Chapter 11.
6. See also for U.S. sector CAPE with a similarly long history Oliver Bunn and Robert J. Shiller,
“Changing Times, Changing Values—A Historical Analysis of Sectors within the US Stock Market
1872–2013.” 
New 
Haven, 
Conn.: 
Yale 
University, 
Cowles 
Foundation, 
2014,
http://cowles.econ.yale.edu/P/cd/d19b/d1950.pdf, and Oliver Bunn, Anthony Lazanas, Robert J.
Shiller, Arne Staal, Cenk Ural, and Ji Zhuang, “Es-CAPE-ing from Overvalued Sectors: Sector
Selection Based on the Cyclically Adjusted Price-Earnings (CAPE) Ratio,” Journal of Portfolio
Management, 41(1) (2014): 16–33.
7. Graham and Dodd’s 1934 “average earnings on common stock price,” which is the
reciprocal of CAPE without an inflation correction in earnings, seems not to have been much
picked up (Benjamin Graham and David Dodd, Securities Analysis [New York: McGraw-Hill,
1934]). Even earlier, the Wall Street Journal in 1911 published an article presenting an “Index of
Railroad Earnings Covering a Ten-Year Period” and evaluated stock price levels using this index.
Barron’s has published a “ratio price to five-year earnings” for its Barron’s 50-Stock Average since
the 1950s. Jeremy Siegel of The Wharton School has argued that a better measure of earnings
could be used for the denominator of the CAPE (“The Shiller CAPE Ratio: A New Look,” paper
presented at the Q-Group Conference, 2014). He proposes a denominator of ten-year-average
earnings based on a different measure of earnings: National Income and Product Accounts
earnings adjusted with a sort of divisor. This is an interesting proposal, which deserves watching,

but it is vulnerable to problems associated with the divisor and has a shorter available history, so
I did not yet see fit to make the change in the series shown here.
Starting in 1953, the interest rate is the yield of a monthly ten-year Treasury Bond series from
the U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Before 1953, the data are
interpolated to monthly from annual average data in Sidney Homer, A History of Interest Rates
(New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1963); for 1871–1900, from Table 38, col. 3, p.
288; for 1901–20, from Table 45, col. 14, p. 341; for 1921–46, from Table 48, col. 1, p. 352; and
for 1947–53, from Table 50, col. 1, p. 359. Jeremy Siegel has a very similar government bond
yield series (www.jeremysiegel.com) that he has studied in detail in his article “The Real Rate of
Interest from 1800–1990: A Study of the U.S. and the U.K.,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 29
(1992): 227–52.
8. It should be abundantly clear that some smoothing is necessary: consider the possibility of
zero earnings in a given year. Annual earnings per share adjusted to the S&P Composite Index
have always been strictly greater than zero in every year since the inception of the index in
1871, but they were negative for one quarter, the fourth quarter of 2008, and annual earnings
could of course pass below zero in the future. Total after-tax corporate profits were actually
negative in the national income accounts for 1931 and 1932. When earnings are zero, the price-
earnings ratio would be infinite in that year, suggesting that there is no upper bound on the price
of the aggregate stock market.
9. The rise in earnings during the stock market’s ascent to its peak in 2000 was partly due to
the market rise itself, owing to some pension accounting rules that make profits respond to an
increase in value of the pension portfolio. It appears that stock market investors did not see
through this accounting anomaly. See Julia Lynn Coronado and Steven A. Sharpe, “Did Pension
Plan Accounting Contribute to a Stock Market Bubble?” (Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2003-38, 2003).
10. Scholars have pointed out that since there was no year zero, each new century begins on
January 1 of a year ending in 1. In 1900, people were more respectful of such scholarship, and
waited a year to celebrate. A celebration of the third millennium, in contrast, happened at the
start of 2000.
11. There had been a very slow and gradual growth of price relative to earnings for thirty
years (real earnings grew at the rate of 2.3% a year from July 1871 to July 1900, while prices
grew at a slightly faster rate of 3.4% a year).
12. These are geometric average real returns using the S&P Composite Index and the Producer
Price Index (since the Consumer Price Index begins in 1913) to convert to real values.
13. See also Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation: 1999 Yearbook, Market
Results for 1926–1998 (Chicago: Ibbotson Associates, 1999), Tables 2-8 through 2-11, pp. 45–51.
When comparing the returns shown here with returns given for similar intervals since 1926 in
their book, it must be borne in mind that theirs are for calendar years only, and therefore do not
generally catch the peaks or troughs of the market.
14. One of John Maynard Keynes’s most famous terms, “animal spirits,” has some overlap with
the concept of irrational exuberance; it has been defined as natural or healthy (rather than
necessarily irrational) exuberance. Keynes was probably the most influential economist of the
twentieth century; he is famous for his 1936 book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money. That revolutionary book has been guiding fiscal and monetary policy leaders around the
world. He wrote in that book: “Even apart from the instability due to speculation, there is the

instability due to the characteristic of human nature that a large proportion of our positive
activities depend on spontaneous optimism rather than a mathematical expectation, whether
moral or hedonistic or economic. Most, probably, of our decisions to do something positive, the
full consequences of which will be drawn out over many days to come, can only be taken as a
result of animal spirits—of a spontaneous urge to action rather than inaction, and not as the
outcome of a weighted average of quantitative benefits multiplied by quantitative probabilities.”
John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (New York:
Harcourt Brace & World, 1961), p. 161. See also George Akerlof and Robert J. Shiller, Animal
Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the Economy and Why This Matters for Global Capitalism
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2009).
Chapter Two    The Bond Market in Historical Perspective
1. See Annette Vissing-Jorgensen and Arvind Krishnamurthy, “The Effects of Quantitative
Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2 (2011): 215–87.
2. See Federal Reserve Board, “Humphrey-Hawkins Report July 22, 1997, Section 2: Economic
and 
Financial 
Developments 
in 
1997”
(http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/1997/july/ReportSection2.htm); the model is
illustrated with a chart titled “Equity Valuation and the Long-Term Interest Rate” showing the
ten-year bond yield and the earnings-price ratio from 1982 through 1997.
3. Economic theory suggests that, if anything, there should be a relation between the real, not
nominal, interest rate and the price-earnings ratio. That there is a relation with the nominal
interest rate is an anomaly. We will return to this in Chapter 4. See also Franco Modigliani and
Richard A. Cohn, “Inflation, Rational Valuation, and the Market,” Financial Analysts Journal, 35
(1979): 22–44; reprinted in Simon Johnson (ed.), The Collected Papers of Franco Modigliani, Vol. 5
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989).
4. William H. Gross, “One Big Idea,” http://www.pimco.com/EN/Insights/Pages/One-Big-
Idea.aspx.
5. See Robert J. Shiller and Jeremy J. Siegel, “The Gibson Paradox and Historical Movements
in Real Long Term Interest Rates,” Journal of Political Economy, 85(5) (1977): 891–98. See also A.
H. Gibson, “The Future Course of High Class Investment Values,” Banker’s Magazine (London)
115 (1923): 15–34, and John Maynard Keynes, A Treatise on Money (New York: Macmillan,
1930).
6. See “Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird’s Eye View,” with John Y.
Campbell, Review of Economic Studies, 58: 495–514, 1991.
7. John Bates Clark, “The Gold Standard of Currency in the Light of Recent Theory,” Political
Science Quarterly, 10(3) (1895): 383–97.
8. The return is not technically guaranteed to be negative, for if there is sufficient deflation to
reduce the inflation-corrected principal below the original nominal principal, the investor
receives then the original nominal principal at maturity.
9. “The riskless asset for a long-term investor is an inflation-indexed consol. If this asset is
available, it will play some role in the optimal portfolio of any investor who has relative risk
aversion greater than one.” John Y. Campbell and Luis M. Viceira, Strategic Asset Allocation:
Portfolio Choice for Long-Term Investors, Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 4. See also Robert J.
Shiller, “Can the Federal Reserve Control Real Interest Rates?” in Rational Expectations and

Economic Policy, ed. Stanley Fischer (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research
and University of Chicago Press, pp. 117–67, 1980), http://www.nber.org/chapters/c6262.pdf.
10. Michael Ashton in “TIPS and CPI Futures—Practice Makes Perfect,” unpublished paper,
2014, describes how changing institutions and rising numbers of professional traders are making
the inflation derivatives market more important over the years. See also Michael J. Fleming and
John R. Sporn, “Trading Activity and Price Transparency in the Inflation Swap Market,” Economic
Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 19(1):45–58, May 2013.
11. See John Y. Campbell, Robert J. Shiller, and Luis M. Viceira, “Understanding Inflation-
Indexed Bond Markets,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (2009): 79–120.
12. See Robert J. Shiller, “Public Resistance to Indexation: A Puzzle,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1 (1997): 159–211.
13. Jeremy Stein, in his speech at the International Monetary Fund, “Incorporating Financial
Stability Considerations into a Monetary Policy Framework,” March 21, 2014.
14. It is conceivable that an inflation-indexed bond with a negative yield could have a positive
real return over its lifetime. This could happen in the United States in the unlikely event that
persistent and strong deflation occurs, since the Treasury Inflation Protected Securities promise
to pay at least the nominal original value of the principal back on maturity.
Chapter Three    The Real Estate Market in Historical Perspective
1. The Bank of International Settlements (BIS) in Basel has pioneered the assembly of home
price data around the world (http://www.bis.org/statistics/pp.htm). The Economist magazine in
London has assembled a list of indices that is similar to the one produced by the BIS
(http://www.economist.com/blogs/dailychart/2011/11/global-house-prices).
2. There have been many booming cities in China, but in other parts of China a huge increase
in supply has kept home price increases in check: the Chinese government has allowed
construction to proceed at a massive rate, without so much of the zoning and environmental
restrictions seen in other countries. In recent years, the Chinese government has sought to temper
the rapid increases in home prices.
3. I produced the home price series shown in Figure 3.1 by first linking together various
annual home price indices (by multiplying each by a constant so that values in one overlapping
year are equalized across indices) to arrive at a nominal home price index. Next, the nominal
home price index was deflated by the Consumer Price Index.
Even though there were no regularly published home price indices before the 1960s, some
economists were constructing indices of home prices that cover most of the years since 1890. We
found home price indices from 1890 to 1934 and from 1953 to the present that used in their
construction some device to attempt to hold the quality of the home constant.
The nominal home price index, 1890–1934, is from Leo Grebler, David M. Blank, and Louis
Winnick, Capital Formation in Residential Real Estate: Trends and Prospects (New York and
Princeton, N.J.: National Bureau of Economic Research and Princeton University Press, 1956),
Appendix C (http://www.nber.org/chapters/c1339.pdf). It is a repeated-measures index based on
a survey of homeowners in twenty-two U.S. cities, who were asked to give the value of their
home in 1934 and the date and price of earlier purchase of that home. Since it is based on
repeated measures of individual homes, the series is protected, in contrast to the simple median
price, from any bias from changes in the mix of houses sold or of the increasing size and quality
of newer homes. Its shortcoming is that it depends on memories of the surveyed homeowners for

the earlier purchase price.
The nominal home price index that we constructed for 1934–53 is a simple average over five
cities of median home prices advertised in newspapers. The cities are Chicago, Los Angeles, New
Orleans, New York, and Washington, D.C. My students collected the data from microfilmed
newspapers at the Yale University library, collecting approximately thirty prices for each city and
year, except that for the fifth city, Washington, D.C., 1934–48, data came from a median price
series from E. M. Fisher, Urban Real Estate Markets: Characteristics and Financing (New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1951). The median series for 1934–53 does not make any
attempt to correct for home quality change, as do the indices we use for the other subperiods.
Improvement in home size and quality puts an upward bias in median home price, and this is
why I avoided using median price as much as possible.
The nominal home price index for 1953–75 is the home purchase component of the U.S.
Consumer Price Index (CPI). The Bureau of Labor Statistics collected data on home prices for
those years for homes that are held constant in age and square footage. In the 1980s, they
discontinued this index when they switched to a rental equivalence basis for housing in the CPI.
They made this change to correct what was considered a conceptual flaw in the housing
component of the CPI: the CPI is supposed to be a price of consumption goods and services, not
of investment assets. For our purposes, however, the old home purchase component is
acceptable. There are, however, some shortcomings in the home purchase component, notably
that it is based only on homes with certain government-subsidized mortgages, and the procedure
that the Bureau of Labor Statistics used to correct for changes in the ceiling on these mortgages
was not optimal. See J. S. Greenlees, “An Empirical Evaluation of the CPI Home Purchase Index
1973–8,” American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association Journal, 10(1) (1982): 1–24. A
more detailed discussion of the indices that were used here for years before 1975 can be found in
my paper “Consumption, Asset Markets and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 17 (1982): 203–38.
The nominal home price index for 1975–present is the monthly S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National
Home Price Index produced by CoreLogic, Inc., purchasers of Case Shiller Weiss, Inc. Before
1992, this index relied partly on U.S. Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (now
replaced by the U.S. Federal Housing Finance Agency) indexes to fill in geographic regions for
which our own data were missing.
The consumer price index used to deflate nominal series to real is the same as that used in
Figure 1.1 and elsewhere in this book.
The building cost index links together two building cost series. The first, for 1890–1915, is
taken from Grebler, Blank, and Winnick, Capital Formation in Residential Real Estate, Table B-10,
col. 1 (Housekeeping), http://www.nber.org/chapters/c1338.pdf, p. 342. Their index is a
weighted average of wages per hour in the building trades and an index of materials prices. The
second is the Engineering News Record Building Cost Index. Their index, for 1915–present, based
on twenty cities, is the cost of 66.38 hours of skilled labor: bricklayers, carpenters, and structural
ironworkers, plus 25 hundredweight of standard structural steel shapes, 1.128 tons of Portland
cement, and 1,088 board feet of two-by-four lumber.
From 1890 to 1953 the interest rate series is from Homer, A History of Interest Rates, Tables 38
(col. 3), 45 (col. 15), 48 (col. 1), and 50 (col. 1), interpolated from annual to monthly. For April
1953–present it is the monthly ten-year Treasury Bond Yield, from the Federal Reserve. This long
rate series is very similar to the one in Jeremy J. Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run, 5th ed. (New

York: McGraw-Hill, 2014), http://jeremysiegel.com. Siegel describes the series in Jeremy J.
Siegel, “The Real Rate of Interest from 1800–1990.”
4. See the Standard & Poor’s analysis of costs of buying relative to renting:
http://www.housingviews.com/2013/02/08/charts-of-rent-vs-buy-and-inflation-adjusted-home-
prices/. A Federal Reserve study finds no significant evidence from regional data that a high
home price–to–income ratio portends future declines in home prices. See Joshua Gallin, “The
Long-Run Relation between House Prices and Income: Evidence from Local Housing Markets”
(Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics
Discussion Paper Series No. 2003.17, 2003). However, this study may not have had sufficient
power with its twenty-three years’ data, ending in the midst of a national home price boom, to
detect such an effect.
5. See Karl E. Case and Robert J. Shiller, “The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family
Homes,” American Economic Review, 79(1) (March 1989): 125–37.
6. According to a Federal Reserve study, the replacement cost of homes from 1970 to 2003 was
much more steady than the price of residential land. See Morris A. Davis and Jonathan
Heathcote, “The Price and Quantity of Residential Land in the United States” (Washington, D.C.:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series No.
2004-37, 2004).
7. Jonathan McCarthy and Richard W. Peach of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York have
reached a different conclusion. In a July 2004 article they write: “Home prices have essentially
moved in line with increases in family income and declines in nominal mortgage interest rates.”
See Jonathan McCarthy and Richard W. Peach, “Are Home Prices the Next ‘Bubble’?” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 2004, p. 1. Part of the reason for their very
different conclusion is that they chose to base their analysis on an index of new homes, the so-
called Constant Quality Index of new home prices. The Constant Quality Index has increased
much less in the last twenty years than have the repeat sales indices, suggesting that there is no
bubble. But new home prices tend to track building costs because new homes tend to be built in
areas where land is abundant; we just cannot expect to see a boom in new home prices. Nor do
we expect to see the burst of a bubble in new home prices: new homes are not built in places
where prices have fallen below construction costs. The structural housing market model
McCarthy and Peach say explains home price movements in terms of interest rates was fit over
their sample period 1981–2003, when interest rates’ downtrend inversely matched a home price
much better than over a longer period. There is a sense in which they are right, though: there are
major areas in the United States where home prices have not risen a lot and there has not been a
bubble.
8. See Claudio Borio and Patrick McGuire, “Twin Peaks in Equity and Housing Prices?” BIS
Quarterly Review, March 2004, pp. 79–93. In the United States fixed-rate long-term mortgages
have predominated since the 1930s. It appears that there is greater sensitivity to interest rate
changes in countries where floating rate mortgages are more widely used. See Kostas Tsatsaronis
and Haibin Zhu, “What Drives Housing Price Dynamics: Cross-Country Evidence,” BIS Quarterly
Review, March 2004, pp. 65–78. Another study of six industrialized countries found an impact on
house prices of interest rates, the stock market, and aggregate economic activity. See Gregory D.
Sutton, “Explaining Changes in House Prices,” BIS Quarterly Review, September 2002, pp. 46–55.
9. World War I was a much smaller war than World War II by U.S. standards. The military
comprised only 9% of the U.S. male population in World War I, compared with 24% in World

War II. U.S. direct involvement in World War I lasted only seven months, whereas U.S.
involvement in World War II lasted forty-five months.
10. Our data for the period 1934–53 are based on five large U.S. cities, and each of the five
cities shows a sharp increase in home prices after World War II. But it is not clear how much the
price increases in these cities correspond to those in the country as a whole. I therefore sought to
find other evidence about the country as a whole, particularly regarding the apparently large
home price increases after World War II.
The U.S. Census Department has collected data at decadal intervals on home prices since 1940
based on homeowners’ estimates. Their data show an increase of 45% between 1940 and 1950
for the median price of a home corrected for inflation; our data show a 30% increase.
A 1951 New York Times article reported a survey of 150 cities, a much better representation of
the country than just five big cities, made by Myron L. Matthews, vice-president of the Dow
Service, Inc. “His report showed that in the typical city the $6000 house of 1941 now has a price
tag of $13,860 on it.” (Lee E. Cooper, “Effects of Curbs on Building Loans Will Appear Soon,”
New York Times, April 22, 1951, p. 225.) The wording “typical city” is a little vague. But these
numbers imply a 131% nominal price increase (28% real increase) in the ten years from 1941 to
1951, not too far from the 154% nominal price increase (41% real increase) that our index shows
over that same interval.
However, a 1949 New York Times article reported the results of an even bigger study of 276
cities by the National Association of Real Estate Boards. It reported that the median over these
cities of the increase in home prices since 1940 was only “about 50%.” (Lee E. Cooper, “Realty
Men Look for Further Rise in Housing Prices,” New York Times, May 3, 1949, p. 81.) Since the
Consumer Price Index rose 73% from 1940 to 1949, their numbers suggest a decline of 13% in
real home prices over this interval, rather than the real increase of 22% that our numbers show
for the same interval. However, the median price increase over 276 cities is likely a downward-
biased measure of the national mean price increase, and puts too much emphasis on small cities.
That study also said that in some congested areas buyers now had to pay “about 100% more.”
Our index shows a 111% nominal increase from 1940 to 1949, suggesting that our numbers may
show an upwardly biased growth rate relative to prices nationwide after World War II if our five
cities were congested areas.
11. President Franklin Roosevelt’s statement on signing the GI Bill, June 24, 1944, Franklin D.
Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum, http://www.fdrlibrary.marist.edu.
12. Data are from Japan Real Estate Institute, Shigaichi Urban Land Price Index, Tokyo
Metropolitan Area, deflated by consumer price index.
13. Prime Residential Properties, rupees per square foot, deflated by consumer price index,
Knight Frank India.
14. See Piet Eichholtz, “A Long Run House Price Index: The Herengracht Index, 1638–1973,”
unpublished paper, the University of Limburg and the University of Amsterdam, 1996.
15 Karl E. Case, “Measuring Urban Land Values,” unpublished paper, Wellesley College,
October 26, 1997.
16. Computed from figures shown in his Table XLIV, “Land Values on North–South Streets in
the Central Business District of Chicago, 1830–1931,” p. 345, in Homer Hoyt, One Hundred Years
of Land Values in Chicago (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1933). I chose the years 1877
and 1931 for comparison because both of them were in the middle of a recession, as defined by
the National Bureau of Economic Research, actually both in depressions, and thus in comparable

economic conditions.
17. Hoyt, One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago, p. 279.
18. U.S. Census data show that the average new house rose from 1,500 square feet in 1970 to
over 2,200 square feet in 2000, and household size decreased from 3.1 persons per household in
1970 to 2.8 persons in 2002.
19. A search found that the first reference to the median selling price of existing homes in a
major newspaper was in the Washington Post in 1968. The article said that the survey that had
produced the median “was initiated over two years ago.” See “Average Sales Price Up $1000 to
$20,630,” Washington Post Times Herald, October 5, 1968. It is clear that there was no well-
publicized regularly published index of existing home selling prices before then. An article in the
New York Times in 1963 about a new government series on median prices of new homes noted:
“The new study is arousing considerable interest in the housing industry. A reason is that no
previous government or industry statistical reports concentrated on sales.” See “New Home Study
Arouses Interest,” New York Times, October 13, 1963.
20. Before real estate investment trusts were created by an act of Congress in 1960, there were
no publicly traded real estate securities in the United States, and hence no place where
speculative attentions to real estate would be recorded in published prices. Even then, the
investment performance of real estate investment trusts is not a good indicator of the investment
performance of individual owner-occupied homes, because the nature of the homes and of the
dividend stream that they yield is fundamentally different.
21. Jennifer Taub, Other People’s Houses: How Decades of Bailouts, Captive Regulators, and Toxic
Bankers Made Home Mortgages a Thrilling Business (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
2014), p. 141.
22. Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, “Summary of ‘the Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion,’”
Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (May 2008): 129–32.
23. “3 WaMu execs agree to settle FDIC lawsuit for up to $64 million,” Los Angeles Times,
December 
3, 
2011. 
http://articles.latimes.com/2011/dec/13/business/la-fi-fdic-wamu-
20111214.
24. Gretchen Morgenson, “Lending Magnate Settles Fraud Case,” New York Times, October 16,
2010. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/16/business/16countrywide.html?
pagewanted=all&_r=0.
Chapter Four    Precipitating Factors: The Internet, the Capitalist Explosion, and Other
Events
1. A number of studies of international data have provided evidence that countries with more
highly developed financial markets show higher economic growth or allocate resources more
efficiently. See Robert G. King and Ross Levine, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter May Be
Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (1993): 717–37; Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-
Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Corporate Ownership around the World,” Journal of Finance, 54
(1999): 471–518; and Jeffrey Wurgler, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 58 (2000): 187–214.
2. One study finds that individual investors tend to be less heavily invested in stocks during
business cycle troughs, when expected returns tend to be high, while institutional investors tend
to do the opposite, and hence to work in the direction of stabilizing the market. See Randolph
Cohen, “Asset Allocation Decisions of Individuals and Institutions,” Harvard Business School

Working Paper Series, No. 03-112, 2003. A Merrill Lynch survey showed that professional fund
managers outside the United States were generally selling U.S. stocks during bull markets from
1994 to 1999, but there was no such clear pattern for U.S. fund managers; see Trevor Greetham,
Owain Evans, and Charles I. Clough, Jr., “Fund Manager Survey: November 1999” (London:
Merrill Lynch & Co., Global Securities Research and Economics Group, 1999).
3. Some simple economic growth models suggest that a sudden technological advance will
have no effect on stock prices; for such models, see Robert Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin,
Economic Growth (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995); Olivier Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, Lectures
on Macroeconomics (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989); or David Romer, Advanced
Macroeconomics (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996). For example, the theoretical effect of a sudden
technological advance might be to spur investment in new capital, which will compete away any
extra profits that the technological advance might make for existing capital.
4. On November 1, 1999, Microsoft and Intel were added to the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
5. Survey by Roper-Starch Worldwide, cited in Karlyn Bowman, “A Reaffirmation of Self-
Reliance? A New Ethic of Self-Sufficiency?” Public Perspective, February–March 1996, pp. 5–8.
The plausibility of changes in materialistic values over time is enhanced by evidence of
differences in such values across cultures. See Gueliz Ger and Russell W. Belk, “Cross-Cultural
Differences in Materialism,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 17 (1996): 55–77.
6. U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS),
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/cvict.htm#ncvs. The survey is based on interviews with people in
84,000 households; results are not affected by the trend towards greater reporting of crimes to
police.
7. See Joel E. Cohen, “A Global Garden for the Twenty-First Century,” The Key Reporter, Spring
1998, p. 1.
8. See World Bank, Averting the Old Age Crisis (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).
9. Gurdip S. Bakshi and Zhiwu Chen (“Baby Boom, Population Aging and Capital Markets,”
Journal of Business, 67 [1994]: 165–202) found a substantial correlation between the average age
of the U.S. population over age 20 and the real S&P Index, 1950–92. However, Robin Brooks
(“Asset Market and Savings Effects of Demographic Transitions,” unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Yale University, 1998) showed that their result was sensitive to the cutoff age (20), and when he
extended their analysis to seven other countries, he found that the fit was poorer. Bakshi and
Chen are probably on the right track, but the evidence for a relation between the Baby Boom and
the level of the stock market is weak.
Possibly the differences in price behavior across asset classes could still be reconciled with a
Baby Boom theory by postulating that people in different age groups have different attitudes
toward risk because of age-related differences in risk tolerance and that the stock market was
relatively high at the peak of the Millennium Boom because the numerous people in their forties
today are naturally less risk averse than older people. But such a theory has never been carefully
worked out or shown to explain relative price movements. It is also noteworthy that the personal
savings rate in the United States was then nearly zero, not significantly positive as the life cycle
theory might suggest.
Economists have argued that given the increase in the stock market recently, savings rates are
in fact surprisingly high; see William G. Gale and John Sabelhaus, “Perspectives on the
Household Saving Rate,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (1999): 181–224.
10. See Ronald Inglehart, “Aggregate Stability and Individual-Level Flux in Mass Belief

Systems,” American Political Science Review, 79(1) (1985): 97–116.
11. Richard Parker, “The Media Knowledge and Reporting of Financial Issues,” presentation at
the Brookings-Wharton Conference on Financial Services, Brookings Institution, Washington,
D.C., October 22, 1998.
12. James T. Hamilton, All the News That’s Fit to Sell: How the Market Transforms Information
into News (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2004).
13. Data courtesy Mitchell Zacks of Zacks Investment Research. According to a Business Week
article, the change is even more dramatic: in mid-1983, fully 26.8% were sells, 24.5% were buys,
and 48.7% were holds. See Jeffrey Laderman, “Wall Street’s Spin Game,” Business Week, October
5, 1998, p. 148.
14. See Hsiou-Wei Lin and Maureen F. McNichols, “Underwriting Relationships, Analysts’
Earnings Forecasts and Investment Recommendations,” Journal of Accounting and Economics,
25(1) (1998): 101–27.
15. See James Grant, “Talking Up the Market,” Financial Times, July 19, 1999, p. 12.
Nevertheless, the analysts’ recommendations are still useful if we take account of this bias. Kent
Womack (“Do Brokerage Analysts’ Recommendations Have Investment Value?” Journal of
Finance, 51[1] [1996]: 137–67) shows that when analysts’ recommendations are switched from
hold to buy, the stock does tend to do well afterward, indicating that analysts do have some
ability to predict the stocks’ returns. When recommendations are switched from hold to sell, the
event is even more accurately predictive (of poorer return). Womack interprets this asymmetric
effect as indicating that because analysts are reluctant to issue sell recommendations, they do so
only when there is a very good reason.
16. See Steven Sharpe, “Re-examining Stock Valuation and Inflation: The Implications of
Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(4) (2002): 632–48, Figure 2,
p. 637. Earnings forecasts are from I/B/E/S and are aggregated from forecasts for individual
firms to forecasts of the S&P 500. Sharpe’s results do not give any clear evidence that the bias in
earnings forecasts has increased since 1979. Moreover, a relatively small number of failures to
predict extreme negative accruals accounts for a good part of the average bias. See Jeffrey
Abarbanell and Reuven Lehavy, “Biased Forecasts or Biased Earnings? The Role of Earnings
Management in Explaining Apparent Optimism and Inefficiency in Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts,”
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 35 (2003): 105–46.
17. Public perception of such a downward bias encouraged in the 1990s the proliferation on
the Internet of “whisper numbers”: earnings forecasts with no attributed sources from analysts
who could freely indulge, due to their anonymity, in their doubts. On the other hand, the term
whisper numbers was also applied to some even more extravagant upwardly biased forecasts that
firms did not want to go on the record for making, fearing the reputational consequences later of
being seen as having made such errors on the optimistic side. The decline in public interest in
whisper numbers after 2000 and a renewed public interest in them in 2003 has been interpreted
as a sign of the decline of, and then rise in, irrational exuberance. See Matt Kranz, “Earnings
Whispers Return,” USA Today, July 22, 2003.
18. Steven A. Sharpe, “How Does the Market Interpret Analysts’ Long-Term Growth Forecasts?”
Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance 20(2) (Spring 2005): 147–66, quote on p. 148.
19. Armen Hovakimian and Ekkachai Saenyasin, “U.S. Analyst Regulation and the Earnings
Forecast Bias around the World,” European Financial Management 20 (3) (June 2014): 435–61.
20. The tax shelter was written into the Internal Revenue Act of 1978 under Section 401(k),

but its applicability to company pension plans was not then clear. R. Theodore Benna, executive
vice-president of the Johnson Companies, an employee benefits consulting firm, tested the IRS by
creating the first 401(k) plan in 1981. The IRS announced in February 1982 that the tax benefits
of such plans would be allowed.
21. See New York Stock Exchange, The Public Speaks to the Exchange Community (New York,
1955).
22. Shlomo Benartzi and Richard H. Thaler, “Naive Diversification Strategies in Defined
Contribution Plans,” American Economic Review, 91(1) (2001): 79–98. Some faults in the Benartzi-
Thaler paper have been identified by Gur Huberman and Wei Jiang “Offering versus Choice in
401(k) Plans: Equity Exposure and Number of Funds,” unpublished paper, Columbia University,
2004.
23. Investment Company Institute, Mutual Fund Fact Book (Washington, D.C., 1999),
http://www.ici.org.
24. See Hugh Bullock, The Story of Investment Companies (New York: Columbia University Press,
1959).
25. See Rudolph Weissman, The Investment Company and the Investor (New York: Harper and
Brothers, 1951), p. 144.
26. Indeed, the flow of investment dollars into mutual funds seems to bear an important
relation to market performance, as mutual fund inflows show an immediate and substantial
reaction when the stock market goes up. See Vincent A. Warther, “Aggregate Mutual Fund Flows
and Security Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 39 (1995): 209–35; and William
Goetzmann and Massimo Massa, “Index Fund Investors,” unpublished paper, Yale University,
1999.
27. See my article “Why Do People Dislike Inflation?” in Christina D. Romer and David H.
Romer (eds.), Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press
and National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997), pp. 13–65.
28. See Modigliani and Cohn, “Inflation, Rational Valuation, and the Market”; see also Robert
J. Shiller and Andrea Beltratti, “Stock Prices and Bond Yields: Can Their Comovements Be
Explained in Terms of Present Value Models?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 30 (1992): 25–46.
29. Modigliani and Cohn also argued (and this is a more subtle point) that people fail to take
account of a bias in measured corporate profits due to the fact that corporations deduct from
their profits the total interest paid on their debt, and not just the real (inflation-corrected)
interest. In inflationary times, part of this interest paid may be viewed merely as a prepayment of
part of the real debt, rather than as a cost to the company. Few investors realize this and make
corrections for this effect of inflation. Their failure to do so may be described as another example
of money illusion. Jay R. Ritter and Richard S. Warr (“The Decline of Inflation and the Bull
Market of 1982–1997,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37[1] [2002]: 29–61) have
shown that market misvaluation of individual firms is related both to the level of inflation and to
the degree of firm leverage, thus offering evidence in support of the Modigliani-Cohn theory.
30. Public misunderstandings of inflation are described in Eldar Shafir, Peter Diamond, and
Amos Tversky, “Money Illusion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2) (1997): 341–74; and
Robert J. Shiller, “Public Resistance to Indexation: A Puzzle.”
31. New York Stock Exchange Fact Book (New York, 1998), http://www.nyse.com. Data on
shares traded show an even more dramatic increase, but this increase is substantially due to

inflation and the increase in the market value, which together encourage splits and therefore an
increase in the total number of shares outstanding.
32. See Gretchen Morgenson, “Investing’s Longtime Best Bet Is Being Trampled by the Bulls,”
New York Times, January 15, 2000, p. 1.
33. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “Special Study: On-Line Brokerage: Keeping
Apace of Cyberspace,” 1999, http://www.sec.gov/pdf/cybrtrnd.pdf.
34. See Kenneth R. French and Richard Roll, “Stock Return Variances: The Arrival of
Information and the Reaction of Traders,” Journal of Financial Economics, 17 (1986): 5–26; see
also Richard Roll, “Orange Juice and Weather,” American Economic Review, 74 (1984): 861–80.
35. See Shlomo Benartzi and Richard H. Thaler, “Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity
Premium Puzzle,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1) (1995): 73–92.
36. As Abbott and Volberg have written, “There can be little doubt that the last two decades of
the Twentieth Century have been marked by substantial increases in the availability and
acceptability of commercial gambling.” Max Wenden Abbott and Rachel A. Volberg, Gambling
and Problem Gambling in the Community: An International Overview and Critique, Report No. 1 of
the New Zealand Gaming Survey, 1999, p. 35.
37. Author’s calculations from numbers quoted in Craig Lambert, “Trafficking in Chance,”
Harvard Magazine, 104(6) (July–August 2002): 32.
38. John W. Welte et al. “Gambling Participation in the United States—Results from a National
Survey,” Journal of Gambling Studies, 18(4) (2002): 313–37.
39. Eugene Martin Christiansen and Sebastian Sinclair, The Gross Annual Wager of the United
States, 2000, Christiansen Capital Advisors, 2000, p. 2.
40. See also William N. Thompson, Legalized Gambling: A Reference Handbook (Santa Barbara,
Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 1994), pp. 52–53.
41. Quantitative evidence on gambling behavior is hard to come by for the 1920s. I counted
the number of articles about gambling in the Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature and reported
the percentage of all articles on the subject, as follows (where I and II denote the first and second
halves of the year 1938, respectively):
1919–21
0%
1922–24
0.004%
1925–28
0.021%
1929–32
0.035%
1933–35
0.006%
1936–38-I
0.003%
1938-II–42
0.008%
These numbers do strongly suggest a sudden and temporary surge in public interest in gambling
between 1925 and 1932, but of course they do not convey anything qualitatively about the
nature of changed public attitudes toward gambling. For a history of gambling and its relation to
speculation, see James Grant, The Trouble with Prosperity: A Contrarian Tale of Boom, Bust, and
Speculation (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1996).
42. George W. Bush campaign speech in Onalaska, Wisconsin, October 26, 2004,
http://www.presidentialrhetoric.com/campaign/speeches/bush_oct26.html.

43. The idea that private property improves incentives goes back to Adam Smith. That private
property creates committed citizens is an ancient tradition. These old ideas are gaining more
respectability in recent years. See, for example, William A. Fischel, The Homevoter Hypothesis:
How Home Values Influence Local Government Taxation, School Finance, and Land-Use Policies
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001).
44. On the same questionnaire we asked: “Has this worry about your income encouraged you
to buy a house, or to buy a bigger house or a house with more land?” While 81% of the 414
respondents said it had had no effect on their decision to purchase a house, those who said it had
encouraged them outnumbered those who said it had discouraged them, by two to one.
45. Data on personal savings are from the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts, Table
5.1. Data on asset growth are from Tables B100 and B100e of the Flow of Funds Accounts of the
United States.
46. Nell Henderson, “Greenspan Credits Economy’s ‘Flexibility’; Federal Reserve Chairman
Says Free Market Helps Absorb Shocks” [final edition], Washington Post, September 28, 2005.
47. See Adam S. Posen, “It Takes More than a Bubble to Become Japan,” Washington, D.C.:
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Working Paper No. 03-9, October 2003.
http://www.piie.com/publications/wp/03-9.pdf.
48. See question X4 in Survey Research Center, University of Michigan, “Index Calculations,”
http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/fetchdoc.php?docid=24770.
49. 
http://som.yale.edu/faculty-research/our-centers-initiatives/international-center-
finance/data/stock-market-confidence-indices/stock-market-confidence-indices. For other stock
market confidence indices, see Robert J. Shiller, “Measuring Bubble Expectations and Investor
Confidence,” Journal of Psychology and Markets, 1(1) (2000): 49–60.
50. 
William 
H. 
Gross, 
“On 
the 
‘Course’ 
to 
a 
New 
Normal,”
http://www.pimco.com/EN/Insights/Pages/Gross%20Sept%20On%20the%20Course%20to%20a%
51. Mario Bollini, Jennifer Barry, and Daniela Rus, “BakeBot: Baking Cookies with the PR2,”
http://web.mit.edu/mbollini/Public/icra/Bakebot.pdf.
52. Robert E. Lucas, “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46 (1978): 1429–
45.
53. See, for example, Fareed Zakaria, “Around the World a Dark Nationalism Threatens Peace,”
http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/editorials/2014/07/08/around-the-world-a-dark-
nationalism-threatens-peace.html.
54. Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press), 2014, Figure 8.8, p. 300.
55. See Jeremy J. Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run, 5th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2014), pp.
252–53.
56. The capitalist explosion, cultural changes lending more prestige to business success,
expanded media reporting of financial news, analysts’ increasingly optimistic forecasts, the
decline of inflation, and the expansion of the volume of stock market trades are all factors in
Europe, though often not as strongly felt as in the United States. Although Europe had less of a
post–World War II Baby Boom than the United States, it did have a pronounced Baby Bust after
the mid-1960s. Europe does not appear to show the same increase in gambling opportunities
evident in the United States. Nevertheless, even though not all of the precipitating factors are
operative in Europe, the strong cultural connections between the United States and Europe, and

the effects of U.S. investors’ demand for European stocks, should cause a substantial contagion
effect.
Chapter Five    Amplification Mechanisms: Naturally Occurring Ponzi Processes
1. Although not explicitly stated there, allusions to the feedback theory can be found in
Charles MacKay’s Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (London:
Bentley), written in 1841. MacKay wrote of the tulip mania: “Many individuals suddenly grew
rich. A golden bait hung temptingly out before the people, and one after another, they rushed to
the tulip marts, like flies around a honey-pot” (p. 146). There is also a suggestion of the feedback
theory in an anonymous pamphlet written during the tulip mania in Holland, Samen-Spraeck
tusschen Waermondt ende Gaergoedt nopende de opkomste ende ondergangh van flora (Haerlem:
Adriaen Roman, 1637). This pamphlet describes the contagious enthusiasm spurred by observing
others’ successes, which brought increasing numbers of people into the market.
2. The sample size n varies across questions because of different mailing sizes and response
rates. The standard errors for the percentages, for this and other questions reported in this
chapter, range from 1% to 4%. Of course, it is conceivable that the results are unreliable for
reasons other than sample size; for example, those who chose to answer the questionnaire might
be more likely than others to feel confident about the stock market. On the other hand, those
who answer the questionnaire are more likely to be the kind of active investors who influence
markets, and so the respondents may be more representative of the investors who are behind the
stock market boom than would be a truly random group of wealthy respondents.
3. Words that respondents use most often to describe their thoughts about home prices are
typically simple, timeless clichés, whose frequency varies through time. See Karl E. Case Jr. and
Robert J. Shiller, “The Behavior of Home Buyers in Boom and Post-Boom Markets,” New England
Economic Review, November–December 1988, pp. 29–46.
4. I did not ask on the questionnaire whether they thought the market would surely go down,
but available data on expectations show that most did not think so around the peak of the market
in 2000.
5. Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1931), p. 309.
6. David Elias, Dow 40,000: Strategies for Profiting from the Greatest Bull Market in History (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1999), p. 8.
7. Dwight R. Lee and Richard B. MacKenzie, “How to (Really) Get Rich in America,” USA
Weekend, August 13–15, 1999, p. 6.
8. Samuel Crowther, “Everybody Ought to Be Rich: An Interview with John J. Raskob,” Ladies
Home Journal, August 1929, pp. 9, 36.
9. Of course, for the majority of people who are saving too little, any encouragement to save
more, even if it is couched in terms of exaggerated investment optimism, is generally a good
thing.
10. Bodo Schäfer, Der Weg zur finanziellen Freiheit: In sieben Jahren die erste Million (Frankfurt:
Campus Verlag, 1999); Bernd Niquet, Keine Angst vorm nächsten Crash: Warum Aktien als
Langfristanlage unschlagbar sind (Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 1999).
11. See David E. Bell, “Regret in Decision Making under Uncertainty,” Operations Research,
30(5) (1982): 961–81; and Graham Loomes and Robert Sugden, “Regret Theory: An Alternative
Theory of Rational Choice under Uncertainty,” Economic Journal, 92 (1982): 805–24.

12. Nassim N. Taleb, Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role of Chance in Life and in the
Markets, 2nd ed. (New York: Texere, 2004).
13. See Richard H. Thaler and Eric J. Johnson, “Gambling with the House Money and Trying
to Break Even: The Effect of Prior Outcomes on Risky Choice,” Management Science, 36 (1990):
643–60.
14. John Kenneth Galbraith, The Great Crash: 1929, 2nd ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1961),
p. 79.
15. Data from the National Association of Investors Corporation website, http://www.better-
investing.org/member/history.html.
16. “Fun Fades at Investing Clubs,” E. S. Browning, Wall Street Journal, February 3, 2013,
http://search.proquest.com/abicomplete/docview/1283594060/57D6C1EBE49C4575PQ/1?
accountid=15172.
17. Brad M. Barber and Terrance Odean, “Online Investors: Do the Slow Die First?” Review of
Financial Studies, 15(2) (2002): 455–89.
18. A psychological theory rationale for such feedback is offered by Nicholas Barberis, Andrei
Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “A Model of Investor Sentiment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 49
(1998): 307–43.
19. Economists John Campbell and John Cochrane have proposed a theory of habit formation
that may also serve to amplify stock market responses. In their model, people become slowly
habituated to the higher level of consumption that they can expect from a more highly valued
stock market. After a stock market increase, investors may be newly experimenting with higher
consumption levels, but not yet habituated to them. Investors who have made profits in the
market may be willing to take more risks, because they still feel they could give up the higher
consumption level if investment losses forced them to do so. Again, their willingness to hold
stocks at higher prices may amplify the effects of the precipitating factors. See John Y. Campbell
and John H. Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock
Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(2) (1999): 205–51.
20. See Karl E. Case, John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller, “Comparing Wealth Effects: The
Stock Market vs. the Housing Market,” Working Paper No. 8606 (Cambridge, Mass.: National
Bureau of Economic Research, November 2001).
21. See Robert J. Shiller, “Market Volatility and Investor Behavior,” American Economic Review,
80 (1990): 58–62; and Shiller, Market Volatility, pp. 376–77.
22. Some economic theorists claim that negative bubbles cannot occur, since prices have a
floor at zero; therefore investors know that price cannot fall forever, and they should figure out
by backward induction that a negative bubble cannot even get started. But what they mean to
say is that bubbles cannot occur when everyone is rational and calculating—and when everyone
assumes that everyone else is rational and calculating.
23. The literature on applications of chaos theory to economics usually does not stress the kind
of price feedback model discussed here, but it may nonetheless offer some insights into the
sources of complexity in financial markets. See Michael Boldrin and Michael Woodford,
“Equilibrium Models Displaying Endogenous Fluctuations and Chaos: A Survey,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 25(2) (1990): 189–222, for a survey of this literature. See also Benoit
Mandelbrot, Fractals and Scaling in Finance: Discontinuity, Concentration, Risk (New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1997); and Brian Arthur et al., “Asset Pricing under Endogenous Expectations in an

Artificial Stock Market,” in W. B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D. Lane (eds.), The Economy as an
Evolving Complex System II (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1997). Another related literature
sets up experimental markets in which people trade in an environment that is designed so that
there is no news or other confounding factors. In these controlled circumstances there tend to be
extraneous “bubble” price movements; see Vernon L. Smith, Gary L. Suchanek, and Arlington W.
Williams, “Bubbles, Crashes and Endogenous Expectations in Experimental Spot Asset Markets,”
Econometrica, 56 (1988): 1119–51.
24. Lauren R. Rublin, “Party On! America’s Portfolio Managers Grow More Bullish on Stocks
and Interest Rates,” Barron’s, May 3, 1999, pp. 31–38.
25. Individuals were not surveyed between 1989 and 1996 and between 1996 and 1999. The
index is a six-month moving average of monthly surveys starting in 2001.
26. See Joseph Bulgatz, Ponzi Schemes, Invaders from Mars, and Other Extra ordinary Popular
Delusions, and the Madness of Crowds (New York: Harmony, 1992), p. 13.
27. Mike Hinman, “World Plus Pleas: Guilty, Guilty,” Anchorage Daily News, July 1, 1998, p.
1F; and Bill Richards, “Highflying Ponzi Scheme Angers and Awes Alaskans,” Wall Street Journal,
August 13, 1998, p. B1.
28. John Templeman, “Pyramids Rock Albania,” Business Week, February 10, 1997, p. 59.
29. Kerin Hope, “Pyramid Finance Schemes,” Financial Times, February 19, 1997, p. 3; and
Jane Perlez, “Albania Calls an Emergency as Chaos Rises,” New York Times, March 3, 1997, p. A1.
30. Jane Perlez, “Albanians, Cash-Poor, Scheming to Get Rich,” New York Times, October 27,
1996, p. A9.
31. This willingness to believe may be related to the human tendency for overconfidence
discussed in Chapter 9; see also Steven Pressman, “On Financial Frauds and Their Causes:
Investor Overconfidence,” American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 57 (1998): 405–21.
32. Charles P. Kindleberger, Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 2nd ed.
(London: Macmillan, 1989), p. 90.
33. Rakesh Khurana, Searching for a Corporate Savior: The Irrational Quest for Charismatic CEOs
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2002).
34. The term no-Ponzi condition has entered the vocabulary of theoretical finance; however, it
refers not to feedback loops but instead to an assumption in their models that investors cannot go
deeper and deeper into debt forever.
35. See Karl E. Case and Robert J. Shiller (“Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2 [2003]: 299–362) for further discussion.
Chapter Six    The News Media
1. No doubt there were speculative price movements before there were newspapers, but I have
found no pre-newspaper accounts of widespread public attention to speculative price movements
that are described by contemporaries as wild and inexplicable or as due solely to investors’
exuberance.
The first regularly published newspapers appeared in the early 1600s. Once publishers
discovered how to generate public interest, increase circulation, and make a profit, papers sprung
up rapidly in many European cities.
We might date the beginning of the mass media somewhat earlier, to the invention of printing
itself, when publication became no longer dependent on patrons. Innumerable pamphlets,

broadsides, and religious and political tracts were printed during the 1500s. Historian of printing
David Zaret (Origins of Democratic Culture: Printing, Petitions, and the Public Sphere in Early-Modern
England [Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999], p. 136) notes that “printing put
commerce squarely at the center of textual production. Unlike that of scribal production, the
economics of text production increasingly involved calculation, risk taking, and other market
behaviors in which printers oriented production to vague estimations of popular demand for
printed texts.” The advent of printing brought with it an increased incentive for literacy; by the
1600s many if not most urban people in Europe could read.
Histories of speculative manias, such as Kindleberger, Manias, Panics and Crashes, give no
examples of speculative bubbles before the 1600s, and my polling of local historians provided
none either. However, I cannot claim to have researched their history exhaustively.
Indeed there are probably some stories that could be regarded as an exception to my
generalization about the coincidence of the first manias and the first newspapers, although other
interpretations are also possible. Yale historian Paul Freedman offered me the example of pepper
as a possible exception: its price in the spice trade seems at times to have been surprisingly high,
and in the 1500s it was very volatile. There are ancient and medieval examples of grain prices
soaring at times of famine. Land price movements were also remarked in history. For example, in
a letter to Nepos around A.D. 95, Pliny the Younger writes, “Have you heard that the price of
land has gone up, particularly in the neighborhood of Rome? The reason for the sudden increase
in price has given rise to a good deal of discussion.” (Pliny the Younger, Letters and Panegyrics,
trans. Betty Radice [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1969], Book 6, No. 19, pp.
437–38.) By saying that there was much discussion, he is suggesting word-of-mouth effects, but
he really does not tell a mania story.
2. The tulip mania, a speculative bubble in the price of tulips in Holland in the 1630s, was
discussed in Chapter 5, note 1.
There were Dutch newspapers by 1618, and Holland, in contrast to other countries at the time,
allowed the printing of domestic news, not just foreign news. On these pioneering Dutch
newspapers, see Robert W. Desmond, The Information Process: World News Reporting to the
Twentieth Century (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1978).
The primary surviving source of information about the tulip mania is a pamphlet published in
Holland during its peak. The anonymous 1637 document, in the form of a dialogue between two
men, gives detailed news of the speculation as it was then unfolding. Numerous other pamphlets
about the mania, published just after its end, also survive; see Peter Garber, Famous First Bubbles:
The Fundamentals of Early Manias (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000). These surviving
pamphlets confirm the existence of well-developed print media capable of disseminating
information about the tulip mania as it happened.
3. “Why Property Ladder Is Having a Recession Refit,” The Telegraph, June 4, 2009.
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/5446569/Why-Property-Ladder-is-having-a-
recession-refit.html.
4. Transcript 3143, MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour, WNET/Thirteen, New York, October 14, 1987,
p. 10.
5. Victor Niederhoffer, “The Analysis of World News Events and Stock Prices,” Journal of
Business, 44(2) (1971): 205; see also David Cutler, James Poterba, and Lawrence Summers,
“What Moves Stock Prices?” Journal of Portfolio Management, 15(3) (1989): 4–12.
6. Robert J. Shiller and William J. Feltus, “Fear of a Crash Caused the Crash,” New York Times,

October 29, 1989, Section 3, p. 3.
7. Cutler, Poterba, and Summers, “What Moves Stock Prices?” p. 10.
8. That is, there is none unless one counts as substantial President Dwight Eisenhower’s heart
attack on September 26, 1955.
9. “The Tokyo Earthquake: Not ‘If’ but ‘When,’“ Tokyo Business Today, April 1995, p. 8.
10. David Santry, “The Long-Shot Choice of a Gambling Guru,” Business Week, May 12, 1980,
p. 112; “The Prophet of Profits,” Time, September 15, 1980, p. 69.
11. Professors Gur Huberman and Tomer Regev of Columbia University wrote a case study of
the soaring price of an individual company’s stock in response to a newspaper story that, while
compellingly written, actually revealed no news. The share price of EntreMed rose from 12 to 85
from the close of the market the day before to its opening on the day of a front-page New York
Times story that described the potential of the company’s drugs to cure cancer. They document
that every fact in the story had already been published five months earlier. (See Gur Huberman
and Tomer Regev, “Speculating on a Cure for Cancer: A Non-Event That Made Stock Prices Soar,”
Journal of Finance, 56(1) (2001): 387–96.) It is plausible—although the authors do not document
this—that many of the buyers of EntreMed shares on that day knew there was no news in the
story, but merely bought thinking that a story that was so well written and featured so
prominently would boost the share price.
12. (New Orleans) Times-Picayune, October 29, 1929, p. 1, col. 8; New York Times, October 29,
1929, p. 1; Wall Street Journal, October 29, 1929, p. 1, col. 2.
13. Jude Wanniski, The Way the World Works, 2nd ed. (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983),
Chapter 7.
14. Allan H. Meltzer, “Monetary and Other Explanations of the Start of the Great Depression,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2 (1976): 460.
15. Rudiger Dornbusch and Stanley Fischer, “The Open Economy: Implications for Monetary
and Fiscal Policy,” in Robert J. Gordon (ed.), The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change
(Chicago: National Bureau of Economic Research and University of Chicago Press, 1986), pp.
459–501.
16. New York Times, October 28, 1929, p. 1.
17. Wall Street Journal, October 28, 1929, p. 1.
18. O. A. Mather, Chicago Tribune, October 27, 1929, p. A1; New York Times, October 25, 1929,
p. 1, col. 8; Guaranty Survey quoted in New York Times, October 28, 1929, p. 37, col. 3.
19. The mailing list for individual investors was a list of high-income active investors (active as
indicated by such characteristics as subscriptions to investment publications and maintaining
accounts with stock brokers) purchased from W. S. Ponton, Inc. The list for institutional investors
was compiled from a random sample from the investment managers section of The Money Market
Directory of Pension Funds and Their Investment Managers. A total of 3,000 questionnaires were
sent out during the week of October 19, 1987: 2,000 to the individual investors and 1,000 to the
institutional investors. There were no follow-up mailings or reminders. I received 605 completed
responses from individual investors and 284 completed responses from institutional investors.
See Shiller, Market Volatility, pp. 379–402, for the analysis of the results that I wrote in
November 1987. We also did a study of Japanese institutional investors in 1987 that confirmed
that their stock market action was primarily in response to news from the United States. See
Robert J. Shiller, Fumiko Kon-Ya, and Yoshiro Tsutsui, “Investor Behavior in the October 1987

Stock Market Crash: The Case of Japan,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 5
(1991): 1–13.
20. Of course, since the questionnaire was filled out after the crash, part of this reported
concern with overpricing may have been due to hindsight bias. Indeed we cannot completely
trust even the self-categorization, into buyers versus sellers on October 19, that respondents
made on the questionnaire. The anonymity of the questionnaires, the plea for truthfulness, and
the stated purpose of the questionnaire as a tool for scientific research on the crash should all
have helped to provide us with more nearly objective answers, but of course no survey results
can be trusted completely.
21. Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms, Report of the Presidential Task Force on
Market Mechanisms (Brady Commission Report) (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1988), p. v.
22. Mark L. Mitchell and Jeffrey M. Netter (“Triggering the 1987 Stock Market Crash:
Antitakeover Provisions in the Proposed House Ways and Means Tax Bill,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 24 [1989]: 37–68) argue that the news did have an immediate impact on some stocks.
It is possible that this news served as a trigger for the crash, as the Brady Commission concludes,
by generating initial price decreases, even if the news had been largely forgotten by the day of
the crash.
23. Hayne Leland, “Who Should Buy Portfolio Insurance,” Journal of Finance, 35 (1980): 582.
24. See Robert J. Shiller, “Portfolio Insurance and Other Investor Fashions as Factors in the
1987 Stock Market Crash,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau
of Economic Research, 1988), pp. 287–95.
25. “Repeating the 1920s? Some Parallels but Some Contrasts,” Wall Street Journal, October 19,
1987, p. 15. This plot was in a box measuring some five inches by ten inches, associated with a
story on the same page by Cynthia Crossen, “Market Slide Has Analysts Eating Crow;
Justification of Summer Rally Questioned.”
26. See Robert K. Merton, Social Theory and Social Structure. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1957.
Chapter Seven    New Era Economic Thinking
1. Dean Foust, “Alan Greenspan’s Brave New World,” Business Week, July 14, 1997, pp. 44–50.
2. Aaron Zitner, “Shhhh, Listen: Could That Be the Ghosts of ’29?” Boston Globe, June 22,
1997, p. E1; Peter Gosselin, “Dow at 10,000: Don’t Laugh Yet,” Boston Globe, June 22, 1997, p.
E1; and Paul Krugman, “How Fast Can the U.S. Economy Grow?” Harvard Business Review, 75
(1997): 123–29.
3. A Nexis search on new era economics produced forty-eight stories, all of which included the
words stock market.
4. See George Katona, Psychological Economics (New York: Elsevier, 1975).
5. Alexander Dana Noyes, Forty Years of American Finance (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons,
1909), pp. 300–301.
6. Boston Post, January 1, 1901, p. 3.
7. Thomas Fleming, Around the Pan with Uncle Hank: His Trip through the Pan-American
Exposition (New York: Nutshell, 1901), p. 50.
8. “A Booming Stock Market: Strength of the Underlying Conditions,” New York Daily Tribune,
April 6, 1901, p. 3.

9. A. A. Housman, “Reasons for Confidence,” New York Times, May 26, 1901, p. v.
10. Allen, Only Yesterday, p. 315.
11. Tracy J. Sutliff, “Revival in All Industries Exceeds Most Sanguine Hopes,” New York Herald
Tribune, January 2, 1925, p. 1.
12. John Moody, “The New Era in Wall Street,” Atlantic Monthly, August 1928, p. 260.
13. Charles Amos Dice, New Levels in the Stock Market (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1929), pp. 75–
183.
14. Irving Fisher, The Stock Market Crash—and After (New York: Macmillan, 1930), pp. 101–74.
15. Craig B. Hazelwood, “Buying Power Termed Basis for Prosperity,” New York Herald Tribune,
January 2, 1929, p. 31.
16. Quoted in Commercial and Financial Chronicle, March 9, 1929, p. 1444.
17. “Is ‘New Era’ Really Here?” U.S. News and World Report, May 20, 1955, p. 21.
18. “The Stock Market: Onward and Upward?” Newsweek, December 12, 1955, p. 59.
19. “The U.S. Prosperity Today,” Time, November 28, 1955, p. 15.
20. “The Stock Market: Onward and Upward?” p. 59.
21. “Why Businessmen Are Optimistic,” U.S. News and World Report, December 23, 1955, p. 18.
22. “Is ‘New Era’ Really Here?” p. 21.
23. “The New America,” Newsweek, December 12, 1955, p. 58.
24. “Investors Bet on a Kennedy-Sparked Upturn,” Business Week, February 4, 1961, p. 84;
Dean S. Ammer, “Entering the New Economy,” Harvard Business Review (1967), pp. 3–4.
25. “Investors Bet on a Kennedy-Sparked Upturn,” p. 84; “The Bull Market,” Business Week,
March 18, 1961, p. 142.
26. “Battling Toward 900,” Business Week, January 23, 1965, p. 26; “Year of the White Chips?”
Newsweek, February 1, 1965, p. 57; “On Toward 1000,” Time, January 14, 1966, p. 78.
27. E. S. Browning and Danielle Sessa, “Stocks Pass 10,000 before Slipping Back,” Wall Street
Journal, March 17, 1999, p. C1.
28. This is a geometric average real return on the S&P Composite Index.
29. Michael Mandel, “The Triumph of the New Economy,” Business Week, December 30, 1996,
pp. 68–70.
30. See Michael Bruno and William Easterly, “Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 41(1) (1998): 2–26. There are of course complicated issues of timing to
consider: a stock market might move down on news that inflation is likely to be higher in the
future and then move up again gradually as consumer prices increase. Careful thought about
such timing issues is too technical for most public discourse, and therefore the issue will most
likely never be resolved in the popular mind (or, for that matter, definitively by economists).
31. Roger Bootle, The Death of Inflation: Surviving and Thriving in the Zero Era (London: Nicholas
Brealey, 1998), pp. 27, 31.
32. Steven Weber, “The End of the Business Cycle?” Foreign Affairs, 76(4) (1997): 65–82.
33. See George Hager, “Productivity Rise Not So Stunning after All?” USA Today, August 7,
2001.
34. According to the dean of productivity researchers, Robert J. Gordon, U.S. productivity,
after abstracting from short-run productivity changes associated with recessions, appears to have

gone through one big wave since 1871. Productivity growth rates gradually rose from the late
nineteenth century, growth rates peaked in the 1950s and 1960s, and then productivity growth
rates gradually declined. Obviously the stock market has not gone through one big wave of this
sort. See Gordon, Robert J., “U.S. Productivity Growth since 1879: One Big Wave?” American
Economic Review, 89(2) (1999): 123–28.
35. “When the Shoeshine Boys Talk Stocks,” Fortune, April 15, 1996, p. 99; U.S. News and
World Report, July 14, 1997, p. 57; Forbes, May 18, 1998, p. 325; Fortune, June 22, 1998, p. 197.
36. See Glenn S. Dumke, The Boom of the Eighties in Southern California (San Marino, Calif.:
Huntington Library, 1944), p. 49.
37. Dumke (The Boom of the Eighties, p. 260), who is in turn quoting Robert Glass Cleland,
History of Occidental College (Los Angeles: Ward Ritchie Press, 1937, p. 4).
38. See Kenneth Ballinger, Miami Millions: The Dance of the Dollars in the Great Florida Land
Boom of 1925 (Miami, Fla.: Franklin Press, 1936).
39. Data are the home prices of the U.S. FHFA, deflated by the Consumer Price Index.
40. See William A. Fischel, Regulatory Takings: Law, Economics and Politics (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1995).
41. Due-on-sale clauses were provisions that the mortgage had to be repaid when the home
was sold, so that the purchaser could not just assume an old mortgage to get its lower rate. When
a California savings and loan association in 1969 tried to enforce a due-on-sale clause to force
repayment of the low-interest-rate mortgages of two California couples, the couples sued. The
California State Supreme Court, in Tucker v. Lassen Savings & Loan Association (1974), ruled that
due-on-sale clauses in mortgages were not enforceable unless the lender could show impairment
of security. Other U.S. states’ courts rendered similar decisions. This made it much easier to buy
a house, but the other side of this was great stress on mortgage lenders, who strove to get the
decisions overturned. This finally happened with the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Fidelity
Federal Saving and Loan Association v. de la Cuesta et al. (1982).
42. Homeowners were offered “buy-downs” that deferred payment of part of the home
purchase price for a few years, after which, many people hoped, mortgage rates would be much
lower. High-interest-rate second or third mortgages on homes were sold by mortgage brokers to
wealthy investors, many of whom apparently thought that they could cash in on the housing
boom by investing in high-yield mortgages. By the early 1980s, when the housing boom faltered,
many homeowners defaulted on these mortgages.
43. Karl E. Case, “The Market for Single-Family Homes in the Boston Area,” New England
Economic Review, May–June 1986, p. 47.
44. Economist Edward Glaeser, in his paper “Reinventing Boston: 1640 to 2003” (Working
Paper No. 10166, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2004), claims that
there were some very important changes in the economy that took place then. He points out that
Boston had been going through a long period of decline: from 1920 to 1980 Boston’s population
had fallen from 0.7% of the U.S. population to 0.25%, as its various manufacturing industries
were lost to competitors far away. With such population decline, there was a surplus of old
housing, some of it now priced below construction costs. As Glaeser argues, when a substantial
amount of existing housing is priced in the market below construction costs, there will be
relatively little supply response to increased demand, and so prices can rise very rapidly until
home prices again surpass construction costs. A solid response in new construction did not come
in Boston until well into the 1980s, and then there was overconstruction and a subsequent fall in

home prices. See also Karl E. Case and Robert J. Shiller, “A Decade of Boom and Bust in the
Prices of Single-Family Homes: Boston and Los Angeles 1983 to 1993,” New England Economic
Review, March–April 1994, pp. 40–51.
45. Quoting Jonathan Rotenberg, in Steven B. Kaufman, “Boston Mixes High Technology with
Its Traditional Economy,” Washington Post, June 30, 1985, p. G3, col. 4.
46. See Edward Glaeser and Albert Saiz, “The Rise of the Skilled City,” Working Paper No.
10191 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2004).
47. Albert W. Atwood, “Vanished Millions: The Aftermath of a Great Bull Market,” Saturday
Evening Post, September 1921, p. 51.
48. Christina Romer, “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 105 (1990): 597–624.
49. Oscar Lange, “Is the American Economy Contracting?” American Economic Review, 29(3)
(1939): 503.
50. See Harvey Klehr, The Heyday of American Communism: The Depression Decade (New York:
Basic Books, 1984).
51. Okun quoted in Time, January 14, 1974, p. 61; Burns quoted in U.S. News and World
Report, June 10, 1974, p. 20.
52. See Bruno and Easterly, “Inflation Crises.”
53. See John Cassidy, Dot.con: How America Lost Its Mind and Money in the Internet Era (New
York: Perennial Currents, 2003).
54. Quoting Martyn Straw, in Andrew Hill, “Dotcom Fever Fades as Investors Seek Profits,”
Financial Times, April 29, 2000, p. 11.
55. See Jack Willoughby, “Burning Up: Warning: Internet Companies Are Running Out of Cash
—Fast,” Barron’s, March 20, 2000, pp. 29–32.
56. By extension, many rituals that our society undertakes have the ultimate purpose of letting
everyone know that everyone knows something; in this way the ritual can have fundamental
social implications. See Michael Suk-Young Chwe, Rational Ritual: Culture, Coordination, and
Common Knowledge (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003).
57. See Hites Ahir and Prakash Loungani, 2014. “There Will Be Growth in the Spring: How Do
Economists 
Predict 
Turning 
Points?” 
Vox, 
April 
14, 
2014,
http://www.voxeu.org/article/predicting-economic-turning-points.
Chapter Eight    New Eras and Bubbles around the World
1. The data for thirty of the countries are from the International Monetary Fund, International
Financial Statistics. The countries for which data start in January 1957 are Austria, Belgium,
Canada, France, Germany, Finland, India, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, the Philippines,
South Africa, the United States, and Venezuela. The remaining countries from this data source
and their starting dates are as follows: Brazil, August 1991; Chile, November 1978; Colombia,
October 1963; Denmark, February 1969; Israel, November 1982; Jamaica, July 1969; Korea,
January 1978; Luxembourg, January 1980; Mexico, July 1985; Pakistan, July 1960; Peru,
September 1989; Portugal, January 1988; Spain, January 1961; Sweden, January 1976; and the
United Kingdom, December 1957. The data for the other six countries are taken from
Datastream, and their starting dates are as follows: Australia, March 1973; Hong Kong, July
1974; Indonesia, January 1996; Singapore, February 1986; Taiwan, January 1986; and Thailand,

January 1984.
For each country, the monthly stock price index was divided by the consumer price index for
the same month to produce a real stock price index. Changes in the real stock price index
reported are largest month-to-month changes in the real indices over the intervals shown,
excluding intervals that occurred within three years of each other. Periods of consumer price
index inflation greater than 4% a month were excluded, since in times of high inflation
inaccuracies of timing or calculation of the consumer price index could cause spurious jumps in
stock price indices.
The tables also show, at the far right, the percentage change in the real stock price index for
the period of the same length (twelve months or five years) starting in the month at which the
period shown in the table ends. Thus, for example, reading from Table 8.1, we see that the
Philippine stock market rose 683.4% in real (inflation-corrected) terms from December 1985 to
December 1986, and rose another 28.4% from December 1986 to December 1987. For another
example, reading from Table 8.4, we see that the Spanish stock market fell 86.6% in real
(inflation-corrected) terms from December 1974 to December 1979 and then rose 0.1% from
December 1979 to December 1984.
2. Note from the rightmost column of Table 8.2 that Korea had a stock price increase in 1999
that would have placed it again in Table 8.1 had 1999 fallen within our sample for Table 8.1.
3. “Casino Times: After 280% Increase This Year, Taiwan’s Stock Market May Be Poised for a
Plunge,” Asian Wall Street Journal Weekly, October 12, 1987.
4. “Obsessed with Numbers, the Taiwanese Are Forsaking Work, Health and Sanity,” Asian
Wall Street Journal Weekly, September 14, 1987.
5. James Brooke, “Venezuela Isn’t Exactly Wild for Another Boom,” New York Times, September
2, 1990, p. IV.3.
6. Eugene Robinson, “As Venezuela Restructures, Even Gas Prices Must Rise,” Toronto Star,
May 21, 1990, p. C6.
7. “Bonanza for Bombay?” Far Eastern Economic Review, May 28, 1992, p. 48.
8. La Repubblica, quoted by Ruth Graber, “Milan Stock Market Has Gone to the Bulls,” Toronto
Star, May 25, 1986, p. F1.
9. Alan Friedman, “Milan’s Bulls Run Wild: Italy’s Stock Market Boom,” Financial Times, March
25, 1986, p. I.25.
10. David Marsh, “The New Appetite for Enterprise: The French Bourse,” Financial Times, July
4, 1984, p. I.14.
11. Even though the French bull market in the late 1990s was extraordinary, enthusiasm for
the stock market did not seem to have invaded French culture as it did the American way of life.
See J. Mo, “Despite Exceptional Performance, the Stock Market Does Not Attract the French,” Le
Monde, November 25, 1999, electronic edition.
12. Werner De Bondt and Richard H. Thaler, “Does the Stock Market Overreact?” Journal of
Finance, 40(3) (1985): 793–805. See John Y. Campbell, Andrew Lo, and Craig Mackinlay, The
Econometrics of Financial Markets (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997), pp. 27–82,
253–89, for a survey of literature on serial correlation of returns.
13. To judge whether a large price increase (or decrease) portends future increases or
decreases, it is tempting to try to use the results shown in the tables alone. One notes, for
example, from Table 8.3 that of the twenty episodes whose large price increases occurred long

enough ago that we can observe the subsequent five-year price change, thirteen (65%) of the
subsequent price changes were down, and the average real price change, averaging over all
episodes shown in Table 8.3, was −10%. One notes, too, from Table 8.4, that of the twenty-one
episodes whose large price decreases occurred long enough ago that we can observe the
subsequent five-year real price change, sixteen (76%) were positive, and the average price
increase, averaging over all the episodes shown in Table 8.4, was 130%.
However, there is a problem in interpreting these results as evidence that the markets can be
predicted, since we used data subsequent to the five-year intervals shown in the tables to identify
the five-year intervals as the largest.
Chapter Nine    Psychological Anchors for the Market
1. For a more comprehensive recent survey of the role of psychology in finance, see Hersh
Shefrin, Beyond Greed and Fear: Understanding Behavioral Finance and the Psychology of Investing
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2000); or Andrei Shleifer, Inefficient Markets: An
Introduction to Behavioral Finance (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
2. See Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases,” Science, 185 (1974): 1124–31.
3. See Robert J. Shiller, “Comovements in Stock Prices and Comovements in Dividends,”
Journal of Finance, 44 (1989): 719–29.
4. See Steven L. Heston and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, “Does Industrial Structure Explain the
Benefits of International Diversification?” Journal of Financial Economics, 36 (1994): 3–27; John
M. Griffin and G. Andrew Karolyi, “Another Look at the Role of the Industrial Structure of
Markets for International Diversification Strategies,” Journal of Financial Economics, 50 (1998):
351–73; and Kenneth Froot and Emil Dabora, “How Are Stock Prices Affected by the Location of
Trade?” Journal of Financial Economics, 53(2) (1999): 189–216. Investor attention also appears to
be attracted to countries with a common language, as anchoring theory would suggest; see Mark
Grinblatt and Matti Keloharju, “Distance, Language, and Culture Bias: The Role of Investor
Sophistication,” Journal of Finance, 56(3) (2001): 1053–73.
5. See James D. Petersen and Cheng-Ho Hsieh, “Do Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
Stocks and Bonds Explain Returns on REITs?” Real Estate Economics, 25 (1997): 321–45.
6. Nancy Pennington and Reid Hastie, “Reasoning in Explanation-Based Decision Making,”
Cognition, 49 (1993): 123–63.
7. See D. W. Bolen and W. H. Boyd, “Gambling and the Gambler: A Review of Preliminary
Findings,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 18(5) (1968): 617–29. Gambling provides stimulation
and excitement, and people who are attracted to games of risk tend to be people who have a
stronger inclination toward sensation seeking; see Marvin Zuckerman, Elizabeth Kolin, Leah
Price, and Ina Zoob, “Development of a Sensation-Seeking Scale,” Journal of Consulting
Psychology, 28(6) (1964): 477–82; William F. Straub, “Sensation Seeking among High-and Low-
Risk Male Athletes,” Journal of Sports Psychology, 4(3) (1982): 243–53; and Helen Gilchrist,
Robert Povey, Adrian Dickenson, and Rachel Povey, “The Sensation-Seeking Scale: Its Use in a
Study of People Choosing Adventure Holidays,” Personality and Individual Differences, 19(4)
(1995): 513–16.
8. See Gideon Keren, “The Rationality of Gambling: Gamblers’ Conceptions of Probability,
Chance and Luck,” in George Wright and Peter Ayton (eds.), Subjective Probability (Chichester,
England: John Wiley and Sons, 1994), pp. 485–99.

9. See Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, “The Law
and Economics of Company Stock in 401(k) Plans,” Journal of Law and Economics, 501(1) (2007):
45–79. See also Shlomo Benartzi, “Why Do Employees Invest Their Retirement Savings in
Company Stock?” unpublished paper, Anderson School, University of California, Los Angeles,
1999. Benartzi finds that employee investment in company stock is strongly influenced by the
return on the company stock over the past ten years. He shows that it is extremely rare for
companies to offer discount incentives for employees to buy company stock, that employees
freely make choices to invest in company stock, and that employee decisions to invest in
company stock do not reflect superior employee information about the company, since the level
of purchases does not predict returns on the stock in the future. A modest shift away from
company stock holdings has been observed since 2006; see the Vanguard Group, Inc.,“How
America 
Saves
2013,”https://pressroom.vanguard.com/content/nonindexed/2013.06.03_How_America_Saves_201
10. Eldar Shafir, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky, “Reason-Based Choice,” Cognition, 49
(1993): 11–36.
11. Thomas J. Stanley and William D. Danko, The Millionaire Next Door: The Surprising Secrets of
America’s Wealthy (New York: Pocket Books, 1996).
12. Baruch Fischhof, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein, “Knowing with Uncertainty: The
Appropriateness of Extreme Confidence,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 3 (1977): 522–64.
13. See G. Gigerenzer, “How to Make Cognitive Illusion Disappear: Beyond ‘Heuristic and
Biases,’” European Review of Social Psychology, 2 (1991): 83–115.
14. See Gordon W. Pitz, “Subjective Probability Distributions for Imperfectly Known
Quantities,” in Lee W. Gregg (ed.), Knowledge and Cognition (Potomac, Md.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1975), pp. 29–41.
15. See Allan Collins, Eleanor Warnock, Nelleke Acello, and Mark L. Miller, “Reasoning from
Incomplete Knowledge,” in Daniel G. Bobrow and Allan Collins (eds.), Representation and
Understanding: Studies in Cognitive Science (New York: Academic Press, 1975), pp. 383–415.
16. See Dagmar Strahlberg and Anne Maass, “Hindsight Bias: Impaired Memory or Biased
Reconstruction,” European Review of Social Psychology, 8 (1998): 105–32.
17. See E. J. Langer, “The Illusion of Control,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32
(1975): 311–28; see also G. A. Quattrone and Amos Tversky, “Causal versus Diagnostic
Contingencies: On Self-Deception and the Voter’s Delusion,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 46(2) (1984): 237–48.
18. Tversky and Kahneman, “Judgment under Uncertainty.”
19. Economists Nicholas Barberis, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny have developed the
representativeness heuristic into a theory of investors’ selective overconfidence and into a
psychological theory of an expectational feedback loop. These authors argue that investors, when
they see stock prices move in the same direction for a while, gradually begin to assume that the
trend is representative of many trends that they have seen in other economic data. According to
a psychological principle of conservatism, people are slow to change their opinions. For this
reason, it takes some time before investors begin to conclude that the trend will continue. The
interplay between the representativeness heuristic and the principle of conservatism determines
the speed at which the speculative feedback progresses. See Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny, “A
Model of Investor Sentiment.” For further theoretical discussions about overconfidence and the

stock market, see also Nicholas Barberis, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos, “Prospect Theory and
Asset Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (2001): 1–53; Kent Daniel, David Hirshleifer,
and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, “Investor Psychology and Security Market Over-and
Underreaction,” Journal of Finance, 53(6) (1998): 1839–86; and Harrison Hong and Jeremy C.
Stein, “A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading, and Overreaction in Asset
Markets,” Journal of Finance, 54(6) (1999): 2143–84.
20. Such ideas are formalized by Paul Milgrom and Nancy Stokey, “Information, Trade, and
Common Knowledge,” Econometrica, 49 (1982): 219–22; and John Geanakoplos, “Common
Knowledge,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6(4) (1992): 53–82.
21. Eldar Shafir and Amos Tversky, “Thinking through Uncertainty: Nonconsequential
Reasoning and Choice,” Cognitive Psychology, 24 (1992): 449–74.
Chapter Ten    Herd Behavior and Epidemics
1. Solomon Asch, Social Psychology (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1952), pp. 450–501.
2. Morton Deutsch and Harold B. Gerard, “A Study of Normative and Informational Social
Influences upon Individual Judgment,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51 (1955):
629–36.
3. Stanley Milgram, Obedience to Authority (New York: Harper and Row, 1974), pp. 13–54.
4. Milgram noted that subjects believed that the experimenter was an expert who knew more
than they did. When he tried a variation of the experiment in which the experimenter was clearly
not an expert, he found a much-diminished tendency for subjects to administer the shocks (ibid.,
pp. 89–112). Nevertheless Milgram, like Asch, did not seem to be aware of an information-based
interpretation for his results. He thought that they revealed an “instinct for obedience” that had
developed from a general evolutionary principle of the “survival of value hierarchy” (ibid., pp.
123–25).
5. See S. D. Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, “A Theory of Fashion, Social
Custom and Cultural Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 81 (1992): 637–54; and Abhijit V.
Banerjee, “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3) (1992):
797–817.
6. See Christopher Avery and Peter Zemsky, “Multidimensional Uncertainty and Herd Behavior
in Financial Markets,” American Economic Review, 88(4) (1998): 724–48; and In Ho Lee, “Market
Crashes and Informational Avalanches,” Review of Economic Studies, 65(4) (1998): 741–60.
7. The respondents were drawn from a random sample of high-income individuals in the
United States by Survey Sampling, Inc. We coded their answers into ten categories. The
percentages of 131 respondents in each category were as follows: (1) friend or relative (13%), (2)
worked for company (21%), (3) someone involved with company (3%), (4) broker (33%), (5)
spinoff of successful company (2%), (6) IPO–publicity (2%), (7) periodicals–newspapers (6%), (8)
customer of company (2%), (9) stock was inherited or a gift (2%), (10) performance of similar
company (0%). The remaining answers could not be placed into categories. See Robert J. Shiller
and John Pound, “Survey Evidence on the Diffusion of Interest and Information among
Investors,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 12 (1989): 47–66. If we repeated this
study today, we would of course have to include television (which now has extensive business
reporting) and the Internet on the list. In Psychological Economics, the psychologist-economist
George Katona presented evidence that a process of repeated human interaction is needed to
promote the kind of “social learning” that spurs people to take action. Robin Barlow and his

colleagues found evidence similar to ours, that individual investors usually make decisions after
conversations with others; see Robin Barlow, Harvey E. Brazer, and James N. Morgan, Economic
Behavior of the Affluent (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1966).
8. Amy Feldman and Bill Egbert, “Mess of an Invest: Little People in Big Trouble with 1.3
Million Scam,” New York Daily News, May 27, 1999, p. 5.
9. See A. A. L. Reid, “Comparing Telephone with Face-to-Face Contact,” in Ithiel de Sola Poole
(ed.), The Social Impact of the Telephone (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977), pp. 386–414.
10. Clarence Day, “Father Lets in the Telephone,” in Life with Father (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 1935), p. 178.
11. Regarding securities fraud in the 1920s and contemporary legislation to limit it, see
Emmanuel Stein, Government and the Investor (New York: Farrar and Reinhart, 1941).
12. See Norman T. Bailey, The Mathematical Theory of Epidemics (London: C. Griffin, 1957).
13. The logistic curve is P = 1/(1 + e–rt), where P is the proportion of the population infected,
r is the infection rate per unit of time, and t is time. This expression is a solution to the
differential equation dP/P = r(1 − P)dt, and (1 − P) is the proportion of the population that is
susceptible to infection.
14. Alan Kirman, “Ants, Rationality and Recruitment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(1)
(1993): 137–56.
15. See David J. Bartholomew, Stochastic Models for Social Processes (New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 1967).
16. Giorgio Vasari, The Life of Leonardo da Vinci (Longmans Green and Co., 1903), p. 35.
17. “‘Mona Lisa’ Thief Gets a Year in Jail,” New York Times, June 6, 1914, p. 3.
18. See Tom Burnam, More Misinformation (Philadelphia: Lippincott and Crowell, 1980), pp.
20–21.
19. John Kenneth Galbraith laid to rest the suicide myth. The New York suicide rate did,
however, rise during the 1930s with the advent of the Great Depression. See Galbraith, The Great
Crash: 1929, pp. 132–37.
20. The sample sizes were 30 (control) and 40 (experimental); see Shiller and Pound, “Survey
Evidence,” p. 54.
21. See N. R. F. Maier, “Reasoning in Humans. II. The Solution of a Problem and Its
Appearance in Consciousness,” Journal of Comparative Psychology, 12 (1931): 181–94; see also
Robert E. Nisbett and Timothy DeCamp Wilson, “Telling More than We Can Know: Verbal
Reports on Mental Processes,” Psychological Review, 84(3) (1977): 231–59.
Chapter Eleven    Efficient Markets, Random Walks, and Bubbles
1. See Eugene Fama, “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,”
Journal of Finance, 25 (1970): 383–417.
2. George Gibson, The Stock Markets of London, Paris and New York (New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1889), p. 11. For a history of thought on efficient markets theory, see Robert J. Shiller,
“From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17
(2003): 83–104.
3. Joseph Stagg Lawrence, Wall Street and Washington (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1929), p. 179.

4. There does seem to be an advantage to following professional analysts’ advice—if one
disregards the trading costs associated with following the frequent changes in their opinions. See
Womack, “Brokerage Analysts’ Recommendations”; and Brad Barber, Reuven Lehavy, Maureen
McNichols, and Brett Trueman, “Can Investors Profit from the Prophets? Consensus Analyst
Recommendations and Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56(1) (2001): 531–63. The latter argue
that, despite transaction costs, investors “who are otherwise considering buying or selling …
would be better off purchasing shares in firms with more favorable consensus recommendations
and selling shares in those with less favorable ratings” (p. 562).
5. Judith Chevalier and Glenn Ellison, “Are Some Mutual Fund Managers Better than Others?
Cross-Sectional Patterns in Behavior and Performance,” Journal of Finance, 54(3) (1999): 875–99.
6. See, for example, William Goetzmann and Roger Ibbotson, “Do Winners Repeat? Patterns in
Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 20 (1994): 9–17; Edwin J. Elton,
Martin Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake, “Survivorship Bias and Mutual Fund Performance,”
Review of Financial Studies, 9(4) (1996): 1097–1120; and, by the same authors, “The Persistence
of Risk-Adjusted Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Business, 69 (1996): 133–37.
7. See Brad M. Barber, Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean, “Do Individual Day
Traders Make Money? Evidence from Taiwan,” unpublished paper, University of California,
Davis, 2004.
8. Andrew Edgecliffe, “eToys Surges after Listing,” Financial Times, May 21, 1999, p. 29.
9. Edward M. Miller, “Risk, Uncertainty and Divergence of Opinion,” Journal of Finance, 32
(1977): 1151–68.
10. Theoretically, the presence of short-sale constraints can also allow for a situation where
asset prices exceed fundamental value even when there are no zealots, that is, when everyone is
perfectly rational, and even in economic models where everyone knows that the price will come
back down by a specified future date. Mathematical economists have demonstrated a theoretical
rational expectations model with common knowledge of an asset’s overpricing (but not common
knowledge of the common knowledge) in which the presence of short-sale constraints thwarts
the backward induction from a commonly known terminal value. Everyone knows that the price
will fall, but it still can sometimes happen that everyone expects to be able to sell the asset to
someone else at a higher price before the price falls. See Franklin Allen, Stephen Morris, and
Andrew Postlewaite, “Finite Bubbles with Short Sale Constraints and Asymmetric Information,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 61 (1993): 206–29.
11. See Charles M. Jones and Owen A. Lamont, “Short Sale Constraints and Stock Returns,”
Journal of Finance, 66(2–3) (2002): 207–39.
12. See Owen A. Lamont and Richard H. Thaler, “Can the Market Add and Subtract?
Mispricing in Stock Market Carve-Outs,” Journal of Political Economy, 111 (2003): 227–68.
13. See Stephen Figlewski, “The Informational Effects of Restrictions on Short Sales: Some
Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 16 (1981): 463–76.
Figlewski’s measure of difficulty shorting may not have been an accurate one, and other
measures have been proposed that predict subsequent returns better. See Joseph Chen, Harrison
Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Breadth of Ownership and Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 66 (2002): 171–205; and Anna Scherbina, “Stock Prices and Differences in Opinion:
Empirical Evidence that Prices Reflect Optimism,” working paper, Kellogg Graduate School of
Management, April 2001.
14. Sanjoy Basu, “The Investment Performance of Common Stocks Relative to Their Price-

Earnings Ratios: A Test of the Efficient Markets,” Journal of Finance, 32(3) (1977): 663–82;
Eugene Fama and Kenneth French, “The Cross Section of Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of
Finance, 47 (1992): 427–66. Firms’ managers also seem to know when their shares are relatively
overpriced by the market and tend to issue new equity more often then. Thus firms’ equity
financing is a negative signal of future returns; see Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler, “The
Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 55(5) (2000):
2219–57.
15. De Bondt and Thaler, “Does the Stock Market Overreact?”; see also James Poterba and
Lawrence Summers, “Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence and Implications,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 22 (1988): 26–59.
16. Jay R. Ritter, “The Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings,” Journal of Finance,
46(1) (1991): 3–27.
17. The advertisement quoting Lynch appeared in numerous places, for example in Mutual
Funds, September 1999, p. 37. The ad said that the data were for the S&P 500 Index, but it did
not give the sample period. By searching for the interval of greatest earnings growth, and making
no correction for inflation, I can roughly replicate the quoted results. To maximize earnings
growth, one chooses a start date right after World War II, when earnings were still depressed by
the war, and also at the bottom of the recession in October 1945. Lagging four-quarter-total S&P
earnings went up 48-fold from the second quarter of 1946 to the third quarter of 1997. Between
June 1946 and April 1998, the S&P Composite Index went up 60-fold. Lynch’s basic result is
therefore more or less confirmed for these intervals. But if one chooses other intervals the results
look very different. Between the fourth quarter of 1947 and the fourth quarter of 1998, earnings
went up only 23-fold, while between December 1947 and April 1999 the S&P Composite went up
83-fold. These slightly different sample periods give a very different impression than that created
by the ad: these results show price growing far more than earnings.
From 1946 to 1997, the producer-price index went up seven-fold, and so in fact real earnings
increased only seven-fold in this period. A seven-fold earnings increase is a growth rate of real
earnings of about 4% a year. Between the fourth quarter of 1947 and the fourth quarter of 1998,
the growth rate of real earnings was only 3% per year. The growth of inflation-corrected earnings
over this entire interval has not been impressive: no more than the current rate of interest on
inflation-indexed government bonds. But the ad—by choosing a sample creatively, by reporting
changes over very long time intervals, and by not making an inflation correction—fostered the
false impression that enormous price increases were warranted by enormous earnings increases.
18. See John Y. Campbell and Robert J. Shiller, “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock
Market Outlook,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 24 (1998): 11–26; and John Y. Campbell and
Robert J. Shiller, “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock Market Outlook: An Update,” in
Richard Thaler (ed.), Advances in Behavioral Finance II (New York: Sage Foundation, 2005).
19. Some have concluded that the ratios (earnings-price ratios, dividend-price ratios, or ratios
of other measures of fundamental value to price) predict returns. In his textbook Asset Pricing,
John Cochrane asserts flatly, in a display box, “Dividend/price ratios forecast excess returns on
stock.” See John Cochrane, Asset Pricing (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001), p.
389.
However, the actual academic literature has still not resolved the question of statistical
significance. There are unresolved statistical complexities, notably those due to the problem of
(near) unit roots in the ratios and the endogenous variable problem of dependency of both

independent and dependent variables on price. Campbell and I (1989) concluded that the
apparent forecastability of returns like that shown in Figure 11.1 is extremely unlikely to be an
artifact of the endogenous variable problem; see John Y. Campbell and Robert J. Shiller, “The
Dividend Ratio Model and Small Sample Bias: A Monte Carlo Study.” Economics Letters, 29
(1989): 325–31. See also Robert Stambaugh, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, “The Long of It: Odds
that Investor Sentiment Spuriously Predicts Anomaly Returns” (Working Paper No. 18231,
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2012). But there are also issues
of the relevance of asymptotic distribution theory in small samples, questions about regime
change, and measurement issues for the underlying data, as well as difficulty interpreting
complex statistical evidence that has been selectively presented by a researcher who may have a
preconceived bias.
Jonathan Lewellen, using U.S. data, argued that there should not be a unit root in the ratios,
and used this assumption to conclude that the dividend-price ratio, the book-to-market ratio, and
the earnings-price ratio are statistically significant in predicting returns. See Jonathan Lewellen,
“Predicting Returns with Financial Ratios,” Journal of Financial Economics, 64 (2004): 209–35.
However, Walter Torous, Rossen Valkanov, and Shu Yan allow for the possibility of unit roots,
estimating bounds for the autoregressive parameter, and conclude that with U.S. data there is
evidence of predictability based on ratios at short-term horizons but not at long-term horizons.
See Walter Torous, Rossen Valkanov, and Shu Yan, “On Predicting Stock Returns with Nearly
Integrated Explanatory Variables,” Journal of Business, 78(1) (2005): 937–66.
John Campbell and Motohiro Yogo derived a more powerful test, also based on estimated
bounds for the autoregressive parameter, and concluded that both the dividend-price ratio and
the earnings-price ratio are significant in predicting excess stock returns using U.S. stock data
back to 1871. See John Y. Campbell and Motohiro Yogo, “Efficient Tests of Stock Return
Predictability” (Working Paper No. w10026, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
Research, October 2003).
Amit Goyal and Ivo Welch did out-of-sample tests of predictive regressions using ratios and
concluded that the estimated relationships were not stable out of sample. See Amit Goyal and Ivo
Welch, “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios,” Management Science, 49 (2003):
639–54.
Andrew Ang and Geert Bekaert looked at data on five countries and concluded that the
predictability of the dividend-price ratio is not robust across countries in predicting returns. See
Andrew Ang and Geert Bekaert, “Stock Return Predictability: Is It There?” unpublished paper,
Columbia University, 2004.
Rossen Valkanov derived some new results about overlapping observations and long-run
predictability regressions, and concluded that the dividend-price ratio is not statistically
significant in predicting returns. See Rossen Valkanov, “Long-Horizon Regressions: Theoretical
Results and Applications,” Journal of Financial Economics, 68 (2003): 201–32.
Erik Hjalmarsson was the first to look at the aggregate stock markets of forty countries with
pooled regressions, and his results generally, but not always, have been unfavorable to the
statistical significance of regressions using ratios to predict returns. See Erik Hjalmarsson,
“Predicting Global Stock Returns with New Methods for Pooled and Long-Run Forecasting
Regressions,” unpublished paper, Yale University, 2004.
The issues that separate these papers are at a high level of subtlety. Years of work will
probably be needed before these issues are fully resolved.

20. In addition to this long-run tendency toward reversal of trends, there is a shorter-run weak
tendency toward momentum, for stock prices to continue moving in the same direction. See
Campbell, Lo, and Mackinlay, The Econometrics of Financial Markets; Narasimhan Jegadeesh and
Sheridan Titman, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for Stock Market
Efficiency,” Journal of Finance, 48 (1993): 65–91; and Bruce N. Lehmann, “Fads, Martingales, and
Market Efficiency,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 60 (1990): 1–28.
21. It was shown long ago that dividends tend to behave over time like a long-moving average
of earnings. See John Lintner, “The Distribution of Incomes of Corporations among Dividends,
Retained Earnings and Taxes,” American Economic Review, 46 (1956): 97–113.
22. Using the real data shown in Figure 1.1, an annualized subsequent ten-year real return was
constructed both for stocks and bonds for each year from 1881 to 2004 (hence corresponding to
returns over ten-year intervals ending from 1891 to 2014). A real long-term interest rate was
computed by subtracting the average actual inflation rate over the preceding ten years from the
long-term bond yield. A regression of the excess return on both the CAPE and the real interest
rate shows a negative coefficient for both and an R-squared of 0.41.
23. Economists Robert Barsky and Brad De Long have argued that stock price movements
cannot be considered to have been caused largely by the speculative behavior of investors if they
correspond to dividend movements. See Robert Barsky and J. Bradford De Long, “Why Have
Stock Prices Fluctuated?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (1993): 291–311. They suggest that
perhaps people were rational to suppose that the recent growth of dividends would continue
indefinitely into the future—even though in fact this growth rate has never continued for very
long in actual historical data.
Kenneth Froot and Maurice Obstfeld, reacting to the same appearance of co-movement
between prices and dividends, postulated an “intrinsic bubble” model in which prices respond in
an apparently exaggerated fashion, but in fact rationally, to dividend movements. In their theory,
stock prices overreact, in a certain sense, to dividends, but yet there are no profit opportunities
to trading to take advantage of this overreaction. See Kenneth Froot and Maurice Obstfeld,
“Intrinsic Bubbles: The Case of Stock Prices,” American Economic Review, 81 (1991): 1189–1214.
But the fit of their “warranted price” to actual price is not much better than the fit of dividends
themselves to actual price, except that their model, by making stock prices more responsive to
dividends when dividends are higher, makes warranted price correspond more closely to actual
price after 1950.
24. A nice review of the ups and downs of all these anomalies is found in Siegel, Stocks for the
Long Run, 5th ed., pp. 326, 176, 336, etc. One study looked at ninety-five different stock market
anomalies predicting returns published in academic journals and found “an upper bound decline
in predictability due to statistical bias of 25%, and a post-publication decline, which [the
authors] attribute both to statistical bias and informed trading, of 56%.” See R. David McLean
and Jeffrey Pontiff, “Does Academic Research Destroy Return Predictability?” unpublished paper,
University of Alberta, 2014.
25. The inconstancy of anomalies reported in studies of market efficiency is also due to the
varying econometric methodologies employed in the different studies. See Tim Loughran and Jay
R. Ritter, “Uniformly Least Powerful Tests of Market Efficiency,” Journal of Financial Economics,
55 (2000): 361–89.
26. Merton Miller, “Behavioral Rationality in Finance: The Case of Dividends,” in Robin M.
Hogarth and Melvin W. Reder (eds.), Rational Choice: The Contrast between Economics and

Psychology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), p. 283.
27. Robert J. Shiller, “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subsequent
Movements in Dividends?” American Economic Review, 71(3) (1981): 421–36; Stephen LeRoy and
Richard Porter, “Stock Price Volatility: A Test Based on Implied Variance Bounds,” Econometrica,
49 (1981): 97–113. See also Sanford J. Grossman and Robert J. Shiller, “The Determinants of the
Variability of Stock Market Prices,” American Economic Review, 71 (1981): 222–27.
28. To compute the dividend present value for any given month, one sums over each
subsequent month the present discounted value for the given year of the real dividends paid in
that subsequent year. The present discounted value in the given year of a real dividend paid in a
subsequent year is the real dividend divided by (1 + r)t, where r is the annual real discount rate
and t is the number of years between the given year and the subsequent year. The dividend
present value in Figure 11.2 was drawn with a constant discount rate r equal to the historical
geometric average real annual return on the market from 1871 to 2013. The assumption that r is
constant through time corresponds to an efficient markets assumption that expected returns on
the market are constant through time, that there are no good or bad times to enter the stock
market in terms of predictable returns.
Of course, we do not know now what dividends will be after the latest year for which data are
available. To compute the dividend present value, I assumed that real dividends after 2013 will
grow at their actual average geometric growth rate during 2003–2013. The need to make an
assumption about real dividend growth after 2013 means that the more recent values of the
dividend present value shown in the figure are unreliable as indicators of actual dividend present
value. However, the numbers given for the dividend present value a couple of decades or more
before 2013 are most likely fairly accurate, since for these years the subsequent years after 2013
are heavily discounted in the present value calculations.
Concern has been expressed that recent measured dividends may understate cash flow from the
firm to investors. Kevin Cole, Jean Helwege, and David Laster (“Stock Market Valuation
Indicators: Is This Time Different?” Financial Analysts Journal, 52 [1996]: 56–64) estimate that
considering share repurchase as a form of dividend would raise dividend-price ratios in the mid-
1990s by about 80 basis points. This adjustment would still leave dividend-price ratios on the
S&P Composite far below their record historic lows until that time. Liang and Sharpe, in “Share
Repurchases and Employee Stock Options,” point out that the Cole, Helwege, and Laster
assumption that share issues occur at market prices is inaccurate because many issues come
about in response to the exercise of employee stock options. Consideration of the fact that issues
are made below market price might be interpreted as suggesting lowering the terminal value for
the dividend present value below the amount shown in Figure 11.2.
29. It must be stressed that efficient markets theory does not mean that the stock price curve
must be more smooth than the dividend present value curve, only that it must be—in a sense
that must be carefully defined—less volatile overall. I took great pains to explain this point in my
first article on excess volatility; see Robert J. Shiller, “The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates
and Expectations Models of the Term Structure,” Journal of Political Economy, 87 (1979): 1062–
88. But some critics, overlooking this explanation, thought they were raising a fresh and original
idea when they later pointed it out again; see, notably, Allan Kleidon, “Variance Bounds Tests
and Stock Price Valuation Models,” Journal of Political Economy, 94 (1986): 953–1001. No
definitive conclusions can be drawn about efficient markets just by looking at this figure.
Nonetheless the figure is, I believe, quite informative about the lack of big-picture evidence for

efficient markets in aggregate U.S. stock market data. Looking at this figure can help disabuse us
of some possibly erroneous notions about the nature of the evidence for market efficiency.
30. Sanford Grossman and I made much of the possibility that dividend discount rates should
vary in response to changing economic conditions, as indicated by changes in real personal
consumption expenditures (in “The Determinants of the Variability of Stock Market Prices”), but
still described the market overall as excessively volatile.
31. Their argument had to do with firms’ setting dividends in response to price, and thereby
achieving a certain sort of nonstationarity in dividends; see Terry A. Marsh and Robert C.
Merton, “Dividend Variability and Variance Bounds Tests for the Rationality of Stock Market
Prices,” American Economic Review, 76(3) (1986): 483–98. In my reply, I argued that although
their model was technically correct, it was hardly relevant to actual U.S. experience over the last
century; see Robert J. Shiller, “The Marsh-Merton Model of Managers’ Smoothing of Dividends,”
American Economic Review, 76(3) (1986): 499–503. The entire debate is now moot, since
econometric work testing for excess volatility no longer relies on assumed stationarity for
detrended dividends; see, for example, John Y. Campbell and John Ammer, “What Moves Stock
and Bond Markets? A Variance Decomposition for Long-Term Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance,
48(1) (1993): 3–38.
32. Campbell and I developed a co-integrated log-linear vector-autoregressive model that was
capable of representing various forms of the efficient markets model. See John Y. Campbell and
Robert J. Shiller, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount
Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1 (1988): 195–228; Shiller, Market Volatility; and Campbell
et al., Econometrics of Financial Markets, pp. 253–337.
33. See Campbell and Shiller, “The Dividend-Price Ratio.”
34. See Campbell and Ammer, “What Moves Stock and Bond Markets?”
35. See Shiller, Market Volatility, pp. 197–214.
36. Paul A. Samuelson once said that stock prices are “micro efficient” and “macro inefficient.”
That is, there is more truth to the efficient markets hypothesis for individual stocks than there is
for the stock market as a whole. There is some evidence that might be construed as supporting
Samuelson’s dictum; see Jeeman Jung and Robert J. Shiller, “Samuelson’s Dictum and the Stock
Market,” Economic Inquiry 43(2) (2005): 221–26. Earlier studies that may be construed as
supporting this conclusion are Randolph Cohen, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, “The
Value Spread,” Journal of Finance, 58 (2003): 609–42; and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, “What Drives
Firm-Level Stock Returns?” Journal of Finance, 57 (2002): 233–64.
Chapter Twelve    Investor Learning—and Unlearning
1. Economists have long puzzled over why the equity premium has been so high historically.
How, they wonder, can it be that over the years people haven’t invested more in stocks, given
that stocks so outperform other investments? See Raj Mehra and Edward C. Prescott, “The Equity
Premium Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 15 (1988): 145–61. According to the learning
theory discussed in this chapter, the equity premium puzzle is supposed to be a thing of the past
—people have finally wised up.
2. Edgar Lawrence Smith, Common Stocks as Long-Term Investments (New York: Macmillan,
1924).
3. Kenneth S. Van Strum, Investing in Purchasing Power (Boston: Barron’s, 1925).
4. Fisher, Stock Market Crash, pp. 202, 99. It is puzzling that he includes the phrase “during a

period of dollar depreciation,” since he emphasizes elsewhere in the book that the 1920s were a
period of exceptionally stable prices. Perhaps he meant to say “even during a period of dollar
depreciation” and may have been referring to one of the periods in the 1920s when there was
slight inflation. He cannot be referring to the exchange rate of the dollar, since we were then on
the gold standard.
5. Dice, New Levels in the Stock Market, p. 126.
6. Franklin L. Dame, “Public Interest in Business Is Found Growing,” New York Herald Tribune,
January 2, 1929, p. 30.
7. Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run, 1st ed., p. 16.
8. See Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation, Table 2-9, p. 46, or consult the
data on my website, http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller.
9. According to data shown in Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation, Table 2-11,
p. 50, there has been no twenty-year period since 1926 when stocks underperformed short-term
interest rates. They do not show data on the 1901–21 time period. My data, from my book
Market Volatility (updated by using the Consumer Price Index to measure inflation after 1913),
actually show a slight underperformance of stocks versus short-term interest rates for 1966–86 as
well as 1901–21, and the difference in results between my data and Ibbotson’s for 1966–86 can
be attributed to a difference in the short-term interest rate (commercial paper versus Treasury
bills) and slight differences in timing.
10. See Philippe Jorion and William N. Goetzmann, “Global Stock Markets in the Twentieth
Century,” Journal of Finance, 54(3) (1999): 953–80, and also Stephen J. Brown, William N.
Goetzmann, and Stephen A. Ross, “Survival,” Journal of Finance, 50(3) (1995): 853–73. Jeremy
Siegel points out that with financial returns the median is generally much lower than the mean,
and the mean appreciation rate over all these countries is not so low. See also Elroy Dimson, Paul
Marsh, and Mike Staunton, Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global Investment History
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2002).
11. James K. Glassman and Kevin A. Hassett, “Are Stocks Overvalued? Not a Chance,” Wall
Street Journal, March 30, 1998, p. 18, and “Stock Prices Are Still Far Too Low,” March 17, 1999,
p. 26; the quote is from the 1999 article.
12. James K. Glassman and Kevin A. Hassett, Dow 36,000: The New Strategy for Profiting from
the Coming Rise in the Stock Market (New York: Times Business/Random House, 1999), p. 140.
13. See, for example, Goetzmann and Ibbotson, “Do Winners Repeat? Patterns in Mutual Fund
Performance”; Elton et al., “Survivorship Bias and Mutual Fund Performance”; and Elton et al.,
“The Persistence of Risk-Adjusted Mutual Fund Performance.”
14. To the extent that mutual funds make better diversification possible for individual
investors, they lower the riskiness of stocks, and therefore the proliferation of mutual funds may
lower the risk premium that investors require. John Heaton and Deborah Lucas conclude that
increased diversification “goes at least half way towards justifying the current high price
dividend ratio in the United States.” Heaton and Lucas raise a valid and potentially significant
issue; nevertheless their theory is a little unsatisfying, as it depicts individuals as completely
rational at all times but does not explain why people did not invest that much in mutual funds
until recently. See John Heaton and Deborah Lucas, “Stock Prices and Fundamentals,”
unpublished paper, Northwestern University, 1999.
Chapter Thirteen    Speculative Volatility in a Free Society

1. The only countries without central banks are Andorra, Monaco, and the Islamic State (if the
last could be called a country).
2. These events are described in Yukio Noguchi, Baburu no Keizaigaku (Bubble Economics)
(Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shimbun Sha, 1992). To suppose that the bubble would not have burst
even without the monetary policy is also reasonable, and there were changes in speculative
expectations that suggest other origins of the Japanese stock market decline; see Robert J.
Shiller, Fumiko Kon-Ya, and Yoshiro Tsutsui, “Why Did the Nikkei Crash? Expanding the Scope
of Expectations Data Collection,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(1) (1996): 156–64.
3. See Barry Eichengreen, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression: 1919–
1939 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), Table 12.1, p. 351.
4. “Courtelyou Puts in $25,000,000,” New York Times, October 24, 1907, p. 1; “Worst Stock
Crash Stemmed by Banks,” New York Times, October 25, 1929, p. 1.
5. “Will History Repeat the ’29 Crash?” Newsweek, June 14, 1965, p. 78.
6. See Shiller, Kon-Ya, and Tsutsui, “Why Did the Nikkei Crash?”
7. Michael Brennan, “Stripping the S&P 500,” Financial Analysts Journal, 54(1) (1998): 14.
8. See Marianne Baxter and Urban Jermann, “The International Diversification Puzzle Is Worse
than You Think,” American Economic Review, 87 (1997): 170–80.
9. Athanasoulis and I show, using a theoretical finance model calibrated with real data, that
proper management of national income risks alone can have large effects on economic welfare.
See Stefano Athanasoulis and Robert J. Shiller, “World Income Components: Discovering and
Implementing Risk Sharing Opportunities,” American Economic Review, 91(4) (2001): 1031–54.
10. Robert J. Shiller, The Subprime Solution: How Today’s Global Crisis Happened and What to Do
about It (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2008).
11. Robert J. Shiller, Rafał M. Wojakowski, M. Shahid Ebrahim, Mark B. Shackleton,
“Mitigating Financial Fragility with Continuous Workout Mortgages,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 85 (2013): 269–85.
12. U.S. National Income and Product Accounts, Table 2.6, Personal Income and Its
Disposition, 
http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?
ReqID=9&step=1#reqid=9&step=3&isuri=1&904=1960&903=76&906=q&905=2014&910
13. Fiscal year 2013 PBGC Projections Report, http://www.pbgc.gov/documents/Projections-
report-2013.pdf.
14. Ideas for expanding risk markets and social insurance to benefit society are described and
analyzed in my recent book Finance and the Good Society (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 2012).

References
Abarbanell, Jeffrey, and Reuven Lehavy. “Biased Forecasts or Biased Earnings? The Role of
Earnings Management in Explaining Apparent Optimism and Inefficiency in Analysts’ Earnings
Forecasts.” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 35 (2003): 105–46.
Abbott, Max Wenden, and Rachel A. Volberg. Gambling and Problem Gambling in the Community:
An International Overview and Critique. Report No. 1 of the New Zealand Gaming Survey, 1999,
p. 35.
Advisory Committee on Endowment Management. Managing Educational Endowments: Report to
the Ford Foundation (Barker Report). New York: Ford Foundation, 1969.
Ahir, Hites, and Prakash Loungani. 2014. “There Will Be Growth in the Spring: How Do
Economists 
Predict 
Turning 
Points?” 
Vox, 
April 
14, 
2014,
http://www.voxeu.org/article/predicting-economic-turning-points.
Akerlof, George A., and Robert J. Shiller. Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the
Economy and Why This Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
2009.
Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Andrew Postlewaite. “Finite Bubbles with Short Sale
Constraints and Asymmetric Information.” Journal of Economic Theory, 61 (1993): 206–29.
Allen, Frederick Lewis. Only Yesterday. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1931.
Ammer, Dean S. “Entering the New Economy.” Harvard Business Review, September–October
1967, pp. 3–4.
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert. “Stock Return Predictability: Is It There?” Unpublished paper,
Columbia University, 2004.
Arthur, Brian, John H. Holland, Blake LeBaron, Richard Palmer, and Paul Tayler. “Asset Pricing
under Endogenous Expectations in an Artificial Stock Market,” in W. B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and
D. Lane (eds.), The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley,
1997, pp. 15–44.
Asch, Solomon. Social Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1952.
Ashton, Michael. “TIPS and CPI Futures—Practice Makes Perfect,” paper presented at the
American Economic Association Meetings, Boston, Mass., January 2014.

Athanasoulis, Stefano, and Robert J. Shiller. “World Income Components: Discovering and
Implementing Risk Sharing Opportunities.” American Economic Review, 91(4) (2001): 1031–54.
Avery, Christopher, and Peter Zemsky. “Multidimensional Uncertainty and Herd Behavior in
Financial Markets.” American Economic Review, 88(4) (1998): 724–48.
Bailey, Norman T. The Mathematical Theory of Epidemics. London: C. Griffin, 1957.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler. “The Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate Stock
Returns.” Journal of Finance, 55(5) (2000): 2219–57.
Bakshi, Gurdip S., and Zhiwu Chen. “Baby Boom, Population Aging and Capital Markets.” Journal
of Business, 67 (1994): 165–202.
Ballinger, Kenneth. Miami Millions: The Dance of the Dollars in the Great Florida Land Boom of
1925. Miami, Fla.: Franklin Press, 1936.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3)
(1992): 797–817.
Barber, Brad M., Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean. “Do Individual Day Traders
Make Money? Evidence from Taiwan.” Unpublished paper, University of California, Davis,
2004.
Barber, Brad M., Reuven Lehavy, Maureen McNichols, and Brett Trueman. “Can Investors Profit
from the Prophets? Consensus Analyst Recommendations and Stock Returns.” Journal of
Finance, 56(1) (2001): 531–63.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean. “Online Investors: Do the Slow Die First?” Review of
Financial Studies, 15(2) (2002): 455–89.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos. “Prospect Theory and Asset Prices.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116 (2001): 1–53.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. “A Model of Investor Sentiment.” Journal
of Financial Economics, 49 (1998): 307–43.
Barlow, Robin, Harvey E. Brazer, and James N. Morgan. Economic Behavior of the Affluent.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1966.
Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. Economic Growth. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.
Barsky, Robert, and J. Bradford De Long. “Why Have Stock Prices Fluctuated?” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 108 (1993): 291–311.
Bartholomew, David J. Stochastic Models for Social Processes. New York: John Wiley and Sons,
1967.
Basu, Sanjoy. “The Investment Performance of Common Stocks Relative to Their Price-Earnings
Ratios: A Test of the Efficient Markets.” Journal of Finance, 32(3) (1977): 663–82.
Batra, Ravi. The Great Depression of 1990: Why It’s Got to Happen, How to Protect Yourself, rev. ed.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987.
Baxter, Marianne, and Urban Jermann. “The International Diversification Puzzle Is Worse than
You Think.” American Economic Review, 87 (1997): 170–80.
Bell, David E. “Regret in Decision Making under Uncertainty.” Operations Research, 30(5) (1982):
961–81.
Benartzi, Shlomo. “Why Do Employees Invest Their Retirement Savings in Company Stock?”
Unpublished paper, Anderson School, University of California, Los Angeles, 1999.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler. “Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity Premium
Puzzle.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1) (1995): 73–92.
———. “Naive Diversification Strategies in Defined Contribution Plans.” American Economic

Review, 91(1) (2001): 79–98.
———. “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving.”
Journal of Political Economy, 112(1) (2004): S164–S187.
Benartzi, Shlomo, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein. “The Law and
Economics of Company Stock in 401(k) Plans.” Journal of Law and Economics, 501(1) (2007):
45–79.
Bikhchandani, S. D., David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch. “A Theory of Fashion, Social Custom and
Cultural Change.” Journal of Political Economy, 81 (1992): 637–54.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Stanley Fischer. Lectures on Macroeconomics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1989.
Boldrin, Michael, and Michael Woodford. “Equilibrium Models Displaying Endogenous
Fluctuations and Chaos: A Survey.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 25(2) (1990): 189–222.
Bolen, D. W., and W. H. Boyd. “Gambling and the Gambler: A Review of Preliminary Findings.”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 18(5) (1968): 617–29.
Bootle, Roger. The Death of Inflation: Surviving and Thriving in the Zero Era. London: Nicholas
Brealey, 1998.
Borio, Claudio, and Patrick McGuire. “Twin Peaks in Equity and Housing Prices?” BIS Quarterly
Review, March 2004, pp. 79–93.
Bowman, Karlyn. “A Reaffirmation of Self-Reliance? A New Ethic of Self-Sufficiency?” Public
Perspective, February–March 1996, pp. 5–8.
Brennan, Michael. “Stripping the S&P 500.” Financial Analysts Journal, 54(1) (1998): 12–22.
Brooks, Robin. “Asset Market and Savings Effects of Demographic Transitions.” Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Yale University, 1998.
Brown, Stephen J., William Goetzmann, and Stephen A. Ross. “Survival.” Journal of Finance,
50(3) (1995): 853–73.
Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly. “Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth.” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 41(1) (1998): 2–26.
Bulgatz, Joseph. Ponzi Schemes, Invaders from Mars, and Other Extraordinary Popular Delusions, and
the Madness of Crowds. New York: Harmony, 1992.
Bullock, Hugh. The Story of Investment Companies. New York: Columbia University Press, 1959.
Bunn, Oliver, Anthony Lazanas, Robert J. Shiller, Arne Staal, Cenk Ural, and Ji Zhuang. “Es-
CAPE-ing from Overvalued Sectors: Sector Selection Based on the Cyclically Adjusted Price-
Earnings (CAPE) Ratio.” Journal of Portfolio Management, 41(1) (2014): 16–33.
Bunn, Oliver, and Robert J. Shiller. “Changing Times, Changing Values—A Historical Analysis of
Sectors within the US Stock Market 1872–2013.” New Haven, Conn.: Yale University, Cowles
Foundation, 2014, http://cowles.econ.yale.edu/P/cd/d19b/d1950.pdf.
Burnam, Tom. More Misinformation. Philadelphia: Lippincott and Crowell, 1980.
Campbell, John Y., and John Ammer. “What Moves Stock and Bond Markets? A Variance
Decomposition for Long-Term Asset Returns.” Journal of Finance, 48(1) (1993): 3–38.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy, 107(2) (1999): 205–51.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew Lo, and Craig Mackinlay. The Econometrics of Financial Markets.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
Dividends and Discount Factors.” Review of Financial Studies, 1 (1988): 195–228.

———. “The Dividend Ratio Model and Small Sample Bias: A Monte Carlo Study.” Economics
Letters, 29 (1989): 325–31.
———. “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock Market Outlook.” Journal of Portfolio
Management, 24 (1998): 11–26.
———. “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock Market Outlook: An Update,” in Richard
Thaler (ed.), Advances in Behavioral Finance II. New York: Sage Foundation, 2005.
Campbell, John Y., Robert J. Shiller, and Luis M. Viceira. “Understanding Inflation-Indexed Bond
Markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (2009): 79–120.
Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira. Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for Long-Term
Investors. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
Campbell, John Y., and Motohiro Yogo. “Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability.” Working
Paper No. w10026, Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2003.
Case, Karl E. “The Market for Single-Family Homes in the Boston Area.” New England Economic
Review, May–June 1986, pp. 38–48.
———. “Measuring Urban Land Values.” Unpublished paper, Wellesley College, October 26,
1997.
Case, Karl E., John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller. “Comparing Wealth Effects: The Stock
Market vs. the Housing Market.” Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 8606, November 2001.
Case, Karl E., Jr., and Robert J. Shiller. “The Behavior of Home Buyers in Boom and Post-Boom
Markets.” New England Economic Review, November–December 1988, pp. 29–46.
———. “The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family Homes.” American Economic Review,
79(1) (March 1989): 125–37.
———. “A Decade of Boom and Bust in the Prices of Single-Family Homes: Boston and Los
Angeles 1983 to 1993.” New England Economic Review, March–April 1994, pp. 40–51.
———. “Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2
(2003): 299–362.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Kinsella Thompson. “What Have They Been Thinking?
Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2
(2012): 265–98.
Cassidy, John. Dot.con: How America Lost Its Mind and Money in the Internet Era. New York:
Perennial Currents, 2003.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein. “Breadth of Ownership and Stock Returns.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 66 (2002): 171–205.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison. “Are Some Mutual Fund Managers Better than Others?
Cross-Sectional Patterns in Behavior and Performance.” Journal of Finance, 54(3) (1999): 875–
99.
Christiansen, Eugene Martin, and Sebastian Sinclair. The Gross Annual Wager of the United States,
2000. Christiansen Capital Advisors, 2000.
Chwe, Michael Suk-Young. Rational Ritual: Culture, Coordination, and Common Knowledge.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003.
Clark, John Bates. “The Gold Standard of Currency in the Light of Recent Theory.” Political
Science Quarterly, 10(3) (1895): 383–97.
Cochrane, John. Asset Pricing. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Cohen, Randolph. “Asset Allocation Decisions of Individuals and Institutions.” Harvard Business
School Working Paper Series, No. 03-112, 2003.

Cohen, Randolph, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. “The Value Spread.” Journal of
Finance, 58 (2003): 609–42.
Cole, Kevin, Jean Helwege, and David Laster. “Stock Market Valuation Indicators: Is This Time
Different?” Financial Analysts Journal, 52 (1996): 56–64.
Collins, Allan, Eleanor Warnock, Nelleke Acello, and Mark L. Miller. “Reasoning from Incomplete
Knowledge,” in Daniel G. Bobrow and Allan Collins (eds.), Representation and Understanding:
Studies in Cognitive Science. New York: Academic Press, 1975, pp. 383–415.
Consumer Federation of America. “Lower-Income and Minority Consumers Most Likely to Prefer
and 
Underestimate 
Risks 
of 
Adjustable 
Rate 
Mortgages.”
http://www.consumerfed.org/072604_ARM_Survey_Release.pdf. Washington, D.C.
Cooper, John C. B. “Price Elasticity of Demand for Crude Oil: Estimates for 23 Countries.” Opec
Review, 27(1) (2003):1–8.
Coronado, Julia Lynn, and Steven A. Sharpe. “Did Pension Plan Accounting Contribute to a Stock
Market Bubble?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2003-38. Washington, D.C.:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2003.
Cowles, Alfred III, and associates. Common Stock Indexes, 2nd ed. Bloomington, Ind.: Principia
Press, 1939.
Cutler, David, James Poterba, and Lawrence Summers. “What Moves Stock Prices?” Journal of
Portfolio Management, 15(3) (1989): 4–12.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam. “Investor Psychology and
Security Market Over-and Underreaction.” Journal of Finance, 53(6) (1998): 1839–86.
Davis, Morris A., and Jonathan Heathcote. “The Price and Quantity of Residential Land in the
United States.” Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance
and Economics Discussion Series No. 2004-37, 2004.
De Bondt, Werner, and Richard H. Thaler. “Does the Stock Market Overreact?” Journal of Finance,
40(3) (1985): 793–805.
Dent, Harry S. The Great Boom Ahead: Your Comprehensive Guide to Personal and Business Profit in
the New Era of Prosperity. New York: Hyperion, 1993.
———. The Roaring 2000s: Building the Wealth & Lifestyle You Desire in the Greatest Boom in
History. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998.
———. The Roaring 2000s Investor: Strategies for the Life You Want. New York: Simon & Schuster,
1999.
Desmond, Robert W. The Information Process: World News Reporting to the Twentieth Century. Iowa
City: University of Iowa Press, 1978.
Deutsch, Morton, and Harold B. Gerard. “A Study of Normative and Informational Social
Influences upon Individual Judgment.” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51 (1955):
629–36.
Dice, Charles Amos. New Levels in the Stock Market. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1929. Diggins, John
Patrick. The Proud Decades: America in War and in Peace 1941–1960. New York: W. W. Norton,
1988.
Dimson, Elroy, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton. Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global
Investment History. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2002.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer. “The Open Economy: Implications for Monetary and
Fiscal Policy,” in Robert J. Gordon (ed.), The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change.
Chicago: National Bureau of Economic Research and University of Chicago Press, 1986, pp.
459–501.

Dumke, Glenn S. The Boom of the Eighties in Southern California. San Marino, Calif.: Huntington
Library, 1944.
Ehrlich, Paul R. The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine Books, 1968. Eichengreen, Barry.
Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression: 1919–1939. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1992.
Eichholtz, Piet A. “A Long Run House Price Index: The Herengracht Index, 1638–1973.”
Unpublished paper, University of Limburg and University of Amsterdam, 1996.
Elias, David. Dow 40,000: Strategies for Profiting from the Greatest Bull Market in History. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake. “The Persistence of Risk-Adjusted
Mutual Fund Performance.” Journal of Business, 69 (1996): 133–37.
———. “Survivorship Bias and Mutual Fund Performance.” Review of Financial Studies, 9(4)
(1996): 1097–1120.
Fair, Ray C. “How Much Is the Stock Market Overvalued?” Unpublished paper, Cowles
Foundation, Yale University, 1999. A revised version of this paper was published as part of Ray
C. Fair, “Fed Policy and the Effects of a Stock Market Crash on the Economy: Is the Fed
Tightening Too Little and Too Late?” Business Economics, April 2000, pp. 7–14. Also available
at http://fairmodel.econ.yale.edu/rayfair/pdf/1999c.pdf.
———. “Fed Policy and the Effects of a Stock Market Crash on the Economy: Is the Fed
Tightening Too Little and Too Late?” Business Economics, April 2000, pp. 7–14. Also available
at http://fairmodel.econ.yale.edu/rayfair/pdf/1999c.pdf.
Fama, Eugene. “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work.” Journal of
Finance, 25 (1970): 383–417.
———. “Two Pillars of Asset Pricing” (Nobel Lecture), American Economic Review, 104(6) (2014):
1467–85.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French. “The Cross Section of Expected Stock Returns.” Journal of
Finance, 47 (1992): 427–66.
Federal Reserve Board. “Humphrey-Hawkins Report July 22, 1997, Section 2: Economic and
Financial 
Developments 
in 
1997.”
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/1997/july/ReportSection2.htm.
Figlewski, Stephen. “The Informational Effects of Restrictions on Short Sales: Some Empirical
Evidence.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 16 (1981): 463–76.
Fischel, William A. Regulatory Takings: Law, Economics and Politics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1995.
———. The Homevoter Hypothesis: How Home Values Influence Local Government Taxation, School
Finance, and Land-Use Policies. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001.
Fischhof, Baruch, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein. “Knowing with Uncertainty: The
Appropriateness of Extreme Confidence.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 3 (1977): 522–64.
Fisher, E. M. Urban Real Estate Markets: Characteristics and Financing. New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research, 1951.
Fisher, Irving. The Stock Market Crash—and After. New York: Macmillan, 1930. Fleming, Michael
J., and John R. Sporn. “Trading Activity and Price Transparency in the Inflation Swap Market.”
Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 19(1) (May 2013): 45–58.
Fleming, Thomas. Around the Pan with Uncle Hank: His Trip through the Pan-American Exposition.
New York: Nutshell, 1901.

Foot, David K., and Daniel Stoffman. Boom, Bust & Echo: How to Profit from the Coming
Demographic Shift. Toronto: McFarlane, Walter & Ross, 1996.
French, Kenneth R., and Richard Roll. “Stock Return Variances: The Arrival of Information and
the Reaction of Traders.” Journal of Financial Economics, 17 (1986): 5–26.
Friedman, Benjamin M. The Moral Consequences of Economic Growth. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
2005.
Froot, Kenneth, and Emil Dabora. “How Are Stock Prices Affected by the Location of Trade?”
Journal of Financial Economics, 53(2) (1999): 189–216.
Froot, Kenneth, and Maurice Obstfeld. “Intrinsic Bubbles: The Case of Stock Prices.” American
Economic Review, 81 (1991): 1189–1214.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. The Great Crash: 1929, 2nd ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1961.
Gale, William G., and John Sabelhaus. “Perspectives on the Household Saving Rate.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (1999): 181–224.
Gallin, Joshua. “The Long-Run Relation between House Prices and Income: Evidence from Local
Housing Markets.” Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Finance and Economics Discussion Paper Series No. 2003.17, 2003.
Garber, Peter. Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 2000.
Geanakoplos, John. “Common Knowledge.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6(4) (1992): 53–82.
Geanakoplos, John, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Stephen P. Zeldes. “Social Security Money’s Worth,”
in Olivia S. Mitchell, Robert J. Myers, and Howard Young (eds.), Prospects for Social Security
Reform. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999, pp. 79–151.
Ger, Gueliz, and Russell W. Belk. “Cross-Cultural Differences in Materialism.” Journal of Economic
Psychology, 17 (1996): 55–77.
Gibson, A. H. “The Future Course of High Class Investment Values,” Banker’s Magazine (London),
115 (1923): 15–34.
Gibson, George. The Stock Markets of London, Paris and New York. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons,
1889.
Gigerenzer, G. “How to Make Cognitive Illusion Disappear: Beyond ‘Heuristic and Biases.’”
European Review of Social Psychology, 2 (1991): 83–115.
Gilchrist, Helen, Robert Povey, Adrian Dickenson, and Rachel Povey. “The Sensation-Seeking
Scale: Its Use in a Study of People Choosing Adventure Holidays.” Personality and Individual
Differences, 19(4) (1995): 513–16.
Glaeser, Edward. “Reinventing Boston: 1640 to 2003.” Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 10166, 2004.
Glaeser, Edward, and Albert Saiz. “The Rise of the Skilled City.” Cambridge, Mass.: National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10191, 2004. Glassman, James K., and Kevin
A. Hassett. Dow 36,000: The New Strategy for Profiting from the Coming Rise in the Stock Market.
New York: Times Business/Random House, 1999.
Goetzmann, William, and Roger Ibbotson. “Do Winners Repeat? Patterns in Mutual Fund
Performance.” Journal of Portfolio Management, 20 (1994): 9–17.
Goetzmann, William, and Massimo Massa. “Index Fund Investors.” Unpublished paper, Yale
University, 1999.
Gordon, Robert J. “U.S. Productivity Growth since 1879: One Big Wave?” American Economic
Review, 89(2) (1999): 123–28.
Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch. “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios.” Management

Science, 49 (2003): 639–54.
Graham, Benjamin, and David Dodd. Securities Analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1934. Grant,
James. The Trouble with Prosperity: A Contrarian Tale of Boom, Bust, and Speculation. New York:
John Wiley and Sons, 1996.
Grebler, Leo, David M. Blank, and Louis Winnick. Capital Formation in Residential Real Estate:
Trends and Prospects. New York and Princeton, N.J.: National Bureau of Economic Research and
Princeton University Press, 1956. http://papers.nber.org/books/greb56-1.
Greenlees, J. S. “An Empirical Evaluation of the CPI Home Purchase Index 1973–8.” American
Real Estate and Urban Economics Association Journal, 10(1) (1982): 1–24.
Greenspan, Alan. “The Challenge of Central Banking in a Democratic Society.” Speech before the
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy, Washington, D.C., December 5, 1996. Available
at http://www.federalreserve.gov/BOARDDOCS/SPEECHES/19961205.htm.
Greetham, Trevor, Owain Evans, and Charles I. Clough, Jr. “Fund Manager Survey: November
1999.” London: Merrill Lynch & Co., Global Securities Research and Economics Group, 1999.
Griffin, John M., and G. Andrew Karolyi. “Another Look at the Role of the Industrial Structure of
Markets for International Diversification Strategies.” Journal of Financial Economics, 50 (1998):
351–73.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju. “Distance, Language, and Culture Bias: The Role of
Investor Sophistication.” Journal of Finance, 56(3) (2001): 1053–73.
Gross, 
William 
H. 
“On 
the 
‘Course’ 
to 
a 
New 
Normal,”
http://www.pimco.com/EN/Insights/Pages/Gross%20Sept%20On%20the%20Course%20to%20
Grossman, Sanford J., and Robert J. Shiller. “The Determinants of the Variability of Stock Market
Prices.” American Economic Review, 71 (1981): 222–27.
Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. “Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis with Data
from the Health and Retirement Survey,” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
50 (1999): 271–324.
Hamilton, James T. All the News That’s Fit to Sell: How the Market Transforms Information into
News. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas. “Stock Prices and Fundamentals.” Unpublished paper,
Northwestern University, 1999.
Heston, Steven L., and K. Geert Rouwenhorst. “Does Industrial Structure Explain the Benefits of
International Diversification?” Journal of Financial Economics, 36 (1994): 3–27. Hjalmarsson,
Erik. “Predicting Global Stock Returns with New Methods for Pooled and Long-Run Forecasting
Regressions.” Unpublished paper, Yale University, 2004.
Holden, Sara, and Jack VanDerhei. “401(k) Plan Asset Allocation, Account Balances, and Loan
Activity in 2003.” Investment Company Institute Perspective, 10(2) (2004): 1–16.
Homer, Sidney. A History of Interest Rates. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1963.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy Stein. “A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading, and
Overreaction in Asset Markets.” Journal of Finance, 54(6) (1999): 2143–84.
Hovakimian, Armen, and Ekkachai Saenyasin. “U.S. Analyst Regulation and the Earnings
Forecast Bias around the World.” European Financial Management, 20(3) (June 2014): 435–61.
Hoyt, Homer. One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago: The Relationship of the Growth of
Chicago to the Rise in Its Land Values. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1933.
Huberman, Gur, and Wei Jiang. “Offering versus Choice in 401(k) Plans: Equity Exposure and
Number of Funds.” Unpublished paper, Columbia University, New York, 2004.
Huberman, Gur, and Tomer Regev. “Speculating on a Cure for Cancer: A Non-Event That Made

Stock Prices Soar.” Journal of Finance, 56(1) (2001): 387–96.
Ibbotson Associates. Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation: 1999 Yearbook, Market Results for 1926–
1998. Chicago: Ibbotson Associates, 1999.
Inglehart, Ronald. “Aggregate Stability and Individual-Level Flux in Mass Belief Systems.”
American Political Science Review, 79(1) (1985): 97–116.
International Monetary Fund. International Financial Statistics. Washington, D.C., 1999.
Investment Company Institute. Mutual Fund Fact Book. Washington, D.C., 1999.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman. “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Stock Market Efficiency.” Journal of Finance, 48 (1993): 65–91.
Jones, Charles M., and Owen A. Lamont. “Short Sale Constraints and Stock Returns.” Journal of
Finance, 66(2–3) (2002): 207–39.
Jorion, Philippe, and William N. Goetzmann. “Global Stock Markets in the Twentieth Century.”
Journal of Finance, 54(3) (1999): 953–80.
Jung, Jeeman, and Robert J. Shiller. “Samuelson’s Dictum and the Stock Market.” Economic
Inquiry, 43(2) (2005): 221–26.
Katona, George. Psychological Economics. New York: Elsevier, 1975.
Kennickell, Arthur B. “A Rolling Tide: Changes in the Distribution of Wealth in the U.S., 1989–
2001.” 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/oss/oss2/papers/concentration.2001.10.pdf.
Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2003.
Keren, Gideon. “The Rationality of Gambling: Gamblers’ Conceptions of Probability, Chance and
Luck,” in George Wright and Peter Ayton (eds.), Subjective Probability. Chichester, England:
John Wiley and Sons, 1994, pp. 485–99.
Keynes, John Maynard. A Treatise on Money. New York: Macmillan, 1930.
———. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. New York: Harcourt Brace &
World, 1961.
Khurana, Rakesh. Searching for a Corporate Savior: The Irrational Quest for Charismatic CEOs.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2002.
Kindleberger, Charles P. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 2nd ed. London:
Macmillan, 1989.
King, Robert G., and Ross Levine. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter May Be Right.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108 (1993): 717–37.
Kirman, Alan. “Ants, Rationality and Recruitment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(1)
(1993): 137–56.
Klehr, Harvey. The Heyday of American Communism: The Depression Decade. New York: Basic
Books, 1984.
Kleidon, Allan. “Variance Bounds Tests and Stock Price Valuation Models.” Journal of Political
Economy, 94 (1986): 953–1001.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Scott Burns. The Coming Generational Storm. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 2004.
Krugman, Paul. “How Fast Can the U.S. Economy Grow?” Harvard Business Review, 75 (1977):
123–29.
Lambert, Craig. “Trafficking in Chance.” Harvard Magazine, 104(6) (July–August 2002): 32.
Lamont, Owen A., and Richard H. Thaler. “Can the Market Add and Subtract? Mispricing in Stock
Market Carve-Outs.” Journal of Political Economy, 111 (2003): 227–68.
Lange, Oscar. “Is the American Economy Contracting?” American Economic Review, 29(3) (1939):

503–13.
Langer, E. J. “The Illusion of Control.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32 (1975):
311–28.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. “Corporate Ownership around
the World.” Journal of Finance, 54 (1999): 471–518.
Lawrence, Joseph Stagg. Wall Street and Washington. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1929.
Lee, In Ho. “Market Crashes and Informational Avalanches.” Review of Economic Studies, 65(4)
(1998): 741–60.
Lehmann, Bruce N. “Fads, Martingales, and Market Efficiency.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 60
(1990): 1–28.
Leland, Hayne. “Who Should Buy Portfolio Insurance.” Journal of Finance, 35 (1980): 581–94.
LeRoy, Stephen, and Richard Porter. “Stock Price Volatility: A Test Based on Implied Variance
Bounds.” Econometrica, 49 (1981): 97–113.
Lewellen, Jonathan. “Predicting Returns with Financial Ratios.” Journal of Financial Economics,
64 (2004): 209–35.
Liang, J. Nellie, and Steven A. Sharpe. “Share Repurchases and Employee Stock Options and
Their Implications for S&P 500 Share Retirements and Expected Returns.” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 1999-59. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, 1999.
Lin, Hsiou-Wei, and Maureen F. McNichols. “Underwriting Relationships, Analysts’ Earnings
Forecasts and Investment Recommendations.” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 25(1)
(1998): 101–27.
Lintner, John. “The Distribution of Incomes of Corporations among Dividends, Retained Earnings
and Taxes,” American Economic Review, 46 (1956): 97–113. Loomes, Graham, and Robert
Sugden. “Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational Choice under Uncertainty.”
Economic Journal, 92 (1982): 805–24. Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter. “Uniformly Least
Powerful Tests of Market Efficiency.” Journal of Financial Economics, 55 (2000): 361–89.
Lucas, Robert E. “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy.” Econometrica, 46 (1978): 1429–45.
Mackay, Charles. Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds. London:
Bentley, 1841.
Maier, N. R. F. “Reasoning in Humans. II. The Solution of a Problem and Its Appearance in
Consciousness.” Journal of Comparative Psychology, 12 (1931): 181–94.
Mandelbrot, Benoit. Fractals and Scaling in Finance: Discontinuity, Concentration, Risk. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1997.
Marsh, Terry A., and Robert C. Merton. “Dividend Variability and Variance Bounds Tests for the
Rationality of Stock Market Prices.” American Economic Review, 76(3) (1986): 483–98.
McCarthy, Jonathan, and Richard W. Peach. “Are Home Prices the Next ‘Bubble’?” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 2004.
McLean, R. David, and Jeffrey Pontiff. “Does Academic Research Destroy Return Predictability?”
Unpublished paper, University of Alberta, 2014.
Mehra, Raj, and Edward C. Prescott. “The Equity Premium Puzzle.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 15 (1988): 145–61.
Meltzer, Allan H. “Monetary and Other Explanations of the Start of the Great Depression.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2 (1976): 455–71.
Merton, Robert K. Social Theory and Social Structure. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1957. Mian, Atif,

and Amir Sufi. “Summary of ‘the Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion.’” Proceedings,
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (May 2008): 129–32.
Milgram, Stanley. Obedience to Authority. New York: Harper and Row, 1974.
Milgrom, Paul, and Nancy Stokey. “Information, Trade, and Common Knowledge.” Econometrica,
49 (1982): 219–22.
Miller, Edward M. “Risk, Uncertainty and Divergence of Opinion.” Journal of Finance, 32 (1977):
1151–68.
Miller, Merton. “Behavioral Rationality in Finance: The Case of Dividends,” in Robin M. Hogarth
and Melvin W. Reder (eds.), Rational Choice: The Contrast between Economics and Psychology.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986, 267–84.
Mitchell, Mark L., and Jeffrey M. Netter. “Triggering the 1987 Stock Market Crash: Antitakeover
Provisions in the Proposed House Ways and Means Tax Bill.” Journal of Financial Economics, 24
(1989): 37–68.
Modigliani, Franco, and Richard A. Cohn. “Inflation, Rational Valuation, and the Market.”
Financial Analysts Journal, 35 (1979): 22–44. Reprinted in Simon Johnson (ed.), The Collected
Papers of Franco Modigliani, Vol. 5. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989.
New York Stock Exchange. The Public Speaks to the Exchange Community. New York, 1955.
———. New York Stock Exchange Fact Book. New York, 1998.
Niederhoffer, Victor. “The Analysis of World News Events and Stock Prices.” Journal of Business,
44(2) (1971): 193–219.
Niquet, Bernd. Keine Angst vorm nächsten Crash: Warum Aktien als Langfristanlage unschlagbar sind.
Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 1999.
Nisbett, Robert E., and Timothy DeCamp Wilson. “Telling More than We Can Know: Verbal
Reports on Mental Processes.” Psychological Review, 84(3) (1977): 231–59. Noguchi, Yukio.
Baburu no Keizaigaku (Bubble Economics). Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shimbun Sha, 1992.
Nordhaus, William D., and Joseph G. Boyer. “Requiem for Kyoto: An Economic Analysis of the
Kyoto Protocol.” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 1201. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University, November 1998.
Noyes, Alexander Dana. Forty Years of American Finance. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1909.
Orman, Suze. The 9 Steps to Financial Freedom. New York: Crown, 1997.
———. The Courage to Be Rich: Creating a Life of Material and Spiritual Abundance. Rutherford,
N.J.: Putnam, 1999.
Parker, Richard. “The Media Knowledge and Reporting of Financial Issues,” presentation at the
Brookings-Wharton Conference on Financial Services, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.,
October 22, 1998.
Pennington, Nancy, and Reid Hastie. “Reasoning in Explanation-Based Decision Making.”
Cognition, 49 (1993): 123–63.
Petersen, James D., and Cheng-Ho Hsieh. “Do Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
Bonds Explain Returns on REITs?” Real Estate Economics, 25 (1997): 321–45.
Piketty, Thomas, Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, 2014.
Pitz, Gordon W. “Subjective Probability Distributions for Imperfectly Known Quantities,” in Lee
W. Gregg (ed.), Knowledge and Cognition. Potomac, Md.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1975,
pp. 29–41.
Pliny the Younger. Letters and Panegyrics, trans. Betty Radice. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1969.

Posen, Adam S. “It Takes More than a Bubble to Become Japan.” Washington, D.C.: Peterson
Institute 
for 
International 
Economics, 
Working 
Paper 
No. 
03-9, 
October 
2003.
http://www.piie.com/publications/wp/03-9.pdf.
Poterba, James, and Lawrence Summers. “Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence and
Implications.” Journal of Financial Economics, 22 (1988): 26–59.
Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms. Report of the Presidential Task Force on Market
Mechanisms (Brady Commission Report). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1988.
Pressman, Steven. “On Financial Frauds and Their Causes: Investor Overconfidence.” American
Journal of Economics and Sociology, 57 (1998): 405–21.
Quattrone, G. A., and Amos Tversky. “Causal versus Diagnostic Contingencies: On Self-Deception
and the Voter’s Delusion.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46(2) (1984): 237–48.
Reid, A. A. L. “Comparing Telephone with Face-to-Face Contact,” in Ithiel de Sola Poole (ed.),
The Social Impact of the Telephone. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977, pp. 386–414.
Ritter, Jay R. “The Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings.” Journal of Finance, 46(1)
(1991): 3–27.
———. “Uniformly Least Powerful Tests of Market Efficiency,” Journal of Financial Economics, 55
(2000): 361–89.
Ritter, Jay R., and Richard S. Warr. “The Decline of Inflation and the Bull Market of 1982–1997.”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 37(1) (2002): 29–61.
Roll, Richard. “Orange Juice and Weather.” American Economic Review, 74 (1984): 861–80.
———. “Price Volatility, International Market Links, and Their Implication for Regulatory
Policies.” Journal of Financial Services Research, 2(2–3) (1989): 211–46.
Romer, Christina. “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 105 (1990): 597–624.
Romer, David. Advanced Macroeconomics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
Rublin, Lauren R. “Party On! America’s Portfolio Managers Grow More Bullish on Stocks and
Interest Rates.” Barron’s, May 3, 1999, pp. 31–38.
Schäfer, Bodo. Der Weg zur finanziellen Freiheit: In sieben Jahren die erste Million. Frankfurt:
Campus Verlag, 1999.
Scherbina, Anna. “Stock Prices and Differences in Opinion: Empirical Evidence That Prices
Reflect Optimism.” Working paper, Kellogg Graduate School of Management, April 2001.
Shafir, Eldar, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky. “Money Illusion.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(2) (1997): 341–74.
Shafir, Eldar, Itamar Simonson, and Amos Tversky. “Reason-Based Choice.” Cognition, 49 (1993):
11–36.
Shafir, Eldar, and Amos Tversky. “Thinking through Uncertainty: Nonconsequential Reasoning
and Choice.” Cognitive Psychology, 24 (1992): 449–74.
Sharpe, Steven A. “Re-examining Stock Valuation and Inflation: The Implications of Analysts’
Earnings Forecasts,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(4) (2002): 632–48.
———. “How Does the Market Interpret Analysts’ Long-Term Growth Forecasts?” Journal of
Accounting, Auditing and Finance, 20(2) (Spring 2005): 147–66.
Shefrin, Hersh. Beyond Greed and Fear: Understanding Behavioral Finance and the Psychology of
Investing. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2000.
Shiller, Robert J. “The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates and Expectations Models of the

Term Structure.” Journal of Political Economy, 87 (1979): 1062–88.
———. “Can the Federal Reserve Control Real Interest Rates?” in Rational Expectations and
Economic Policy, ed. Stanley Fischer. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research
and University of Chicago Press, pp. 117–67, 1980. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c6262.pdf.
———. “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subsequent Movements in
Dividends?” American Economic Review, 71(3) (1981): 421–36.
———. “Consumption, Asset Markets and Macroeconomic Fluctuations.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 17 (1982): 203–38.
—. “The Marsh-Merton Model of Managers’ Smoothing of Dividends.” American Economic Review,
76(3) (1986): 499–503.
———. “Portfolio Insurance and Other Investor Fashions as Factors in the 1987 Stock Market
Crash,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1988, pp. 287–95.
———. “Comovements in Stock Prices and Comovements in Dividends.” Journal of Finance, 44
(1989): 719–29.
———. Market Volatility. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989.
———. “Market Volatility and Investor Behavior.” American Economic Review, 80 (1990): 58–62.
———. “Public Resistance to Indexation: A Puzzle.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1
(1997): 159–211.
———. “Why Do People Dislike Inflation?” in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer (eds.),
Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press and National
Bureau of Economic Research, 1997, pp. 13–65.
———. “Social Security and Institutions for Intergenerational, Intragenerational and
International Risk Sharing.” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 50 (1999):
165–204.
———. “Measuring Bubble Expectations and Investor Confidence.” Journal of Psychology and
Markets, 1(1) (2000): 49–60.
———. “From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
17 (2003): 83–104.
———. The Subprime Solution: How Today’s Global Crisis Happened and What to Do about It.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2008.
———. Finance and the Good Society. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2012.
———. “Speculative Asset Prices” (Nobel Lecture). American Economic Review, 104(6) (2014):
1486; also appearing here as the appendix to this book.
Shiller, Robert J., and Andrea Beltratti. “Stock Prices and Bond Yields: Can Their Comovements
Be Explained in Terms of Present Value Models?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 30 (1992):
25–46.
Shiller, Robert J., and John Y. Campbell. “Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird’s
Eye View.” Review of Economic Studies, 58 (1991): 495–514.
Shiller, Robert J., Fumiko Kon-Ya, and Yoshiro Tsutsui. “Investor Behavior in the October 1987
Stock Market Crash: The Case of Japan.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 5
(1991): 1–13.
———. “Why Did the Nikkei Crash? Expanding the Scope of Expectations Data Collection.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(1) (1996): 156–64.
Shiller, Robert J., and John Pound. “Survey Evidence on the Diffusion of Interest and Information
among Investors.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 12 (1989): 47–66.

Shiller, Robert J., and Jeremy J. Siegel. “The Gibson Paradox and Historical Movements in Real
Long Term Interest Rates.” Journal of Political Economy, 85(5) (1977): 891–98.
Shiller, Robert J., Rafał M. Wojakowski, M. Shahid Ebrahim, and Mark B. Shackleton. “Mitigating
Financial Fragility with Continuous Workout Mortgages.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 85 (2013): 269–85.
Shleifer, Andrei. Inefficient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press, 2000.
Siegel, Jeremy J. “The Real Rate of Interest from 1800–1990: A Study of the U.S. and the U.K.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 29 (1992): 227–52.
———. Stocks for the Long Run, 1st ed. Burr Ridge, Ill.: Richard D. Irwin, 1994.
———. Stocks for the Long Run, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2014. Also available at
http://jeremysiegel.com.
———. The Future for Investors. New York: Crown Business, 2005.
———. 2014. “The Shiller CAPE Ratio: A New Look,” paper presented at the Q-Group
Conference, 
October 
2013 
(http://www.q-group.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/01/2013fall_siegelpaper.pdf).
Smith, Edgar Lawrence. Common Stocks as Long-Term Investments. New York: Macmillan, 1924.
Smith, Vernon L., Gary L. Suchanek, and Arlington W. Williams. “Bubbles, Crashes and
Endogenous Expectations in Experimental Spot Asset Markets.” Econometrica, 56 (1988): 1119–
51.
Stambaugh, Robert, Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan. “The Long of It: Odds that Investor Sentiment
Spuriously Predicts Anomaly Returns.” Working Paper No. 18231, Cambridge, Mass.: National
Bureau of Economic Research, July 2012.
Stanley, Thomas J., and William D. Danko. The Millionaire Next Door: The Surprising Secrets of
America’s Wealthy. New York: Pocket Books, 1996.
Stein, Emmanuel. Government and the Investor. New York: Farrar and Reinhart, 1941.
Sterling, William P., and Stephen R. Waite. Boomernomics: The Future of Your Money in the
Upcoming Generational Warfare. Westminster, Md.: Ballantine, 1998.
Strahlberg, Dagmar, and Anne Maass. “Hindsight Bias: Impaired Memory or Biased
Reconstruction.” European Review of Social Psychology, 8 (1998): 105–32.
Straub, William F. “Sensation Seeking among High-and Low-Risk Male Athletes.” Journal of Sports
Psychology, 4(3) (1982): 243–53.
Sutton, Gregory D. “Explaining Changes in House Prices.” Bank of International Settlements
Quarterly Review, September 2002, pp. 46–55.
Swensen, David. Pioneering Portfolio Management. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 2000.
Taleb, Nassim N. Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role of Chance in Life and in the Markets, 2nd
ed. New York: Texere, 2004.
Taub, Jennifer. Other People’s Houses: How Decades of Bailouts, Captive Regulators, and Toxic
Bankers Made Home Mortgages a Thrilling Business. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
2014.
Thaler, Richard H., ed. Advances in Behavioral Finance II. New York: Sage Foundation, 2005.
Thaler, Richard H., and Eric J. Johnson. “Gambling with the House Money and Trying to Break
Even: The Effect of Prior Outcomes on Risky Choice.” Management Science, 36 (1990): 643–60.
Thompson, William N. Legalized Gambling: A Reference Handbook. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-
CLIO, 1994.

TIAA-CREF 
Institute. 
“Participant 
Asset 
Allocation 
Report.” 
http://www.tiaa-
crefinstitute.org/Data/statistics/pdfs/AAdec2003.pdf.
Tobias, Andrew. “The Billion-Dollar Harvard-Yale Game.” Esquire, December 19, 1978, pp. 77–
85.
Torous, Walter, Rossen Valkanov, and Shu Yan. “On Predicting Stock Returns with Nearly
Integrated Explanatory Variables.” Journal of Business, 78(1) (2005): 937–66.
Triano, Christine. “Private Foundations and Public Charities: Is It Time to Increase Payout?”
http://www.nng.org/html/ourprograms/campaign/payoutppr-table.html#fulltext. 
National
Network of Grantmakers, 1999.
Tsatsaronis, Kostas, and Haibin Zhu. “What Drives Housing Price Dynamics: Cross-Country
Evidence.” BIS Quarterly Review, March 2004, pp. 65–78.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.”
Science, 185 (1974): 1124–31.
U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration. “Participant Investment
Education: Final Rule.” 29 CFR Part 2509, Interpretive Bulletin 96-1. Federal Register, 61(113)
(1996): 
29,585–90. 
Also 
available 
at
http://www.dol.gov/dol/pwba/public/regs/fedreg/final/96–14093.htm.
Valkanov, Rossen. “Long-Horizon Regressions: Theoretical Results and Applications.” Journal of
Financial Economics, 68 (2003): 201–32.
Vanguard 
Group, 
Inc. 
“How 
America 
Saves 
2013.”
https://pressroom.vanguard.com/content/nonindexed/2013.06.03_How_America_Saves_2013.pd
Van Strum, Kenneth S. Investing in Purchasing Power. Boston: Barron’s, 1925.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on
Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2
(2011): 215–87.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo. “What Drives Firm-Level Stock Returns?” Journal of Finance, 57 (2002):
233–64.
Warren, George F., and Frank A. Pearson. Gold and Prices. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1935.
Warther, Vincent A. “Aggregate Mutual Fund Flows and Security Returns.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 39 (1995): 209–35.
Weber, Steven. “The End of the Business Cycle?” Foreign Affairs, 76(4) (1997): 65–82. Weissman,
Rudolph. The Investment Company and the Investor. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1951.
Welte, John W., et al. “Gambling Participation in the United States—Results from a National
Survey.” Journal of Gambling Studies, 18(4) (2002): 313–37.
Willoughby, Jack. “Burning Up: Warning: Internet Companies Are Running Out of Cash—Fast.”
Barron’s, March 20, 2000, pp. 29–32.
Womack, Kent. “Do Brokerage Analysts’ Recommendations Have Investment Value?” Journal of
Finance, 51(1) (1996): 137–67.
World Bank. Averting the Old Age Crisis. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Wurgler, Jeffrey. “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 58 (2000): 187–214.
Zaret, David. Origins of Democratic Culture: Printing, Petitions, and the Public Sphere in Early-Modern
England. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1999.
Zuckerman, Marvin, Elizabeth Kolin, Leah Price, and Ina Zoob. “Development of a Sensation-
Seeking Scale.” Journal of Consulting Psychology, 28(6) (1964): 477–82.

Index
Page numbers for entries occurring in figures are followed by an f, those for entries occurring in
notes by an n, and those for entries occurring in tables, by a t.
Acampora, Ralph, 124
adaptive expectations, 85–86
advertising, 54–55, 185, 202–3
agricultural technology, 132
Ahir, Hites, 149
Akerlof, George, xvi, 10
Albania, Ponzi schemes in, 90, 91
Allen, Franklin, 264
Allen, Frederick Lewis, 74, 129
Amazon.com, 43
American Economic Review, 144, 209, 212
American Stock Exchange, 270, 270n35
Ammer, John, 212, 251–52
amplification mechanisms: emotions as, 80–81; habit formation as,
297n19; operation of, 70; as Ponzi schemes, 70. See also attention;
confidence; expectations; feedback loops
Amsterdam real estate market, 29. See also Netherlands
analysts: investment performance of, 198; optimistic forecasts of, 49–51,
292–93n17; recommendations of, 49–50, 51, 292n13, 292n15, 311n4

anchors. See psychological anchors
Andersen Hans Christian, 148
Andres Perez, Carlos, 157
Ang, Andrew, 313–14n19
animal spirits, xvi, 10, 253, 254–55, 269, 284n14
Animal Spirits (Akerlof and Shiller), xvi, 10
ant behaviors, 183–84
antitrust legislation, 128
Apple, 65
Aquino, Corazon, 155
Argentina, stock prices in, 109
Arnott, Robert D., 248n10
Asch, Solomon, 175–76, 177
Asia. See specific countries
Asian financial crisis, 43, 160, 232
Asness, Clifford S., 248n10
asset allocation decisions, 80–81, 96, 207
Associated Press, 110–11
Atlanta Constitution, 112
Atlantic Refining, 113
attention: changes in, 190–91; errors in, 189; focusing, 188–89; to
fundamentals, 226, 232–33; to news media, 101–2, 107–8, 185; of
public, 81–84, 92, 129–30, 149, 185, 189–90, 231, 242–43; rational
inattention, 262; shift from fundamental truths, 217; social, 189–90;
triggers of, 190–91
attention cascades, 108–10, 114, 122
Atwood, Albert W., 144
Australia: bond yields in, 16f; real estate markets in, xi, 18, 26f, 27, 125;
stock prices in, 152t
Austria, stock prices in, 151t, 153t authority, obedience to, 177, 309n4
automobiles, 130, 132, 134
Baby Boom: bull markets and, 134, 291–92n9; perceived effects on
markets, 45–47; real estate market and, 23–24; retirements of, 65,
142, 235

Baby Bust, 46
Bailey, Martin J., 259
Baker, Malcolm, 261
Banco de la República, xiii
Bank for International Settlements (BIS), 22, 113, 285n1
banking crises, 160. See also financial crises
Bank of Japan, 228
banks: failures of, 20, 36; housing bubbles and, 35–36; stress tests of, 63.
See also central banks; investment banks; mortgages
Barber, Brad M., 83
Barberis, Nicholas, 261, 264, 308–9n19
Barlow, Robin, 310n7
Barron’s, 110, 147
Barron’s Big Money Poll, 87, 88
Barsky, Robert, 315n23
Baruch, Bernard, 138
Basu, Sanjoy, 201
Batra, Ravi, 103
bear markets, 70–71
Bear Stearns, 20
beauty contest theory of stock market, 262–64
behavioral economics, 240, 261, 268
behavioral finance: on bubbles, 241; developments after 1980, 261–62,
263–65; early history of, 262–63; importance of, xxvi; redesigning
markets, 268; on stock market influences, 253–54
Bekaert, Geert, 313–14n19
Benartzi, Shlomo, 53, 57–58
benefit corporations, 269
Benos, Evangelos, 262
Betterinvesting, 82
binder boys, 139
Bingham, Hiram, 111
birth control, 45–46
BIS (Bank for International Settlements), 22, 113, 285n1

Black, Fischer, 268
Black Monday. See stock market crash of 1929
Blackstone Group, xv, 21
Black Thursday (1929), 112–14
Bloomberg Television, 48
blue-sky legislation, 181
boiler rooms, 181
Bombay real estate market, 27
bond markets: bubbles in, xi, 12, 13, 17; precipitating factors in, 17;
speculation in, 14
bond returns: compared to stocks, 13, 64, 65, 207, 215, 216–17, 218,
221, 226, 318n9; of inflation-indexed bonds, 15, 16f, 17, 285n8,
285n14
bonds: inflation-indexed, 15–17, 16f, 270–71, 285nn8–9, 285n14;
interest rates on, 64, 236, 245; long-term, 11; prices of, 11, 17; social
policy, 268; stocks compared with, 215–17, 218, 226, 236, 318n9
bond yields: historical, 16f; inflation and, 14, 15; of inflation-indexed
bonds, 15–16, 16f; price-earnings ratios and, 12, 13; recent, 15, 17,
64, 236; of Treasuries, 13, 15, 16f
Bonham, Raejean, 90, 91
Boom, Bust & Echo (Foot and Stoffman), 47
Boomernomics (Sterling and Waite), 47
booms. See bull markets; Millennium Boom; New-Normal Boom;
Ownership-Society Boom; real estate booms
Bootle, Roger, 136
Borah, William, 112
Boston Globe, 124
Boston real estate market: land values in, 29–30; media coverage of,
121; price decline in, 146; prices in, 24–25, 25f, 26f, 27, 141–42,
304n44; start of boom in, 125; surveys on, 72–73
Brady, Nicholas, 116
Brady Commission, 116–18, 301–2n22
brain: attention focused by, 188–89; communication and, 179, 180–81;
myths about, 188; reactions to ambiguity, 265
brainwashing, 175–76

Brazil, stock prices in, 4, 5f, 109
Brennan, Michael, 232–33, 270, 270n36
brokerage commissions, 57
bubbles. See speculative bubbles
bucket shops, 181
building costs: home prices and, 19, 20f, 22, 30, 31, 33, 260, 288n7;
indices of, 286–87n3; inflation in, 19, 20f, 30; trends in, 22
bull market of 1920s: as bubble, 113; communications technology in,
182; confidence during, 74; earnings growth in, 203; income
inequality in era of, 66; investor learning in, 215–16; new era thinking
and, 129–32, 144, 230; public attention during, 81, 129–30. See also
stock market crash of 1929; stock market peak of 1929
bull market of 1950s/1960s: compared to 1920s market, 230; earnings
in, 203; new era thinking and, 132–35, 145, 230; peak (1966), 8–9,
135, 230; price-earnings ratios in, 8–9; public attention to, 242–43
bull market of 1990s. See Millennium Boom
bull market of 2003–7. See Ownership-Society Boom
bull market of 2009–. See New-Normal Boom
bull markets: beginnings of, 191; ends of, 159–60; media coverage of,
103–4; new era thinking and, 125; public attention to, 82, 83, 92. See
also stock market peaks
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S., 64, 137, 286–87n3
Burke, Kenneth, 144–45
Burns, Arthur, 145
Bush, George W., xii, xxiii, 3, 60
business books, 130–31
business cycles, 136–37, 211. See also cyclically adjusted price-earnings
ratios
business magazines, 48, 93, 118. See also media
Business Week, 124, 135, 147
buy recommendations, 49, 51, 292n13, 292n15, 311n4
Byrd, Richard, 111
Cable News Network (CNN), 47–48
CAC-40 index, 109

Caldwell, Erskine, 144–45
California: Proposition 13, 140; real estate markets in, 24, 25f, 27,
72–73, 125, 138–39, 140, 146; Silicon Valley, 141, 146
Campbell, John Y., xv, 6, 15, 204, 212, 251–52, 297n19, 313–14n19
Canada: real estate markets in, xi, 18, 26f, 27; stock prices in, 152t
Cantwell, Robert, 145
Cao, Dan, 264
CAPE. See cyclically adjusted price-earnings ratios
capital gains taxes, xxii, 45, 117, 221, 233
Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Piketty), 66
capitalism, xxiii, 60, 136, 144–45, 228, 268
Capone, Al, 139
career anxieties, 65–66
Carnegie, Andrew, 128
Carnegie Fund, 113–14
Case, Karl E., xiv, 29, 33, 34–35, 61, 72, 95, 141, 232, 254, 258, 259
Case-Shiller indices. See S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices
Case Shiller Weiss, Inc., 259
casinos, 58, 139, 264. See also gambling
Cassidy, John, 147
celebrities, 104, 109–10, 138, 234
cell phones, 142
Census data, 28–29, 31, 259, 288n10
Center for Industrial Renovation of Kansai, 108
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), 256
central banks, stabilization mandates of, 227. See also Federal Reserve;
monetary policy
chaos theory, 87
Chevalier, Judith, 198
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME Group), 232, 261, 269
Chicago real estate market, 29–30
Chicago Tribune, 113
child custody experiment, 169–70
Chile: bond yields in, 16f; stock prices in, 4, 151t, 153t, 154t; Unidad de

Fomento of, 271, 271n37
China: brainwashing techniques in, 175–76; capitalism in, 43; real estate
markets in, 18, 26f, 27, 30, 285–86n2; short sales in, 231; stock prices
in, 4, 5f. See also Hong Kong
circuit breakers, 230–31
Clark, John Bates, 14–15
Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, 128
Clinton, William, 45
CME Group. See Chicago Mercantile Exchange
CNBC, 48
CNN (Cable News Network), 47–48
CNNfn, 48
Coca-Cola, 169
Cochrane, John, 246n8, 297n19, 313n19
Cohen, Abby Joseph, 104
Cohn, Richard, 55–56, 263, 294n29
Cole, Kevin, 316n28
collective memory, 253
Colombia: real estate markets in, xiii, xiv; stock prices in, 151t, 152t,
153t, 154t
Commercial and Financial Chronicle, 132
communication: information processing and, 179; interpersonal, 179–82,
184–85, 187, 310n7; word-of-mouth, 125, 179–82, 184–87. See also
media; telephones
communism, 43, 60, 144–45, 175–76
communities of interest, 127–28, 144
computers: personal, 42, 141; viruses in, 184; Y2K crisis, 62, 187. See
also technology
confidence: after financial crises, 63; changes in, xiv, 61, 70–74, 71f,
72f, 87–88, 88f, 148; consumer, 85, 148, 295n44; feedback and, 72,
73, 85; investor, xx, xxiii, 63, 172–73; loss of, 144–45; in Millennium
Boom, xiv, xix–xx, xxvii, 70–72, 73, 75, 87–88, 148; sources of, 74–77;
survey evidence on, 63, 71–74, 71f, 72f, 87–89, 172–73, 218. See also
optimism; overconfidence
Congress: lobbying of, 113; majority parties in, 44–45, 60; Smoot-

Hawley tariff, 111–12; tax legislation, 117
Connecticut Manufacturer’s Association, 111
Conroy, Jack, 145
Consensus Forecasts, 149
conservatism, principle of, 308–9n19
Constant Quality Index, 259–60, 260f, 288n7
construction costs. See building costs
consumer confidence, 85, 148, 295n44
consumer credit, 134
Consumer Price Index (CPI), 13, 28, 282n3, 286–87n3. See also inflation
consumption: in efficient markets theory, 251–52; of wealth, 167–68
contagion. See epidemic models
Continuous Workout Mortgages, 234
cooperative movements, 34
Cootner, Paul, 242
Copenhagen real estate market, 27
CoreLogic, Inc., 232, 259
corporate profits: declines in, 148; feedback loops, 85–86; inflation and,
294n29; Internet impact on, 42–43; public interest in, 125–26; taxes
on, 129; technological advances and, 42–43, 291n3. See also earnings
corporate scandals, xxii
corporations: benefit, 269; headquarters locations of, 167; mergers of,
127, 131, 180; patriotic names of, 262; restructuring of, 137
Council of Economic Advisors, 145
Countrywide Financial, 20, 36
Cowles, Alfred, 247
CPI. See Consumer Price Index
Craxi, Bettino, 158
crime: decline in, 44; fraud, 36, 91–92; insider trading, 36, 180;
organized, 59. See also Ponzi schemes
crowdfunding, 268–69
CRSP. See Center for Research in Security Prices
Cuba, 105
cultural factors, 17, 43–44, 58–59, 161–62. See also media; new era

economic thinking
currencies. See exchange rates
Cutler, David, 107, 108
cyclically adjusted price-earnings ratios (CAPE): criticism of, 13; defined,
xv–xvi, 6; earnings measure in, 282–83n5; interest rates and, 7f,
12–13; at market peaks, 9, 206, 207; as predictors of ten-year returns,
204–6, 205f, 207. See also price-earnings ratios
Dahlberg, Edward, 145
Daladier, Edouard, 111
Danko, William, 77
Data General Corporation, 141
DAX index, 1, 109
Day, Clarence, 181
day-of-the-week effect, 208
day traders, 57, 199
The Death of Inflation (Bootle), 136
De Bondt, Werner, 160–61, 202
debt crises, 62, 64, 159, 270
decision making: ambiguity and, 265; on asset allocation, 80–81, 96,
207; based on past patterns, 172; by institutional investors, 190;
intuitive 
judgments, 
166, 
171, 
173, 
228; 
by 
jurors, 
168;
nonconsequentialist reasoning in, 173; representativeness heuristic in,
172, 308–9n19; social pressures and, 175–77
decision trees, 173
defined benefit pension plans, 51–52, 235–36
defined contribution pension plans: expansion of, 51–53; 401(k) plans,
51–53, 54, 80–81, 293n20; 403(b) plans, 52
deflation, 207, 215, 285n8, 285n14
De Forest, Lee, 130
De Gaulle, Charles, 105
Delhi real estate market, 27
De Long, Brad, 315n23
Democratic National Convention of 1952, 105
Democratic Party, 60

democratizing finance, 266, 268–70
demographics. See Baby Boom; population
Denmark, stock prices in, 151t, 152t
Dent, Harry S., 47
depressions, 6, 8, 63. See also Great Depression; recessions
Deutsch, Morton, 176
Dice, Charles Amos, 130–31, 216
Digital Equipment Company, 141
Dilbert, 137
diversification: in individual stocks, 266; learning about, 219, 221;
mutual funds and, 221, 319n14; of risk, 219, 233
dividend present value: computing, 247, 316n28; dividend-price ratios
and, 256–58, 257f; growth of, 209, 210f; models of, 243–44, 251;
stock prices and, 210–12, 210f, 247–50, 248f, 251–52, 252f; volatility
of, 209, 211, 213
dividend-price ratios, 256–58, 257f, 313–14n19, 316n28
dividends: changes in, 207–8, 316n28; data sources for, 282n3; earnings
and, 315n21; factors in setting, 208; futures markets for, 232–33, 270,
270n36; over-reactions to, 264; payout rates of, 248n10; price-
earnings ratios and, 206; relationship to stock price movements,
206–8, 209–12, 313–14n19, 315n23
dividend yields, 206–7, 257, 258n20
Dodd, David, 6, 262, 282n7
Dodd-Frank Act, 227
Dolley, James C., 246
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 112
Dos Passos, John, 145
dot-com stocks. See Internet stocks
Dow 36,000 (Glassman and Hassett), 219
Dow 40,000 (Elias), 75–76
Dow Jones Industrial Average: composition of, 291n4; crash of 1989,
106–7; crash of 2000, 146–47; expectations for, xxviii, 75–76, 77–79,
131–32; forecasting, 102, 104, 109–10, 131, 219; Internet stocks and,
43; irrational exuberance remark and, 1, 2; media coverage of, 104,
109–10; milestones for, xxviii, 2, 135, 167, 241; record changes of,

104; trading interruptions and, 230. See also bull markets; stock
market crashes; stock market peaks; stock price indices
Dublin real estate market, 27
due-on-sale clauses, in mortgages, 141, 304n41
Dukakis, Michael, 142
Durkheim, Émile, 253
earnings: after financial crises, 63–64; data sources for, 282n3; declines
in, 7–8; dividends and, 315n21; growth of, 5, 6–7, 8–9, 42, 203,
312–13n17; historical, in United States, 3f, 5, 8–9, 202–3, 283n8,
312–13n17; inflation and, 263; optimistic forecasts for, 50,
292–93n17; pension accounting rules and, 283n9; as stock price
driver, 202–3, 312–13n17; whisper numbers for, 292–93n17. See also
corporate profits; price-earnings ratios
earthquakes, 108–9
Ebrahim, M. Shahid, 234
economic growth: feedback loops with prices, 85, 86; financial market
development and, 40, 290n1; forecasts of, 125–26; inflation and, 136;
in 1950s, 203; slow, 67; stimulus programs, 236. See also recessions
Economist, 34, 147, 285n1
efficiency: as goal, 265; price-value ratio and, 268; of real estate market,
258–61, 269–70; of stock markets, 211
efficient markets theory: anomalies in, 208–9, 262, 315n24; arguments
for, 196–98, 200, 202–3, 255; on asset prices, 195, 242, 243–46;
background of, 196; on bubbles, 241; consumption in, 251–52;
evidence against, 199–202, 203, 208–13, 245–47, 249–50, 264,
316–17n29; evidence for, 195, 198, 208–9, 243–44, 246; Fama on,
xiii, 196, 242; individual stock prices and, 256–58, 317n36; influence
of, xxvi–xxvii; information in, 107; learning and, 213, 214; limitations
of, 196–97; random walks, 195, 221, 243–44; tests of, 243–47, 255.
See also mispricing; smart money
Ehrlich, Paul, 145
Eichholtz, Piet, 29
elderly. See pension plans; retirement plans; Social Security
electrification, 127, 130
Elias, David, 75–76

Ellison, Glenn, 198
e-mail, 182, 184
emotions: in decision making, 173–74; gambling and, 81, 307n7; of
investors, 76, 80–81, 85, 165–66; media evocation of, 102. See also
psychological factors
“The Emperor’s New Clothes” (Andersen), 148
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 54
end-of-career anxieties, 65–66
EntreMed, 300–301n11
epidemic models, xv, 182–87, 241
equity mutual funds. See mutual funds
equity premium, 215, 317–18n1
An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science (Robbins),
266–67
ethics, xxii, 170
eToys, 199–200
E*Trade.com, 43
Europe: Mississippi Bubble, 240; precipitating factors in, 69, 296n56;
sovereign debt crisis in, 64, 270. See also specific countries European
Systemic Risk Board, 227
event studies, 246, 255
excess-profits tax, 129
excess volatility, 209–13, 245–47, 264
exchange rates: crises, 159–60; fixed, 229
exogenous factors, 86, 108, 148
expectational feedback loops, 308–9n19
expectations: adaptive, 85–86; of future dividends, 243; of future
returns, xiv, 252, 256–58; inflation and, 56; prices and, 267; survey
evidence on, 77–79. See also confidence; forecasting; optimism
expert opinions: attention to, 187; attributed, 187–88; authority of, 177,
188, 233; bases of, 228; on expected returns, 80; in media coverage,
102–3, 104, 234; opinion leaders, 227, 228, 229–30; publicizing, 227,
228; questioning of, 226. See also smart money
face-to-face 
communication, 
179–82. 
See 
also 
word-of-mouth

communication
Fama, Eugene, xiii, 196, 201–2, 242, 246
Fannie Mae (Federal National Mortgage Association), 20, 33–34
Farrell, James, 145
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 36
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), 61
Federal Reserve: board of governors of, 204; bull market of 1920s and,
131; chairs of, 230; forward guidance, 64; monetary policy of, 61–62,
64, 133, 228, 230; quantitative easing by, 13, 64, 207; stock market
peaks and, 9, 230; stress tests by, 63. See also Greenspan, Alan
Fed Model, 12
feedback loops: amplification mechanisms and, 70, 84, 97; in bubbles,
70, 84, 85–87, 93–94, 114, 226, 296n1; in crash of 1987, 115–17,
118–19; in crash of 2000, 148; expectational, 308–9n19; investor
perceptions of, 87–89, 226; irrational exuberance and, 97; media roles
in, 121–22; negative, 86–87, 148; new era thinking and, 125;
nonlinear, 87; in Ponzi schemes, 89–91; price-to-corporate earnings-to-
price, 85–86; price-to-GDP-to-price, 85; price-to-price, 85, 119,
121–22, 138; in real estate market, 85; between stock and housing
markets, 94–96, 148; survey evidence on, 95–96, 115–16; theory of,
70, 84–87
Feltus, William J., 106–7
fertility rates, 45–46. See also Baby Boom; population
Fidelity Investments, 202–3
Figlewski, Stephen, 201
Finance and the Good Society (Shiller), 266
finance textbooks, 70, 94
financial crises: Asian, 43, 160, 232; beneficial aspects of, 232; debt, 62,
64, 159, 270; ends of new eras and, 159–60; exchange rate, 159;
regulatory responses to, 227
financial crisis (2007–9): asset price booms following, 62–63; bank
failures in, 20, 36; bubbles preceding, 148–49; legal charges following,
36, 92; mortgage crisis and, 18, 20, 35–36, 269–70; political impact
of, 228; recession, xiv, 4, 149; regulatory responses to, 63; saving rates
during, 235; as unanticipated crisis, 149; unemployment following, 65

financial innovations, 265–66, 268–71
Financial News Network, 48
Financial Stability Oversight Council, 227
financial technology, 233
Financial Times, 146–47, 158
Finland, stock prices in, 151t, 152t, 153t, 154t Fischer, Stanley, 112
Fischhof, Baruch, 170
Fiserv, Inc., 232
Fisher, Irving, 131–32, 134, 215–16
Fisher, Lawrence, 246
fixed exchange rate system, 229
Flip that House, 102
Florida real estate markets, 24–25, 25f, 32, 139, 143
FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee), 61
Fooled by Randomness (Taleb), 81
Foot, David K., 47
Fordney-McCumber tariff, 112
forecasting: during bubbles, 227, 228; of crashes, 102; of dividends,
247–50; of Dow Jones Industrial Average, 102, 104, 109–10, 219;
errors in, 75; of home prices, 21–22; of returns, 80, 206, 228, 243–45,
313n19; short-term, 244–45; of stock prices, 131, 172–73, 206,
243–45. See also expectations
Foreign Affairs, 136–37
foreign investors, speculative bubbles and, 231–32
Fortune, 138
Fostel, Ana, 264
401(k) plans, 51–53, 54, 80–81, 293n20
403(b) plans, 52
framing, 264, 268, 269, 270–71
France: real estate markets in, 18, 26f, 27, 125; stock prices in, 4, 5f,
109, 152t, 153t, 154t, 158, 306n11
fraud, 36, 91–92, 181. See also Ponzi schemes
Freddie Mac (Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation), 20, 33–34
Freedman, Paul, 299n1

free-rider problem, xxvii, 188
French, Kenneth, 202
Freud, Sigmund, 186
Friedman, Benjamin, 67–68
Froot, Kenneth, 315n23
FTSE 100 index, 1, 109
Fujimori, Alberto, 157
fundamentals: absence of change in, 110–11, 141, 147–48; attention to,
226, 232–33; inattention to, 226–27, 262; information on, 265, 268;
news reports on, 110–11; prices related to, 40, 107–8, 207–8, 226,
242, 245–46, 270; in real estate markets, 225. See also corporate
profits; dividends; earnings; interest rates
futures: on dividends, 232–33, 270, 270n36; on home price indices, 232,
234, 261, 269; perpetual, 270; on stock indices, 233
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 82, 243, 311n19
gambling: emotions and, 81, 307n7; in Florida, 139; house money effect
in, 81, 85, 264; opportunities for, 58–59; storytelling in, 168–69; in
Taiwan, 156
Gandhi, Rajiv, 157
GDP. See gross domestic product
Geanakoplos. John, 264
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (Keynes), 262–63,
284n14
Gerard, Harold, 176
Germany: investment books in, 77; Nazi, 145, 176; stock prices in, 1, 4,
5f, 109
GI Bill of Rights, 24
Gibson, A. H., 13
Gibson, George, 196
Glaeser, Edward, 304n44
Glassman, James K., 219
Global House Price Index, 27
globalization, 136–37, 161
Goetzmann, William N., 217

gold standard, 229
Google Trends, 149
Gordon, Robert J., 303n34
government bonds, European, 64, 270. See also bonds; Treasury bonds
government deficits, xxii, 115
Goyal, Amit, 313–14n19
Graf Zeppelin, 111
Graham, Benjamin, 6, 262, 282n7
Grant, James, 49
Granville, Joseph, 109–10
The Great Boom Ahead (Dent), 47
The Great Crash: 1929 (Galbraith), 82, 243
Great Depression: explanations of, 111–12; fear of recurrence of, 63;
interest rates during, 12; loss of confidence in, 144–45; monetary
policy and, 228, 229; real estate market during, 23; recovery from, 6,
152–53; stock prices in, 249–50; suicide rates during, 311n19
The Great Depression of 1990 (Batra), 103
Great Society, 134–35
Greenspan, Alan: congressional testimony by, 12; on flexibility of U.S.
economy, 61–62; irrational exuberance speech of, 1, 2, 9, 230;
monetary policy of, 61; on new era, 9, 124
Greenspan put, 62
Gross, William, xii, 3, 13, 64
gross domestic product (GDP): derivatives markets on, 270; feedback
loops with prices, 85, 86; government deficits and, xxii. See also
economic growth
Grossman, Sanford, 251
Guaranty Survey, 113
Guaranty Trust Company, 113
Gulf War, 47, 156
Guo, Wen-Chung, 264
habit formation theory, 297n19
Halbwachs, Maurice, 253
Hamilton, James, 48

Hang Seng index, 1
Hangzhou real estate market, 27
Hansen, Lars Peter, 251
Harrison, Michael, 264
Harvard Business Review, 124
Hassett, Kevin A., 219
Hastie, Reid, 168
He, Zhiguo, 264
Heaton, John, 319n14
hedge funds. See institutional investors
hedging risks, 233–34, 269–70
Helwege, Jean, 316n28
Henry, David, 147
herd behavior, xxi, 175–78
Herengracht canal, Amsterdam, 29
HGTV, 102
hindsight bias, 171
history, forgotten, 253
Hjalmarsson, Erik, 313–14n19
hold recommendations, 49, 51, 292n13, 292n15
home equity insurance, 269
home price indices: Constant Quality, 259–60, 260f, 288n7; futures on,
232, 234, 261, 269; Global House Price Index, 27; historical, 19–22,
20f, 286–87n3; National Association of Real Estate Boards, 33;
problems with, 258–59; quality and, 29; weighted repeat sales method
in, 33–34, 259. See also S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices
home prices: building costs and, 19, 20f, 22, 30, 31, 33, 260, 288n7;
data sources for, 33–34, 258–59, 288–89n10; factors in, 30–33, 88–89,
140, 225–26; forecastability of, 21–22; historical, 19, 20f, 22–24,
27–30, 32; of new homes, 288n7, 290n19; perceived trends in, 28,
30–31, 34–35, 226; quality and, 28–29, 289n18; real, 23, 271; recent,
19–21, 22, 24–26, 225–26; stock markets and, 22, 23; in U.S. cities,
23, 24–27, 25f, 29–30, 31–32, 288–89n10; wealth effect of, 61, 235;
world, 18, 22, 26–27, 26f. See also real estate markets
home price-to-income ratios, xx–xxi, 21, 287n4, 288n7

Hong, Harrison, 264
Hong Kong: real estate market in, 18; stock prices in, 1, 4, 151t, 152t,
153t, 160
Hoover, Herbert, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114
Horesh, Ronnie, 268
house money effect, 81, 85, 264
housing bubbles. See home prices; real estate booms
housing cooperative movement, 34
housing markets. See home prices; real estate markets
Hoyt, Homer, 29–30
Hsu, Ming, 265
Huang, Ming, 264
Huberman, Gur, 300–301n11
Huettel, Scott A., 265
Hughes, Langston, 145
human factors engineering, 265, 266
humanizing finance, 266
Humphrey, George, 133
Ibbotson Associates, 284n13
IBM, 180
ideas: conflicting, 187–88; contagion of, 179–87, 189–90, 241; spread by
media, 103, 122, 179
income inequality, 66–67
incomes: concerns about future, 61; growth of, 30; hedging, 233–34,
270; home price-to-income ratios, xx–xxi, 21, 287n4, 288n7
income taxes, xxii, 139, 144
index funds, 76. See also mutual funds
index participations, 270
India: economic reforms in, 157; real estate markets in, 27; stock prices
in, 5f, 151t, 152t, 153t, 154t, 157–58
individual investors: advice for, 77, 234; in bull markets, 129, 133–34,
135, 138; confidence of, xx, xxiii, 63, 172–73; crash of 1987 and,
114–16, 172, 180; day traders, 57; defined contribution pension plans
of, 51–53, 54, 80–81, 293n20; demand for stocks of, 254–55;

expectations of, 77–79; financial knowledge of, 52; financial news
and, 48; holding long-run investments, 219; information sources of,
179–80; institutional investors compared with, 41, 290–91n2; interest
in stocks of, 53; investment clubs of, 82–83; recommendations for,
236; risk management by, 233–34, 270; smart money and, 197–98;
valuation confidence of, xiv, 87–88, 88f. See also investor surveys;
mutual funds
Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), 54
Indonesia, stock prices in, 4, 152t Industry Standard, 48
inequality, increases in, 66–67
infection rates, 182–83, 184, 185. See also epidemic models
inflation: in building costs, 19, 20f, 30; decline of, 55–56; economic
growth and, 136; effects on stated earnings, 263; fear of, 145; in
future, 13; home prices and, 28, 271; indexing to, 270–71; interest
rates and, 13–17, 14f, 55–56; in Peru, 157; stock as hedge against,
135; stock prices and, 133, 135, 136, 303n30; in Venezuela, 156. See
also Consumer Price Index
inflation-indexed bonds, 15–17, 16f, 270–71, 285nn8–9, 285n14
information, 175–77, 254–55. See also learning; media
information cascades, 178
information processing, human, 179
information technology. See computers; technology
inheritance taxes, 139
initial public offerings, 93, 147, 201, 202
innovations. See financial innovations; technology
insider trading, 36, 180
institutional investors: confidence of, 63, 172–73; crash of 1987 and,
114–18, 172, 180; expectations of, 77–79; individual investors
compared with, 41, 290–91n2; investment performance of, 198;
Japanese, 231, 301n19; portfolio insurance of, 117, 118, 119; in real
estate markets, xv, 21, 261; research by, xxviii, 190; shifts in attention
of, 190; valuation confidence of, xiv, 87–88, 88f. See also investors;
investor surveys
intelligence, investor, 197–99. See also smart money
interactive communication, 181–82

interest rates: crash of 1987 and, 116, 117; economic importance of, 11;
inflation and, 13–17, 14f, 55–56; long-term, 11–12, 13–14, 14f, 15,
40, 64, 207, 213; low, 17, 19, 62, 65; mortgage, 64, 140–41, 288n8;
nominal, 14, 15, 55–56, 284n3; price-earnings ratios and, 7f, 12–13,
284n3; raising, 228, 230; real, 14–15, 55–56, 217, 284n3; real estate
markets and, 19, 20f, 22, 62, 64, 140–41, 288n8; short-term, 11, 216;
stock returns and, 13, 207, 318n9; suggested policy on, 228–29; term
structure of, 245; volatility of, 213. See also monetary policy
Internal Revenue Service, 51
International Monetary Fund, xi, 27
Internet: arrival of, 41–43, 123–24, 142; economic importance of,
123–24, 137; e-mail, 182, 184; gambling, 58; growth of, 182; online
trading, 57, 83; searches, 149; social media, 181, 182, 184; word-of-
mouth communication on, 184. See also websites
Internet firms, 42, 43, 92–93. See also technology companies
Internet stocks, 146–48, 199–200
Interstate Commerce Commission, 111
intrinsic bubble model, 315n23
intuitive judgments, 166, 171, 173, 228
inventions. See technology
investment banks, 93. See also analysts; institutional investors
investment clubs, 82–83
Investment Company Act of 1940, 54
investment trusts: history of, 54; real estate, 167, 290n20
investor confidence. See confidence
investors: asset allocation decisions by, 80–81, 96, 207; emotions of, 76,
80–81, 85, 165–66; foreign, 231–32; limited liability of, 265–66; long-
term, 205; perceived feedback loops, 87–89, 226; persistence of
success of, 198–99; professional, 41, 87, 88, 198, 227; smart money,
21, 196–99, 200, 201, 254–55; zealots, 200, 312n10. See also
individual investors; institutional investors
investor surveys: on confidence, 63, 71–74, 71f, 72f, 172–73, 218; on
information sources, 179–80; on investor sentiment, 254; in Japan,
231; on merits of stocks vs. bonds, 218; on mutual funds, 220–21; on
stock market crash of 1987, 114–16, 117–18, 172–73, 180,

301nn19–20; on stock market crash of 1989, 106–7; on stock-picking,
220–21; on stock research, 190
Iraq. See Gulf War
IRAs. See Individual Retirement Accounts
Ireland, real estate market in, 18
irrational exuberance: in bubbles, 191–92; defined, 1–2; feedback loops
and, 97; Greenspan’s speech on, 1, 2, 9, 230; importance of concept,
1–2; learning and, 214, 222; in Millennium Boom, xxv–xxvi,
xxviii–xxix, 1–2, 4, 9; in real estate markets, xx–xxi, 33, 34; worries
about, 9–10
Irrational Exuberance (Shiller, first edition), xi, xii, 147; preface, xxv–xxix
Irrational Exuberance (Shiller, second edition), xi, xii, 240; preface,
xix–xxiii
irrationalexuberance.com (author’s Web site), xvii
Israel, real estate markets in, xi
Istanbul real estate market, 27
Italy: real estate market in, 18, 27; stock prices in, 151t, 152t, 154t, 158
Jamaica, stock prices in, 151t, 152t, 153t, 154t
January effect, 208
Japan: earthquakes in, 108–9; institutional investors in, 231, 301n19;
monetary policy in, 228; real estate markets in, 19, 27, 30; recessions
in, xxii, 43; stock prices in, 1, 4, 5f, 43, 74, 108, 153t, 160, 231–32,
319n2; U.S. competition with, 145; yen, 228
Jensen, Michael, 246
Jochec, Marek, 262
Johnson, Lyndon B., 8, 134–35
Jorion, Philippe, 217
Journal of Finance, 200
judgments. See decision making; intuitive judgments
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, 269
Jung, Jeeman, 256
jurors, decision making process of, 168
justification, 168, 169–70

Kahneman, Daniel, 166–67, 172, 264
Katona, George, 310n7
KB Toys, 200
Kennedy, John F., 8, 105, 134, 145
Kennedy-Johnson peak, 8–9, 230
Kennedy Market. See bull market of 1950s/1960s
Keynes, John Maynard, xvi, 10, 13, 253, 262–64, 284n14
Khrushchev, Nikita, 105

Khurana, Rakesh, 93
Killinger, Kerry, 35–36
Kindleberger, Charles P., 92, 243
Kirman, Alan, 183–84
Kleidon, Allan W., 246
Kobe earthquake, 108–9
Korea: real estate market in, 30; stock prices in, 4, 5f, 151t, 152t, 153t,
154t, 160
Korean War, 105
Kreps, David, 264
Krugman, Paul, 124, 147
Kubler, Felix, 264
Kuwait, 156–57
labor productivity, 137, 303n34
labor unions, 52, 132, 235
Ladies’ Home Journal, 76
Ladner, Linda, 232
land values, 22–23, 29–30, 31, 140. See also real estate markets
Lange, Oscar, 144
Laster, David, 316n28
Las Vegas real estate market, 27
Latin America. See specific countries
Lawrence, Joseph, 196
learning: about bond vs. stock performance, 215–17, 218, 221; about
real estate markets, 222; about risk, 214–17, 219; about stock
markets, 214–17, 219–21; social, 310n7; unlearning and, 221–22
Lefevre, Edwin, 129
Lehman Brothers, 20
Leland, Hayne, 118
lenders. See banks; mortgages
Leonardo da Vinci, 185–87
LeRoy, Stephen F., 209, 245, 251
Lewellen, Jonathan, 313–14n19
libertarian paternalism, 268

Lichtenstein, Sarah, 170
Life with Father (Day), 181
limited liability, 265–66
logistic curve, 182–83, 310n13
London real estate market, 26f, 27, 142. See also United Kingdom
London stock exchange, 1, 109
Long Term Capital Management, 62, 212
Los Angeles real estate market, 24, 25f, 72–73, 125, 138–39, 146
Los Angeles Times, 145
loser stocks, 160–61
lotteries, 58–59, 171
Lotus Development Corporation, 141, 142, 180
Louisiana lottery, 58
Loungani, Prakash, 149
Lucas, Deborah, 319n14
Lucas, Robert E., 66, 251
Luxembourg, stock prices in, 151t
Lynch, Peter, 202–3, 312–13n17
MacKay, Charles, 296n1
MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour, 103
Macro Markets (Shiller), 266
MacroMarkets LLC, 261, 261n22, 270n35
MacroShares, 261n22, 270, 270n35
Madoff, Bernie, 90
Madrid real estate market, 27
magical thinking, 171
Maier, N.R.F., 190–91
Malaysia, stock prices in, 4
managed capitalism, 136
managerial revolutions, 137
Mandel, Michael, 136
Manias, Panics and Crashes (Kindleberger), 92, 243
man of smoke metaphor, xxi

Marconi, Guglielmo, 127
Marcos, Ferdinand, 155
markets, factors affecting, 40. See also bonds; efficient markets theory;
futures; real estate markets; stock markets
Market Volatility (Shiller), 247
Marsh, Terry, 212, 246
Martin, William McChesney, 230
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 65, 92
Massachusetts Investors Trust, 54
Massachusetts Miracle, 142
materialistic values, 43–44, 291n5
McCarthy, Jonathan, 288n7
McKinley, William, 128
media: attention cascades precipitated by, 108–10, 122; bull markets
and, xxvii–xxviii, 82, 132–33, 136–38; business coverage by, 47–49;
competition among, xxvii–xxviii, 101–2, 241; conventional wisdom in,
xxviii, 104; on crash of 1987, 103; debates cultivated by, 102–3;
experts quoted in, 102–3, 104, 234; explanations for stock price
fluctuations, 110–14, 126, 211; face-to-face communications vs.,
179–82; financial coverage by, 75, 76, 82, 102, 103–5, 115, 158, 215,
234; global culture of, 120–21; interactive, 181, 182; Internet stocks
and, 146–47; market outlook reports by, 103–4; Mona Lisa theft story
in, 186–87; new era economic thinking in, 124–26, 132–34, 136–37,
144; news preceding crashes, 110–19; public attention to, 101–2,
107–8; real estate market coverage by, 34, 35, 102, 121, 290n19;
record overload in, 104–5, 115, 241; roles of, 101–10, 121–22,
147–48, 241; setting stage for market moves, 101–2; tag-along news,
106–7
Mehta, Harshad (“Big Bull”), 158
Meksi, Aleksander, 90
Melbourne real estate market, 27
Meltzer, Allan, 111–12
memory, collective, 253
mergers, corporate, 127, 131, 180
Merrill Lynch, xxviii, 20, 290–91n2

Merton, Robert C., 212, 246
Merton, Robert K., 121
Mexico: peso crisis in, 159; stock prices in, 4, 5f, 153t, 159
Miami real estate market, 24–25, 25f, 32, 139
Mian, Atif, 36
Milgram, Stanley, 177, 309n4
Millennium Boom: as bubble, xii, xxii, xxvi, 5, 138, 146–47; confidence
during, xiv, xix–xx, xxvii, 70–72, 73, 75, 87–88, 148; corporate
scandals and, xxii; earnings growth in, 203; end of, xii, xx, xxii, 2, 4,
146–48; interest rates and, 12; Internet stocks in, 146–48, 199–200;
irrational exuberance in, xxv–xxvi, xxviii–xxix, 1–2, 4, 9; media
coverage of, xxvii–xxviii, 82; mispricing in, 199–200; new era thinking
and, xxii, 124–25, 136–38; precipitating factors of, 41–59, 68–69;
predicted duration of, 47; public attention to, 82, 83; real estate boom
and, xxii, 22; real price increases in, 4, 152; saving rates during, 235;
tax revenues during, xxii; underfunded pension plans and, 235. See
also stock market peak of 2000
Miller, Edward, 200
Miller, Merton, 209, 242
The Millionaire Next Door (Stanley and Danko), 77, 170
Milwaukee real estate market, 72–73
mispricing: causes of, 200–201; correcting, 200; information failures
and, 178; knowledge of, 312n10; obvious, 199–201; smart money and,
196–97, 200; statistical evidence of, 201–2; value investing and, 202
Mississippi Bubble, 240
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), 65, 92
Mitterrand, François, 158
Modigliani, Franco, 55–56, 263, 294n29
Mona Lisa (Leonardo), 185–87
monetary policy: anti-inflationary, 133; asset price booms and, 62; to
discourage bubbles, 228–29, 230; quantitative easing, 13, 64, 207;
supportive, 61–62. See also interest rates
Monetary Policy Report, 12
money illusion, 56, 271, 294n29
money managers. See institutional investors; professional investors

Moody, John, 130
Moody’s Aaa Corporate Bond Total Return Index, 216
moral anchors, 166, 167–70
The Moral Consequences of Economic Growth (Friedman), 67
moral hazard problems, 32
Morgan, J. P., 129, 229
Morris, Stephen, 264
mortgages: assumable, 141; buy-downs of, 304n42; continuous workout,
234; defaults on, 23, 304n42; due-on-sale clauses in, 141, 304n41;
floating-rate, 288n8; interest rates on, 64, 140–41, 288n8; lenders,
35–36; lending standards for, xii, 44, 60–61; with preplanned
workouts, 269; subprime, xii, 18, 20, 35–36, 60–61, 269–70; for
veterans, 24
Moss, David A., 265–66
movies, 130, 185
Mozilo, Angelo, 36
Mussolini, Benito, 111
mutation rates, 184
Muth, Richard F., 259
mutual funds: advertising by, 54–55, 202–3; fees of, 221; growth of,
53–55, 134, 219–20, 319n14; index funds, 76; inflows to, 293n26;
investment performance of, 199, 220; investor education by, 219;
investor selection of, 219–21
NAIC (National Association of Investors Corporation), 82–83
NASDAQ, 41–42, 56–57, 62, 199
National Association of Investors Corporation (NAIC), 82–83
National Association of Real Estate Boards, 33, 288–89n10
National Association of Realtors, 258–59
National Broadcasting Company, 130
National Bureau of Economic Research, 240, 261
nationalism: company names and, 262; increase in, xi, 66, 67–68
natural disasters. See earthquakes
Nazi Germany, 145, 176
negative bubbles, 86–87, 114, 116, 117, 298n22

negative feedback loops, 86–87, 148
Netherlands: real estate markets in, 29; real estate shows in, 102; stock
prices in, 153t; tulip mania, 29, 101, 241–42, 296n1, 300n2
neuroscience, 188, 265. See also brain
new era economic thinking: in bull markets, xxii, 124–25, 129–35,
136–38, 144, 145, 230; created by stock markets, 126; ends of,
143–49, 159–60; evidence of, 124; Greenspan on, 9, 124; in
international stock markets, 155–58, 159; media discussions of,
124–26, 132–34, 136–37, 144; occurrence of, 123; peak of 1901 and,
126–29; public reactions to, 123–24, 125–26; in real estate market,
xiv, 125, 138–43; spread of, xii–xiii
The New Financial Order (Shiller), 266
New Levels in the Stock Market (Dice), 130–31
New-Normal Boom: confidence during, 74; evidence of bubbles in,
xi–xii; name of, xii, 3, 64; precipitating factors for, 62–68, 225;
prospects for, 227; real price increases in, 4; underfunded pension
plans and, 235–36
newspapers: early, 101, 299n1; financial coverage by, 102. See also
media
Newsweek, 133–34, 135, 147
New York Daily Tribune, 127–28
New Yorker, 147
New York Herald Tribune, 216
New York real estate market, 26f, 27
New York Stock Exchange: MacroShares trading on, 261n22; Rule 80B,
230; stock borrowing and lending on, 201; trading volumes on, 56,
294n31. See also bull markets; Dow Jones Industrial Average; stock
market crashes
New York Times, 105, 111, 112, 113, 132, 145, 147
New Zealand real estate market, 18
Niederhoffer, Victor, 105–6, 107
Nikkei index, 1, 74, 108, 231–32, 319n2
Niquet, Bernd, 77
Nobel Prize, 196, 242, 244, 246
No Fear of the Next Crash (Niquet), 77

nominal interest rates, 14, 15, 55–56, 284n3
nonconsequentialist reasoning, 173
no-Ponzi condition, 299n34
Northeast U.S. real estate market, 140, 141, 142. See also Boston real
estate market
Northern Securities Company, 128
Norway: real estate market in, 18; stock prices in, 152t, 153t, 154t
Nourse. Hugh O., 259
Obstfeld, Maurice, 315n23
Occupy Wall Street movement, 67, 228
Odean, Terrance, 83
Office of Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO), U.S., 33–34, 286–87n3
oil prices, 156–57
Okun, Arthur, 145
One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago (Hoyt), 29–30
online trading, 57, 83
Only Yesterday (Allen), 74, 129
opinion leaders, 227, 228, 229–30. See also expert opinions
optimism: of analysts’ forecasts, 49–51; in early twentieth century, 127;
of investors, 74, 75–76, 79. See also confidence; new era economic
thinking
options, put, 233
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, xxii, 159
Orman, Suze, 77
Other People’s Houses (Taub), 35
overconfidence: based on expert opinions, 177; learning and, 83; of
public, xxiii, 228; reasons for, 171; selective, 308–9n19; tendencies
toward, 170–72, 264, 299n31; trading volumes and, 172. See also
confidence
ownership society, xii, xxiii, 60–61, 140
Ownership-Society Boom: end of, 4, 148–49, 191; investor confidence
during, 73–74; name of, xii, 3; precipitating factors for, 59–62, 225;
real estate boom and, xii, xx–xxi, 20; real price increases in, 4; saving
rates during, 235; underfunded pension plans and, 235

PaineWebber/Gallup index, 79
Pakistan, stock prices in, 152t, 154t
Palazzeschi, Aldo, xxi
Palm, 201
Pan-American Exposition, 127, 128
Paris: Louvre, 185–87; real estate market in, 26f, 27, 125
Paris stock exchange, 109
Parker, Richard, 48
participation nonprofits, 269
patriotism, 262. See also nationalism
pattern-recognition faculty, 75
PBGC (Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation), 235–36
Peach, Richard W., 288n7
Pennington, Nancy, 168
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), 235–36
pension funds. See institutional investors
pension plans: defined benefit, 51–52, 235–36; defined contribution,
51–53, 54, 80–81, 293n20; earnings and, 283n9. See also retirement
plans
personal computers, 42, 141
Peru, stock prices in, 151t, 153t, 157
peso crisis, 159
Philippines, stock prices in, 151t, 152t, 153t, 154t, 155
Phoenix real estate market, 24–25, 25f, 32
Piketty, Thomas, 66–67
political changes, 43, 44–45, 67–68
Ponzi, Charles, 90–91
Ponzi schemes: amplification mechanisms as, 70; bubbles as, 93–94;
described, 90; feedback loops in, 89–91; investment trusts as, 54
population: fear of explosion, 145; fertility rates, 45–46; home prices
and, 18–19, 20f, 22. See also Baby Boom
The Population Bomb (Ehrlich), 145
Porter, Richard D., 209, 245
portfolio insurance, 117, 118, 119

Portugal, stock prices in, 151t, 153t, 154t
Posen, Adam, 62
Poterba, James, 107, 108
Pound, John, 179–80, 190
Prechter, Robert, 115
precipitating factors: Baby Boom as, 45–47; in bond markets, 17;
cultural, 43–44, 58–59; defined contribution pension plans as, 51–53;
end-of-career anxieties as, 65–66; in Europe, 69, 296n56; gambling
opportunities as, 58–59; increased inequality as, 66–67; Internet
introduction as, 41–43; for market movements, 39–41, 225; media
business coverage as, 47–49; for Millennium Boom, 41–59, 68–69;
mutual fund growth as, 53–55; for New-Normal Boom, 62–68, 225;
optimistic analysts’ forecasts as, 49–51; ownership society as, 60–61;
for Ownership-Society Boom, 59–62, 225; political, 43, 44–45; for real
estate booms, 88–89, 142, 148, 225–26; supportive monetary policy
as, 61–62; timing of, 40; trading volumes as, 56–58
present value. See dividend present value
price-earnings ratios: as anchors, 167; early, 282–83n5; earnings
forecasts and, 50; high, 147, 214; historical, 6, 7f, 8–9, 126, 216,
283n11; interest rates and, 7f, 12–13, 284n3; of large-cap stocks, 147;
of overpriced stocks, 201–2; in Philippines, 155; ranges of, 202–3;
returns and, 204–7, 205f, 216, 313–14n19; in Taiwan, 156. See also
cyclically adjusted price-earnings ratios; earnings
price-insensitive selling, 116, 117
price-rental ratios, 34
prices: allocation of scarce resources by, 267; random walks of, 195,
221, 243–44. See also efficient markets theory; home prices; inflation;
price-earnings ratios; stock prices
price-to-book value ratios, 202
price-to-corporate earnings-to-price feedback, 85–86
price-to-GDP-to-price feedback, 85, 86
price-to-price feedback, 85, 119, 121–22, 138
printing history, 299n1
probabilities, 80, 169, 170, 171, 172, 253, 264–65
productivity growth, 137, 303n34

professional investors, 41, 87, 88, 106–7, 198, 227. See also institutional
investors; investors
profits. See corporate profits; earnings
Prohibition, 59, 132
Property Ladder, 102
property taxes, 140
Proposition 13, 140
prospect theory, 264
psychological anchors: arbitrary, 265; evidence of, 166; fragility of,
173–74; intuitive judgments, 166, 171, 173; moral, 166, 167–70;
overconfidence, 170–73; quantitative, 166–67
psychological factors: animal spirits, xvi, 10, 253, 254–55, 269, 284n14;
confidence and, 75; contradictory views, 187–88; in feedback loops,
86; herd behavior, xxi, 175–78; in real estate markets, xiv, 18, 25–26,
89, 225–26; in stock markets, 81, 115–16, 226–27, 253. See also
confidence; decision making; emotions; irrational exuberance;
overconfidence
put options, 233
pyramid schemes. See Ponzi schemes
quantitative anchors, 166–67
quantitative easing, 13, 64, 207
quasi-magical thinking, 171
racetrack betting, 58
radio, 127, 130. See also media
railroads, 22–23, 111, 124, 128, 138, 144
The Random Character of Stock Market Prices (Cootner), 242
randomness, 87
random walks, 195, 221, 243, 244. See also efficient markets theory
rational expectations models, 312n10
rational inattention model, 262
“reaching for yield,” 65, 67
Reagan, Ronald, 44, 116, 140, 146
real estate booms: of 1997–2006, xii, xx–xxi, xxii, 19–21, 25–26, 125,

139–43, 259–60; bubbles and, xi, xii, xv, 22–23, 25–27, 33, 34–36,
88–89, 139, 149; ends of, 146, 148–49; explanations of, 18–19;
feedback between stock market and, 94–96, 148; historical, xii, 22–25,
138–39, 299–300n1; international, xi, xii, xiii, 18, 96; local, 22–23,
24–25; mortgage lenders and, 35–36; national, 139–41; in new
construction, 33; new era thinking and, xiv, 125, 138–43; post–World
War II, 21, 22, 23–24, 288–89n10; precipitating factors for, 88–89,
142, 148, 225–26; public attention to, 149; regional, 23, 24, 138–42;
saving rates and, 61
real estate investment trusts, 167, 290n20
real estate markets: Baby Boom and, 46, 47; confidence in, 21, 71,
72–73, 72f, 88–89; crashes in, 18, 19, 20, 21; creative financing in,
141; efficiency of, 258–61, 269–70; feedback between stock market
and, 94–96, 148; feedback loops in, 85; fundamental forces in, 225;
hedging in, 234, 269–70; in historical perspective, 19–24; homebuyer
surveys, 88–89, 95–96, 254; institutional investors in, xv, 21, 261;
interest rates and, 19, 20f, 22, 62, 64, 140–41, 288n8; international,
26–27, 96; irrational exuberance in, xx–xxi, 33, 34; land values and,
22–23, 29–30, 31, 140; learning in, 222; media coverage of, 34, 35,
102, 121, 290n19; population and, 18–19, 22; property flippers, 102;
psychological factors in, xiv, 18, 25–26, 89, 225–26; public attention
to, 102; regional, 25; rentals, 21, 32–33, 34, 260–61; risk in, xiv, 222;
size of, 258; smart money in, xv, 21; stock market compared with, 20,
22, 260–61; trading costs in, 260; for vacation or second-home
properties, 142–43. See also home prices; mortgages; real estate booms
real estate myth, 30
real interest rates, 14–15, 55–56, 217
real returns, 56, 216–17
real stock prices. See stock prices
recessions: of 1920–21, 6, 23, 143–44; of 1980s, 50, 141, 146, 160; of
1990–91, 6, 42, 50, 146; of 2001, xxii, 146, 148, 217; of 2007–9, xiv,
4, 149, 217; dividends and, 211; in Japan, xxii, 43; monetary policy
and, 229. See also depressions
record overload, 104–5, 115, 241
Red Herring, 48
Reed, David, 112

Regev, Tomer, 300–301n11
regression tests, 243–46
Regulation FD, 51
removal rates, 182, 183, 184, 185. See also epidemic models
rent control, 34
representativeness heuristic, 172, 308–9n19
Republican Party, 44–45, 60
restructuring, corporate, 137
retirement, of Baby Boomers, 65, 142, 235
retirement plans: company stock in, 53, 169, 308n9; Individual
Retirement Accounts, 54; in overvalued markets, 234–36. See also
pension plans; Social Security
returns: cyclically adjusted price-earnings ratios and, 204–6, 205f, 207;
equity premium, 215, 317–18n1; expected, xiv, 252, 256–58;
forecasting, 80, 206, 228, 243–45, 313n19; historical, 8, 9, 215, 216;
predictability of, 253; price-earnings ratios and, 204–7, 205f, 216,
313–14n19; real, 56, 216–17; on real estate investments, 28, 32–33;
stock-bond comparisons, 13, 207, 215, 216–17, 221, 226, 318n9;
underfunded pension plans and, 235. See also bond returns; capital
gains taxes; dividends
risk: aversion to and age, 291–92n9; in bond markets, 215;
diversification of, 219, 233; gambling and, 58–59, 307n7; hedging,
233–34, 269–70; inflation-indexed bonds and, 15–16, 285n9; learning
about, 214–17, 219; of losses, 81; macroeconomic, 136–37;
management of, 233–34, 269; of natural disasters, 109; perceived
increases in, 66; in real estate markets, xiv, 222; in stock markets,
214–16, 219; of terrorism, 67–68
Ritter, Jay, 202
The Road to Financial Freedom (Schäfer), 77
The Roaring 2000s (Dent), 47
The Roaring 2000s Investor (Dent), 47
Robbins, Lionel, 266–67
Roberts, Harry, 242
robots, 65
Rockefeller, John D., 229

Roll, Richard, 246
Rome real estate market, 27
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 24
Roosevelt, Theodore, 128
Roper-Starch surveys, 43–44
Rostenkowski, Dan, 117
Rothman, James E., 242
Rubinstein, Mark, 118
Rule 80B, New York Stock Exchange, 230
Russia: debt crisis in, 62; real estate market in, 18. See also Soviet Union
S&P. See Standard and Poor’s
S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices: confidence in real estate market
and, 72–73, 72f; development of, 259; futures on, 232, 261, 269;
home prices compared to renting, 21; increases in, xiii; MacroShares
based on, 261n22, 270, 270n35; monthly, 286–87n3; real prices,
259–60, 260f; for U.S. cities, 24–25, 25f, 26–27, 26f; for world cities,
26–27, 26f
Samuelson, Paul A., 255–56, 256n19, 317n36
San Diego real estate market, 27, 138–39
San Francisco real estate market, 72–73, 146
San Jose, 146
Santa Barbara real estate market, 138–39
Santa Fe Railroad, 138
Santos, Tano, 264
Santos Calderón, Juan Manuel, xiv
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 51
Saroyan, William, 145
SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test) scores, 198
Saturday Evening Post, 144
Saunders, Edward M., 262
saving rates: of Baby Boomers, 46; income inequality and, 67; real estate
booms and, 61; in United States, 61, 235, 236, 291–92n9
savings: life-cycle patterns of, 46, 291–92n9; in overvalued markets,
234–35, 236. See also retirement plans; savings rates; wealth

savings and loans. See mortgages
Schäfer, Bodo, 77
Scheinkman, Jose, 264
Schlumberger, 257–58
Schmedders, Karl, 264
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores, 198
Searching for a Corporate Savior (Khurana), 93
Securities Act of 1933, 181
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC): establishment of, 181;
insider trading investigations by, 36, 180; Regulation FD of, 51;
reports to, 190; short sales rules of, 231; trading regulations of, 57
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 181
Security Analysis (Graham and Dodd), 262
self-fulfilling prophecies, xxviii, 85. See also feedback loops
sell recommendations, 49, 51, 292n13, 292n15, 311n4
Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944 (GI Bill of Rights), 24
Shackleton, Mark B., 234
Shafir, Eldar, 169–70, 173–74
Shanghai real estate market, 26f, 27
Sharpe, Steven, 50
Shefrin, Hersh M., 261
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, 128
Shiller, Robert J., xiv, 6, 13, 33, 61, 72, 95, 106–7, 147, 179–80, 204,
209, 212, 218, 234, 240, 242, 245–46, 251, 256, 261, 266
Shin, Hyun, 264
Shining Path, 157
Shleifer, Andrei, 261, 308–9n19
short sales: in bull market of 1920s, 144; constraints on, 200–201, 231,
312n10; of overpriced stocks, 202, 231; in real estate markets, xv;
rules on, 231; use of, 233
Siegel, Jeremy J., 13, 147, 215, 216, 248n10, 282–83n5
Silicon Valley, 141, 146
Simonson, Itamar, 169–70
Simpson, O. J. (trial of), 47

Sims, Christopher A., 245, 262
Singapore, stock prices in, 4
Singh, Manmohan, 157
Singleton, Kenneth J., 245, 251
Slovic, Paul, 170
small-firm effect, 208
smart money: demand for stocks of, 254–55; effects on prices, 196–98,
200, 227; investment performance of, 198–99, 255; mispricing and,
200, 201; in real estate markets, xv, 21
Smith, Adam, 267
Smith, Edgar Lawrence, 215
Smoot, Reed, 112
Smoot-Hawley tariff, 111–12
social attention, 189–90. See also attention
Social Finance, Ltd., 268
social influence, 175–77, 226. See also communication; opinion leaders
socialism, 43, 60, 158
social media, 181, 182, 184
social policy bonds, 268
Social Security, 46, 60, 65
South Africa: real estate market in, 18; stock prices in, 152t, 154t
South Korea. See Korea
Soviet Union, 43, 105. See also Russia
Spain: real estate market in, 18; stock prices in, 151t, 152t, 153t, 154t
speculative bubbles: alternative metaphors for, 241–42; in bond markets,
xi, 12, 13, 17; bursting of, 86, 113, 143, 232, 241; defined, xiii–xiv, 2,
240–41; efficient markets view of, 241; ends of, xv, 241; excess
volatility in, 213; foreign investors and, 231–32; fraud and
manipulation in, 91–92; historical, xii–xiii, 29, 101, 240, 241–42,
299–300n1; house money effect in, 81, 85, 264; in international stock
markets, 155–58; intrinsic, 315n23; media roles in, 101, 121–22, 241;
Millennium, xii, xxii, xxvi, 5, 138, 146–47; monetary policy during,
228–29; as naturally occurring Ponzi processes, 70, 93–94; negative,
86–87, 114, 116, 117, 298n22; negative effects of, 227–28;
overconfidence and, 171, 173; policy recommendations to manage and

prevent, 227–37; public perceptions of, 87–89, 149, 242–43; in real
estate markets, 22–23, 25–27, 33, 34–36, 88–89, 139; recent, xi; word-
of-mouth communication and, 125, 182, 187. See also amplification
mechanisms; feedback loops; mispricing; precipitating factors
Sraer, David, 264
stagflation, 145
Standard and Poor’s (S&P) / Case-Shiller Home Price Index. See
S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices
Standard and Poor’s (S&P) Composite Stock Price Index: big news days
and, 105–6; bond returns compared to, 216–17; composition of,
282n2; dividend present value and, 247–51, 248f, 252f, 316n28;
earnings, 3f, 5, 6, 42, 203, 283n8; historical, 2–3, 3f, 4–6, 8–9, 210;
media explanations of moves in, 107–8; in World War II, 68
Standard and Poor’s (S&P) 500 Index, xix, xx, 50, 282n2
Standard and Poor’s (S&P) 500 Strips, 232–33
Stanley, Thomas, 77
Stein, Jeremy, 17
Sterling, William, 47
Stiff, David, 232
stock analysts. See analysts
stock index futures, 233. See also stock price indices
The Stock Market Crash—and After (Fisher), 131–32
stock market crashes: of 1907, 129, 229; of 1973-74, 71, 208; of 1989,
106–7; of 2000, xx, 146–48; of 2007, 148–49, 201; dividend changes
and, 208; fear of, 63; media coverage of, 106, 146–47; public reactions
to, 230–31; recoveries from, 73–74, 73f, 143, 215, 218, 231, 241
stock market crash of 1929: aftermath of, xv, 143; crash of 1987
compared with, 118–19, 167; dividend changes following, 208;
efficient markets view of, 196; events preceding, 110–14, 230;
investment trusts and, 54; real estate market and, 23; short sales and,
201; stabilization efforts and, 229–30; suicides attributed to, 188,
311n19. See also bull market of 1920s
stock market crash of 1987: compared to crash of 1929, 118–19, 167;
confidence following, 173; explanations of, 115–19; Federal Reserve
reaction to, 62; in France, 158; investor surveys on, 114–16, 117–18,

172–73, 180, 301nn19–20; media coverage of, 103; news preceding,
114–19, 301–2n22; prior price declines, 230
stock market participants. See investors
stock market peak of 1929: compared to later peaks, 4, 5–6; confidence
during, 74; Fed warnings during, 230; monetary policy during, 228,
230; new era thinking and, 131; price-earnings ratios in, 8, 207. See
also bull market of 1920s; stock market crash of 1929
stock market peak of 2000: compared to other peaks, 3, 4–6; dot-com
crash and, 146–48; earnings and, 5, 6–7, 283n9; Fed warnings during,
230; investor confidence during, 72, 73; mispriced stocks in, 200;
precipitating factors for, 225; price-earnings ratios at, 206; in United
States, 2; in world markets, 4. See also Millennium Boom
stock market peaks: of 1901, 8, 126–29, 143–44, 203; of 1966, 8–9, 135,
230. See also bull markets; Dow Jones Industrial Average
stock markets: beauty contest theory of, 262–64; broadening access to,
231–32; commissions in, 57; feedback between real estate market and,
94–96, 148; foreign investors in, 231–32; history of, 253, 265–66;
investor confidence in, 70–71, 71f, 73, 73f, 74–77; media coverage of,
103–5, 115; participation in, xxii–xxiii; psychological factors in,
115–16, 226–27, 253; public attention to, 81–84, 102; trading
interruptions on, 230, 236; trading volumes on, 56–58, 156, 172,
294n31
The Stock Markets of London, Paris and New York (Gibson), 196
stock price indices: dividend futures on, 232–33, 270, 270n36; inflation
correction of, 56, 282n3; international, 1, 109; Nikkei, 1, 74, 108,
231–32, 319n2; record levels of, 104–5, 241; spreads among, 213. See
also Dow Jones Industrial Average; Standard and Poor’s Composite
Stock Price Index
stock prices: as anchors, 167; attention to increases in, 190; big news
days and, 105–6; daily exposure to, 57–58; demand for stocks and,
254–55; dividends and, 206–8, 209–12, 210f, 313–14n19, 315n23,
316n28; efficient markets view of, 195, 196–99, 211–12; forecasting,
172–73, 206, 243–45; fundamentals and, 40, 107–8, 207–8, 226, 242,
245–46, 270; individual movements of, 201–2, 255–58; media
explanations of moves in, 107–8, 110–14; momentum of, 314n20;
random movements of, 87, 195; real estate markets and, 22, 23;

regression to mean of, 202; reversals of large movements, 160–61;
valuation confidence index, xiv, 87–88, 88f; volatility of, xxii–xxiii,
211, 213, 249. See also mispricing; price-earnings ratios; speculative
bubbles
stock prices, U.S.: data sources for, 282n3; expectations for, 77–79,
131–32, 135, 172–73; in Great Depression, 249–50; interest rates and,
12–13; largest movements in, 3–4, 152–53; real historical, 2–6, 3f, 5f,
8–9; recent, 5f, 9–10
stock prices, world: bubbles in, 155–58; Greenspan’s irrational
exuberance speech and, 1; largest movements in, 3–4, 150–58, 151t,
152t, 153t, 154t, 159–60, 161; new era economic thinking and,
155–58, 159; real appreciation rates of, 217; recent, 3–4, 5f; reversals
of large movements, 157, 159, 161, 306–7n13; stories associated with
largest changes in, 154–58, 159–60
“Stock Prices and Social Dynamics” (Shiller), 253
stock returns. See dividends; returns
stocks: initial public offerings of, 93, 147, 201, 202; issuance decisions,
312n14, 316n28; large-cap, 147; picking, 190, 220–21; superiority as
investments, 70–73, 71f, 214–16, 221
Stocks for the Long Run (Siegel), 215, 216
Stoffman, Daniel, 47
stories: in advertising, 185; in bubbles, 93–94; communicating, 179, 188;
of gamblers, 168–69; of individual stocks, 168; of Internet firms, 93;
on large price changes, 154–58, 159–60; as moral anchors, 167–70; in
Ponzi schemes, 90–91. See also new era economic thinking
structural factors. See amplification mechanisms; precipitating factors
subprime mortgages, xii, 18, 20, 35–36, 60–61, 269–70
The Subprime Solution (Shiller), 234, 266
Suez crisis, 105
Sufi, Amir, 36
sugar lobby, 113
Summers, Lawrence, 107, 108
Sunstein, Cass, 268
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, 63
survey data: on confidence, 87–89, 172–73, 218, 295n44; on

expectations, 77–79; on homebuyers, xiv, 88–89, 95–96, 254; on
materialistic values, 43–44; on media vs. personal communication,
179–80; on mutual fund investments, 220; psychological anchors in,
166–67; on real estate market, 34–35. See also investor surveys
The Suze Orman Show, 77
Sweden, stock prices in, 151t, 152t, 153t
Sydney real estate market, 26f, 27, 125
tag-along news, 106–7
Taiwan: day traders in, 199; stock prices in, 151t, 152t, 153t, 155–56,
160
Taleb, Nassim N., 81
tariffs, 111–12
Taub, Jennifer, 35
taxes: capital gains, xxii, 45, 117, 221, 233; concerns about, 115, 117;
excess-profits, 129; 401(k) plans and, 52, 293n20; housing choices
and, 32; income, xxii, 139, 144; inheritance, 139; property, 140; state,
139
technology: advances in, 123–24, 126–27, 130, 131–32, 133, 137,
141–42, 217; cell phones, 142; in construction industry, 30; financial,
233; gambling, 58; hightech companies, 141, 145, 291n4; interactive,
181, 182, 184; mobile, 65, 142; productivity growth and, 137; profit
impact of, 42–43, 291n3; robots, 65; stock prices and, 291n3; stock
trading, 57. See also computers; Internet
technology companies, 141–42, 201. See also Internet firms
telephone (game), 184
telephones: cell, 142; importance in communication, 181
television: financial news on, 47–48, 77; growth of, 133; power of, 181;
real estate shows, 102; viewers of, 42. See also media
terrorism, 67–68
Thailand, stock prices in, 151t, 152t, 153t, 154t, 160
Thaler, Richard H., 53, 57–58, 160–61, 202, 240, 261, 268
Thatcher, Margaret, 140
3Com, 201
Tianjin real estate market, 27

Time, 109, 135
Tokyo real estate market, 27
Tokyo stock exchange, 108. See also Nikkei index
Torous, Walter, 313–14n19
Toys “R” Us, 199
trade: deficits, 116, 117; international, 112, 156–57; tariffs, 111–12
trading volumes: increase in, 294n31; overconfidence as factor in, 172;
as precipitating factor, 56–58; in Taiwan, 156
Treasury bonds: interest rates of, 13–14, 14f; yields of, 13, 15, 16f. See
also bonds
Treatise on Probability (Keynes), 253
trusts, 127–28. See also antitrust legislation; investment trusts
tulip mania, 29, 101, 241–42, 296n1, 300n2
Tversky, Amos, 166–67, 169–70, 172, 173–74, 264
Twentieth Century Peak (1901), 8, 126–29, 143–44, 203
UAL Corporation, 106–7
UBS Index of Investor Optimism, 79
unemployment, 23, 65, 145, 156
Union Pacific Railroad, 138
unions. See labor unions
United Airlines, 106
United Kingdom: bond yields in, 15, 16f; real estate markets in, 18, 26f,
27, 142; real estate shows in, 102; social impact bonds in, 268; stock
prices in, 1, 4, 5f, 109, 152t, 154t
United News, 111
United States: economic competitors of, 43; government deficits of, 115;
infrastructure investment by, 236; trade deficits of, 116, 117. See also
Federal Reserve; Treasury bonds
U.S. Census Bureau, 28–29, 31, 259–60, 288n10
University of Michigan Consumer Sentiment survey, 63
unlearning, 221–22
uptick rule, for short sales, 231
USA Today, 145, 147
USA Weekend, 76

U.S. News and World Report, 132–33
U.S. Steel, 111, 127
vacation or second-home properties, 142–43
Valkanov, Rossen, 313–14n19
valuation confidence index, xiv, 87–88, 88f
value investing, 202
values, materialistic, 43–44, 291n5
Vancouver real estate market, 26f, 27
Van Strum, Kenneth S., 215
Vasari, Giorgio, 186
VEFA, 91
Venezuela, stock prices in, 151t, 154t, 156–57
venture capital, 268–69
Viceira, Luis, 15
videoconferencing, 182, 184
Vishny, Robert, 308–9n19
volatility: causes of, 240; circuit breakers and, 230–31; of dividend
present value, 209, 211, 213; excess, 209–13, 245–47, 264; gambling
and, 59; of interest rates, 213; of stock prices, xxii–xxiii, 211, 213,
249; trading hours and, 57. See also speculative bubbles
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 256
Waite, Stephen, 47
Wall Street Journal, 110, 111, 113, 118–19, 219
WaMu. See Washington Mutual
Wang Laboratories, 141
Wanniski, Jude, 111
Warburg, Paul M., 132
Washington, D.C., real estate market, 27
Washington Mutual, Inc. (WaMu), 20, 35–36
Washington Post, 145
Watson, James, 112
wealth: accumulation of, 77, 170; consumption of, 167–68; distribution
of, 227; get-rich-quick ideas, 219, 234. See also savings

wealth effect, 61, 85, 235
weather, stock prices and, 262
Weber, Steven, 136–37
websites: of author, xvii; crowdfunding, 268–69; early users, 41–42; e-
commerce, 199–200. See also Internet
Weiss, Allan, 259
Welch, Ivo, 313–14n19
wheel of fortune experiment, 166–67
whisper numbers, 292–93n17
white lies, 91–93
Who’s Minding the Store? (Shiller), 266
Willoughby, Jack, 147
wind trade, 241–42
winner stocks, 160–61
wishful-thinking bias, xiv, 65, 67. See also irrational exuberance
Wojakowski, Rafal M., 234
women in work force, 44
word-of-mouth communication: epidemic models applied to, 184–87; on
Internet, 184; of investors, 179–82; of new era thinking, 125; speed of,
180; transmission errors, 184. See also communication
world events: as context, xi, 62; stock market movements and, 105–6,
111, 113–14, 115, 174, 185
World War I: price-earnings ratio and, 6; real estate market following,
23, 24; stock market reactions to, 68; U.S. involvement in, 288n9
World War II: economic stimulus of, 132; price-earnings ratio and, 6;
real estate boom following, 21, 22, 23–24, 288–89n10; stock market
reactions to, 68; U.S. involvement in, 288n9
World Wide Web. See Internet; websites
Wu, Ho-Mou, 264
Wurgler, Jeffrey, 261
Xiong, Wei, 264
Yan, Shu, 313–14n19
yen, 228

yields. See bond yields; dividend yields
Yogo, Motohiro, 313–14n19
Y2K crisis, 62, 187
Zacks Investment Research, 49
zealots, 200, 312n10
zeitgeist, 175

