ISSN 2754-7094 (online)
ISSN 2754-7086 (print)
Taner Edis
Islam’s Encounter 
with Modern 
Science
Islam and the 
Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Elements in Islam and the Sciences
edited by
Nidhal Guessoum
American University of Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
Stefano Bigliardi
Al Akhawayn University in Ifrane, Morocco
ISLAM’S ENCOUNTER
WITH MODERN SCIENCE
A Mismatch Made in Heaven
Taner Edis
Truman State University
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009478649
DOI: 10.1017/9781009257473
© Taner Edis 2023
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
First published 2023
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-009-47864-9 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-009-25744-2 Paperback
ISSN 2754-7094 (online)
ISSN 2754-7086 (print)
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
remain, accurate or appropriate.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
A Mismatch Made in Heaven
Elements in Islam and Science
DOI: 10.1017/9781009257473
First published online: November 2023
Taner Edis
Truman State University
Author for correspondence: Taner Edis, edis@truman.edu
Abstract: Within Muslim populations, debates about the compatibility
between science and religion tend to be framed by the long-standing
competition between modernizing reformers, particularly westernizers,
and theological conservatives. Much like their liberal Christian
counterparts, reformers propose to embrace technical knowledge and
reinterpret traditional beliefs undermined by modern science.
Conservatives are more open to challenging the content of science,
especially when science appears to support materialist views. Islamists
promote an alternative, non-Western style of modernity, nurturing
a more pious professional class that contrasts with westernized elites.
By scientiﬁc standards, westernizers appear to have the upper hand,
especially as conservative apologetics is drawn toward distortions of
science such as creationism, or fruitless attempts to Islamize science.
But conservatives can also point to some success in defusing tensions
between scientiﬁc and religious institutions without adopting the full
secularization of science seen in post-Christian countries.
This Element also has a video abstract: www.cambridge.org/edis_abstract
Keywords: Islam, science and Islam, westernization, Islamic creationism,
materialism, science and religion
© Taner Edis 2023
ISBNs: 9781009478649 (HB), 9781009257442 (PB), 9781009257473 (OC)
ISSNs: 2754-7094 (online), 2754-7086 (print)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contents
1 Why Science Matters
1
2 Conﬂicts of Content
12
3 Clashes of Culture
24
4 Pressures of Politics
36
5 Why Science Doesn’t Matter
47
References
60
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1 Why Science Matters
1.1 The Scientiﬁc Religion
Long ago, when I lived in Baltimore, the slogan “Baltimore: the city that reads”
started appearing on park benches and other public surfaces. Baltimore had been
found to have a high rate of functional illiteracy, which must have been
embarrassing to civic leaders. Hence the slogan: it did not really announce
that denizens of Baltimore were enthusiastic readers, but the opposite. “The city
that reads” expressed an aspiration, not a reality. It signaled a vague determin-
ation to do something about an acknowledged problem.
Before I landed in Baltimore for graduate school, I grew up in Turkey. There,
political and cultural leaders were concerned about how Turkey lagged in
science and technology. It still lags behind. Indeed, all Muslim countries do
(Guessoum and Osama 2015a; Guessoum and Osama 2015b). Many Muslim
intellectuals, who often think of Islam as a civilization as well as a faith, worry
that Muslims always seem backward in science. Therefore, some are apt to
declare a perfect harmony between Islam and science. Islam is supposed to be
a scientiﬁc religion, the most rational of the Abrahamic faiths. The Prophet
encouraged the pursuit of knowledge, and in the early Islamic empires, when
piety was purer, Muslims enjoyed a Golden Age of scientiﬁc accomplishment.
Not only did Islam promote scientiﬁc investigation, science was practically
a religious duty (Akhter 2009; Al-Hassani, Woodcock, and Saoud 2012).
As in “Baltimore: the city that reads,” such proclamations reveal aspirations
rather than realities. Muslims not only lag in science, they often have difﬁculties
reconciling science and faith. Modern science has raised questions about the
supernatural beliefs endorsed by all world religions. Muslims have also had to
face such challenges (Edis 2007). And for most Muslims, science, however
valued, remains an import from foreign lands.
Pronouncements about the harmony between science and Islam also overlook
deep divisions among Muslims. Many Muslim elites have favored extensive
modernization of Muslim institutions and practices. Indeed, some modernizing
reformers are best described as westernizers, urging Muslims to follow Western
examples in culture as well as in technical accomplishments. Reformers typic-
ally afﬁrm the compatibility of Islam and science, but they imagine an Islam
puriﬁed of what they think of as medieval superstitions. For those most enthu-
siastic about Western modernity, science comes ﬁrst, and religion has to adapt.
More conservative Muslims also want to acquire science and are enthusiastic
about technology. But they will quickly add that the glorious design revealed in
creation can only fortify the faith of the believers. Traditional supernatural
beliefs are not negotiable, and science must support such beliefs. Many
1
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Muslims, naturally, ﬁnd merit in both modernizing and conservative positions,
and hope to steer a moderate course. Debates about science and religion,
however, are often framed by the opposition between westernizing and conser-
vative poles.
I come from a secular, westernizing background, and I have never been
a believer. My views on Islam are those of an outsider to the faith. Still, like
many of my more devout friends who also went into science and engineering,
I have had to face questions about science in Muslim lands. After all, everyone
agrees that Muslims have not yet succeeded at modern science. Westernizers,
tradition-minded conservatives, and Islamists will join in deploring the poor
state of science and technology in the Muslim world. Muslim countries have
low research productivity (Haq and Tanveer 2020). Very few well-known
scientists are Muslim. Nobel laureates in the sciences, for example, include
only Mohammad Abdus Salam (physics 1979), Ahmed Zewail (chemistry
1999), and Aziz Sancar (chemistry 2015). Abdus Salam, who belonged to the
Ahmadi sect, is not even considered legally Muslim in his native Pakistan. More
important, all did their scientiﬁc work outside of Muslim lands, in the post-
Christian West. Today, it is easy to encounter diversity and inclusion-inspired
pictures of lab workers in headscarves. Such images paper over how individual
Muslim scientists are bit players in global enterprises detached from any local
culture. Muslims do not set the research agendas. Islam does not contribute to
the picture of the universe drawn by our sciences. In the lab, Islam is an
irrelevance.
In the natural sciences such as physics, chemistry, and biology, the Muslim
presence is so unremarkable that if aliens were to abduct all Muslims from all
the labs of the world, the global scientiﬁc enterprise would hardly be affected. If
all Jewish scientists were to mysteriously disappear, it would be impossible not
to notice. Again, among Muslims, such an observation is not controversial. All
factions agree that Muslim contributions to science in modern times have been
unimpressive. Almost everyone thinks that science matters, and that poor
performance is a collective problem, even an embarrassment, for the world of
Islam.
The direct causes of underperformance are clear enough. After all, scientiﬁc
research is expensive, and most Muslim countries are not rich. They occupy
a subordinate role in the global economy and often have a poorly educated labor
force (Akhtar 2018; Kuru 2019: 62–63). Many Muslim lands have industrial-
ized, but the high end of technology development, together with cutting-edge
natural science, takes place elsewhere. Almost all Muslim countries were
subjected to colonialism, and today operate under what is in many respects
a neocolonial economic order.
2
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In that case, a proper evaluation of Muslim scientiﬁc production would
compare countries in a similar economic position. Then, it turns out that
while Muslims still underperform, their deﬁcit in science is smaller. Middle-
and lower-income countries tend to invest more in the applied sciences –
engineering, medicine – that promise immediate beneﬁts. Particularly when
applied science is included, middle-income Muslim countries have a scientiﬁc
production roughly on a par with similarly situated non-Muslim countries.
Turkey, Malaysia, and Indonesia have taken advantage of the deindustrializa-
tion of the post-Christian West to achieve middle-income status, and their
contribution to science and technology is comparable to other recently industri-
alized countries with similar per capita incomes. Their ofﬁcials and academics
often focus on concerns such as advancing their countries’ position in
a knowledge economy. Underperformance in science education, for example,
is a practical worry for businesses, not just a deﬁcit in national prestige associ-
ated with a lag in natural science (Aysan et al. 2018; Hill, Khan, and Zhuang
2012).
There is, naturally, considerable variation. Iran, laboring under economic
strangulation by the United States, still sustains a respectable scientiﬁc enter-
prise and entertains ambitions in biotechnology (Fard, Moslemy, and Golshahi
2013; Sooﬁand Ghazinoory 2013). Iran’s performance perhaps reﬂects its
traditional position as a center of intellectual activity in the Islamic world.
Arab countries do not do very well. Political instability and failed states do
not make good conditions for scientiﬁc work. Oil-producing countries are rich,
but they do not support the broad technical expertise more diverse economies
require (Kuru 2019: 48–52; Mydin, Askari, and Mirakhor 2018).
Still, even if poor scientiﬁc performance reﬂects underdevelopment, Muslims
wonder why they ﬁnd themselves in such a predicament. After all, why should
Muslims, who possess a scientiﬁc religion, and whose superior faith should
grant them an unparalleled insight into how the universe functions, be left
behind in the ﬁrst place? Reformers often blame religious conservatism; con-
servatives suspect that insufﬁcient piety is at the root of all Muslim troubles.
Whatever is responsible, there is then the question of what is to be done,
especially in cases where modern knowledge appears to contradict traditional
beliefs. Among reformers, westernizers want to separate science from religion,
sometimes going so far as recognizing the authority of revelation only in matters
of abstruse metaphysics and personal morality. Islamists envision an Islam-
friendly science operating in a pious society, and have competing visions for
how to achieve such a goal. In any case, Muslims confront questions about
modern science and their religion. Are traditional supernatural beliefs compat-
ible with scientiﬁc knowledge? Is Islam an impediment to doing science?
3
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Debates about Islam and science center on elite forms of knowledge. Science,
after all, belongs to highly trained specialists. Scientiﬁc knowledge then dif-
fuses though the population via education and the media, under the guidance of
educated professionals. In this respect, science is similar to ofﬁcial theologies
propagated by a specialized class of religious scholars. Questions about science
and religion are not just fuel for intellectual debate. They also involve oppor-
tunities for competition and cooperation between elite institutions.
To further complicate matters, religion has a strong populist element. In most
Muslim countries, an ofﬁcially sanctioned version of Islam coexists in tension
with multiple sects, revival movements, and popular supernatural beliefs that
overﬂow orthodox channels. Religious movements may come to enjoy political
power and reshape theology. And in turn, representatives of ofﬁcial religion can
draw on popular support to impose their views about science. Modernizing
reformers can’t make such populist appeals. But they still have to worry about
whether popular religion will be an obstacle to producing a scientiﬁcally edu-
cated population. The relationship of science and Islam, then, involves more
than knowledge claims propagated by elites. How ordinary believers respond to
scientiﬁc and religious controversies is just as important (Edis 2007).
Muslim populations are typically more devout than the mostly secular citi-
zens of technologically advanced post-Christian countries. This does not mean
religiously orthodox conformity. Rival religious movements promote varied
attitudes toward science or technology. Different movements also have different
ways of relating to historical memories of classical Islamic civilization, even as
traditional beliefs continue to deﬁne a common ideal.
Muslims, even though they have widely varying levels of religious obser-
vance, very often understand the world in supernatural terms. For example, after
an earthquake or tsunami in a Muslim country, some preachers will announce
that the disaster was a divine punishment. After all, the Quran has many verses
in which insufﬁciently faithful peoples are punished through disasters. Surveys
show that much of the population will agree that natural events reﬂect supernat-
ural purposes (Aksa 2020; Chester, Duncan, and Al Ghasyah Dhanhani 2013).
Muslims typically believe in jinn, invisible spirits who can interact with humans
and cause mischief. Religious leaders afﬁrm the reality of jinn, citing Quranic
verses. They may offer to help believers who think they may be attacked or
possessed by jinn (El-Zein 2009; Rassool 2019).
Such a magical, supernatural view of the world runs deeper than popular
superstitions. Muslims often resist Darwinian evolution, not just because the
Quran endorses the special creation of humans, but also because Muslim
intellectual culture usually suggests that the intricate design of lifeforms is
prime evidence for a creator (Edis 2009). Alongside modern medicine,
4
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Muslim patients often favor traditional treatments such as cupping, leeches, and
exorcisms of jinn through chanting Quranic verses. Such practices, sometimes
called “prophetic medicine,” attract customers partly because they are supposed
to be more Islamically authentic. Many pseudoscientiﬁc enterprises attempt to
combine such traditional medical practices with an image of modern expertise
(Hussein, Albar, and Alsanad 2019; Sax 2020; Stiedenroth 2020).
The encounter between Islam and modern science, then, does not just gener-
ate apologetic literature, competing theological interpretations, and academic
controversies. Very often, projects of reconciling religion and science are
connected to religious movements and a popular religious marketplace of
ideas and practices. Especially when they lack strong connections to scientiﬁc
institutions and westernized elites, such religious movements promote distor-
tions of science. Slogans asserting harmony between science and Islam do not
just express aspirations. They also conceal a serious mismatch between how
modern science and traditional Islam describe our world.
1.2 Losing the Golden Age
Arguments that Islam encourages science invariably look back to a Golden Age
of Muslim science. Between the ninth and thirteenth centuries, empires ruled by
Muslims hosted the strongest intellectual communities in the world. Both the
material wealth of Muslim elites, and the number of volumes in their libraries,
were incomparably greater than the barbarians in Western Europe.
Naturally, this period has inspired religious and nationalist mythmaking.
Stories about a Golden Age function as a proof of concept of the afﬁnity
between Islam and science. Past glories may yet be revived. Therefore, medi-
eval philosophers and investigators who may have found little recognition in
their lifetimes now appear as heroes in textbooks. In some accounts, Muslims
are supposed to have laid the groundwork for or anticipated much of later
European science and technology (Al-Hassani, Woodcock, and Saoud 2012;
Kollu and Han 2022; for criticism see Brentjes, Edis, and Richter-Bernburg
2016; Elshakry 2020).
For example, in many Arab countries, the ninth-century Andalusian Ibn
Firnas is celebrated for achieving ﬂight. Most Turks believe that in the seven-
teenth century, Hezarfen Ahmet Çelebi ﬂew across the Bosporus. Both stories
are based on untrustworthy sources and have details that seem closer to sorcery
than technology. And ﬂight with artiﬁcial wings powered by arm muscles is
physically impossible. Such myths have even spread outside Muslim countries,
endorsed by books, traveling museum exhibits, and online resources. Muslims,
5
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

apparently, invented much of what led to modern technology, but then inexplic-
ably failed to follow through (Edis and Bix 2016).
There is no doubt that the early Muslim empires inherited the knowledge built
up by the civilizations of antiquity, developed it further, and produced the best
medieval examples of what, in hindsight, we would call natural science.
Nonetheless, medieval knowledge – in Christendom as well as in Muslim
lands – was different from modern science. Medieval bestiaries would include
fantastic creatures, astronomy and mathematics were entwined with astrology,
and medical texts recommended magical practices as well as describing useful
surgical techniques. Some medieval science practiced in Muslim lands, such as
optics, showed signs of developing an experimental approach coupled to math-
ematical modeling. Selectively emphasizing what appears similar to today’s
science, however, overlooks the overall intellectual context of medieval know-
ledge. The Muslim precursor of science never abandoned a supernatural frame-
work where divine intentions and magical inﬂuences were pervasive. Mystical
philosophies or astrology had a much stronger inﬂuence on intellectual life than
abortive attempts at developing optics. Even when practically oriented, Muslim
science had only tenuous links to technological advancement (Blake 2016, Saif
et al. 2021).
Just as important, Muslim intellectual practices never led to a properly
institutionalized enterprise of experimental investigation coupled to theoretical
explanation. Most of the kinds of knowledge Muslims inherited from antiquity
were considered “foreign sciences.” Compared to the religious sciences, these
foreign sciences enjoyed lesser prestige. Some, such as medicine, were practic-
ally useful and worthy of pursuit. Others, however, were more closely associ-
ated with Greek philosophy. And philosophy, although theistic, harbored
a tendency toward doubting revelation. Muslim orthodoxy, particularly in the
dominant Sunni tradition, developed in a manner that encouraged suspicion of
speculative philosophy (Aydın 2021a; Hassan 2020).
Much of medieval science, together with philosophy, therefore never found
a stable institutional home. Almost all premodern Muslim learning depended on
informal associations of scholars. Nonetheless, madrassa education produced
a shared intellectual background for the class of religious scholars. This educa-
tion emphasized the religious sciences, particularly the interpretation of sacred
texts and the production of appropriate legal rulings. Even theology had
a secondary status. While the foreign sciences were never excluded from
Muslim intellectual life, their propagation almost entirely depended on sparse
networks of scholars who happened to have a personal interest. For classical
Muslim civilization, the precursors of natural science existed on the periphery
of intellectual life (Huff 2017; Dallal 2010 complicates this picture).
6
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Medieval Christian science was broadly similar; if anything, it was less
impressive. In that case, why did modern science emerge from the backwaters
of Western Europe and not Muslim lands, or perhaps China? Historians of
science do not have a clear consensus on an explanation. But it appears that
no single factor is responsible – not any major feature of intellectual life in any
medieval civilization.
Certainly, some aspects of Muslim intellectual tradition impeded natural
science (Huff 2017). For example, Muslims were often drawn toward occasion-
alism, which denied natural causality in order to emphasize the complete
dependence of everything on a divine will. And yet, a rigid occasionalism
was never the only metaphysical option for Muslim thinkers. Moreover, the
Muslim ambivalence about philosophy could have encouraged investigators to
set metaphysics aside and develop a more practical, experimental science. Some
premodern Muslim thinkers decoupled natural science from religious and
metaphysical concerns (Dallal 2010). That such intellectual options did not
generate a modern scientiﬁc enterprise is probably due to historical accidents
rather than anything central to Islam.
Historians still debate whether the science practiced in Muslim empires
began to stagnate, or even decline (Dallal 2010; Kuru 2019: 104–07). In any
event, the continued development of Muslim science took place slowly, within
its medieval, supernatural framework. Western Europe, in contrast, witnessed
the explosion of an experimental and mathematically formulated physical
science that joined curiosity-driven investigations with relentless technological
advances. This new variety of science carved out an intellectual and institu-
tional space that became increasingly independent of both orthodox supernat-
uralism and popular magical beliefs. The Muslim form of science never
achieved a similar lift-off (Huff 2011).
Muslim elites became keenly aware of the new science in the eighteenth
century, after Europeans inﬂicted catastrophic defeats on Muslim empires such
as the Ottomans and Mughal India. The Western European barbarians set out to
trade with and to colonize the globe. The superior military and commercial
prowess of the Western Christians was associated with the new forms of
knowledge they had developed (Livingston 2018a).
Rulers of Muslim lands tried to adapt, both by attempting to revive a purer
state of their religion and by embracing change. A new, more disciplined
military organization was crucial, as was a more efﬁcient imperial bureaucracy.
And since European power was linked to their superior knowledge, it behooved
Muslims to learn what was useful from the new science.
The new science, however, kept growing explosively, contributing to the
Industrial Revolution and further colonialism. During the nineteenth century,
7
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Muslim power rapidly receded, and elites could no longer invest their hopes in
religious revival or tinkering around the edges of medieval institutions. Some
westernization was inescapable, and assimilating the new science had to be an
important component of the effort to become more modern. Once again,
militaries and imperial bureaucracies led the way, installing a modern state
apparatus and introducing modern education, including science and technology,
starting with the children of elites. Science mattered, and it mattered because it
was key to military and economic survival (Burçak 2008; Kalın 2002).
Whether in Iran, the Ottoman Middle East, or the Indian subcontinent under
British domination, a common feature of the nineteenth- and early-twentieth-
century intellectual landscape became calls for a revival of rationality and
science within Islam. The old practices had gone stagnant, and the religious
scholars had become too set in their ways. Moreover, Muslims did not just need
to absorb the new learning and adapt it to their lands. Since the new scientiﬁc
knowledge continued to grow at a fast pace, catching up to the modern world
required that Muslims should learn how to practice science and not be continu-
ally left behind as the frontiers of knowledge advanced. Some traditionally
educated religious scholars embraced reform and some took reactionary posi-
tions. But Muslim lands also started developing a stratum of elites who had
a modern education. They usually supported reform (Masud 2009).
Some of today’s factions – conservatives, westernizers – already appear at the
beginning of the debates about Islam and modern science. Almost everyone
agreed that some modernization was necessary, but how far should reforms go?
Importing useful knowledge was not enough. But to actively produce new
knowledge, how much of the modern culture associated with Western science
needed to be assimilated? To save Muslim civilization, how much exposure to
the suspect morals and religious deviations of the modern world could be
tolerated? Reformers were willing to interfere with traditional religion in
order to protect what they thought was essential to Islam. Conservatives insisted
that importing science should not extend to corrupting religion.
To further complicate matters, in the late nineteenth century, after Darwin,
Christendom faced an intensiﬁed confrontation between scientiﬁc and tradition-
ally religious descriptions of the world. As a result, together with science,
Muslims imported the Western debate about science versus supernatural reli-
gion. A handful of extreme westernizers even toyed with the science-inspired
materialist philosophies emerging in Europe (Hanioğlu 2008). They were easily
suppressed, but among westernizers, the notion of a conﬂict between science
and religion lingered. Science mattered, science was a necessity. But Western
science, it seemed, also harbored a potential threat.
8
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1.3 Responding to Science
Muslims were not the only ones to struggle to come to terms with the modern
world. Western Europe and its settler societies, where modernity started and
picked up steam, became accustomed to social and cultural upheavals. Where
colonial powers penetrated, novel economic relationships, modern military
practices, and subversive political ideals followed. And somehow entangled
with the promises and problems of modernity, maybe even driving it all, was the
new science.
Russian, Chinese, and Japanese intellectuals of the nineteenth century also
worried about modernizing without losing their cultural distinctions. Buddhists
and Hindus also had to respond to a science that was taking an increasingly
materialist direction, removing signs of spirit and purpose from nature (Brown
2020). Even Western Christians were uneasy. On one hand, imperial success
could signal the triumph of a suitably modernized Christianity and its ideals of
progress. On the other hand, modern institutions tended toward independence
from religion. Science, Christians hoped, could afﬁrm a spiritual and moral
order in nature. But science also contained a potential for mischief.
Across the world, elites started demanding more modern, less pervasively
religious forms of education for their offspring. Intellectuals asked if their
societies could follow the example of the Christian West without too many of
the accompanying cultural dislocations. Usually, they expected that religion
would still underwrite the social order, provided it adapted to the times. Science
was a very useful tool, but it had to be used with care.
Many intellectuals, however, sought a new freedom in the disruptions of
modernity. Some came to expect national salvation through capitalist ideologies
of progress; others were captivated by the aspiration to an alternative modernity
represented by the political left (Sing 2018). Science, in any case, would light
the path, whether by the technologies unleashed by captains of industry, or by an
allegedly scientiﬁc socialism. In more liberal and left-wing circles, science
became not just a source of doubt about the supernatural, but part of a more
comprehensive critique of religious ways of life.
Even conservative religious responses to science and modernity became
marked by doubt as a viable option. Religious fundamentalism, for example,
is a modern phenomenon. A literal interpretation of sacred texts becomes more
popular when the texts are available to a wider, more literate population. For
fundamentalists, scripture no longer belongs to a mythic, sacred reality that
stands apart from the everyday world. Stories become history, and statements in
sacred texts come to express concrete facts like the facts of science (Bruce 2008:
12–14).
9
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Modernizing interpretations of sacred texts are also products of an intellec-
tual culture shaped by the new science. When confronted with an embarrassing
passage, a fundamentalist might insist that it is nonetheless true, just like
a scientiﬁc fact. A theological modernist might interpret the text more meta-
phorically, perhaps turning it into a vehicle for a moral message. But such
metaphors start becoming mere literary metaphors. The sense that sacred texts
present deeper, more solid truths than those of the seen world, that mere material
existence is patterned by the primary reality of the spiritual realm, starts to fade
away.
All these tendencies exist within Islam today. Indeed, there is very little that is
unique about Muslim responses to modern science eroding the credibility of
supernatural claims. Almost every apologetic maneuver, every theological
evasion, every scriptural reinterpretation has a Christian parallel. Every pseudo-
scientiﬁc enterprise, every conspiracy theory favored by Muslims has echoes
among Jews, Hindus, or Buddhists. For centuries now, intellectuals belonging
to every world religion have felt torn between ambitions to achieve a pious
version of modernity and suspicions that nothing less than restoration of
a bygone age will do.
Naturally, the details of how Muslims attempt to protect their faith can be
very different. Muslims believe the Quran is divine revelation, not the Bible,
and so they will defend different stories. Compared to Christians, conservative
Muslims are loyal to different conceptions of social and sexual morality, and
their revealed truths support a distinctly Muslim social order. But modern
science challenges all traditional supernatural claims (Edis 2002). Modern
social and economic life strains all revealed moralities.
Muslim positions on science and religion, then, are distinctive not because of
their content but their context. Western Christians can claim to have ushered in
modernity, even if they wish it had not spun out of control. The corrosive doubt
inadvertently encouraged by modern knowledge may be unfortunate, but it is an
outgrowth of a Christian intellectual culture. For Muslims, in contrast, Western
technological modernity has been a foreign import. The new science, in its
relentless advance, has highlighted how Muslims have constantly needed to
play catch-up. Some reformers have seen opportunity in change, but for most
conservative Muslims science has too often been one of the forces that frag-
mented Muslim civilization. The skepticism that often accompanies science has
not been an internally generated heresy that became increasingly hard to
contain. Instead, it has been an external imposition (Edis 2007).
During much of the twentieth century, conservative Muslim reactions to
science might have seemed of little consequence. After all, the reformers had
the upper hand. The last independent Muslim empire, the Ottomans, succumbed
10
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to the colonial powers. But then, the Anatolian Turks successfully fought for
their independence. The new Turkish leadership imposed an ambitious program
of westernization on their territory. The Turkish Revolution of the 1920s
attempted to purify Islam by reducing the faith to a core that concerned personal
identity and ritual practice, rather than public matters of law or politics.
Inﬂuenced by materialist and secularizing currents of thought, the revolutionar-
ies trusted in science and modern education. And since they wanted a culture
that sustained modernity and constantly created novelty, they even favored
Western forms of art and music. The Turkish Republic aimed to be a secular
state that would nurture the best science and technology, while a depoliticized
Islam would still reign over the personal lives of its citizens (Berkes 1998; Kuru
and Stepan 2012).
As other Muslim countries attained independence after the Second World
War, their elites leaned toward secular nationalism. No one matched the Turkish
revolutionaries in their anti-clerical fervor. But the nationalists still attempted to
tame traditional authorities such as the religious scholars. Secular law took
precedence over an Islamic law mostly restricted to personal matters. By mid-
century, many Western observers expected a continually diminishing role for
Islam in public life.
That did not happen. In the last ﬁfty years, political Islam has captured the
imagination of many Muslims worldwide. A variety of political Islam that has
taken power in large, middle-income countries – Turkey, Malaysia, Indonesia –
is particularly important. Such Islamists have taken the fate of Western
Christianity as a bad example to avoid, and vigorously opposed secularism
and cultural westernization. They have tended toward fundamentalism. But
such Islamists have also been inspired by the United States as a wealthy, but
conservative, power. They have promoted an ardently capitalist, populist, and
publicly religious politics. And they have won elections by promising worldly
success for Muslims, uniting political and religious salvation. After the collapse
of the political left, they have offered their own, more pious form of alternative
modernity (Edis 2016).
Today’s Islamists are likely to be enthusiastic about technology and about all
forms of modern expertise that lead to economic rewards. They are cooler
toward natural science. Indeed, they represent a third option to relate science
and religion, beyond a more traditional conservatism and westernization. The
Islamist ideal of pious modernity decouples science and technology, downplay-
ing science while afﬁrming technology and economic growth.
In any case, Islamists have enjoyed political success. They set the context of
the relationship between science and Islam today. Debates about science and
religion are often framed as contests between theological options, scholarly
11
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

analyses, or scientists’ interpretations of their faith. But a context shaped by
political Islam encourages suspicion of educated elites, and favors media-
friendly presentations over more academic forms of discourse (Edis 2020a).
Such an environment also affects which scholars enjoy inﬂuence. For better or
for worse, Islam encounters science through popular apologetics as much as
through intellectually serious proposals.
2 Conﬂicts of Content
2.1 Scientiﬁc Miracles in the Quran
If the afﬁnity between science and Islam is not to remain an aspirational slogan,
it should eventually require some evidence. That should not be too difﬁcult.
After all, Muslims usually believe that our existence expresses a divine purpose,
and that the universe has a supernatural design. It would be no surprise, then, if
revelations from the creator should also manifest an exact knowledge of our
universe.
Many Muslims are convinced that just such evidence is available. A popular
form of Islamic apologetics claims that modern science and technology can be
found preﬁgured in the Quran (Bigliardi 2017; Naguib 2019; Telliel 2019).
Scattered verses contain hints about how nature works that could not have been
known to Arabs in the sixth century. These scientiﬁc miracles in the Quran show
that the sacred text is not a mere human composition: it must have a divine
source. Far from challenging faith, modern science conﬁrms the truth of Islam.
According to such apologetics, the Quran refers to the expansion of the
universe. After all, 21:30 says that heaven and earth were once joined and
then separated. 51:47 speaks of how the creator expanded the heavens. More
earthly aspects of science, such as the water cycle, appear in verses such as
39:21, describing the divine power that sends down rain and makes waters ﬂow.
Even minor details show up, such as 25:53 that describes two seas, salty and
fresh, separated from one another. Obviously, this must refer to the salinity
barrier between the Mediterranean and the Atlantic.
The Quran is supposed to present accurate embryological information when
it describes how a drop of semen progresses to become a clot and then ﬂesh, in
23:12–14 and other verses (Guénon 2019). In numerous verses, the Quran refers
to seven heavens. Various interpreters ﬁnd all sorts of details of modern
astrophysics in the seven layers of sky: galaxies, perhaps, or the hidden dimen-
sions postulated by string theory, or dark matter and dark energy. No one in the
sixth century could have known about such things. Apologists then proceed to
calculate the speed of light from Quranic verses, suggest that stories about the
miracles of Solomon hint that airplanes are possible, and ﬁnd evidence of atoms
12
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and nuclear energy in revelation. Biology, geology, physics, and chemistry: they
are all there in the Quran (Nurbaki 2022 [1985]; Sayksa and Arni 2016).
The notion that all knowledge is linked to the Quran has deep roots. But
proclaiming that science can be found in sacred texts is a distinctly modern form
of apologetics. Highly educated Muslims might ﬁnd the interpretations to be
forced, associating this style of apologetics with televangelists and a lower-class
style of religiosity. And many a conservative scholar will dismiss newfangled
readings in favor of interpretations established during the classical period of
Islam (Çalışkan 2020; Sardar 2011: 356–57). And yet, ﬁnding science in the
Quran is very popular, surfacing in innumerable books, pamphlets, websites,
and online videos that reassure Muslims that their religion is correct.
Arguing that modern science and technology is preﬁgured in the Quran goes
back at least to the early twentieth century, when some religious scholars
explored more modern interpretations of their texts and encouraged Muslims
to pursue the new sciences (Livingston 2018b). Indeed, such apologetics
became the signature of some inﬂuential modernizing religious movements.
The Nur movement in Turkey, for example, promoted economic development
and technological modernity, encouraging the religious leadership of engineers
and businessmen as much as more traditional scholars. Starting with popular
magazines that claimed science supported Islam, they pioneered an apologetics
style that turned out to be perfectly suited to the internet era (Mardin 1989;
Markham and Sayılgan 2017).
In the second half of the twentieth century, apologetics claiming that science
supported religion became commonplace throughout the Muslim world. In
premodern times, popular Islam tended to have a lot of local variation, assimi-
lating regional supernatural beliefs and propagating miracle stories featuring
the local Suﬁsaints. Today’s globalized Islam has erased many of these differ-
ences. Scripture has become more directly available to individual believers,
strengthening more fundamentalist attitudes. Modern systems of public educa-
tion have made science the authority about facts of nature. Naturally, popular
religion has come to combine science and traditional beliefs. If Western scien-
tists would acknowledge the scientiﬁc miracles in the Quran, that would be best.
In the late twentieth century, ﬁgures such as Maurice Bucaille, a French medical
doctor, became central actors in the developing international apologetic of
ﬁnding science in the Quran (Bigliardi 2011).
And once interpreters start looking for it, scientiﬁc miracles associated with
Islam appear beyond the Quran. For example, the prophetic traditions include
many stories concerning health and disease, including episodes where the
Prophet performs healings. Magical practices are common, as in the story
where Muhammad advises that if a houseﬂy falls in a drink, it should be fully
13
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

dipped in, because one of its wings has a disease and the other the cure (Bukhari
4:537). Among many Muslims today, fake scientiﬁc medical practices that have
an Islamic pedigree are popular, especially if they can be linked with sacred
texts. Muslim medical professionals regularly publish papers afﬁrming both
pseudoscientiﬁc practices and scientiﬁc miracles in the Quran (Orayj 2022).
According to any scholarly standard, efforts to have scientiﬁc miracles
validate Islam are embarrassments. Fundamentalist approaches to reconciling
sacred texts with modern knowledge are not promising. Indeed, the problem is
not just a text getting some facts wrong. Large parts of the Muslim sacred texts
are remarkably opaque and open to interpretation. A handful of errors could be
interpreted away. The deeper problem is that it is not difﬁcult to understand
many of the scientiﬁcally dubious statements in sacred texts. Consider, for
example, Quranic pronouncements about the seven heavens or the seven layers
of skies. This is a notable feature of the universe as imagined by the Quran,
further elaborated in traditions such as those about the Night Journey of the
Prophet. There is nothing remotely similar to seven layers of sky in today’s
astrophysics. But at the time of the Quran, the appropriate cosmology would
have included Ptolemaic astronomy, which featured seven celestial spheres
associated with the Sun, Moon, and the visible planets (Janos 2012).
The Quran also contains fossilized relics of even older Near Eastern cosmol-
ogies, with a ﬂat Earth below and a solid ﬁrmament stretched above. When the
Quran alludes to the divine spreading out of the surface of the Earth, held in
place by mountains like tent pegs, it refers to ancient beliefs, not the expanding
universe of today’s astrophysics (Wright 2000).
The alleged embryology in the Quran is an echo of the medicine of antiquity
(Elsakaan and Longo 2016). Magical healing in the prophetic traditions is
ancient superstition. The universe of the sacred texts is an archaic conception,
a stage for miracle stories about biblical ﬁgures such as Moses, Solomon, and
Jesus. Divine power is manifested in resurrections, magic, and talking animals.
The modern tendency toward fundamentalism only ampliﬁes the conﬂict
with modern science invited by such an overall picture. At face value, the
sacred texts assume a framework of a high god, angels, demons, lesser spirits
such as jinn, and relate the adventures of prophets and miracle-workers. They
speak of a heaven and hell, and a possibly imminent apocalypse and judgment.
In such a thoroughly supernatural framework, divine purpose and design works
as a genuine explanation rather than a metaphysical assertion – traditional
beliefs make sense. But when taken literally, almost nothing in such
a framework ﬁts modern scientiﬁc understandings of how the universe works.
There is a stark conﬂict between ancient conceptions of the world in which
supernatural agency makes sense and our modern sciences where nature works
14
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

on its own. This is a serious difﬁculty for every religious tradition. Christians
faced this challenge ﬁrst, as advancing historical and natural scientiﬁc know-
ledge made it increasingly difﬁcult to accept a universe infused with supernat-
ural purpose in every detail. Some theologians responded by turning to
fundamentalism, others resorted to more obscure interpretations of traditional
beliefs. Today, conservative Christian scholars still defend supernatural explan-
ations of both ancient and contemporary miracle stories (Keener 2011). But they
do so as intellectual rebels, aware that in the secularized intellectual high culture
of today’s wealthy post-Christian countries, belief in miracles or literally
understood Bible stories is no longer respectable.
Among Muslims, setting overt supernaturalism aside has also been difﬁcult.
With economic development, folk varieties of Islam are giving way to more
globalized, more scripture-focused forms of Islam, dampening beliefs in the
miracles performed by local saints (van Bruinessen 2009). But such changes
have led to even more emphasis on the supernatural beliefs embedded in the
sacred texts.
Muslims have always been drawn toward adopting the parts of science that
are useful while rejecting aspects that are culturally dangerous. Belief in
scientiﬁc miracles in the Quran promises just such a resolution. Indeed, if not
to a similar extent, some Christians have also thought that modern science might
be preﬁgured in the Bible. Hindu nationalists are also famous for ﬁnding science
and technology in their sacred texts (Nanda 2016). But the Muslim temptation
to afﬁrm scriptural miracles may be stronger. The Quran is more central to Islam
than the Bible is to Christianity or Judaism. Almost every Muslim believes that
the Quran is a direct divine communication. And if the Quran best makes sense
in an archaic framework where supernatural forces are palpably real, Muslims
will naturally reinterpret their faith to both afﬁrm their texts and ﬁnd science in
the Quran.
2.2 Staying within Physics
Science is not just a set of facts, and scientists do not collect facts like stamps.
Modern science is notable for its ambitious conceptual frameworks – overarch-
ing theories about how the world works – such as relativity, quantum mechan-
ics, or evolution. These are not mere theories in the colloquial sense; such
theoretical frameworks are universal and fundamental statements about the
universe. Science makes progress when it achieves positive feedback loops
that let its experiments and theories correct one another, providing evidence that
the conceptual frameworks at work are at least good approximations to reality.
15
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In the nineteenth century, when Muslims became acquainted with Western
debates over science and religion, they encountered materialist attempts to
fashion an overall framework. Darwinian evolution provoked the strongest
controversy, but nineteenth-century materialism was most inspired by the
physical science of the day. Life, it seemed, might eventually be understood
within the laws of physics. Human minds, perhaps, would also be assimilated
into a picture where nature worked according to rigid, impersonal rules of cause
and effect (Gregory 1977; Olson 2008). A miracle would be a violation of those
rules.
For Christians, such a concept of miracles could be welcome. After all,
a miracle would then not just be a spectacular display of power but a clear
sign of something beyond nature. Materialists, however, thought of divine
intervention as an arbitrary, improbable intrusion into the well-established
natural order. Muslims ﬁrst interpreted this debate in terms of their own
intellectual tradition, which favored forms of occasionalism that made the
divine will directly responsible for everything. The few early Muslim responses
to materialism revisited metaphysical debates within Islamic philosophical
theology (Bulğen 2019), but only superﬁcially engaged with the new scientiﬁc
developments that inspired the European materialists.
The more interesting reactions to materialism came from the Christian West,
where some tried to turn science against materialism. Psychical researchers in
the nineteenth century hoped to establish the primary reality of spirit by
scientiﬁc means. A quest for paranormal phenomena became established on
the fringes of science. Psychic feats became the new miracles, indicating
a realm of freedom beyond the rules that determined the behavior of mere
matter. The prospect of paranormal realities attracted religious thinkers who
favored a more individualist spirituality that could escape both the dogmas of
the established religions and the hopelessness of materialism (Lachapelle 2011;
Oppenheim 1985).
Relativity and quantum mechanics, which physicists ushered in during the
ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, complicated matters. Until then, debates about
materialism took commonsense conceptions of matter, causality, and the laws of
nature for granted. The revolutions in physics unsettled all of that, producing
a picture of a universe where commonsense notions were useful only in the very
limited environment of our everyday experience. Relativity violated our intu-
itions about time and space. Quantum mechanics revealed a world where our
everyday sense of order and causality was erected on a substrate of microscopic
randomness.
Some Christians and Muslims have thought that quantum mechanics could
allow miracles that did not violate the laws of physics – divine interventions
16
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

might be hidden in the statistical noise (Russell 2009; Taslaman 2008; for
criticism see Edis 2019). But the most enthusiastic support for the notion that
the new physics re-enchanted the world has come from religious movements
outside the mainstream of monotheism, often associated with occult spiritual-
ities and the religions of the Indian subcontinent. To New Agers and similar
enthusiasts, it has seemed that the new physics broke the materialist framework
of rigid rules. It allowed for the paranormal.
Parapsychologists, descendants of the psychical researchers, often argue that
quantum physics suggests that consciousness is the fundamental reality. But
parapsychologists have never been able to convince the mainstream scientiﬁc
community that psychic phenomena are real (Edis 2018b; Reber and Alcock
2020). Nonetheless, both psychic claims and mystical views that take inspir-
ation from quantum physics remain popular. In the post-Christian West, para-
normal belief is a main feature of alternative, individualist spiritualities. In
India, quantum mysticism has found support from Hindu nationalists and has
established a presence even in higher education (Geraci 2018; Nanda 2003).
So far, Muslims have shown no comparable interest in using modern physics
for apologetic purposes. Some Muslims with a physics background have argued
that Islam is compatible with modern physics, or at least that physics does not
demand materialism (Bigliardi 2014; Guessoum 2010). However, they have
only rarely endorsed the large-scale distortions of physics required for quantum
mysticism. There are crank attempts to make physical predictions using
“Islamic science” (Jaafar and Wahiddin 2016), but they attract little attention,
even among conservative Muslim apologists.
Popular media in Muslim lands often embraces psychics and uses the word
“quantum” to mean magic. Many Muslims believe in psychic powers and ask
religious scholars how such powers may be understood in the context of
traditional Islamic beliefs. But the connection between paranormal claims and
popular Islam is superﬁcial, comparable to the way that reports of encounters
with space aliens also attract attention and provoke questions about jinn.
Apologists who argue that science supports traditional Islam will occasionally
borrow from the global subculture of paranormal beliefs and quantum mysti-
cism to score points against materialism (Tarhan 2021 [2008]). Nonetheless, for
popular Muslim apologetics, abuse of modern physics is rarely a main theme.
One possible exception is Suﬁ-inspired literature that appeals to educated,
professional-class seekers and potential converts, both in urban environments in
Muslim lands and in the post-Christian West. But westernized neo-Suﬁbeliefs
tend to be uprooted from Islamic tradition and hardly distinguishable from the
derivatives of Hindu or Buddhist spiritualities that also appeal to an upmarket
clientele (Soyubol 2021). The tendency toward deiﬁcation of individual
17
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

consciousness apparent in paranormal mysticism usually does not sit well with
the strict monotheism demanded by more conservative varieties of Islam.
The Muslim response to physics-inspired materialism has, therefore, largely
taken the form of passive resistance. Muslims mostly ignore the challenges to
supernatural claims implicit in the conceptual frameworks of physics. The few
who respond, even today, usually just reafﬁrm perceptions of the universe in
which supernatural events make sense. Muslims have not constructed elaborate,
seemingly scientiﬁc apologetic enterprises that draw on parapsychology and
quantum mysticism.
In any case, relativity and quantum mechanics have not fundamentally
changed the varieties of materialism – physicalism (Brown and Ladyman
2019) – inspired by physics. Commonsense concepts of matter or causality
are no longer sustainable, so that physical objects have become tied up in
structures such as quantum ﬁelds. Physicists describe all events through com-
binations of rules and randomness, and the laws of physics are expressions of
universal symmetries of nature. There is no good prospect that any signature of
divine design that goes beyond rules and randomness will ever be discovered
(Edis 2021a: 46–76; Edis and Boudry 2014). The nineteenth-century hope that
life could be understood within physical science has largely been realized;
science no longer recognizes life forces or chemical souls. Today’s frontier
for physicalists is to more fully understand how minds work. And our current
sciences of the mind operate in a forthrightly materialist framework, expecting
that solutions to our scientiﬁc puzzles will come through ﬁguring out the vastly
complex operations of human brains (Elpidorou and Dove 2018; Fields,
Glazebrook, and Levin 2021).
Most critics of materialism recognize its dominance in natural science.
Theologians of all religions complain about materialism and scientism (Kalın
2018; Williams and Robinson 2015); advocates of parapsychology or intelligent
design creationism offer their alternatives as a way to overcome the materialism
of the scientiﬁc mainstream (Dembski and Witt 2010; Tart 2009). Nonetheless,
at present, most scientists judge that supernatural ideas do not present any
promise of explaining anything interesting related to their particular specialty.
After all, supernatural and paranormal claims have a poor track record. A kind
of soft materialism reigns: no individual scientist needs to explicitly reject
supernatural intervention, but the explanations the scientiﬁc community judges
to be worth investigating invariably exclude supernatural agents (Boucher
2020; Boudry, Blancke, and Braeckman 2012).
This is not to say that today’s science answers all the important questions. The
cutting edge of science is always full of uncertainty. No one can guarantee that
research in artiﬁcial intelligence and in cognitive neuroscience will wrap up all
18
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mysteries about minds, if only we wait a few more decades. Cosmology is full
of knotty problems, and since physicists still don’t have a good theory of
quantum gravity, our understanding of physics breaks down around black
holes and the big bang. No one can be ironclad certain that future physicists
will not reconsider supernatural forces. But for now, the open questions in
science look like they require improvements in science such as more data and
better physical theories. A religious person may still hope that a supernatural
agent is concealed behind scientiﬁc puzzles. But this is much like praying for
supernatural intervention to help a cancer patient. The impulse is understand-
able, but according to current scientiﬁc knowledge, the prayer will not increase
the odds of recovery.
Therefore, again, it is notable that distortions of modern physics are only
a minor feature of Muslim apologetics. This is especially remarkable given the
history of Muslim opposition to hints of materialism in imported science, and
the strong negative reaction materialism provokes even today. Passive rejection,
without investing in elaborate distortions of science, seems to work well
enough.
One reason must be that, as the popularity of seeking science in the Quran
demonstrates, a more-or-less traditional supernaturalist framework for under-
standing the universe is still a live option. The laws of physics hover in the
background as a sign of divine order, while Quranic miracle stories demonstrate
divine sovereignty over creation.
More important, while modern physics might motivate a form of materialism,
that argument is abstract and remote. Physicalism, while a respectable philo-
sophical position, appeals only to academic scientists and philosophers. Physics
is relevant to the question of miracles and supernatural intervention. But physics
does not directly touch on the concerns that most world religions address:
morality, life and death, what it means to be human. With nothing quite so
important at stake, most religious believers can leave descriptions of the
material world to the physicists. But believers also think that where anything
spiritual is concerned, wondrous exceptions happen. Supernatural forces insti-
tuted the laws of physics, and when the divine will so requires, miracles will
take place.
2.3 Resisting Evolution
Biology has more to say about human life. Physics may have set the stage for
emptying the universe of divine purpose, but nothing brought this loss home
like Darwinian evolution. A combination of rules and randomness, acting over
long stretches of time, produces the life forms we see, including ourselves.
19
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Followers of the monotheistic religions, and even Hindus and Buddhists, have
found it hard to fully accept the stark Darwinian view of life (Brown 2020).
Evolution remains the most prominent example of a conﬂict between the
content of modern science and traditional religious doctrines.
From its beginning, the Muslim encounter with evolution has been entangled
with controversies over materialism. Few of the Muslims in the late nineteenth
century who ﬁrst commented on Darwin’s theory showed much interest in
biology, but some westernizers adopted the new views of evolution percolating
in from Europe. The notion of the common descent of species often came
wrapped up in misconceptions about a purposive unfolding of higher states of
being. Since westernizers opposed the religious conservatives who they thought
stood in the way of social progress, biological evolution also became part of
a narrative of cosmic progress. For the conservatives, evolution was notable
mainly as an example of the religious errors that were concealed in the imported
foreign knowledge (Livingston 2018b; Riexinger 2011; Varisco 2018; Ziadat
1986).
Today, conservative Muslim populations continue to resist evolution.
Majorities in most populous Muslim countries reject human evolution (Bell
et al. 2013: 132–33; Carlisle, Hameed, and Elsdon-Baker 2019). Beyond that,
however, there is considerable variation in how different countries handle
science education, where evolution tends to provoke religious opposition. The
Iranian theocracy has no problem accepting the common descent of non-human
species. But the conservatively religious Saudi and Gulf states tend to deny all
evolution, and have been the source of much crude apologetics that rejects
evolution for religious reasons (Burton 2010; Determann 2015). Pakistani
textbooks cover non-human evolution, but bookend all science with quotations
from the Quran and praise of the creator (Ashgar, Hameed, and Farahani 2014;
Ashgar, Wiles, and Alters 2010). Egypt includes evolution in the curriculum,
but large numbers of both students and teachers passively reject evolution
(Mansour 2011). Indonesian and Malaysian universities produce a steady
stream of doctoral theses criticizing evolution. And in Turkey, suspicion of
evolution combines with opposition to ofﬁcial secularism to produce an elabor-
ate, actively creationist apologetics that includes pretenses to being scientiﬁc.
Turkish creationism has found institutional support at all levels of education
(Edis 2021b; Edis and BouJaoude 2014).
Traditional Muslim beliefs cannot easily be made compatible with human
evolution. The Quran contains stories about Adam and Eve. Although Muslim
theologians have not thought that the expulsion from paradise was as centrally
important as in Christian doctrine, the Quran is clear that Adam and Eve were
specially created and that all humans descend from them. Established
20
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

interpretations of the Quran have assumed a literal Adam and Eve (Jalajel
2009). And when the Quran mentions non-human life, it does so in the context
of an archaic conception of nature where divine creation is the obvious explan-
ation for life forms.
Compared to many Christian creationists, however, Muslims are far less
interested in the age of the Earth. The Quran alludes to biblical creation stories
and says nothing that hints at geological deep time or the vast time scales of
today’s cosmology. Before modern science, Muslims accepted the common
assumption that creation was a few thousand years old. But the age of the
universe was never a religiously important issue, and the Quran stays vague.
Therefore, Muslim creationism, even when it borrows heavily from Christian
creationism, typically ignores ﬂood geology (Yahya 1997 is an exception).
The most immediate threat that modern biology presents is that evolution is
out of place in the ancient, thoroughly supernaturalist framework in which
traditional beliefs make sense. Accepting evolution is difﬁcult without treating
sacred texts as religious literature that need to be suitably reinterpreted. That,
however, would risk introducing a human element into revelation. For most
Muslims, the Quran remains direct divine communication to which a believer
must submit (Malik 2021).
Even setting aside the mismatch with scripture, many Muslims ﬁnd human
evolution unacceptable. As conservative Jews and Christians do, Muslims
usually insist that humans are exceptional: we have an exalted status in creation,
and we cannot be associated with mere animals. We are supposed to be spirits in
material bodies, set in this world to be morally tested and then rewarded with
heaven or punished with hell. Moreover, the social morality prescribed by
traditional Islam is rooted in our created nature. Biology, therefore, is infused
with morality (Edis and Bix 2005). Our religiosity and moral sense indicates an
enormous gap between humans and other life forms. Evolution reduces humans
to mere animals. Muslims, even when they allow that humans have a biological
history, tend to argue that a separately created supernatural soul must have been
infused into our material bodies (Batchelor 2017; Doko 2021).
Still, separating souls from bodies suggests some room for compromise. Like
many Jews and Christians, Muslims have the option of conceiving of evolution
as a divinely guided process. Darwinian evolution, as biologists understand it,
produces adaptations through blind variation and selection. Many Muslims
accept common descent, acknowledging that all non-human life forms are
related. They insist, however, that evolution is an unfolding of intelligent
design, rather than a result of variation and selection. A supernatural power
directed the process to make sure that human bodies appeared, suitable for the
insertion of souls (Ateş 1991; Taslaman 2007).
21
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Guided evolution can be a popular option. It does not conﬂict with science as
overtly as creationism, and does not interfere with secondary science education.
In most Muslim countries, religious scholars have become government employ-
ees, and governments have promoted science education as part of efforts to
modernize. Ofﬁcially endorsed scholars, therefore, often support guided evolu-
tion. Some apologists even ﬁnd hints of common descent in the Quran. And
a few will claim that the idea of evolution was ﬁrst invented by Muslim
philosophers (Bayrakdar 1987; for criticism, see Malik 2019).
Muslim versions of guided evolution need not be committed to notions of
progress in stages, the way that biological evolution has often been misunder-
stood among Christians. Nonetheless, guided evolution still conﬂicts with
biology. Surveys that reveal Muslim resistance to evolution typically also
show substantial minorities that afﬁrm evolution. That can be misleading.
Muslims have not been polled about evolution as thoroughly and over as long
a time period as Western Christians. And the survey questions put to Muslims
typically do not distinguish between guided evolution and blind Darwinian
evolution. It is unlikely that many conservative Muslims fully agree with
a completely scientiﬁc picture of evolution.
From a religious point of view, the pervasive randomness in modern science
is not acceptable. Popular apologists, such as creationists and those who ﬁnd
science in the Quran, often suggest that evolution relies on pure chance to
suddenly assemble structures of vast complexity. That is mistaken. And yet,
apologists correctly notice that according to today’s science, the history of life is
sculpted by chance. Evolution includes mechanisms, such as arms races, that
drive increasing complexity within lineages. Starting from the very simple,
a mindless process of diversiﬁcation will produce life forms that are more
complex and cognitively capable. Still, evolution happens without design or
foresight, as a consequence of the rules and randomness of physics. The
existence of humans is a historical accident. None of this decisively rules out
religious conceptions of life: as with Christians, there are Muslims who argue
that divine designs manifest through natural causes in a manner undetectable by
science (Malik 2021; Malik, Karamali, and Khalayleh 2022). Superﬁcially,
removing supernatural agency to a metaphysical plane restores compatibility
between science and religion. But notions of invisible inﬂuences that serve
a hidden purpose result in cosmic conspiracy theories (Edis 2019).
Evolution, as understood by biologists, is not a story of bodies being prepared
to house spirits. Indeed, our sciences of the mind have been deeply inﬂuenced
by our understanding of evolution. Variation and selection builds brains, and
contributes to mechanisms within brains. One of the promising areas of research
in the last few decades has been applying evolutionary perspectives on
22
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

cognition and culture to more closely connect the natural and the social sci-
ences. Such efforts are too new to have fully settled results. But cognitive and
evolutionary approaches to culture even extend to explanations of religious
belief. Muslims have often thought that our created nature inclines us toward
perceiving the truth of Islam. Indeed, normal human minds easily acquire
beliefs about supernatural agents acting on the world. This predisposition is
now subject to explanations where evolution takes on a central role (Turner et al.
2017; Van Eyghen and Szocik 2021).
Conservative Muslims who resist evolution, then, have good reason to be
suspicious. The materialist tendencies within modern science are corrosive of
supernatural belief. And Darwinian evolution is the most dangerous conceptual
framework linked to materialism. Morality, piety, religious experience – every-
thing spiritual that religious believers think deﬁes material explanations now
attracts scientists who hope to poke and prod and examine it. The scientists
usually adopt a Darwinian perspective, asking how processes of information
replication and selection help explain what is happening.
Nonetheless, Muslims can still favor theological options that accept modern
biology, just as they can adopt less traditional views of miracles. Theologians
may promote less overt forms of divine intervention in the history of life (Malik
2021), science educators can argue that Muslims need to learn about evolution
(Dajani 2015), and scientists may seek a sense of cosmic design outside of
biology (Guessoum 2010).
The long-term prospects for reconciling popular religious beliefs with sci-
ence through modern theologies are hard to judge. It may help, however, that
most of the content of modern science has little bearing on debates concerning
science and religion. No religious apologist is likely to concern themselves
about the behavior of magnetic materials. Scientists of all religious persuasions
can enter a lab, setting aside their cultural backgrounds when they immerse
themselves in technical matters. In most scientists’ careers, scientiﬁc claims and
religious concerns are like ships that pass in the night, barely acknowledging
one another. Religious intellectuals rarely have to address materialist aspects of
science, other than an issuing an occasional denunciation. Extremely popular
religious websites that answer questions from believers usually include apolo-
getics that distort science. But the overwhelming majority of the questions they
address are about details of Muslim doctrine, ritual obligations, moral concerns,
and Islamic law. Believers are not overwhelmed by worries about evolution or
materialism.
Nonetheless, the broad conceptual frameworks that anchor modern science
are badly mismatched with traditional Islam. This does not mean that the
institutions of science and religion must also conﬂict. If peacekeeping strategies
23
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

succeed, scientists can afﬁrm that faith has its place, and religious leaders can
refrain from interfering in science education. Even so, the intellectual tension
between modern science and supernatural convictions is very real. For many
Muslims today, responding to that tension has come to mean misplaced claims
of science in sacred texts, science denial, and even pseudoscientiﬁc enterprises
such as creationism. And in the Muslim world, rejection of science is not just
a feature of dissenting fundamentalist movements. Even the intellectual high
culture can exhibit resistance to evolution; even institutions of higher education
can harbor creationists (Edis 2021b; Livingston 2018b).
3 Clashes of Culture
3.1 Separate Spheres
Modern science challenges all supernatural beliefs. Since somewhat different
doctrines may be at stake, Christian concerns about a theory such as evolution
are not always identical to the worries that occupy Muslims. But fundamentally,
the problems are much the same. Therefore, Muslim responses to the materialist
aspects of science are often very similar to ideas explored by Christians, or,
indeed, by adherents of almost any world religion. There are a limited number
of options.
Popular apologetic moves such as seeking science in the Quran or embracing
creationism protect religion, but at the cost of distorting science too much.
Muslims are still under pressure to better assimilate modern knowledge and
improve their position, even in our postcolonial times. Rejecting important
conceptual frameworks of science, then, might not be the best strategy.
Containing the materialist threat also requires efforts that enjoy more intellec-
tual credibility.
In that case, one possibility is to develop modernist Muslim positions analo-
gous to theologically liberal forms of Christianity (Masud 2009). This requires
not just a softening of fundamentalist inclinations, but going against the grain of
traditional beliefs. Therefore, efforts to liberalize Islam have always been
contentious (Ali 2007; Kaminski 2021). Nonetheless, Muslims have the option
of putting more emphasis on the human element in understanding sacred texts,
reinterpreting them in order to avoid appearances of conﬂict with modern
science (Bacik 2021).
Strategic reinterpretation, however, is not enough. Theological modernists
want to recognize a proper role for science, but in doing so, they also want to
establish a legitimate sphere for faith. Recognizing separate spheres for science
and religion should also help dampen some of the controversies over tradition
24
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and modernity that have consumed Muslim intellectuals for centuries
(Ramadan 2009).
One way to start is to observe that science and religion represent different
intellectual cultures, promoting different approaches to their subjects. Western
science has usually cultivated an attitude of critical detachment. Individual
scientists may be hotheaded, but the scientiﬁc community as a whole must
enforce a cool, disciplined skepticism. Such organized skepticism guards
against common human cognitive biases and makes sure the scientiﬁc commu-
nity has solid, public evidence before endorsing proposed explanations
(McIntyre 2019). The culture of science separates facts from values; the
demands it makes, such as not falsifying data, are narrowly focused on obtain-
ing the facts, rather than afﬁrming any comprehensive moral outlook.
Muslims have also made use of an ethos of scholarship. But in contrast to the
culture of Western science, Muslims have historically trusted the personal
testimony of pious believers. Therefore, their judgments of truth have been
closely tied to Muslim conceptions of moral probity. A believer must continu-
ally struggle against selﬁshness, cultivate the virtues associated with piety, and
aim to surrender to the divine. Indeed, a believer’s capacity to obtain reliable
knowledge, particularly religious knowledge, depends on their piety. Drifting
away from religiously deﬁned virtues impairs our ability to perceive the divine
order in the universe. Traditional forms of Islam, ﬁnally, often demand absolute
trust in the sources of religious knowledge: the sacred texts, or perhaps the Suﬁ
master who heads a religious brotherhood (Huff 2017; Rosen 2002).
For critics of traditional Islam, the differences between the intellectual
cultures associated with science and religion are another indication of
a mismatch between science and traditional piety. There is a clash of cultures
as well as content. Westernizers among Muslims have often described scientiﬁc
practice as an impersonal application of a scientiﬁc method, celebrating the
culture of science as an exemplar of openness and free investigation. In contrast,
they have associated conventional religion with blind faith and obedience. The
Islam of the religious scholars is supposed to be dogmatic, inﬂexible, slow to
change – thereby impeding the rapid progress that Muslim societies require.
And to go beyond importing knowledge, to do science, Muslims must adopt
some of the more skeptical outlook that fuels modern science. Westernizers
have particularly emphasized reform of education, arguing that Muslims must
encourage free inquiry and open criticism, rather than the rote transmission of
sanctiﬁed knowledge more characteristic of traditional Islamic societies
(Demirdağ and Khalifa 2020).
In some cases, however, religion can change rapidly. Islamist ideology, for
example, is a modern development, not an expression of timeless Islamic
25
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

political views. More important, encouraging skepticism in the proper circum-
stances need not exclude cultivating pious trust when appropriate. Theologians
can use the distinction between scientiﬁc and religious conceptions of know-
ledge to carve out separate spheres for science and religion.
A sophisticated defense of the sphere of monotheistic religion bases belief on
trust in a power that is overwhelming but fundamentally personal. The lived
experience of a faith opens the believer up to an ultimate reality that that
responds to religious needs and infuses purpose into existence. This purpose
goes far beyond petty individual concerns, anchoring a morality that can draw
believers out of selﬁshness. Responding to the divine reality encountered
through a pious life will drive a deepening trust in the sources of religious
knowledge. A believer will therefore surrender to the authority of sacred texts
such as the Quran. And all of this is perfectly legitimate. After all, we cannot
expect to approach a personal deity by maintaining a critical distance, con-
structing and analyzing theories, and performing controlled experiments.
Immersion in ritual, mysticism, community worship, and moral self-discipline
will be more fruitful.
Moreover, if science is deﬁned by a scientiﬁc method, that method is bound to
have limitations. The tools that are good for physics need not work for meta-
physics. Material and spiritual realities are distinct, with different ways of
knowing appropriate to each realm (Gould 1999). There are overlaps, since
the spiritual realm provides the creative spark that animates the material
universe. Therefore, a modern believer will recognize the deeper harmony
between religious and scientiﬁc knowledge, even when partisans of only one
way of knowing insist on conﬂict.
Variations on such theological views, which promise to give both science and
religion their due, are congenial to many Muslims. Modernizing reformers,
including westernizers, can accept a liberal settlement, as most have wanted to
preserve a distinctly Muslim culture by adopting the best aspects of modernity.
Many modern, educated Muslims, including Muslim scientists, have little
interest in fundamentalism (Ecklund et al. 2019: 125–44). They may not be as
observant as some religious overachievers, but they retain a sense of the sacred
that is rooted in Muslim tradition. If recognizing distinct spheres for scientiﬁc
and religious knowledge would prevent unproductive conﬂicts, almost every
Muslim should beneﬁt.
The notion of separate spheres ﬁnds support from the way that most of the
time, science and religion barely interact, like ships passing in the night. Even
better, insulating religion from science-based criticism is intellectually respect-
able. Like liberal Christians, Muslim modernists can draw on currents in
philosophy that acknowledge the successes of science but insist that science
26
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

has limits. After all, how could science justify the scientiﬁc method, without
arguing in a circle? Would it not be scientism, an illegitimate extension of the
methods of natural science into all domains of knowledge, to dismiss other ways
of knowing? Materialism may be just a form of intellectual imperialism, as
morally tainted as its military relative. Muslims, therefore, can accept almost all
of modern science, provided that science does not overreach and attempt to
deny the divine design of the world (Guessoum 2010).
So a liberal settlement seems promising. But religious conservatives and
Islamists are not convinced. There isn’t much that is distinctively Islamic about
a liberal modernism: it works just as well for Christianity, or almost any religion.
For theological conservatives, the details are important. Islamic doctrines are not
interpretive sauce poured on top of a generic religious experience. Muslims have
to be correct, and the others mistaken. Almost every Muslim thinker, conservative
or liberal, agrees that science has important limitations, and that in its proper
place, science can be a wonderful tool. Both liberals who want to make peace with
biology and conservative critics of evolution will proclaim that against material-
ism, nonscientiﬁc ways of knowing have to be acknowledged (Bakar 2005). But
conservatives want to afﬁrm what they think of as the true faith, not a formless
spirituality. If necessary, Muslims will have to stand ﬁrm for religious truth, even
when secular science appears to undermine it.
From a conservative perspective, modernists too easily let scientists have the
ﬁnal word. Whenever there is a real conﬂict in content, modernized religiosity
surrenders to secular norms of knowledge production, asking only for a small
protected domain of faith. For religion, this is at best a disguised retreat.
Separate spheres seemingly protects both science and religion, but in practice,
where serious public knowledge is concerned, liberal modernists capitulate to
Western science (Toosi 2019).
Conservative Muslims are often sensitive to developments in the post-
Christian West. They consider Christianity to be an inferior religion, treating
its fate as a cautionary tale. The slow collapse of European Christianity does not
inspire conﬁdence. If Muslims were to behave like liberal Christians, that would
invite further spread of the moral decay brought on by secular modernity (Aydın
2000). A liberal settlement may well appear plausible to rootless, atomized
individuals who happen to feel spiritual. But it does little to constrain the spread
of materialism in the guise of science.
To many conservatives, modernist reinterpretations of Islam look like glo-
balized professional-class mush. Liberal modernists never make the boundaries
between their separate spheres clear, leaving believers unsure about when
secular science should hold sway and when a Muslim should accept religious
authority instead.
27
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

3.2 A Hierarchy of Knowledge
In most Muslim countries, theologically conservative views remain an import-
ant part of the intellectual high culture. As a result, there is room for a view of
science and religion that is more robust than just claiming that science and
supernatural convictions are compatible. Muslims can refuse to adopt modern
liberalism with some Muslim sauce on top, and instead assert the primacy of
revealed truth in all intellectual endeavors (Auda 2021).
The most attractive option would be to start from a classical Muslim
conception of knowledge and update it in the light of today’s conditions.
Conservative Muslims could then construct an authentically Islamic philoso-
phy of science, as part of a broader picture that recognizes the religious ways
of knowing acknowledged by most believers (Açıkgenç 2016; Bakar 1999;
Kalın 2001; Nasr 1987).
The natural development of Islamic intellectual life was interrupted by
Western colonialism. Instead of cultivating their heritage of ideas, Muslims
were diverted into responding to the new knowledge that underwrote colonial
power. A successful response, however, could not just mean imitating Western
ways, adopting the oppressor’s culture in order to survive. If Muslims were to
catch up with Western technology, becoming powerful, wealthy actors in polit-
ical and economic affairs, we should then also see a Muslim civilization more
conﬁdent in its vision of scientiﬁc and religious knowledge. A more authentic
vision may indeed release Muslims from the trap of continually having to play
catch-up.
In the classical Islamic conception, there is a hierarchy of knowledge.
The religious sciences come ﬁrst: they address the most foundational real-
ities, the morally most weighty concerns (Bakar 1998; Heck 2002). And
these are not just abstract matters concerning unseen realms. Understanding
the Quran and ﬁguring out the demands of Islamic law are critical for
successfully navigating the challenges of this life and making it into
a desirable afterlife.
Islamic civilization granted a secondary status to the foreign sciences
inherited from antiquity, recognizing their practical value. Modern science,
though vastly more powerful, can still occupy a similar place in the hierarchy.
The technological prowess generated by natural science is compelling. But
today’s science, sundered from the higher truths of revealed religion, is
morally blind (Golshani 2007; Sardar 1984). Worse, science is too often
joined with a secular outlook that violates the moral order revealed by the
deeper penetration of the religious sciences.
28
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A revived Muslim conception of knowledge will emphasize unity. Just as
strict monotheism demands that everything depends on a singular divine will,
a holistic Islamic vision uniﬁes all knowledge under a single theme. If, for
example, religious knowledge requires personal trust in morally acceptable
sources of knowledge, that need for trust cannot be conﬁned to a religious
sphere. A scientist may think she deals with impersonal laws of nature, but that
itself must ultimately be based on trust in a rational created order. Facts and
values are not cut off from one another; they are uniﬁed by the supernatural
purpose underlying the surface realities investigated by natural science (Hassan
2016).
Classical Muslim intellectual culture recognized the supernatural in its hier-
archy of knowledge. But it did more. Incorporating the inﬂuence of Neoplatonic
philosophy and mystical practices, Muslim thinkers spoke of higher realities
and the ways to know them. They conceived of reason itself as akin to a mystical
power of apprehending unseen realities. We moderns, with our overspecialized
and fragmented intellectual lives, could beneﬁt from such a unifying vision.
A revived Muslim conception of knowledge would restore reason to its role of
helping us approach the divine, rather than becoming an instrument of apostasy
(Nasr 1987).
What, then, should Muslims do about the uncomfortable parts of modern
science, especially those conceptual frameworks that cause trouble? Islam is not
a world-denying religion; it accepts both unseen realms and the practically
useful applications of true knowledge. But those aspects of modern science
that cast doubt on a divine order must be due to materialist philosophical
assumptions, not real science. Parts of Western science have gone astray.
They will have to be Islamized – reconstructed in order to ﬁt an overall
Islamic conception of knowledge (Madani 2016; Setia 2007).
Physics might not be too difﬁcult to handle. After all, there are still elements
of mathematical Platonism in the culture of physics; some theorists insist that
the laws of nature are Platonic realities and that the mathematical elegance of
a theory is a sign of its truth (Tegmark 2014). The Platonism in the tradition of
Islamic philosophy could enrich the Platonic relics in physics, deepening it
beyond mere mathematical abstractions. A sense of cosmic order or natural
cause and effect presents no problem for monotheism, as long as science can
acknowledge purpose and design behind natural mechanisms.
Biology may appear more recalcitrant, as variation and selection cuts against
more metaphysically essentialist conceptions of species (Dennett 2017, for
qualiﬁcation see Wilkins 2013). But an Islamic philosophy of science, which
might include a retooled Platonism, would amend biology on a higher intellec-
tual plane, not at the level of material details. The end result would be
29
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a revitalized, non-Darwinian biology that no longer treats intelligent design as
a taboo. Instead, a properly Islamic biology would recognize divine purpose in
the very foundations of its concept of life.
The social sciences should also be brought under a unifying Islamic frame-
work. The Western versions of social science are transparently ideological,
serving a liberal individualist moral agenda. A Muslim social science would
accept that neutral description of social facts is a fantasy, explicitly anchoring
social thought in a revealed value system. When dealing with social problems,
Muslims would draw on the rich heritage of Islamic law. They would develop
Islamic ideals of social organization rooted in the sacred texts and Muslim
intellectual tradition, adapting them to our highly technological times
(AbuSulayman 1989; Awaru et al. 2021).
Reviving classical Islamic ways of thinking is not enough: such a project
risks becoming culturally insular, which may produce technological stagnation.
But attempts to formulate a more Islamic vision of science can also draw on
intellectual trends that enjoy global inﬂuence. Suspicions about secular Western
science and defenses of nonscientiﬁc ways of knowing are common in some
academic circles. Moral criticisms of the exceptionally rapacious technological
civilization represented by the post-Christian West are even more common.
In the late twentieth century, many critiques of science and modernity
expressed a postmodern mood. There was no such thing as scientiﬁc method.
Claims to knowledge were really manifestations of power. Indeed, all truth
claims proceeded from particular standpoints, which could never be neutral or
objective. The standpoints of oppressed groups were, if anything, superior. The
colonizing powers dismissed the knowledge systems of colonized peoples as
superstitions to be swept aside by the new European science. Justice, however,
demanded the rehabilitation of the ways of knowing embraced by colonized
peoples (Kidd, Medina, and Pohlhaus Jr. 2017; Vaditya 2018).
Indeed, if colonialism was a crime, the contribution of Western science to this
crime should also be recognized. For example, for much of its recent history,
biology has been thoroughly racist. “Survival of the ﬁttest” justiﬁed Europeans
exterminating the people whose lands they stole. Genetics was motivated by
eugenics (Bashford and Levine 2010; Yudell 2014). Physics has attracted
massive amounts of funding by promising to build bigger bombs. Perhaps, as
secular people think, facts are value-free, and science must sell its services to the
highest bidder. But then, perhaps separation of fact and value is just an excuse
for bad behavior. Moral revulsion at the uses of science opens up space for
alternative conceptions of science that do not erase nonscientiﬁc ways of
knowing and that are integrated with less predatory values.
30
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

High postmodernism had a self-devouring quality, burning up in a ﬂash of
incoherence. And rejection of all grand schemes to explain the world, treating
all as a species of intellectual imperialism, does not sit well with traditional
monotheism. Nonetheless, many Muslim intellectuals were attracted to post-
modern critiques of Western science and modernity (Aydın 2021b). After
runaway postmodern doubt did its work, faith could rebuild the world. Mere
human efforts could never produce dependable knowledge. But that only
highlighted the need for a divine power to underwrite all truth.
A postmodern sensibility continues to inﬂuence the humanities and social
sciences today. To many scholars, moral truths and the demands of justice seem
more certain than the technicalities of science. Colonized and oppressed popu-
lations have been deprived of the ability to maintain their own concepts of
knowledge. When old-fashioned Western modernists accuse some communities
of endorsing superstitions or pseudoscience – creationism, traditional medicine,
spirit possession – they exert power to shore up a morally defective modern
order. At the very least, defenders of the cognitive authority of mainstream
science might be insufﬁciently committed to cultural diversity and inclusion
(Ludwig et al. 2022; Scott 2011).
Islam has an imperial past of its own, and plenty of dead white men as heroes,
even if they wear turbans. Still, as more recent victims of colonialism, Muslims
can ﬁnd a postcolonial intellectual climate congenial. The prospect of an
authentically Muslim version of science that unites matter and spirit, fact and
value, and promotes a moral approach to nature and other people can be
exciting. A project of revitalizing and building on a classical Muslim hierarchy
of knowledge would appear futile in an intellectual environment where secular
Western forms of knowledge production enjoy an unquestioned dominance. But
when Western science loses some prestige, there is more room to construct an
alternative.
A renewed hierarchy of knowledge will not appeal as much to Muslims who
are more at peace with modernity. Making revelation the foundation of know-
ledge comes uncomfortably close to afﬁrming suspicions that Muslim intellec-
tual cultures are characterized by their dogmatism. Ambitions to protect
traditional Muslim beliefs by constructing a more Islamic science reinforce
conservative habits of thought, putting further distance between Muslims and
the more skeptical outlook that has led to the successes of modern science.
Perhaps modernists envision a sphere for faith that is too small. But if Islamizers
had their way, there would be practically no sphere for science that was not
conditioned by religious doctrines.
A more Islamic science could still have been a good idea, if the world
happened to work according to traditional supernatural beliefs. Presumably,
31
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Muslims practicing such a science would then enjoy the fruits of their superior
production of knowledge. But proposals to revive a classical Muslim vision of
knowledge have now been in play for many decades, with no concrete achieve-
ments to show. Their results have usually been as bizarre as attempts to ﬁnd
science in the Quran, with an added element of hostility to Western science
(Livingston 2018b: 323–32). No sciences have yet been Islamized in substance.
Postcolonial complaints about Western science usually end up as sterile rhetoric
that ignores the content of the science (Dasgupta 2014). Joining Islam and
modern science still mostly means tacking verses from the Quran onto routine
scientiﬁc work. And that is just another example of taking Western science and
pouring Muslim sauce on top.
3.3 Materialism Strikes Back
Conservative and reforming Muslims argue about the proper relationship
between science and religion. Much of their disagreement concerns the best
way to avoid materialism. Meanwhile, while implicitly part of the debate, there
are very few actual materialists around. There are some uneasy cultural
Muslims who have come to doubt supernatural claims. A few openly reject
the faith (Rizvi 2016), even though traditional Islam treats apostasy as a betrayal
of the community punishable by death. In the days when Marxism was a live
option, some public intellectuals would have expressed materialist views.
Today, materialism is mostly a symbolic enemy, representing the abyss into
which the religiously lax might descend if they do not right their ways. Critics of
attempts to marry Islam and science almost always adopt a liberal, secularist
point of view, asking the ships of science and religion to pass even further in the
night (Hoodbhoy 1991).
Since the materialists among Muslims have been extreme westernizers, the
materialist contribution to the science and religion debate largely derives from
Western intellectual developments. And the materialist instinct is to turn science
loose on itself. Science, in such a view, would not reﬂect a transcendent reality.
Science has to be a thoroughly earthly practice, an activity of material brains,
and an institution with a history and a sociology. It could well have a record of
crimes as well as spectacular successes.
Academically, science studies have often been associated with a postmodern
suspicion of science. Nonetheless, much of science studies looks like a scientiﬁc
study of scientiﬁc practices, providing detailed accounts of institutions.
Historians, philosophers, and sociologists of science examine the messy pro-
cesses by which scientiﬁc communities interact with their objects of study and
construct their knowledge claims.
32
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

As a result, it appears that there is no such thing as a scientiﬁc method. At
least, there is no pre-set procedure that, when followed, must produce accurate
knowledge about the world. Scientists use multiple, overlapping methods that
seem appropriate in particular domains. Science, therefore, does not represent
a single way of knowing. Modern knowledge looks like a network of descrip-
tions linked together through relationships of mutual support, such as the
positive feedback between theories and independent observations that is so
compelling in physics. Methods, in such a picture, are good or bad ways of
learning about the world. And whether any method is good or bad is a fact about
the world, established through mutual support like any other fact of science.
Methods are not transcendent principles that certify facts, and they do not
require metaphysical justiﬁcations beyond earthly realities (Edis 2018a; Edis
2021a).
If all this is correct, science could possibly assimilate ways of knowing
associated with supernatural beliefs, from mystical illumination to psychic
insight. Our world could be such that, as a matter of fact, reading tea leaves
had real predictive power. But any proposed method can fail as well as succeed.
It can fail to achieve mutual support with the rest of our body of knowledge, and
investigators will conclude that it is a poor way of knowing. Indeed, materialists
think that religious practices are much better at producing feelings of conviction
than genuine knowledge. Creationism, for example, is not wrong because
approaches such as trust in scripture run afoul of a predetermined scientiﬁc
method. Creationists are mistaken because accepting their claims would mas-
sively disrupt the mutually supporting networks of knowledge established by
the natural sciences. And when creationism institutionalizes its practices, pro-
ducing apologetics rather than real inquiry, it becomes a pseudoscience (Edis
2018b; Edis 2021a).
Just as some proposed ways of knowing do not work, so can some intellectual
cultures fail to nurture genuine knowledge. It all depends on the sort of world we
live in. Conservative varieties of Islam may support learning strategies that are
not appropriate to our circumstances. So far, modern science has operated in
many different political environments. Nationalism, for example, can encour-
age ethnocentric misrepresentations of reality, but it can also support scientiﬁc
enterprises as sources of national prestige and power. Traditional monotheism,
with its attachments to failed ways of knowing, tendencies to produce pseudos-
ciences such as creationism, and moral strictures against religious skepticism,
might not do as well (Coyne 2016; Edis 2002).
There are, however, complications. For example, creationism might be
a terrible ﬁt with the current state of natural science, but it has strong mutually
supporting links with conservative moral commitments. Muslim resistance to
33
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

evolution is often motivated by a conviction that nature is inscribed with a moral
order. Our created nature is supposed to reﬂect traditional Islamic beliefs about
social and sexual morality (Edis and Bix 2005). Evolution disrupts this vital
moral knowledge. From a conservative Muslim standpoint, that may be a strong
reason to reject evolution.
The trouble is not conﬁned to evolution: materialist aspects of science have
difﬁculty making room for a robust conception of moral truth. Modern forms of
dissent from traditional religion are usually accompanied by strongly held
moral ideals of liberal individualism and human progress (LeDrew 2016).
Westernizers among Muslims often endorse a heroic image of science, taking
it to represent human ingenuity when unshackled by medieval dogmas. But
modern science, with its separation of facts and values and its materialist
conceptual frameworks, does not endorse any universal, authoritative moral
vision. The value of personal autonomy is no more closely attached to the facts
of science than is religious conformity. In that case, morality may well belong to
a separate sphere of knowledge. Even secularists who have little use for
traditional supernaturalism might take moral knowledge to transcend mere
material realities.
A materialist, however, will now turn science loose on morality. Humans, like
other animals, have interests rooted in reproduction. Moreover, we are highly
social animals who use our enormous brains to plot social strategies and track
opportunities for cooperation and for backstabbing. Our advanced cognition
and language produces channels of information reproduction separate from our
genes, setting the stage for cultural evolution. We construct moral enterprises
that can command our loyalties even against our biological interests.
None of the science about evolution, cognition, culture, and morality is
remotely close to completion. And yet, the prospects for understanding moral
perceptions and behaviors entirely within ordinary material realities are very
good. Such an earthly account of morality, however, cannot entirely satisfy
a moralist. Instead of universal, authoritative moral facts, a scientiﬁc explan-
ation of morality presents us with a multitude of moral outlooks competing
within a social ecology. Not every moral outlook can stably reproduce itself. But
we still end up with multiple competing coalitions of interests, with an accom-
panying plurality of social identities and moral perceptions. We might share
enough of a common human nature that most people will value conditions such
as freedom or security. Such values, however, often conﬂict with each other and
are riven with internal conﬂicts. And with advancing biotechnologies, human
nature is not stable enough to ﬁx what almost everyone will value. Without
a transcendent realm of moral values, it is hard to sustain a uniﬁed moral vision.
Instead, we end up with a moral chaos (Edis 2018a; Edis 2021a).
34
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Such a fractured moral world is not acceptable to devout Muslims, or indeed
adherents of any strong moral ideology. Moral values that transcend the material
world do not help scientists explain the details of human moral lives. But belief
in a transcendent morality is very useful for fortifying moral convictions,
recruiting allies, and demonizing rivals. Accepting the chaos inevitably means
embracing a degree of moral relativism or skepticism about morality (Blackford
2016; Marks 2013). And if an earthbound view of morality spreads through
a community, this may well weaken the group’s cohesion. Even if materialism
about the nature of morality were scientiﬁcally correct, it would be morally
unacceptable.
Intellectuals with a strong sense of morality, then, are likely to resist materi-
alist explanations of morality. Moreover, scientiﬁc explanation is only one
among many intellectual purposes. In every civilization, intellectual institutions
have pursued a plurality of goals. Poking at the world and achieving accurate
descriptions is one such goal, and modern science does exceptionally well at it.
But historically, even more intellectual effort has been devoted to prescribing
how we should live together. Institutions of higher learning have always been in
the business of producing and maintaining ideology. Scholars proclaiming
moral ideologies have been as socially valuable as scientists laying the ground-
work for new technologies. Monotheistic religion has been particularly focused
on imposing order on a moral chaos (Langermann 2012).
As a result, debates about science and religion are not intellectually resolv-
able. Participants have too many legitimate but incompatible goals. Materialists
may insist that scientiﬁc explanations should be decisive, but religious thinkers
will continue to judge claims according to a moral vision.
In the secular, post-Christian West, conﬂicts between different intellectual
purposes do not always attract attention. The triumph of liberal individualism,
and a clean institutional separation between science and religion, may make the
issues seem settled. Nonetheless, ideology remains. Western liberals still go on
moral crusades, make life difﬁcult for those who do not morally conform, and
even distort science when the demands of morality seem urgent. The current
fervor about diversity and inclusion is an example. Liberals recognize that much
about personal identity, such as gender, has to do with social role-playing. But
they then let culture wars about identity put pressure on science. Moreover, they
impose their new moral orthodoxy on those, such as Christian conservatives,
who have a rival moral outlook. For many Western liberals today, error has no
rights, and heresy is violence that does not deserve a platform (Campbell and
Manning 2018). Scientists who study human sexuality and other politically
sensitive subjects have to watch what they say (Abbot et al. 2023; Dreger 2015).
35
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In the Muslim world, gender is also subject to culture wars. Conservatives
who think that traditional sex roles reﬂect morality-infused metaphysical
essences now face the demands of increasingly educated and assertive
Muslim women (Dalaman 2021). Perceptions of reality, and therefore science,
are inevitably entangled in such culture wars.
Traditional beliefs are still strong among Muslims: conservatives hope that an
Islamized vision of science can be morally persuasive. Their rivals offer separ-
ate spheres as a sensible compromise. The goals of accurately describing the
world and producing a workable ideology are not compatible. But the goal of
social cohesion may still be served by sweeping such conﬂicts under the carpet.
No doubt there will be materialists among the overeducated, who may be
willing to live with moral chaos. But especially after the demise of Marxism,
it is hard to anticipate that materialism will generate any potent ideology.
4 Pressures of Politics
4.1 The Westernizers Take Control
Debates about science and Islam feature scholars, scientists, and their various
understandings of religion. But not every interpretation of sacred texts is
inﬂuential. A televangelist may do more to shape public perceptions of science
and religion than a roomful of theologians. Then again, inﬂuence can be
ﬂeeting. The most notable positions on science and Islam are institutionalized.
They propagate through education. Moreover, institutions will favor some ideas
more than others. If a government promotes westernization, theologians who
advocate separation of science and religion will more easily ﬁnd academic
positions. If an Islamist style of modernization is in fashion, proposals to
Islamize science will appear more plausible.
Understanding Muslim views on science and religion, then, also requires
attention to how ideas are spread, reproduced, and institutionalized. Knowledge
about bridge-building is rooted in experience; engineering textbooks present
well-tested information about bridges that stand up. With supernatural beliefs,
the constraints are less straightforward. In some historical circumstances, reli-
gious scholars have established a local consensus on the fundamentals of Islam,
even as they continued to disagree about details. In the premodern Muslim
empires, the scholars enjoyed a monopoly on education, which beyond a narrow
stratum of elites, consisted of little beyond local boys gathering to memorize the
Quran. Even today, in more conservative circles, an ideal of consensus persists.
Modernizing reforms, however, introduced new institutions, and fractured
any elite consensus on Islam. Reforms started with militaries, and the training of
ofﬁcers, engineers, and associated medical men ushered in a European style of
36
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

education. Change soon spread to imperial bureaucracies. Assimilating the new
science required new educational institutions, which produced a class of ofﬁ-
cials and intellectuals with interests diverging from the religious scholars
(Demirdağ and Khalifa 2020).
In the Middle East, this new professional class still served an Islamic vision
of civilization, remaining loyal to an Ottoman Empire that sought legitimacy
through its protection of the true faith. The new professionals proposed to
manage modernization carefully, importing the technical knowledge of the
West while avoiding religiously corrosive ideas. Nonetheless, the interests of
the professionals were in tension with those of the religious scholars. Educated
elites became a constituency favoring further westernization, even seculariza-
tion, of the Empire (İhsanoğlu 2004; Somel 2001).
Many of today’s controversies over science and Islam have roots in the
fracturing of consensus among nineteenth-century elites. As the Ottoman state
gradually collapsed, the differences between elites educated in a Western style
and provincial networks of traditional scholars became sharper. Intellectuals in
urban centers gravitated toward a nationalism that might appeal to the non-Arab
Muslims in core Ottoman territories, most of whom spoke Turkish. The reli-
gious scholars, particularly in the provinces, remained locked into a pre-
industrial economy and resented the centralizing tendencies of the modernizing
Empire. They lost prestige, and the more conservative scholars resisted change,
opposing what they saw as the religious deviations inherent in the new know-
ledge and the new institutions of learning.
Debates about science and Islam, therefore, have an important political
aspect. Controversies about miracles or room for divine purpose in evolution
may appear to turn on textual minutiae or metaphysical tastes, but positions
about science have been closely connected to stands on state endorsement of
religion or the public role of Islamic law. In environments where job security
may hinge on accepting secularism, a conservatively religious academic might
feel safer attacking Darwinian ideas than directly opposing a secular political
order. In a conservative cultural environment, a westernizer might emphasize
technical scientiﬁc matters that cast doubt on conservative beliefs.
Such controversies intensify when cultural reproduction is at stake.
Westernizers typically favor a degree of secularism; they insist on separating
science from religion in education. Religious scholars have lost much of their
inﬂuence, but today, Islamists favor an expansive role for religious expertise in
modern institutions. Islamist governments, therefore, will often provide open-
ings for creationism in the curriculum. Political circumstances shape Muslim
perceptions of science and Islam.
37
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Political interactions between powerful institutions produce plenty of local
variation, such as the way every Muslim country handles evolution in science
education in a different manner (Edis and BouJaoude 2014). Moreover, institu-
tions change. Science, with its universities and government and corporate labs,
is not what it was when controversies over materialism surfaced in the nine-
teenth century. Islam is no longer deﬁned by networks of traditional scholars
and Suﬁbrotherhoods. The best approach to institutions, then, is historical:
tracing how science and religion staked out their territories in a particular
country, in speciﬁc circumstances.
Turkish history provides a particularly good illustration. In the early twenti-
eth century, the new Turkish Republic, remnant of the Ottoman Empire,
embarked on the most extensive program of westernization that the Muslim
world has seen. Today, Turkey has also been shaped by decades of Islamist rule.
During this time, Turks have confronted most questions about Islam and science
and explored different institutional arrangements. The Turkish experience is not
common to all Muslims. And yet, the extremes Turks have encountered, from an
extensive top-down westernization to strong creationist movements, means that
Turkish history ﬁnds echoes in science and religion disputes in other Muslim
countries.
The leaders of the new Republic were westernizers from the military and the
Ottoman bureaucracy. They proceeded to reform or abolish every institution
they thought was a medieval relic. Religious conservatives interpret the two
decades after the proclamation of the Turkish Republic as a calamity, where an
authoritarian and aggressively secular state repressed religious expression, shut
down traditional institutions of religious learning, and outlawed Suﬁbrother-
hoods. The ruling elites saw westernization as a way of joining a universal
civilization, measuring progress by the way that the wives of ofﬁcials unveiled
and joined their husbands in attending opera performances (Gingeras 2019).
The early Turkish Republic invested in education, including science, particu-
larly applied science. Much of this was an extension of late Ottoman practices,
such as establishing new institutions by copying European models, and sending
students abroad to get a modern education. But the revolutionary period gave
westernization further depth. The new republican ideals were to be made ﬂesh
by schoolteachers, who were supposed to go out into the impoverished coun-
tryside and help the peasantry into the modern age. The leaders of the Republic
adapted religious language to secular purposes, proclaiming that the truest
guidance in life was to be found in science. They reformed the universities
established in late Ottoman times, which in the 1930s also beneﬁted from an
inﬂux of scientists ﬂeeing Nazi Germany. Republican policies placed all levels
of education under strict state control, adopting the goal that every student
38
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

should have a common education, centered on the goal of achieving modernity.
Evolution became a straightforward part of the science curriculum.
While the Turkish republicans held science in high regard, their guiding
ideology was nationalism. The Turkish nation had to be invented, starting
with a population whose main bonds were still religious. Science, indeed,
could have a role in the process. Engineering and agricultural science would
improve the nation’s fortunes. For some elite factions, racialist understandings
of biology, common in the early twentieth century, could help deﬁne the Turkish
nation by revealing its innate racial superiority (Karaömerlioğlu and Yolun
2020; Peker and Taşkın 2018).
Meanwhile, the republicans brought most religious institutions under state
control. Approved scholars and religious functionaries became state employees.
Religious institutions would continue to legitimate the state, but now they
would have to lend support to nationalism and modernization.
Most Turkish republicans continued to think of themselves as good Muslims.
But they envisioned a reformed Islam stripped of medieval superstitions and
independent political power. In matters of personal conscience, basic public
morality, and ritual obligations, religious institutions would still control their
own sphere. But the religious scholars and the mystical brotherhoods could
never again be allowed to hold back the progress of the nation. If the scholars
and the Suﬁmasters went beyond their proper sphere, making pronouncements
about miracles or presuming to dictate laws, the experience of the Ottoman
collapse showed that the result would be the ruin of the Muslim nation (Alperen
2003: 100–54; Parla and Davison 2004).
The early Turkish Republic, then, endorsed a particular vision of compatibil-
ity between science and religion. Ofﬁcially sanctioned theologians and scholars
housed in reformed, nationalist institutions had to support modernization and
science. Evolution, for example, was established science. The proper under-
standing of the sacred texts, therefore, had to be compatible with the common
descent of life forms (Kaya 2012; Riexinger 2011). Among republican elites,
the favored view about science and religion became a variety of a theologically
modernist separate spheres conception. But support for separate spheres did not
derive from liberal individualism and its tendency to privatize spirituality.
Instead, the separation of science and religion was an imposition by the state,
in service of a project of rapid modernization.
More conservative Muslim intellectuals were appalled by the secular turn of
the new Republic. During the revolutionary period, many responded to the
monumental betrayal by the westernizers by trying to preserve relics of trad-
itional religious institutions, particularly in provincial areas where central
government power was weak. But the most effective resistance to secular
39
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

impositions came from religious movements with a modernizing character. In
Turkey, the best example is the Nur movement. While remaining theologically
conservative, and organizing in a form resembling a loose brotherhood, Nur
adherents recognized the importance of technology, the modern professions,
and education. In the early years of the Turkish Republic, however, such
movements survived as persecuted underground networks (Abu-Rabi 2003;
Mardin 1989).
During the peak of westernizing zeal, republicans found an opportunity to
shape institutions as they preferred, carving out a space for science relatively
free from religious inﬂuence. The independence of science, however, was only
a minor element of the broader project of creating a secular political order.
Religious thinkers continued to oppose materialism and similar skeptical views,
which had real inﬂuence among republican elites (Hanioğlu 2012; Peker 2020).
In the upheavals of the Turkish Revolution, conservatives found conﬁrmation
that materialism was a catastrophe for the faith. But religious resistance to
secular ideology was mostly passive. Unlike in Arab countries, where scholars
and intellectuals usually rejected anything associated with Darwin (Livingston
2018b), in Turkey, religious conservatives were too busy salvaging what they
could from the ruins of their institutions to publicly contest ideas such as
evolution.
Relationships between religious and scientiﬁc institutions, then, took shape
within the broader political conﬂict between conservatives and westernizers,
tradition and modernity. Science mattered, but conservatives had far more
immediate threats to be concerned about. Creating scientiﬁc institutions was
an important part of the westernizing project. But in republican education, the
ﬁrst priority was instilling nationalism, more than a scientiﬁc perception of the
world.
4.2 Interregnum
After the Second World War, European colonial empires fell apart. The elites of
newly independent Muslim countries found themselves in charge of modern-
ization projects. They had the Turkish experience to learn from – its success as
well as its excess. No other Muslim country attempted a cultural revolution as
ambitious as Turkish westernization. But most adopted a measure of political
secularism (Salem 1996). A viable state required modern institutions and the
best technical knowledge. Science, particularly applied science, was vital for
the future of the new nations.
Arab nationalism enjoyed its heyday in the mid-twentieth century, honoring
Islam but also reducing the importance of religion in political affairs. The shahs
40
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of Iran opted for a top-down, authoritarian westernization. Many of the found-
ing elites of Pakistan thought of being Muslim as akin to an ethnicity; even after
the bloodbath of partition, they envisioned a more secular, rather than theocratic
country. Indonesians had to forge a nation out of their archipelago, and took
Islam to be just one aspect of national identity. Their post-independence politics
was shaped by aspirations for a non-aligned movement and worries about
communist inﬂuence, as much as by pressures from religious conservatives.
In all such cases, the military was the strongest national institution, and the
state was the most plausible actor to build infrastructure and encourage eco-
nomic growth. Professional elites educated in a Western style got to shape their
countries after having led anti-colonial struggles. Socialist ideas, often pro-
moted as a scientiﬁc way forward, suggested an alternative path to techno-
logical modernity that avoided the exploitative practices of the colonial West.
And nationalists everywhere acted to curb the independent power of the reli-
gious scholars, often by turning them into state employees. They promoted mass
education as the key to modernity and looked to applied scientists to spearhead
development efforts.
None of this was unique to Muslim countries. In the nineteenth century,
Russian and German intellectuals had already explored the consequences of
coming late to modernity. The Japanese and Chinese had confronted the chal-
lenges of importing modern technologies and their accompanying social dis-
locations. Indians, achieving independence around the same time as most
Muslims, wrote aspirations to promote a scientiﬁc temperament into their
constitution. In the mid-twentieth century, an institutionalized separation of
science and religion seemed attractive to dominant elites everywhere.
Politically, the ascendance of a class of professional managers seemed foreor-
dained; it just remained to be worked out whether their vehicle would be state-
led economies or megacorporations.
Meanwhile, the Turkish Revolution had run out of steam. After the Second
World War, Turkey followed a more right-wing trajectory. The ruling conserva-
tives drew support from religious brotherhoods and the Nur movement, and
strengthened institutions such as the schools set up to train religious functionar-
ies. They brought more religion into politics, but also reconciled the largely
devout population to republican institutions (Göle 2000). They adopted anti-
communism, and looked toward the United States as a politically and reli-
giously conservative power that was also at the cutting edge of technology
and modernity.
Turkish elites, however, remained deeply divided. After a coup in 1960,
a more secular style of westernization came back on track. The inadvertent
result was an opening for the political left. Turkey continued to industrialize,
41
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

experienced mass migration to urban centers, and boasted a growing and
inﬂuential class of educated professionals. Signiﬁcant minorities among pro-
fessionals, students, and urban industrial workers were drawn toward social
democratic and socialist politics. They took for granted a vision of progress led
by applied science, and the strict ofﬁcial secularism restored after the coup
allowed them to imagine that religion as a political force was limited to
occasional reactionary outbursts (Landau 1974).
Passive resistance to evolution was still common in mid-century Turkey. But
explicit creationism seemed conﬁned to a small, usually provincial subculture
of ultraorthodox Islam. A science enthusiast could hope that Turks would come
to contribute to the grand human story of scientiﬁc progress, but the main barrier
to such ambitions was economic underdevelopment. After all, Western science
had entered an era of Big Science, where cutting-edge experiments required
massive resources. Scientists from a still poor, still-industrializing country
could only aspire to a supporting role in the international enterprise of science.
Religious conservatives continued to exert political inﬂuence, and were
a leading force in anti-communist organizing. Communism, after all, seemed
to be the shape that the materialist threat took at that moment. A modernity that
contained an alternative to Western capitalism was attractive, but that alterna-
tive had to be found in Islam. More important, by the mid-century, the religious
movements that resisted forced westernization had themselves adopted more
modern forms of organization. They attracted culturally conservative, often
provincially rooted students and professionals. Nascent Islamist political for-
mations throughout the Muslim world became notable for the engineers in their
leadership.
In Turkey, the Nur movement generated the most effective challenge to
establishment views of science and religion. One of their rising leaders,
Fethullah Gülen, denounced evolution and started to acquire more inﬂuence
(Gülen 2011 [1970]). The Nur movement claimed that science and technology
were found in the Quran and attacked those aspects of science, such as evolu-
tion, that were harder to force into a narrative of Quranic miracles. Nur literature
of this period still bore the marks of a conservative religious subculture, but it
was also becoming clear that modern media offered new ways to disseminate
religious messages (Tee 2016).
In the 1970s, Islamists entered coalition governments, making evolution
a minor culture war item, an indirect way of opposing ofﬁcial secularism.
Their inﬂuence, however, was limited to symbolic victories such as inserting
a disclaimer about evolution into some textbooks.
In 1980, a US-backed military coup shifted the political pressures on scien-
tiﬁc and religious institutions. Just over a decade ago, Indonesian conservatives
42
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

had solved their communist problem through mass murder. The Turkish mili-
tary produced less bloodshed, but it also eradicated left-wing political options
(Ozan 2012). Religious conservatives took the opportunity to promote their
vision of cultural restoration – the coup era instituted a policy of “Turkish-
Islamic synthesis” that rejected Darwinian evolution as a materialist error. The
conservative government that eased Turkey back into civilian rule had a strong
Islamist faction who ran the Ministry of Education. The Ministry sought out
recommendations from creationist, Nur movement-connected academics, who
then turned to American creationism for inspiration. As a result, the Ministry
commissioned translations of Christian creationist literature for use in public
schools (Edis 2021b).
In the post-coup Turkey of the 1980s and 1990s, ofﬁcial secularism entered
a state of decay. Islamism not only penetrated governing institutions but, after
the demise of communism, also represented the only viable radical opposition.
Controversies over creation and evolution became regular culture war items
covered by the mass media. Turkey took advantage of European deindustrial-
ization and established itself as a middle-income country. Islamists, when they
held power, promoted creationism and invested in religious education. The
religious schools that had been operating alongside ordinary public schools
had already expanded far beyond the training of religious functionaries; they
now produced Islamist cadres for business and government. The Gülenist
branch of the Nur movement became very inﬂuential, cultivating a “golden
generation” of educated, but devout, elites intended to occupy the pinnacles of
the modern professions such as the applied sciences (Özgür 2012; Weller 2022).
As it came closer to power, Islamist ideology shifted away from protest and
opposition. Turkish conservatives aspired to a cultural counter-revolution, but
found themselves bogged down in compromises. A modernized Islam could
reign, but only if it worked together with business interests and assimilated the
most up-to-date management practices. The alternative, pious, culturally
authentic modernity of the Islamists fused with free market ideologies and
efforts to produce a devout elite to replace the corrupt secularists (Atasoy
2009; Tuğal 2009).
Turkish debates about science and religion, then, became a feature of
a culture war in an environment where all the dynamism was on the side of
the Islamists. Secular intellectuals and scientists in established universities
opposed creationism or notions of Islamizing science, but offered little but
echoes of a discredited ofﬁcial secularism (Sayın and Kence 1999). An assertive
new generation of religious intellectuals favored an apologetics that blended
into media-driven ephemera, televangelism, and the rival religious interpret-
ations of competing religious movements. Islamists throughout the Muslim
43
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

world, however, faced a problem. They clearly were the wave of the future – an
alliance between culturally conservative business leaders, professionals turning
toward religious nationalism, and an urban working class abandoned by secular
liberals had plenty of political potential. But ideologies have to be institutional-
ized. And however sclerotic, an older, more secular stratum of elites remained in
charge of modern institutions. The elites had to be replaced.
4.3 A Pious Modernity
Around the turn of the millennium, Turkish creationism acquired a new look.
A ﬂood of well-produced books, magazines, and visual media products under
the brand name of “Harun Yahya” appeared in the marketplace. Denouncing
evolution as a blatant lie that laid the foundation of all modern evils, the Harun
Yahya material portrayed an international conspiracy to undermine religion and
corrupt morality.
In substance, the Harun Yahya literature was profoundly unserious: it con-
sisted of a barely coherent assembly of complaints derived from Christian and
Muslim popular apologetics. Its centerpiece was creationism, but it also strayed
into messianic fantasies and conspiracy theories (Edis 2021b; Solberg 2013).
Notably, however, this was creationism as a private enterprise, independent of
political parties and controversies over public school curricula. And through the
mass media, this creationism tried to appeal to everyone, shedding most signs of
its origins in a strictly observant subculture.
The Harun Yahya enterprise was the project of a group even most religious
conservatives considered to be a cult. This group was also tied to shady business
dealings, corruption, and even organized crime. Nonetheless, Harun Yahya
captured public attention, and through translation efforts and clever publicity
stunts, acquired some inﬂuence among Muslims outside of Turkey (Lumbard
and Nayed 2010; Riexinger 2009). For a while, Harun Yahya became the
leading image of Islamic creationism: at home in modern media and business,
coupling religious apologetics with a sense of wealth and success in the free
market economy.
Entrepreneurial, media-driven creationism was ﬂashy. But the more import-
ant recent developments in Turkey concern institutional capture. Under con-
tinuous Islamist rule since 2002, a religiously conservative vision of science and
Islam became entrenched in Turkish institutions of science and science educa-
tion. At the same time, Islamists put into practice the latest fashions in business,
ﬁnance, and economics. The Islamists proposed to ﬁnally overcome under-
development: they would realize the dream of commercial wealth and military
power without compromising Muslim culture (Atasoy 2009; Yankaya 2014).
44
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In secondary science education, Islamist rule meant some mild creationism in
textbooks and further expansion of the religious school system to strengthen an
alternative, religion-infused system of education. In order to bring up a pious,
moral generation, history would be related from a religious nationalist point of
view, and science courses would downplay any hints of materialism (Eroler
2019; Yalçınoğlu 2009; Yıldız, Korkmaz, and Doğan 2019).
The Islamists also put higher education and research institutions under
pressure. Efforts to produce religiously conservative cadres of experts in
applied science and business-related ﬁelds had borne fruit. Gülenists, in par-
ticular, produced many of the golden generation of pious professionals who
would carry out the Islamist project. The government stacked the leadership of
scientiﬁc institutions with religious conservatives, often with backgrounds in
applied science. They also founded many new universities, especially in the
provinces. While older universities remained bastions of a secular elite with
separationist views on science and Islam, in the new universities both adminis-
trative and academic personnel tended toward Islamist loyalties (Kaynar and
Parlak 2005; Tekerek 2023). Turkey always had critics of evolution even among
faculty in science and science education departments. During Islamist rule,
rejection of evolution among the professoriate became commonplace.
The political pressure on higher education also fed back into a media-driven
political environment. Unlike the post-Christian West, the intellectual high
culture in Muslim-majority countries remains hospitable to conservative reli-
gious views. When a television program convenes a panel of talking heads to
discuss current affairs or culture war controversies, there are plenty of Islamist
credentialed experts. After all, Islamism is a mainstream view. Educated pro-
fessionals, long the strongest constituency favoring westernization and
a separation between science and religion, now face a challenge from an
Islamist counter-elite.
Among religious intellectuals, evolution is not the only aspect of science that
is suspect. Alternative medicine, for example, has enjoyed a burst of popularity.
Some of this is due to media inﬂuences and westernized professionals experi-
menting with imported New Age notions. Many Islamist writers, however,
criticize modern medicine for its materialism and neglect of spiritual realities.
In any case, cultural authenticity has become a selling point in some corners of
the medical marketplace. Practitioners advertise using leeches and cupping as
traditional Islamic medicine, and ﬁnd plenty of customers (Bulaç 2015: 115–48;
S¸imşek et al. 2017).
Recent events have intensiﬁed the trend toward re-Islamization. A quarrel
between Gülenists and the governing party erupted in a botched 2016 coup
attempt led by Gülenists (Doğan 2019). The ruling faction of Islamists
45
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

responded by purging Gülenists from all institutions. Universities were severely
affected; many secular academics lost their positions along with the Gülenists,
often to be replaced by Islamists more loyal to the ruling party. The government
then completely removed evolution from secondary school curricula, and
directed an increasing share of resources to its favored religious schools.
They even cracked down on the Harun Yahya enterprise and imprisoned its
leaders, seeing it as a group with suspect loyalties.
Turkish creationism, meanwhile, continued to ﬂourish. In 2017, some of the
newer provincial universities started hosting annual International Creation
Congresses, where over multiple days and parallel sessions, academic theolo-
gians, applied scientists, and natural scientists claimed to expose the errors of
evolution and held up hope for an Islamically acceptable natural science that
will uphold morality, rather than encourage nonbelief. These conferences have
attracted support from among the highest ranks of religious ofﬁcials in Turkey
(Edis 2021b).
Such developments are not just external, politically motivated impositions on
academic institutions. In contrast to Western scientists who are often drawn
toward materialism, Turkish scientists, like Muslim scientists worldwide, tend
to be religious believers. They need not be Islamists, and usually favor separate
spheres for science and religion. But unlike their post-Christian counterparts
who often perceive a conﬂict between science and supernatural beliefs, Muslim
scientists usually afﬁrm harmony between science and Islam – much like Indian
scientists who reject the possibility of conﬂict between science and Hindu
convictions (Ecklund et al. 2019).
Moreover, the status of science is different in Muslim countries. The need to
catch up to the West in commercial and military power has promoted an
emphasis on applied science. The best and brightest students go into engineer-
ing, not physics; medicine, not biology. The departments of natural science in
most universities are adjuncts to the training of applied scientists. And the
Islamist version of modernity fully accepts expertise in applied science as
well as all practical, business-adjacent disciplines. Applied scientists tend to
be more religiously and politically conservative than natural scientists
(Gambetta and Hertog 2016: 128–58).
All this has resulted in intellectual environments where concerns about
loyalties are never far from the surface. Apologetic and culturally defensive
enterprises ﬂourish, both among Islamist upstarts and secularists representing
an older establishment. Both academic disputes and public debates keep hover-
ing around the edges of the culture wars. Controversies about Darwin periodic-
ally ﬂare up, mainly because creation and evolution serve as proxies for
46
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Islamism or westernization. Few parties to the debate have been interested in
biology for its own sake.
Together with such an intellectual climate, science in Muslim lands often
suffers from a lack of institutional independence. Ideally, scientists should be
able to pursue questions that arise from debates internal to the scientiﬁc enter-
prise. Due both to resource constraints and to political pressures, Muslim
scientists cannot pursue such questions as frequently as they would like.
Institutionalizing an internal culture of scientiﬁc inquiry has turned out to be
difﬁcult (Determann 2015, Forster 2018).
In the context of Islamist politics, the weakness of natural science need not be
a concern. After all, the Islamist version of alternative modernity embraces all
the useful, money-making aspects of applied science. Disputes over evolution
matter only because of ideological consequences, since denying evolution
rarely affects practical applications such as medicine. Islamists have bet on
escaping a subordinate position in a global economy by combining proﬁciency
at applied science with the social beneﬁts of a unifying religious ideology (Edis
2016; Edis 2020b).
It is hard to judge whether such a gamble can succeed. Moderate Islamists in
Turkey, Indonesia, and Malaysia can point to some accomplishments, but such
countries have also become too mired in corruption to hold up much hope for
Muslims globally. But it is also important not to judge Muslim scientiﬁc
institutions by an impossible ideal of strict intellectual independence. After
all, Western science, which has long represented the best practices, is also
susceptible to political pressures and corrupting inﬂuences. A research scientist
today spends much of her time pursuing grants while working in corporatized
universities that prioritize the production of intellectual property (Mirowski
2011; Sassower 2015). And while traditional religion has weakened in post-
Christian countries, ideological pressures and culture wars have not vanished.
Whatever independence scientiﬁc institutions enjoy is earned through their
service to broader material and ideological interests that stand in tension with
curiosity about how the world works. So far, institutions of science have not fared
well under Islamist rule. But Muslims can still aspire to a pious modernity that
may yet outcompete its Western rival. If any experiment has ambiguous results,
as in Turkey, an Islamist can still hope to learn from the experience and try again.
5 Why Science Doesn’t Matter
5.1 An Unsolvable Problem
Conservative versions of Islam, it might seem, emerge battered from their
encounters with modern knowledge. If science is any guide, popular
47
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

supernatural claims seem dubious, even false. Believers, especially fundamen-
talists, stand their ground. But they mostly produce cheap apologetics and
distortions of science. There are more theological, more sophisticated ways of
deﬂecting criticism. Still, responses that don’t confront science are too often
evasions, protecting religious sentiments by hollowing out their content. And
grandiose dreams of reconstructing science along Islamically acceptable lines
only emphasize the mismatch between cultures of piety and scientiﬁc practices
of critical inquiry.
The Muslim history of grafting scientiﬁc and educational institutions onto
rapidly modernizing societies also does not inspire conﬁdence. Plenty of
Muslims have joined the ranks of technical professionals vital to modern
economies, including scientists. But there is almost nothing that is speciﬁcally
Islamic in the work they produce. When religious and political pressures
inﬂuence scientiﬁc institutions, the result is invariably a mess.
It is then tempting for reformers, especially westernizers, to declare victory in
their long struggle against religious conservatives. Islam should ﬁnd its proper
place in the private sphere and in tight-knit faith communities, becoming an
expression of personal devotion rather than a matter for public evidence and
critical debate. Muslims, whatever their level of piety and observance, can and
should participate in science and contribute to human progress. But religious
scholars and political Islamists should not presume to dictate what are supposed
to be publicly available facts.
There is, however, an alternative story. Modernizing reforms started out as
prescriptions for strengthening Muslim states facing Western colonial domin-
ation. But reform was not merely a response to circumstances, still less
a demand of science. Necessity turned into ideology: westernizers became
enamored of not just of facts and technologies but ideals concerning social
organization, political rights, and moral progress. Their opponents, the defend-
ers of the faith, recognized the ideological aspects of the debate. While acknow-
ledging the need to acquire the power that drove modernity, conservatives
always thought they had to struggle against alien values. And at least to some
extent, the conservatives succeeded. As a faith, as a set of supernatural beliefs,
Islam remains strong. The more signiﬁcant story, then, might be how some
conservative varieties of Islam survived, even thrived, in the face of all the
criticism rooted in science and modern knowledge.
Much has changed: almost all versions of Islam have become modern faiths
that inhabit a modernized world. Muslims today live in cities that look much
like elsewhere on the globe. They chase after dollars and cents and watch soap
operas. Some chafe under dictatorships, but many periodically select between
business-friendly candidates by responding to advertising campaigns. Their
48
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

possessions reﬂect their income much more than their religion. Aside from the
ultraorthodox, even their dress is distinctive mostly in the way that women
usually cover their heads. Traditional modesty has long been made suitable for
a consumer lifestyle by an Islamic fashion industry (Craciun 2017; Fischer
2022).
And yet, compared to the post-Christian West, Muslim supernatural beliefs
and moral convictions remain alive and well. In much of Europe, organized
Christianity has collapsed. Even the population of the United States, after a long
lag, appears to be becoming more secular (McCaffree 2017; Schnabel and Bock
2018). Science and mass science education has contributed to the decline of
Western Christianity, if only by making supernatural forces less plausible for
many people. Sociologists who study European secularization, however, allow
science only a minor, indirect role. Liberal individualism, material security, and
the bureaucratic rationalization of everyday life are far more effective. Post-
Christian consumers are not scientiﬁc materialists. They have, nonetheless, lost
interest in organized religion (Bruce 2017).
Many conservative Muslim thinkers express pride that for all their troubles,
their parts of the world have so far escaped that fate. The premodern networks of
independent scholars have declined. But there are new sets of religious experts,
new generations of the faithful eager to learn what is permitted and what is
forbidden. The call to prayer still echoes in the streets, and believers still ﬁll the
mosques. Faith ﬂourishes online (Çamdereli, Doğan, and S¸ener 2015).
Sociologists, who used to expect that modernity would lead to secularization
everywhere, today debate desecularization and point to prominent examples
from the Muslim world (Berger 1999; Keskin 2011).
For conservatives who celebrate resistance to secularization, aspects of
traditional Islam that draw criticism from westernizers can look like strengths.
Responding to criticism by evasion or apologetic maneuvers are not virtues in
a scientiﬁc setting. Philosophers of science may recognize them as immunizing
strategies that protect beliefs from failure (Boudry and Braeckman 2011). But
then, any ideology that coordinates belief and action at a large scale needs
a healthy immune system.
If debates over science and religion concerned just the facts, Islam could long
ago have become a watered-down personal spirituality and a matter of individ-
ual conscience. In a narrowly academic context, it still looks like Suﬁmasters
cannot violate the laws of physics, or that unguided evolution best explains the
data of biology. But in a world where science matters because of its practical
uses, it is almost impossible to isolate views about science from political
loyalties and moral concerns. And today, once the debate on science and
49
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Islam becomes a public spectacle channeled through the mass media, it just
becomes fuel to an endless culture war.
Again, westernizers, overrepresented among professionals who make a living
off their expertise, may deplore the inability of science and religion to keep to
their own spheres. But the boundaries are blurry. A more conservative Muslim,
for example, might expect traditional morality to be reﬂected in the created
nature of humans (Edis and Bix 2005). It does no good to simply declare that
biology is separate from morality. Moreover, intellectual life always harbors
purposes other than just obtaining the facts. Scientiﬁc, aesthetic, moral, com-
mercial, or therapeutic interests are entwined together in all intellectual enter-
prises, and these interests regularly conﬂict with one another.
Sometimes multiple interests will align. In the emergency brought on by
Western colonialism, importing accurate knowledge and putting applied science
to work deeply mattered for all Muslim elites. But any success in defending
Muslim lands, any partial westernization, also created conditions where con-
ﬂicts of interest could again rise to the surface. Science, in the sense of obtaining
an accurate picture of the world, is always one interest among many. In fact,
science, for most participants in debates over science and Islam, has had
a strictly instrumental value: Muslims had to get the practically signiﬁcant
facts right in order to serve deeper interests, in order to shape the world into
the way it ought to be. Accuracy for its own sake might satisfy idle curiosity. But
no more (Edis and Boudry 2019). Science, in other words, fundamentally does
not matter.
A multiplicity of misaligned interests is a problem. Religious thinkers offer
a solution. After all, the true religion is supposed to point toward the transcend-
ent unity beyond any surface appearances of moral chaos. At the level of some
inscrutable divine purpose, human interests in accuracy, morality, beauty, and
happiness converge onto a harmonious whole. If a true believer is bothered by
the apparent mismatch between Islam and science, she must redouble her efforts
to reveal the deeper harmony.
Westernizers have usually tried to contain the moral chaos through enforcing
separate spheres. But the boundaries are ever porous. The more conventionally
devout eventually insist that the unseen will become manifest in the miraculous,
that the divine moral order must be reﬂected in worldly politics. Westernizers
often interpret such demands as irruptions of medieval irrationality. If so, they
may even support a kind of liberal authoritarianism, where such irrationality has
to be suppressed to achieve progress and liberty (Bayraklı and Hafez 2018; Bose
2018). As an ideology to harmonize interests and impose order upon chaos,
liberalism is as good as any. But westernizers have also habitually equated their
ideologies with science and reason. That is an overstatement at best.
50
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

If moral chaos happens to be a fact of life, then there is no resolution to
debates about science and religion. There is no transcendent harmony of
interests to reconcile a multiplicity of legitimate purposes. But human societies
still have to cope with the disharmony. Belief systems that help societies cope
will very likely incorporate useful falsehoods. After all, beliefs have costs and
beneﬁts. A rougher, more approximate description, for example, can be easier to
acquire and use when compared to a more accurate model. Separate spheres
may be intellectually dubious, but it can also lead to quick and clear decisions in
legal contexts. Moreover, expressions of belief often signal loyalties.
Sacriﬁcing accurate knowledge may very well, on balance, be rational if it
helps believers maintain religious networks of mutual aid (Edis and Boudry
2019).
They might not be literally true in a narrow academic sense, but the various
mainstream views Muslims have adopted about science and religion all repre-
sent at least partial successes. It is interesting to ask whether any view of science
and Islam is correct. But there is also another question: since beliefs answer to
multiple conﬂicting interests, which approach on offer has the better prospects
for cultural reproduction? It is worth speculating about the future of debates on
science and Islam. Will the competition between conservatives and westernizers
continue to frame the issue, or might any new approaches take the stage?
5.2 Ever More Western
Historically, westernizers have endorsed many of the science-based criticisms
of traditional supernatural beliefs. Today’s westernized, professional-class
Muslims rarely pray at the shrines of Suﬁsaints, and they have almost aban-
doned beliefs in jinn. They may not deny the existence of angels, but they think
that angelic visitations are very unusual. Proper religion keeps its focus on
moral and ritual concerns, and it is pretty easygoing in what it demands in such
matters. The institutions of science and religion each sustain their own sets of
proper experts, who should not intrude into each other’s domains.
This is an attractive pragmatism that promises to make use of both the latest
scientiﬁc knowledge and the best of religious tradition. There may be different
intellectual purposes to pursue, and it might not be possible to satisfy all
purposes at once. But that should not prevent Muslims from adopting sensible
compromises. Neither materialists who insist that science is the only reliable
guide to reality, nor zealots who trace all truth to their sacred texts, will be
satisﬁed with a liberal settlement. But there are few such people. Most Muslims
have sought a middle path, pursuing worldly success as well as reassurance for
an afterlife.
51
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In practice, the constituency for the happy compromise represented by
a liberal settlement between science and Islam has also remained small. The
ideologically westernized part of Muslim populations rarely commands major-
ity support. The older generation of Muslim elites who led struggles for
independence and then took over the apparatus of modern Muslim states were
often committed westernizers. Their descendants today still enjoy considerable
power and inﬂuence – they have not been fully displaced by Islamist counter-
elites. They are, however, no longer in charge.
Today’s secular elites are even more thoroughly westernized. They are part of
a mobile, global professional class, where a Pakistani engineer might routinely
work with an Egyptian designer, together with others of diverse religions and
national backgrounds. Such professionals enjoy similar educations that instill
a common conventional wisdom about science and religion. Nonetheless, most
Muslim countries still have distinctly subordinate roles in the global economy.
Therefore, secular Muslim professionals are often caught between loyalty to the
nationalisms of older generations and their present status as part of a privileged
international elite, integrated with a liberal empire led by the United States.
The religion of this liberal, educated class is, unsurprisingly, eclectic.
Professionals tend to favor spiritualities that are individualist and therapeutic,
rather than rooted in tight-knit communities. Bookstores in Turkish cities will
stock books on business success and managing stress that have an Islamic twist
(Koşar 2013). But there will also be translations from Western authors who
sprinkle their lifestyle advice with New Age spiritual nostrums. Astrology
cycles in and out of fashion. Urban professionals may also experiment with
beliefs such as karma or psychic powers. Traditional expressions of Islam,
however, are associated with Islamists, or worse, a premodern peasantry.
Modernized derivatives of Suﬁsm, offering a range of levels of commitment
suitable for busy consumers, are more attractive (Cengiz, Küçükural and Gür
2021).
Within secular liberal social bubbles, science has positive associations: it
remains a symbol of human progress. Culturally, older generations of western-
izers were often stranded between East and West. Their heirs today, now fully
westernized, usually oppose claims such as creationism, mainly as a way of
taking the liberal side in the culture wars.
Liberal attitudes toward Islam, however, have not spread far beyond educated
professionals. And Islamists have challenged the control of education enjoyed
by the older generation of westernizers. A liberal settlement certainly remains
a leading, widely respected position on science and Islam. But it risks stagna-
tion. Westernized Muslims asserting their conventional wisdom on the proper
52
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

places of science and Islam may ﬁnd that they persuade few people outside of
their own social circles.
One possible novelty might be to reject what once seemed to be a sensible
compromise. Taking science-based criticisms of supernatural beliefs more
seriously, some among a new generation of westernized liberals might sever
all allegiances to Islam. They might even revive materialism.
When Marxism was still a viable ideology, materialism had a noticeable
constituency. Many intellectuals used Marxism, with its dubious claims to
social scientiﬁc status, to give some moral depth to the purposeless universe
described by the natural sciences. The religious scholars, the landlords, and the
new classes of industrial capitalists and ﬁnanciers represented not divine justice
but bondage and exploitation. Leftist ideals of an alternative modernity and
progress for the working classes, however, were continually repressed and
eventually completely defeated. Marxist versions of religious doubt and materi-
alism lost their plausibility. Notoriously, in many Muslim countries, former
Marxists reemerged as Islamists, now pressing for social equality as an Islamic
demand for justice. They were then defeated once again, as conservative,
enthusiastically capitalist varieties of Islamism achieved power (Bardawil
2020; Tuğal 2009).
And yet, today there are some signs of renewed religious dissent. Religious
doubt has been rare in Muslim societies; skepticism about all supernatural
claims has been rarer still. The Muslim philosophical tradition has never
generated a serious form of religious nonbelief (Akhtar 2008). Traditional
Islam, with its death penalty for apostasy and insistence on community loyalty,
has made dissent dangerous and doubt socially invisible. Until recently, imper-
fect survey data showed a level of atheism of about 1 percent or less in Muslim
populations. People who describe themselves as religiously indifferent or unob-
servant have hovered around 15 percent in non-Arab countries such as Turkey
and Indonesia and stood at less than 10 percent in most Arab countries (Schielke
2013). Lately, though the surveys are usually journalistic rather than social
scientiﬁc in quality, it appears these numbers may be growing, including in
notoriously conservative Arab countries (Arab World in Seven Charts 2020).
Even in countries such as Turkey, where Islamists have enjoyed success, there
are some signs of secularization (Ertit 2018). Alarmed commentators in popular
media have expressed worries about a trend toward denial of core Muslim
beliefs among noticeable numbers of young people.
It is hard to interpret all this. No doubt, some of this increased rejection of
religion is due to the way that Islam has become as much a political identity as
a common cultural background. Opposition to Islamist politics may well be
channeled into slightly elevated levels of religious dissent. Furthermore, some
53
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

among increasingly urban populations, with weaker community ties, have
drifted in a more socially liberal direction. Many younger nonbelievers not
only express moral disagreement with more conservative versions of Islam,
they are also not satisﬁed with the compromises made by earlier generations of
westernizers.
And then there is the internet. While televangelists and apologists have taken
advantage of the new communication technologies, so have critics of traditional
Islam, making counter-apologetics easily available. Muslims who question their
inherited religion can now readily locate skeptical arguments online. They can
ﬁnd support from like-minded dissidents without compromising their anonym-
ity. Common counter-apologetic arguments, which closely resemble the litera-
ture dissenting from Christianity, regularly draw on modern science,
particularly evolution, to undermine the Muslim perception of a divinely
designed universe. Some religious commentators point to perceptions of
a conﬂict between science and Islam as a major reason for increasing doubt
(Chouhoud 2016; Malik 2018).
A revival of materialism, therefore, has become possible. However, science-
based criticisms of supernatural beliefs are only part of the newly visible
arguments against Islam. Dissent appears driven largely by moral discomfort
with traditional practices and Islamist politics. Even when arguments against
religion have more substance, they tend to raise ancient metaphysical conun-
drums. For example, unlike Christianity, the problem of reconciling suffering
with a divinely created universe has not been prominent in the Islamic philo-
sophical and theological tradition. Today, there is renewed popular interest in
whether the evils of the world are compatible with divine purpose (Edis 2021c).
None of this, however, requires much interest in science. Nonbelievers who
grapple with the way that materialism tends to make all comprehensive moral
frameworks insecure are even rarer.
It is therefore very difﬁcult to predict how the current forms of religious
dissent might affect long-standing debates about science and Islam. Nonbelief
has become more visible, but it is still conﬁned to a small minority, and it is
largely reactive in nature. The Marxist materialists of old had ambitions to draw
in the working class. They were mistaken in their expectations: suspicions of
religious deviance always undercut support for leftist politics among Muslims.
Today’s expressions of religious dissent are much more individualist and
identitarian in character. Therefore, they are likely to be politically inconse-
quential, except as an ingredient for more culture wars.
Nonbelief among cultural Muslims appears to be largely a form of ultraliberal
moral conviction, rather than a stance inspired directly by modern science. And
right now, all versions of liberal Islam are caught up in the present crisis of
54
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Muslim secularism. The post-independence secular regimes in Muslim coun-
tries have failed to develop much appeal beyond the more westernized factions
of educated professionals. Varieties of secular liberal views of science and
religion, whether separate spheres or some kind of science-inspired material-
ism, depend on the political fortunes of the professional class and the modern
state. Nothing about that situation has fundamentally changed.
In the more medium-term future, a more serious problem is the prospect of
environmental catastrophe (Bradshaw et al. 2021). Westernized Muslims are
invested in the fortunes of political liberalism, from its ideals of progress to its
international imperial order. Since the impetus for westernization was catching
up to Western technology and power, a mindset of growth and development at
all costs prevails. Environmental interests are largely boutique lifestyle
concerns.
Muslim critics of amoral Western science often point to environmental
degradation as a consequence of the exploitative nature of Western science
(Saniotis 2012; Sardar 2006: 91–107). Such criticism is opportunistic – the
recent Islamist environmental record has been typical of capitalist development
everywhere. Nonetheless, the practical problem our environmental predicament
poses for liberals remains. Without steady economic growth, without the con-
sumerist forms of progress, much of the plausibility of a liberal settlement will
vanish.
Westernizers have been driven by the long emergency of having to catch up to
the industrialized colonial powers. They have had little opportunity to reﬂect on
whether
ever-intensifying
extractive
development
was
a
good
idea.
Environmental crises such as climate change are likely to leave westernized
Muslims with fewer rationales for their culture war positions. As circumstances
change, the older compromises will not be as practical anymore.
5.3 A Useful Mess
From the start, Muslim debates about science and religion have been closely
linked to the question of how much of Islamic civilization had to be sacriﬁced in
order to assimilate the new knowledge. Conservatives wanted to keep western-
ization to a minimum. At the beginning of the debates, it was not clear exactly
what this minimum was. Today, after more than two centuries of modernization
efforts, perhaps it is easier to decide where to draw the line.
The westernizers have been correct that traditional Muslim cultures pre-
sented too many obstacles for science and technology. Even so, some very
traditional forms of faith remain attractive. The older, hierarchical concept of
knowledge, often linked to mystical practices and an otherworldly orientation,
55
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

may seem just the antidote to modern disillusionment. A more traditional
approach promises a uniﬁed picture of reality that answers to the deepest
aspirations of believers, integrated with a way of life that demands piety and
self-discipline.
Religious brotherhoods still offer such a way of life (Raudvere and Stenberg
2009). There are practical advantages as well: in a modern economy, brother-
hoods can provide a form of solidarity that competes with meritocratic indi-
vidualism. To professional-class liberals, such solidarity appears as a form of
corruption. Nonetheless, brotherhoods do not just provide material advantages –
piety holds everything together. Believers can ﬁnd a conviction of profound
truths, moral enlightenment, and personal contentment. The problem remains,
however, that thoroughly supernatural conceptions of reality are at odds with
modern science. They are technologically sterile.
The most insistently Islamic ways of life, then, are likely to be conﬁned to
communities of religious overachievers. Such enclaves of piety usually rely on
a wider circle of more worldly believers, including businessmen and profes-
sionals, to support their enterprise. As long as there are enough who can take
care of the technical aspects of modern life, enclaves can ﬂourish.
Such focused communities are not a historical novelty. Ordinary Muslims
have most often been on the outskirts of communities of intense devotion, not in
their inner circle. But today, maintaining a way of life that supports traditional
concepts of knowledge is more complicated. Classical Islamic civilization is
irretrievably lost. Muslims no longer live in environments where supernatural
perceptions of the universe are virtually unchallenged. There still are plenty of
religious experts, often academics, who defend a traditional ideal. But to
outsiders, their efforts look like exercises in intellectual nostalgia. In any case,
today, Muslims who are disturbed by a mismatch between science and religion
have other options.
The main competition to traditionalists comes from those who might be
broadly called Islamists. Islamism often appears to be an ideology with little
concern about science and theology, beyond its tendency toward fundamental-
ism. Politically, however, even when not in power, Islamists have captured the
imagination of Muslims worldwide. Mainstream conservatives and religious
nationalists everywhere have come to reﬂect something of the Islamist attitudes
toward modernity. And moderate, business-friendly Islamism has stumbled
onto its own ideas about what to take from the West and what to reject (Edis
2016).
The moderate Islamist position on science is hard to pin down. Compared to
traditionalists, Islamists are less concerned with a uniﬁed religious vision. In
fact, views on science that travel together with political Islam are something of
56
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a jumble. We have creationism, prophetic medicine, cheap miracles – a motley
collection of apologetic strategies and pseudosciences that are shaped by
a competition for media attention as much as any roots in Muslim tradition.
The vision of a science harmonious with Islam, shaped by devout applied
scientists and entrepreneurs of belief, is most often populist, opportunist, even
superﬁcial in character. A sympathetic observer might call this vision eclectic;
a more severe critic would consider it incoherent. It is a bit of a mess.
The moderate Islamist option also accepts a vast amount of westernization.
For example, Muslims everywhere have largely adopted modern ﬁnancial
institutions, including banking and corporations, even though they are not
recognized in traditional Islamic law. The sacred texts frown on charging
interest, but no Muslim faction with credible claims to running a modern
economy can avoid it. Therefore, some very conservative Muslims have
engaged in all the creative reinterpretation and rule-bending necessary to
make this happen (Kuran 2004; Kuran 2011). Islamist ideology would not be
conceivable without considerable prior westernization. Some scholars even
argue that in a backhanded way, Islamism has been a secularizing force in
Muslim societies (Iqtidar 2011; Kazemipur 2022).
One problem with such extensive adoption of modern ways is that claims of
cultural authenticity start ringing hollow – the illusion of authenticity comes
from pouring Muslim sauce over Western substance. Some will wear European
dress and add a headscarf, others will embrace electrical engineering and
promote creationism.
There is, however, a pattern behind the Western ways embraced by conser-
vatives. Modern economies have meant not just new technologies but new
forms of social organization that affect even the roles of the sexes and the
structure of families. Here, Western countries have tended toward a liberal
individualism suspicious of all unchosen encumbrances, including faith and
family. Most Muslims have responded differently. Moderate Islamists have
been very effective in politically mobilizing conservative women, and have
promoted a more conservative ideal for the sexes. Women, in their view, must
be modest and pious but can still be publicly active and engaged in the profes-
sions. This is very different from a more rigidly traditional ideal that tends to
seclude women in the private family compound.
So the headscarf may not be so superﬁcial after all. Conservative Muslims
hope to modernize in a way that protects family ties and sex roles. Islamic
feminists try to reinterpret sacred texts to further the interests of women,
criticizing how religious expertise has usually been monopolized by men. But
most Muslim feminists are not interested in promoting a liberal conception of
individual autonomy above all. They remain committed to faith, family, and the
57
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

complementarity of the sexes. While modern Muslims experiment with new
arrangements to meet today’s economic demands, they also resist Western
ideologies that corrode a more Muslim way of life (Edis 2016: 133–66;
Mahmood 2001).
Conservative Muslim approaches to science are similar. Science is useful.
Technology is vital. Nonetheless, science does not matter enough to put central
supernatural convictions at risk. In that case, what outsiders might perceive as
eclecticism or incoherence is perhaps better understood as a willingness to
experiment. Muslims who do not retreat into pious enclaves also have to
immunize their beliefs from challenges, often by wrapping important beliefs
in protective layers of pseudoscience. The result looks like a mess, since what
works to protect core beliefs is not always obvious, and can change with time
and circumstances. Discovering what works requires experimentation.
In time, if industrial civilization avoids self-destruction, even the Muslim
sauce poured on top of modern practices might transform what it covers. What
starts out as fake science might evolve into more sophisticated theological
means of evading criticism. For now, however, we should still expect something
of a mess.
In any case, it is not just conservative Muslims who ﬁnd themselves pulled in
many different directions. I have to confess to some of that myself. By tempera-
ment and by training, I am a physics chauvinist. My sympathies, therefore, are
with materialism. I grew up in a social bubble dominated by westernizers;
embracing Western ways comes naturally to me. But my views are not popular
among Muslims, and so I sometimes have to resort to stereotypical separate
spheres rhetoric, even though it has serious intellectual ﬂaws.
A few years ago, in an introductory physics class, I started discussing
quantum mechanics, pointing out how it presents us with a microscopic world
that operates randomly. One of my students then blurted out a question: but then,
what about God? In the American Midwestern university where I teach, most
students are Christian or secular. This student was Muslim. And she recognized,
perhaps, the difﬁculty that randomness poses when the world was supposed to
be a product of divine design.
At ﬁrst, it seemed that this was a great question. Here was a student really
paying attention, not passively ﬁling what I said into a box labeled “for the
physics exam” but recognizing connections with her other interests. I could
even have interpreted the question as an invitation to mount one of my favorite
hobbyhorses.
But then again, I wanted my students to learn physics. If my questioner felt
her religion challenged, she could become less enthusiastic about science.
I don’t want to help produce more creationists. And any amount of time
58
Islam and the Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I spent exploring the question would be less time for me to help all my students
understand some very tricky physics to follow.
So I didn’t take any risks. I said that the issue was interesting, but physicists
tended not to talk about religion. There were a few Christian and Muslim
theologians who addressed the question, and I would be happy to suggest
some books to anyone who would ask later. I did not mention that I was not
impressed with such theological efforts. And then I moved on to a calculation
that was relevant for the coming exam.
For anyone who has an overwhelming interest in satisfying their curiosity,
science will matter a lot. For the rest of us, even in the science classroom, there
are many competing interests to balance, and we may ﬁnd ourselves in a bit of
a mess. For most Muslims today, well satisﬁed with their faith and caught up in
the practical problems of modern life, science does not matter very much.
59
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
Abbot, D., Bikfalvi, A., Bleske-Rechek, A. et al. (2023). In defense of merit in
science. Journal of Controversial Ideas, 3(1), 1.
Abu-Rabi, I. M., ed. (2003). Islam at the Crossroads: On the Life and Thought
of Bediuzzaman Said Nursi. Albany: State University of New York Press.
AbuSulayman, A., ed. (1989). Islamization of Knowledge: General Principles
and Work Plan, 2d ed. Herndon: International Institute of Islamic Thought.
Açıkgenç, A. (2016). Philosophy of science in epistemological perspective. In
M. H. Kamali, O. Bakar, D. A. Batchelor, & R. Hashim, eds., Islamic
Perspectives on Science and Technology: Selected Conference Papers.
Singapore: Springer, pp. 59–74.
Akhtar, S. (2008). The Quran and the Secular Mind: A Philosophy of Islam.
New York: Routledge.
Akhtar, S. (2018). The performance of Islamic countries’ ﬁnancial and
economic systems since the 1990s. In Ö. Ü. Eriş, & A. S. İkiz, eds.,
The Political Economy of Muslim Countries, Newcastle: Cambridge
Scholars, pp. 35–63.
Akhter, S. (2009). Faith and Philosophy of Islam. Delhi: Kalpaz Publications.
Aksa, F. I. (2020). Islamic perspectives in disaster: An alternative to changing
fatalistic attitudes. Jamba, 12(1), 942.
Al-Hassani, S. T. S., Woodcock, E., & Saoud, R., eds. (2012). 1001 Inventions:
Muslim Heritage in Our World, Manchester: Foundation for Science,
Technology and Civilisation.
Ali, M. M. (2007). Liberal Islam: an analysis. American Journal of Islamic
Social Sciences, 24(2), 44–70.
Alperen, A. (2003). Sosyolojik Açıdan Türkiye’de İslam ve Modernleşme:
Çağımız İslam Dünyasında Modernleşme Hareketleri ve Türkiye’deki
Etkileri. Adana: Karahan Kitabevi.
The Arab World in Seven Charts: Are Arabs Turning Their Backs on Religion?
(2019). BBC News (June 24), www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-
48703377 (accessed October 9, 2022).
Ashgar, A., Hameed, S., & Farahani, N. K. (2014). Evolution in biology
textbooks: a comparative analysis of 5 Muslim countries. Religion and
Education, 41(1), 1–15.
Asghar, A., Wiles, J. R., & Alters, B. (2010). The origin and evolution of life in
Pakistani high school biology. Journal of Biological Education, 44(2),
65–71.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Atasoy, Y. (2009). Islam‘s Marriage with Neoliberalism: State Transformation
in Turkey. New York: Palgrave McMillan.
Ateş, S. (1991). Gerçek Din Bu, vol. 1. İstanbul: Yeni Ufuklar Neşriyat.
Auda, J. (2021). Re-envisioning Islamic Scholarship: Maqasid Methodology as
a New Approach. Milpitas: Claritas Books.
Awaru, A. O. T., Salam, R., Torro, S., & Suhaeb, F. W. (2021). The Islamization
of the social sciences: A review. GNOSI, 4(3), 24–41.
Aydın, H. (2021a). İslam Kültüründe Felsefenin Krizi ve Aydınlanma Sorunu.
Bursa: Sentez Yayıncılık.
Aydın, H. (2021b). Eleştirel Aklın Işığında Postmodernizm ve Yansımaları.
Bursa: Sentez Yayıncılık.
Aydın, M. S. (2000). İslâm’ın Evrenselliği. İstanbul: Ufuk Kitapları.
Aysan, A. F., Babacan, M., Gur, N., & Karahan, H., eds. (2018). Turkish
Economy: Between Middle Income Trap and High Income Status. Cham:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Bacik, G. (2021). Contemporary Rationalist Islam in Turkey: The Religious
Opposition to Sunni Revival. London: I. B. Tauris.
Bakar, O. (1998). Classiﬁcation of Knowledge in Islam: A Study in Islamic
Philosophies of Science. Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society.
Bakar, O. (1999). The History and Philosophy of Islamic Science. Cambridge:
Islamic Texts Society.
Bakar, O. (2005). Gülen on religion and science: A theological perspective. The
Muslim World 95(3), 359–72.
Bardawil, F. A. (2020). Revolution and Disenchantment: Arab Marxism and the
Binds of Emancipation. Durham: Duke University Press.
Bashford, A., & Levine, P., eds. (2010). The Oxford Handbook of the History of
Eugenics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Batchelor, D. A. (2017). Adam and Eve’s origin: A theory harmonising scien-
tiﬁc evidence with the Qur’anic text. Theology and Science, 15(4), 490–508.
Bayrakdar, M. (1987). İslam’da Evrimci Yaradılış Teorisi. İstanbul: İnsan
Yayınları.
Bayraklı, E., & Hafez, F., eds. (2018). Islamophobia in Muslim Majority
Societies. London: Routledge.
Bell, J., Lugo, L., Cooperman, A. et al. (2013). The World’s Muslims: Religion,
Politics and Society. Washington: Pew Research Center.
Berger, P. L., ed. (1999). The Desecularization of the World: Resurgent Religion
and World Politics. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans.
Berkes, N. (1998). The Development of Secularism in Turkey. New York:
Routledge.
61
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bigliardi, S. (2011). Snakes from staves? science, scriptures and the supernat-
ural in Maurice Bucaille. Zygon, 46, 793–805.
Bigliardi, S. (2014). The contemporary debate on the harmony between Islam
and science: Emergence and challenges of a new generation. Social
Epistemology, 28(2), 167–86.
Bigliardi, S. (2017). The “scientiﬁc miracle of the Qur’ān,” pseudoscience, and
conspiracism. Zygon 52(1), 146–71.
Blackford, R. (2016). The Mystery of Moral Authority. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Blake, S. P. (2016). Astronomy and Astrology in the Islamic World. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Bose, S. (2018). Secular States, Religious Politics: India, Turkey, and the
Future of Secularism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boucher, S. C. (2020). Methodological naturalism in the sciences. International
Journal for Philosophy of Religion, 88, 57–80.
Boudry, M., Blancke, S., & Braeckman, J. (2012). Grist to the mill of
anti-evolutionism: the failed strategy of ruling the supernatural out of science
by philosophical ﬁat. Science & Education, 21, 1151–65.
Boudry, M., & Braeckman, J. (2011). Immunizing strategies and epistemic
defense mechanisms. Philosophia, 39, 145–61.
Bradshaw, C. J. A., Ehrlich, P. R., Beattie, A., et al. (2021). Underestimating the
challenges of avoiding a ghastly future. Frontiers in Conservation Science, 1,
615419.
Brentjes, S., Edis, T., & Richter-Bernburg, L., eds. (2016). 1001 Distortions:
How (Not) to Narrate History of Science, Medicine, and Technology in Non-
Western Cultures. Würtzburg: Ergon-Verlag.
Brown, C. M., ed. (2020). Asian Religious Responses to Darwinism:
Evolutionary Theories in Middle Eastern, South Asian and East Asian
Cultural Contexts. Dordrecht: Springer.
Brown, R. G., & Ladyman, J. (2019). Materialism: A Historical and
Philosophical Inquiry. London: Routledge.
Bruce, S. (2008). Fundamentalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bruce, S. (2017). Secular Beats Spiritual: The Westernization of the
Easternization of the West. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bulaç, A. (2015). İnsanın Özgürlük Arayışı. İstanbul: İnkılap Kitabevi.
Bulğen, M. (2019). The criticism of materialism in late Ottoman’s new science
of kalām, ULUM, 2(1), 133–67.
Burçak, B. (2008). Modernization, science and engineering in the early nine-
teenth century Ottoman Empire. Middle Eastern Studies, 44(1), 69–83.
62
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Burton, E. K. (2010). Teaching evolution in Muslim states: Iran and Saudi
Arabia compared. Reports of the National Center for Science Education,
30(3), 28–32.
Çalışkan, M. T., ed. (2020). Kur’an ve Pozitif Bilim. İstanbul: KURAMER
Yayınları.
Çamdereli, M., Doğan, B. Ö., & S¸ener, N. K., eds. (2015). Dijitalleşen Din.
İstanbul: Köprü Kitapları.
Campbell, B., & Manning, J. (2018). The Rise of Victimhood Culture:
Microaggressions, Safe Spaces, and the New Culture Wars. Cham:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Carlisle, J., Hameed, S., & Elsdon-Baker, F. (2019). Muslim perceptions of
biological evolution: A critical review of quantitative and qualitative
research. In S. H. Jones, R. Catto, & T. Kaden, eds., Science, Belief and
Society: International Perspectives on Religion, Non-Religion and the Public
Understanding of Science. Bristol: Bristol University Press, pp. 147–170.
Cengiz, K., Küçükural, Ö., & Gür, H. (2021). Türkiye’de Spiritüel Arayışlar
Deizm, Yoga, Budizm, Meditasyon, Reiki vb. İstanbul: İletişim Yayınları.
Chester, D. K., Duncan, A. M., & Al Ghasyah Dhanhani, H. (2013). Volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes and Islam. Disaster Prevention and Management,
22(3), 278–92.
Chouhoud, Y. (2016). Modern pathways to doubt in Islam. Yaqeen Institute for
Islamic Research, https://yaqeeninstitute.org/youssef-chouhoud/modern-
pathways-to-doubt-in-islam (accessed October 9, 2022).
Coyne, J. A. (2016). Faith Versus Fact: Why Science and Religion Are
Incompatible. New York: Penguin Books.
Craciun, M. (2017). Islam, Faith, and Fashion: The Islamic Fashion Industry in
Turkey. London: Bloomsbury.
Dajani, R. (2015). Why I teach evolution to Muslim students. Nature, 520, 409.
Dalaman, Z. B. (2021). From secular Muslim feminism to Islamic feminism(s)
and new generation Islamic feminists in Egypt, Iran and Turkey. Border
Crossing, 11(1), 77–91.
Dallal, A. S. (2010). Islam, Science, and the Challenge of History. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Dasgupta, S. (2014). Science studies “sans” science: Two cautionary postcolo-
nial tales. Social Scientist, 42(5/6), 43–61.
Dembski, W. A., & Witt, J. (2010). Intelligent Design Uncensored: An Easy-to-
Understand Guide to the Controversy. Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press.
Demirdağ, S., & Khalifa, M. (2020). The effects of westernization efforts on the
Turkish education system. International Journal of Educational Research
Review, 5(3), 165–77.
63
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Dennett, D. C. (2017). Darwin and the overdue demise of essentialism. In
D. L. Smith, ed., How Biology Shapes Philosophy: New Foundations for
Naturalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 9–22.
Determann, J. M. (2015). Researching Biology and Evolution in the Gulf States:
Networks of Science in the Middle East. London: I. B. Tauris.
Doğan, R. (2019). Political Islamists in Turkey and the Gülen Movement.
Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
Doko, E. (2021). Islam and evolution: A defense. Kader, 19(3), 899–913.
Dreger, A. (2015). Galileo’s Middle Finger: Heretics, Activists, and the Search
for Justice in Science. New York: Penguin.
Ecklund E. H., Johnson, D. R, Vaidyanathan, B. et al. (2019). Secularity and
Science: What Scientists around the World Really Think about Religion.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Edis, T., & Bix, A. S. (2005). Biology and “created nature”: Gender and the
body in popular Islamic literature from modern Turkey and the West. Arab
Studies Journal, 12(2)/13(1), 140–58.
Edis, T. (2002). The Ghost in the Universe: God in Light of Modern Science.
Amherst: Prometheus Books.
Edis, T. (2007). An Illusion of Harmony: Science and Religion in Islam.
Amherst: Prometheus Books.
Edis, T. (2008). Science and Nonbelief. Amherst: Prometheus Books.
Edis, T. (2009). Muslim resistance to Darwinian evolution. In J. Seckbach, &
R. Gordon, eds., Divine Action and Natural Selection: Science, Faith and
Evolution. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, pp. 519–32.
Edis, T. (2016). Islam Evolving: Radicalism, Reformation, and the Uneasy
Relationship with the Secular West. Amherst: Prometheus Books.
Edis, T. (2018a). Two cheers for scientism. In M. Boudry, & M. Pigliucci, eds.,
Science Unlimited? The Challenges of Scientism. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 73–94.
Edis, T. (2018b). From creationism to economics: how far should analyses of
pseudoscience extend? Mètode Science Studies Journal, 8, 141–47.
Edis, T. (2019). Cosmic conspiracy theories: how theologies evade science. In
J. Seckbach, & R. Gordon, eds., Theology and Science: From Genesis to
Astrobiology. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, pp. 143–66.
Edis, T. (2020a). A revolt against expertise: pseudoscience, right-wing populism,
and post-truth politics. Disputatio Philosophical Research Bulletin, 9(13), 67–95.
Edis, T. (2020b). The politics of Islamic opposition to evolution in Turkey. In
C. M. Brown, ed., Asian Religious Responses to Darwinism: Evolutionary
Theories in Middle Eastern, South Asian, and East Asian Cultural Contexts.
Cham: Springer, pp. 19–36.
64
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Edis, T. (2021a). Weirdness!: What Fake Science and the Paranormal Tell Us
About the Nature of Science. Durham: Pitchstone.
Edis, T. (2021b). The Turkish model of Islamic creationism. Almagest, 12,
40–65.
Edis, T. (2021c). Doubt and submission: why evil is a minor problem for Islam.
In J. W. Loftus, ed., God and Horrendous Suffering. Denver: GCRR Press,
pp. 304–25.
Edis, T., & Bix, A. S. (2016). Flights of fancy: The “1001 inventions” exhibition
and popular misrepresentations of medieval Muslim science and technology.
In S. Brentjes, T. Edis, & L. Richter-Bernburg, eds., 1001 Distortions: How
(Not) to Narrate History of Science, Medicine, and Technology in Non-
Western Cultures. Würtzburg: Ergon-Verlag, pp. 189–200.
Edis, T., & Boudry, M. (2014). Beyond physics? on the prospects of ﬁnding
a meaningful oracle. Foundations of Science, 19(4), 403–22.
Edis, T., & Boudry, M. (2019). Truth and consequences: When is it rational to
accept falsehoods? Journal of Cognition and Culture, 19, 153–75.
Edis, T., & BouJaoude, S. (2014). Rejecting materialism: Responses to modern
science in the Muslim Middle East. In M. R. Matthews, ed., International
Handbook of Research in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching Volume
III. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 1663–90.
Elpidorou, A., & Dove, G. (2018) Consciousness and Physicalism: A Defense
of a Research Program. New York: Routledge.
Elsakaan, N., & Longo, M. (2016). The embryo development in Quranic verses.
Medicina Nei Secoli Arte e Scienza, 28(3), 921–38.
Elshakry, M. (2020). The invention of the Muslim Golden Age: universal
history, the Arabs, science, and Islam. In D. Edelstein, N. Wheatley, &
S. Geroulanos, eds., Power and Time: Temporalities in Conﬂict and the
Making of History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 80–102.
El-Zein, A. (2009). Islam, Arabs, and the Intelligent World of the Jinn.
Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
Eroler, E. G. (2019). “Dindar Nesil Yetiştirmek”: Türkiye’nin Eğitim
Politikalarında Ulus ve Vatandaş İnşası (2002–2016). İstanbul: İletişim
Yayıncılık.
Ertit, V. (2018). God is dying in Turkey as well: application of secularization
theory to a non-Christian Society. Open Theology, 4(1), 192–211.
Fard, R. M. N., Moslemy M., & Golshahi, H. (2013). The history of modern
biotechnology in Iran: a medical review. Journal of Biotechnology and
Biomaterials, 3(2), 1000159.
65
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Fields, C., Glazebrook, J. F., & Levin, M. (2021). Minimal physicalism as a
scale-free substrate for cognition and consciousness. Neuroscience of
Consciousness, 7(2), niab013.
Fischer, J. (2022). Muslim material culture: Western perspectives and global
markets. In R. Tottoli, ed., Routledge Handbook of Islam in the West, 2nd ed.
New York: Routledge, pp. 348–62.
Forster, N. (2018). Why are there so few world-class universities in the Middle
East and North Africa? Journal of Further and Higher Education, 42(8),
1025–39.
Gambetta, D., & Hertog, S. (2016). Engineers of Jihad: The Curious
Connection
between
Violent
Extremism
and
Education.
Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Geraci, R. M. (2018). Temples of Modernity: Nationalism, Hinduism, and
Transhumanism in South Indian Science. Lanham: Lexington Books.
Gingeras, R. (2019). Eternal Dawn: Turkey in the Age of Atatürk. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Göle, N. (2000). İslam ve Modernlik Üzerine Melez Desenler. İstanbul: Metis
Yayınları.
Golshani, M. (2007). Science for humanity: An Islamic perspective. Islam &
Science, 5(2), 179–90.
Gould, S. J. (1999). Rocks of Ages: Science and Religion in the Fullness of Life.
New York: Ballantine.
Gregory, F. (1977). Scientiﬁc Materialism in Nineteenth Century Germany.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Guénon, M. (2019). ʿAbd al-Majīd al-Zindānī’s iʿjāz ʿilmī approach: embryonic
development in Q. 23:12–14 as a scientiﬁc miracle. Journal of Qur’anic
Studies, 21(3), 32–56.
Guessoum, N. (2010). Islam’s Quantum Question: Reconciling Muslim
Tradition and Modern Science. London: Bloomsbury.
Guessoum, N., & Osama, A. (2015a). Institutions: revive universities of the
Muslim world. Nature, 526, 634 -36.
Guessoum, N., & Osama, A., eds. (2015b). Report of Zakri Task Force on
Science at Universities of the Muslim World. Islamabad: Muslim World
Science Initiative.
Gülen, M. F. (2011). Yaratılış Gerçeği ve Evrim. İstanbul: Nil Yayınları.
Hanioğlu, M. S¸. (2008). A Brief History of the Late Ottoman Empire. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Hanioğlu, M. S¸. (2012). The historical roots of Kemalism. In A. T. Kuru, &
A. C. Stepan, eds., Democracy, Islam, and Secularism in Turkey. New York:
Columbia University Press, pp. 32–60.
66
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Haq, I. U., & Tanveer, M. (2020). Status of research productivity and higher
education in the members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
Library Philosophy and Practice (e- Journal), 3845.
Hassan, L. (2020). Ash‘arism Encounters Avicennism: Sayf al-Dīn al-Āmidī on
Creation. Piscataway: Gorgias Press.
Hassan, M. K. (2016). The necessity of studying the natural sciences from the
Qur’anic worldview. In M. H. Kamali, O. Bakar, D. A. Batchelor, &
R. Hashim, eds., Islamic Perspectives on Science and Technology: Selected
Conference Papers. Singapore: Springer, pp. 35–58.
Heck, P. (2002). The hierarchy of knowledge in Islamic civilization. Arabica,
49(1), 27–54.
Hoodbhoy, P. (1991). Islam and Science: Religious Orthodoxy and the Battle
for Rationality. London: Zed Books.
Hill, H., Khan, M. E., & Zhuang, J., eds. (2012). Diagnosing the Indonesian
Economy: Toward Inclusive and Green Growth. London: Anthem Press and
Asian Development Bank.
Huff, T. (2011). Intellectual Curiosity and the Scientiﬁc Revolution: A Global
Perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Huff, T. (2017). The Rise of Early Modern Science: Islam, China, and the West,
3rd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hussein, A. A., Albar, M. A., & Alsanad, S. M. (2019). Prophetic medicine,
Islamic medicine, traditional Arabic and Islamic medicine (TAIM): revisiting
concepts and deﬁnitions. Acta Scientiﬁc Medical Sciences, 3(8), 62–69.
İhsanoğlu, E. M. (2004). Science, Technology, and Learning in the Ottoman
Empire: Western Inﬂuence, Local Institutions, and the Transfer of
Knowledge. Burlington: Ashgate/Variorum.
Iqtidar, H. (2011). Secularizing Islamists? Jama‘at-e-Islami and Jama‘at-ud-
Da‘wa in Urban Pakistan. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jaafar, A. N., & Wahiddin, M. R. (2016). A new quantum theory in accordance
with Islamic science. In M. H. Kamali, O. Bakar, D. A. Batchelor &
R. Hashim, eds., Islamic Perspectives on Science and Technology: Selected
Conference Papers. Singapore: Springer, pp. 237–58.
Jalajel, D. S. (2009). Islam and Biological Evolution: Exploring Classical
Sources and Methodologies. Western Cape: University of the Western Cape.
Janos, D. (2012). Qur’ānic cosmography in its historical perspective: Some
notes on the formation of a religious worldview. Religion, 42(2), 215–31.
Kalın, İ. (2001). The sacred versus the secular: Nasr on science. In L. E. Hahn,
R. E. Auxier, & L. W. Stone, eds., Library of Living Philosophers: Seyyed
Hossein Nasr. Chicago: Open Court Press, pp. 445–62.
67
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Kalın, İ. (2002). Three views of science in the Islamic world. In T. Peters,
M. Iqbal, & S. N. Haq, eds., God, Life, and the Cosmos: Christian and
Islamic Perspectives. New York: Routledge, pp. 43–75.
Kalın, İ. (2018). Barbar, Modern, Medenî: Medeniyet Üzerine Notlar. İstanbul:
İnsan Yayınları.
Kaminski, J. J. (2021). Islam, Liberalism, and Ontology: A Critical Re-
evaluation. New York: Routledge.
Karaömerlioğlu, M. A., & Yolun, M. (2020). Turkish nationalism and the
evolutionary idea (1923–1938). Nations and Nationalism, 26, 743–58.
Kaya, V. (2012). Can the Quran support Darwin? an evolutionist approach by
two Turkish scholars after the foundation of the Turkish Republic. The
Muslim World, 102, 357–70.
Kaynar, M., & Parlak, İ. (2005). Her İle Bir Üniversite: Türkiye’de Yüksek
Öğretim Sisteminin Çöküşü. Ankara: Paragraf Yayınevi.
Kazemipur, A. (2022). Sacred as Secular: Secularization Under Theocracy in
Iran. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Keener, C. S. (2011). Miracles: The Credibility of the New Testament Accounts.
Grand Rapids: Baker Academic.
Keskin, T., ed. (2011). The Sociology of Islam: Secularism, Economy and
Politics. Reading: Ithaca Press.
Kidd, I. J., José Medina, J., & Pohlhaus, Jr., G. (2017). The Routledge
Handbook of Epistemic Injustice. New York: Routledge.
Kollu, H. Y., & Han, A. (2022). Bilimin Anlatılmayan Tarihi. Ankara: Lopus
Yayınevi.
Koşar, U. (2013). Allah De Ötesini Bırak. İstanbul: Destek Yayınları.
Kuran, T. (2004). Islam and Mammon: The Economic Predicaments of
Islamism. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kuran, T. (2011). The Long Divergence: How Islamic Law Held Back the
Middle East. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kuru, A. T., & Stepan, A., eds. (2012). Democracy, Islam, & Secularism in
Turkey. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kuru, A. T. (2019). Islam, Authoritarianism, and Underdevelopment.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lachapelle, S. (2011). Investigating the Supernatural: From Spiritism and
Occultism to Psychical Research and Metapsychics in France, 1853–1931.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Landau, J. M. (1974). Radical Politics in Modern Turkey. Leiden: Brill.
Langermann, Y. T., ed. (2012). Monotheism & Ethics: Historical and
Contemporary Intersections Among Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
Leiden: Brill.
68
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LeDrew, S. (2016). The Evolution of Atheism: The Politics of a Modern
Movement. New York: Oxford University Press.
Livingston, J. W. (2018a). The Rise of Science in Islam and the West: From
Shared Heritage to Parting of The Ways, 8th to 19th Centuries. New York:
Routledge.
Livingston, J. W. (2018b). In the Shadows of Glories Past: Jihad for Modern
Science in Muslim Societies, 1850 to the Arab Spring. New York: Routledge.
Ludwig, D., Koskinen, I., Mncube, Z., Poliseli, L., & Reyes-Galindo, L., eds.
(2022). Global Epistemologies and Philosophies of Science. New York:
Routledge.
Lumbard, J., & Nayed, A. A., eds. (2010). The 500 Most Inﬂuential Muslims
2010. Amman: Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Centre.
Madani, R. A. (2016). Islamization of science. International Journal of Islamic
Thought, 9, 51–63.
Mahmood, S. (2001). Feminist theory, embodiment, and the docile agent: Some
reﬂections on the Egyptian Islamic revival. Cultural Anthropology 16(2),
202–36.
Malik, S. A. (2018). Atheism and Islam: A Contemporary Discourse. Abu
Dhabi: Kalam Research & Media.
Malik, S. A. (2019). Old texts, new masks: A critical review of misreading
evolution onto historical Islamic texts. Zygon, 54, 501–22.
Malik, S. A. (2021). Islam and Evolution: Al-Ghazālī and the Modern
Evolutionary Paradigm. New York: Routledge.
Malik, S. A., Karamali, H., & Khalayleh, M. Y. A. (2022). Does criticizing
intelligent design (ID) undermine design discourse in the Qurʾān? a kalāmic
response. Zygon, 57, 490–513.
Mansour, N. (2011). Science teachers’ views of science and religion vs. the
Islamic perspective: Conﬂicting or compatible? Science Education, 95(2),
281–309.
Mardin, S¸. (1989). Religion and Social Change in Modern Turkey: The Case of
Bediuzzaman Said Nursi. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Markham, I. S., & Sayılgan, Z. (2017). The Companion to Said Nursi Studies.
Eugene: Pickwick Publications.
Marks, J. (2013). Ethics Without Morals: In Defense of Amorality. New York:
Routledge.
Masud, M. K. (2009). Islamic modernism. In M. K. Masud, A. Salvatore, &
M. van Bruinessen, eds., Islam and Modernity: Key Issues and Debates.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 237–60.
McCaffree, K. (2017). The Secular Landscape: The Decline of Religion in
America. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
69
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

McIntyre, L. (2019). The Scientiﬁc Attitude: Defending Science from Denial,
Fraud, and Pseudoscience. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Mirowski, P. (2011). Science-Mart: Privatizing American Science. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Mydin, L., Askari, H., & Mirakhor, A. (2018). Resource Rich Muslim Countries
and Islamic Institutional Reforms. Pieterlen: Peter Lang.
Naguib, S. (2019). The hermeneutics of miracle: Evolution, eloquence, and the
critique of scientiﬁc exegesis in the literary school of tafsīr. Part I: From
Muḥammad ʿAbduh to Amīn al-Khūlī. Journal of Qur’anic Studies. 21(3),
57–88.
Nanda, M. (2003). Prophets Facing Backward: Postmodern Critiques of
Science and Hindu Nationalism in India. Piscataway: Rutgers University
Press.
Nanda, M. (2016). Science in Saffron: Skeptical Essays on History of Science.
Palam Vihar: Three Essays Collective.
Nasr, S. H. (1987). Knowledge and the Sacred. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Nurbaki, H. (2022). Kur’an-ı Kerim’den Ayetler ve İlmi Gerçekler. 15th print-
ing, Ankara: Türkiye Diyanet Vakfı.
Olson, R. G. (2008). Science and Scientism in Nineteenth-century Europe.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Oppenheim, J. (1985). The Other World: Spiritualism and Psychical Research
in England, 1850–1914. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Orayj, K. (2022). Prophetic medicine: building an epistemological framework
to overcome the conﬂict between religion and evidence-based medicine.
European Journal of Medicine and Natural Sciences, 5(1), 44–62.
Ozan, E. D. (2012). Gülme Sırası Bizde: 12 Eylül’e Giderken Sermaye Sınıfı
Kriz ve Devlet. İstanbul: Metis Yayınları.
Özgür, İ. (2012). Islamic Schools in Modern Turkey: Faith, Politics, and
Education. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Parla, T., & Davison, A. (2004). Corporatist Ideology in Kemalist Turkey.
New York: Syracuse University Press.
Peker, D., & Taşkın O. (2018). The enlightenment tradition and science educa-
tion in Turkey. In M. R. Matthews, ed., History, Philosophy, and Science
Teaching. Cham: Springer, pp. 67–97.
Peker, E. (2020). Beyond positivism: Building Turkish laiklik in the transition
from the empire to the republic (1908–38). Social Science History, 44(2),
301–27.
Ramadan, T. (2009). Radical Reform: Islamic Ethics and Liberation.
New York: Oxford University Press.
70
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Rassool, G. H. (2019). Evil Eye, Jinn Possession, and Mental Health Issues: An
Islamic Perspective. New York: Routledge.
Raudvere, C., & Stenberg, L., eds. (2009). Suﬁsm Today: Heritage and
Tradition in the Global Community. London: I. B. Tauris.
Reber, A. S., & Alcock, J. E. (2020). Searching for the impossible:
Parapsychology’s elusive quest. American Psychologist, 75(3), 391–99.
Riexinger, M. (2009). Responses of South Asian Muslims to the theory of
evolution. Welt des Islams, 49(2), 212–47.
Riexinger, M. (2011). Islamic opposition to the Darwinian theory of evolution.
In J. R. Lewis, & O. Hammer, eds., Handbook of Religion and the Authority
of Science. Leiden: Brill, pp. 483–510.
Rizvi, A. A. (2016). The Atheist Muslim: A Journey from Religion to Reason.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Rosen, L. (2002). The Culture of Islam: Changing Aspects of Contemporary
Muslim Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Russell, R. J. (2009). Divine action and quantum mechanics: a fresh assessment.
In F. L. Shults, N. Murphy, & R. J. Russell, eds., Philosophy, Science and
Divine Action. Boston: Brill, pp. 351–403.
Saif, L., Leoni, F., Melvin-Koushki, M., & Yahya, F., eds. (2021). Islamicate
Occult Sciences in Theory and Practice. Leiden: Brill.
Salem, P. (1996). The rise and fall of secularism in the Arab world. Middle East
Policy, 4, 147–60.
Saniotis, A. (2012). Muslims and ecology: fostering Islamic environmental
ethics. Contemporary Islam, 6, 155–71.
Sardar, Z., ed. (1984). The Touch of Midas: Science, Values, and Environment in
Islam and the West. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Sardar, Z. (2006). How Do You Know? Reading Ziauddin Sardar on Islam,
Science and Cultural Relations. London: Pluto Press.
Sardar, Z. (2011). Reading the Qur’an: The Contemporary Relevance of the
Sacred Text of Islam. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sassower, R. (2015). Compromising the Ideals of Science. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Sax, W. S. (2020). The birth of the (exorcism) clinic: Media, modernity, and the
jinn. In A. Michaels, & C. Wulf, eds., Science and Scientiﬁcation in South
Asia and Europe. London: Routledge, pp. 69–77.
Sayın, Ü., & Kence, A. (1999). Islamic scientiﬁc creationism. Reports of the
National Center for Science Education, 19(6), 18–20, 25–29.
Sayksa, D. S., & Arni, J. (2016). Evidences of scientiﬁc miracle of Al-Qur’an in
the modern era. Jurnal Ushuluddin, 24(1), 79–90.
71
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Schielke, S. (2013). The Islamic world. In S. Bullivant and M. Ruse, eds., The
Oxford Handbook of Atheism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schnabel, L., & Bock, S. (2018). The persistent and exceptional intensity of
American religion: A response to recent research. Sociological Science, 5,
711–21.
Scott, C. (2011). Science for the West, myth for the rest? The case of James Bay
Cree knowledge construction. In S. Harding, ed., The Postcolonial Science
and Technology Studies Reader. Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 175–
97.
Setia, A. (2007). Three meanings of Islamic science: toward operationalizing
Islamization of science. Islam & Science, 5(1), 23–52.
S¸imşek, B., Aksoy, D. Y., Başaran, N. C. et al. (2017). Mapping traditional and
complementary medicine in Turkey. European Journal of Integrative
Medicine, 15, 68–72.
Sing, M. (2018). The tempestuous affair between Marxism and Islam: attrac-
tion, hostility, and accommodation since 1917. In B. Hendrich, ed., Muslims
and Capitalism: An Uneasy Relationship? Baden-Baden: Ergon-Verlag, pp.
49–102.
Solberg, A. R. (2013). The Mahdi Wears Armani: An Analysis of the Harun
Yahya Enterprise. Huddinge: Södertörns Högskola.
Somel, S. A. (2001). The Modernization of Public Education in the Ottoman
Empire 1839–1908: Islamization, Autocracy and Discipline. Leiden: Brill.
Sooﬁ, A. S., & Ghazinoory, S. (2013). Science and Innovations in Iran:
Development, Progress, and Challenges. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Soyubol, K. (2021). In search of perfection: Neo-spiritualism, Islamic mysti-
cism, and secularism in Turkey. Modern Intellectual History, 18(1), 70–94.
Stiedenroth, K. S. (2020). Unani Medicine in the Making: Practices and
Representations in 21st-century India. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press.
Tarhan, N. (2021). İnanç Psikolojisi ve Bilim: Ruh, Beyin ve Akıl Üçgeninde
İnsanoğlu. 17th printing, İstanbul: Timaş Yayınları.
Tart, C. T. (2009). The End of Materialism: How Evidence of the Paranormal Is
Bringing Science and Spirit Together. Oakland: New Harbinger.
Taslaman, C. (2007). Evrim Teorisi, Felsefe ve Tanrı. İstanbul: İstanbul
Yayınevi.
Taslaman, C. (2008). Kuantum Teorisi, Felsefe ve Tanrı. İstanbul: İstanbul
Yayınevi.
Tee, C. (2016). The Gülen Movement in Turkey: The Politics of Islam and
Modernity. London: I. B. Tauris.
72
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Tegmark, M. (2014). Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest for the Ultimate
Nature of Reality. New York: Alfred E. Knopf.
Tekerek, T. (2023). Taşra Üniversiteleri: AK Partinin Arka Kampüsü. İstanbul:
İletişim Yayınları.
Telliel, Y. D. (2019). Miraculous evidence: scientiﬁc wonders and religious
reasons. Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East,
39(3), 528–42.
Toosi, J. F. (2019). A model for reconciling Islamic teachings with the intellec-
tual and scientiﬁc achievements of modernity. Islam and Civilisational
Renewal Journal, 10(2), 264–79.
Tuğal, C. (2009). Passive Revolution: Absorbing the Islamic Challenge to
Capitalism. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Turner, J. H., Maryanski, A., Petersen, A. K., & Geertz, A. W., eds. (2017). The
Emergence and Evolution of Religion: By Means of Natural Selection. Milton
Park: Taylor & Francis.
Vaditya, V. (2018). Social domination and epistemic marginalisation: Towards
methodology of the oppressed. Social Epistemology, 32(4), 272–85.
van Bruinessen, M. (2009). Suﬁsm, “popular” Islam and the encounter with
modernity. In M. K. Masud, A. Salvatore, & M. van Bruinessen, eds., Islam
and Modernity: Key Issues and Debates. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, pp. 125–57.
Van Eyghen, H., & Szocik, K. (2021). Revising Cognitive and Evolutionary
Science of Religion: Religion as an Adaptation. Cham: Springer Nature.
Varisco, D. (2018). Darwin and dunya: Muslim responses to Darwinian
evolution. Journal of International and Global Studies, 9(2), 14–39.
Weller, P. (2022). Fethullah Gülen’s Teaching and Practice: Inheritance,
Context, and Interactive Development. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wilkins, J. (2013). Biological essentialism. In K. Kampourakis, ed., The
Philosophy of Biology: A Companion for Educators. Dordrecht: Springer,
pp. 395–419.
Williams, R. N., & Robinson, D. N., eds. (2015). Scientism: The New
Orthodoxy. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Wright, J. E. (2000). The Early History of Heaven. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Yahya, H. (1997). Evrim Aldatmacası: Evrim Teorisi’nin Bilimsel Çöküşü ve
Teorinin İdeolojik Arka Planı. İstanbul: Vural Yayıncılık.
Yalçınoğlu, P. (2009). Impacts of anti-evolutionist movements on educa-
tional policies and practices in USA and Turkey. İlköğretim Online, 8(1),
254–67.
73
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Yankaya, D. (2014). Yeni İslâmî Burjuvazi: Türk Modeli. İstanbul: İletişim
Yayınları.
Yıldız, A., Korkmaz, N., & Doğan, N., eds. (2019). Tarihten Güncele Laik
Eğitim: Kavramlar, Deneyimler, Sorunlar. İstanbul: Kalkedon Yayıncılık.
Yudell, M. (2014). Race Unmasked: Biology and Race in the Twentieth Century.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Ziadat, A. A. (1986). Western Science in the Arab World: The Impact of
Darwinism 1860–1930. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
74
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Islam and the Sciences
Nidhal Guessoum
American University of Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
Nidhal Guessoum is Professor of Astrophysics at the American University of Sharjah, United
Arab Emirates. Besides Astrophysics, he has made notable contributions in Science & Islam/
Religion, education, and the public understanding of science; he has published books on
these subjects in several languages, including The Story of the Universe (in Arabic, ﬁrst
edition in 1997), Islam’s Quantum Question (in English in 2010, translated into several
languages), and The Young Muslim’s Guide to Modern Science (in English 2019, translated
into several languages), numerous articles (academic and general-public), and vast
social-media activity.
Stefano Bigliardi
Al Akhawayn University in Ifrane, Morocco
Stefano Bigliardi is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Al Akhawayn University in Ifrane,
Morocco. He trained as a philosopher of science, has a PhD in philosophy from the
University of Bologna; and has been serving in diﬀerent positions at universities in Germany,
Sweden, Mexico, and Switzerland. He has published a monograph and a general-public
book on Islam and Science as well as dozens of articles (peer-reviewed and popular) on the
subject and others. Since 2016, he has taught undergraduate courses on Islam and Science
at Al Akhawayn University in Ifrane, Morocco.
About the Series
Elements in Islam and the Sciences is a new platform for the exploration, critical review and
concise analysis of Islamic engagements with the sciences: past, present and future. The
series will not only assess ideas, arguments and positions; it will also present novel views
that push forward the frontiers of the ﬁeld. These Elements will evince strong
philosophical, theological, historical, and social dimensions as they address interactions
between Islam and a wide range of scientiﬁc subjects.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Islam and the Sciences
Elements in the Series
Islam and Science: Past, Present, and Future Debates
Nidhal Guessoum and Stefano Bigliardi
Islam’s Encounter with Modern Science: A Mismatch Made in Heaven
Taner Edis
A full series listing is available at: www.cambridge.org/EISC
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009257473 Published online by Cambridge University Press

