•
•
•
•
Research Article 
Auditory Processing Disorder: Protocols 
and Controversy 
Katherine Ismena and Diana C. Emanuela 
a Department of Speech-Language Pathology & Audiology, Towson University, MD 
A R  T  I  C L E  
I  N  F  O  
Article History: 
Received February 22, 2023 
Revision received April 27, 2023 
Accepted June 13, 2023 
Editor-in-Chief: Erin M. Picou 
Editor: Christina Roup 
https://doi.org/10.1044/2023_AJA-23-00035 
Correspondence to Diana C. Emanuel: demanuel@towson.edu. 
Disclosure: The authors have declared that no competing financial or 
nonfinancial interests existed at the time of publication. 
A B  S T  R  A  C  T  
Purpose: This study examined current auditory processing disorder (APD) pro-
tocols and audiologists’ perspectives on the active debate seen in the literature 
regarding the status of APD as a unique disorder. 
Method: This study used a cross-sectional, nonexperimental survey design. 
The participants were 134 U.S. audiologists, representing diversity across expe-
rience level and work setting. 
Results: Popular APD tests from prior surveys remain popular, and a few new 
tests have emerged. Most audiologists use diverse strategies to identify poten-
tial comorbid disorders as part of their APD protocol, including multidisciplinary 
assessment and referral to other specialists. Most participants disagreed with 
the assertion that APD is not a unique disorder; however, many also pointed 
out that patients’ struggles with listening need to be the primary focus of APD 
assessment and management, regardless of the label of the disorder. Qualita-
tive analysis of participant comments on the controversy yielded six themes: 
Clinical Experience, Comorbidity, Listening Skills, Literature Support, Overdiag-
nosis, and More Information Needed. 
Conclusion: Most participants consider APD to be a unique disorder, citing 
clinical experience and the literature for support; however, many also indicated 
APD is complicated by comorbidity and APD may be overdiagnosed. 
Differential diagnosis of auditory processing disor-
der (APD) is challenging in several respects. For example, 
APD is often comorbid with disorders that share similar 
symptoms (Cacace & McFarland, 2005; Chermak, 2002), 
and many APD tests include suboptimal support docu-
mentation and normative data (Cooper & Gates, 1991; 
Golding et al., 2004; Nagao et al., 2016). In addition, there 
is usually consensus that APD should be assessed with a 
diverse battery of tests; however, while there are myriad 
recommendations and consensus statements, there is no 
single, agreed-upon, standardized test battery nor gold stan-
dard criterion for differential diagnosis of APD (American 
Academy of Audiology [AAA], 2010; Bamiou et al., 2001; 
Bellis & Ferre, 1999; Chermak, 2002; Emanuel et al., 2011; 
Jerger & Musiek, 2000). As a result, McFarland and 
Cacace (2014) summarized the issue as follows: “For over 
three decades, the concept of central auditory processing 
disorder (CAPD) has been a lightning rod for controversy. 
Controversial issues have been explored from a variety of 
perspectives ranging from whether or not this disorder actu-
ally exists to what might be the best evaluation instruments 
and potential treatments” (p. 261). 
Recent additions to the complexity of APD include 
the assertion from researchers that APD lacks clear defini-
tion and symptomology that would provide clear justifica-
tion for, and satisfy arguments against, APD as a unique 
clinical entity (Moore, 2018; Vermiglio, 2014; Wilson, 
2019). Moore (2018) stated that APD diagnosis is associ-
ated with an inconsistent combination of tests that do not 
satisfy the requirements needed to support APD as a legit-
imately unique disorder based on the scientific evidence. 
He suggested that difficulties experienced by children diag-
nosed with APD are more accurately attributed to diffi-
culty with attention. Moore (2018) and Wilson (2019)
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Copyright © 2023 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
614
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

have suggested that APD could be more accurately 
described as a symptomology-based list of listening diffi-
culties rather than a disorder. 
The assertion that APD is not a unique disorder has 
not gone unchallenged. Auditory scientists have provided 
evidence to support APD as a clinical entity, summarizing 
their perspectives as follows: “As with any branch of audi-
tory science, research on CAPD continues to be pursued 
in many different areas. However, there is robust scientific 
evidence pertaining to the clinical existence, diagnosis, and 
treatment of CAPD” (Abramson et al., 2018, p. 28). Still, 
the controversy is highly visible within the extant litera-
ture, via passionate rhetoric wherein APD proponents 
provide evidence of APD as a unique disorder, describe 
success of targeted APD interventions, and note the inclu-
sion of APD in diagnostic coding manuals (International 
Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision [ICD-10], H93.25; 
Bellis et al., 2012; Iliadou et al., 2018; Iliadou & Eleftheriadis, 
2017; Moncrieff, 2017; World Health Organization, 1993). 
Banter within the literature varies from collegial exchange 
of ideas relative to the complexity of APD (e.g., Jerger, 
2016; Vermiglio, 2016, 2017) through various levels of dis-
agreement, as seen via examples provided in Table 1 from 
17 papers published within five different journals (Chermak 
et al., 2018; de Wit et al., 2016, 2018; Fey et al., 2011, 
2012; Iliadou et al., 2018; Iliadou & Eleftheriadis, 2018; 
Vermiglio, 2018a, 2018b, 2018c). For example, an Ear and 
Hearing editorial (Moore, 2018) stated that the journal 
would no longer accept any articles that indicate APD is a 
single diagnostic entity. This was met with a strong rebuttal 
coauthored by 28 clinicians and researchers working in 
APD, describing this editorial policy as indefensible (Iliadou 
et al., 2018). 
While the controversy is clearly visible within the lit-
erature, the impact on clinical audiologists conducting 
APD testing is unknown. As a result, while the initial aim 
of this research was to provide an updated examination of 
current APD protocols, we also took the opportunity to 
examine the opinions of APD audiologists on the contro-
versy, including their level of agreement with the assertion 
that APD is not a unique entity and the potential impact 
of this controversy on clinical protocols. 
Method 
This study was approved by the Towson University 
Institutional Review Board. 
Participants 
Participants for this survey were 134 clinical audiol-
ogists. Recruitment packets were sent to 804 audiologists 
from the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 
(ASHA) database who conduct APD testing. According to 
ASHA at the time we purchased the mailing list, these 
audiologists represented the population of ASHA-affiliated 
audiologists who self-identified as conducting APD testing. 
Participants were asked to return the survey in a postage-
paid envelope or to use the link provided in the recruitment 
letter to complete the survey online (this link was not dis-
tributed in any other way). Surveys were received from 134 
audiologists, representing 17% of the target population. 
Most participants (n = 104) completed the paper version of 
the survey, and some (n = 30) completed the survey online. 
Survey 
The survey draft began as a modified version of the 
APD survey conducted by Emanuel et al. (2011) and 
expanded to obtain novel data regarding audiologist per-
ceptions about the APD controversy. The survey draft 
was revised based on feedback obtained from a pilot test 
(n = 4) of the survey instrument with APD audiologists 
recruited by convenience sampling. The final survey con-
sisted of 27 questions including eight demographic ques-
tions and 19 APD-based questions. All survey questions 
and a summary of participant responses are included in 
the Appendix. At the end of the survey, two of the open-
set questions asked participants to describe their percep-
tions of the APD controversy. Qualitative data from these 
questions were subjected to content analysis to examine 
themes within the responses (Pitney et al., 2020); specifi-
cally, inductive reasoning was used as the basis of analysis 
that began with initial coding at the phrase or sentence 
level and moved to focused coding based on patterns seen 
across the data. Codes were used to group findings into 
consistent and supportable themes (Merriam, 2009). 
Results 
Participant and Clinical Demographics 
This sample represented highly experienced clini-
cians, with 69.4% of participants reporting over 20 years 
of clinical experience and 86.6% reporting over 10 years 
of clinical experience (with 74% reporting over 10 years of 
experience in APD). The sample also represented highly 
educated clinicians, with 82.7% holding a clinical or 
research doctorate (or both, as reported by three partici-
pants); in addition, 11 participants also had credentials in 
speech-language pathology, and eight reported that they 
had teaching credentials. Most participants (89.4%) were 
women. The most common work settings were private 
practice, school, hospital, and university, together captur-
ing 76.9% of the work settings for this sample.
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
615
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
Table 1. Evidence of the controversy associated with auditory processing disorders (APDs). 
Original article
Peer reaction
Author response 
de Wit et al. (2016) 
“Listening difficulties of children with APD 
may be a consequence of cognitive, 
language, and attention issues rather than 
bottom-up auditory processing” (p. 384). 
(JSLHR) 
“The conclusions in the de Wit et al. (2016) 
review are unfortunate in light of 
advances made in the clinical diagnosis 
and treatment of bottom-up auditory 
processing disorders” (Moncrieff, 2017, 
p. 1448). (JSLHR) 
“We believe that our original conclusions are 
valid given the limited evidence that is 
currently available about the etiology of 
auditory processing disorders” (de Wit 
et al., 2018, p. 1517). (JSLHR) 
Fey et al. (2011) 
“The evidence base is too  small and  weak  to  
provide clear guidance to speech-language 
pathologists faced with treating children 
with diagnosed APD. . .  Clinicians who 
decide to use auditory interventions 
should be aware of the limitations in the 
evidence and take special care to monitor 
the spoken and written language status of 
their young clients” (p. 246). (LSHSS) 
“A more comprehensive review than that 
done by Fey et al. (2011) would have 
better addressed the fundamental 
question of the efficacy of direct 
remediation activities for children with 
central auditory processing disorder” 
(Bellis et al., 2012, p. 381). (LSHSS) 
“We argue that the conceptualizations and 
methods on which our review was based 
were well motivated, and that our original 
conclusions are valid given the limited 
evidence that is currently available from 
clinical studies of auditory training with 
school-age children” (Fey et al., 2012, 
p. 387). (LSHSS) 
Vermiglio (2018a) 
“A key component in diagnostic accuracy 
research is the gold standard’ also known 
as the reference standard test. . . .  A 
review of the literature reveals a poor 
understanding of this concept, especially 
in the area of auditory processing 
disorder” (p. 6). (ASHA SIG) 
“We identify several faulty premises, 
inconsistent use of terminology, and several 
key errors and omissions that undermine 
Vermiglio’s assertions. We conclude that the 
definition of auditory processing disorder 
(APD) is not ambiguous; a clinically useful 
and widely adopted gold standard for the 
diagnosis of APD is in use across the 
world; and this efficient test battery leads 
to verifiable diagnosis of APD and deficit-
specific, individualized intervention” 
(Chermak et al., 2018, p. 77). (ASHA SIG) 
“The lack of clarity in the APD construct is 
fueled by the ambiguity of the definitions. 
The ‘evidence’ for an APD, irrespective of 
the presence of a lesion of the central 
auditory system, is derived through the 
logical fallacy of equivocation” (Vermiglio, 
2018c, p. 83). (ASHA SIG) 
Iliadou and Eleftheriadis (2017) 
“This clinical case stresses the importance of 
testing for APD with a psychoacoustical 
test battery despite current debate of lack 
of a gold standard diagnostic approach to 
APD” (p. 91). (JAAA) 
“The reason that there is no reference 
standard for APD is that APD is not a 
legitimate disorder. . .A ‘lack of a gold 
standard’ (or reference standard) is not a 
trivial matter. Its absence means that 
there is no way to know the diagnostic 
accuracy of a given index test” (Vermiglio, 
2018b, pp. 262–263). (JAAA) 
“APD or CAPD is a clinical entity recognized 
by audiological societies throughout the 
world...and is included in the ...ICD-10... 
code H93.25...Heterogeneity is inherent to 
disorders and if one was to define a clinical 
entity based on representation of a 
homogeneous patient group then we 
should not accept diagnoses such as 
dyslexia, autism spectrum disorder” (Iliadou 
& Eleftheriadis, 2018, p. 264). (JAAA) 
Moore (2018) 
“Journal editorial policy, effective 
immediately for new 
submissions. . .‘articles that either 
implicitly or explicitly assume APD is a 
single diagnostic characteristic of the 
auditory system likely will not be 
considered for publication’” (p. 617). 
(E&H) 
“We provide scientific evidence in this 
rebuttal that challenges a multitude of 
Moore’s statements and conclusions 
used to support his opinion and this 
indefensible editorial policy” (Iliadou et al., 
2018, p. 1236). (E&H) 
Vermiglio (2016) 
“For a particular index test, while the 
diagnostic accuracy for detection of a 
central site of lesion may have been 
determined appropriately, it is inappropriate 
to reassign these diagnostic accuracy 
values to a different diagnostic target such 
as a CAPD” (p. 141). (JAAA) 
“Dr. Vermiglio’s insightful analysis suggested 
to me that we take a bolder approach by 
seeking a biological marker as a reference 
standard for disorders of speech processing 
in the brain. One possible candidate. . .is 
the auditory event-related potential” 
(Jerger, 2016, p. 683). (JAAA) 
“I appreciate his [Jerger’s] insights into the 
issue of diagnostic accuracy and his 
suggestion to use the auditory event-related 
potential (AERP) as a reference standard for 
disorders of speech processing” (Vermiglio, 
2017, p. 102). (JAAA) 
Note. 
Journal title abbreviations are provided at the end of each quote. JSLHR = Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research; 
LSHSS = Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools; ASHA SIG = Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups; JAAA = 
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology; E&H = Ear and Hearing. 
The majority of participants (94%) conduct APD 
testing with children (< 18 years), and most (73%) reported 
testing both children and adults. About a third (38.1%) 
reported testing children aged 3–6 years, and about a third 
(29.9%) reported testing adults aged 65 years and older. 
Participants represented diversity regarding APD-related 
clinical functions; specifically, the majority reportedly diag-
nose APD (96%) and provide APD-related amplification
616
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

services (68%), recommendations (66%), consultation (55%), 
and screening (53%), with slightly fewer than half providing 
environmental modifications (43%). Almost a third (29%) 
provide direct therapy for APD. Most participants (86.6%) 
indicated they work with professionals from other disciplines 
as part of multidisciplinary teams and/or interdisciplinary 
teams. The most noted other disciplines involved in the 
APD process were speech-language pathology, psychology, 
and education. 
APD Protocols 
Participants were asked to identify audiometric tests 
they require either prior to APD assessment or as part of 
their APD assessment. All tests reported by two or more 
participants are included in Figure 1. Most participants 
(90%–100%) require a basic audiological battery including 
pure-tone thresholds, tympanometry, otoscopy, word rec-
ognition score (WRS), and speech recognition threshold. 
In addition, between 50% and 70% of participants test 
acoustic reflex thresholds, distortion product otoacoustic 
emissions, and WRS in noise. Participants were asked to 
identify tests they use as part of their APD test battery. 
Tests reported by two or more participants are included in 
Figure 2. The majority of participants reported using the 
Dichotic Digits Test (DDT; Musiek et al., 1991), Compet-
ing Sentences Test (CST; Willeford, 1978), Staggered 
Spondaic Words (SSW) test (Katz, 1962), Tests for Audi-
tory Processing Disorders (SCAN all versions; e.g., Keith, 
1994), Pitch Pattern Test (PPT; Pinheiro & Ptacek, 1971), 
Speech-in-Noise (SIN) test (Etymotic Research, 1993), and 
Time-Compressed Speech test (e.g., Veterans Administration, 
1992). Other commonly reported tests (22%–45% of partici-
pants) were the Random Gap Detection Test (Keith, 2000), 
High/Low-Pass Filtered Speech (e.g., Veterans Administra-
tion, 1992; Willeford, 1977), Duration Pattern Test (DPT; 
Musiek et al., 1990), Gaps-in-Noise (GIN) test (Musiek 
et al., 2005), Frequency Pattern Test (FPT; Musiek & 
Pinheiro, 1987), and Phonemic Synthesis test (Katz & 
Harmon, 1981). Of these, the Phonemic Synthesis test 
may be underreported here, as it was not included on the 
survey checklist and was submitted by participants as a 
write-in response under the “other/please specify” option. 
Figure 1. Audiometric tests required prior to or as part of auditory processing disorder assessment. WRS = word recognition score; SRT = 
speech recognition threshold; ART = acoustic reflex threshold; DPOAEs = distortion product otoacoustic emissions; ARD = acoustic reflex 
decay; TEOAEs = transient evoked otoacoustic emissions. 
Participants were asked to identify the source(s) used 
to guide the selection of tests for their APD battery. We 
provided a list of 12 possible sources, and participants
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
617
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
could also write in other answers. Of the 132 participants 
who answered this question, 12 selected only one source 
(most often the Buffalo model, n = 5; Katz, 2007) and the 
rest selected between two and 10 sources (M = 4.9, SD = 
2.3), indicating that most use multiple sources for guid-
ance on APD assessment. Overall, the most often identi-
fied sources were clinical experience (70%), ASHA (2005; 
55%), Buffalo model (55%), personal review of literature 
(52%), AAA (2010) Clinical Practice Guidelines (52%), 
and information obtained from seminar/workshop (52%); 
for a complete list, see the Appendix. 
Figure 2. Tests used as part of APD test battery. APD = auditory processing disorder; SCAN = Tests for Auditory Processing Disorders; 
BKB-SIN = Bamford–Kowal–Bench Speech-in-Noise Test; QuickSIN = Quick Speech-in-Noise Test. 
Participants were asked to identify one or more cri-
teria used for a positive diagnosis of APD, given a list of 
six possible criteria plus the opportunity to select the 
“other/please specify” option and write in a response (see 
the Appendix). Of the 129 participants who answered this 
question, 60% (n = 78) chose only one option, most often 
“failed two tests by at least two standard deviations” (n = 
52) or “failed one test by at least two standard deviations” 
(n = 11). More than one response was selected by 51 par-
ticipants, with the most common combinations including 
“failed one test by at least two standard deviations” plus 
either 
“failed 
one 
test 
by 
at 
least 
three 
standard 
deviations” (n = 23) or other/pattern interpretation (n = 
11). Other/pattern interpretation responses indicated partici-
pants used pattern of responses to assist with their assess-
ment, with about a third of these responses indicating that 
pattern interpretation was based on Buffalo and/or Bellis– 
Ferre models (Bellis & Ferre, 1999). Overall, the majority 
of participants (74%) selected “failed two tests by at least 
two standard deviations” as one of their responses, and no 
other individual item was selected by more than 20% of 
participants. 
Participants identified the APD management strate-
gies they recommended, with compensatory strategies 
(98%), FM system (94%), aural rehabilitation (66%), and 
referral to another professional (58%, usually speech-
language pathologist) selected by most participants. Par-
ticipants were asked to list the aural rehabilitation 
apps they use. In response, participants listed not only 
“apps” (applications available via smart devices) but also 
other 
types of 
computer-based training 
and various 
games. Overall, 37 different aural rehabilitation tools 
were listed by participants, with the top five being 
Acoustic Pioneer (n = 17; Barker & Purdy, 2015), Hear-
Builder 
(n 
= 
12; 
http://www.hearbuilder.com), 
Fast
618
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

ForWord (n = 12; Tallal et al., 1996), CAPDOTS (n = 9;  
http://www.capdots.com), and LACE (n = 9; http://www. 
laceauditorytraining.com). 
Participants were asked about their APD protocols 
regarding identification of comorbid language, cognitive, 
and attention deficit disorders. For these areas, most par-
ticipants (93% for cognitive and attention deficit, 92% for 
language) identified one or more approaches. The most 
common approaches were the use of multidisciplinary or 
interdisciplinary assessment and/or referral to other profes-
sionals (most often speech-language pathologists and psy-
chologists) based on case history. Participants rarely indi-
cated that they screen for language and cognitive disorders 
as part of their routine APD protocol (5% of sample). 
Inclusion of attention deficit screening as part of the rou-
tine protocol was reported more often than it was for the 
other two areas (25% of sample), but this approach was 
still less common than the use of approaches such as mul-
tidisciplinary assessment. When reported, the most com-
mon single tool used for attention screening was the Audi-
tory Continuous Performance Test (Auditec Inc., 2015). 
As this test was identified as a tool used by 51 partici-
pants, far more than the number who reported they 
include attention screening in their routine protocol, it 
appears that participants sometimes use screening tools 
for comorbid disorders that are not necessarily included as 
part of their routine test battery. 
Recent Controversy 
The survey included questions about the recent con-
troversy surrounding the assertion by a few researchers 
that APD is not a unique diagnosis. The first question 
asked participants if they had read the editorial by Moore 
(2018) or similar literature or if they had been exposed to 
this issue via presentation. In response, 68% (n = 91) of 
participants said yes and 32% (n = 43) said no. The next 
question asked participants if they had changed their clini-
cal approach to APD diagnosis because of this informa-
tion. In response, 10 participants said yes, 80 said no, and 
one participant did not answer the question. The next 
question asked participants how they had changed their 
clinical approach. Nine participants wrote a response. All 
responses are listed in the Appendix. Content analysis indi-
cated that the commentary could be considered within two 
themes: Way of Thinking Shift (n = 4)  or  Clarification  (n = 
5). Way of Thinking Shift commentary was associated with 
word choice indicating a change in perspective (e.g., “It 
makes me. . .” and “It made me. . .” and “more”) followed 
by a description of perspective shift. For example: 
It makes me look at APD as more of a way to help 
an individual figure out what is occurring and why 
they may be struggling. The tests help to narrow 
down possible areas they can work on to help make 
listening easier. (P#33) 
Commentary associated with the Clarification theme 
included a description of the participants’ approach to 
APD testing. Within this theme, participants either clearly 
described in-place protocols (e.g., “My testing has always 
been. . .”) or did not clearly state if the protocol had 
changed but provided a description on their approach to 
APD. In most cases, commentary indicated that APD was 
viewed within a larger context and not with a focus on 
just the APD test battery. For example: 
To clarify, I have made changes over time but more 
based upon my own experience. The population I 
see often has multiple diagnoses—ADHD, Speech/ 
language disorders, anxiety, etc.—and would never fit 
into the definition of APD as a standalone diagnosis 
that 
occurs 
in 
the 
absence 
of 
other 
disorders 
(although I do see that also). Therefore, while I use 
APD for a diagnosis code for billing, I describe the 
person’s results in terms of areas of weakness and 
how they might affect communication and learning 
and how they are affected by/affect other comorbid 
conditions. (P#76) 
Audiologist Perceptions: Is APD a Unique 
Disorder? 
The final question on the survey asked participants 
to provide their perspectives on the recent assertion in the 
literature that APD does not exist as a unique disorder. 
Written responses to this open-set question were provided 
by 122 participants. As a first approach, each response 
was examined to identify any elements that indicated 
agreement or disagreement with the assertion that APD is 
not a unique disorder. As a result of this analysis, partici-
pant commentary could be broadly grouped using three 
categories, as follows: 
1.
Disagreement was indicated by word choice that 
clearly indicated disagreement with the assertion 
(e.g., “I disagree”), a statement supporting the oppo-
site assertion that APD is a unique disorder (e.g., 
“It is a real disorder”), and/or a statement disparag-
ing the assertion itself and/or the researchers making 
this assertion (e.g., “ignorant,” “mistaken,” “limited 
understanding,” “myopic,” and “narrow minded”). 
For example, “The evidence that CAPD is an entity 
is incontrovertible” (P#132). 
2.
Agreement was indicated by word choice that clearly 
indicated agreement with the assertion (e.g., “I 
agree”) and/or a statement supporting the opposite
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
619
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
assertion that APD is not a unique disorder (e.g., 
“APD is not a unitary disorder”). For example, 
“There is no such thing as APD/auditory processing 
by itself as we can’t isolate auditory processing from 
the cognitive/linguistic aspect” (P#118). 
3.
Neutral was the classification we used for responses 
that indicated that the participant did not agree or 
disagree (e.g., “No opinion,” “I haven’t read enough 
to answer”), that the participant felt there was insuf-
ficient evidence to make a decision (e.g., “More 
research is needed,” “There is a lot of gray area”), 
and/or that it did not matter one way or the other 
(e.g., “Regardless of its existence, the problems 
reported by patients are real”). In addition, any 
responses that did not clearly convey either disagree-
ment or agreement with the assertion were grouped 
within the neutral category. For example, “Parents 
come to me with a child who is struggling. If I see 
this child has needs secondary to measurable diffi-
culties, and that I can help the child overcome these 
(and better function in daily/school/peer activities), 
then I’m not so concerned about what label is 
ascribed. . .  Real or not, it is valuable” (P#36). 
Using these criteria, we found 80 participants (66%) 
disagreed with the assertion that APD is not a unique dis-
order (i.e., felt APD is a unique disorder), 31 participants 
(25%) had a neutral response, and 11 (9%) agreed with 
the assertion (i.e., felt APD is not a unique disorder). This 
first 
approach 
to 
analysis 
of 
these 
qualitative 
data 
provided us with an indication of the bias of the sample. 
This bias should be considered in tandem with the results 
of this study. 
Six themes were identified from the data. These 
themes are listed in order of frequency in Table 2, along 
with one representative quote. (A more extensive quote 
bank is available in the Appendix.) 
Table 2. Themes from qualitative data and representative quotes to support these themes. 
Theme
Representative quotes 
#1 Clinical Experience
“Based upon my experience in testing and diagnosing APD, I believe it does exist” (P#15) 
#2 Comorbidity
“Individuals may have a multitude of overlap in how hearing, speech + language is processed and APD 
should be evaluated in conjunction with a multidisciplinary team approach.” (P#105) 
“I believe that APD exists although rarely in isolation.” (P#78) 
“I feel it is likely true that it does not exist. I have not found many children that do not have another 
explanation for their behaviors or difficulties.” (P#77) 
#3 Listening Skills
“Regardless of the label, there seem to be individuals that can’t understand speech if background noise is 
present, can’t turn off 1 ear and listen with the other and have difficulty interpreting speech coming into 
both ears at the same time. Some individuals are greatly debilitated by these issues. Some have difficulty 
with auditory directions but can follow visual directions. To me the brain is not processing auditory 
information correctly. What should we call this problem instead of APD?.” (P#14) 
#4 Literature Support
“There is ample evidence in the literature to support the notion that APD(s) are a complex set of disorders 
subserved by the CNS that involve peripheral integrity and the ability to analyze, synthesize, attach 
meaning to, and manipulate rapidly changing acoustic speech and nonspeech patterns and to execute a 
response.” (P#38) 
#5 Overdiagnosis
“I feel that APD does exist as a disorder; however, some clinical facilities over-diagnose because testing is 
completed prior to obtaining information about cognitive, learning, and speech-language abilities.” (P#55) 
“I believe that APD DOES exist as a disorder. However, I believe that most audiologists are over diagnosing 
APD based on faulty criteria for diagnosis.” (P#103) 
#6 More Information Needed 
“I think we need to improve our approaches and develop one working model.” (P#18) 
“I think the formal definition of APD that we have traditionally used needs to be updated, and specifically 
for adults acquired APD in relation to TBI, noise-exposure, blast-exposure, and ‘hidden hearing loss’ are 
very different than for children with developmental APD.” (P#79) 
Participants who think APD is a unique disorder 
were the ones most likely to provide commentary within 
the Clinical Experience (Theme #1) and Literature Sup-
port (Theme #4) themes, as participants tended to use 
these two areas to support their opinion that APD is a 
unique disorder. Specifically, participants described their 
clinical experience with APD diagnosis and treatment for 
their patients and, occasionally, their family members and 
referred to the peer-reviewed literature as an indication of 
the scientific basis of their perspectives. In a few cases, 
participants also cited other types of publications, such as 
the ICD-10 manual and ASHA/AAA documents. 
Within the Comorbidity theme (Theme #2), partici-
pant commentary frequently described the complexity of 
differential diagnosis because of commonly comorbid dis-
orders such as language, cognitive, and attention disor-
ders. This commentary was common regardless of partici-
pant opinion on APD as a unique diagnosis, with partici-
pants often describing the importance of considering a 
team approach to assessment or referral to other special-
ists. Another theme seen across participants, regardless of 
their 
opinion 
on 
APD 
as 
a 
unique 
disorder, 
was
620
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

Overdiagnosis (Theme #5). This commentary indicated 
APD was overdiagnosed and/or rare. This commentary 
tended to indicate APD was overdiagnosed because of 
either inadequate assessment criteria or failure to use a 
team approach for diagnosis and treatment. 
Participants 
classified 
as 
neutral 
regarding 
their 
opinion on the controversy were the ones most likely to 
contribute commentary within the Listening Skills theme 
(Theme #3). Within this commentary, participants described 
the ways their patients had struggled and that a focus on 
this difficulty, specifically difficulty listening and under-
standing, was the most important focus for them when 
they consider APD diagnosis and treatment. Within this 
theme, it is clear some audiologists are not interested in 
the APD label or in its uniqueness as a disorder, only that 
they have a role to play to support patients with poor lis-
tening skills. As a group, participants classified as neutral 
were also most likely to contribute commentary within the 
Need More Information theme (Theme #6). Within this 
theme, participants discussed the need for more data and 
greater consensus on the definition of APD and on the 
approach to diagnosis and treatment. 
Discussion 
Findings from this study provide an overview of 
current APD protocols, how audiologists select their 
assessment approach that addresses comorbid disorders, 
and perceptions about APD as a unique clinical entity. In 
addition, we noted one area of possible concern within the 
demographics of APD audiologists, both within our sam-
ple and within national data, that we discuss below. 
Demographics 
Our sample of 134 audiologists captured 17% of the 
target population (ASHA audiologists who identify APD 
as a specialty area); however, participants represented 
excellent diversity across work settings, experience, and 
patient 
populations 
served. 
Gender 
diversity 
(89.4% 
women) was poor relative to general population statistics 
but 
representative 
compared 
with 
audiologist 
gender 
statistics (86.6% women; ASHA, 2022). We considered 
one of the strengths of the sample to be the wealth of 
experience of the participants; however, upon considering 
our data, we noticed our participants tended to overrepre-
sent highly experienced audiologists. As a result, we exam-
ined the closest available data set for comparison: recent 
age-related demographics for APD audiologists from the 
ASHA database (ASHA, 2021) with filtering provided by 
ASHA staff. This examination indicated a preponderance 
of APD audiologists within the older age ranges. 
Table 3 lists clinical experience data for the current 
sample and age data from ASHA (2021) for audiologists 
who identity APD as a specialty area (exact data for com-
parison were not available). Note that the majority of our 
sample (55.2%) had 26 or more years of clinical experience, 
and relatively few (13.4%) were within their first 10 years 
of practice. ASHA (2021) data indicated a similar trend, 
specifically that APD audiologists are far more prevalent 
within the older age ranges of the scale compared to the 
younger end, with almost half (48.1%) of APD audiologists 
being 55 years and older and only 6.5% being 34 years and 
younger. Thus, there appears to be a “graying” of APD 
audiologists; in other words, seasoned audiologists with 
26+ years of experience and within about a decade or so of 
traditional retirement age (~65 years) tend to dominate the 
subpopulation of audiologists who report APD as a spe-
cialty area, both by consideration of distributions shown in 
Table 3 and comparing these data to the relatively young 
average age across all U.S. audiologists, estimated to be 
about 41.7 years (DATA USA, 2020). This could be a 
future concern as audiologists with APD expertise begin to 
retire, possibly resulting in poorer access to care, if audiolo-
gists with APD specialization are not replaced. 
What Has Changed in the Past Decade? 
Consensus in the literature indicates APD evaluation 
should consist of a comprehensive test battery evaluating 
both peripheral and central auditory systems and including 
both subjective and objective tests (AAA, 2010; Bamiou 
et al., 2001; Bellis & Ferre, 1999; Chermak, 2002; Jerger & 
Musiek, 2000). Our survey asked audiologists about the 
audiometric tests they require either prior to or as part of
Table 3. Years of clinical practice (this study) and age American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 
[ASHA], 2021) data for audiologists who identify auditory processing disorder as a specialty area. 
Experience (current sample; n = 134)
Age (ASHA, 2021; n = 865) 
1–10 years
13.4%
≤ 34 years
6.5% 
11–15 years
6.0%
35–44 years
17.6% 
16–20 years
11.2%
45–54 years
27.8% 
21–25 years
14.1%
55–64 years
23.7% 
26+ years
55.2%
65+ years
24.4%
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
621
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
their APD protocol. Like the prior survey (Emanuel et al., 
2011), most participants reported basic audiometric testing 
and otoacoustic emissions as part of their usual protocol, 
and few reported electrophysiology. This is not unexpected 
because, although research has suggested electrophysiologi-
cal testing has the potential to become a valued part of 
APD assessment (Abdollahi et al., 2019; Ankmnal-Veeranna 
et al., 2019; Parbery-Clark et al., 2012; Rocha-Muniz et al., 
2016), there are no generally accepted criteria for the clinical 
use of electrophysiologic measures when evaluating APD 
(AAA, 2010). As a result, it remains an active area of 
research but a rare test within the clinical APD test battery.
When participants were asked to identify the func-
tions they perform as part of APD care, the majority indi-
cated they diagnose APD, provide APD-related amplifica-
tion services and other management strategies, and consult 
on APD cases; slightly fewer than half provide environ-
mental modifications. Less than a third (29%) provide 
direct therapy to treat APD, even though it is within the 
scope of practice of audiologists (ASHA, 2005), and prior 
surveys have indicated that 40% of audiologists feel audi-
ologists should provide direct therapy (Emanuel et al., 
2011) and 62% of speech-language pathologists feel audi-
ologists should provide direct therapy (Emanuel et al., 
2015); however, this aligns with prior assertions in the 
literature that APD treatment by audiologists is restricted 
because of poor reimbursement, time limitations, and 
school system restrictions (DeBonis & Moncrieff, 2008; 
Emanuel et al., 2015). 
Participants identified sources they used to create an 
APD test battery, and we compared the current results to 
that in the work of Emanuel et al. (2011), as shown in 
Figure 3. Like the prior study findings, most participants 
create APD test batteries based on multiple sources. Many 
of the popular sources of information were similar to the 
prior survey (e.g., clinical experience, ASHA report, litera-
ture review), and a few sources have increased in popular-
ity. Specifically, AAA clinical practice guidelines were not 
included in the 2011 survey, but they were identified by 
more than half of the participants as a reference for the 
creation of the APD battery. Use of the Buffalo model, 
consultation with other audiologists, and participation on 
APD working groups were rarely reported in the 2011 sur-
vey but often reported in the current survey. The Buffalo 
model is a comprehensive approach to the evaluation and 
management of APD. It includes three tests of auditory 
processing: SSW, Phonemic Synthesis, and SIN. 
Figure 3. Comparison of data from the work of Emanuel et al. (2011) and from this study regarding how audiologists select their APD test bat-
tery. APD = auditory processing disorder; ASHA = American Speech-Language-Hearing Association; AAA = American Academy of Audiology. 
We asked audiologists to indicate the APD tests 
they conduct on a regular basis. We compared these data 
with the tests selected as “always” or “often” used by
622
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

audiologists in the work of Emanuel et al. (2011). APD 
tests reported by most participants in this study were also 
reported by most participants in Emanuel et al. (2011), 
indicating consistency of use over time for the most popu-
lar APD tests, including the CST, DDT, SSW, SCAN, 
SIN, and PPT. Some changes were seen in the prevalence 
of reported tests across studies. Differences in reported 
percentage of 10% or more between this study and the 
work of Emanuel et al. (2011) are listed in Table 4, along 
with prior results from the work of Emanuel (2002) for 
comparison. As this table indicates, there was an increase 
over time in reported use of CST, Time-Compressed 
Speech, and GIN tests. There was a decrease in reported 
use of SIN, High/Low-Pass Filtered Speech, and DPT. A 
decrease was also seen for the PPT; however, the FPT 
was not included in the 2011 survey, and when examined 
together (PPT, FPT, or both), one or both were selected 
by 78% of current study participants compared with 79% 
reported for the PPT in 2011 and 77% in 2002 (where it 
was the only FPT listed on the surveys); thus, it appears 
the percentage of audiologists using some version of a 
PPT is, essentially, unchanged over the past 2 decades. 
Notable items that did not appear in the 2002 or 
2011 survey, but were reported by participants in this 
study, include the Phonemic Synthesis test, Dichotic Word 
Listening Test (DWLT; Roberts et al., 1994), Listening in 
Spatialized Noise–Sentences (LiSN-S; Cameron & Dillon, 
2007), 
and 
Multiple 
Auditory 
Processing 
Assessment 
(MAPA; Domitz & Schow, 2000). Of these, Phonemic Syn-
thesis, LiSN-S, and MAPA data are likely underreported 
here, as these items were not included on the current survey 
checklist and were, instead, submitted as write-in items in 
response to an “other/please specify” option. The DWLT 
and Phonemic Synthesis test have been available for 3 and 4 
decades, respectively; in comparison, the MAPA and LiSN-
S are somewhat newer, at just over and just under 20 years, 
respectively. The MAPA examines several domains within 
auditory 
processing 
(monaural 
low-redundancy 
speech, 
temporal processing, dichotic speech), for children from 7;0 
to 14;11 (years;months) of age. Its original version was 
described as “encouraging” by researchers (Domitz & 
Schow, 2000), and normative data are now available for a 
revised version (MAPA-2; Hurford & Jacobs, 2021). The 
LiSN-S is a test for children 6 years and older. It examines 
listening-in-noise skills via audiometric earphones in which 
the signals emulate varying azimuth of speakers and 
noises via a virtual three-dimensional auditory environ-
ment. The LiSN-S, developed in Australia (Cameron & 
Dillon, 2007), is an important step in the Australian Hear-
ing CAPD protocol. Unlike typical protocols in which a 
complete battery of tests is conducted prior to diagnosis 
and treatment planning, this Australian protocol follows a 
hierarchical list of tests conducted in sequence until a child 
fails one test; at that point, testing stops and targeted 
intervention is planned in the area of weakness (Cameron 
et al., 2015). 
Table 4. Notable changes in the percentage of participants reporting regular use of specific auditory processing disorder tests. 
Test 
Study, sample size, and participant affiliation 
Emanuel (2002)a 
n = 25  
EAAb 
Emanuel et al. (2011) 
n = 195 
ASHAc 
Current (2021) 
n = 134 
ASHAc 
Change from 
2011 to 2021 
Competing Sentences Test (CST)
40%
60%
73%
Increase 
Time-Compressed Speech
27%
30%
57%
Increase 
Gaps-in-Noise (GIN) test
—
16%
28%
Increase 
Speech-in-Noise (SIN) test
24%
77%
64%
Decrease 
Pitch Pattern Test (PPT)
77%
79%
65%
Decrease 
High/Low-Pass Filtered Speechd 
31%
50%
36%
Decrease 
Duration Pattern Test (DPT)
44%
40%
29%
Decrease 
Frequency Pattern Test (FPT)
—
—
26%
Newe 
Phonemic Synthesisf 
—
—
21%
Newe 
Dichotic Words Listening Test (DWLT)
—
—
11%
Newe 
Listening in Spatialized Noise–Sentences (LiSN-S)f 
—
—
9%
Newe 
Note. 
Dashes indicate data are not available for that item. ASHA = American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 
a Values are extrapolated from published figures for Internet participants. b Participants were recruited from Educational Audiology Association 
(EAA) membership. c Participants were recruited from ASHA membership. d The current survey asked about low- and high-pass speech 
together; prior surveys asked about only low-pass filtered speech. e “New” indicates the item was not reported in prior surveys (it does not 
indicate the age of the test). f Tests may be underreported, as these tests were not listed on the survey and were submitted by participants 
in an open-set response option labeled “other/please specify.” 
Audiologists’ Perspectives on APD as a 
Unique Disorder 
This study examined audiologists’ perspective on 
recent assertions that APD does not exist as a unique
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
623
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
disorder (e.g., Moore, 2018; Vermiglio, 2014). The major-
ity of audiologists (66%) consider APD to be a unique dis-
order, with some passionately so; 9% do not; and 25% 
responded to our questions without clearly choosing sides. 
When we consider this classification in conjunction with 
the six themes that emerged from participant commentary 
and add a quantitative overlay, additional perspectives 
can be gleaned (see Figure 4). Participants who consider 
APD to be a unique disorder tended to support this per-
spective citing their clinical experience and the scientific 
evidence in the literature, providing compelling accounts 
of patients who have benefited from APD diagnosis and 
treatment. 
Regardless of their perspectives on the uniqueness of 
APD, participants often discussed the complexity of differ-
ential diagnosis because of comorbid disorders, and some 
participants stated that APD was overdiagnosed and/or that 
APD is much rarer than it appears based on how often it is 
diagnosed by audiologists. Participants showed concern and 
care for patients struggling with listening difficulties and 
suggested that audiologists’ primary focus should be helping 
patients find the support they need. Participants classified in 
the neutral group were the ones most likely to indicate that 
the status of APD as a unique disorder was irrelevant and 
that audiologists should focus more on being part of a holis-
tic, multidisciplinary/interdisciplinary assessment process for 
the benefit of patients, rather than on the formal diagnosis 
of APD. In contrast, within the group that supports APD 
as a unique diagnosis, participants expressed concern that 
if APD is abandoned in its current form, patients will be 
misdiagnosed and may not receive appropriate interven-
tion, similar to concerns already expressed in the literature 
(e.g., Iliadou et al., 2018). 
Figure 4. Frequency of comments classified within six themes. APD = auditory processing disorder. 
Multidisciplinary and Interdisciplinary 
Approach 
Estimates of the prevalence of APD vary widely, 
which has been attributed to the diagnostic criteria used 
to establish a positive APD diagnosis and the complexity 
of differential diagnosis because of comorbid disorders. 
For example, Sharma et al. (2009) suggested that reported 
prevalence of APD in isolation was lower than published 
estimates. Their study of 68 school-age children with lis-
tening difficulty indicated that only 4% had APD in isola-
tion and that it was far more common to see APD comor-
bid with language and/or reading disorders. The co-
occurrence of APD with other disorders, including lan-
guage, cognitive, and attention deficits, is widely noted 
within the literature, as illustrated by this summary from 
the AAA (2010) guidelines: “Multidisciplinary assessment 
complements audiologic diagnosis by revealing functional 
deficits associated with the (C)APD, identifying comorbid
624
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

conditions, and informing intervention plans” (p. 5). This 
study indicated that participants were aware of the high 
rate of comorbidity of APD with other disorders associ-
ated with listening difficulties and were aware of the 
importance of using a multidisciplinary team approach. In 
this sample, 69% of participants reported that at least one 
other discipline was involved in the APD diagnostic pro-
cess at their primary work setting, 87% reported they 
work with other professionals as part of multidisciplinary 
and/or interdisciplinary teams, 93% reported their APD 
protocol included at least one strategy to identify possible 
cognitive and attention disorders, and 92% reported at 
least one strategy to identify possible language disorders. 
With that said, 7%–8% of participants do not routinely 
rule out language, cognitive, or attention deficits as part 
of their assessment, and many base their referrals on 
patient case history or behavior during the testing, which 
could add subjectivity to the assessment process relative to 
ruling out comorbid disorders. Overall, this study suggests 
that most audiologists who conduct APD tests are not 
doing so in an audiology silo but, instead, are actively 
participating in a multidisciplinary approach for assess-
ment and treatment, which is consistent with recommen-
dations seen in the literature (Chermak et al., 2017; Keller 
& Tillery, 2002). 
Summary 
Findings from this study indicated that many APD 
protocols are consistent over time, when comparing cur-
rent survey findings with a similar survey conducted a 
decade ago (Emanuel et al., 2011), including basic audiom-
etry required prior to or as part of APD testing; rare use of 
electrophysiology testing as part of the APD battery; con-
tinued popularity of many APD tests over decades; use of 
multiple sources to inform APD protocols; and a focus on 
approaches to APD assessment and management that 
involve multiple professionals, including speech-language 
pathologists, psychologists, and educators. The current sur-
vey indicated changes over time in a few areas, including 
new tests and sources of information to guide the assess-
ment process, including the Buffalo model, AAA Clinical 
Practice Guidelines (2010), consultation with other audiolo-
gists, and participation on APD working groups. The 
majority of participants in this study asserted that APD 
was a unique disorder, about a quarter were more con-
cerned with helping patients than in the formal diagnosis of 
APD, and a small minority (9%) agreed with assertions in 
the literature that APD was not a unique disorder. 
Limitations and Future Research 
While this study had a robust sample size, it repre-
sents only 17% of the population we sampled. The 
response rate may have been a result of the timing of the 
survey distribution. Participants were recruited in early 
2021, when the COVID-19 pandemic still had an impact 
on health care personnel, after almost a year of pandemic-
related restrictions. Note also that our sample was drawn 
from audiologists affiliated with ASHA. According to 
ASHA’s Member & Affiliate Profile report, there were 
13,910 U.S. audiologists affiliated with ASHA in 2021, 
which likely includes some retirees and others who do not 
practice clinically. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (2021), there were 14,600 audiology jobs in the 
United States. Thus, our sampling procedure did not 
include all clinical audiologists in the United States because 
we recruited from among only ASHA-affiliated audiolo-
gists. In addition, survey participants were not compensated 
for their time, which may have reduced the potential pool 
of participants. Survey studies are limited in their breadth 
to optimize completion rate; however, future studies should 
expand the checklist of APD tests and expand the focus to 
examine connections between APD diagnosis and treatment 
and to further explore optimal ways for audiologists to 
integrate their care of APD patients with other disciplines. 
Data Availability Statement 
Data are provided in the aggregate in the Appendix. 
Some of the raw data (participant quotes) are included in 
this Appendix. Raw data for all items are not publicly 
available. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank the Towson Univer-
sity Graduate Student Association for funding participant 
recruitment efforts. 
References 
Abdollahi, F. Z., Lotfi, Y., Moosavi, A., & Bakhshi, E. (2019). 
Binaural interaction component of middle latency response in 
children suspected to central auditory processing disorder. 
Indian Journal of Otolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, 
71(2), 182–185. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12070-017-1114-5 
Abramson, M., Moncrieff, D., Chermak, G. D., Musiek, F. E., 
Geffner, D., & Guillory, L. (2018). Six points of audiological 
consensus on central auditory processing disorders (CAPD). 
Hearing Review, 25(4), 38–40. https://hearingreview.com/hearing-
loss/hearing-disorders/apd/six-points-audiological-consensus-
central-auditory-processing-disorders-capd 
American Academy of Audiology. (2010). Guidelines for the diag-
nosis, treatment, and management of children and adults with 
central auditory processing disorder. https://audiology-web.s3. 
amazonaws.com/migrated/CAPD%20Guidelines%208-2010.pdf_ 
539952af956c79.73897613.pdf
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
625
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2005). Central 
auditory processing disorders. https://www.asha.org 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2021). ASHA 
membership data, year-end 2021, and specialized analyses con-
ducted by ASHA’s Surveys and Analysis unit. https://www. 
asha.org/siteassets/surveys/2021-member-affiliate-profile.pdf 
American 
Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association. 
(2022). 
2021 
member and affiliate profile. https://www.asha.org/siteassets/ 
surveys/2021-member-affiliate-profile.pdf 
Ankmnal-Veeranna, S., Allan, C., & Allen, P. (2019). Auditory 
brainstem responses in children with auditory processing dis-
order. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 30(10), 
904–917. https://doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.18046 
Auditec Inc. (2015). Auditory Continuous Performance Test (ACPT). 
https://auditec.com/2015/10/26/auditory-continuous-performance-
test-acpt/ 
Bamiou, D.-E., Musiek, F. E., & Luxon, L. M. (2001). Aetiology 
and clinical presentations of auditory processing Disorders— 
A review. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 85(5), 361–365. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.85.5.361 
Barker, M. D., & Purdy, S. C. (2015). An initial investigation 
into the validity of a computer-based auditory processing 
assessment (Feather Squadron). International Journal of Audi-
ology, 55(3), 173–183. https://doi.org/10.3109/14992027.2015. 
1074734 
Bellis, T. J., Chermak, G. D., Weihing, J., & Musiek, F. E. 
(2012). Efficacy of auditory interventions for central audi-
tory processing disorder: A response to Fey et al. (2011). 
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 43(3), 
381–386. https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2012/11-0085) 
Bellis,  T. J., & Ferre, J. M.  (1999). Multidimensional approach 
to the differential diagnosis of central auditory processing disor-
ders in children. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 
10(6), 319–328. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-1748503 
Cacace, A. T., & McFarland, D. J. (2005). The importance of 
modality specificity in diagnosing central auditory processing 
disorder. American Journal of Audiology, 14(2), 112–123. 
https://doi.org/10.1044/1059-0889(2005/012) 
Cameron, S., & Dillon, H. (2007). Development of the Listening 
in Spatialized Noise-Sentences Test (LiSN-S). Ear and Hearing, 
28(2), 196–211. https://doi.org/10.1097/AUD.0b013e318031267f 
Cameron, S., Glyde, H., Dillon, H., King, A., & Gillies, K. 
(2015). Results from a national central auditory processing 
disorder service: A real-world assessment of diagnostic prac-
tices and remediation for central auditory processing disorder. 
Seminars in Hearing, 36(4), 216–236. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-
0035-1564457 
Chermak, 
G. 
D. 
(2002). 
Deciphering 
auditory 
processing 
disorders in children. Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America, 
35(4), 733–749. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0030-6665(02)00056-7 
Chermak, G. D., Bamiou, D.-E., Iliadou, V., & Musiek, F. E. 
(2017). Practical guidelines to minimise language and cogni-
tive confounds in the diagnosis of CAPD: A brief tutorial. 
International Journal of Audiology, 56(7), 499–506. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/14992027.2017.1284351 
Chermak, G. D., Iliadou, V., Bamiou, D.-E., & Musiek, F. E. 
(2018). Letter to the editor: Response to Vermiglio, 2018, 
“The gold standard and auditory processing disorder.” Per-
spectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups, 3(6), 77–82. 
https://doi.org/10.1044/persp3.SIG6.77 
Cooper, J. C., Jr., & Gates, G. A. (1991). Hearing in the 
elderly—The Framingham cohort, 1983–1985: Part II. Preva-
lence of central auditory processing disorders. Ear and Hearing, 
12(5), 304–311. https://doi.org/10.1097/00003446-199110000-00002 
DATA USA. (2020). Audiologists. https://datausa.io/profile/soc/ 
audiologists 
DeBonis, D. A., & Moncrieff, D. (2008). Auditory processing dis-
orders: An update for speech-language pathologists. American 
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 17(1), 4–18. https:// 
doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2008/002) 
de Wit, E., Steenbergen, B., Visser-Bochane, M. I., van der 
Schans, C. P., van Dijk, P., & Luinge, M. R. (2018). Response 
to the letter to the editor from Moncrieff (2017) regarding de 
Wit et al. (2016), “Characteristics of auditory processing dis-
orders: A systematic review.” Journal of Speech, Language, 
and Hearing Research, 61(6), 1517–1519. https://doi.org/10. 
1044/2018_JSLHR-H-0412 
de Wit, E., Visser-Bochane, M. I., Steenbergen, B., van Dijk, P., 
van der Schans, C. P., & Luinge, M. R. (2016). Characteristics 
of auditory processing disorders: A systematic review. Journal 
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 59(2), 384–413. 
https://doi.org/10.1044/2015_JSLHR-H-15-0118 
Domitz, D. M., & Schow, R. L. (2000). A new CAPD battery— 
Multiple Auditory Processing Assessment: Factor analysis and 
comparisons with SCAN. American Journal of Audiology, 9(2), 
101–111. https://doi.org/10.1044/1059-0889(2000/012) 
Emanuel, D. C. (2002). The auditory processing battery: Survey 
of common practices. Journal of the American Academy of Audi-
ology, 13(2), 93–117. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0040-1715952 
Emanuel, D. C., Ficca, K. N., & Korczak, P. (2011). Survey 
of the diagnosis and management of auditory processing dis-
order. American Journal of Audiology, 20(1), 48–60. https:// 
doi.org/10.1044/1059-0889(2011/10-0019) 
Emanuel, D. C., Marczewski, C., Nagle, S., & Fallon, K. (2015). 
Survey of auditory processing protocols and perceptions of 
speech-language pathologists in comparison with perceptions 
of audiologists. Contemporary Issues in Communication Sci-
ence and Disorders, 42, 110–121. https://doi.org/10.1044/cicsd_ 
42_S_110 
Etymotic Research. (1993). The SIN test [CD]. 
Fey, M. E., Kamhi, A. G., & Richard, G. J. (2012). Auditory 
training for children with auditory processing disorder and lan-
guage impairment: A response to Bellis, Chermak, Weihing, and 
Musiek. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 
43(3), 387–392. https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2012/12-0016) 
Fey, 
M. 
E., 
Richard, 
G. 
J., 
Geffner, 
D., 
Kamhi, 
A. 
G., 
Medwetsky, L., Paul, D., Ross-Swain, D., Wallach, G. P., 
Frymark, T., & Schooling, T. (2011). Auditory processing dis-
order and auditory/language interventions: An evidence-based 
systematic review. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in 
Schools, 42(3), 246–264. https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2010/ 
10-0013) 
Golding, M., Carter, N., Mitchell, P., & Hood, L. J. (2004). Prev-
alence of central auditory processing (CAP) abnormality in an 
older Australian population: The Blue Mountains Hearing 
Study. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 15(9), 
633–642. https://doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.15.9.4 
Hurford, D. P., & Jacobs, E. (2021). Multiple Auditory Process-
ing Assessment–2. In J. F. Carlson, K. F. Geisinger, & J. L. 
Jonson (Eds.), The twenty-first mental measurements yearbook. 
Buros Institute of Mental Measurements. 
Iliadou, V. V., Chermak, G. D., Bamiou, D.-E., Rawool, V. W., 
Ptok, M., Purdy, S., Jutras, B., Moncrieff, D., Mattsson, 
T. S., Ferre, J. M., Fox, C., Grech, H., Geffner, D., Hedjever, 
M., Bellis, T. J., Nimatoudis, I., Eleftheriadis, N., Pedersen, 
E. R., Weihing, J., . . . Musiek, F. E. (2018). Letter to the edi-
tor: An affront to scientific inquiry re: Moore, D. R. (2018) 
Editorial: Auditory processing disorder, Ear Hear, 39, 617–620.
626
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

Ear and Hearing, 39(6), 1236−1242. https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
AUD.0000000000000644 
Iliadou, V. V., & Eleftheriadis, N. (2017). Auditory processing dis-
order as the sole manifestation of a cerebellopontine and internal 
auditory canal lesion. Journal of the American Academy of 
Audiology, 28(1), 91–101. https://doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.15127 
Iliadou, V. V., & Eleftheriadis, N. (2018). Response to the letter 
from 
Dr. 
Vermiglio 
regarding 
Iliadou 
and 
Eleftheriadis 
(2017): CAPD is classified in ICD-10 as H93.25. Journal of 
the American Academy of Audiology, 29(3), 264–265. https:// 
doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.17022 
Jerger, J. (2016). Response to Dr. Vermiglio. Journal of the 
American Academy of Audiology, 27(8), 683. https://doi.org/ 
10.3766/jaaa.16088 
Jerger, J., & Musiek, F. (2000). Report of the consensus confer-
ence on the diagnosis of auditory processing disorders in 
school-aged 
children. 
Journal 
of 
the 
American 
Academy 
of Audiology, 11(9), 467–474. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-
1748136 
Katz, J. (1962). The use of staggered spondaic words for asses-
sing the integrity of the central auditory nervous system. Jour-
nal of Auditory Research, 2, 327–337. 
Katz, J. (2007). APD evaluation to therapy: The Buffalo Model. 
http://www.Audiologyonline.Com/articles/apd-evaluation-to-
therapy-buffalo-945 
Katz, J., & Harmon, C. (1981). Phonemic synthesis: Diagnostic 
and training program. In R. Keith (Ed.), Central auditory and 
language disorders in children. College-Hill Press. 
Keith, R. (1994). SCAN–A: Test for auditory processing disorders 
in adolescents and adults. The Psychological Corporation. 
Keith, R. (2000). Random Gap Detection Test (RGDT). Auditec. 
Keller, W. D., & Tillery, K. L. (2002). Reliable differential diag-
nosis and effective management of auditory processing and 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorders. Seminars in Hearing, 
23(4), 337–348. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2002-35882 
McFarland, D. J., & Cacace, A. T. (2014). Current controversies 
in CAPD: From Procrustes’ bed to Pandora’s box. In T. K. 
Parthasarathy (Ed.), An introduction to auditory processing dis-
orders in children (pp. 261–278). Psychology Press. 
Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and 
implementation. Wiley. 
Moncrieff, D. (2017). Response to de Wit et al., 2016, “Charac-
teristics of auditory processing disorders: A systematic review.” 
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 60(5), 
1448–1450. https://doi.org/10.1044/2017_JSLHR-H-16-0258 
Moore, D. R. (2018). Guest editorial: Auditory processing disor-
der. Ear and Hearing, 39(4), 617–620. https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
AUD.0000000000000582 
Musiek, F. E., Baran, J. A., & Pinheiro, M. L. (1990). Duration 
pattern recognition in normal subjects and patients with cere-
bral and cochlear lesions. Audiology, 29(6), 304–313. https:// 
doi.org/10.3109/00206099009072861 
Musiek, F. E., Gollegly, K. M., Kibbe, K. S., & Verkest-Lenz, 
S. B. (1991). Proposed screening test for central auditory dis-
orders: Follow-up on the dichotic digits test. American Journal 
of Otolaryngology, 12(2), 109–113. 
Musiek, F. E., & Pinheiro, M. L. (1987). Frequency patterns in 
cochlear, brainstem, and cerebral lesions. Audiology, 26(2), 
79–88. https://doi.org/10.3109/00206098709078409 
Musiek, F. E., Shinn, J., Jirsa, R., Bamiou, D.-E., Baran, J. A., 
& Zaidan, E. (2005). GIN (Gaps-In-Noise) test performance 
in subjects with confirmed central auditory nervous system 
involvement. Ear and Hearing, 26(6), 608–618. https://doi.org/ 
10.1097/01.aud.0000188069.80699.41 
Nagao, K., Riegner, T., Padilla, J., Greenwood, L. A., Loson, J., 
Zavala, S., & Morlet, T. (2016). Prevalence of auditory pro-
cessing disorder in school-aged children in the mid-Atlantic 
region. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 27(9), 
691–700. https://doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.15020 
Parbery-Clark, A., Anderson, S., Hittner, E., & Kraus, N. (2012). 
Musical experience offsets age-related delays in neural timing. 
Neurobiology of Aging, 33(7), 1483.e1−1483.e4. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.12.015 
Pinheiro, M. L., & Ptacek, P. H. (1971). Reversals in the percep-
tion of noise and tone patterns. The Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, 49(6B), 1778–1782. https://doi.org/10. 
1121/1.1912581 
Pitney, W. A., Parker, J., Mazerolle, S. M., & Potteiger, K. 
(2020). Qualitative research in the health professions. SLACK 
Incorporated. 
Roberts, M. A., Persinger, M. A., Grote, C., Evertowski, L. M., 
Springer, J. A., Tuten, T., Moulden, D., Franzen, K. M., 
Roberts, R. J., & Baglio, C. S. (1994). The Dichotic Word 
Listening Test: Preliminary observations in American and 
Canadian samples. Applied Neuropsychology, 1(1), 45–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15324826an0101&2_9 
Rocha-Muniz, C. N., Filippini, R., Neves-Lobo, I. F., Rabelo, 
C. M., Morais, A. A., Murphy, C. F. B., Calarga, K. S., 
Ribeiro Leite, L. C., Pires, M. M., Sena-Yoshinaga, T. A., & 
Schochat, E. (2016). Can speech-evoked auditory brainstem 
response become a useful tool in clinical practice? CoDAS, 
28(1), 77–80. https://doi.org/10.1590/2317-1782/20162014231 
Sharma, M., Purdy, S. C., & Kelly, A. S. (2009). Comorbidity of 
auditory processing, language, and reading disorders. Journal 
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 52(3), 706–722. 
https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/07-0226) 
Tallal, P., Miller, S. L., Bedi, G., Byma, G., Wang, X., Nagarajan, 
S. S., Schreiner, C., Jenkins, W. M., & Merzenich, M. M. (1996). 
Language comprehension in language-learning impaired children 
improved with acoustically modified speech. Science, 271(5245), 
81–84. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.271.5245.81 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2021). Occupational outlook 
handbook: 
Audiologists. 
https://www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/ 
audiologists.htm. Retrieved April 14, 2023. 
Vermiglio, A. J. (2014). On the clinical entity in audiology: (Cen-
tral) auditory processing and speech recognition in noise dis-
orders. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 25(9), 
904–917. https://doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.25.9.11 
Vermiglio, A. J. (2016). On diagnostic accuracy in audiology: 
Central site of lesion and central auditory processing disorder 
studies. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 27(2), 
141–156. https://doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.15079 
Vermiglio, A. J. (2017). A response to Dr. Jerger regarding “On 
diagnostic accuracy in audiology: Central site of lesion and 
central auditory processing disorder studies.” Journal of the 
American Academy of Audiology, 28(1), 102. https://doi.org/ 
10.3766/jaaa.16123 
Vermiglio, A. J. (2018a). The gold standard and auditory 
processing 
disorder. 
Perspectives 
of 
the 
ASHA 
Special 
Interest Groups, 36(6), 6–17. https://doi.org/10.1044/persp3. 
SIG6.6 
Vermiglio, A. J. (2018b). Response to Drs. Iliadou and Eleftheriadis 
regarding “Auditory processing disorder (APD) as the sole 
manifestation of a cerebellopontine and internal auditory canal 
lesion.” Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 29(3), 
262–263. https://doi.org/10.3766/jaaa.17009 
Vermiglio, A. J. (2018c). Response to the letter to the editor from 
Chermak, Iliadou, Bamiou, and Musiek (2018) regarding
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
627
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
Vermiglio (2018), “The gold standard and auditory processing 
disorder.” Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups, 
3(6), 83–90. https://doi.org/10.1044/persp3.SIG6.83 
Veterans Administration. (1992). Tonal and speech materials for 
auditory perceptual assessment [Audio compact disc]. Research and 
Development Service, Veterans’ Administration Central Office. 
Willeford, J. A. (1978). Sentence tests of central auditory func-
tion. In J. Katz (Ed.), Handbook of clinical audiology (pp. 
252–261). Williams & Wilkins. 
Willeford, J. A. (1977). Assessing central auditory behavior in 
children: A test battery approach. In R. W. Keith (Ed.), Cen-
tral auditory dysfunction (pp. 43–72). Grune & Stratton. 
Wilson, W. J. (2019). On the definition of APD and the need for a 
conceptual model of terminology. International Journal of Audiol-
ogy, 58(8), 516–523. https://doi.org/10.1080/14992027.2019.1600057 
World Health Organization. (1993). The ICD-10 classification of 
mental and behavioural disorders: Diagnostic criteria for research. 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/37108
628
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(table continues)
Appendix (p. 1 of 11) 
Survey Questions and Response Summary1 
Question
%
n 
Q1. How many years have you been practicing clinically in the area of audiology? 
Less than 1 year
0.0
0 
1–5 years
5.2
7 
6–10 years
8.2
11 
11–15 years
6.0
8 
16–20 years
11.2
15 
21–25 years
14.1
19 
26+ years
55.2
74 
Total number of respondents = 134 
Q2. What is your gender? 
Woman
89.4
118 
Man
10.6
14 
Non-binary/third gender
0
0
Total number of responses = 132 
Q3. What degrees do you currently hold? Please check all that apply.* 
Master’s Degree
33.8
45 
Clinical Doctorate (e.g., Au.D.)
67.7
90 
Research Doctorate
17.3
23 
Isolated: Terminal Master’s Degree (no doctorate)
17.3
23 
Grouped: Any doctorate (clinical or research)
82.7
110 
Grouped: Two doctoral degrees (clinical and research)
2.3
3 
Total number of respondents = 133 
Q4. If you hold professional credentials in another field besides audiology, can you specify the field and credential? (Short-answer response) 
Speech-language pathology (SLP)
—
11 
Education
—
8 
Total number of respondents = 17* 
Note: *Two respondents reported both SLP and education credentials. 
Q5. In what setting do you currently practice? Please check all that apply.* 
Q6. If more than one setting selected, please provide what you consider to be your primary work setting. (Short-answer response)* 
Private practice
25.4
34 
School system
20.1
27 
Hospital
17.2
23 
University clinic
14.2
19 
Non-profit clinic
5.2
7 
Government facility (Includes VA)
4.5
6 
ENT office
3.7
5 
Community Clinic
1.5
2 
Other/multiple sites*
8.2
11 
Total number of respondents = 134 
*Note: Q5 and Q6 were examined together. This table represents the aggregate response for primary work setting. The “other/multiple sites” 
category represents work settings associated with fewer than two participant responses for other work settings and/or participants who 
reported multiple settings but who did not identify one as the primary work setting.
1 The number of respondents is reported for each question. Percentages for each question are based on this number. Responses of “prefer not to 
answer” were considered missing data. 
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
629
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(table continues)
Appendix (p. 2 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
•
•
•
Q7. What age groups do you test for APD? Please check all that apply.* 
Age 3–6 years
38.1
51 
Age 7–10 years
93.3
125 
Age 11–14 years
93.3
125 
Age 15–17 years
90.3
121 
Age 18–25 years
77.6
104 
Age 26–40 years
63.4
85 
Age 41–65 years
56.7
76 
Age 65+ years
29.9
40 
Filtered: Children (< 18) but not adults (18+)
23.5
28 
Filtered: Adults (18+) but not children
6.7
8 
Filtered: Both children and adults
73.1
98 
Total number of respondents = 134 
Q8. How many years of clinical experience do you have in the area of APD? 
1–5 years
11.5
15 
6–10 years
14.5
19 
11–15 years
12.2
16 
16–20 years
19.1
25 
21–25 years
16.8
22 
26+ years
26.0
34 
Total number of respondents = 131 
Q9. Prior to, or as part of your overall assessment for APD testing, what audiometric tests do you require? Please check all that apply. 
Pure Tone Audiometry+ 
100.0
131 
Tympanometry+ 
96.2
126 
Otoscopy+ 
95.4
125 
Word Recognition Score (in quiet)+ 
90.1
118 
Speech Recognition Threshold (SRT)+ 
89.3
117 
Acoustic Reflex Thresholds (ART)+ 
66.4
87 
Distortion Product Otoacoustic Emissions (DPOAEs)+ 
58.0
76 
Word Recognition Score (in noise)+ 
52.7
69 
Acoustic Reflex Decay (ARD)+ 
10.7
14 
Transient Evoked Otoacoustic Emissions (TEOAEs)+ 
9.9
13 
Electrophysiology*
2.3
3 
Performance Intensity Testing+ 
0.8
1 
Total number of respondents = 131 
Notes: (1) Items noted with + were provided to participants via checklist on the survey. (2) *The electrophysiology response was created by 
grouping three participant responses submitted under “other/specify.” The individual responses were ABR, cABR, and ABR/middle/P300. All 
other write-in responses submitted under “other/specify” were submitted by only one participant per response. These were Comprehensive 
case history, QuickSIN or BKBSIN depending on age, and extended high frequency.
630
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(table continues)
Appendix (p. 3 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
Q10. Which of the following APD tests do you conduct on a regular basis? Please check all that apply. 
Dichotic Digits Test (DDT)+ 
74.8
98 
Competing Sentences Test (CST)+ 
73.3
96 
Staggered Spondaic Words (SSW)+ 
71.8
94 
SCAN+ *
71.0
93 
Pitch Pattern Test (PPT)+ 
64.9
85 
Speech-in-Noise Test+ 
64.1
84 
Time Compressed Speech+ 
56.5
74 
Random Gap Detection Test (RGDT)+ 
45.0
59 
High/Low Pass Filtered Speech+ 
35.9
47 
Duration Pattern Test (DPT)+ 
29.0
38 
Gaps in Noise (GIN) Test+ 
28.2
37 
Frequency Pattern Test (FPT)+ 
26.0
34 
Phonemic Synthesis
20.6
27 
Time Compressed and Reverberated Speech+ 
13.0
17 
Dichotic Words Listening Test (DWLT)+ 
10.7
14 
Listening in Spatialized Noise – Sentence (LiSN-S)
9.2
12 
BKB-SIN
6.9
9 
Masking Level Difference (MLD)
6.1
8 
Auditory Fusion Test–Revised+ 
5.3
7 
Acoustic Pioneer–Feather Squadron
5.3
7 
Synthetic Sentence Identification (SSI)+ 
4.6
6 
Binaural Fusion
3.1
4 
Multiple Auditory Processing Assessment (MAPA)
3.1
4 
QuickSIN
3.1
4 
Dichotic Rhyme Test (DRT)+ 
3.1
4 
Test of Auditory Processing Skills (TAPS)
2.3
3 
Auditory Skills Assessment (ASA)
1.5
2 
Lindamood Auditory Conceptualization Test
1.5
2 
Words in Quiet/Words in Noise
1.5
2 
Gap Detection Screening
1.5
2 
Rapidly Alternating Speech Perception Test (RASP)
1.5
2 
Dichotic Consonant Vowel Test (DCVT)+ 
0.8
1 
Total number of respondents = 131 
Notes: (1) Items noted with + were provided to participants via checklist on the survey. All other tests listed here were written in by participants 
under the “other/specify” option. (2) *The SCAN category includes all versions of the SCAN and reports of specific sub-tests of the SCAN. (3) 
Eight participants wrote Auditory Continuous Performance Test (ACPT) under the “other/specify” option for this question. Those data are 
included in the data summary under Question 18. (4) In addition to the items listed here, the following tests were submitted as write-in 
responses by only one participant per item: Binaural Integration/Binaural Interaction/Binaural Separation, Cognivue, Competing Environmental 
Sounds (CES), Competing Words-Directed Ear (CW-DE), Dichotic Sentence Identification (DSI), Differential Screening Test for Processing 
(DSTP), Electrophysiology (MLR, P300, MMN), and Three-interval forced choice gap detection test (3IFC-GDT). 
Q11. Which of the following do you perform? Please check all that apply. 
Diagnose APD
96
126 
Provide APD-related amplification services (e.g., FM-system fitting)
68
89 
Provide recommendations (but no direct management)
66
87 
Provide consultation for APD management
55
72 
Screen for APD
53
69 
Make environmental modifications to academic or vocational environments
43
56 
Provide direct therapy to treat APD*
29
38 
Total number of respondents = 131 
Note: *Three of the participants who reported providing direct therapy also reported SLP credentials and one reported education credentials.
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
631
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(table continues)
Appendix (p. 4 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
•
•
•
Q12. What other disciplines are involved in the APD diagnostic process at your primary clinical setting? Please check all that apply. 
Speech-language pathology+ 
65.2
86 
Psychology+ 
43.2
57 
None+ 
31.1
41 
Education+ 
28.8
38 
Otolaryngology+ 
14.4
19 
Developmental pediatrics+ 
11.4
15 
Neurology+ 
10.6
14 
Occupational therapy and/or Physical Therapy
6.8
9 
Other medical*
3.8
5 
Neuropsychology
2.3
3 
Total number of respondents = 132 
Notes: (1) Items noted with + were provided to participants via checklist on the survey. All other specialty areas listed here were written in 
by participants under the “other/specify” option. (2) *“Other medical” includes the following participant responses: MD, pediatrics, Doctor 
of Optometry, neurophysiology, and physical medicine. (3) In addition to the items listed here, the following were submitted by only one 
participant per item: vision therapists, reading specialists, and behavioral health (mind–body, art therapy). 
Q13. Do you work with professionals from other disciplines as part of a multidisciplinary team OR an interdisciplinary team? 
Multidisciplinary only
54.5
73 
Interdisciplinary only
26.9
36 
Both (Multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary)
5.2
7 
Neither*
13.4
18 
Total number of respondents = 134* 
Note: *This question did not include a “neither” response item; this response is assumed based on no response to the question. The 
overall total number of participants (n = 134) was used as the divisor to provide an indication of overall use of a team approach. 
Q14. How do you identify language disorders as part of your differential diagnosis process for APD? Choose the item that most 
closely matches the approach you use most often. 
APD evaluations are conducted as part of a multidisciplinary team approach, and 
language disorders are evaluated by a professional from another discipline as 
part of that process. 
39.6
53 
APD evaluations are conducted as part of an interdisciplinary team approach at 
my primary workplace, and language disorders are evaluated by a professional 
from another discipline as part of that process. 
24.6
33 
I do not routinely screen for language disorders, but I refer for a speech-language 
evaluation if case history suggests possible language disorder. 
23.9
32 
I do not screen for language disorders but require a speech-language evaluation 
as part of my APD assessment protocol. 
8.2
11 
I do not rule out language disorders as part of my APD evaluation.
7.5
10 
I screen for language disorders and refer to a speech-language pathologist if the 
screening suggests possible language disorder. 
4.5
6 
Other/please specify
9.7
13 
Filtered: Participants who selected or wrote in at least one strategy
92.5
124 
Total number of respondents = 134 
Note: Responses under “other (please specify)” included case history/review of prior results (n = 11), depends on APD test results (n = 2), 
and Feather Squadron (n = 1).
632
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(table continues)
Appendix (p. 5 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
Q15. If you personally conduct a screening for language disorders, what screening methods do you use? Please check all that apply. 
Parent and/or teacher checklist+ 
—
11 
Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals Screener (CELF)+ 
—
5 
Student Language Scale (SLS) Screener for Language and Literacy+ 
—
0 
DELV- Screening+ 
—
0 
Adolescent Language Screening Test (ALST)+ 
—
0 
Screening Test of Adolescent Language (STAL)+ 
—
0 
Other (please specify)+ 
—
12 
Total number of respondents = 23 
Note: Item notes with + were provided to participants via checklist on the survey. Responses under “other (please specify)” included case 
history/review of prior results (n = 5), full evaluation (n = 3), and one response each for these responses: Pre-school language scale (PLS-5), 
Differential Screening Test for Processing (DSTP, Ferre & Richard), Buffalo Model questionnaire and TAPS, Comparison of high and low 
predictability scores on the SPIN test, phonological assessment or screening. 
Q16. How do you identify cognitive disorders as part of your differential diagnosis process for APD? Choose the item that most 
closely matches the approach you use most often. 
APD evaluations are conducted as part of a multidisciplinary team approach, and 
cognitive disorders are evaluated for by a professional from another discipline 
as part of that process. 
34.9
45 
I do not routinely screen for cognitive disorders, but I refer for an evaluation by a 
psychologist if case history suggests a possible cognitive disorder. 
34.1
44 
APD evaluations are conducted as part of an interdisciplinary team approach at 
my primary workplace, and cognitive disorders are evaluated for by a 
professional from another discipline as part of that process. 
23.3
30 
I do not rule out cognitive disorders as part of my APD evaluation.
6.8
10 
I screen for cognitive disorders and refer to a psychologist if the screening 
suggests possible cognitive disorder. 
5.4
7 
I do not screen for cognitive disorders but require an evaluation by a psychologist 
as part of my APD assessment protocol. 
5.4
7 
Other (please specify)+ 
5.4
7 
Filtered: Participants who selected or wrote in at least one strategy
92.2
119 
Total number of respondents = 129 
Note: “Other (please specify)” responses included case history/review of prior results (n = 5), variable approach (n = 1), and a statement that 
persons with low IQ are not tested for APD (n = 1). 
Q17. If you personally conduct a screening for cognitive disorders, what screening methods do you use? Please check all that apply. 
Parent and/or teacher checklist+ 
—
3 
Test of Non-verbal Intelligence (TONI-4)+ 
—
2 
Other
—
6 
Total number of respondents = 10 
Note: Item notes with + were provided to participants via checklist on the survey. One respondent who checked TONI-4 clarified that it was 
used for research only. Tests provided by participants who selected “other” were WASI-II (Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence-2nd 
edition), MOCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment), G-PCOG (General Practitioner Assessment of Cognition), Cognivue, and Short-term 
Auditory Memory Test.
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
633
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(table continues)
Appendix (p. 6 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
•
•
•
Q18. How do you identify attention disorders (e.g., Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder [ADHD]) as part of your differential 
diagnosis process for APD? Please check all that apply. 
APD evaluations are conducted as part of a multidisciplinary team approach, and 
attention disorders are evaluated for by a professional from another discipline 
as part of that process.+ 
27.1
36 
I do not routinely screen for attention disorders but screen and refer for an 
evaluation by a psychologist if the behavior during testing suggests possible 
attention disorder.+ 
26.3
35 
I screen for attention disorders and refer to a psychologist if the screening 
suggests possible attention disorder.+ 
24.8
33 
I identify ADHD prior to the examination and whether patients have taken 
prescribed medication prior to the APD assessment.+ 
24.8
33 
APD evaluations are conducted as part of an interdisciplinary team approach at 
my primary workplace, and attention disorders are evaluated for by a 
professional from another discipline as part of that process.+ 
19.5
26 
I do not rule out attention disorders as part of my APD evaluation.+ 
6.8
9 
I do not screen for attention disorders but require an evaluation by a psychologist 
as part of my APD assessment protocol.+ 
5.3
7 
Other/please specify
3.8
5 
Filtered: Participants who selected or wrote in at least one strategy
93.2
124 
Total number of respondents = 133 
Note: Item notes with + were provided to participants via checklist on the survey. “Other/please specify” responses included the following: 
screen and refer for neurodevelopmental evaluation, Parent checklist (Geffner Listening Inventory), screen for listening attention, auditory 
memory test, I have worked with psychologists to discuss how to conduct testing to reduce the effect of attention. 
Q19. If you personally conduct a screening for attention disorders, what screening methods do you use? Please check all that apply. 
Auditory Continuous Performance Test (ACPT)+ 
—
51 
Parent and/or teacher checklist+ 
—
12 
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function (BRIEF)+ 
—
4 
Conners’ Continuous Performance Test-II (CPT-II)+ 
—
4 
Integrated Visual and Auditory (IVA) Continuous Performance Test+ 
—
0 
Test of Variables of Attention (TOVA)+ 
—
0 
Other/please specify
—
8 
Total number of respondents = 60 
Note: Item notes with + were provided to participants via checklist on the survey. “Other/please specify” responses included case history/ 
clinical observation (n = 5, two of these also included other items from this list), school noise assessment, SAAT if needed, FOCUS test, 
Monaural Selective Auditory Attention test, and competing sentences test for attention.
634
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(table continues)
Appendix (p. 7 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
Q20. If you generally use a test battery approach for APD testing, what source(s) do you use to guide the selection of APD tests 
in your test battery? Please check all that apply. 
Clinical Experience+ 
69.7
92 
ASHA Report (2005)+ 
55.3
73 
Buffalo Model (Katz, 2007)+ 
54.5
72 
AAA Clinical Practice Guidelines (2010)+ 
52.3
69 
Personal review of literature+ 
52.3
69 
Information obtained via seminar/workshop+ 
51.5
68 
Consultation with other audiologists+ 
41.7
55 
Information from an APD working group+ 
32.6
43 
Clinical site protocols+ 
25.0
33 
Recommendations from professional mentor+ 
25.0
33 
Bruton Documents of 2000+ 
9.1
12 
State technical assistance papers+ 
6.8
9 
Other/specify: Bellis–Ferre Model
6.8
9 
Other/specify (not including Bellis–Ferre Model)*
8.3
11 
Total number of respondents = 132 
Note: Item notes with + were provided to participants via checklist on the survey. *“Other/specify” comments in this response were 
SCAN 3 + DSTP, MCAP Military Central Auditory Processing Disorder, More recent ASHA technical report maybe 2019?, All auditory 
processing skills with at least 1 test each. . .depending on patient reported symptoms, Doctoral coursework, Would like to update tests but 
have not found anything I want to use, IGAPS and accumulated knowledge, functional skill assessment, Medwetsky’s Spoken-Language 
Processing Model, evolution from above and workshops/papers/experience, and ASHA clinical portal. 
Note: Participants selected between 1 and 10 items for this question (M = 4.9, SD = 2.3). 
Q21. What criteria do you utilize for a positive diagnosis of APD? Please check all that apply. 
Failed two tests by at least two standard deviations+ 
73.6
95 
Failed one test by at least three standard deviations+ 
19.4
25 
Other/specify: Diagnosis based on pattern of results*
19.4
25 
Failed one test by at least two standard deviations+ 
12.4
16 
Failed two tests by at least three standard deviations+ 
4.7
6 
Other/specify: Other responses not including**
5.4
7 
Failed one or more tests using non-speech stimuli sounds+ 
3.9
5 
Failed one or more tests using speech sounds+ 
3.9
5 
Total number of respondents = 129 
Note: Items noted with + were included in the survey checklist. *“Other/specify” responses described some aspect of interpretation based on a 
pattern of responses within or across skills with 7 of these responses comparing response patterns with Buffalo and/or Bellis–Ferre models. 
**“Other/specify” responses that did not discuss pattern interpretation included Canadian Guidelines, Test interpretations by author [of the 
test], clinically significant (i.e., 15 standard point difference) between subtests/must be more than 1, one test 1.5 SD below, Failed 3 or 
more measures by 1 SD, < 2 tests + delay > = 2 tests = disorder, failed 1 test by at least 2 SD or 2 of the same area of deficit by 1 SD. 
Number of items selected (including other) ranges from 1 to 7 (M = 1.5, SD = 0.8) with this strata: 1 criterion n = 78; 2 criteria n = 45; 3 
criteria n = 4; 4 criteria n = 1, 7 criteria n = 1. 
Q22. What APD management do you recommend? Please check all that apply. 
Compensatory strategies+ 
97.7
129 
FM system/Roger/Remote microphone technology+ 
93.9
124 
Aural Rehabilitation+ 
65.9
87 
Refer to another professional+ (follow-up with Q22A)
57.6
76 
Aural Rehabilitation Apps+ (follow-up with Q22B)
39.4
52 
Total number of respondents = 132
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
635
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(table continues)
Appendix (p. 8 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
•
•
•
Q22A: Refer to another professional (please specify; open-set response) 
Speech-Language Pathologist (SLP)
—
40 
Educators/Educational consultants
—
10 
Occupational Therapist (OT)
—
7 
Neuropsychologist
—
4 
Other physicians
—
4 
Reading specialist
—
3 
Vision therapist
—
3 
Psychologist
—
2 
Cognitive therapist
—
2 
Total number of respondents = 45 
Q22B. Aural Rehabilitation Apps (please specify; open-set response) 
Acoustic Pioneer
—
17 
HearBuilder
—
12 
Fast ForWord
—
12 
CapDots
—
9 
LACE
—
9 
Hear Coach
—
7 
CLEAR Works-4-ears
—
4 
Earobics
—
4 
Auditory Rehabilitation for Interaural Asymmetry (ARIA)
—
3 
NAL
—
2 
Insane Earplane
—
2 
DIID
—
2 
Zoo Caper
—
2 
Angel Sound
—
2 
Constraint-Induced Auditory Training (CIAT)
—
2 
Posit Science/Brain HQ
—
2 
Computer-based Auditory Training (CBAT)
—
2 
Total number of respondents = 45 
Note: Participants provided both “apps” (applications available via smart devices) and other types of computer-based training in response 
to this question. Additional responses that were provided by only one respondent per item included Localization clock, minimal pairs 
training, ABC Pocket Phonics, Phonics on the farm, Simon Says, Scattergories, Music lab, Listen 1–3 and 4–8, Reading Assistant, 
Sound Storm, Interactive Metronome, Auditory workout, Flowkey, iLs, IM, Phonemic Therapy, Lexia, Hamaguchi, APT (auditory pattern 
training), and Blob Chorus. 
Q23. What APD management do you provide? Please check all that apply. 
Compensatory strategies
85.0
91 
FM system/Roger/Remote microphone technology
88.8
95 
Aural Rehabilitation
43.0
46 
Total number of respondents = 109 
Q24. There is a recent body of literature that suggests the diagnosis of APD, as it has been traditionally defined and assessed, 
does not represent evidence-based practice. This editorial suggests APD does not exist as a unique disorder. Have you read 
the editorial by Moore (2018), or similar literature, or seen a recent presentation on this topic? 
Yes
67.9
91 
No
32.1
43 
Total number of respondents = 134
636
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

Appendix (p. 9 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
Q25. If yes, did this information change your clinical approach to the diagnosis and/or management of APD? 
No
88.9
80 
Yes
11.1
10 
Total number of respondents = 90 
Q26. If yes, what changes have you made to your clinical approach? (Open-set response) 
Quote Bank (All comments submitted by participants are listed below) 
Theme #1: Way of Thinking Shift 
○
It makes me look at APD as more of a way to help individuals figure out what is occurring and why they may be struggling. The 
tests help to narrow down possible areas they can work on to help make listening easier. (P#33) 
○
It made me more sensitive in how I approached advising patients, families, and other professionals, even though I didn’t agree fully 
with the opinion. I would be content using the term ‘listening difficulties’ rather than APD. (P#37) 
○
More info. About efficacy of tests (P#134) 
○
I do not always consider poor performance on 2 or more test measures to be an indicator of APD. I am choosing tests that do not 
follow the Buffalo Model as I have done previously. (P#98) 
Theme #2: Clarification 
○
To clarify, I have made changes over time but more based upon my own experience. The population I see often has multiple 
diagnoses - ADHD, Speech/language disorders, anxiety, etc. - and would never fit into the definition of APD as a standalone 
diagnosis that occurs in the absence of other disorders. (Although, I do see that also). Therefore, while I use APD for a diagnosis 
code for billing, I describe the person’s results in terms of areas of weakness and how they might affect communication and learning 
and how they are affected by/affect other comorbid conditions. (P#76) 
○
My testing has always been just a part of the student’s whole evaluation for eligibility for special education services. They have to 
meet state criteria for services-APD is not an eligibility category. (P#107) 
○
Interdisciplinary approach- never dx APD in isolation w/ just the test battery. (P#92) 
○
We do an intake assessment that screens IQ, language, memory, and attention before APD testing. (P#77) 
○
There needs to be a very specific therapy protocol to serve those clients who have symptoms of APD whether or not they have test 
data verifying APD. (P#34) 
Total number of respondents = 9 
Q27. What is your perspective on the assertion of some researchers that APD does not exist as a disorder? (Open-set response) 
Total number of respondents = 122 
Quote Bank (List below includes representative quotes for each of the six themes) 
Theme #1: Clinical Experience 
○
Based upon my experience in testing and diagnosing APD, I believe it does exist. (P#15) 
○
I consistently see children and adults demonstrate difficulty on tests and it matches the difficulties they are expressing. Also I am 
seeing positive change in children’s academic performance and a reduction in fatigue. Parents report improvement in classroom 
performance. (P#24) 
○
Whether or not others “believe in” APD or not, I have helped thousands of kids by diagnosing and developing treatment plans. I have 
seen them overcome struggles and become successful students, then adults, by diagnosing APD. Real or not, it is valuable. (P#36) 
○
Treating auditory processing weaknesses (or listening difficulties), in my experience can improve outcomes. (P#37) 
○
10 years working on APD and doing clinical research in APD is providing me with enough evidence-based information and experience to 
define very well this disorder. (P#44) 
○
I disagree with the perspective that it does not exist. I have seen first hand the difference in identifying and treating speech, language, 
literacy, and learning deficits with and without consideration of APD as primary or comingled deficits/disorders. (P#45) 
○
Have seen impact of students as they struggle to learn and once APD is found and support is provided - their lives change for the better. (P#49) 
○
In my clinical experience they [people who do not support APD as a unique disorder] are mistaken and claiming it doesn’t exist hurts 
those who are advocating for and caring for those who live with APD. APD therapy works and makes life better for those who follow 
through and complete therapy. (P#85) 
Theme #2: Comorbidity 
○
Most children and adults referred for testing have other disorders that make it difficult to differentiate APD by itself or as a 
characteristic of another already diagnosed disorder. (P#5) 
○
I do believe that APD exists, but it very often coexists with other problems. I believe that ignoring the auditory component would 
under serve the patient. (P#11) 
○
What can make diagnosing an APD challenging is there are many systems at play when we listen and process speech. For ex: 
cognition, language skills, attention, etc. A good solid auditory foundation (good auditory processing skills) is key to developing 
speech and language skills and only an audiologist can diagnose an APD. (P#16) 
○
When you see a child without co-morbid difficulties come in with auditory only difficulties it is clear APD exists. When co-morbid 
disorders are involved, it is more difficult to see it. (P#18) 
○
It [APD diagnosis] is like tossing all the colors in a bucket and then trying to pull out only the green. (P#42) 
○
It is extremely difficult to rule out APD from other functions such as language processing, executive functioning, etc. (P#48) 
(table continues)
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
637
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

Appendix (p. 10 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
•
•
•
○
I do think there is a lot of gray area as many kids have co-morbidities so it’s difficult to determine what is APD and what is something 
else. (P#53) 
○
APD is not a unitary disorder, it is multi factorial and multidimensional. (P#86) 
Theme #3: Listening Skills 
○
Dismissal of APD as a disorder does not provide a viable alternative to define speech-in-noise or other deficits in understanding in 
presence of normal hearing. (P#13) 
○
Regardless of the label, there seem to be individuals that can’t understand speech if background noise is present, can’t turn off 1 
ear and listen with the other and have difficulty interpreting speech coming into both ears at the same time. Some individuals are 
greatly debilitated by these issues. Some have difficulty with auditory directions but can follow visual directions. To me the brain is 
not processing auditory information correctly. What should we call this problem instead of APD? (P#14) 
○
There may be other reasons for the individuals’ struggle, but our testing can still help narrow down where they may be struggling so 
we can help give them strategies to make life easier. I look at the testing can lead to treatment options. Not necessarily a diagnosis -
communication problem (diagnosis is often needed to justify treatment). (P#33) 
○
I identify auditory deficits associated when taxing the CANS. Deficits identified in the absence of neurological symptoms are used 
for educational intervention for school-age children and college students. (P#56) 
○
I believe auditory weaknesses are much more prevalent as a “symptom” or feature of more global disorders such as specific learning 
disorder, ASD, AD/HD, language disorder, etc. Personally, I do not diagnose APD independent of these disorders, rather, state the 
patient has an “auditory weakness secondary to a diagnosis of “the larger disorder.” (P#61) 
○
I do not care what the ‘symptoms’ are called - they need to be addressed and treated. (P#65) 
○
This is complicated, but I have seen some patients for whom auditory processing weaknesses are significant contributors to their 
functional concerns. (P#76) 
○
As a professional practicing in public education, I am not concerned about identifying formal disorder. (leave that to the researchers) I 
identify functional auditory weaknesses/needs in the area of central auditory processing in order to add to a body of evidence for an 
educational disability identification. (P#82) 
○
I do not diagnose APD because it will send everyone on the “APD Wild Goose Chase” but the APD battery has value + helps the team 
to determine the best tools/modifications accommodations + referral to the appropriate professionals to support the student’s 
weaknesses + provide educational support. This has been our philosophy for MANY MANY years. (P#99) 
○
APD may not be a discreet disorder, but testing probably does identify students that have “listening problems” and does call 
attention to the problems. One real problem that does occur is when children with ADHD are mis-diagnosed with APD and may not 
get medical treatment that may help them. (P#108) 
○
These children are having difficulty. Anyway I can help I will in order to receive services they need to have a diagnosis. If it’s not 
APD, what is it? (P#119) 
Theme #4: Literature Support 
○
The strongest argument is the medical profession has recognized APD by giving it an ICD-10-CM diagnosis (code: H93.25 CAPD). (P#16) 
○
There is ample evidence in the literature to support the notion that APD (s) are a complex set of disorders subserved by the CNS 
that involve peripheral integrity and the ability to analyze, synthesize, attach meaning to, and manipulate rapidly changing acoustic 
speech and nonspeech patterns and to execute a response. ANY breakdown can result in a “processing” impairment. . . .Moore and 
others are trying to find a unitary deficit that can somehow be isolated out from other co-contributing factors. The auditory system 
doesn’t operate in a vacuum. Their quest is futile. Once one accepts that these are complex disorders, teasing out the 
“auditoriness” of the issue becomes much easier. You have to evaluate from a “big picture” perspective. (P#26) 
○
Myopic [the Assertion that APD does not exist as a unique disorder is] and ignores much of the research work by previous 
researchers. (P#38) 
○
Researchers that state APD does not exist are misinformed and not attending to facts. I frequently point them to other research 
(e.g., brain processing, neuroplasticity) to offer them additional information. (P#39) 
○
I completely disagree [with the assertion that APD does not exist] especially because there is twice as much evidence based 
research that supports not only the medical diagnosis but the detriment of not treating the disorder on academic and 
communication ability performance. (P#54) 
○
Read the response to Dr. Moore’s editorial which listed 40 persons as authors. . .  I think this response is very clear to the overall 
mistakes that Dr. Moore and his followers have made in assessing the research literature. (P#67) 
○
Recent publication: There exists considerable documentation for APD being a “debilitating neurological condition in which the brain 
is unable to effectively process sounds and speech.” Alyson Mountjoy, 2021. This is more than a receptive language issue. This is 
about the flexibility of the auditory system to tune in/out with precision in the midst of auditory challenges. (P#68) 
(table continues)
638
American Journal of Audiology
Vol. 32
614–639
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

Appendix (p. 11 of 11)
Survey Questions and Response Summary1
○
After decades of research on individuals with confirmed central auditory nervous system lesions showing that it exists, this 
assertion infuriates me. It is vastly uninformed and shows the limited knowledge of the person making the assertion. (P#83) 
Theme #5: Overdiagnosis 
○
Always felt CAP is over diagnosed. Really testing for “functional listening skills. I think early research is correct in ~2–3% 
demonstrate true CAPD. (P#2) 
○
It does exist but is not as prevalent as some would like to believe and is very variable. I don’t provide an APD diagnosis if results 
don’t meet criteria. I will often report results are not APD and symptoms likely due to cognitive higher order issues. (P#20) 
○
I have seen very few (2–3 students) with true APD and no other factors. If lang/cog/attention cannot be ruled out APD testing is 
impacted giving a false positive since most students with contributing factors can’t pass APD testing. (P#28) 
○
I feel that APD does exist as a disorder; however, some clinical facilities over-diagnose because testing is completed prior to 
obtaining information about cognitive, learning, and speech-language abilities. (P#55) 
○
I do believe it exists as a disorder; however, I do believe it is a true “zebra” disorder. In my almost 12 years of clinical practice, I 
can count on 2 hands how many times I have diagnosed APD independent of other higher level disorders. (P#61) 
○
APD is NOT a catch all (which I think so we’ve dx too many kids with APD). (P#92) 
○
I believe that APD DOES exist as a disorder. However, I believe that most audiologists are over diagnosing APD based on faulty 
criteria for diagnosis. (P#103) 
○
One real problem that does occur is when children with ADHD are mis-diagnosed with APD and may not get medical treatment that 
may help them. (P#106) 
Theme #6: More Information Needed 
○
I think we need to improve our approaches and develop one working model. (P#18) 
○
Disagree [with the assertion that APD is not a unique disorder]; however, I am interested in reviewing the literature and may 
reconsider when fully informed. (P#21) 
○
Difficulties in finding consensus on the definition of APD and how to adequately isolate and identify it requires continual research 
and development for clinical practice, and does not suggest that APD does not exist. A separate concerning issue is practitioners 
who try to re-define APD as skills ranging from auditory perception to auditory cognitive processing - not helpful! Also, terminology 
is problematic across disciplines - what audiology generally calls auditory processing differs from the way the same label is used by 
SLPs as well as psychologists! (P#50) 
○
We need more neurophysiological data (cABR) pre and post therapy to help define APD. (P#74) 
○
I find that testing lacks and the fact that there is not a consistent recommended battery or gold standard makes it impossible to 
diagnose something. If something truly exists, you should be able to replicate and any provider should be able to find it, but you 
can only compare the same tests. Also “treatment” is completely lacking in this area. (P#77) 
○
I think the formal definition of APD that we have traditionally used needs to be updated, and specifically for adults acquired APD in 
relation to TBI, noise-exposure, blast-exposure, and “hidden hearing loss” are very different than for children with developmental 
APD. (P#79) 
○
Wouldn’t throw out the things that work for patients just because more research is needed to explain WHY they work. (P#80) 
○
Much is yet to be learned. I’m currently offering the best resource + recommendation to my families that I have available. Until a 
new tx or dx protocol is established to replace parental concerns for/clinical indications for APD, I will continue to offer testing. (#97)
Ismen & Emanuel: Auditory Processing Disorder Protocols
639
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

