Prediction Errors and Attention
in the Presence and Absence of
Feedback
Andy J. Wills
University of Exeter
ABSTRACT—Contemporary theories of learning typically
assume that learning is driven by prediction errors—in
other words, that we learn more when our predictions turn
out to be incorrect than we do when our predictions are
correct. Results from the recording of electrical brain ac-
tivity suggest one mechanism by which this might happen;
we seem to direct visual attention toward the likely causes
of previous prediction errors. This can happen very rap-
idly—within less than 200 milliseconds of the error-causing
object being presented. It is tempting to infer that if
learning is driven by prediction errors, then little can be
learned in the absence of feedback. Such a conclusion is
unwarranted. In fact, the substantial learning that is
sometimes the result of simple exposure to objects can also
be explained by processes of directing attention toward the
likely causes of previous prediction errors.
KEYWORDS—prediction error; attention; perceptual learn-
ing; categorization; contingency learning; blocking; expo-
sure learning; EEG; ERP; eye tracking
Nothing fails like success because we don’t learn from it.
Attributed to Kenneth E. Boulding (1910–1993)
We appear to learn more about things for which we initially
make incorrect predictions than we do about things for which our
initial predictions are correct—the element of surprise seems
conducive to learning. What are the mental processes that lead
to this phenomenon, and what are the implications for situations
in which there are no obvious external indicators of whether one
has succeeded or failed?
PREDICTION AND LEARNING
The relationship between errors of prediction and learning is
best illustrated by a short example. Imagine you are an allergist,
trying to discover which of several foods (peas, carrots, chicken,
ham) produce an allergic reaction in your patient. Figure 1a
illustrates what you learn as a result of your investigation.
Given the information in this ﬁgure, which do you think is more
likely to cause an allergic reaction in the patient—chicken or
ham?
The most common response to this question is ‘‘ham.’’ This is
intriguing because, in both cases, you have seen the patient eat
the food in question and develop a rash. You have seen this
happen an equal number of times for each of the two foods. So,
what underlies the belief that ham is more likely to cause an
allergic reaction? It cannot be attributed to differences in prior
beliefs about chicken and ham, because the result is also found
with entirely artiﬁcial stimuli (such as meaningless abstract
shapes; e.g., Wills, Lavric, Croft, & Hodgson, 2007; see also
Fig. 1b).
The phenomenon at work, known as cue competition, is widely
observed in humans and other animals (Shanks, 1995) and is
predicted by the hypothesis that we learn more from prediction
errors than we do from prediction successes. A prediction error
occurs when an event in the environment differs from our ex-
pectations. The concept of a prediction error roughly equates to
the everyday concept of being surprised (as opposed to being
wrong). We were not surprised that the patient developed a rash
after eating peas and chicken, because we could already predict
the presence of an allergic reaction on the grounds that he had
eaten peas, which we already knew caused a rash. We therefore
learned relatively little about the relationship between chicken
and allergic reaction. In contrast, we were somewhat more sur-
prised that the patient developed a rash after eating ham, and
hence we learned more about the relationship between ham and
allergic reaction.
Address correspondence to Andy Wills, School of Psychology,
University of Exeter, Washington Singer Labs, Perry Road, Exeter,
EX4 4QG, United Kingdom; e-mail: a.j.wills@ex.ac.uk.
CURRENT DIRECTIONS IN PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Volume 18—Number 2
95
Copyright r 2009 Association for Psychological Science

Associative theories propose that learning is the formation of
associations between representations (for example, in the case of
Pavlov’s dogs, the formation of an association between a repre-
sentation of a sound, and a representation of food). Classic as-
sociative-learning theory (e.g., Thorndike, 1898) is embarrassed
by results such as cue competition, because the theory assumes
that learning is simply driven by reinforcement. However, since
the early 1970s, most associative theories of learning have in-
corporated the assumption that learning is driven by prediction
error, largely on the basis of evidence such as cue competition
Cue competition experiment 
Wills et al. (2007)  
Trial types  
First you learn … 
Phase 1: First you learn … 
Phase 1
Peas
Rash
 Jominy fever 
A+
Carrots
No rash
 No fever
B-
Then you learn …
Phase 2:Then you learn …
Phase 2
Peas + chicken
Rash
 + 
Jominy fever 
AX+
Carrots + ham 
Rash
 + 
Jominy fever 
BY+
Then you’re asked …
Phase 3:Then you’re asked … 
Phase 3
Chicken
Rash? 
Fever?
X
Ham 
Rash?
Fever?
Y
Errors in phase 2 
Event-related potentials in phase 3
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1
2
3
4
5
6
Block
Proportion of errors
BY + 
AX + 
X
Y
Selection negativity (X-Y)
A
B
C
D
E
Fig 1. An illustrative cue-competition experiment (A) and a slightly simpliﬁed representation of the Wills, Lavric, Croft, & Hodgson (2007) cue-
competition experiment (B, C) and its results (D, E). In the illustrative experiment (A), participants are told that a person eats certain foods and that
consumption of these foods either does or does not cause them to develop a rash. Participants are then asked whether certain foods, not previously
consumed in isolation (chicken, ham), will cause that person to develop a rash. In the Wills et al. (2007) experiment (Panel B), participants were
asked to imagine they worked for a medicalreferral service and that their job was to predicta ﬁctitious disease(‘‘Jominyfever’’) on the basis of ‘‘cell
bodies’’ in patients’blood samples.These cell bodies were actuallyabstract shapes that were randomlyallocatedfor each participant. On each trial,
one or two cell bodies were presented,and participants made either a ‘‘fever’’or a ‘‘no fever’’ response via key presses and received feedback on the
accuracy of each response. Panel (C) shows this experiment expressed in the standard notation for learning experiments: Different letters (A, B, X,
Y) indicate different stimuli, 1 indicates the presence of an outcome,  indicates the absence of an outcome. Proportion of prediction errors for
AX1 and BY1 as phase 2 proceeds is shown in (D); a prediction error occurs when the participant incorrectly predicts the outcome of the trial.
Panel (E) shows event-related potentials to the presentation of X alone and Yalone in phase 3. The third line shows the difference between the event-
related potentials for X and Y—this difference is described as a selection negativity.
96
Volume 18—Number 2
Prediction Errors and Attention

and other related phenomena (see Pearce, 2008). These con-
temporary learning theories were primarily developed to explain
animal learning, but from the early 1980s they became in-
creasingly used to account for human learning as well (see Wills,
2005).
PREDICTION AND ATTENTION
One of the predictions of a number of contemporary associative
theories is that differences in prediction error lead to differences
in attention. For example, Pearce and Hall (1980) argue that
learning is driven by prediction error because learners are
limited in their ability to process the stimuli they encounter.
To make best use of these limited resources, stimuli that have
recently been followed by unpredicted events are prioritized
by being given greater attention. This attentional differentiation
leads to greater learning about stimuli that have recently been
followed by unpredicted events.
In a recent study (Wills et al., 2007), we investigated the re-
lationship between attention and prediction error in humans by
measuring event-related potentials (ERPs) in a cue-competition
experiment. ERPs are one way of estimating how an individual’s
electroencephalogram (EEG) changes in response to particular
events. In our case, the event of interest was the presentation of
an abstract shape that either had or had not previously been
involved in substantial errors of prediction.
The design of our experiment is illustrated in Figure 1b.
Participants were asked to imagine their job was to predict a
ﬁctitious disease on the basis of ‘‘cell bodies’’ in patients’ blood
samples. These cell bodies were actually abstract shapes. On
each trial, one or two cell bodies were presented, and partici-
pants made either a ‘‘fever’’ or a ‘‘no fever’’ response via key
presses and received feedback on the accuracy of each response.
Figure 1c re-expresses the design of our experiment in the
standard notation of learning experiments: Different letters (A,
B, X, Y) indicate different stimuli, 1 indicates the presence of
an outcome, and  indicates the absence of an outcome.
As Figure 1d shows, AX1 trials resulted in few prediction
errors while BY1 trials initially resulted in many prediction
errors. Behaviorally, our experiment showed the standard cue-
competition result: When Y was subsequently presented alone,
the probability of a participant responding ‘‘fever’’ was 0.72,
whereas it was 0.45 for X presented alone. The stimulus previ-
ously involved in more prediction errors (Y) was more strongly
associated with fever.
The phenomenon of cue competition is already well estab-
lished behaviorally. The novel aspect of our study was to make
use of the large body of knowledge about ERPs to identify
‘‘signatures’’ of attentional processing. In particular, given that
our stimuli are distinguishable primarily by shape, one would
expect to see a selection negativity if stimulus Y is attended to
more than stimulus X (Hillyard & Anllo-Vento, 1998). In other
words, one would expect the ERP for Y to be temporarily less
positive than the ERP for X. This is what we observed, starting
approximately 140 milliseconds after the onset of the stimulus
(Fig. 1e).
There are two interesting implications of this result. First, it
provides support for the idea that there is a correspondence
between errors of prediction and the allocation of sensory pro-
cessing. We may learn more from our prediction errors than from
our prediction successes because the brain directs attention
toward likely causes of previous errors. The second implication
arises from the fact that the difference in attention is apparent
less than 200 milliseconds after stimulus onset. It seems un-
likely that much conscious deliberation is taking place during
this very short amount of time.
PREDICTION IN THE ABSENCE OF FEEDBACK
Learning may be driven by errors of prediction, and one reason
for this may be that objects involved in prediction errors attract
attention. One might therefore be tempted to conclude that very
little is learned in the absence of feedback. Such a conclusion
would, however, be incorrect. Both humans and animals (see,
e.g., Gibson & Walk, 1956) learn in the absence of feedback, as
demonstrated by exposure tasks. Although people are not able
to predict an outcome or category label during exposure tasks
(because no such information is provided), they are able to make
predictions about which aspects of the patterns tend to occur
together. Errors in making these predictions can then drive
learning about these co-occurrences.
One demonstration of exposure learning in humans can be
found in our recent work (Wills, Suret, & McLaren, 2004). In
the ﬁnal part of our experiment, people had to learn to divide
abstract patterns into two categories (see Fig. 2a). The task is
not easy but can be done on the basis of overall similarity. This
part of the experiment involved standard, feedback-informed
learning: Participants were asked to guess which category each
pattern belonged to and were told after each guess whether
they were right or wrong. They performed poorly at ﬁrst, but
eventually they could categorize the patterns with a high degree
of accuracy.
The key manipulation in this study involved comparing these
participants to a different group that had been pre-exposed to the
patterns before categorizing them. Pre-exposure involved asking
this group of participants to look through a large number of
patterns one at a time and say whether they had seen that par-
ticular pattern before (each pattern was presented exactly twice).
They were not told whether their responses were right or wrong.
These people then went on to learn to categorize the patterns in
the presence of feedback. The people who had been pre-exposed
to the patterns learned the categorization more quickly than did
those who had not been pre-exposed. It is therefore clear that
something about the stimuli was learned during pre-exposure. In
other words, signiﬁcant learning occurred in the absence of
feedback.
Volume 18—Number 2
97
Andy J. Wills

Although this might seem to be a very different sort of learning
than that discussed in the ﬁrst part of this article, the existence
of exposure learning can be predicted from the same central
concepts; namely, (a) prediction error drives learning, and (b)
stimuli previously involved in prediction error attract attention;
prediction errors, in this case, mean failures to predict which
aspects of the patterns tend to co-occur. Under these two central
concepts, attention will be directed towards the parts of the
pattern that are hardest to predict by co-occurrences (and hence
that have high prediction error). This would, under some cir-
cumstances, make it easier to categorize the patterns later. This
is because the aspects of objects that are hardest to predict by
co-occurrence are often those that are relatively rare, and these
rare aspects often tend to predict category membership better
than common aspects.
It is, perhaps, not immediately obvious that rarity and diag-
nosticity (i.e., the ability to predict category membership) will
often be correlated. The clearest, although somewhat extreme,
example of rarity correlating with diagnosticity involves features
that are present in all presented stimuli. Such features are
clearly not rare (they always occur!), and, as a result of their
ubiquity, they cannot provide a basis for dividing the stimuli into
categories. Less common features can. Generally, to the extent
that natural categories can be conceived as overlapping sets of
features, there will be a correlation between rarity and diag-
nosticity. For example, the categories lion, tiger, and leopard all
share a number of features (e.g., four legs). These features are
therefore common across this set of three categories but are not
diagnostic of lion versus tiger versus leopard. In contrast, stripes
are relatively rare across this set of three categories, and they are
highly diagnostic. However, in the lab it is possible to decouple
rarity and diagnosticity. If one uses categories for which rarity
and diagnosticity are not related, then it should be possible to
abolish, or even reverse, the effect of pre-exposure. This is be-
cause in stimuli for which rarity and diagnosticity are unrelated,
attention will not be selectively drawn to the diagnostic features
of the stimuli (under the hypothesis, discussed above, that rarity
and prediction error tend to be related).
As we predicted, in stimuli such as those shown in Figure 2b,
for which rarity and diagnosticity are unrelated, pre-exposure
leads to worse categorization performance than no exposure
at all. The fact that two sets of patterns, which seem basically
quite similar (Fig. 2a vs. Fig. 2b), can lead to opposite effects of
pre-exposure seems quite counterintuitive. Nevertheless, it is
predicted by an account that people make predictions about the
co-occurrence of features and that those features that are hardest
to predict by co-occurrence are the ones that become psycho-
logically most salient.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Effects such as cue competition suggest that we learn more when
our predictions are incorrect than we do when our predictions
are correct. Our recent study of ERPs supports the idea that one
mechanism behind this phenomenon is the brain’s tendency to
direct attention toward those aspects of the environment that are
most likely to have caused previous prediction errors. This
direction of attention can be rapid (less than 200 milliseconds).
The applicability of the idea that attention follows prediction
error extends beyond situations in which feedback is obviously
present—it can also be successfully applied to situations in
which different parts of a presented object co-occur to some
extent. Such situations permit learning to occur through sim-
ple exposure to objects. The concept of attention following
Category A
Category A
A  – Exposure facilitates
categorization
B  – Exposure retards
categorization
Category B
Category B
Fig. 2. An example of a categorization that is easier to learn if you look through a large number of the
patterns ﬁrst (panel A) and one that is made more difﬁcult by pre-exposure (panel B). In our exper-
iments (Wills et al., 2004), participants had to learn to divide the abstract patterns into two categories,
as illustrated (although the number of patterns used in each case was much greater than 12). The
opportunity to look through a large number of the patterns like those in panel (A) helped participants
learn the categorization more quickly. In contrast, looking through the patterns in panel (B) resulted
in the participants taking more time to learn the categorization. The critical, although nonobvious,
difference between the two sets of patterns is that in A, aspects of the pattern that predict category
membership are rarer than aspects of the pattern that do not. The pattern in the center of this ﬁgure is
for illustration only—it is a magniﬁcation of one of the other patterns
98
Volume 18—Number 2
Prediction Errors and Attention

prediction error can be used to predict when such exposure
will help you to later categorize these objects and when it will
hinder you.
In summary, the phenomena we observe can be explained by
the two following principles: (a) Learning that is associative in
nature is driven by prediction error, and (b) stimuli previously
involved in prediction error attract attention. Such an account
has a number of strengths. First, it is amenable to expression in
formal mathematical terms (see, e.g., McLaren & Mackintosh,
2000), which allows clarity and speciﬁcity. Second, it has sub-
stantial generality across different learning tasks, including both
those that include explicit feedback (Wills et al., 2007) and
those that do not (Wills et al., 2004). Third, the account has
generality across a variety of species (see Pearce, 2008, for a
discussion of this account as it applies to nonhuman animals).
Fourth, it makes predictions that are nonintuitive but never-
theless correct (for example, that exposure to the patterns in
Fig. 2a helps you categorize them, but exposure to the patterns in
Fig. 2b hinders categorization). More generally, studies such as
those discussed here suggest that the brain seems to have a kind
of ‘‘heads up’’ system that draws attention rapidly toward those
aspects of our environment that are the likely causes of previous
prediction errors and therefore may merit closer consideration.
Although it is often said that we see what we expect to see, these
studies suggest that we attend to that which has previously
caused our expectations to be violated.
In this article, I have concentrated on prediction-error-driven
associative learning. One might alternatively argue that humans
learn equally about all of the relationships in the example in
Figure 1a but that they then work through a series of reasoned
inductive inferences. For example, when faced with the infor-
mation peas 1 chicken ! rash, participants might reason along
the following lines: ‘‘Peas and chicken cause rash, but peas on
their own cause rash; I therefore can’t be sure that chicken
caused the rash.’’ When faced with carrots 1 ham ! rash,
however, they may reason as follows: ‘‘Carrots and ham cause
rash, but carrots on their own do not cause rash; it therefore
seems likely that the ham caused the rash.’’
One problem with such an account is that, although the at-
tentional difference we observed (Fig. 1e) is sufﬁcient to account
for the cue-competition effect, it seems unlikely that this at-
tentional difference results directly from conscious inferential
reasoning, because it happens so quickly. One could also per-
haps argue that the attentional difference is caused more indi-
rectly by a conscious reasoning process modulating attention in
a top-down manner. Measurements of gaze duration (Kruschke,
Kappenman, & Hetrick, 2005; Wills et al., 2007) make such an
account problematic: People spend more time looking at objects
that have been involved in many prediction errors than at objects
that have not, and this difference in gaze duration appears to be
established before people become proﬁcient at avoiding errors.
If the attentional difference were the result of a top-down in-
ﬂuence from a reasoning process, then one might expect it
to follow, rather than precede, competent performance on the
task.
Nevertheless, it is likely that learning sometimes does involve
processes that cannot be capturedby a simple associative system
and that these processes may be more properly accounted for by
a process of deliberative reasoning. There are phenomena that
are problematic for associative accounts (e.g., De Houwer
& Beckers, 2002) and for reasoning-based accounts (e.g., Le
Pelley, Oakeshott, & McLaren, 2005), and a number of re-
searchers have proposed multiprocess accounts of learning (e.g.,
Ashby, Alfonso-Reese, Turken, & Waldron, 1998; Erickson
& Kruschke, 1998; Nosofsky, Palmeri, & McKinley, 1994).
Examining the relative contributions of reasoning-based and
associative processes, and the ways in which they interact, is an
important direction for future research.
Recommended Reading
Ashby, F.G., & Maddox, W.T. (2005). Human category learning. Annual
Review of Psychology, 56, 115–178. A clear summary of the idea
that categorization is best understood as the result of multiple,
competing brain systems.
Pearce, J.M. (2008). (See References). A well-written, very accessible
introduction to animal cognition in general, including good
coverage of associative theory.
Wills, A.J. (2005). (See References). An edited collection of relatively
accessible articles on human associative learning.
Acknowledgments—Some of the research reported in this
article was supported by a BBSRC grant 9/S17109. The writing
of the article was supported by an EC Framework 6 project grant
516542 (NEST).
REFERENCES
Ashby, F.G., Alfonso-Reese, L.A., Turken, A.U., & Waldron, E.M.
(1998). A neuropsychological theory of multiple systems in
category learning. Psychological Review, 105, 442–481.
De Houwer, J., & Beckers, T. (2002). Higher-order retrospective
revaluation in human causal learning. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 55B, 137–151.
Erickson, M.A., & Kruschke, J.K. (1998). Rules and exemplars in
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
127, 107–140.
Gibson, E.J., & Walk, R.W. (1956). The effect of prolonged exposure
to visually presented patterns on learning to discriminate them.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 49,
239–242.
Hillyard, S.A., & Anllo-Vento, L. (1998). Event-related brain potentials
in the study of visual selective attention. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 95, 781–787.
Kruschke, J.K., Kappenman, E.S., & Hetrick, W.P. (2005). Eye gaze
and individual differences consistent with learned attention in
associative blocking and highlighting. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 31, 830–845.
Volume 18—Number 2
99
Andy J. Wills

Le Pelley, M.E., Oakeshott, S.M., & McLaren, I.P.L. (2005). Block-
ing and unblocking in human causal learning. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology:
Animal
Behavior
Processes,
31,
56–70.
McLaren, I.P.L., & Mackintosh, N.J. (2000). An elemental model of
associative learning: I. Latent inhibition and perceptual learning.
Animal Learning & Behavior, 28, 211–246.
Nosofsky, R.M., Palmeri, T.J., & McKinley, S.C. (1994). Rule-plus-
exception model of classiﬁcation learning. Psychological Review,
101, 53–79.
Pearce, J.M. (2008). Animal Learning and Cognition. Hove, UK: Psy-
chology Press.
Pearce, J.M., & Hall, G. (1980). A model for Pavlovian learning: Vari-
ations in the effectiveness of conditioned but not of unconditioned
stimuli. Psychological Review, 87, 532–552.
Shanks, D.R. (1995). The psychology of associative learning. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Thorndike, E.L. (1898). Animal intelligence: An experimental study of
the associative processes in animals. The Psychological Review
Monograph Supplements, 2 (Whole No. 8).
Wills, A.J. (2005). New Directions in Human Associative Learning.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wills, A.J., Lavric, A., Croft, G., & Hodgson, T.L. (2007). Predictive
learning, prediction errors and attention: Evidence from event-
related
potentials
and
eye-tracking.
Journal
of
Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19, 843–854.
Wills, A.J., Suret, M.B., & McLaren, I.P.L. (2004). The role of category
structure in determining the effects of stimulus preexposure
on categorization accuracy. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 57B, 79–88.
100
Volume 18—Number 2
Prediction Errors and Attention

