INTERNATIONAL SERIES OF MONOGRAPHS IN
PU R E AND A PPL IE D  M A TH EM A TIC S
General Editors: I. N. Sneddon and M. Stark 
Executive Editors: J. P. Kahane, A. P. Robertson and S. Ulam
VOLUME 31
ELEMENTS
OF MATHEMATICAL LOGIC


JAN LUKASIEWICZ
ELEMENTS
OF MATHEMATICAL LOGIC
TRANSLATED FROM POLISH 
by
OLGIERD WOJTASIEWICZ
PERGAMON PRESS
OXFORD • LONDON ■ EDINBURGH ■ NEW YORK 
TORONTO • PARIS • BRAUNSCHWEIG
PWN—POLISH SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHERS
WARSZAWA

Pergamon Press Ltd., Headington Hill Hall, Oxford 
4 & 5 Fitzroy Square, London W.l
Pergamon Press (Scotland) Ltd., 2 & 3 Teviot Place, Edinburgh 1 
Pergamon Press Inc., 44—01 21st Street, Long Island City, New York J1101 
Pergamon of Canada, Ltd., 6 Adelaide Street East, Toronto, Ontario 
Pergamon Press S.A.R.L., 24 rue des Ecoles, Paris 5e 
Friedr. Vieweg&Sohn Verlag, Postfach 185, 33 Braunschweig, West Germany
First edition 1963 
Reprinted 1966
Copyright 1963
by PANSTWOWE WYDAWNICTWO NAUKOWE 
(PWN — POLISH SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHERS) 
WARSZAWA
Original Title:
Elementy logiki matematycznej 
WARSZAWA, PWN 
Second Edition 1958
Library o f Congress Catalog Card No. 63-10013 
Printed in Poland
(1487/64)

CONTENTS
Preface to the Second E d itio n .........................................................
vii
A uthor’s Preface to the First E d itio n ............................................
ix
I. Introduction..............................................................................................
1
1. Trends in M athem atical Logic. M athem atical Logie 
Versus Philosophical L o g i c ................................................
1
2. Theorems and Rules of Inference. The Sentential 
Logic and the Term Logic 
.................................................
9
II. The Sentential C alculus......................................................................
22
3. The Prim itive Term s and the Axioms of the Sentential 
C alculus........................................................................................
22
4. Definitions and Rules of Inference in the Sentential
C alculus........................................................................................
31
5. Theorems of the Sentential C a lc u lu s...............................
41
m . Selected Problems from the Methodology of the Sentential Calculus
67
6. The Consistency and the Independence of Axioms 
of the Sentential Calculus. M any-valued Logic. . . .
67
7. The Completeness of the Sentential Calculus . . . .
81
IV. The Sentential Calculus with Quantifiers ...........................................
92
8. Quantifiers. Rules of Inference. T h e se s..........................
92
V. Aristotle’s Syllogistic..........................................................................
103
9. Axioms. Definitions. Rules of I n f e r e n c e ......................
103
10. Theses of Aristotle’s S y llo g is tic ........................................
107
119
The L ist of W orks Quoted ...................................................................
122


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
The first edition of Jan  Lukasiewicz's Elements of Mathematical 
Logic appeared in 1929 as authorized lecture notes x. Published by 
the Association of Students of M athematics and Physics in W arsaw 
University, these lecture notes served two purposes: students of the 
F aculty of the M athem atical and N atural Sciences used them  when 
preparing for the exam ination in the foundations of philosophy; the 
notes included the latest results obtained by their author, among 
them  some results th at h ad  not been published before. T hirty years 
after, Lukasiewicz’s book has not lost its didactic and scientific 
value, and at th e same tim e it has acquired the value of an historical 
docum ent testifying to the role th at was played by the researches of 
the W arsaw centre in the development of m athem atical logic in 
the first decade after W orld W ar I.
The new edition of the Elements differs from the first b u t slightly. 
The corrections m ade are small and few. The only section th a t has 
been modified more essentially is Section III.7, containing a proof 
of the completeness of th e sentential calculus. The proof of com­
pleteness which is given here is modelled on Lukasiewicz’s later 
proofs. In  its basic idea it does not differ from th a t given in the 
first edition, b u t is m arkedly shorter. The last section of the 
Elements—“ On Reasoning in the N atural Sciences”—has been 
dropped, too. Included in the first edition as a “ Supplem ent” , it 
was not connected w ith the contents of the remaining sections.
The first edition of the Elements had no footnotes a t all. Thus, 
all the footnotes in the second edition come from its editor. Further, 
the first edition has been rounded off by a detailed bibliography 
of- the works referred to in the Elements and of those works hy 
Lukasiewicz whose subject m atter pertains to the problems discussed 
in the Elements.
J E R Z Y  Si-U P E C K l


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
The present notes from lectures delivered a t W arsaw University 
in the autum n trim ester of the academic year 1928/9 are entitled 
Elements of Maihematical Logic for they cover only the two simplest 
logical systems, nam ely the sentential calculus and Aristotle’s 
syllogistic *. I have endeavoured to present these two systems in 
my lectures in such a way th a t they m ight be accessible to beginners. 
I hope th a t Chapter IV, too, in which I outline th e sentential calculus 
extended by the introduction of universal quantifiers, will not present 
any serious difficulties to the reader. The m o st' difficult issues 
discussed in these lectures belong to the methodology of the sen­
tential calculus. Especially difficult is the proof of the completeness 
of th a t calculus, given in Section III.7, which requires a  longer and 
careful study. I have, however, included th a t proof both because of 
its exceptional importance, and because of the fact th at in its present 
form it has never been published before.
These lecture notes bring for the first tim e, in a more extensive 
form, some of the results of m y long researches on m athem atical 
logic. I enum erate here the more im portant new results whose author­
ship, I think, I m ay ascribe to myself. They are as follows: 1. The 
parenthesis-free notation of expressions in the sentential calculus 
and in A ristotle’s syllogistic. 2. The system of axioms of the sen­
tential calculus 8 given on p. 27-28. 3. The way of noting down proofs 
in the sentential calculus and in Aristotle’s syllogistic, and in m any 
cases the very structure of those proofs. 4. Remarks on “ generalizing 
deduction” on p. 46. 5. Systems of many-valued logic. 6. The idea 
of the proof of the completeness of the sentential calculus, presented 
in III.7 . 7. The axiom atization of A ristotle’s syllogistic, w ith com­
plete proofs of th e laws of the square of opposition, th e laws of 
conversion, and all the valid modes of syllogisms. 8. Some historical 
rem arks (e.g., oh the form of A ristotle’s syllogism, on Stoic logic, 
on Frege as the founder of th e sentential calculus, and remarks 
about Origenes and Sextus).
To those results which I have obtained by m y own reflection I 
could also add the proof of the consistency of the sentential calculus 
and the m ethod of exam ination of the independence of the theses 
of th a t calculus. B ut the proof of consistency of the sentential cal-

X
a u t h o r ’s p r e f a c e  t o  t h e  f i r s t  e d i t i o n
cuius had already been given in 1921 by E. L. P ost in his paper 
“ Introduction to a General Theory of Elem entary Propositions” , and 
a  m ethod of examining the independence of the theses of the sen- 
tential calculus was first published in 1926 by Bernays in his paper 
“ Axiomatisehe Untersuchungen des Aussagenkalkuls der ‘Principia 
M athem atica’ ” 3. I had conceived the same m ethod even before 
1926 as a result of engaging in the study of many-valued logic, and 
thanks to the suggestive rem ark by D r Tarski th a t the results of 
m any-valued logic m ight in some cases be used in proving independ­
ence (cf. A. Tarski’s paper “ 0 wyrazie pierwotnym  logistyki” 
(On the Prim itive Term  of Logistic), [32], pp. 11 and 12 of the off­
print). B y using a “ m atrix” m ethod, which I had devised, to examine 
independence, I had made sure and had published, even before 
Bernays (in a report on a lecture entitled “ Dem onstration de la 
compatibility des axiomes de la theorie de la deduction” [12]), th a t 
in W hitehead and Bussell’s system  of sentential calculus Axiom 1.5, 
and in H ilbert’s system, given in [5], Axiom 2 were not independent 
of the remaining ones, while all the other axioms in both systems 
were independent of the rem aining ones. In  th at report I also dem­
onstrated the independence of the axiom system specified on p. 27 
in th e present lecture notes.
In  P o st’s paper of 1921 quoted above, there are certain purely 
formal considerations concerning m any-valued systems of the sen­
tential calculus. In view of this fact I should like to point out th at 
my system  of three-valued logic had been developed before 1921, 
since I presented it as early as on June 19, 1920, at a sitting of the 
Polish Philosophical Society in Lwow (cf. [11])- My researches on 
m any-valued logic have since been considerably advanced by the 
members of m y Seminar, D r Lindenbaum  and Mr W ajsberg. Among 
other things, Mr W ajsberg has shown th a t the system of three-valued 
logic can be axiomatized. These results have so far not been printed 4.
W hat is included in these lectures over and above the points 
enum erated above is not m y property. Some information I have 
drawn from books, m ainly from  Principia Mathematica by W hitehead 
and Bussell [35] and from  Frege’s works. The example of the m ath­
ematical proof given in Paragraph 6, as well as the historical data 
concerning Axiom 2, given on p. 29-30, come from Vailati [33], pp. 518 £f. 
A letter from Professor Bernays, of Gottingen, which reached me 
in Septem ber 1928, informed me th a t this author had simplified the 
system  of axioms of the sentential calculus based on implication, 
as form ulated by .Dr Tarski (ef. pp. 49 and 98).
I owe most, however, to the scientific atm osphere which has 
developed in W arsaw University in the field of m athem atical logic.

a u t h o r ’s p r e f a c e  t o  t h e  f i r s t  ED ITIO N
XI
In discussions with, m y colleagues, especially Professor S. Lesniewski 
and D r A. Tarski, and often in discussions with their and my own 
students, I have m ade clear to myself m any a concept, I have 
assimilated m any a w ay of form ulating ideas, and I have learned 
about m any a new result, about which I am today not in a position 
to say to whom the credit of authorship goes. I t was in such dis­
cussions, for example, if m y memory does not fail me, th at the 
rules were established for using the universal quantifiers in th a t 
system of the sentential calculus which is described in Chap. IV. 
W hen outlining th a t system, and especially when explaining the 
concept of meaningful expression in th at system and the rule of 
substitution, I have availed myself of the information kindly supplied 
by D r Tarski, who had presented such a system earlier than I did, 
and had discussed it in his courses. To be exact, I shall also add th a t 
I have adopted the term  functor from Professor Kotarbinski, and 
the term  meaningful exjpre&Hon from Professor Lesniewski. I t is 
also to Professor Lesniewski th a t I owe the critical opinions con­
cerning the interpretation of implication, as form ulated ou page 25 
of these Elements s.
I delivered these lectures, as I usually do, from memory, resort­
ing to notes only in those parts which are expressed in  symbols. 
T hat is why Mr. Fresburger, as the editor of these lecture notes, had 
to take great pains to m ake readable w hat were originally spoken 
lectures. I avail myself of this opportunity to express to him my 
heartfelt thanks for the work he has done. I m ust also add th a t 
Mr Presburger’s contribution to this publication can also be seen 
in some places in the contents of these notes. This refers above all 
to th e proof of the completeness of the sentential calculus. The 
explanation of the concept of meaningful expression in the sentential 
calculus as well as th e rule of substitution in th at calculus also owe 
to Mr. Presburger their present form, which is more exact than the 
one I gave in my lectures.
As com plem entary readings th e  reader may use the textbook 
of m athem atical logic by H ilbert and Ackermann, published in 1928: 
Grundeiige der theoretischen Logih [6]. I t m ust be said th at t his 
textbook has in no way influenced the content of the present lecture 
notes, w ith the exception of one terminological point: following its 
authors I use the term s free or bound variable, instead of real or 
apparent variable, as has been the usage thus far. I should also add 
th a t I am  now preparing a comprehensive monograph which is to 
cover the whole of the m ost im portant problems of the sentential 
calculus *.
JA N  LU K ASIEW IC Z
Warsaw. February 23, 1929.


I. INTRODUCTION
1. Trends In Mathematical Logic.
Mathematical Logic Versus Philosophical Logic
1. George Boole, an English m athem atician who lived 
in th e m id-19th century, is considered th e founder of 
m athem atical logic. H is fundam ental work, published in  
1854, is entitled A n  Investigation of the Law s of Thought [2]. 
In  his analysis Boole started  from  the observation th a t 
the general law s of thought, w ith one exception, are 
strictly analogous to th e law s of m athem atical algebra.
L et us consider th e m athem atical law  of com m uta­
tiv ity  of m ultiplication, w hich Boole symbolizes as: 
soy =  y x \ in conform ity w ith th a t law , th e product of any 
two num bers is n o t changed w hen th e order of its elem ents 
is reversed. The letters x  and y  which appear in  th e law  
of com m utativity are variables whose values are ex­
pressions th a t stand for any num bers, for th a t law  is 
correct for all num bers. Boole also uses variables, b u t 
th eir values are expressions standing for classes of objects. 
In  thus defining th e range of th e variables, Boole in ter­
prets th e expression x y as denoting th e class of objects 
th a t belong both to th e class x  and to th e class y. If, for 
instance, x  is th e class of w hite objects, and y is th e class 
of sheep, th en  in Boole’s interpretation x y  is th e class 
of those objects which belong both to th e class of w hite 
objects and to th e class of sheep, and thus is th e class 
of w hite sheep. B y interpreting variables and m ultipli­
cation in this w ay Boole noticed th a t the law  of com m u­
tativ ity : x y ~  y x  rem ains valid if we apply it to classes 
of objects. E or th e class of those objects which belong 
both to th e class x  and to th e class y is identical w ith

2
I . INTRODUCTION
th e class of those objects w hich belong both to the class y 
and to th e class x. This fact can be illustrated, which, 
by th e w ay, Boole did n o t do, by m eans of circles, in 
a m anner know n from  trad itio n al logic. In  this in ter­
p retatio n  a circle stands for a class of objects. If, as in
Fig. 1 , tw o circles stand for the 
classes x  and y 7 then th e p art 
com m on to both circles represents 
both th e class x y  and the class yx.
A part from  this analogy w ith 
th e law  of com m utativity of m ul­
tiplication Boole pointed to m any 
other sim ilarities 
betw een 
the 
laws pertaining to classes and th e laws of m athem atical 
algebra, and thus founded th e algebra of logic. W e will 
not, however, be concerned w ith it in any greater detail, 
for our aim  is only to characterize the standpoint taken 
by Boole. W ith th a t end in  view  we shall be concerned 
w ith the point a t which, as Boole saw it, th e analogy 
w ith m athem atical algebra comes to an end.
Follow ing Boole’s interpretation, in th e algebra of 
logic th e law x x  =  x  is tru e for any values of the variable x. 
F or th e class x x  is th e class of those objects which belong 
both to the class x  and to  th e class x , and hence form  th e 
class x. Thus, e.g., th e class of those objects which belong 
both to th e class of m en and to th e class of m en is th e 
class of men. Y et in m athem atical algebra the law: 
x x  =  x  is not tru e for every value of the variable x. W e 
know th a t th e equation x 2 =  x, as an equation of the 
second degree, has only tw o solutions, in our case the 
values 0 and I. Taking this fact into account Boole con­
cluded th a t in th e algebra of logic all those laws are 
valid which are tru e in m athem atical algebra when the 
values are lim ited to the values 0 and 1. For w ith this 
restriction the law  x x  — x  is tru e for aU values of th e 
variable x , since we have: 0 *0 = 0  and 1*1 =  1 .

TRENDS IN MATHEMATICAL LOGIC
3
In  his algebra of. logic Boole also interpreted th e 
symbols of zero and unity. Since they are constant symbols, 
they are to be understood as certain constant classes; 
according to Boole, “1” stands for th e class of all objects, 
and “ 0” for th e em pty class, th a t is th e class to which 
no object belongs. Hence every object belongs to th e 
class “1” , it is th e class of th e to tality  of objects. The 
em pty class, e.g., is th e class of m ountains of gold, the 
class of square circles, the class of chim eras, etc., for 
no object is a m ountain of gold, no object is a square 
circle, no object is a chim era. The problem  of existence 
of th e em pty class entails considerable difficulty, for if 
no square circles exist then it seems th a t th e class of 
square circles should not exist either. W e shall not analyse 
this issue m ore closely.
In  developing his algebra of logic Boole introduced 
logical addition and logical subtraction, both understood 
in a specific way. The latter operation will be explained 
to serve th e purpose of our exposition of the subject. 
The class x — y, the difference of th e classes x  and y, is 
the class of those objects which belong to th e class x, 
w ith the exception of th e objects belonging to the class y. 
If, e.g., x  is th e class of m en and y  is the class of Asians, 
then x — y is th e class of all m en except the Asians. 
Likewise, if a? is the class of m en, then 1 —a; is the class 
of all objects except m en, th a t is th e class of non-m en.
In  his algebra of logic Boole handled the equalities 
of classes ju st like m athem atical equalities. S tarting from  
th e law : x x  =  x , or x % — x, as discussed above, by sub- 
stracting x 2 from  both sides of th e equality he obtained 
a?2—a? — x — it2, and hence: 0 =  x — x 2, or x  — x2 =  0. By 
tstring x  outside parentheses he obtained the law
x  (1—«c) =  0 .
If, for instance, x  is th e class of m en, th en  this law  states 
th a t the class of the objects belonging both to the class

4
I. INTKOUUCTION
of m en and to  th e class of non-m en is the em pty class. 
This law was for Boole an expression of the logical 
principle which, since A ristotle, had been known as th e 
principle of contradiction. In  conform ity w ith th a t principle, 
no object m ay possess sim ultaneously two contradictory 
properties, e.g., be a t th e sam e tim e a m an and a non-m an. 
Boole ascribed to  his algebra of logic an immense im ­
portance because he saw th a t w ith its help he was in 
a position to prove the m ost im portant logical laws.
The exam ple of reasoning given above shows clearly 
th a t Boole’s m ethod was purely algebraic. Boole’s work 
was continued in th e sam e direction by the Am erican 
logician Peirce, th e author of m any papers on m athem atical 
logic, published in American periodicals. I t was on Peirce’s 
works th a t th e Germ an logician E rn st Schroder, who 
lived in the second half of th e 19th century (d. 1902), 
based his researches; he is th e author of the m ost com­
prehensive work on m athem atical logic so far, th e three- 
volum e study entitled Vorlesungen iiber die Algebra der 
Logik [28],
Schroder term inates th a t trend in  m athem atical logic 
which was based on the applications of the algebraic 
m ethod x. F or a logician connected w ith th a t trend m ath­
em atics was the m odel of how to  proceed in research, 
and sometimes even an auxiliary discipline. Boole employed 
fairly difficult m athem atical theorem s in  order to  present 
and prove some of th e results he obtained in his logical 
research. E xternally th e algebra of logic used m athem atical 
symbolism. Problem s were form ulated in a m athem atical 
w ay, e.g., m any references were m ade in the algebra of 
logic to solving logical equations.
2. 
The founder and representative of the other trend 
in m athem atical logic was th e Germ an m athem atician 
G ottlob Frege, who Kved in th e second half of the 19th 
and in th e early 20th century. In  1879 he published his 
first work on m athem atical logic, entitled Begriffsschrift [3].

TRENDS IN MATHEMATICAL LOGIC
5
A t th a t tim e he apparently did not know  th e works 
of Boole and his followers. Frege’s m ost im portant 
work is Grundlagen der A rithm eiik [4]. Frege set him self 
th e task  of investigating how far it is possible to proceed 
in arithm etic by m eans of reasoning th a t is based exclu­
sively on th e general laws of thought and does not resort 
to th e statem ents about em pirical facts. The aim  of Frege’s 
researches was to dem onstrate th e possibility of founding 
all of arithm etic on logical laws alone. To achieve th a t, 
Frege had to give com plete proofs, w ithout any gaps 
w hatever, for if there is a gap in a proof, th e suspicion 
arises th a t perhaps in  th a t place we resort to some extra- 
logical prem ises. I t is only w hen all th e proofs are given 
in a com plete form  th a t we can be sure th a t arithm etic 
can be b u ilt on logical prem ises alone.
W hen striving to reach his ideal of th e strictly scientific 
m athem atical m ethod, nam ely th e axiom atic m ethod, al­
ready used by Euclid, Frege m ade Ms tw o principal dis­
coveries: he created certain new logical system s, previously 
(even in Boole’s works) im perfectly know n and under­
stood (above all th e sentential calculus, expounded in 
Beg-riffsschrift), and was th e first, as it seems, to notice 
th e difference betw een th e prem ises on wMeh a reasoning 
is based, and th e rules of inference, th a t is the rules w hich 
determ ine how we are to proceed in order to prove a given 
thesis on th e strength of certain prem ises. The difference 
betw een th e prem ises of reasoning and th e rules of 
inference is brought clearly into relief when th e prem ises 
are w ritten in  a sym bolic form : it then becom es clear th a t 
th e rules of inference cannot also be w ritten in symbols, 
a t least if we confine ourselves to those sym bols which 
occur in  th e prem ises.
The need to  use sym bolism  in  logic becam e clear to 
Frege w hen he noticed th e difficulties resulting from  
everyday speech. Frege’s logical sym bolism  could not, as 
w as th e case w ith Boole’s sym bolism , be modelled on m athe­
2

6
1. INTRODtiCTlON
m atics, for Frege’s logic was to serve above all to lay 
th e foundations of arithm etic; consequently, th e use of 
arithm etical sym bolism  in logic would lead to an am ­
biguity of sym bols. This is .the first difference betw een 
th e tren d  represented by Frege and th e algebra of logic. 
The second difference results from  th e first: as he did 
n o t use algebraic sym bolism , Frege was n o t tem pted to 
set logic tasks which were analogous to m athem atical 
problem s, he did n o t use m athem atical m ethods in logic 
and therefore b e tte r understood th e specific n atu re of 
th e logical problem s. Finally, th e th ird  difference is con­
nected w ith Frege’s principal objective: since he w anted 
to base arithm etic on logical foundations he could not 
resort in his research to any m athem atical theorem s.
The priceless value of Frege’s logical researches con­
sists in th eir exceptional precision; their author worked 
out a tru ly  scientific m ethod of laying th e foundations 
of m athem atics, and in  th a t respect th e tren d  in  logic 
in itiated  by Frege has m uch greater services to  its credit 
th an  th e trend represented b y  th e algebra of logic.
Frege’s 
logic 
influenced 
th e 
English 
scientists 
A. IS". W hitehead and B. Bussell, th e authors of P rin cip ia  
M athem atiea [35], vol. 1 of which, containing th e study 
of m athem atical logic, appeared in  1910 (second printing 
in  1925). P rin cip ia  M athem atiea is w ritten in  a special 
sym bolic language, w ith com m ents on th e te x t in English. 
T hat w ork p u t into effect Frege’s idea th a t m athem atics 
should be presented as a system  th a t begins w ith logic, 
on w hich are based th e various branches of m athem atics 
in th e narrow er sense of th e word. W hitehead and Bussell 
also availed, them selves, especially in  w hat concerns 
sym bolism , of th e works of th e Italian  m athem atician 
G. Peano, who in his P orm ulaire de m athem atiques strove 
to note down m athem atical theorem s in  sym bols he had 
invented, and to prove them  in a strict m anner. The last 
volum e of his publication appeared in 1908 as Form ulario

TRENDS IN MATHEMATICAL LOGIC
7
matematicoj w ritten in th e artificial language called latino 
sine flexione. The authors of P rincipia M athem atica 
adopted a m odified sym bolism  of Peano, which is sim pler 
th an  th e in tricate notation used by Frege. Y et when it 
comes to precision and subtlety in  th e scientific m ethod, 
both Peano’s form ulas and the work of W hitehead and 
Bussell prove inferior to Frege’s works. Frege is th e m odern 
logician m ost penetrating in finding and m ost subtle in 
solving the problem s th a t rest a t th e roots of logic.
3. 
W hat is the relationship betw een m athem atical 
logic, the developm ent of which has been described above, 
and philosophical logicf W hen using the term  philosophical 
logic I  have in m ind th a t set of issues which are raised 
in books w ritten by philosophers, I  have in m ind th a t 
logic which we have learned in secondary school. P h il­
osophical logic is not a homogeneous discipline, b u t 
contains issues of diverse content. In  particular, it en­
croaches upon psychology w hen it refers not only to sen­
tences in th e logical sense of th e word, b u t also to those 
psychic phenom ena which correspond to  sentences and 
w hich are called *‘judgm ents” or “propositions” . Com­
bining logic w ith psychology is a result of an erroneous 
interpretation of th e subject m atter of logical researcha. 
I t is often said th a t logic is th e science of th e laws of 
thought, and since thinking is a psychic act, therefore 
logic should form  p a rt of psychology. I t  m ight as well 
be argued th a t arithm etic is a psychological discipline 
because it is concerned w ith adding and m ultiplying 
num bers and raising them  to powers, and there is no 
doubt th a t addition, m ultiplication and raising to a power 
are psychic acts. T e t no one claim s that, arithm etic is 
p a rt of psychology. Likewise, logic is not p art of psychol­
ogy. The psychological issues connected w ith th e process 
of thinking m ust be investigated by quite different m ethods 
from  those used in logic.
Philosophical logic also includes certain epistem ological
2*

8
I. INTRODUCTION
problem s, e.g., th e problem  of w hat is tru th , and w hether 
there is any criterion of tru th . T e t these m atters also 
do n o t belong to  logic: as we shall see later, it is possible 
to build w ith m axim um  precision logical system s in  which 
no reference w hatever will be m ade to  tru th  and falsehood. 
The problem  of tru th  belongs to  those epistem ological 
issues which are extrem ely difficult to  solve, have so far 
been ridden w ith obscurity, and probably will not be 
solved soon.
If we rem ove from  philosophical logic all those issues 
which belong to psychology, epistem ology and philosophy 
in general, then w hat rem ains will constitute w hat is 
called form al logic, containing logical issues proper. And 
these issues of philosophical logic do not differ from  
the issues of m athem atical logic, b u t they are treated  by 
philosophers w ith m uch less precision th an  by m athem at­
ical logicians. Philosophical logic, from  th e beginning 
of m odern philosophy up to our tim es, has suffered 
a serious decline. If one m ay speak of a kinship of m ethods 
used in  form al logic and in  m athem atical logic, this can 
only refer to ancient logic. The ancients created certain 
logical system s, still very im perfect b u t which certainly 
can be considered th e first stages in  th e developm ent of 
contem porary system s of m athem atical logic. Conse­
quently, if m athem atical logic is opposed to philosophical 
logic, this pertains principally to m odern and m ost recent 
tim es. In  fact, there are n o t tw o logics, m athem atical 
and philosophical; there is only one logic, founded by 
A ristotle, com pleted by th e ancient school of the Stoics, 
and pursued, often w ith great subtlety, by m edieval 
logicians, and it is th a t logic which is developed by 
m athem atical logic. The realization of th a t unity of logic 
is already gaining ground, and some authors cease to use 
th e term  “ m athem atical logic” . The recent {1928) book 
by D. H ilbert and W . A ckerm ann bears th e title Grundziige 
der theoretischen LogiJc [6] and contains an exposition of

THEOREMS AND RULES OF INFERENCE
9
m athem atical logic. If the present lectures 3 are entitled 
P rinciples of M athem atical Logic, this is only in  order 
to em phasize w hat w ill he their trend and m ethod4.
2. Theorems and Rules of Inference.
The Sentential Logic and the Term Logic
4. In  textbooks of traditional logic A ristotle’s sim plest 
syllogism is usually presented in th e following form :
A ll M  is P ,
1 
A ll $  is M .
Therefore all S  is P .
To illustrate this, exam ples like th e following are given:
All m en are m ortal,
All Poles are m en.
Therefore all Poles are m ortal.
A ristotle of Stagira, a Greek philosopher who lived 
in th e fourth century B.O. (d. 322 B. C.), is considered 
the founder of logic and, in particular, the author of 
the syllogism quoted above ®. A ristotle was in  fact th e 
author of a logical theory which m ight be called the 
theory of syllogism and which, as we know today, is only 
a sm all fragm ent of th e whole of logic. Philosophers, 
however, were so fascinated by A ristotle’s work th a t 
they often asserted th a t th e whole of logic was con­
tained in the theory of syllogism and th a t th a t theory 
was a com plete and perfect discipline. Such a view of 
A ristotle’s syllogistic was held by Im m anuel K ant. These 
facts testify to th e great authority enjoyed by A ristotle, 
b u t a t the sam e tim e to th e decline of logical thinking 
in th e case of m odem  philosophers. A ristotle’s work is 
very rem arkable; in  his own tim e it was th e product 
of a genius, y et it is but a tiny fragm ent of w hat we 
know about logic today.

10
I. INTRODUCTION
The p attern  of a syllogism  given under I, as form ulated 
in trad itio n al logic, is n o t A ristotle’s syllogism. If we 
disregard certain slight differences, A ristotle’s syllogism 
which corresponds to th e traditional syllogism  quoted 
above can be w ritten down as follows:
If 
all M  is P
I I  
and all 8  is M ,
th en  all S  is P .
P ractically all the historians of logic fail to notice the 
difference betw een th e form s I  and I I ,' and quote A ris­
to tle’s syllogism in form  I; this is also done by one of 
th e m ost reliable historians of logic, th e Germ an scholar 
P ran tl, who lived in th e m id-19th century.
The difference betw een th e two form s of syllogism, 
as given above, is very essential. A ristotle’s syllogism (II) 
is a conditional sentence, w hich has an antecedent and 
a consequent: th e antecedent is contained betw een the 
words “if” and “th en ” and consists of tw o clauses con­
nected by th e w ord “ and” , and th e consequent follows 
th e w ord “th en ” . Thus th e entire syllogism form s a single 
sentence, a com plex sentence. On th e other hand, th e 
trad itio n al syllogism  (I) does n o t form  a single sentence, 
b u t consists of th ree sentences: th e first tw o sentences 
are n o t connected by th e w ord “ and” into a single whole, 
and th e expression “therefore” does not, as does th e 
expression “if ... th en ” , com bine tw o sentences into 
a com plex sentence. W hat is th e difference betw een the 
expressions “therefore” and “if ... then” ? The expression 
“ therefore” is used w hen we draw  conclusions. In  th e 
exam ple of syllogism  I, as given above, from  the sentences 
“A ll m en are m ortal” and “A ll Poles are m en” we 
deduce th e sentence “All Poles are m ortal” . The in ­
ference is considered correct only if th e sentences from  
which we sta rt— th e prem ises—are considered correct.

THEOREMS AW'D RULES OF INFERENCE
11
If in syllogism I  we substitute “m an” for M , “p lan t” 
for P , and “Pole” for S, we obtain the following syllogism :
All m en are plants.
All Poles are men.
Therefore all Poles are plants.
Ho one, however, would consider th a t syllogism to be 
correct. The sense of incorrectness of th a t syllogism 
results from  th e falsehood of the first prem ise. B ut if 
the syllogism is form ulated in  th e form  I  w ith th e variables 
S, M , P , this cannqt m ean th a t one considers th e premises 
w ith th e variables to be tru e: no one will say th a t the 
expression “ All M  is P ” is tru e. T hat expression is neither 
tru e nor false before definite term s are substituted for 
th e variables M  and P . If we w ant to im part sense to 
syllogism I, form ulated w ith variables, we m ust tre a t 
it as a scheme of inference w hich expresses the following 
rule: whoever accepts sentences of the type “AM M  is P ” 
and “AM 8  is Af” , he is also entitled to accept a sentence 
of the type “AM S  is P ” . In  this rule we refer n o t to th e 
acceptance of th e sentence “All M  is P ”, b u t to th e 
acceptance of a sentence of the type of “All M  is P ” . 
And by sentences of th e types of “All M  is P ” we under­
stand those sentences w hich are obtained from  the ex­
pression “All M  is P ” by th e substitution for th e variables 
of some definite term s.
The difficulties discussed above and pertaining to  th e 
traditional syllogism , do n o t appear in  th e case of A ris­
to tle’s syllogism. A ristotle’s syllogism  form s, as has been 
said, a single sentence w hich is tru e for all th e substitutions 
of definite term s for th e variables, regardless of w hether 
after such substitutions th e prem ises become tru e or false 
clauses. For th e sam e substitutions for which syllogism I 
was not true, syllogism I I  is tru e: if all m en are plants 
and all Poles are m en, then all Poles are plants.

12
I. INTRODUCTION
O ur way of understanding syllogism I  enables us 
b etter to  explain th e difference betw een a logical theorem  
and a rule of inference. In  th e form ulation of a  rule of 
inference we encounter expressions which have no logical 
sense; these are th e expressions “whoever accepts”, “is 
entitled”. These expressions pertain to the mode of pro­
cedure of the person who m akes an inference. In  syllo­
gism II, which is a logical theorem , no such expressions 
occur.
If our w ay of interpreting th e traditional syllogism 
is correct then we have to  state th a t its form ulation 
given under I  is very obscure and does not convey to  the 
reader its actual content. T raditional logic com pletely 
ignored the difference betw een a logical theorem  and 
a rule of inference. F or us, th a t difference is of an essential 
nature, and in th e future we shall em phasize it m ost 
strictly in our considerations.
5. A fter A ristotle, logic in antiquity was devel­
oped in th e school of th e S toics8. Its founder in  th e 
3rd century B .C . was Zeno of Edition (Citium), and its 
m ost outstanding representative was Chrysippus. The 
w ritings of th e Stoics have not been preserved u n til our 
tim es, and only fragm ents of Stoic logic have reached us. 
The Stoics also form ulated certain syllogisms, an exam ple 
of which is th e following form ula:
If p j then g.
I l l  
Kow p .
Therefore g.
Like the traditional syllogism, the syllogism form ulated 
above is a  scheme of inference. In  all probability it was 
precisely under th e influence of th e Stoic syllogism  th a t 
traditional logic used to form ulate A ristotle’s syllogisms 
as schemes of inference and forgot about th e original 
A ristotelian form  of th e syllogism. The rule of inference, 
the scheme of which is the Stoic syllogism as given above,

THEOREM S AND RU LES O F IN FER EN C E
13
would be: whoever recognizes sentences of the type “If p , 
then 3” and “p ” , is entitled also to recognize th e sentence 
of the type “ g” . This rule is w hat is called the rule of 
detachment (or: m odus ponens— Tr.), one of th e sim plest 
rules of inference, to  be m et in  every logical system . 
The following scheme is an exam ple of the application 
of th a t rule:
If today is F riday, then tom orrow  is Saturday.
Now today is Friday.
Then tom orrow  is Saturday.
I t is possible to form ulate a logical theorem  which 
would be in a sim ilar relation to the said rule as A ristotle’s 
syllogism  is to trad itio n al syllogism. The theorem  in 
question is:
IV  
If (if p , then q) and p, then q.
This theorem  is a conditional sentence, as is syllogism II. 
Its  antecedent obviously is “ (if p , th en  q) and p ” , its 
consequent, q. The antecedent is a com bination into one 
sentence, b y  m eans of th e word “and” , of tw o sentences, 
th e first of w hich is in tu rn  a conditional sentence.
W hat is the difference betw een syllogism I I  and 
syllogism  IV ? In  both cases variables do occur in the 
syllogism s: M } P , 8  in  th e form er, and p , q in  the latter. 
The essential difference as betw een these variables per­
tains to the values w hich they can assum e. In  A ristotle’s 
syllogism  only terms can be values of th e variables; 
m oreover, this pertains only to  general nam es, i.e., such 
as m ay serve as predicates to  m ore th an  one object. They 
m ay be such term s as “ a Pole” , “ a p lan t” , b u t not 
individual term s such as “A ristotle of S tagira” , or em pty 
term s, i.e., which cannot serve as predicates to any object, 
e.g., “ chim era” , “ a square circle” , etc. On the other hand, 
th e values of th e variables in  syllogism  IV  m ay n o t be 
term s. Should we su b stitu te for th e variables p  and q

14
I . INTOODUCTIOK
some term s, e.g., “a m an” and “a p lan t”, respectively, 
we would obtain:
If (if a m an, th en  a plant) and a m an, then a plant.
This expression w onld be neither tru e nor false; m oreover, 
it would not be a sentence a t all; it wonld be a m eaningless 
expression. Only sentences m ay be th e values of the 
variables in  syllogism  IY . As in scheme III, in syllogism IV  
we m ay substitute for p  th e sentence “today is F riday” , 
and for q th e sentence “tom orrow  is S aturday” , and we 
obtain th e following tru e sentence:
If (if today is F riday, then tom orrow  is Saturday)
and today is F riday, then tom orrow  is Saturday.
Terms and sentences are quite different categories of 
expressions, so th a t in those cases where we use a term  
m eaningfully, we m ay not use a sentence m eaningfully, 
and where we use a sentence m eaningfully, we m ay not 
use a term  m eaningfully. Thus, A ristotle’s theory is con­
cerned w ith expressions in  which term  variables occur, 
and the logical theory originated by th e Stoics is con­
cerned w ith expressions in  which only sentential varia­
bles occur.
In  th e light of th e difference now under discussion 
th e logic of th e Stoics and th e logic of A ristotle are two 
different logical theories: the form er is a logic of sentences, 
and the latter is a logic of term s. This difference is stressed 
here because philosophical logic absolutely does not 
realize this fact: Stoic syllogisms are usually presented 
there as a sort of com plem ent of A ristotle’s syllogisms.
In  th e syllogistic of the Stoics no term s occur a t all, 
whereas in A ristotle’s syllogistic we have to do w ith 
sentences, although sentential variables do not appear 
there. W e shall see later th a t the syllogistic of th e Stoics 
logically precedes th a t of A ristotle: in justifying theorem s 
of th e logic of term s we m ust base ourselves on theorem s 
from  the logic of sentences.

THEOREM S AND RULES OF IN FER EN C E
15
The logic of sentences, which is not taken into account 
in th e textbooks of philosophical logic, is a m uch m ore 
im portant theory th an  th e theory of the A ristotelian 
syllogism. In  m athem atical reasoning th e theory of th e 
A ristotelian syllogism  has practically no applications, 
whereas th ere is probably no in tricate m athem atical 
proof w hich does n o t refer to theorem s from  the logic 
of sentences.
The logic of sentences w as for th e first tim e form ulated 
as a system  in  Frege’s B egriffsschrift; th e authors of 
P rin cip ia  M athem atica called it th e theory of deduction, 
w hich is n o t a fo rtu n ate term , since one m ight think th a t 
it is a theory of deducing in  general.
In  th e light of investigations by m athem atical logic, 
A ristotle’s syllogistic is a sm all fragm ent of a m ore general 
theory founded by Professor S. Le^niewski and called by 
him  ontology7. The theorem s of ontology which are 
applicable to m athem atics are m ainly theorem s not in ­
cluded in  A ristotle’s syllogistic.
6. To illu strate the issues raised here I  shall give the 
proof of a m athem atical theorem  as an exam ple. In  th a t 
proof I  shall avail m yself of one arithm etical theorem , 
and of logical theorem s I  shall use only tw o, both belonging 
to th e sentential calculus; I  shall m ake no reference to 
th e theory of th e A ristotelian syllogism. In  this exam ple 
I  shall use certain rules of inference, w hich w ill give us 
an opportunity to becom e directly acquainted w ith th e 
difference betw een a  theorem  and a rule of inference, as 
em phasized above. The exam ple to  be given now w ill be 
a m odel of a com plete m athem atical proof, satisfying th e 
conditions of precision form ulated by Frege.
I  
shall m ake use of tw o rules of inference: th e rule 
of detachm ent and th e rule of substitution. The rule of 
detachm ent was form ulated above in connection w ith 
Stoic syllogism  III. L et th e sym bol G be used so th a t 
th e expression Cpq is an abbreviation of th e conditional

16
I . INTRODUCTION
sentence w ith th e antecedent p  and th e consequent q. 
The rule of detachm ent entitles ns to accept a sentence 
of the type q on th e strength of acceptance of sentences 
of the types Cpq and p .
The role of substitution m ore or less corresponds to  
th e principle w hich in  trad itio n al logic was called dictum  
de om ni {a statem ent about everything). In  L atin it goes: 
quidquid de om nibus valet, valet etiam  de quibusdam  et de 
singulis, w hich in  an  inform al translation m ight be p u t as: 
w hat holds of all things of a certain hind, also holds of some 
and of single things of that hind. W hat is valid, e.g., of all 
m en, is also valid of A ristotle of Stagira. The rule of 
substitution perm its us, on the strength of a generally 
recognized theorem  w ith variables, to  accept as tru e 
a sentence obtained from  th is theorem  by replacing 
variables w ith some other expressions, b u t th e expressions 
replacing th e variables m ust be of th e sam e category as 
th e variables concerned: sentences are to be substituted for 
sentential variables, and terms for term  variables.
In  philosophical logic th e principle dictum  de om ni was 
considered th e m ain principle of deductive inference. 
This led to th e conclusion th a t deduction always starts 
from  general sentences and leads to certain less general 
sentences. Today we know  from  m athem atical logic th a t 
in deductive inference we have to use other rules as 
well as th e rule of substitution, e.g., th e rule of de­
tachm ent. If these rules are com bined, then, as we shall 
soon see, we m ay obtain quite new results, not contained 
in th e prem ises. C ontrary to w hat is often thought, de­
duction is not ju st explanation or realization of those 
laws which we previously knew  in some im plicit way. 
D eductive inference is a very pow erful m ethod of reason­
ing and leads to new discoveries. All m athem atics resorts 
to th a t m ethod of inference, and it is well know n how 
im portant m athem atics is for technology and the natural 
sciences.

THEOREMS AND RULES OF IN FER EN C E
17
One of th e theorem s of th e sentential calculus, to which 
we shall refer, is th e law  of the hypothetical syUogism. 
If th e sym bol C, introduced above, stands for an im pli­
cation, th e law  can be w ritten in  th e following form :
1 
GGpqGGqrGpr.
This law  is a conditional sentence th e antecedent and 
the consequent of w hich are m arked by braces below; 
the antecedent and th e consequent of th e consequent 
are m arked by braces above. Theorem  1 is usually applied 
when we have tw o recognized sentences of th e type Cpq 
and Ggr. W e first m ake appropriate substitutions in  Theo­
rem  1. N ext, on th e strength of th e rule of detachm ent— 
in view of the recognition of th e antecedent of Theorem  1, 
nam ely a sentence of th e type Cpq—we obtain a sentence 
of th e type CCqrGpr; here again, in view of th e recognition 
of its antecedent, nam ely a sentence of th e type Gqr, we 
obtain by detachm ent a sentence of the type Gpr.
Before sym bolizing th e second logical prem ise we shall 
introduce an abbreviation of the sentence “it is not tru e 
th a t p ”j which will be sym bolized N p . The prem ise will 
be w ritten as
2 
C G N p p p .
W e have sym bolized, w ith recourse to abbreviations 
already adopted, th e following sentence: “If (if it is not 
tru e th a t p , then p ), then p " . Theorem  2 is a conditional 
sentence th e antecedent of which again is also a conditional 
sentence w ith an antecedent which is th e negation of the 
consequent. To understand th e sense of Theorem  2 let 
us note th a t it enables us to start from  a sentence of the 
type G N pp and to obtain in  conclusion, on the strength 
of th e rules of substitution and detachm ent, a sentence 
of th e type p . In  fact, a sentence of th e type p  m ust 
here be true; should it not be true, then its negation,

1 8
I. INTRO D U CTIO N
i.e.j a sentence of th e type N p , would be true. Y et from  
th a t sentence and from  a recognized sentence of the type 
C N pp we would obtain, on th e strength of th e rule of 
detachm ent, a sentence of th e type p ; in this way we 
w ould have to recognize tw o contradictory sentences, 
of th e types N p  and p , respectively. Since two con­
tradictory sentences cannot both be true, then our assum p­
tion about the tru th  of th e sentence of the type N p  m ust 
be false; and hence the sentence of th e type p  is true.
A p art from  these two prem ises from  th e dom ain of 
th e sentential calculus we shall refer in the proof to the 
following theorem  from  th e arithm etic of n atu ral num bers: 
if the product of two natural num bers, a - b, is divisible by 
the p rim e num ber n, and if the natural num ber a is not 
divisible by the prim e num ber n , then the natural num ber b 
is divisible by the prim e num ber n . I t follows from  this 
theorem  th a t if th e product of two n atu ral num bers is 
divisible by th e prim e num ber n , then th e elem ents of 
th a t product cannot both be n o t divisible by n . F or th e 
purpose of th e sym bolic notation of this theorem  we 
shall introduce, ap art from  logical abbreviations, the 
following arithm etical abbreviation: sentences of th e type 
**a is divisible b y  th e prim e num ber w” will be w ritten as 
“(asP n)” 8, and th e sentence “a is not divisible by th e 
prim e num ber n ”, being equivalent to  th e sentence “it 
is n o t tru e th a t a is divisible by th e prim e num ber w” , 
will be w ritten as “N (a e P n )”. Consequently th e theorem  
of th e arithm etic of n atu ral num bers referred to  above 
will have the following form :
3 
C (a - bePn) G N  (asP n) (bePn) .
The variables a and b which occur in this theorem  can 
take as th eir values only nam es of natural num bers.
Now, adopting as prem ises only th e three theorem s 
given above (two logical and one arithm etical), and ap­

THEOREM S AND BURES OB IN FE R E N C E
19
plying only tw o rules of inference: th e rule of substitution 
and th e rule of detachm ent, we shall prove th e  following 
theorem :
G (a • a eP n) (aeP n) .
This theorem  states th a t if the square of a num ber a is 
divisible by a p rim e num ber, then the num ber a itself also 
is divisible by that p rim e num ber. E .g., 36 is divisible b y  3, 
and therefore 6 , too, is divisible b y  3. The theorem  w hich 
we are to  prove is a m odernized form  of E uclid’s theorem  
given in  his E lem ents as Theorem  12 in  Book IX . The 
proof w hich w ill be given here repeats th e basic idea of 
E uclid’s proof and is usually referred to  as an  exam ple 
of a proof w hich, am ong other things, refers to Theorem  2. 
T hat theorem  is th e subject m atter of th e m onograph [33] 
w ritten b y  th e Italian  logician V ailati, who lived in  th e 
second half of th e 19th century.
STow comes th e proof. To Theorem  3 we apply the rule 
of substitution: for all th e occurrences of the num erical 
variable b in th e theorem  we su b stitu te th e num erical 
variable a and thus obtain th e acceptance of th e resulting 
sentence 4. This step will be sym bolized thus:
3 bja * 4,
4 
G (a * aeP n) G N  (aePn) (aeP n) .
X ext we apply to Theorem  1 th e rule of substitution. 
W e perform  a substitution such th a t th e antecedent of 
th e sentence to  be obtained will have th e sam e form  as 
sentence 4.
1 p j(a  * a eP n), q /G N (a eP n) (a eP n), rj(aeP n) * 5,
5 
GG (a • aeP n) G N  (a eP n) (aePn)
G G G N (aePn) (aeP n) (aePn) C (a * aePn) (a eP n) .
The accepted sentence 5 is a conditional sentence the 
antecedent of which is 
equiform  w ith th e accepted

20
I . INTRODUCTION
sentence 4; hence th e consequent of sentence 5 can, on 
th e strength of th e rule of detachm ent, he recognized as 
sentence 6 :
5 * 04 — 6 ,
6 
0 0 OjV(a eP n) (aeP n){a eP n) 0 (a • aeP u)(aeP n) .
- — 
. 
 
 
 
------- -----------------------------------------------------■ 
—
-----------------------------------------------------*
To Theorem  2 we apply th e substitution in such a way 
th a t we obtain a sentence equiform  w ith th e antecedent 
of sentence 6 :
2 p j(a eP n ) * 7 ,
7 
0  G N (a eP n) (a eP n) (aeP n) .
The rule of detachm ent can now be applied to sentences 
6 and 7:
6 * 07 — 8 ,
8 
0 (a • aeP n)(aeP n) .
Sentence 8 is th e theorem  th a t was to be proved.
The proof of Theorem  8 as given above is an exam ple of 
a com plete proof. In  th a t proof, th e recognition of every 
sentence is justified by a  certain rule w hich was adopted 
in  advance. E very step in  th e proof can be substanti­
ated; th e substantiation is to  be found in  th a t line of the 
proof w hich precedes every sentence recognized in the 
proof.
The proof given above m ight be carried out w ithout 
th e use of sym bols, b u t then it would seem m ore com­
plicated and less clear. The sym bols we have adopted 
are shorter th an  th e corresponding words in everyday 
language and enable us to see a t a glance how a given 
theorem  is constructed. M oreover, sym bolic notation m akes 
easier a  com plete form alization of the proof. The proof 
m ight be checked quite m echanically. A person who did 
not know  th e m eaning of th e sym bols we have used would

THEOREM S AND RU LES OF IN FE R E N C E
21
be in a position to check th e correctness of th e proof 
if he only knew the rules of inference.
The proof given above is a m odel of scientific precision. 
W hoever has understood in w hat th e precision of such 
a form alized proof consists will use different standards 
when m easuring th e ^precision of th e proofs he finds in 
other disciplines: m athem atics, physics, th e n atu ral sci­
ences. N ot every discipline can today reach such a level 
of scientific precision as has been achieved by m athem atical 
logic. B ut it is a good thing to have a high standard of 
scientific precision, for we can then properly evaluate th e 
precision of other proofs and strive to increase it. This 
is one of th e greatest achievem ents of m athem atical logic: 
it has created a new standard of scientific -precision, so fa r 
unequaled in  general by m athem atics, and a fortiori by other 
disciplines.

II. THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
3. The Primitive Terms and the Axioms of the Sentential Calculus
7. The sentential calculus is an axiom atic deductive 
system. The deductive m ethod, also called the geometrical 
method and known as early as antiquity, used to be 
interpreted in various ways. Blaise Pascal, the em inent 
17th-century m athem atician and philosopher, in his essay 
D e Vesprit geomeirigue form ulated the view th a t the ideal 
geometrical m ethod consists in defining everything and 
substantiating everything. This, however, is unachievable, 
as Pascal knew. In  order to define an expression we m ust 
m ake use of other expressions. Since we cannot proceed 
to infinity, we m ust adopt certain words w ithout de­
finition. Thus in every deductive theory there are certain 
undefined words which are called the prim itive terms of 
th a t theory. The m eaning of a prim itive term  can only 
be explained by examples.
I t  is also not possible to prove all the sentences of 
a given theory, for the proof of any sentence is based 
on the tru th  of other sentences. Consequently, a t the 
outset of every deductive theory we m ust recognize w ithout 
proof certain sentences which are called the axiom s of th at 
theory. In  philosophy the term  axioms often means sen­
tences which, besides being adopted w ithout proof are 
directly self-evident. This was A ristotle’s interpretation 
of the term  “ axiom ” . On the other hand, the Stoics called 
all sentences axioms. In  our interpretation, axioms are 
sentences which are recognized w ithout proof, b u t need 
not be self-evident. Y et it serves the purpose well so to 
choose the axioms of a theory th a t their tru th  is clear

PR IM ITIV E TERM S AND AXIOMS
23
w ithout proof. Moreover, w hat is an axiom  in one de­
ductive system , th a t is a sentence which in th a t system  
is accepted w ithout proof, m ay in another system  occur 
as a theorem  and he provable in th a t system.
The system  of the sentential calculus which is to be 
expounded below contains tw o kinds of prim itive term s: 
symbols of negation IF and symbols of th e conditional 
sentence O. In  th e sentential calculus, small letters of th e 
L atin alphabet will be used as sentential variables, i.e., 
variables which can take any sentences as their values. 
Capital letters, such as IF and C, will be taken to be con­
stants, i.e., symbols for which no other expression m ay 
be substituted.
The expression of th e type IFp is the negation of the 
sentence p . In  English, the word not, which corresponds 
to th e sym bol IF, is usually not placed before the negated 
sentence. The negation of the sentence “today is T hursday” 
is th e sentence “ today is n o t Thursday” . If we w ant to  
place th e negating expression before the sentence in 
question we m ust use the more com plicated phrase “it 
is not tru e th a t” ; if we do so then the negation of th e 
sentence under discussion will be “it is not tru e th a t today 
is T hursday” . In  th a t respect-the Greek language is m ore 
convenient, for there the negating word m ay be placed 
before th e whole sentence; such also is the position of 
negation in Stoic logic.
The expression IFp, like every expression containing 
variables, is called a function. The function in question 
consists of two p arts: the functor IF and the argum ent p . 
An expression consisting of the functor IF and of one 
argum ent which is a  sentence and stands to th e right of 
the functor, is a sentence. T hat is w hy we say th a t the 
functor IF is a sentence-form ing functor of one sentential 
argum ent.
The expressions p  and IFp are two contradictory 
sentences. Two contradictory sentences cannot both be
3*

2 4
II. T H E  SENTEN TIA L CALCULUS
tru e: if th e sentence p  is tru e, then th e sentence N p  m ust 
be false, and if th e sentence p  is false, th en  th e sentence 
N p  is tru e. U sually we sym bolize a false sentence as “ 0” , 
and a tru e sentence as “ 1” . W e m ay therefore w rite down 
in  sym bolic notation th e  following equations: NO — 1, 
N X  =  0, w hich are to  be read: the negation of a false sen­
tence is a true sentence, the negation of a true sentence is 
a fcilse sentence.
The function Cpg is a  conditional sentence (im plication) 
w ith th e antecedent p  and th e consequent g; it is read 
“if p , th en  <?” . The functor G is w ritten before th e ante­
cedent p  and th e consequent q of th e im plication. In  
English, th e functor G has its counterpart in  tw o words, 
“if” and “th en ” . In  th a t respect, too, b o th  Greek and 
L atin come closer to th e notation we have adopted, for 
in those languages th e sym bol of the conditional sentence 
consists of one w ord and stands a t th e beginning of th e 
conditional sentence.
In  our logical sym bolism  we shall always w rite functors 
a t th e beginning of th e functions in  question. In  this 
w ay we avoid th e need to w rite the parentheses. A  sim ilar 
notation could ju st as well be used in  arithm etic. Should 
we w rite down th e sum  of tw o num bers “ a-b 6” as “ +  06” , 
th en  we could w rite th e law  of associativity
«+(& +<?) =  { a + b )  +  c 
in  th e parenthesis-free notation as
-\-a -{-b c=  -t--{-a&c
In  reading th e last line we m ust bear in m ind th a t every 
sym bol 
form s a  sum  together w ith tw o num erical
expressions th a t stand to th e right of it. These num erical 
expressions m ay in tu rn  be either variables or sums. W e 
should read th e conditional sentences, such as those given 
in  6, Section 1.2, in  the same way.

PR IM ITIV E TERM S AND AXIOMS
25
The symbol 0  is a functor of two argum ents; it forms 
an im plication—hence a sentence— of two argum ents th a t 
are sentences; the sym bol G is thus a sentence-forming 
functor of two sentential arguments.
The im plication Cpq is often identified w ith the sentence 
“if V is then q is” , which, however, is an incorrect inter­
pretation. The sentence quoted above is meaningful only 
if the variables are treated as term  variables, e.g., “if 
P eter is, then P aul is” . B u t in the im plication Cpq there 
are only sentential variables. I t is also erroneous to iden­
tify the im plication Cpq w ith the sense of the sentence 
“if *p’ is true, then tq> is tru e” , for the last-nam ed sen­
tence m eans “if the sentence ip'> is true, then th e sentence 
iqJ is tru e” . H ere the variables are in quotation m arks, 
for we have to do w ith the names of those variables. 
On the other hand, in the sentence Cpq it is not the names 
of variables which occur, b u t the variables themselves. 
The third erroneous interpretation of th e m eaning of the 
sentence Cpq is its identification with the meaning of the 
sentence “ 
is a consequence of ‘p ’ 
this means th a t 
“ the sentence ‘g’ can be inferred from th e sentence ‘p ’ ” , 
so th a t here again we have to do w ith nam es of variables 
and also w ith th e possibility of inferring something, which 
is not inherent in the m eaning of the sentence Cpq.
In  order to become better acquainted w ith the meaning 
of the sentence Cpq let us discuss the cases in which th a t 
sentence is true or false. R etaining the symbols “ 0” and 
“1” as standing, respectively, for false and true sentences, 
we have to analyze, according to the falsehood or tru th  
of the argum ents of the im plication, th e following four 
cases:
<700, <701, <710, <711.
F irst of all, let us note th a t <710 =  0, th a t is, th a t an 
im plication w ith a true antecedent and a false consequent 
is false. F or should, e.g., the im plication “If W arsaw lies

26
II. TH E SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
on V istula then 2 -2  =  5” be true, th en  by recognizing 
th e tru e sentence “W arsaw  lies on V istula” we could 
prove, on th e strength of th e rule of detachm ent, th e false 
sentence “ 2 -2  =  6” .
In  order to discuss th e rem aining eases let us analyze 
the following arithm etical theorem  w hich is an im plication:
If a; is divisible by 9, then x  is divisible by 3.
This im plication is tru e for all th e values of th e num er­
ical variable x. H ence on substituting a?/16 we should 
obtain a tru e sentence. The substitution yields:
If 16 is divisible by 9, th en  16 is divisible by 3.
W e have thus obtained an im plication w ith a false 
antecedent and a false consequent. In  view  of such 
exam ples we agree th a t <700 =  1, i.e., th a t an im plication 
w ith a false antecedent and a false consequent is true.
B y substituting: o?/15 we obtain:
If 15 is divisible by 9, then 15 is divisible by 3.
How th e antecedent is false and th e consequent true. 
W e therefore agree th a t C01 =  1, i.e., th a t an im plication 
w ith a false antecedent and a true consequent is true.
B y substituting: jz/18 we obtain an im plication w ith 
a tru e antecedent and a tru e consequent:
If 18 is divisible by 9, then 18 is divisible by 3.
Consequently, we agree th a t O il =  1, i.e., th a t an 
im plication w ith a true antecedent and a true consequent 
is true.
On th e other hand, we cannot find a substitution for 
w hich th e antecedent of th e im plication under discussion 
is true, and the consequent false.
This m anner of determ ining th e tru th  or the falsehood 
of im plications entails certain properties of im plications 
which seem paradoxical from  th e point of view of every­
day usage. The antecedents and consequents, as discussed

PR IM ITIV E TERM S AND AXIOMS
27
in our example, w hether tru e or false, have some inner 
sem antic links resulting from  th e general arithm etical 
theorem. B ut in th e sentential calculus we m ay not 
impose on the variables such sem antic links, which m ay 
be taken from  any field—m athem atics, law, geography. 
We m ay not do so for we are unable to characterize those 
links in the field of logic, which does not presuppose the 
knowledge of any such specialized discipline. W e m ust 
therefore recognize as true, e.g., an im plication w ith a false 
antecedent and an arbitrary consequent, even if there 
be no sem antic link between the antecedent and the 
consequent. Hence we shall recognize as true the sentence:
If Lwow lies on Yistula, then 2 • 2 — 5.
Likewise, we shall recognize as true the sentences:
If 2*2 =  5, then W arsaw lies on Vistula,
If 2*2 =  4, then W arsaw lies on Vistula.
P u ttin g  together all th e possible cases, we shall say 
generally th a t an im plication is true if and only if either 
its antecedent is false, or its consequent is true. Such an 
interpretation of th e im plication is an extension of the 
sense of the expression conditional sentence as used in 
everyday language, and hence its paradoxical properties 
in the field of logic.
Our explanations concerning the intuitive sense of 
the prim itive term s are in  no way definitions of those 
term s. They are merely comments which m ake it easier 
to grasp the properties of the prim itive term s, properties 
which result from th e axioms of the sentential calculus.
8 . As suggested by Professor Le^niewski, both the 
axioms and the theorems of a deductive system will be 
called theses of th a t system. The following three theses 
will be adopted as the axioms of our system of the sen­
tential calculus:

28
H . TH E SENTEN TIA L CALCULUS
1
GGpqGGqrGpr,
2
G G N ppp ,
3
G p G N p q.
A part from  variables, these axioms include only two kinds 
of the prim itive term s discussed above. The first two 
axioms are those sentences which we have resorted to in 
Section 1.2 to prove arithm etical theorems. Axiom 1 is 
one of the forms of the lam o f hypothetical syllogism, forms 
which were know n to A ristotle. T hat law m ay appear 
m ore intuitive in th e form :
G R G pqG qrG pr.
The symbol R , which will be introduced into the sentential 
calculus by a definition, is a sentence-forming functor 
of two sentential argum ents. Sentences of the type R p q  
are read iip  and q”. The Symbol K  is the sign of conjunction 
of two sentences. The second form  of the law  of hypothet­
ical syllogism is to be read: “If (if p , then q, and if q, 
then r), then if p, then r ” .
Axiom 1 can be inferred from  the second form  of the 
law of hypothetical syllogism on the strength of the law 
of exportation:
CGKpqrGpCqr .
This law authorizes us, in the case of an im plication th at 
has in its antecedent a conjunction of two sentences, to 
shift one of these two sentences to the consequent. For 
instance, from  the sentence “if a? is even and x  is divisible 
by 3, then x  is divisible by 6” , we m ay obtain, by the 
law  of exportation and the rules of substitution and 
detachm ent, the sentence “if a; is even, then (if a? is divisible 
by 3, then x  is divisible by 6)”. W e shall reach Axiom 1

PRIMITIVE TERMS AND AXIOMS
29
precisely in this way, by assuming the second form of 
the law of the hypothetical syllogism. By substituting in 
the law of exportation: p /Cpq, qjCqrf rjC pr, we obtain:
CCKCpqCqrCprCCpqCCqrCpr .
Since the antecedent of the sentence thus obtained is the 
second form  of the law of the hypothetical syllogism, 
we assert the consequent, i.e., Axiom 1,
Quite similarly we m ight reach the second form of 
the law of hypothetical syllogism by assuming Axiom 1 
and the following law of im portation:
GCp GqrCKpgr .
Hence, the second form  of the law of the hypothetical 
syllogism m ight replace Axiom 1. W e shall not, however, 
adopt it as an axiom since we would thus increase th e 
num ber of prim itive term s in our system of the sentential 
calculus by the conjunction symbol K .
The reasoning based on Axiom 2 was known, as 
m entioned in Section 1.2, to Euclid. Euclid’s commen­
tator, the Jesuit Clavius, who lived a t the end of the 
16th century, drew attention to reasoning of this kind 
and emphasized its strange structure. The m ode of in­
ference based on Axiom 2 became popular among Jesuit 
scholars owing to Clavius. In  the early 18th century the 
Italian  Saccheri published his book JEuclidcs ab om ni 
naevo vindicates, in which he endeavoured to prove 
Euclid’s parallel axiom—an issue which long absorbed 
the attention of m athem aticians Saccheri w anted to base 
his proof on Axiom 2 and to dem onstrate th a t Euclid’s 
axiom follows from its negation. Today we know th a t 
such a proof is not possible. T et Saccheri’s investigations 
were not lost: by drawing conclusions from  the negation 
of the parallel axiom he gave rise to non-Euclidean 
geometries.

30
ir. TH E SENTENTIA L CALCULUS
To explain the sense of Axiom 3 let ns substitute for p  
any tru e sentence, symbolized by “1” . The axiom m il 
then yield: C lC & lq .
The rule of detachm ent will give CNXq. B ut we know 
th a t N 1  — 0, so th a t we have: GOq, Thus by means of 
Axiom 3 we m ay assert an im plication w ith a false ante­
cedent and an arbitrary consequent. This is in agreement 
w ith previous explanations concerning the functor C, 
for we have: (700 — 1, 001 =  1.
Axiom 3 can be deduced from the law of exportation 
and a certain theorem  th a t was known to the Franciscan 
Buns Scotus, one of the m ost em inent medieval philos­
ophers (late 13th and early 14th century). Scotus asserted 
th a t if two contradictory sentences were both true, then 
everything would be possible, for it is not possible th a t 
two contradictory sentences should both be true. Scotus’ 
theorem  corresponds to th e following law in the sentential 
calculus:
G K p N p q .
An example of consequence given by Scotus: Socrates 
exists and Socrates does not exist, hence the stick stands 
in  the corner, is an application of th a t law.
B y substituting in the law of exportation: q jN p , rjq, 
we obtain
G C K p N p q C p G N p q.
Since the antecedent of the im plication thus obtained is 
Scotus’ law, we assert, by the rule of detachm ent, the 
consequent which is Axiom 3.
The explanations concerning the three axioms in 
question, given under 6, Section 1.2, and above, are 
intended to convince th e reader th a t they are true. For 
according to w hat has been said about axioms, they need 
not be self-evident w ithout explanation.

DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF INFERENCE
31
4. Definitions and Rules of Inference in the Sentential Calculus
9. O ur system  of the sentential calculus will contain, 
not only prim itive term s, b u t also defined terms* To 
im part precision to th e concept of definition let ns con­
sider any definition current in everyday usage. For in­
stance, we often encounter the following; a square — 
parallelogram w ith equal sides and angles.
In  such a definition, th e  symbol 
” is read “is” 
(or “is the. same as” ). A definition always includes two 
expressions, e.g., “a square” and “ a parallelogram  w ith 
equal sides and angles”, which b y  th a t definition have 
the same meaning. One of these expressions, in this ease 
“a parallelogram  w ith equal sides and angles” , is adopted 
as comprehensible; in traditional logic it is called the 
definiens (th at which defines). The other expression, in 
this case “a square” , is in traditional logic called the 
definiendum  (th at which is to be defined); it is treated 
as incomprehensible before the introduction of the defi­
nition in question, so th a t the m eaning of the definiendum 
is explained only by the definiens. The fact th a t the 
definiens m ust be comprehensible even before the defi­
nition has been introduced, dem onstrates the impossi­
bility of defining all th e term s of a theory, and the ne­
cessity of adopting certain prim itive term s.
A part from  the properties described above, definitions 
m ust have another essential property. If the definiendum 
occurs in a true sentence, then the sentence obtained from  
the form er through the replacem ent of the definiendum 
by the appropriate definiens ought to rem ain true. For 
instance, if it is true th a t th e diagonals of a square cross 
a t right angles, then it is also true th a t the diagonals of 
a parallelogram  w ith equal sides and angles cross a t the 
right angles. And vice versa, if the definiens occurs in a true 
sentence, then the replacem ent of th a t definiens by the 
appropriate definiendum  ought to yield a true sentence.

32
IT. THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
W hat has now been said about definitions, was already 
known in traditional logic. Y et research in m athem atical 
logic has raised another issue connected w ith definitions. 
Are definitions to be mere abbreviations, or can they 
also perform a creative role and have an essential share 
in reasoning? I t has turned out th a t definitions m ay be 
treated so th at a definition D  makes it possible to prove 
a theorem  T  in which the definiendum of the definition D  
does not occur b u t which nevertheless cannot be proved 
w ithout the said definition I). In  this way the definition D  
would play an essential role in the proof and thus would, 
like the premises of the proof, contribute a new element.
W ithout engaging in any detailed analysis not belonging 
to a general course in logic, I  shall only state th a t in 
m y opinion definitions cannot play any creative ro le 1. 
In  this respect I share the standpoint of the authors of 
P rincipia M athem atica and hold th at definitions are 
theoretically superfluous. If there is a theory in which 
definitions do not appear a t all, then nothing new should 
be obtainable in th a t theory after the introduction of 
definitions, except for the fact th at the outw ard forms 
of certain theorems m ay be changed as a result of replacing 
the defmiens by the definiendum. In  m y opinion the 
advantage to be obtained from definitions m ay only be 
th a t (1) definitions serve to abbreviate certain expressions 
belonging to a given theory, and th a t (2) by introducing 
a new term  definitions may, together with th a t new term , 
contribute some new intuitions to the theory and thus 
add to the term s belonging to the theory in question term s 
which have a meaning outside th a t theory. These m erits 
of definitions will soon be illustrated by examples.
There is still one issue connected with definitions: 
are the definitions belonging to a given theory theses of 
th a t theory? H ere again I  shall abstain from detailed 
considerations and confine myself to the statem ent th at 
the requirem ents form ulated above m ake me treat defi-

D E FIN ITIO N S AND RULES O F IN FER EN C E
33
nitions as certain equalities which are theses of a given 
theory, b u t are noted down on the m argin of th a t theory, 
as are the rules of inference. The special rule of inference, 
called the rule of replacement, perm its us to use definitions 
so th a t in any thesis we m ay replace one side of a given 
definition by the other.
1 0 . 
The first definition to be given now states th a t 
the expressions A p q  and C N pq have the same meaning. 
T hat definition, w ith th e help of the second of the two 
expressions quoted, containing only those elements which 
have already occurred in the axioms, enables us to in­
troduce into our system  of the sentential calculus th e 
new term  A , which is a sentence-forming functor of two 
sentential argum ents. L et it be noted first of all th a t 
this definition shortens an expression consisting of four 
letters to one consisting of only three. B ut the more 
im portant thing is the new intuition which th a t definition 
introduces into the sentential calculus. The functor A  
corresponds to the expression or in everyday language 
and is a symbol of the alternation of two sentences.
L et us study the word “ or” by an example. A person 
calls up a firm  whose managers are P eter and Paul and 
asks when he can find any one of the managers in the 
office. H e is told th a t between 12 and 2 p.m. Peter is 
in the office or Paul is in the office. If the inform ation 
is true, then the inquirer will, in the specified period of 
tim e, find in the office a t least one of the managers, 
though he m ay find both. A t any rate, if P eter will not 
be in the office, Paul will be there. W e see th a t if the 
sentence iip  or g” is true, then the sentence “if not p , 
then g” is true. Should the inquirer have been informed 
th a t if P eter is not in the office between 12 and 2 p.m., 
then at th a t tim e Paul is in the office, this would m ean 
th a t between 12 and 2 p.m. P eter is in the office or Paul 
is in the office. This example confirms th a t the expressions 
A p q and C N pq have the same meaning.

34
II. THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
Let it be noted, however, th a t the word “or” can 
also have other meanings th an  has the functor A . In  the 
sentence “I  shall go to the right or I  shall go to the left” 
we w ant to exclude the possibility of the simultaneous 
tru th  of the sentences “I  shall go to the right” and “ I 
shall go to the left” . In  th is sense “ either ... or” would 
perhaps be more appropriate. B ut our definition does 
not im part such a sense to the functor A . Hence, in con­
form ity w ith our definition, the following symbolic equal­
ities are satisfied:
A 0 0 =  C N 00 =  CIO =  0 ,
A 0 1  =  CAfOl =  O il =  1 ,
A 1 0  =  C N 10 =  €00 =  1 ,
A l l  =  CAT! 1 =  001 =  1 .
Thus we see th a t the function A p q , called alternation, 
is false only if its both arguments are false, and in  all other 
cases it is true.
The second definition of which we shall avail ourselves 
in the sentential calculus, states th a t th e expression K p q  
means the same as th e expression AfGpAlq. The functor K  
corresponds to the word “ and” in everyday language, 
and thus is the sym bol of th e conjunction of two sentences. 
The expression defining conjunction is a negation of the 
expression CpAlq. The tru th  of the last-nam ed expression 
excludes the possibility of the simultaneous tru th  of the 
sentences p  and q. F or instance, from  the tru th  of the 
sentence “if P eter is in the office, then Paul is not in th e 
office” it follows th a t the sentences “P eter is in the office” 
and “ Paul is in the office” cannot be simultaneously true. 
Hence the function K p q , being the- negation of the ex­
pression GpAfq, is true only if the sentences p  and q do 
not exclude one another b u t are sim ultaneously true. 
This is in agreem ent w ith the current sense of the word 
“ and”, for the sentence “P eter is in the office and P aul

DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF INFERENCE
35
is in the office” is true only if both its components are 
sim ultaneously true.
Our definition yields the following symbolic equalities:
K 0 0 =  NCONO =  NC01 =  N 1  =  0 ,
K O I =  K C 0 K 1  =  HCOO =  H I =- 0 , 
m o  =  HC1H0 =  HC11 =  H I =  0 ,
m i  =  h c i h i  =  nr c i o  =  h o  =  1 .
Thus we see th a t the function K p q  is true only if both its 
argum ents are true, and in  all other cases it is false.
The th ird  definition states th a t the expression D pq 
has the same m eaning as the expression C pN q. The 
functor D j which also is a sentence-forming functor of 
two sentential argum ents, is called th e symbol of non- 
conjunction (or alternative denial). Ho conjunction in th e 
gram m atical sense of the word corresponds in English 
to the functor D . N ote th a t the conjunction of two sen­
tences is defined as the negation of the expression which 
defines non-conjunction. Hence the expression K p q  m ight 
be defined as having the same m eaning as N D pq. R ef­
erence has already been m ade to the fact th a t the tru th  
of the expression C pN q excludes the possibility of the 
sim ultaneous tru th  of the sentences p  and q. The sense 
of the functor D  is more clearly explained by the following 
equalities:
m o  =  coho =  c o i =  1 , 
d o i =  c o m  =  coo =  i  , 
m o  =  c ih o  =  c i i  =  i  ,
D ll =  C1H1 =  CIO — 0 .
T hus the function D pq is false only if both its arguments 
are true, and otherwise it is always true.
The functor D, which does not actually contribute 
any new intuitions to the sentential calculus, is here in ­
troduced only for theoretical reasons, because it has the

36
II. THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
property th a t it can serve as the only prim itive term  of 
the sentential calculus. This has been dem onstrated by 
the American logician H . M. Sheffera. In  our system of 
the sentential calculus there are two prim itive terms: 
C and N , b u t there is an axiom system in the sentential 
calculus which has the functor T> as its only prim itive 
term ; all the other functors can in th at system be defined 
by means of the functor J>.
The fourth, and the last, definition to be introduced 
now states th at the expression E pq has the same meaning 
as the expression N C C pqN O qp. The functor E  is called 
the symbol of equivalence. To realize its meaning let us 
refer to the definition of conjunction. W hen in the ex­
pression th at defines conjunction we substitute Gpq for p , 
and Cqp for q, we obtain the expression th a t defines 
equivalence. Hence the meaning of the expression E pq 
is the same as th at of K C pqC qp; its tru th  states the 
occurrence of implications from  the first argum ent to the 
second and from  the second to the first. The expression 
E pq is read: p  if and only if q. F or equivalence we obtain 
the following equalities:
.000 =  N C C 00N C 00 =  N G 1N 1 =  JV010 =  NO =  1 ,
E 01 =  N C  C O IN  CIO =  N C 1 N 0  =  E C U  =  N 1  0 ,
E 10 =  N G G 10N C 01 =  N G 0N 1 =  N G 00 =  Arl  =  0 ,
j011 =  NG G 11NG 11 =  N C 1 N 1  =  N C 10 =  NO =  1 .
Thus we see th a t the function E pq is true only if its arguments 
are either both false or both true. W hen one of the arguments 
is true and the other is false, the function E p q  is false.
The analysis given thus far in this subsection offers 
inform al explanations of the definitions listed below:
01 
A p q  — C N p q ,
0 2 
K p q  -- N G pN q ,
03 
E p q  — C pN q ,
04 
E p q  — N G G pqN C qp .

D EFIN ITIO N S AND BULES OF IN FER EN C E
37
The symbol “ = ” in these definitions states th at the ex­
pressions on its two sides have the same meaning.
11. Expressions of the sentential calculus include the 
variables p t g, r , ..., and constants, prim itive or defined, 
which together w ith sentential argum ents again form 
sentences. E very expression which is form ed of variables 
and which is a sentence, will be called a m eaningful ex­
pression. This term  is left undefined, b u t the following 
theorem  will enable us to decide about every expression 
formed of variables and of constants of the sentential 
calculus, whether it is a meaningful expression or not.
The expression x  is a m eaningful expression i f  and only 
if one of the following conditions is satisfied:
1 ) a? is a sm all letter,
2 ) x  is th e negation of a meaningful expression,
3) x  
is an im plication 
with argum ents which 
are
m eaningful expressions,
4) x  
is an alternation 
w ith argum ents which 
are
m eaningful expressions,
5) x  
is a conjunction w ith argum ents which 
are
m eaningful expressions,
6 ) x  is a non-conjunction with argum ents which are 
m eaningful expressions,
7) x  
is an equivalence 
with argum ents which 
are
m eaningful expressions.
In  conformity with this theorem, if an x  is a meaningful 
expression, then one of the seven conditions given above 
is satisfied. A nd conversely: if one of the seven conditions 
given above is satisfied} then x  is a meaningful expression. 
L et Z  stand for any meaningful expression. The following 
symbolic equalities are then satisfied:
~NZ =  Z , 
C Z Z =  Z , 
A Z Z  =  Z , 
K Z Z  =  Z , 
D Z Z *
Z , 
B Z Z =  Z .
L et us consider an expression formed of variables and 
constants of the sentential calculus, e.g., G N pA K pH qr.
4

38
U . T H E  SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
I t  follows from  th e theorem  above th a t every small letter 
is a m eaningful expression. W e therefore replace in the 
expression now under discussion every small letter b y  Z  
and apply th e symbolic equalities given above:
C N Z A K Z N Z Z  =  G Z A K Z Z Z  =  C Z A Z Z  =  G Z Z =  Z .
W e have thus dem onstrated th a t th e expression under 
discussion is a m eaningful expression.
L et us now suppose th a t we have to examine the ex­
pression N p K D q r. B y proceeding in  an analogous way 
we obtain N Z K D Z Z  =  Z K Z . I t  is claimed th a t the ex­
pression under discussion is not a m eaningful expression. 
In  fact, were it a m eaningful expression, then in conform ity 
w ith the theorem  above a t least one of the seven conditions 
would have to be satisfied. As can easily be ascertained, 
none of these conditions is satisfied.
Proceeding in this way we m ay decide about every 
expression. th a t consists only of variables and constants 
of the sentential calculus w hether it is a meaningful ex­
pression. F or instance, we can m ake sure th a t the ex­
pressions
N pC qqK p , 
C N q C r, 
JBpqKpr 
are not m eaningful expressions, but the expressions 
G C qrG N pK qp , 
D rC pK qp
are m eaningful expressions.
In  order to form ulate th e rules of inference in a more 
precise way we shall use the word equiform. We say th at p  
is equiform w ith p , th a t the expression G N p is equiform 
w ith the expression G N p. In  e v ery d a y language we say 
about those expressions which in our sense are equiform, 
th a t they are the same or identical. This, however, is not 
correct, since equiform expressions need n o t be identical. 
E quiform ity consists only in the sim ilarity of geometrical 
forms.

D EFIN ITIO N S AND KUU3S OF IN FER EN C E
39
W e say that an expression @ is a correct substitution of 
the expression a if and only if /? differs from  a only in  that 
in  place of certain variables w hich occur in  a the expression f} 
has certain m eaningful expressions, such that m eaningful 
expressions in  
are equiform  whenever they correspond to 
equiform  variables in  a.
F or instance, the expression
(a) 
GGpqGGqrCpr
following a correct substitution, yields the expression
((3) 
GGp GNpqG GGNpqr Gpr
obtained through the substitution qjG Spq, On the other 
hand, the expression
(£') 
C C pC N pqG CqrCpr
is not a correct substitution of the expression (a), for th e 
variables in the expression (a) which are equiform w ith q 
do not have in ((3') counterparts in  equiform meaningful 
expressions. The first such variable has in (£') its counter­
p a rt in an expression equiform with CMpq, and the second, 
an expression equiform w ith q.
L et us now form ulate th e rules of inferences in our 
system  of the sentential calculus. There are three such 
rules: the rule of substitution) the rule of detachment, and 
th e rule of replacement which enable us to m ake use of 
definitions.
The rule of substitution', if an expression a is a thesis 
of the system , then we m ay recognize as a thesis of the 
system  any expression which is a correct substitution of 
the expression a.
The rule of detachment', if any expressions a and /S 
are theses of the system and the expression a is an im plica­
tion w ith the antecedent equiform with 
then we m ay re­
cognize as a thesis of the system any expression y which 
is equiform with the consequent of the im plication a.
4 *

40
II. TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
The rule of replacem ent: if an expression a is a thesis 
of the system, and an expression 
is p a rt of expression a 
and is equiform w ith the right side of one of the definitions 
given above or one of its correct substitutions, then we m ay 
recognize as a  thesis of the system  any expression y which 
is obtained from  expression a through the replacem ent 
of expression /? by an expression equiform w ith the left 
side of the same definition or by its corresponding correct 
substitution of th a t left side.
The rule of replacem ent m akes use of th a t property 
of the definition th a t w hatever is true about the definiens 
(the right side of th e definition) is also true about the 
definiendum (the left side of th e definition). N ote th a t 
our rule of replacem ent does not state anything about 
replacing the definiendum by th e definiens. I t  has been 
deliberately given a weaker form ulation, since even in 
th at version it suffices to m ake a full use of the definitions.
The rule of replacem ent enables us to m ake use both 
of definitions and of their correct substitutions. Starting, 
e.g., from Axiom 3:
G pCNpq
we m ay use Definition 01:
A p q ™ GTfpq
and prove the thesis:
C pA pq .
On the other hand, we m ay start from Axiom 2:
G G N ppp
and use the following correct substitution of Definition 01:
A p p  =  GTlpp
and prove the thesis:
C A ppp .

THEOREMS OF THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
41
There are very essential differences between the rule 
of substitution and th e rule of replacem ent. F irst, th e 
rule of substitution allows only for replacem ent of single 
small letters, i.e., sentential variables, whereas the rule 
of replacem ent allows for th e replacem ent of expressions 
containing a greater num ber of symbols. The second 
difference consists in this, th a t when applying the rule 
of substitution we m ust replace all equiform variables by 
equiform expressions, whereas the rule of replacem ent 
makes it possible to replace only one expression in a thesis, 
even if a second expression, equiform with the first, 
occurs in th at thesis. Thus, e.g., when we have th e thesis:
G C N pqC N pq
we m ay avail ourselves of the rule of replacem ent and 
Definition 01 and obtain both the thesis
G A pqA pq
and the theses
C A pqC N pq , 
G C N pqApq .
5. Theorems of the Sentential Calculus
12. W e shall now proceed to prove some theorems 
of the sentential calculus, in doing so we shall confine 
ourselves to the three axioms and the three rules of 
inference given above. The proofs will be carried out in 
the complete form, w ithout any gaps. The notation, 
however, will resort to abbreviations. E very proved thesis 
will have its num ber and will be preceded by a proof line. 
For instance, Theorem 4 will be preceded by the following 
proof line:
1 p jG pq, qfGCqrGpr, rjs * 01 —  4 .
A proof line always consists of two parts, separated by 
an asterisk. P a rt one indicates, in our example, th a t the 
rule of substitution is to be applied to Thesis 1. T hat

42
n .  TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
p art of the proof line which follows the asterisk indicates 
th a t the substitution of Thesis 1, obtained in the way 
indicated above, has the form  of an im plication whose 
antecedent is equiform w ith Thesis 1, and whose con­
sequent is equiform w ith Theorem 4, now being proved. 
Thus, by applying the rule of detachm ent, we m ay prove 
Theorem 4.
The num bers of those theses which are not ju st aux­
iliary, b u t are for some reasons interesting in themselves, 
will be underlined. The axioms are repeated below:
1
GGpqGGqrGpr,
2
G G N ppp ,
3
G p G N p q.
W e prove Theorem 4:
1 p jC p q , qjCG qrCpr, rjs * 01 —  4,
4 
G CG CqrG prsCCpqs.
The abbreviation in the proof line can be expanded quite 
mechanically. B y carrying out the indicated substitutions 
in Axiom 1 we obtain
GGGpqGGqrGprGGGGgrCprsGCpqs.
The antecedent of th e substitution obtained is in fact 
equiform w ith Thesis 1, and hence we m ay recognize 
Thesis 4, which is equiform w ith the consequent of the 
substitution obtained.
W e now prove the next theorem :
4 qfGqr, rfC sr, sfGGsqGpCsr * G4 p f s ,  s/GpGsr —  5,
5 
GGpGqrCGsqGpGsr.
W e m ay w rite th e proof in greater detail. The substitution 
of Thesis 4, indicated in the first p art of th e proof line, 
has the form
CGCGGqrCsrCpCsrCCsqCpCsrCGpGqrCGsqCpCsr.

TH E0EEM 3. OF TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
43
The antecedent of this substitution is equiform  w ith the 
following substitution of Thesis 4, indicated in th e second 
p a rt of th e proof line:
CGCCqrGsrGpCsrGGsqGpCsr.
H ence we m ay recognize Thesis 5, w hich is equiform  w ith 
th e consequent of th e first substitution. In  this proof we 
tw ice apply th e rule of substitution, and once the rule 
of detachm ent. Thesis 5 is im portant because on its 
strength, if we have a recognized sentence of the ty p e 
GpCqr and an im plication of th e type Gsq, in  the first 
sentence we m ay replace th e sentence q by th e sentence s 
and accept th e sentence of the ty p e GpCsr.
W e shall n o t hereafter expand th e proof lines in detail. 
W hat is w ritten down in  th e proof line can always be 
checked quite m echanically by m aking sure th a t th e 
expression sym bolized by th e first p a rt of th e proof line 
is equiform  w ith th e expression sym bolized by the second 
p art.
4 sfGCCprsCCqrs * C lp fG q r, qfC pr, rfs —  6 ,
6 
COpqGCCprsGOqrs.
5 p jG p q } qfC C prs, rfC C qrs, s jt*  C6 —  7 ,
7 
CCtCCprsGGpqGtGCgrs.
H aving proved Theses 4-7 we are now in. a position to 
deduce Thesis 8 :
7 tjC pq, p jq , r fs 1 s/G p s, qjr * C l rjs — 8 ,
8 
C C qrC C pqC C rsC ps.
Thesis 8 is called sorites. I t is a generalization of th e law 
of th e hypothetical syllogism, i.e., Axiom 1. By m eans 
of Thesis 8 one m ay, on the strength of the recognized 
im plications of the type Gqr, Gpq, Grs, prove the im pli­
cation of th e type Cps.

44
II. TH E SENTENTIA L CALCULUS
ISTot-e th a t in proving theorem s we have so far resorted, 
ap art from  th e rules of inference, only to  Axiom 1, b u t 
neither to Axiom 2 nor to Axiom 3.
1 qjG N pq * 03 — 9 ,
9 
GGCJSfpqrGpr.
Thesis 9 would become m ore intuitive if we applied to it 
Definition 01 on th e strength of the rule of replacem ent. 
W e would then obtain th e theorem
CG ApqrCpr .
By this theorem , on th e strength of a tru e im plication 
whose antecedent is an alternation one can prove an 
im plication whose antecedent is equiform  w ith the first 
argum ent of th a t alternation, and th e consequent rem ains 
unchanged.
9 rfC G G N pppG G qpp * C6 p [ N p , r[p , sfp —  10 ,
10 
GpGG G N ppp GGqpp .
10 p jC G N p p p  * G2 —  02 p jG G N ppp — 1 1 ,
11 
G C qG G N pppC G N ppp.
In  th e second p a rt of th e last proof line above, the double 
application of th e rule of detachm ent has been m arked,
9 p jt, q[G G N p p p , rjG G N ppp * O il q fN t — 12 ,
12 
G tG G N ppp.
7 p jN p , r/p , sjp * 012 — 13 ,
13 
0  GNpqGtCGqpp .
1 p [G N p q } qjGtCGgpp * 013 — 14 ,
14 
G G G tG CqpprG CNpqr.
14 tjN G G qpp, r[GGqpp * 02 pjG G qpp — 15 ,
15 
G G N pqG C qpp.

THEOREMS O P THE SENTEN TIA L CALCULUS
45
Thesis 15 m akes it possible to prove a sentence of th e 
type p  on th e strength of accepted sentences of th e types 
G N pq and Ggp.
Thesis 2 of onr axiom  system  m ight be replaced by 
Thesis 15; the axiom  system  consisting of theses 1, 3 and
15 w ould suffice to build th e sentential calculus.
13. The theorem s proved so far are introductory theses. 
W e shall now prove a series of theorem s containing th e 
prim itive term  G.
9 q jp , rfp * C2 —  16 ,
16 
Gpp .
Thesis 16 is called th e law of identity. In  philosophical 
logic this nam e denotes to a certain indefinite theorem  
pertaining to  term s. A ttention is draw n here to  the fact 
th a t in  our system  th e law  of id en tity  refers to sentences. 
I t  can also be form ulated in  a stronger form , nam ely as 
th e thesis: B p p . The law  of id en tity  in  th e form  of Thesis
16 is often criticized. I t  is claim ed th a t th e law  of identity, 
as a tautology, is of no im portance w hatever; th e sentence 
“if today is W ednesday, then today is W ednesday’* is 
of no use in any inference th a t would be of interest. I t 
would in fact be so if we w anted to avail ourselves of 
Thesis 16 in proving a sentence p  by m eans of th a t 
sentence p . Thesis 16, however, m ay occur in  reasoning 
as a prem ise. W e m ight, for instance, assum e only Thesis 15 
and Thesis 16 in  order to prove our Axiom 2. The proof 
line of such a proof w ould run:
15 q jN p * <716 pjJSTp — 2 .
In  this w ay th e law  of id en tity  can play an essential rdle 
in proofs.
9 rJCCqpp * <715 — 17 ,
17 
C pG C qpp.
5 p lq , qjO N pq, rjq , sfp * G17 p jq , q jN p — C3 — 18 ,
18 
C qC pq.

46
II. T H E  SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
Thesis 18, as proved above, called th e law of sim plification, 
points to  th e property of th e sym bol C referred to  in 
Section II.3 . B y su b stitu tin g  in  Thesis 18 any tru e sen­
tence for q, e.g., “ 2-2 — 4” , and b y  applying the rule 
of detachm ent we obtain G p(2-2 =  4). Thus an im pli­
cation w ith a tru e consequent and an arb itrary  antecedent 
is true.
W e shall now engage in  certain considerations con­
nected w ith Thesis 18, w hich will show b y  an exam ple 
th a t by m eans of deductive reasoning we m ay pass from  
certain theorem s to  m ore general ones (cf. p. 16 above). 
B et us assum e th e tru th  of th e thesis
18 ! 
CpGpCrCsr.
W e prove:
18xpjO pG pC rC sr * C l8X —  C18X —  182 ,
182 
C rC sr.
Thesis 183 differs from  Thesis 18 only by th e shape of 
th e variables, and is therefore also th e law  of sim plification. 
W e prove farth er:
183
182 rjCrCsTj sjq *  O l8 2 —  18s , 
G qC rG sr.
18*
182 rjGqCrGsr, sjp  * 0 1 83 — 184 , 
G pC qC rC sr.
18J
1 8 . q ]p  * 1 8 ., 
C p C p C rG a r.
Thesis 184, through substitutions, has yielded Thesis 18x, 
b u t a t th e sam e tim e Thesis 184 is m ore general th an  
Thesis 18x. Y et b y  assum ing only Thesis 18x we m ay, 
b y  resorting to  th e rule of substitution and th e rule of 
detachm ent, prove Thesis 184. Thus we see th a t by com-

THEOREM S OF TH E SENTEN TIA L CALCULUS
47
billing th e rule of substitution w ith th e rule of detachm ent 
we m ay reach conclusions th a t are m ore general th an  the 
prem ises3. Two such theses as 18x and 184, one of which 
can be proved only if the other is assum ed, and conversely, 
the other can be proved only if th e first is assum ed, are 
called inferentidU y equivalent. I t  also follows from  our 
exam ple th a t th e  law  of sim plification is inferentially 
equivalent to Thesis 18x.
3- P H , 
* 018 — 19 ,
19 
CCG pgrG qr.
The substitution pjJSfp in Thesis 19 would yield
GGGNpqrGqr
which, after the application of D efinition 01, would in 
tu rn  yield
C CApqrCqr
th a t is a theorem  analogous to  th a t obtained from  Thesis 9.
19 p jN q , q jp , rjCGpqq * 015 p fq t qjp —  20 ,
20 
G pG G pqq.
Thesis 20 is usually considered an  equivalent of the Stoic 
syllogism m odus ponens, given under 5 in  Section 1.2, 
Thesis 20 cannot, however, replace the rule of detachm ent.
5 P lq , qlG qr, sfp * 020 p jq , qjr —  21 ,
21 
CGpGqrCqCpr .
Thesis 21 is th e very im portant law of com m utation. From  
th e theorem  “If x  is divisible by 2, th en  (if x  is divisible 
by 3, th en  x  is divisible b y  6)” we m ay, on th e strength 
of the law  of com m utation, obtain th e theorem  “If x 
is divisible by 3, then (if a? is divisible by 2, then x  is di­
visible by 6 )” .
21 p (G pq, qjG qr, rjG pr * 01 —  22 ,
22 
GGqrGGpqGpr.

48
II. TUB SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
B y applying th e law  of com m utation to Thesis 1 we have 
obtained^ as Thesis 22, another form  of the law of the 
syllogism.
1 pjC pG gr, qjC qCpr, r.js * 021 —  23 ,
23 
C C C qC prsC C pC qrs.
23 q [N p , rjq, ajCGGpqpp * 015 qjGpq — 03 —  24 ,
24 
G G G pqpp.
Thesis 24 was know n even to  Peirce. I t  m akes it possible 
to prove a sentence of th e type p  on th e strength of 
a sentence of th e type CGpqp.
21 p fC p q , qfCCprSj rjCGyrs * 06 — 25 ,
25 
GCCprsCGpqGCqrs .
25 p jC p q , r jp , efp, qjr * 024 —  26 ,
26 
C G G pqrC C rpp.
26 rjq * 27 ,
27 
GCGpqqGG qpp.
Thesis 27 enables us to  replace, in an expression of the 
ty p e GCpqq, th e sentence p  by th e sentence q, and vice 
versa. I t is connected w ith th e possibility of defining 
alternation w ith th e aid of th e term  0  alone:
A p q = i GCpqq.
Using such a definition we m ight, on the strength of 
Thesis 27, prove th e law of com m utativity of alternation:
C A pqA qp ,
1 pjG C pgr, qjC G rpp, rfs * 026 — 28 ,
28 
O0 0 GrppsGCGpqrs .
28 e(GGprr * 027 p jr , q\p —  29 ,
29 
C C C pqrC C prr.

Thesis 29 is im portant because, as A. Tarski has shown, 
w hen com bined w ith Thesis 1 and Thesis 18 it form s 
a system  of three sentences th a t is sufficient to prove 
ail those possible theses of th e sentential calculus which 
contain O as th e only constant. P . B em ays noticed th a t 
Thesis 29 can be replaced in  th a t system  by th e sim pler 
Thesis 24.
THEOREM S OF TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS 
49
30
29 rjG pq * 016 p fC p q —  30 , 
C C pC pqG pq.
Thesis 30 occurs as an  axiom  in th e axiom  system  of the 
sentential calculus form ulated b y  D . H ilb e rt4. I t was 
already know n to  Sextus Em piricus, physician and phi­
losopher who lived about A.D. 200.
W e shall now prove several theorem s which m ay 
be regarded as lem m as in  th e proof of Thesis 35.
31
7 tjG G pqr, s jr t qjs * 029 — 3 1 , 
GGpsGGGpqrCGsrr .
32
21 p jC p s, qjGGpqr, rjGGsrr * 031 —  32 , 
GGGpqrGGpsGGsrr.
33
32 qjr, rjGqGpr * 018 qjG pr, p lq  —  33 , 
GCpsCGsGqCprCqCpr .
34
21 p jG p s, qjCsG qCpr} rjGqGpr * 033 — 34 , 
CGsCqGprCGpsGqGpr .
35
34 sjG qr, g/O^gr * 022 — 35 , 
GGpG qrCG pqGpr.
Thesis 35 occurs as an axiom  in  the first axiom  system  
of the sentential calculus, given by Frege in his B egriffs- 
schrift [3]. I t  differs from  Thesis 22 only in th a t the 
antecedent p  is added to it.

50
II. THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
14. W e shall now form ulate a num ber of theorems 
which contain the symbols (7 and JSf, b u t no defined term s 
of the sentential calculus.
36
21 q f N p , rjq * <73 —  36 , 
C N p C p q .
37
1 pjJSfp j 
* 036 —  37 , 
C G G p q r G N p r.
38
27 p (l) fp , qjp * 02 —  38 , 
GCpSfpJHp .
39
37 p j N p ,  q lp , r jp  * 02 —  39 , 
CJSrUTpp .
40
9 q /N N - p , r j N S f p  * 038 p j N p  — 40 , 
G p N N p  .
Theses 39 and 40 form  the very im portant law of double 
negation. The following types of inference are based on 
this law: it is not tru e th a t Copernicus was not a Pole, 
therefore Copernicus was a Pole; Copernicus was a Pole, 
therefore it is n o t true th at Copernicus was not a Pole.
41
1 p f N N p , z ip , rjq * (739 —  41 , 
G C p q C N N p q .
42
1 p jC p q , qjGHfNpq * (741 — 42 , 
C G G N N pqrC C pqr.
43
42 rjG G qN pN p * 015 p /N p  — 43 , 
G CpqCG qNpNp .
44
5 pjG pq, qjG qN p, r(N p  * 043 — 44 , 
GGsGqNpGGpqGsNp .
45
5 p f G N p q , qjG qp, rfp * 03 5 — 45 , 
CGsGqpCCNpqGsp .

THEOREM S OF TH E SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS 
51
46
44 s\N q  * (736 p fq , q fN p —  46 , 
G G pqG NqNp .
47
44 sfq> ql&q * 
plq» qlNp —  4 7 , 
G G pNqG qNp .
48
45 sjN q * 036 p f q , qjp —  48 , 
G G N pqG N qp .
49
45 sfq, qfNq * 03 p fq , qjp —  49 , 
G G N pN qG qp .
Theses 46, 47, 48, 49 form  th e four laws of transposition. 
Thesis 46 perm its ns to recognize an im plication of the 
type G N qN p on the strength of an im plication of the ty p e 
Cpq. To p u t it generally, th e law s of transposition perm it 
us, on th e strength of an accepted im plication, to accept 
an im plication whose antecedent is contradictory to th e 
consequent of th e form er im plication, and whose con­
sequent is contradictory to the antecedent of the form er 
im plication. B y applying Thesis 46 to th e sentence “if 
today is Thursday, th en  tom orrow  is F rid ay ” we obtain 
th e sentence “if' tom orrow  is n o t F riday, then today is 
n o t T hursday” .
Theses 18, 21, 35, 39, 40, 46 occur as axiom s in the 
first axiom  system  of th e sentential calculus, given by 
Frege in his B egriffsschrift [3]. Y et Thesis 21 is super­
fluous as an axiom , for it can be proved by Theses 18 
and 35 5.
In  Section 1.2, 
we have deduced from  Thesis 2 
a m athem atical proof belonging to th e category of w hat 
is called apagogie proofs. B y m eans of the law s of 
transposition we can form alize certain apagogie proofs 
w hich are m ost frequently used. To prove a theorem  T  
th e following reasoning is often em ployed: th e falsehood 
of theorem  T  is assum ed, which is tan tam o u n t to  the 
assum ption of the tru th  o sentence N T . A  conclusion W .

of which it is otherw ise know n th a t it is false, is draw n 
from  th a t assum ption; thus, it is known th a t sentence 
N W  is true. Since th e assum ption has resulted in a false 
conclusion, it m ust be false. Hence sentence N T  is false, 
and therefore sentence T  is true.
In  th e sentential calculus the reasoning given above 
would be: in Thesis 48 we m ake the substitutions p jT , 
qfW , and we obtain
C C N T W G N W T  .
Since it is dem onstrated in th e proof th a t C N T W , we 
apply the rule of detachm ent and obtain C N W T . Since 
th e antecedent N W  of th e last im plication is accepted, 
we again apply th e rule of detachm ent and obtain thesis T .
52 
II- t h e  s e n t e n t ia l  c a l c u l u s
50
1 p /C N p q y qlG N qp * 048 —  50 , 
C C C N qprC C N pqr.
51
22 qjC qry rjC N rN q  * 046 p fq y qjr —  5 1 , 
G C pC qrC pG N rN q.
52
22 qjC qN r, rjC rN q * 047 p (q y qjr —  52 , 
G G pC qN rG pC rN q.
53
50 rjCCpqq * 015 p jq , qjp — 53 , 
G C N pqC C pqq.
54
21 p jG N p q , qjG pqy rjq * 053 — 54 , 
GGpqGGNpqq .
Theses 53 and 54 are rem arkable in th a t they perm it us 
to recognize th e sentence q on th e strength of two recog­
nized im plications of th e types Cpq and C N pq (w ith 
equiform  consequents and contradictory antecedents). 
Consequently, a sentence im plied by two contradictory 
sentences is true.
Theses 18, 21, 22, 30, 3, 54 appear as axiom s of the 
sentential calculus in an article by D. H ilb e rt6. One of

theorem s of th e sen ten tia l calculus
53
them , however, nam ely Thesis 30, is superfluous, since 
it can he proved by m eans of th e rem aining ones 7.
Thesis 55 perm its us to  recognize a sentence of the type 
N p  on th e strength of sentences of th e type Gpq and 
CpN q, Thus a sentence w hich im plies two. contradictory 
sentences is false. The apagogic reasoning based on Thesis 
55 was know n in  antiquity. The C hristian author Origenes, 
who lived in th e th ird  century A.D ., gives a n  exam ple, 
seem ingly of Stoic origin, of the following consequence: 
if you know th a t you are dead, th en  you are dead; if 
you know  th a t you are dead, then you are n o t dead; 
and consequently you do n o t know  th a t you are dead. 
The first prem ise is based on th e assum ption th a t all 
knowledge is true, and th e second, on th e assum ption 
th a t if one knows som ething then one is not dead. In  
conform ity w ith th e conclusion draw n, no one can know  
th a t he is dead. W e direct th e reader’s attention to 
Thesis 55 because it is often claim ed th a t two sentences 
of th e types Gpq and C pN q cannot both be true. This 
erroneous view results from  th e fact th a t people forget 
th a t a tru e im plication m ay have a false antecedent.
55
44 s(C pN q * (747 — 55 , 
0 C pqC C pN qN p .
56
1 p fG N p q , qjGGpqq * <753 —  56 , 
GCGGpqqrCONpqr .
57
56 g/r, v(GGpqGGqrr * (732 g/r, sfq — 57 , 
GGNprGCpqGCqrr .
58
1 p JG jfp r, qjCGpqGCqrr, rfs * C57 — 58 , 
C G G CpqC GqrrsC G N p rs ,
59
58 sJCGqrGGpqr * (721 p jG p q, qfGqr — 59 , 
G G N pr GGqrGCpqr .
5

Theses 19, 37, 59 form  a system  of theses which suf­
fices to  prove all th e theorem s of th e sentential calculus; 
hence th a t system  is inferentiaJly equivalent to  our three 
axiom s. The theses quoted above are interesting in  view 
of th eir stru ctu ral relationship: they are, respectively, of 
the type 8: Cafi, G ay, CyCfia.
54 
II. THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
60
22 q jC N p r, rfC C qrC C pqr, p js * 059 — 60, 
CCsCXfprC$CCqrCCpqr.
61
60 sjC pr j pfJifp * 041 qjr —  61, 
CCprC CqrC C N p q r.
Thesis 61 differs from  Thesis 59 only in  th a t th e sentences 
jyp  and p  are replaced respectively by p  and N p .
66
48 qjCpq * 036 —  6 6 , 
G N G pqp.
67
46 P/2> 2/0pg * 018 —  67, 
C N C pqN q.
62
1 q jN N p , rjq * 040 —  62, 
C C N N pqC pq.
63
21 rjp * 018 q{p ,p jq  —  63, 
C qC pp.
64
4 8 p /g , 2/Gpp * 063 q l^ q  —  64, 
G N C p p q.
65
61 p /g , r/g , qjN G pp * 016 p jq  —  064 —  65, 
C C N qN C ppq.
Theses 62 and 65 w ill be useful in  Section III.7 .

THEOREM S O F THE SENTEN TIA L CALCULUS
55
Theses 66 and 67 dem onstrate th a t th e falsehood of an 
im plication entails th e tru th  of th e antecedent of th a t 
im plication and the falsehood of th e consequent.
48 p fq , q/C pN q * (718 qfN q —  6 8 ,
68 
C N C pN qq,
Thesis 68 differs from  Thesis 67 only in th a t the sen­
tences q and N q  are replaced, respectively, b y  th e con­
trad icto ry  sentences N q  and q.
51 qjG pq, rjq * (720 —  69,
69 
G pG N qN G pq.
Thesis 69 is connected w ith Theses 66 and 67 j it shows 
th a t th e tru th  of th e antecedent and th e falsehood of the 
consequent of an im plication entail the falsehood of th a t 
im plication.
52 qjC pN q, rfq * (720 qjN q —  70,
70 
G pC qN G pN q.
Thesis 70 differs from  Thesis 69 only in  th a t sentences 
N q  and q are replaced, respectively, by sentences q 
and N q.
70 p jG p p , qjGqq * (716 —  (716 p fq  —  71,
71 
N G G ppN G qq.
Thesis 71 is an exam ple of a theorem  th a t begins w ith 
th e functor N .
15. 
W e now give a num ber of theorem s in  which th e 
sym bols of alternation occur alongside th e prim itive term s. 
F irst we recall the definition of alternation.
72
Ol A p q  — G N p q . 
3 * 01-72,
Op A p q .
5*

56
II. TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
The proof line of Thesis 72 indicates th a t in  Thesis 3 
w e have replaced, in  conform ity w ith the role of replace­
m ent, th e expression equiform  w ith the right side of 
D efinition 01 by an expression eqniform  w ith the left 
side of th a t definition.
18 p/JVp *0 1 -7 3 ,
73 
G qApq.
B y Theses 72 and 73 every sentence im plies an alterna­
tion, one of th e argum ents of which is th e sentence in 
question, and th e other argum ent is an arbitrary sentence.
2 * 01 g/p- 74,
74 
G A p p p .
In  this proof we have n o t resorted directly to  Defini­
tion 01, b u t to  one of its correct substitutions. Thesis 74, 
together w ith the substitution qjp of Thesis 73, yields the 
law of tautology for alternation, which, using th e sym ­
bol E  m ight by noted down as a single thesis: E A p p p .
48 * 01-01 p fq , qjp- 75,
75 
G A p q A q p .
In  th e proof above we have tw ice applied the rule of 
replacem ent: we have first availed ourselves directly of 
D efinition 01, and then of its correct substitution. Thesis 75 
is th e law  of com m utativity of alternation; it states th a t 
the order of the argum ents w hich occur in  an alternation 
m ay be changed.
76
22 pfE fp * 01-01 g/r- 76, 
G G qrC A pqA pr.
77
21 qfEFq * 01 p fq , qjr • 01 p fq , qjCpr • 77, 
G C pA qrA qG pr.
78
77 p jN p  * 01 q(Aqr • 01 qjr - 78, 
G A p A g rA q A p r.

THEOREMS OP TH E SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
57
Theses 73, 74, 75, 76, 78 form  th e axiom  system  of the 
sentential calculus presented in P rin cip ia  M athem atiea [35]. 
T hat axiom  system  is preceded b y  the following defini­
tion of im plication: Cpq =  A N p q , for th e prim itive term s 
of th a t system  are A  and JOT. In  this w ay a defined term  
occurs in th e axiom s them selves. Thesis 78 can be proved 
by m eans of th e rem aining axiom s, and as such is super­
fluous as an axiom  9.
9 * 01*79,
79 
C C A pqrC pr.
19 p jW p * 01*80,
80 
C C ApqrC qr.
61 * 01*81,
81 
GCprCCqr C A p q r.
Thesis 81 enables us to  accept, on the strength of sen­
tences of th e type: Cpr and Cqr, a sentence of the type 
CApgr. Theses 79, 80 and 81 m ay be adopted as axiom s 
of th e sentential calculus if we adopt A  and 27 as the 
prim itive term s and adm it th e occurrence of defined term s 
in  axiom s. The said theses are structurally related, for 
th ey  are, respectively, of th e ty p e Ca/?, Cay, C fiC ya10.
53 * 01*82,
82 
C ApqC Cpqq.
37 r(q * 01 83,
83 
C C C pqqA pq.
Theses 82 and 83 dem onstrate, as m entioned above 
(cf. the rem ark to Thesis 27), the adm issibility of the 
following definition of alternation: A p q  =  GCpqq.
16 p jC N p q  * 011*84,
84 
C A pqC N pq.

58
n .  T H E  SENTENTIA L CALCULUS
The sym bol “I ” w hich occurs in  th e proof line indicates 
th a t in  th e appropriate substitution of Thesis 16 we 
replace only th e first expression, equiform  w ith th e right 
side of th e definition. Thesis 84 corresponds to th e Stoic 
schem e of inference, called m odus toTlendo ponens, which 
th e Stoics used to sym bolize as follows:
p  or q.
I t is not tru e th a t p .
Therefore q.
16 p jG N p q * 0 1 1 1 -8 5 ,
85 
C C N p q A p q.
41 * 01 p/iyp - 8 6 ,
86 
G C pqA P fpq.
62 * 01 p l& p  • 87,
87 
C A N p q C p q.
Theses 86 and 87 dem onstrate th e adm issibility of a de­
finition of im plication such as is adopted in P rin cip ia 
M athem atica (cf. th e rem ark to Thesis 78 above).
±6 p fA N p q , qjCpq * 087 —  8 8 ,
88 
G N G p q N A N p q .
46 p jC p q , qjA P fpq * 086 —  80,
89 
G N A N p q N G p q .
85 qilifp * 016 p jN p  —  90,
90 
A p lS fp.
Thesis 90 is a sym bolic expression of th e law o f the ex­
cluded m iddle, w hich states th a t of two contradictory 
sentences a t least one is true. The sentence “today is

theorem s o f t h e sen ten tia l calculus
f>9
W ednesday or today is not W ednesday” is an application 
of Thesis 90.
16. 
The following series of theorem s includes, in addi­
tion to th e functors w hich have already occurred, also th e 
functor K . The definition of conjunction is repeated here:
02 K p q  =  N G p N q .
70 * 02-91,
91 
C pC qK pq.
21 rjK p q * C91 —  92,
92 
G qG pK pq.
Theses 91 and 92 enables us to accept, on th e strength 
of two accepted sentences, th e conjunction whose ar­
gum ents are th e sentences in question.
66 qfN q * 02-93,
93 
C K p q p .
68 * 02-94,
94 
C K pqq.
Theses 93 and 94 enable us to accept, on th e strength 
of an accepted conjunction, any of its argum ents.
30 q fK p p  * 091 qjp —  95,
95 
G p K p p .
Thesis 95 and th e substitution of Thesis 94, q/p, give the 
law of tautology for conjunction-, it m ight be sym bolized 
as one thesis: E K p p p .
1 p fK p q , qfp * 093 —  96,
96 
GGprG Kpqr.
1 p fK p q *  094 —  97,
97 
CC grG Kpqr.

60
I I . TH E SENTENTIA L CALCULUS
Theses 96 and 97 enable ns to recognize an im plication 
of th e type G Kpqr on the strength of an im plication of 
th e type Gpr or Cqr.
5 pfG K p q r, qfC qK pq, rjC qr, sjp
* 022 q jK p q , p jq  —  091 — 98,
98 
CGKpqrCp Gqr.
21 pfC K pqC qr, qjC K pqq, rjG K pqr * 095 p jK p q — 094— 99,
99 
C G K pqG qrC K pqr.
1 p jO p r, qjC K pqr, rjs * 096 — 100,
100 
0 0 GKpqrsG Gprs.
100 rjC qr, s/G K pqr * 099 — 1 0 1,
101 
0  CpCqr G K pqr.
Theses 98 and 101 are th e laws of exportation and im por­
tation, referred to  above (cf. p. 28-29).
101 p jG pq, qjGqr, rfG pr * 0 1  — 1 0 2,
102 
CK G pqCqrC pr.
101 pjC q r, qjC pq, rjC pr * 022 — 103,
103 
G K  GqrGpqCpr.
The law  of im portation enables ns to  give to th e law  of 
th e syllogism th e form  of Thesis 102 or Thesis 103.
101 gjC pq, rjq * 020 — 104,
104 
G K pG pqq.
Thesis 104 corresponds to the Stoic scheme of inference 
called m odus ponens.
101 rjK q p  * 092 q jp , p fq  — 105,
105 
G K p q K q p.

THEOREM S O F THE SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
61
Thesis 105 is th e law of com m utativity of conjunction.
101 qfUTp, rjq * 0 3  — 106,
106 
CKpAFp{jf.
As m entioned above, Thesis 106 was known to  D uns 
Scotus.
101 q/XTq, rjN C p q * 069 — 107,
107 
G K pN qN C pq.
47 p jK p & q , qjCpq * 0107 —  108,
108 
G G pqN K pN  q .
108 qjp * 016 — 109,
109 
N K p N p .
Thesis 109 is a sym bolic form ulation of the law of con- 
tradiction, which states th a t tw o contradictory sentences 
cannot both be true. The sentence “it is not tru e th a t 
(today is W ednesday and today is not W ednesday)” is 
an application of Thesis 109.
88 q/N q * 02 *110,
110 
C K p q N A N p N q .
89 qfN q * 02 *111,
111 
C N A N p N q K p q .
Theses 110 and 111 dem onstrate th e adm issibility of the 
following definition of conjunction: K p q  — N A N p N q .
47 p jK p q , qfA N pA fq * 0110 — 112,
112 
C A N p N q N K p q .
48 p jA N p N q , qjK pq * O l l l  —  113,
113 
C N K p q A N p N q .
Theses 112 and 113 are de M organ's laws, w hich state

62
II. T H E  SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
th a t there is a b ilateral im plication betw een th e negation 
of th e conjunction of two sentences and the alternation 
of th e negations of those sentences.
65 * 02 qjlSg-114,
114 
G N  C p q K p N q .
107 p fN p  * 01 *115,
115 
C K N p N  q N A p q .
114 p /R p  * 01-116,
116 
G N A p q K N p iN  q .
Theses 115 and 116 also are de M organ’s law s; they state 
th a t there is a b ilateral im plication between, the negation 
of th e alternation of tw o sentences and th e conjunction 
of th e negations of those sentences.
17. 
The following series of theorem s will also include 
Sheffer’s sym bol, or sym bol of alternative denial. Its defini­
tion is now  recalled:
03 D pq =  G pN q.
117
38 * 03 2/P-117, 
G D p p N p .
118
18 qfN p * 03 qjp -118, 
G N p D p p .
Theses 117 and 118 dem onstrate th e adm issibility of th e 
following definition of negation by m eans of th e sym bol 
of alternative denial:
N p  =  D p p .
47 +03-03 p )q , g/p-119,
119 
G D pqD qp.
Thesis 119 is th e law of com m utativity of 
alternative 
denial.

THEOREM S OF TH E SEN TEN TIA L uALCULUS
63
120
55 * 03-120, 
G G pqC B pqN p.
121
120 * 03 p jD p q , q ip ' 121, 
O C pqD D pqp.
122
1 p fG p q , qlD D pgp * (7121 —  122, 
C G D D pqprC C pgr.
123
122 rjD pD pq * (7119 p jD p q , qfp — 123, 
C C pqD pB pq.
124
68 * 03-124, 
G N B pqq.
125
22 q!NDpq<s rjq * (7124 —  125, 
C G pN D pqG pq.
126
125 * 03 qfD pq- 126, 
C D pD pqG pq,
Theses 123 and 126 dem onstrate th e adm issibility of th e 
following definition of im plication b y  m eans of th e sym bol 
of altern ativ e denial alone:
Gpq =  B p D p q  .
Sheffer has show n11 th a t all th e term s of th e sentential 
calculus can be defined by m eans of alternative denial. 
I t  can be seen from  th e results obtained above th a t the 
term s of th e sentential calculus w hich appear in  our system  
can be defined b y  m eans of th e sym bol of alternative 
denial: for negation and im plication this can be seen 
directly from  Theses 117, 118, 123 and 126; alternation, 
conjunction and equivalence are definable by m eans of 
negation and im plication, w hich can easily be reduced to 
alternative denial.
The French logician J . M ood gave a single axiom  
of th e sentential calculus, w ith alternative denial as

64
IT. T H E  SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
th e only prim itive term  12 K icod’s axiom  is very com­
plicated and n o t very intuitive. In  our notation it can he 
w ritten down as follows:
D D pD qrD D tD ttD D sqD D psD ps.
In stead  of th e usual rule of detachm ent, form ulated w ith 
respect to  im plication, K icod’s system  contains th e rule 
w hich perm its us to  accept th e expression y on the 
strength of th e recognized expression D a D fiy and th e 
recognized expression a.
18. 
The last series of theorem s of th e sentential cal­
culus includes theorem s th a t contain th e sym bol of equi­
valence, introduced above b y  D efinition 04:
04 E p q =  N G G pqN G qp.
16 pfN G G pqN G qp * 041*02 p fG p q , qfGqp 11*127,
127 
G E pqK  GpqGqp.
16 pftfC G p q N G q p  * 02 p fG p q , q(Gqp I* 0411*128,
128 
G K G pqG qpEpq.
Theses 127 and 128 show w hat has already been pointed 
o u t above, nam ely th a t th e following definition of equi­
valence m ight be used:
B p q =  K G pqG qp,
66 p fG p q , qfN C qp * 04*129,
129 
GEpqGpq.
6 8 p fG p q , qfGqp * 04-130,
130 
C E pqC qp.
Theses 129 and 130 perm it us to  accept, on th e strength 
of an  accepted equivalence of tw o sentences, th e im pli­
cation betw een one of these tw o sentences and th e other.
131
70 pfG pq, qfGqp * 04*131, 
CGpqGGqpEpq.

THEOREM S OF THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
65
Thesis 131 perm its us to accept th e equivalence of tw o 
sentences on th e strength of two im plications holding in 
tw o directions betw een these two sentences. W hen Thesis
131 is applied to  th e theorem s proved above, a num ber 
of law s are obtained which have th e form  of equivalences.
131 qjp * 016 —  016 — 132,
132 
E p p .
Thesis 132 is th e law of identity in  the form  of an equivalence. 
131 pfG pG qr, qjGqGpr * 021 —  021 p fq , qjp — 133,
133 
E G p GqrGqGpr.
Thesis 133 is th e law of eommutaMon in  the form  of an 
equivalence.
134
131 pjG pG pq, qjCpq * 030 — 018 qfCpq —  134,
EG pC pqG pq.
135
131 q jlfN p  * 040 —  049 — 135, 
E p N N p .
Thesis 135 is th e law of double negation in  the form  of 
a n  equivalence.
136
131 p jC p q , qjC N qN p * 046 —  049 p fq , qjp —  136,
E C pqG H fqN p.
Thesis 136 is th e law of transposition in  the form  of an 
equivalence.
137
131 p jG p q , q fA N p q  * 086 —  087 — 137, 
E G p q A N p q .
138
131 pjG pG qrj qjG K pqr * 0101 —  098 — 138, 
E G p C qrG K pqr.

66
II. THIS SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
The laws of im portation and exportation are w ritten down 
in  one sentence, nam ely Thesis 138.
131 p fN p , qjD pp * 0118 —  0117 — 139,
139 
jW N pD pp.
131 p fC p q , qjD pD pq * 0123 —  0126 — 140,
140 
ECpqJDpDpq.
Theses 137, 139, 140 are equivalents of th e possible de­
finitions m entioned above.
W e shall now prove a num ber of theses in  which de­
fined sym bols do n o t occur. They w ill prove useful in 
Section I I I . 7 13.
40 p(G pp * C16 — 141,
141 
N N C p p .
5 p jC N C p q r, qjC N qN C pq, rjC N q r, sjp
* 022 qjN C pq, p jN q  — 069 —  142,
142 
GCJtf C pqrG pC N gr.
21 pjG N G pqG N qr, qjC N G pqN q, rjC N C pqr
* 035 p jN C p q , q jN q — 067 — 143,
143 
0 G N  C pqC N qrC N  C pqr.
25 p fN G p q , rjCJPqr, sfG N G pqr, qjp * 0143 —  066 — 144,
144 
GGp C N qrG N  C pqr.
22 qjGqr, rIGCrsCqs * 01 p fq , q jr, rjs —  145,
145 
CCpCqrCpCCrsCqs. 
lp jG p C q r } qJCpCCrsCqs, rjCCrsCpCqs
* 0145 — 021, q(G rs, rjCqs — 146,
146 
CCpCqrCCrsCpCqs.

III. SELECTED PROBLEMS FROM 
THE METHODOLOGY OF THE SENTENTIAL
CALCULUS
6. The Consistency and the Independence of Axioms of the Sentential Calculus.
Many-valued Logic
19. In  the next tw o sections we shall he concerned 
w ith problem s th a t do n o t belong to  th e system  of th e 
sentential calculus itself, b u t are problem s in  which the 
sentential calculus is an object of investigation, and thus 
belong to the methodology of that system . These issues, 
them selves of great im portance, have never been raised 
in  philosophical logic and have developed entirely in 
connection w ith m athem atical logic. O ur analysis will not 
tak e th e form  of form alized and com plete proofs, as were 
used above in proving theorem s of th e sentential calculus. 
The proofs to be presented below m ight be form alized 
w ithin some axiom atic system , b u t th a t w ould be ex­
trem ely difficult. O ur proofs w ill be carried out as is usually 
done in m athem atics, i.e., we shall sta rt from  assum ptions 
whose tru th  w ill be d ictated  by intuition. O ur purpose is 
only to convince th e reader of th e tru th  of th e theorem s 
given.
The first problem  to be dealt w ith is th a t of th e 
consistency of th e axiom s of th e sentential calculus. I t 
will be shown th a t if we sta rt from  our axiom s and 
proceed in  accordance w ith th e rules of inference, we can 
never prove tw o sentences, one of w hich has th e form  a, 
an d  th e other N a , and thus are contradictory. This is 
very im portant, for should we prove two contradictory 
sentences, we w ould have to  recognize th e tru th  of both

68
III. METHODOLOGY OF TH E SENTEN TIA L CALCULUS
these sentences, since we recognize the tru th  of every 
sentence th a t is provable in  th e sentential calculus. B ut, 
in conform ity w ith th e principle of contradiction, two 
contradictory sentences cannot both be true. The possi­
bility of arriving a t a contradiction would thus underm ine 
th e foundation of our system ; certain theses of the system  
could then be false sentences, and the sentential calculus 
would lose its value as a theory in which only tru e sen­
tences are provable. The inconsistency of our system  
would also entail another consequence. Should we prove 
tw o theses of th e form s, respectively, a and N a , then 
we could apply to .Axiom 3 th e substitution p ja  and 
thus obtain
C aC N aq.
B y applying detachm ent twice we could prove thesis q. 
B y substituting for q any m eaningful expression we would 
thereby prove it. Hence in  an inconsistent system  every 
m eaningful expression would be a thesis of th a t system , 
which would com pletely obliterate the difference between 
th e falsehood and th e tru th  of m eaningful expressions.
In  order to carry out a proof of consistency of the 
system  of th e sentential calculus let us draw attention 
to the fact th a t in our system  definitions are m erely ab­
breviations and do not play any essential role in th e proofs. 
The rule of replacem ent perm its us to replace in any thesis, 
th e definiens b y  th e definiendum . W e could prove th at, 
in  our system , from  any thesis th a t contains a definiendum  
we m ay also deduce a thesis in which the said definiendum  
is replaced by th e appropriate definiens. In  this way, in 
our system  of th e sentential calculus every proof has its 
counterpart in which no defined term s occur. Hence if 
our system  were inconsistent, i.e., if we could prove in 
it two contradictory sentences of the form , respectively, 
jS and -/V/5, we could also prove two sentences containing 
no defined term s, having the form , respectively, a and JV'a,

CONSISTENCY OF AXIOMS. MANY-VALUED LOGIC
69
where a w ould differ from  
a t the m ost by having a certain 
definiendum  replaced by the corresponding definiens. B ut 
no defined term s would occur in th e proofs of sentences 
of th e form  a and N a . Thus to prove th e consistency of 
our system  it suffices to dem onstrate th a t the definition- 
free system  of the sentential calculus is consistent. Such 
a system  differs from  our system  only in- th a t it includes 
no rule of replacem ent, and th e rule of substitution is 
restricted to  m eaningful expressions th a t contain no de­
fined term s.
The basic idea of a proof of consistency of th e definition- 
free sentential calculus consists in  constructing a certain 
property <p0 which satisfies th e following three conditions:
1) property <pa is an attrib u te of every axiom;
2) if an expression has property <p0> then every sub­
stitu tio n  of th a t expression (containing no defined term s) 
has property <p0; if any two expressions have property <p0, 
then th e expression obtained from  them  on th e strength 
of the rule of detachm ent also has property <p0',
3) tw o contradictory expressions, i.e., of th e form s a 
and JOfa, respectively, cannot both have property <p0.
Condition 2) can be form ulated m ore briefly b y  stating 
th a t property <p0 is hereditary w ith respect to th e rules of 
inference of th e definition-free sentential calculus.
If we succeed in  indicating a property <p0 w hich satisfies 
th e three conditions stated above, then th e system  under 
investigation is, of course, n o t inconsistent, since every pos­
sible thesis of th e system  has property <p0. The la tte r follows 
from  conditions 1) and 2). E very thesis of th e system  is 
derived from  axiom s after a finite num ber of applications 
of rules of inference. Since every axiom  has property q>9 
and property <p^ is hereditary w ith respect to the rules 
of inference, th en  th a t property m ust reach every thesis. 
Should, then, tw o expressions of the form s o and JVa, 
respectively, be theses of the system , th ey  would both 
have to possess property <pQ) b u t this is im possible in view
6

70
111. m e t h o d o l o g y  o f  t h e  s e n t e n t i a l  c a l c u l u s
of condition 3). Therefore th e system  of the sentential 
ealcnlus cannot be inconsistent.
W e shall now indicate a property <p0 which satisfies 
the three conditions in question. Let us consider the 
symbolic equalities pertaining to negation and im plication, 
and given on pp. 23-24 above. They will be symbolized in 
an abbreviated form  as the following table:
0
0
1
N
0
I
1
1
1*
0
1
0
The symbols in th e first column of the table are the values 
of the argum ent of negation or the values of the first 
argum ent of im plication; the values of the second argum ent 
of im plication are in the first row of the table. The four 
values of im plication corresponding to the respective com­
binations of the values of the argum ents are to be found 
in the two lower rows of the two middle columns, and the 
values of negation, in the last column of the table.
I n  the proof of consistency we need not treat the symbols 
“ 0” and “1” a# falsehood and truth. For us they are symbols 
whose meanings are reduced to the role assigned to them  
by  the table above.
L et us now examine Axiom 1. Let us substitute for 
the variables p , q, r some of the symbols “0” and “1” , 
so th a t equiform symbols are substituted for equiform 
variables, e.g., p/1, g/0, r/0. The result is
(7 0100 COO CIO.
L et us reduce the expression obtained on the strength 
of the table above:
OCIOOOOOOIO =*= C0C10 =  000 =  1 .
The expression under investigation has, after complete 
reduction, changed into the symbol “1” . I t can easily be 
ascertained th a t for every substitution of the symbols “ 0”

CONSISTENCY OP AXIOMS. MANY-VALUED LOGIC
71
and “1” for variables in Axiom 1 tlie resulting expression 
changes, after a reduction in accordance -with the table 
above, into the symbol “1” . The num ber of such sub­
stitutions will be finite, in the present case it will be 
23 =  8. In  general, it can be dem onstrated th a t for an 
expression containing n  diversiform variables th e num ber 
of such substitutions will be 2n.
The property th at, for every substitution of the symbol 
“0 ” or “l ” for the variables, this expression, after re­
duction in conformity with the table given above, always 
changes into the symbol “1 ” , is exactly the property <p0 for 
which we are searching. The symbol “1” , which is m arked 
with an asterisk above, is called the designated value.
I t  is now to be dem onstrated th a t the given property 
93,1 satisfies the three conditions in question. First, property 
<p0 m ust be the property of our axioms. I t  has been m en­
tioned above th a t Axiom 1 has property 9?0 • If we interpret 
the symbols “ 0 ” and “ 1” as falsehood and tru th , respec­
tively, we see th a t if an expression has property q>0 this 
is equivalent to the given expression changing into a true 
sentence for all the substitutions for the variables.
I t  can be verified directly th a t the rem aining axioms 
also have property <p0. For Axiom 2 we have only two 
substitutions, p j0 and p ( 1, which can easily be checked:
CCiVOOO =  <7(7100 =  COO =  1 ,
C C N 111 =  (7(7011 =  (711 «  1 .
F or Axiom 3 there are 22 =  4 substitutions. L et one of 
them , p jl, q/0, be checked by way of example:
c i c m o  =  (71(700 =  O il =  1 .
The checking of the rem aining three substitutions is left 
to the reader.
W e now consider condition 2 ): property <jp0 is hereditary 
w ith respect to the rules of inference of the definition-free 
sentential calculus. Suppose th at the expression W  has
6 *

72
111. METHODOLOGY OF THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
property <p0 and tliat the substitution p ja  is performed, 
where a is a m eaningful expression th a t contains no 
defined term s. Suppose further th a t the resulting ex­
pression P  does not have property <p0j i.e., th a t after 
a certain substitution it changes on reduction into the 
symbol “0” . A fter this substitution the expression a changes 
on reduction into a certain symbol. L et us now substitute 
for p  in th e expression W  the symbol into which a has 
changed, and for th e rem aining variables, such symbols 
respectively as we have substituted in  the expression P . 
For such a substitution the expression W  would also have 
to change into the symbol “0” , which is impossible. Hence 
expression P  cannot change into “0” for any substitution 
whatever. Thus, every substitution of an expression th at 
has property tpQ also possesses th a t property.
Suppose now th a t certain expressions of the form 
Gap and a have property <p0. Should expression p n o t 
have property <pQ, then for a certain substitution it would 
change into “ 0” . For a corresponding substitution a would 
change into th e symbol “1” , since it has property <p9. 
Consequently, the expression Cap would change into “0” 
in conformity w ith our table (O10 =  0). That, however, 
is not possible, since the expression Gap has property <pQ. 
Hence expression p m ust have th at property too. The 
property. 
is thus'hereditary with respect to detachm ent.
W e pass to condition 3): the expressions a and J a  
cannot both have property <p0, for if, for any substitution, 
a changes into “1” , then in conformity w ith onr table 
{AT =  0) the expression N a  for the same substitution 
changes into “0” .
W e have thus dem onstrated th at the given property <p0 
satisfies the three conditions in question. In  view of 
previous considerations it follows th at our system  of the 
sentential calculus is consistent.
20. The second issue pertaining to our system  of the 
sentential calculus is th at of the independence of the axiom s

CONSISTENCY O F AXIOMS. MANY-VALUED LOGIC
73
we have form ulated above. The intention is th a t none of 
the three axioms can he proved by means of the rem ain­
ing axioms and the rules of inference as adopted in the 
system. F or should any of the axioms be provable by 
means of the rem aining ones, it would thus become super­
fluous as an axiom and could be included in th e system 
as a theorem . Superfluous axioms are to be avoided. 
The axiom  systems of Frege, W hitehead and Bussell, 
and H ilbert, as m entioned above, do not satisfy th e 
requirem ent of independence since, as has been indicated 
in* the foregoing, each of these systems contains one 
dependent axiom. I t will be dem onstrated th a t m y system 
of axioms is a system  of theses each of which is independent 
of the others. The m ethod of the proof of independence, 
which 
will be described here, was 
first published 
by P. Bernays 
this 
m ethod 
was 
known to me 
before.
I t  follows easily from  the comments on th e proof of 
consistency th at to prove the independence of the axioms 
in our system it suffices to prove the independence of 
the axioms of th e definition-free sentential calculus. F or if 
there were a proof of an axiom by means of the rem aining 
ones, then there would also be a proof of th a t axiom 
th a t would not contain any defined term s; thus the axiom 
in question would also be dependent in the definition- 
free sentential calculus.
The proof of the independence of the axioms of the 
definition-free sentential calculus is in some respects similar 
to the proof of consistency. For instance, to prove th a t 
Axiom 1 is independent of Axioms 2 and 3, we shall 
construct a certain property q>x th a t satisfies the following 
three conditions:
1) property ^  is an attribute of Axioms 2 and 3;
2) property <px is hereditary w ith respect to the rules 
of inference of the definition-free sentential calculus;
3) property rpx is not an attribute of Axiom 1.

If there exists a property <px th a t satisfies these three 
conditions, then Axiom 1 is independent of Axioms 2 
and 3. F or by conditions 1) and 2) every consequence 
of Axioms 2 and 3 has property <pL. Hence if Axiom 1 
were a consequence of Axioms 2 and 3, it would also 
have to possess property y x. This, however, is impossible 
in view of condition 3). Thus from the existence of prop­
erty q>! follows the independence of Axiom 1.
P roperty <px is defined by a table analogous to the 
table used in the proof of consistency. T e t in this case 
the variables take on three values: “ 0” , “1” , “2” . If an 
expression has property <px, then for any substitution of 
the symbols “0” , “1” , “2” for the variables it always 
changes into “1” after reduction in conformity w ith the 
table given below.
74: 
H I. METHODOLOGY OP TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
0
0 1 2
IV
0
1 1 1
1
0 1 0
0
2
1 1 0
2
A part from the equalities for im plication and negation 
already known, this table also yields other equalities, 
e.g., 020 =  1, 012 =  0, A2 =  2.
In  order to check condition 1) we have to check 3” 
substitutions for an expression containing n diversiform 
variables. Hence for Axiom 2 we have to check three 
substitutions. L et us examine, by way of example, the 
substitution p/2; it yields:
OGN222 =  CC222 =  C01 =  1 .
For Axiom 3 we have to check 32 — 9, substitutions. 
For instance, the substitution p /l, qf2 yields:
G10N12 =  G1G02 = 0 1 1  =  1 .

CONSISTENCY O F AXIOMS. M ANY-VALUED LOGIC
75
I t  can easily be verified, th at for all other substitu­
tions we also get “ 1” after reduction. This verification 
is left for th e reader.
Let us examine condition 2), which states th a t property
is hereditary. T hat property <px is hereditary w ith 
respect to substitution can easily be shown by a reasoning 
analogous to th a t used in the proof of consistency. L et us 
now consider two expressions, of the form CajH and a, 
which have the property px. Suppose th a t for some sub­
stitution expression § does not change into “l ” , i.e., 
changes into “ 0” or “2” . For the corresponding sub­
stitution, a changes into “ 1” , for a has property <pt . Hence, 
in view of our table (CIO =  0, <712 =  0), the expression 
Ca/? would change into the symbol “ 0” . This, however, 
is impossible since the expression Cafi has property <px. 
Hence /3 m ust also have property <px. Property <px is thus 
hereditary w ith respect to the rules of inference of the 
definiton-free sentential calculus.
Finally, it can easily be ascertained th a t Axiom 1 
does not have property (px, i.e., th a t on reduction it does 
not change into the symbol “1 ” for all substitutions. 
For a certain substitution Axiom 1 changes, after reduc­
tion, into the symbol “ 0” . This is the following substi­
tution: p j2, g/0, r/2, which yields:
<7C20<7C02<722 =  Cl CIO =  CIO =  0 .
Since property <pz satisfies the three conditions for­
m ulated above, A xio m  1 is independent of A xio m s 2 and 3.
To prove the independence of Axiom 2 we consider 
the property g?2, defined b y  the table below.
c
0 1
TV
0
1 1
0
1* 0 1
0

7 6
III. METHODOLOGY OP T H E  SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
An expression lias property <p2 if, for every substitution 
of the symbols “ 0” and “l ” for the variables it always 
changes into the symbol “1 ”, following a reduction per­
formed in- accordance w ith the table given above.
I t  can easily be seen th a t Axioms 1 and 3 have prop­
erty <p2. F or Axiom 1 this follows from the fact th a t 
the said axiom includes im plication symbols only, and for 
im plication the table gives the same equalities we had 
in the proof of consistency. Further, it follows from  the 
table above th a t N p  =  0 regardless of the value of p; 
likewise, GOq — 1, O pl =  1. Hence, for Axiom 3 we have, 
regardless of the value of the variables:
G pC N pq =  CpCOq =  G pl =  1 .
I t  can also easily be ascertained, just as it was in 
the proof of consistency, th at property <p2 is hereditary 
w ith respect to the rules of inference. On the other hand, 
Axiom 2 does not have property <p2, for on substituting 
p j 0 we have
CG N000 =  00000 =  010 =  0 .
W e have thus demonstrated the independence of A xio m  2 
from  A xiom s 1 and 3.
To prove the independence of Axiom 3 we form ulate 
property 973, defined by the table below.
€
0 1
nr
0
1 1
1
1*
0 1
1
An expression has property <p2 if, for every substitution 
of th e symbols “ 0n and “ 1 ” for the variables, it always 
changes into the symbol “1 ” following a reduction in 
conformity with the table above. In  the p art pertaining 
to im plication, this table does not differ at all from the

CONSISTENCY O F AXIOMS. MANY-VALUED LOGIC
77
table used in the proof of consistency, and hence Axiom 1 
has property <pz . Axiom 2 also has property <pz for v e  have:
GGWOOO =  CC100 =  000 =  1 ,
GGN111 =  00111 =  O il =  1 .
I t can also easily be seen th a t property <pz is hereditary 
w ith respect to the rules of inference. On the other hand, 
Axiom 3 does not have property <pZi since the substitution: 
p j l , qjO yields
G i c m o  =  o i o io  =  o io  =  o .
W e have thus demonstrated the independence of A xio m  3 
from  A xio m s 1 and 2.
This completes the proof of independence of our 
system of axioms: no axiom  in  our system  of the sentential 
calculus is a consequence of the rem aining axiom s.
21. The proof of the independence of the axioms of 
the sentential calculus included the use of a table w ith 
three values: “ 0”, “ l ” , “2”. In  proving the independence 
of the various theses of the sentential calculus one often 
has to use tables th a t contain three or more different 
values. A ttention has been drawn to the fact th a t in 
proving consistency and independence it is not necessary 
to treat the symbols “ 0” and “ 1” as standing for false 
and true sentences, respectively. However, one m ay wish 
to know whether the third symbol used in the proofs of 
independence, can also be interpreted logically, as can 
the symbols “ 0” and “1 ” .
In  carrying out the proof of independence we have 
dem onstrated th a t every thesis of the sentential calculus 
has property <p0l which we consider to be the charac­
teristic property of the tru e sentences of the calculus 
under investigation. For a t the root of the logic we use 
there is the assum ption th a t every sentence always has 
one, and only one, of the two logical values: falsehood

78
III. METHODOLOGY OF TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
and tru th . This assum ption is usually not form ulated 
explicitly, b u t is a basic assum ption m ade in logic. This 
principle of two values in our logic corresponds to the 
principle of contradiction and the principle of the ex­
cluded middle interpreted as follows: no sentence is both 
true and false (the principle of contradiction), and every 
sentence is either true or false (the principle of the ex­
cluded middle). I t  is only in th a t sense th a t these principles 
m ay be considered basic laws of logic.
The principle of two values offers us a criterion for 
checking m eaningful expressions of the sentential cal­
culus w ithout proving them  by means of axioms. For 
in conformity w ith th a t principle, to check the general 
tru th  of a m eaningful expression we have precisely to 
determ ine w hether all the substitutions of th a t expression, 
in which the variables adopt one of the two values, false­
hood or tru th , “ 0” or “1 ” , change into true sentences. 
In  other words, in order to check whether a meaningful 
expression is tru e we have to m ake sure whether it has 
property y0.
W e m ight, however, adopt a standpoint at variance 
with the principle of two values in logic. W e m ight assume 
th a t a sentence, in the logical sense of the term , m ight 
have values other than falsehood and tru th . A sentence, 
of which we do not know whether it is false or true, m ight 
have no value determ ined as tru th  or falsehood, but 
m ight have some third, undeterm ined, value. W e m ight, 
for instance, consider th at the sentence “in a year from 
now I  shall be in W arsaw ” is neither true nor false and 
has a third, undeterm ined, value, which can be symbolized 
as 
W e m ight go still further and ascribe to sentences 
infinitely m any values contained between falsehood and 
tru th . In  th a t case we would have an analogy w ith the 
calculus of probability, in which infinitely m any degrees 
of probability are ascribed to events. In this way we 
should obtain a bundle of m any-valued logics: a three­

CONSISTENCY OF AXIOMS. MANY-VALUED LOGIC
79
valued logic, a four-valued logic, etc., and finally a logic 
of in fin itely m any values. Symbols other th an  “0” and “1” 
used in the proofs of independence would thus correspond 
to the various degrees of tru th  of sentences in logics with 
th e corresponding num bers of values. I have developed 
th e m ethod of proving the independence of theses of the 
sentential calculus precisely in connection w ith the study 
of m any-valued logic.
In  three-valued logic we would have to give a table 
for im plication and negation, analogous to the one we 
have in two-valued logic. The following table seems the 
m ost intuitive:
0
O i l
N
0
1 1 1
1
*
i l l
i
1*
O i l
0
In  this way, in three-valued logic every meaningful ex­
pression which, for all the substitutions of the symbols 
“ 0” , “ i ” , “1” for the variables, always changes into the 
symbol “1” following a reduction in conform ity w ith the 
table above, is true. I t can easily be verified th a t in 
three-valued logic, interpreted in this way, our Axioms 1 
and 3 are true. On the other hand, Axiom 2 is not true, 
for on substituting: p / i , we have
ccN m  =  ccm  =  Cl* =  * .
I t  follows from  the table above th a t every theorem  of 
three-valued logic also is a theorem  of two-valued logic 
(but, of course, not vice versa). T hus three-valued logic 
is a 'proper part of two-valued logic.
Three-valued logic can be form ulated as an axiom atic 
system , as was our system  of two-valued sentential 
calculus 2. If th a t were done, then in proving theorems 
we would not have to refer to the table given above.

80
III. METHODOLOGY O F THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
In  the logic of infinitely m any values it is assnmed 
th a t sentences can take on infinitely m any values, re­
presented b y  rational num bers x  th a t satisfy the con­
dition 0 <  x  <  1. Obviously, no table can be built for 
such a logic, since it would have to consist of infinitely 
m any rows and columns. The properties of im plication 
and negation in th e logic of infinitely m any values are 
defined as follows, it being assumed th a t p  and q are 
rational num bers in  the interval [0 , 1]:
if p  < q , then Cpq =  1 ; 
it p >  q, then Cpq =  1— +  q ;
N p  — 1—p .
The properties of im plication and negation, as given in 
three-valued logic, follow from  these equalities. I t  can 
also be seen th a t if the argum ents of im plication and 
negation are n o t outside the interval of the rational 
num bers [0 , 1], neither are the values of im plication and 
negation outside th a t interval.
In  m any-valued logic the following definitions are 
adopted:
A p q  *= O C pqq,
K p q  =  N A N p N q ,
B p q — KG pqCgp .
These definitions of alternation and equivalence have 
been discussed above. The definition of conjunction is 
based on De M organ’s laws.
The logic of infinitely m any values is a proper part 
of two-valued logic; in m ost cases those theorems of 
two-valued logic on which are based certain forms of 
apagogic reasoning are not valid in infinite-valued logic.
The relationship between the many-valued logics and 
two-valued logic resembles th at between non-Euclidean 
geometries and Euclidean geometry. Both non-Euclidean

T H E  COM PLETENESS OF TH E SEN TEN TIA L CALCULTJS
81
geom etries and m any-valued logics are consistent system s, 
although they differ from  E uclidean geom etry and tw o­
valued logic respectively. W ithout prejudice to  th e issue 
w hich logic, if any, is true, we m ay point out th a t tw o­
valued logic has the advantage of being m uch sim pler th an  
are m any-valued logics. B ut, in any case, m any-valued 
logics have proved useful by developing the m ethod of 
investigating independence, a m ethod which I could dem ­
onstrate here only in a very lim ited w ay 3.
7. The Completeness of the Sentential Calculus
22. In  the preceding section we discussed tw o-valued 
logic and stated  th a t it is our intention th a t property <p0j 
defined in the proof of consistency, should be th e charac­
teristic property of th e sentential calculus. In  connection 
w ith the proof of consistency it was also dem onstrated 
th a t every thesis of the sentential calculus has property <p0. 
The issue now arises w hether every expression th a t has 
property <p9 is a thesis of th e sentential calculus, in other 
words, 'w hether every expression which we hold to be 
tru e in  conform ity w ith th e principle of two-valuedness 
of logic, is a consequence of our system  of axiom s. Eor 
it m ay be th a t our system  of axiom s is too weak to prove 
all th e sentences having property g?0. This would be true, 
for instance, of a system  consisting only of the first two 
axiom s: Axiom 3, while possessing property <p0, would be 
n o t dedueible from  such a system  of axiom s.
B u t th e problem  of com pleteness can be form ulated 
w ithout any reference w hatever to property <p0- Suppose 
th a t every expression th a t has property 9o0 is a thesis 
of our system  of the sentential calculus. L et us consider 
an expression w hich does n o t have property <po, e.g., the 
expression Cpq. On substituting p j l ,  qjO, we obtain: 
CIO =  0. B y applying th e rule of substitution, we can 
easily obtain from  th e expression under consideration

82
III. METHODOLOGY OF THE SENTEN TIA L CALCULUS
another expression which would change into “ 0” for all 
the. possible substitutions. I t suffices to substitute pfC pp, 
qjN C pp, which will yield: C C ppN C pp. The expression 
N C G p p N C p p, having property <p0, is by definition a thesis 
of the system. Thus we see th a t an expression which does 
not have property <p0 on being joined to the system, enables 
us to arrive a t a contradiction w ithin the system.
B y following this example we can easily dem onstrate 
in general th a t if every expression having property <pQ 
is a thesis of the system, then every meaningful ex­
pression (w ithout defined term s) which is not a thesis 
of the system, on being joined to the system, enables us 
to arrive at a contradiction. I t  follows directly th a t the 
converse holds tru e as well: if every meaningful expression 
(w ithout defined term s) which is not a thesis of the system, 
on being joined to the system, enables us to arrive at 
a contradiction, then every expression w ith property <j30 
is a thesis of the system. For should an expression with 
property <p„ not be a thesis of the system, then on being 
joined to the system  it would have to result in a con­
tradiction; b u t we know from  the proof of consistency 
th at no expression with property <p0 can in our system 
yield a contradiction.
I t follows from  the above th at the answer in the 
affirm ative to the question raised above is equivalent to 
the following theorem: every m eaningful expression (without 
defined terms) either is a thesis of our system of the sentential 
calculus, or} when joined to that system , 
enables us to 
arrive at a contradiction. If this theorem is true then we 
say th a t our system of the sentential calculus is a complete 
system.
The first proof of the completeness of the sentential 
calculus was given by the American logician E. Post 
in 1921. Another proof of completeness was offered in 
W arsaw by A. Tarski 4. The proof of completeness to be 
given below differs from the two mentioned above.

T H E  COM PLETENESS OF THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
83
In  order to prove the completeness of our system  of 
the sentential calculus it is necessary, to dem onstrate th a t 
there are no m eaningful expressions (w ithout defined 
term s) which are not consequences of the system  and 
a t the same tim e do n o t lead to a contradiction on being 
joined to the system. Such expressions will he called inde­
pendent expressions.
I t  is assumed th a t small Greek letters, whether w ith 
subscribed indices or not, stand for any meaningful ex­
pressions of the sentential calculus which do not contain 
defined symbols. I t is also assumed th a t the term  thesis 
m ay stand either for any of Axioms 1, 2 or 3, or for any 
expression which can be derived from  these axioms by 
m eans of the rules of substitution and detachm ent alone.
The concept of equivalent expressions, im portant for 
further analysis, is also introduced.
Def. la . The expressions a and fi are equivalent if and 
only if the im plications Cap and Cfia are theses.
b. The expression a is equivalent to the expressions f$x 
and /?3 if and only if the im plications Caf$t , Cafi2 and 
C@x Cfi2a are theses 5.
The relations thus defined will be noted symbolically:
(a) 
,
(b) 
&
A num ber of lemmas concerning the concept of equiv­
alent expressions will now be given:
L .l. The following equivalences are true (they are ac­
companied by the num bers of theses from which a given 
equivalence follows):
(a)
C a G fiy ^C fiC a y,
(21)
(b)
a C N  a N  Cpp ,
(3, 
65)
(c)
C N N  ay ~  Cay ,
(62, 41)

(d) 
C N C a P y~ C a G N f$ y, 
(142, 144)
(e) 
G C a P y ~ C N a y ,  Gfiy. 
(37, 19, 59)
D etailed proofs of the first and th e last of these equiv­
alences will be given here; the proofs of the rem aining 
equivalences are analogous.
B y substituting p i  a, qjfi, rjy in Thesis 21, and then 
p/j8, qja, r(y in th e same thesis, we state th a t the following 
two im plications:
GCaCfiyCfiGay 
and 
CCfiCayCaCpy 
are theses;
This, w ith Def. la , leads to equivalence (a).
~Now let th e following substitutions be m ade in Theses 
37, 19 and 59: p /a, g/£, rfy. Thus th e im plications
CCCaPyGNay, GCCaPyCfiy 
and 
OGNayGGPyGGafiy
are theses. This, w ith Def. lb , leads to equivalence (e). 
L .2a, I f
84: 
III. METHODOLOGY OF TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
(1 )
a~ /3 
and 
P ~ y
then
(2)
a ~ y .
Proof. I t  follows from  assum ptions (1 ) th a t th e im plica­
tions
Cap, 
Gfictj 
Gf3y 
and 
<7y/S
are theses. W e substitute in Thesis 1 : p /a, qjfi, rfy, and 
next: p/y, qfft, rja. On applying th e rule of detachm ent 
to th e expressions thus obtained and to expressions (3) 
we state th a t th e im plications
Gay 
and 
Gya
are theses. Hence, equivalence (2) is true.

TH E COM PLETENESS OF T H E  SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
85
L. 2b. I f
(1 ) 
a'--'/? 
and 
P ~ Y n y t  
then
(2) 
a ~ y XTy%.
Proof. If follows from  assum ptions (1) th a t th e implica­
tions
(3) 
Cap, 
Cfia, 
CPyx, 
C0y2, 
and 
CyxCy
are theses. In  Thesis 1 we substitute pja, qjft, rfyx, and 
next pja, qjp, rjyz. On applying the rule of detachm ent 
to the expressions thus obtained and to  expressions (3) 
we state th a t th e im plications
(4) 
Cayx 
and 
Cayz 
are theses.
W e now substitute in Thesis 146: p j y x, qly*, rIPt sla- 
On applying th e rule of detachm ent to the expression thus 
obtained and to expressions (3) we state th a t the expression 
CyxCya a is a thesis. This, and the fact th a t expressions (4) 
are theses, leads to the equality (2 ).
L. 3. I f
(1) 
fi~ y
then
(2) 
CanCan^ x... Ca1P ‘-^C an Can_ 1... Gaxy .
Proof. The proof of this lem m a is by induction. 
F or n  — 1 the equivalence (2) has the form
(3) 
C a x p ^ C a ^ y .
I t  follows from assum ption (1) and from  Def. la  
th a t the implications
(4) 
Cfiy 
and 
Cyfl 
are theses.
7

86
III. 3U3THODOliOCrIf O I' TUB SBKTBNTIAL CALCULUS
W e substitute in Thesis 22: qj§9 r{yf p ja x, and next 
qjy, r(fi, p fa x. On applying the rule of detachm ent to the 
expressions thus obtained and to expressions (4) we state 
th a t the im plications
GGaxfiGaxy 
and 
GCa^yGa^^
are theses. This, and Def. la , leads to equivalence (3). 
Thus, for n  =  1 th e lem m a is true.
Let Jfc be any n atu ral num ber. The tru th  of the follow­
ing equivalence is assumed:
Gak Gak_ 1...Gaxp ~ G a k Gak_ 1... Gaxy .
Hence the im plications
(5) 
GGak Gctk_x... G<xxfiGctk Gak_x... Gaxy ,
CGak Gak^ x.., CcqyCafc Gak_ x... Coifi
are theses. W e again substitute in Thesis 22: q!Gak Cak_x„. 
Gaxp, rlG<xk Cak_ 1...G al y ,p la k+lt and next: qjGak, Cak_ x... 
Gaxy, rlC ak Gak_x... Gaxfi, p ja k+x. On applying the rule of 
detachm ent to the expressions thus obtained and to 
expressions (5) we state th a t the implications
GGak+1 Cg^... Gai^Gak+1 Gak ... Gaxy ,
GGak+1 Gak ...C  al yGak+x Cafc... Gax /?
are theses. Hence the equivalence
Gak+1 Gak ... 0a* ft ~  Gak+1 Gak... 0% y
is true. The inductive proof of equivalence (2) is thus 
completed.
L.4. I f  the sequence ix, 
i„ is any perm utation of
the num bers 1 , 2 , ..., n , then
(1) 
GaiiCait...G ainP ~ G a xGa2...C anf}.
Proof. In  the proof of this lem m a the following theorem  
from  the theory of perm utations will be used:

T H E  COM PLETENESS OF TH E SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
87
B y  perform ing in  the sequence 1
,
2
m ultiple 
adjacent transpositions we can obtain a n y perm utation of 
the num bers of that sequence 6.
L et & be a natural num ber less th an  n. From  equiv­
alence (a) of Lem m a 1 it follows th a t
Gak+1 Gak <?«*+2 • ••  GanP ~ Gak ®ak+l < ? < **+ 2“ * 
*
This equivalence and the preceding lem m a lead to the 
equivalence
Gax... Gak_x Gak+1 Cak Cak+2... Can fi
~ C a x... Gak_ 1Gak Cak+1.„ 
.
This, L .2a, and th e com binatorial theorem  quoted 
above easily lead to equivalence (1 ).
23. The following lem m a is of particular im portance 
for further analysis:
L.5a. I f
and the expression 0 is not independent, then expression a 
is not independent. 
b. I f
(1 ) 
0 ^ 0!, 03
and neither §x nor 02 is independent then expression a is 
not independent.
Proof. Only p a rt b  of the lem m a will be proved, the 
proof of p a rt a being left to the reader.
From  the assum ption th a t expressions 0X and 02 are 
not independent it follows th a t either both of them  are 
theses or th a t a t least one of them , when joined to the 
system , leads to a contradiction.
From  Def. lb  and (1) it follows im m ediately th a t 
in the form er case expression a is a thesis and thus 
is not an independent expression. I t also follows from 
Def. lb  and (1) th a t the joining to the system  of
7*

8 8
III. METHODOLOGY OF T H E  SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS
expression a entails th e joining to the system  of both 
expressions & and /?2. Thus, if th e joining of one of these 
expressions leads to  a contradiction in  the system , then 
th e joining to  th e system  of expression a also entails 
a contradiction in  th e system ; hence in  th e la tte r of th e 
tw o possible cases, expression a is n o t independent.
E very m eaningful expression of the sentential calculus 
having the form
I  
CaxCal ...CanNCpp
w ill be called an expression of form  I. The expressions 
al} Oa,..., an w ill be called the antecedents of expression I.
I t  follows from  equivalence (b) of Lem m a 1 th a t 
L .6. E very m eaningful expression of the sentential calculus 
is equivalent to a certain expression of form  I.
Def. 2. A n  expression of form  I  is called sim ple if and 
only i f  each of its antecedent is a single variable or the negation 
of a single variable.
F or instance,
G pC N qN C pp, 
C rC sC tN C pp, 
G NqCqNG pp 
are sim ple expressions.
L. 7. N o  sim ple expression <p is an independent expression.
Proof. L et ns consider tw o cases:
a. The antecedents of th e expression p  include con­
trad icto ry  expressions.
b. No tw o antecedents of th e  expression 9? are con­
tradictory.
I t  follows easily from  L. 4 th a t in case a th e expression q> 
is equivalent to  a certain substitution of Thesis 3, th a t 
is to  an  expression w hich is n o t independent. I t  now 
follows from  L .5a, th a t in  th e case under consideration 
th e lem m a is true.
In  case b for every non-negated variable th a t occurs 
in  th e antecedents of th e expression q> we substitute th e

TH E COMPLETENESS OP TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
89
expression Gpp, and for every negated variable which 
occurs in  these antecedents, the expression N  Gpp. I t can 
easily be seen th a t snch a substitution can be m ade.
On applying repeatedly th e rule of detachm ent to th e 
expression thus obtained and to Theses 16 and 141 we 
obtain one of th e following three expressions:
N G p p , 
JSfGGppGpp, 
N  CLf C p p N  G pp.
Hence, using Thesis 64, we easily infer th a t in case b the 
joining to the system  of th e expression tp results in a con­
tradiction, and so in th a t case, too, th e expression <p is 
not independent.
Def. 3. L et <p and ip be any. expression of the form  I.
The expression <p is sim pler than the expression y> if 
and only i f  either the expression <p is w ritten w ith fewer 
symbols than the expression y or these two expressions are 
w ritten w ith the same num ber of symbols and the expression <p 
has a greater num ber of antecedents than has the expression tp.
Thus, for instance, th e expressions
GqN G pp, 
GqGrK G pp, 
G pG N qN  Gpp
are respectively sim pler th an  th e expressions
GNJSfqNGpp, 
G G trG qG rNCpp, 
G N C pqN G pp.
Xi. 8. A n y  expression <p of the form  I  which is not a sim ple 
expression is equivalent to one or two sim pler expressions.
Proof. I t  follows easily from  D ef. 2 and from  D.4 th a t 
th e expression <p is equivalent to  a certain expression of 
form  I
(1) 
Opy
in  w hich th e antecedent y> is neither a single variable nor 
th e negation of a single variable. Consequently, th e expres­
sion yj m ust have one of th e following three form s:
N N a , 
N G aP, 
Gap.

90
H I. METHODOLOGY OP TH E SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
I t  follows from  equivalences (c) and (d) of Lem m a 1 th a t 
in th e first two cases expression (1) is equivalent to one 
sim pler expression, and from  equivalence (e) of th e same 
lem m a it follows th a t in  th e th ird  case expression (I) 
is equivalent to tw o sim pler expressions. H ence the lem m a 
follows from  th e statem ent th a t expression <p is equiv­
alent to  expression (1), and from  L .2a and L.2b.
The lem m as given above m ake it possible to  prove:
Theorem . The system  of the sentential calculus, based 
on the aodoms
and in  w hich the rules of substitution and detachment are 
valid, is a complete system .
Proof. I t  will be shown th a t every m eaningful express­
ion w ritten exclusively w ith variables and th e sym bols C 
and Tl either is a consequence of Axioms 1, 2, 3, or, when 
joined to th e system , results in  contradictory expressions 
in  th a t system ; hence, we shall show th a t no m eaningful 
expression is an independent expression.
Suppose th a t contrary to  w hat we intend to prove, 
independent expressions exist. If this is so, th en  by L.6 
and L .5 a there also exist independent expressions of th e 
form  I. I t  follows from  L .7 th a t they cannot be sim ple 
expressions. Thus th e assum ption of the existence of 
independent expressions entails th e existence of independ­
en t expressions of form  I  which are n o t sim ple ex­
pressions.
N ote fu rth er th a t th e existence of independent ex­
pressions of form  I . entails th e existence of the sim plest 
of such expressions, i.e. such th a t none of these ex­
pressions is sim pler th an  it. F or in every non-em pty set 
of expressions there is an expression th a t is w ritten w ith
1 
0  GpqG GgrGpr,
2 
G G N ppp,
3 
C pG N pq,

TH E COM PLETENESS OF THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS
91
a num ber of symbols which is not greater th an  any other 
expression of th a t set. Among th e expressions of form  I  
w ritten w ith th e same num ber of symbols there m ust 
be one which has a num ber of antecedents greater than, 
or the same as, the rem aining expressions.
Then let <p be an independent expression of form  I  
which is not a simple expression, and let no expression 
simpler th an  <p be an independent expression. B ut by 
L .8  expression <p is equivalent to one or two simpler 
expressions. This, w ith L .5a and L. 5b, shows th a t the 
expression <p is not independent. Thus the assum ption 
or the existence of independent expressions leads to 
a contradiction. Hence the theorem  is true.

IV. THE SENTENTIAL CALCULUS 
W ITH QUANTIFIERS
8. Quantifiers. Rules of Inference. Theses
24. The system  of the sentential calculus expounded 
above contains sentential variables and constant functors. 
B ut the sentential calculus can be extended by th e in ­
troduction of variable functors and w hat are called quan­
tifiers. One such system , containing the sentential cal­
culus, is S. Le^niewski’s protothetics1. To acquaint the 
reader w ith th e concept of th e quantifier we shall outline 
here th e sentential calculus enriched w ith quantifiers.
The term  “ quantifier55 was used by Peirce in his paper 
of 1885 [26]. W e shall first of all explain th e m eaning 
of th e universal quantifier, sym bolized by Peirce as f j .  
If <p(p) stands for a sentence of th e sentential calculus, 
containing th e variable p , then the expression of th e form  
[]p<p(p) is read: “for every p , p ip )”. F or instance, the 
expression of the form  [JpC pq is read: “for every p , 
if p , then g” .
B y using the symbols of falsehood and tru th , “0” 
and “1” , we can com prehend th e m eaning of th e universal 
quantifier. W e use th e  expression “for every p , <p{p)" 
to  state th a t th e expression “p ip )” turns out to be tru e 
for all concrete substitutions for the variable p . Since, 
however, th e sentential variable p  can tak e on only two 
values: “ 0” or “1” , it suffices to dem onstrate the sim ul­
taneous tru th  of th e sentences <p{0) and y (l), th a t is th e 
tru th  of th e expression uK<p(0)<p(l)” '} thus we have: 
[]p<p (p ) =  K<p (0) q> (1). 
F or 
instance, 
f j p p  =  -EDI =  0;
— K C 00C 11 =  -E ll == 1. The universal quantifier

Q U A NTIFIERS. RULES OF IN FER EN C E. THESES
93
is no t a functor, as are C, A , etc. An expression in which 
the quantifier is not directly followed by a single variable, 
b u t is followed by a compound expression, is meaningless 
for us. Thus, for instance, the expression [JJ^qGqq is 
meaningless.
In  the m eaningful expression fjp G p q  those variables 
which are equiform w ith th e variable th a t directly follows 
the quantifier, are called variables bound by th a t quantifier. 
A variable th a t is not bound is called pee. In  the meaning­
ful expression G fJpG pqp not all the variables th at are 
equiform w ith p  are bound: the last variable equif orm 
w ith p  is free, because it does not belong to the meaningful 
expression Cpq th a t directly follows the expression f j p . 
If in an expression containing a quantifier there is still 
a free variable, it can in tu rn  be bound by a quantifier. 
Hence th e expression fJpG JJpG pqp is meaningful. In  th a t 
expression there are four bound variables equiform w ith p . 
B ut th e first and the fourth of these variables are bound 
by the. first quantifier, belonging to the expression in 
question, while the second and the th ird  are bound by 
the second quantifier. The expression under consideration 
also includes one free variable, q, which m ay be bound, 
yielding the m eaningful expression [JqJ~[pG flCpqp.
The m eaningful expression G q fjp p  contains only one 
free variable g, so th a t the expression f j  qG qfJpp is m eaning­
ful. Y et the expression f]p C q []p p  is meaningless, for the 
first quantifier does not bind any other variable than the 
one th a t follows it directly. In  a meaningful expression 
every quantifier m ust bind a t least two variables. The 
expressions f j p ,  f] p q , [J p I I p P 316 no* meaningful.
In  order to decide w hether an expression is a meaning­
ful expression of the sentential calculus w ith th e universal 
quantifier we m ay use the following theorem : if <p{p) is 
a m eaningful expression that contains at least one p ee 
variable equiform  w ith p , then the expression of the form  
fjp p ip )  w a m eaningful expression; in the meaningful

94
IV . TH E SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS W IT H  QUANTIFIERS
expression thus obtained the variables equiform w ith p  
are already bound variables.
Exam ples have been used to explain w hat expressions 
w ith the universal quantifier, are m eaningful expressions. 
By using the quality: f]p<p(p) =  K<p(Q)q>(l) form ulated 
above we can check every m eaningful expression, we 
have seen th a t the expression f] p p  is false, and the ex­
pression f]p G p p  is true. W e also have:
G fjp p p  — C K O lp — COp .
This expression is universally true, for COO =  1, C01 — 1.
Thus the expression G fjp p p  (which contains one free 
variable) is universally true. On th e other hand, the 
m eaningful expression fJp G p q w ith one free variable q 
is not universally true, for on substituting q/0 we obtain
fJpG pO  =  K C 00C 10 =  # 1 0  =  0 .
L et us now examine the expression C p fjp p : on substi­
tuting for the free variable p (0 we have
GOfJpp =  C0 # 0 1 — COO =  1 .
On substituting p j l  we have
G l f j p p  =  G 1 K 0 1 =  CIO =  0 .
The expression C p fjp p  is rem arkable for behaving like 
the function #  which also gives
# 0  =  1 , 
# 1 = 0 .
Thus the symbol of negation can be defined by means 
of im plication and the universal quantifier, in the follow­
ing way:
N p  — C p fjp p .

Q U A N TIFIERS. RULES OF IN FER EN C E. THESES
95
Together -with the universal quantifier we m ay in­
troduce the existential quantifier 
The expression of 
the form  ]?p<p(p) is read: “for some p , <p(p)”- The ex­
pression “for some p,q> (p)” is used when we w ant to 
m ake sure th a t the expression “(pip)” proves true for 
the substitution of a certain sentence for the variable p . 
In  th a t case a t least one of the expressions 9 (0 ),gp(l) is 
true, so th at, in other words, the expression A<p(0)<p(l) 
is true; this yields the following symbolic equality:
£p<p(p) =  J$?(0 M 1) , 
which in tu rn  gives
£ p p  == A 01 =  1 , 
^JpC pq — AC O qC lq =  A lC lq  — 1 
(regardless of the value of q) .
F urther, the application of De M organ’s laws gives 
^T JP P iP ) “  
(0 )9 (1 ) =  X-?^93(0)^9?(l) =  £pN *p{p) .
Thus we see th a t the expression J¥f]p<p(p) is equivalent 
to the expression ^pN<p{p)„ In  fact, if it is not true th a t 
for all th e substitutions of concrete sentences for the 
variable p , <p(p) proves true then for some substitution 
for the variable p  the expression <p(p) proves false, which 
means th a t the expression Ncp{p) proves true.
25. The sentential calculus w ith quantifiers can be 
form ulated as an axiom atic system. An axiom atic system  
of the sentential calculus w ith the universal quantifier 
will be outlined here, w ith only im plication and the 
universal quantifier being adopted as prim itive term s. 
isTegation will be defined as m entioned above.
Five rules of inference will be adopted. The first two 
of them  will be the rules of substitution and of detachm ent. 
The latter is the same as in the quantifier-free sentential 
calculus. To the former, however, certain reservations 
m ust be added. In  the sentential calculus with a quantifier

96
IV- TH E SEN TEN TIA L CALCULUS W ITH  QUANTIFIERS
the rule of substitution perm its us to substitute meaning­
ful expressions w ith universal quantifiers, b u t substitutions 
m ay be m ade for free variables only. Thus, on substituting 
p IC q rtM  v e  obtain from  the expression
G flp p p
the expression
c rip p G q fjq q -
L et us examine the expression G fJpG pqq with the 
free variables q. W e note th at regardless of the value 
of q we have: GOq ~  1 , C lq =  q, K lq  =  q. Thus, regardless 
of the value of q we have:
C ripC P M  =  CKCOqClqq =  O K lqq =  Gqq .
The expression C[~JpCpqq is thus universally true. Let us 
substitute in  it qjGqp. This will yield the expression 
G fJpG pCqpG qp which is not universally true, for on 
substituting for the free variables: pjQ, q/1 we obtain
G f]pG pG lpC 10 =  GKC0G10C1G11G10
=  GKCOOCUO =  GK110 =  G10 =  0 .
By substituting qjGqp we have passed from the true ex­
pression Gj~JpGpqq to the false expression C fjpC pC qpC qp. 
This has been due only to the fact th a t a certain free 
variable of the substituted expression Oqp, nam ely the 
variable equiform w ith p , has become a bound variable 
after the substitution. In  order to avoid the possibility 
of transition, on the strength of the rule of substitution, 
from  a true sentence to a false sentence, we introduce 
a restriction on the rule of substitution, such th a t every 
variable which is free in th e substituted expression m ust 
rem ain so after the substitution has been made.
A part from the rules of substitution and of detachm ent 
we adopt two rules for handling the universal quantifier.

Q U A N TIFIERS. RULES OF IN F E R E N C E . THESES
97
The first of them , called the rule of join in g  the quantifier, 
m il be referred to  as rule B J . Mule B J  perm its ns, on the 
strength of a thesis of the form  Gaft {p) w hich is an im plication 
whose consequent contains the free variable p  and whose 
antecedent does not contain any free variable equiform w ith 
p , to accept as a thesis an expression of the form  G a fjp fi(p ), 
i,e., to jo in  the quantifier to the consequent of the thesis in  
question. F or instance, on the strength of the thesis GqCpq 
we m ay accept as a thesis th e expression G qffpC pq. 
Likewise, on the strength of th e expression G ffp p G p q  
we m ay accept the expression G []p p f]p G p q .
Buie B J can be justified by m eans of the thesis be­
longing to the sentential calculus: G CpqCG prG pKqr, which 
has not been proved, b u t which can easily be checked, 
e.g., by th e zero-one verification m ethod. T hat thesis 
perm its us, on the strength of sentences of the form  
Gpq and Cpr, to accept a sentence of the form  C pK gr. 
Hence, if we have a thesis of the form  Gaf3 (p), where a 
does not contain any free variable equiform  w ith p , then 
by substitution we obtain th e theses: Ca/3(0), <7a/S(l). 
These in tu rn  yield G aK p{0)/?(l), th a t is G a fjp p (p ).
Buie BO, the rule of om itting the quantifier, which is 
th e second rule of handling the quantifier, is in a w ay 
a converse of the rule B J. O n the strength of a thesis of the 
form  C a[fpf}(p) (where a m ay contain a free variable 
equiform  w ith p ) , rule BO perm its us to accept as a thesis 
an expression of the form  Ca(${p). F o r instance, on the 
strength of th e thesis G fjp p ffp p  we m ay accept the 
thesis G ffp p p .
Buie BO  can be justified by m eans of the theses of 
th e sentential calculus: 
GGpKqrCpq and GGpKqrGpr, 
which perm it us to recognize sentences of the form Gpq 
and Gpr on the strength of a sentence of the form  C pK qr, 
Thus, a thesis of th e form  Ca[Jp@ (p), i.e., C a K p {0 )fi(l) 
yields theses of th e form  Ca(${0) and Gafi{ 1). The lasfc 
two sentences yield the universally true sentence Cafi(p).

98
IV . T H E  S E N T E N T IA L  CALCULUS "WITH Q U A N T IFIE R S
The last rule of inference in the sentential calculus 
w ith the universal quantifier is the rule of replacem ent, 
which adm its th e definition
(D) 
N p  — C p [[p p  .
The rule of replacement perm its us to replace, in  every thesis 
of the system , the right side of a given definition, or of one 
o f its proper substitutions, by the lep side of that d efin i­
tion, or of its analogous substitution.
26. As the system  of axioms of th e sentential calculus 
w ith the universal quantifier we adopt th e system  of 
Tarski and B em ays (referred to  on p. 49), w ith C as 
th e only prim itive term . The second prim itive term , [], 
does not occur in  th e axioms. The axioms are as follows:
T1 
QqGpth
T2 
G G C pqpp,
T3 
CGpqGGqrGpr,
A num ber of theorem s will be deduced from  these axioms 
by m eans of the five rules of inference, form ulated above. 
In  particular, we shall prove our axiom  system  of the 
ordinary sentential calculus.
The following three theses of the ordinary sentential 
calculus can be proved by Axioms T l, T2, T3 (the proofs 
will not be given here):
T4 
G p p ,
T5 
G Gp GqrGqGpr,
T 6 
GCqrGCpqCpr.
W e now w rite down th e proof line of Thesis 7:
T2 g//7pp * D -T 7 ,
T7 
G C N p p p .

QUANTIFIERS. RULES OF IN FER EN C E. THESES
99
I n  the proof line above, th e asterisk is preceded by the 
following sentence derived from T2 by substitutions
G G G pf[pppp.
W e use the definition of negation to obtain from  this 
substitution Thesis 7, which is th e second axiom of our 
system  of the ordinary sentential calculus. We continue:
T4 p I U p p  * BO • T 8,
T8 
C flp p p .
In  the proof given above we obtain, through substitution, 
the sentence
c I I p p U p p
from  which, on applying rule RO, we obtain Thesis T8.
T6 q l f j p p , rjq * CT8 pjq —  T9,
T9 
GGp [ J p p  Gpq.
In  this proof the rule of detachm ent has been applied 
to th e following substitutions of T6 and T8:
G C nP P qG C pflP P  Gpq, 
G []p p q,
T9 * D • T10,
T10 
G N pG pq.
T5 p j N p , q jp , rjq * CT10 —  T i l ,
T i l  
GpGNpq.
Thesis T i l  is the third axiom of our system of the ordi­
nary sentential calculus. Thus all three axioms of our 
system  of the ordinary sentential calculus occur as theses 
in the sentential calculus w ith the universal quantifier.
In  the sentential calculus with the universal quantifier 
we m ay, from  every thesis <p(jp), containing at least one 
free variable p , obtain a thesis of the form f]p<p(p) by

1 0 0
IV . TH E SEN TENTIAL CALCULUS W IT H  QUANTIFIERS
joining the universal quantifier a t the beginning. B y way 
of example, we shall dem onstrate this for the thesis Gpp.
T1 qjG pp ^p jq  * CT4 — T12,
T12 
G gC pp.
T12 * B J-T 1 3 ,
T13 
<7g//p G p p .
Since the antecedent of Thesis T12 does not include any 
variable equiform w ith p , rule B J m ay be applied.
T13 q{Cpp * CT4 —  T14,
T14 
n * 0 p p -
Thus by means of the thesis Gpp we have proved T14. 
If two diversiform free variables occur in a thesis, they 
both m ay be bound by universal quantifiers standing a t 
the beginning of th a t thesis. This will be shown by proving 
T18 by means of T1 as an example.
T1 qjGqCpq, p jr  * CT1 —  T15,
T15
CrCqCpq.
T 1 5 * R J -T 1 6 ,
T16
C rfJqC qC pq.
T16 * 35J ♦ T17,
T17
G r n v f l ^ G p q -
T17 rjC pp * CT4 —  T18,
T18
[ I p I  h G q C p q .
The procedure used in proving T14 and T18 m ay also 
be used in  the case of expressions containing an arbitrary 
num ber of diversiform free variables. W hen proceding in 
the reverse order to th a t observed above, we m ay eliminate

Q U A N TIFIERS. RULES OF IN FE R E N C E . THESES
101
the universal quantifiers standing a t the beginning of 
a thesis. Thus expressions of the forms <p{p) and [] p <p (p ) 
are inferentiaUy equivalent w ithin our system  of the 
sentential calculus w ith the universal quantifier.
The expressions f}qC p q and GpJJqq, th e latter of which 
is derived from  the form er through the shifting of the 
quantifier standing a t the beginning, to the consequent 
of th a t expression, are not only inferentiaUy equivalent 
b u t simply equivalent. This will be dem onstrated by 
proving T24 and T27. F or this purpose we shall use the 
following two theses of the ordinary sentential calculus, 
which will not be proved here:
T19 
CGpCqrC N C pN qr .
T20 
C C N C pN qrC pC qr.
Theses T19 and T20 are equivalents of the laws of im ­
portation and exportation. Their underlined parts are 
conjunctions w ritten b y  m eans of im plication and negation.
T 4  p IFIqCp z  * s o  * r a i ,
T21 
G fJqC pqC pq.
T 1 9 p llJ a C p q , q jp , tfq  * CT21 —  T22,
T22 
GNCYl9.Gpq.Npq.
T22 * R J-T 2 3 ,
T23 
G N  G fJ qC pqN p f] q q .
The variable q occurs in th e antecedent of T22, b u t it 
is bound, so th a t rule B J  m ay be applied.
T 20p jf]q C p q , q lp ,r ff] q q  * CT23 —  T24,
T24 
G fJqC pqG pflqq.
8

102
IV . THJfi SJfiNTifiNTlAU CALCULUS W IT H  Q U A N T IF IE S
To prove T27 no reference need be m ade to T19 and T 20:
T4 p [ fjq q  * BO ♦ T 25,
T25 
O f[q q q.
T 6 q j[jq q t rjq * CT25 —  T26,
T26 
w p flq q C p q *
T26 * B J • T 27,
T27 
C G p fJq sH iC p q .
W e confine ourselves to these few theses, which give 
a very general idea of the universal quantifier. Quantifiers 
play an im portant role in building axiom atic systems, in 
particular if the variable bound by th e quantifier is a nam e 
variable. M athem atical theorem s usually require the use of 
quantifiers for their symbolic form ulation.

V. ARISTOTLE’S SYLLOGISTIC
9. Axioms. Definitions. Rules of Inference
27. Only sentential variables occur in  the sentential 
calculus; neither names nor nam e variables appear in it. 
In  the present chapter we shall be concerned w ith a certain 
theory of nam e variables, we shall present A ristotle’s 
syllogistic as an axiom atic system. True, as has been 
m entioned above, A ristotelian logic has little application 
in reasonings usually m et, y et the axiom atic system  to 
be presented here is one of th e simplest known axiom atic 
systems of nam e variables. I t  is above all in view of th e 
dom inant role which used to be, and in philosophical 
logic still is, ascribed to A ristotle’s theory th a t I  intend 
to axiom atize th at theory and thereby to assign it its 
proper place in logic, and to show how it ought to be 
expounded in a precise way
In  our system the following letters of the L atin alpha­
bet: a , b, m , will be used as nam e variables. Two prim ­
itive term s: XI and I , are adopted, both of them  being 
sentence-forming functors of two nam e arguments.
An expression of the form  TJdb is read “ all a is &” 
and is called a . universal affirm ative sentence. As in Aris­
totle’s logic, em pty nam es m ay not be the values of our 
nam e variables, i.e., such names as “ square circle” . If this 
restriction were not observed, we would have to recognize 
certain false theses of the theory we are going to present. 
An expression of the form  la b  is called a particular a ffir­
m ative sentence and is read “ some a is 
the restriction 
of the variables to non-em pty names being valid in this 
case too.
8*

104
V. ARISTOTLE’S SYLLOGISTIC
The functors TJ and l  m ay he interpreted by circles, 
as was done in the 18th century by the German m athe­
m atician L. Euler. If one circle stands for objects a, and 
the other for objects b, then the expression Uab m ay be 
interpreted by th e following figure:
Likewise, the expression Jab m ay be interpreted by. 
the following figure:
The prim itive term s given above occur in the following 
four axioms of our system :
S I
Uaa.
S2
l a a .
S3
C K U m bU am U ab.
S 4
C K  X fm blm alah.
Axiom SI is read “all a is a” , and Axiom S2 is read “some 
a is a” . These sentences are tru e for all the values of the 
variable a which are non-em pty names, e.g., “all men 
are m en” , “some m en are m en” . Theses S I and S2 do

AXIOMS. D E FIN ITIO N S. REXES OF IN FER EN C E
105
not explicitly appear in A ristotle’s works, b u t they were 
recognised by bis disciples.
The n ex t tw o axioms are A ristotle’s syllogisms, w ritten 
in the form  of conditional sentences (cf. 1.2 above). 
Axiom S3 is read: “If all m  is b and all a is m, then all 
a is 5” . W hen interpreted by E uler’s circles, this syllogism 
would yield:
Axiom S4 is read: “ If all m is b and some m  is a, then 
some a is 6” . The following m ay serve as an example: 
“All Poles are men, some Poles are scientists, therefore 
some scientists are m en” . The interpretation b y  E uler’s 
circles would be as follows:
In  our system  we adopt two definitions, which define 
the functors O and Y  (these are sentence-forming functors 
of two nam e argum ents):
E l  
Oab — N U a b .
E 2 
Y ab =  m a b .
The expression of the form  Oab, called a particular negative 
sentence, is read: “some a is not 6” ; the expression of 
the form  Taft, called a universal negative sentence, is read:

106
V. AKISTOTI/E’S SYLLOGISTIC
“ no a is 6” . These definitions become intuitive when 
applied to examples: the sentence “some m en are not 
Poles” m eans the same as the sentence “it is n o t true 
th a t all m en are Poles” , and the sentence “no circles 
are squares” m eans the same as the sentence “it is not 
true th a t some circles are squares” .
The axiom atic exposition of Aristotelian logic, as offered 
in this book, is based on th e sentential calculus as an 
earlier theory, and presupposes the tru th  of all the theses 
belonging to th a t calculus. Thus A ristotle’s logic is n o t 
a prim itive logical theory, and for its foundation requires 
a certain earlier theory th a t investigates sentences in 
general, w ithout engaging in the study of the details of 
their structure.
In  the system  here expounded, m eaningful expressions 
are all those expressions which are obtained from  a m ean­
ingful expression of th e sentential calculus by th e re­
placem ent of all its sentential variables by some expressions 
of the form: TJab, la b , Oab, Tab.
Three rules of inference will be used. The rule of sub­
stitution, known from  th e sentential calculus, will here 
be modified so th a t we m ay, in the theses of the sentential 
calculus, substitute for sentential variables m eaningful 
expressions which, ap art from  constants of the sentential 
calculus, contain term s of A ristotle’s logic. In  the theses 
of our system, only nam e variables m ay be substituted 
for nam e variables.
The rule of detachm ent remains as it is in the sen­
tential calculus. Finally, th e rule of replacem ent enables 
ns to use the definitions D1 and D2, as given above, by 
replacing in the theses of our system  th e expressions th a t 
are equiform w ith th e right sides of these definitions or 
the substitutions of such expressions correspondingly by 
the left sides of the definitions in question.
Before proceeding to prove theses of A ristotle’s syllo­
gistic we shall specify those theses of the sentential cal-

t h e s e s  o f  a k x s t o t l e ’s s y l l o g i s t i c
107
cuius which will he used directly; some of these theses 
have heen proved when discussing the sentential calculus, 
while the others can easily by justified by means of the 
zero-one verification m ethod.
T h l
C p p .
T h 2
G C pqG G qrC pr.
T h 3
G C p q C N q N p .
T h 4
G G p N q O q N p .
T h 5
G G N p q G N q p .
T h 6
G G K pqrC p G qr.
T h 7
G G K p q rC q G p r.
T h 8
G C K p q r C K p N r N q .
T h 9
G G K p q r G K N r q N p .
T h lO
G C K p q rC  G sp G K sqr
T h l l
C C K p q rG C sq G K p sr.
T h l2
G G K p q rG G rsG K q p s.
10. Theses of Aristotle’s Syllogistic
28. W e now proceed to prove theorem s of A ristotle’s 
syllogistic. In  doing so we shall refer exclusively to theses 
of the sentential calculus and the axioms, definitions, 
and rules of inference of A ristotle’s syllogistic, as given 
above.
The first group of theorem s to be dealt w ith are those 
theorem s which are usually treated in a schematic way 
as th e square of opposition. This is a square a t th e vertices 
of which are w ritten the four functions of syllogistic; 
Uab, la b , Y a b t Oab. The first argum ent of any of the 
four functors of syllogistic is called subject, and th e second, 
the predicate. The functions w ritten a t the vertices of the

108
v . a k i s t o t u e ’s s y l l o g i s t i c
square of opposition have eqniform  subjects and eqniform 
predicates. These functions are placed so th a t the universal 
sentences, nam ely the universal affirm ative sentence and 
the universal negative sentence, are a t the upper vertices 
of th e square of opposition; the particular sentences, 
nam ely the particular affirm ative sentence and the partic­
ular negative sentence, are at th e lower vertices of the 
square. The affirm ative sentences are at the left vertices 
of th e square of opposition, and the negative* sentences, 
a t th e right vertices.
Certain relations of im plicational consequence can be 
stated between the functions of the square of opposition 
or their negations. W e say th a t the relation of contradiction 
holds between th e functions w ritten a t th e ends of the 
same diagonal of the square of opposition. Every function 
from  the square of opposition implies the negation of the 
function which is its contradiction, and conversely, the 
negation of any function from  th e square of opposition 
implies th e function which is its contradiction. The re­
lations of contradiction between the functions of the 
square of opposition will be proved as theses from  S5 
to 812, inclusively. In  view of the properties of im plication 
it follow s from  these theses th a t sentences of the form  Uab 
and Oab cannot both be tru e or both be false; likewise,

TH ESES O F ARISTOTLE’S SYLLOGISTIC
109
the sentences Y ah and Jab cannot both be true or both 
be false.
The relation of subaltem ation holds betw een a sentence 
of th e form  la b  and a sentence of th e form  Uab. The sen­
tence TJab implies th e sentence la b , b u t not conversely. 
Likewise, the relation of subaltem ation holds between the 
sentence Oab and th e sentence Ydb. The relations of 
subalternation will be proved as theses from  S13 to S16, 
inclusively.
The relation of contrariety holds betw een universal 
sentences, i.e., sentences of the form  Uab and Y ob. E ach 
of these sentences implies th e negation of the other, b u t 
n o t conversely. Thus contrary sentences cannot both be 
true, b u t can both be false. The laws of contrariety will 
be proved as theses S17 and S18.
The relation of subcontrariety holds between particular 
sentences, i.e., sentences of the form  la b  and OaJ>. The 
negation of each of these sentences implies th e other 
sentence, b u t not conversely. Subcontrary sentences can 
thus both be true, b u t cannot both be false. The laws 
of subcontrariety will be proved as theses S19 and S20.
W e repeat the axioms and definitions of A ristotle’s 
syllogistic and then pass on to proofs.
S I
U aa.
S2
Ia a .
S3
G K U m b Uam U ab.
S 4
C K U m b lm a la b .
D1
Oab — N U a b t
D2
Y ab =  2s l a b .
T h l pjJSfUab * D 1 1 ♦ S5,
S5
COabJTUab.
T h l p fN U a b  * D 1 H  • S6.
S6
O NU abO ab.

110
V. ARISTOTLE’S SYLLOGISTIC
87
T h4pjO db, qjU ab * 0S5 — S7, 
G U abNO ab.
S8
Th5 p jU a b , qjOab * 0S6 — 88, 
G N O abU ab.
89
T ill p jN Ia b  * D2 I * S 9 , 
C Y a b N Ia b .
810
T hl p jN Ia b  * D2 II * S10, 
G N Ia b Y a b .
S ll
Th4 p /Y a b , qjlab * OS9 — S ll, 
G la b N Y a b .
S12
Th5 p jla b , q jY a b  * 0810 —  812, 
G N Y a b la b .
The laws of th e square of opposition for contradictory- 
sentences have been proved.
Th7 p jJJa b , q jla a , 
rjla b  * 084 m ja — OS2 —  S13 ,
S1.3 
G U ablab.
Th3 pjJJab, qjlab * OS13 —  814,
S14 
G N Id b N U a b .
S14 * D2 * D 1 * S15,
815 
G YabOab.
Th3 p jY a b , qjOab * 0S15 —  816,
S16 
G N O abN Y ab.
The laws of subalternation have been proved.
S14 * D2 • S17,
817 
C Y a b N U a b .
Th4 * p /Y a b , qjU ab * 0817 — SI 8 ,
SI 8 
C U a b N Y a b .

TH ESES OP ARISTOTLE’S SYLLOGISTIC
111
The laws of contrariety have been proved.
S l4  * D1 * S19,
SI 9 
C N IdbO ab.
Th5 p jla b , qjOab * CS19 —  S20,
520 
G N O abldb.
The laws of subcontrariety have been proved.
Those theorems of A ristotle’s syllogistic which we are 
going to prove now form  th e laws of conversion. These 
laws perm it us to exchange in certain cases the subjects 
and th e predicates of expressions belonging to syllogistic, 
either w ithout or with a sim ultaneous change of the functor 
in question.
Th6 pjTJaa, q jla b ,r jlb a
* <7S4 m fa , b ja, afb — CS1 —  S21,
521 
G la b lb a .
Thesis S21 perm its us to convert the particular affirm ative 
sentences.
Th2 p jU a b , q fla b , rflb a  * CS13 —  GS21 — S22,
522 
G U ablba.
Thesis S22 perm its us to convert the universal affirm ative 
sentences, b u t with a sim ultaneous change of the functor TJ 
into th e functor I.
Th3 p flb a , qflab * CS21 a(b, bja —  S23,
523 
G N Id b N lb a .
S23 * D 2-S24,
524 
G Y a b N Ib a .
S24 * D2 alb, 6/o- S25,
525 
G Y a b Y b a .
Thesis S25 perm its us to convert universal negative 
sentences.

112
v. a e i s t o t l e ’s  s y l l o g i s t i c
29. W e now pass to th e  proper p a rt of A ristotle’s 
syllogistic, nam ely to syllogism s. Syllogisms are certain 
m eaningful expressions which belong to the system  under 
discussion and have th e form  of implications. The con 
sequent of such an im plication consists of one of the 
four functions, Uab, la b , Yah, Oab, and its antecedent, 
of a conjunction of two. such functions. Any two functions 
which occur in a given syllogism have one, and only one, 
equiform  argum ent, so th a t three, and only three, di­
versiform  variables occur in a single syllogism which 
contains six variables.
The consequent of a syllogism is called its conclusion, 
and th e functions occurring in  th e antecedent are called 
th e prem ises of th a t syllogism. T hat premise which 
contains th e variable which is equiform with the predicate 
of th e conclusion always is the first argum ent of the 
conjunction th a t forms the antecedent of the syllogism. 
Our Axiom S3:
G K  XJmb TJam Uab
m ay serve as an exam ple of a syllogism. T hat variable 
in the syllogism which has no equiform counterpart in  
the conclusion, is called the m iddle term. The variable 
equiform  w ith th e predicate of th e conclusion is called 
th e m ajor term , and th e variable equiform  w ith the subject 
of th e conclusion is called the m inor term. The last two 
nam es m ay be justified only in the case of our Axiom S3, 
where in  conform ity w ith th e interpretation by m eans of 
E uler’s circles the nam e a is as it were contained in the 
nam e b.
T h at prem ise of th e syllogism which includes th e m ajor 
term  is called the m ajor prem ise, and th a t which includes 
th e m inor term , th e m inor prem ise.
I n  th e te x t th a t follows th e m iddle term  will always 
be equiform  w ith m , the m inor term , w ith a, the m ajor 
term , w ith b. All syllogism are classed into four figures,

THESES OF ARISTOTLE’S SYLLOGISTIC
113
according to w hether th e m iddle term  occurs as subject 
or as predicate in  th e prem ises. The first figure includes 
those syllogisms in  w hich th e m iddle term  is th e subject 
in  th e m ajor prem ise, and th e predicate in th e m inor 
prem ise. The second figure includes those syllogisms in 
w hich th e m iddle term  is th e predicate in  both prem ises. 
The th ird  figure includes those syllogism s in w hich th e 
m iddle term  is th e subject in  b oth prem ises. Finally, the 
fourth figure includes those syllogisms in which th e m iddle 
term  is th e predicate in  the m ajor prem ise and th e subject 
in th e m inor prem ise. The classification of the syllogisms 
into figures is shown by th e following scheme of th e 
position of term s in th e prem ises:
I  
mb
I I  
bm
I I I  
mb
IY  
bm
am
am
m a
m a
If th e m ajor term , th e m iddle and th e m inor term  
are in  all syllogisms equiform  w ith b, m , a, respectively, 
then it can easily be seen th a t every figure includes 64 
diversiform  syllogism s. B y joining to  each com bination 
of variables one of th e four functors we obtain 42 =  16, 
com binations of prem ises, and to each of these 16 com ­
binations we m ay join one of the four conclusions. In  this 
w ay we obtain in  all 16 * 42 =  256 diversiform  syllogism s. 
Y et only 24 of them , six in  each figure, are tru e syllogisms. 
These 24 syllogism s will be the theses of our system . 
Since tw o syllogisms, one belonging to  Figure I, and th e 
other belonging to  Figure III, have been adopted as axiom s, 
S3 and S4 respectively, there are 22 syllogisms to be proved.
E ach of th e 24 tru e syllogisms has its nam e, coming 
from  traditional logic. F u rth er, in traditional logic th e 
letters a, i, e, o, are used as symbols of functors, instead 
of the letters 27, J, Y , O, respectively, as used in this book. 
The nam es of syllogisms are form ed so th a t they contain 
three vowels equiform  w ith th e trad itio n al sym bols of 
functors as they occur in  th e m ajor prem ise, th e m inor

114.
T , A RISTOTLE'S SYLLOGISTIC
premise, and the conclusion, in th a t order, of the syllogism 
in question. Thus, our Axiom S3 is called Barbara, and 
Axiom S4, D atisi. The traditional nam es will be given 
in parentheses following the syllogisms concerned as th ey  
are proved below.
W e shall first prove th e rem aining five syllogisms 
belonging to Figure I.
T h ll pjU 'm b, q jlm a , r jla b , gf Uam
* CS4 — CS22 bjm — S26,
526 
G K U m bU am lab 
(B arbari).
Th8 p j V m b , q jlm a , rjla b  * OS4 — S27,
527 
G K  U m b N Ia b N Im a .
T h ll pjX Im b, q jN Ia b , r jN I m a , sjY b a
* CS27 —  CS24 ajbj bja —  S28,
528 
G K U m b Y b a N Im a .
T h l2  p jU a m , q jY m b , r jN Ia b , sjY a b
* OS28 m ja , bjm , ajb —  CS10 —  S29,
529 
G U Y  m b U am Y ab 
(Gelarent).
Th2 p jK Y m b U a m , q jY a b , rjOab
* CS29 —  GS15 — S30,
530 
C K Y m bU am O ab 
{Gelaront).
T h ll p jV m b , q jlm a , r jla b , sjla m
* 0S4 —  CS21 bjm  — S31,
531 
C K U m b la m la b  
(D a rii).
Th9 p jV m b , q jlm a , rjla b  * OS1 — S32,
532 
G K N Ia b lm a N  V m b .
S32 a jm , m ja  * D 2 ajm  * D1 * S33,
533 
G K Y m blam O ab 
(Ferio).

THJfiSJES O l' XKISTOTIJS’S SYLLOGISTIC
115
W e shall now prove the six syllogisms belonging to 
Figure II.
ThlO p jY m b , qj V a m , r jY a b , sj Y b m
* CS29 — CS25 a lb , bjm  —  S34,
534 
G K Y b m U a m Y a b  
(Cesar e).
Th2 p jK Y b m  U am , q jY d b , rjOab
* CS34-— CS15 —  S35,
535 
G K Ybm U am O ah 
(Cesaro).
T hl2 p jY a m , q jV b m , r jY b a , sjY a b
* CS34 6/a, afb —  GS25 a/6, bfa —  S30,
S3 0 
O K  V bm  Y a m  Yah 
(Gamestres).
Th2 p jK  U b m Y a m , q /Y a b , r/Oab
* CS36 —  CS15 — S37,
S3 7 
C K O  bm Y  amOab 
(Camestrop).
ThlO p jY m b , q jla m , rjO ab, slY b m
* CS33 — GS25 a jb , bjm  —  S38,
538 
C K Y bm la m O a b  
(Festino).
Th8 p i U m b, qj U am , r/ C/a6 * CS3 — S39,
539 
GIT Gm6_2V Ga&iV G am .
S39 m /6, 6/m * D l 6/m * D1 - S40,
540 
CKU bm O am O ab 
(Baroeo).
W e shall now prove the rem aining five syllogisms 
belonging to Figure ±11.
T h ll p lU m b f q llm a , r fla b , sfU m a
* GS4 _  GS13 a fm , 6/a —  S41,
541 
O K  Umb U m alab 
(D arapti).

116
v. a k is t o t l e ’s s y l l o g is t ic
T l i l l p jY m b , q jla m , rjO ab, sjU m a
* CS33 — OS22 a jm , bja —  S42,
S42 
G K Yrnb UmaOab 
(Felapton).
T h l2 p jU m a , q jlm b , rjlb a , sfla b
* OS4 b ja , alb —  CS21 ajb, bja —  843,
843 
C K Im b U m alab 
(B is am is).
Th9 pjU m b, qjUam, rjUab * OS3 —  S44,
544 
G K K  Uab V a m N  U m b.
S44 ajm, mfa * D1 a/^  • D1 * S45,
545 
CKOmb UmaOab 
{Bocardo).
T lill p fY m b , q jla m , rjO ab, sjlm a
* CS33 —  CS21 a fm t bja —  S46,
846 
C K Y m blm aO ab 
(F&rison).
Finally, we shall prove all the syllogisms belonging 
to Figure IV.
ThlO p jlm b , qj U m a, r jla b , sj Ubm
* OS43 —  CS22 ajb, bjm —  S47,
547 
O K  Ubm U m alab 
(B am alip).
M ill p jU b m , q fY a m , r}Y a b , sjY m a
* CS36 —  0S25 a jm , bja — 848,
548 
C K U b m Y m a Y a b  
{Oalemes).
Th2 pJK U bm  Y m a , q jY a b , rjOab
* 0848 —  CS15 —  S49,
849 
O K  Ubm Y7naOab 
{Calemop).

TH ESES OF ABISTOTLE’S STIX O G1STIC
117
ThlO p jlm b , qjXJma, r jla b , sjlb m
* OS43 —  CS21 ajb, bjm  —  S50,
550 
G K Ibm X fm alab 
(D im atis).
ThlO p jY m b , q{Xfma, rjO db, sjY b m
* CS42 —  CS25 a jb , bjm  —  S51,
551 
C K Y b m  JJmaOab 
(JPesapo),
ThlO p jY m b , q jlm a , rjO db, sjY b m
* CS46 —  CS25 a jb , bjm  —  S52,
552 
G K Y bm lm aO db 
(Fresison).
Thus, all th e tru e syllogisms occur in our system . 
All those syllogisms which are not specified in our system 
as theses, are false sentences.
9


NOTES
Preface to the Second Edition
1 
The title page of the first edition of th e Elements was as follows: 
W ydaw nictw a K ola M atem atyczno-Fizycznego Stuchaezdw U ni- 
w ersytetu W arszawskiego. Tom X V III. D r Jan  Lukasiewicz Profesor 
U niw ersytetu W arszawskiego. Elementy Logilci Matematycznej. Skrypt 
autoryzow any opraeow al M. Presburger. Z cz^sciowej subw encji 
Senatu A kadem iekiego UniW. Warsz* N akladem  K om isji W ydaw- 
niczej 
K ola M atem atyczno-Fizycznego Sluchaezdw U niw ersytetu 
W arszawskiego, 1929 [Publications of th e Association of Students 
of M athem atics and Physics in W arsaw  U niversity. Vol. X V III. 
Elem ents of M athem atical Logic by D r Ja n  Lukasiewicz, Professor 
a t W arsaw  U niversity. A uthorized lecture notes prepared by M. Pres- 
burger. P artly  subsidized by th e Senate of W arsaw  U niversity. 
Financed by the Publishing Com m ittee of th e A ssociation of Students 
of M athem atics and Physics in W arsaw  U niversity, 1929].
Author’s Preface to the First Edition
1 In  the first edition of the Elements th e term  “teoria dedukcji” 
(theory of deduction) was constantly used instead of the term  
“ rachunek zdan” (sentential calculus). This change, which is in 
conform ity w ith th e term inology later used by Lukasiewicz, is th e 
only term inological alteration m ade in the present edition of the 
Elements.
* The num bers of pages in The Author's Preface refer, of course, 
to th e present edition.
3 F or detailed bibliographical data concerning these papers see 
The List of the Works Quoted a t the end of this book. P ost’s article 
is there listed under [1], and B ernays’s article under [27]. F u rth er 
references to The Inst of the Works Quoted will be given in th e 
form  of num bers in square brackets.
4 The first m ention published in p rin t and referring to m any­
valued logics is to  be found in The Farewell lecture Delivered by 
Professor Jan Lukasiewicz in the Great Hall of Warsaw University 
on March 7, 1918 [10], This proves th a t his system  of three-valued 
logic was constructed by Lukasiewicz as early as in 1917. The
9*

1 2 0
NOTES
results obtained by A . Lindenbaum  are given in [24]. A proof th a t 
three-valued logic can be axiom atized is offered in [34].
* Of. [7], pp, 180 f.
8 T hat m onograph has, unfortunately, never been published.
Chapter I
1 
In  th e years th a t followed th e publication of the first edition 
of the Elements algebraic m ethods again cam e to be used in research 
on logic.
3 A cam paign against psychologism in logic was waged by 
Lukasiewicz from  the very beginning of his activity as a scientist. 
F or detailed argum ents against psychologism see, e.g., th e lecture 
Logic and Psychology, delivered in 1908 [9].
3 I.e., the lectures whose notes became the first edition of the 
Elements.
4 The relationships between m athem atical logic and philosophical 
logic were often dealt w ith by Lukasiewicz in his articles from  the 
period 1929-1937 [14], [19-21].
s Lukasiewicz worked as intensively od A ristotle’s syllogistic as 
on th e sentential calculus. H e w rote a com prehensive m onograph on 
th a t subject [23].
* Stoic logic was discussed by Lukasiewicz in greater detail 
in [18],
7 Le^niewski’s system  is described in [31].
8 The sym bol e is th e prim itive term  of Le.4niewski’s ontology [31].
Chapter II
1 The role of definitions in deductive system s is discussed by 
Lukasiewicz in greater detail in [13].
2 In  [29].
3 F or m ore detailed rem arks see [17].
4 Cf. [5].
8 The sim plification of system s of axiom s given by other authors 
was discussed by Lukasiewicz in [12].
8 Cf. [5].
7 Cf. note 5 in this C hapter.
3 The axiom s of th e sentential calculus which has alternation 
and negation as its prim itive term s, and which are given above 
on pp. 55-57, have a sim ilar structure.
9 Cf. note 4 in this Chapter.
10 The system  based on these axioms is analysed in [16].

NOTES
1 2 1
11 Cf. [25].
“  Cf. [29].
13 These theses are n o t given in th e first edition of th e Elements.
Chapter XU
1 Cf. [J].
* An axiom atic system  of three-valued logic w as bu ilt by 
M. W ajsberg. Cf. [34].
3 The issues raised here are analysed by Lukasiewicz more 
com prehensively in [15] and [24].
* P ost’s proof is given in [27], T arski’s proof has not been 
published.
5 I t can easily be seen th a t equivalent expressions are inferentially 
equivalent, but not conversely {the concept of inferential equivalence 
was defined on p . 47). For instance, the expressions p  and q are 
inferentially equivalent, b u t they are not equivalent.
6 Cf. [30], pp. 4 and 5.
Chapter IV
1 P rotothetics is expounded in [8].
Chapter V
1 A ristotle’s syllogistic is extensively dealt w ith by Lukasiewicz 
in [22] and [23].

THE LIST OF WORKS QUOTED
[1] P . Bernays, 1 ‘ Axiomatische TTntersuchung des Aussagenkalkuls 
der ‘Principia Mathematics* 
Mathematische Zeitsehrift, XXV, 
1926.
[2] G. Boole, A n Investigation of the Laws of Thought. London 1854.
[3] G. Frege, Begriffsschrift, eine. der mathematischen nachgebildete 
Pormelsprache des reinen Denkens. Halle 1879.
[4] Gr. Frege, Die Grundlagen der ArithmetiJc. Breslau 1884.
[5] D. H ilbert, “Die logiscben Grundlagen der M athem atik” . 
Mathematische Annalen, L X X X V III, 1923.
[6] D. H ilbert, W . Aekerm ann, Grundziige der theoretischen Logik. 
Berlin 1928.
[7] St. Le£niewski, “ O podstaw acb m atem atyki” [On tbe Foun­
dations of M athematics]. Przeglq/d Filozojiczny, X X X , 1927.
[8] St. Le&iiewski, “ Grundzuge eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen 
der M athem atik” . Fundamenta Mathematieae, X IV , 1929.
[9] J . Lukasiewicz, “Logika a psychologia” [Logic and Psychology]. 
Przeglqd Filozoficsny, X , 1907.
[10] J . Lukasiewicz, Tresd wykladu pozegnalnego wygloszonego w auli 
TJniwersytetu Warszawskiego dnia 7 marca 1918 [The Tend of 
the Farewell lecture Delivered in the Great Hall of Warsaw 
University on March 7, 1918], W arszawa 1918.
[11] J. Lukasiewicz, “ O logic© trojw artoiciowej” [On Three-valued 
Logic]. Buch Filozoficzny, V, 1920.
[12] J . Lukasiewicz, “D em onstration de la compatibility des axiomes 
de la th^orie de la deduction” . Annates de la Societe Polonaise de 
Mathematique, 111, 1925.
[13] J. Lukasiewicz, “ Sola definicji w syBtemach dedukeyjnych” 
[The Kole of Definitions in Deduetive Systems]. Much Filozo- 
ficzny, X I, 1928/29.
[14] J . Lukasiewicz, “ O znaczeniu i potrzebach logiki m atem atycz- 
nej” [On the Im portance and Needs of M athematical Logie]. 
Pfauka Polska, X , 1929.
[15] J . Lukasiewicz, “ Philosophische Bemerkungen zu mehrwertigen 
Systemen des Aussagenkalkuls” . Syr aw ozda/nia z posiedzen 
Tovoarzystwa Naukowego Warszawskiego, W ydz. I l l , X X III, 
1930.

TH E LIST OP WORKS QUOTE©
123
[16] J . Lukasiewicz, “ E in V ollstandigkeitsbew eis des zweiwertigen 
A ussagehkalkuls” . Sprawozdania z posiedzen Towarsystwa HJaulco- 
wego Warszawshiego, Wy&z. I ll, X X IV , 1931.
[17] J . Lukasiewicz, “ Uwagi o aksjom acie N icoda i ‘dedukcji uogol- 
niaj^cej’ ” [Notes on Nieod’s Axiom and on G eneralizing De­
duction1]. Ksiqga pamiqtkowa Polskiego Towarzystwa FUozofiez- 
nego, 1931.
[18] J . Lukasiewicz, “ Z M storii logiki zdari” [From  th e H istory of 
th e Logic of Propositions]. Przeglqd Filozoficzny, X X X V II, 
1934.
[19] J . Lukasiewicz, “ Znaczenie analizy logicznej d la poznania” 
[The M eaning of Logical A nalysis for Cognition]. Przeglqd 
Filozoficzny, X X X V II, 1934.
[20] J . Lukasiewicz, “ Logistyka a filozofia” [Logistic and Philosophy]. 
Przeglqd Filozoficzny, X X X IX , 1936.
[21] J . Lukasiewicz, “ W obronie logistyki” [In Defence of Logistic]. 
Stadia Gnesnensia, XV, 1937.
[22] J . Lukasiewicz, “ O sylogistyce A rystotelesa” [On A ristotle’s 
Syllogistic]. 
Sprawozdania Polshiej Akademii 
Umiej&nosci, 
X LIV , 1939.
[23] J . Lukasiewicz, Aristotle's Syllogistic from the Standpoint of 
Modern Formal Logic, Oxford 1951. (The second, enlarged edition 
of th is book appeared in 1957J.
[24] J . Lukasiew icz, A. T arski, "B hdania nad rachunkiem  zdad” 
[Researches on th e Sentential Caleulus]. Sprawozdania z posie­
dzen Towarzystwa Naukowego Warszawshiego, W ydz. I ll, X X III, 
1930.
[25] J . Nicod, “ A R eduction in the N um ber of the Prim itive P ro­
positions of Logie” . Proceedings of Cambridge Philosophical 
Society, X IX , 1917.
[26] S. Ch. Peirce, “ On the A lgebra of Logic” . American Journal 
of Mathematics, V II, 1885.
[27] E . L . Post, “ Introduction to a General Theory of Elem entary 
Propositions” . American Journal of Mathematics, X L III, 1921.
[28] E . Schroder, Varies ungen iiber die Algebra der Logik, Leipzig, 
Bd. 1 —  1890, B d. 2 —  1891, Bd. 3 —  1895.
[29] H . M. Sheffer, “A Set of Five Independent Postulates for Boolean 
A lgebra w ith A pplication to Logical C onstants” . Transactions 
of American Mathematics, X IV , 1913.
[30] W . Sierpihski, Zasady algebry wyzszej [The E ssentials of H igher 
A lgebra], W yd. 2, W arszaw a-W roclaw  1951.
[31] J . Slupecki, “ St. Lesniewski’s Calculus of Nam es” . Studia 
Logica, H I, 1955.

124
TH E LIST OP WOBKS QUOTED
[32] A . Tarski, «*0 w yrazie pierw otnym  logistyki” [On th e Prim itive 
Term  of Logistic]. Przeglqd Filozofiezny, X X X I, 1923.
[33] G. V ailati, Scritti. Leipzig—Firenze 1911.
[34] M. W ajsberg, “A ksjom atyzacja trojw artosciow ego rachunku 
zdari” [An A sdom atization of th e Thiee-valued Sentential 
Calculus]. Spra/wozdawia z posiedzen Towarzystwa Naukowego 
Warszawskiego, W ydz. I ll, X X IV , 1931.
[35] A. W hitehead, B. Bussell, Principia Mathematica. Second 
edition, Cambridge 1925.

