[IR 10.3 (2007) 311–313] 
Implicit Religion (print) 
ISSN 1463–9955 
 
Implicit Religion (online) ISSN 1743–1697 
 
 
doi: 10.1558/imre2007.v10.i3.311 
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2008, Unit 6, The Village, 101 Amies Street, London  
SW11 2JW. 
 
 
 
 
Book Review 
 
 
God, The Failed Hypothesis: How Science Shows That God Does Not Exist by 
Victor Stenger. Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books, 2007. ISBN 978-1-
59102-481-1. Hbk. 294 pp. $28. 
 
Victor Stenger’s book God, The Failed Hypothesis echoes the recent well-
publicised attacks of both Daniel Dennett (2006) and Richard Dawkins (2006) 
against religious belief, most speciﬁcally belief in God. However, I must con-
fess to being somewhat surprised by Stenger’s notion that the concept of God is 
a hypothesis which can be veriﬁed or falsiﬁed by scientiﬁc method. From my 
earliest studies in theology I warmed to Paul Tillich’s notion that it was a mis-
take to think of God as ‘existing’. Tillich says, ‘There can be little doubt that 
the arguments [for the existence of God] are a failure in so far as they claim to 
be arguments. Both the concept of existence and the method of arguing to a 
conclusion are inadequate for the idea of God’ (1968). For the past half-century 
many theologians have been attempting to grapple with, and indeed radically re-
think, the concept of God, not just for an academic but for a popular audience, 
in order to reconnect Christianity with modernity. The ‘Observer’ famously 
reported that Bishop John Robinson’s book Honest to God was suggesting that 
‘Our image of God must go’ (1963). D. Z. Phillips (1976) argued that it was a 
mistake to understand religious claims as though they were primitive explana-
tions of how the world came to be. Don Cupitt (1980) wrote a controversial book 
entitled Taking Leave of God, in which he argued that ‘God’ was best understood 
as an internalised human ideal. Indeed it seems to me that Edward Bailey’s own 
emphasis on the concept of ‘implicit religion’ is seeking to show that there is 
more to religious believing than subscribing to theological doctrines and 
dogmas with their emphasis upon knowledge of supposed supernatural facts. 
My initial response, therefore, to the title of the book was rather lukewarm.  
 Even so, in recent years it has become increasingly clear that the signiﬁcance 
of Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection has been seen to undermine 
the design argument for the existence of God, an argument which many saw, 
and still see, as the most persuasive, acting as a sort of rational buttress to reli-
gious belief. According to this argument the world is perceived as being ordered 
by the laws of nature, laws by means of which we can have some control over 
our lives. We do not experience the world as random and haphazard in spite  
of its complexity and unpredictability. It has seemed reasonable therefore  

312 
John Hey 
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2008. 
 
to argue that it is legitimate to deduce from this that the world is both designed 
and purposive, and that human beings can live according to that purpose. 
Daniel Dennett in his 1996 book spoke of Darwin’s ‘dangerous idea’. He 
claimed that ‘it promises to put our most cherished visions of life on a new 
foundation’. The Darwinian theory of evolution, argue the neo-Darwinians, 
undermines religious belief because it explains the so-called design in nature 
as being an entirely natural self-explanatory biological process. Stenger agrees: 
‘Evolution removes the need to introduce God at any step in the process of the 
development of life from the simplest earlier forms’ (p. 52).  
 There are three strands to Stenger’s argument: the ﬁrst relates to scientiﬁc 
methodology, the second is a critique of the design argument and the third pro-
vides empirical evidence to subvert many of the tenets of religious believing.  
 First, he dismisses the idea that science and religion constitute different areas 
of human understanding. If there is a God who created and sustains the world 
then it is reasonable to look for empirical evidence to support the hypothesis. He 
says, ‘Science is decidedly not just another cultural narrative… it differs from 
other cultural narratives because of its superior power, utility and universality’ 
(p. 39). The role of science, then, for Stenger is universal. It has the power, and 
indeed the responsibility, to investigate religious claims relating to the existence 
of God. But it also has epistemological limitations. Science does not provide us 
with knowledge of the world as it is in itself. Its function is a pragmatic one, in 
that it offers us models of the world which enable human beings to interact 
with it in ways that are predictable and practical. The so-called laws of nature 
are not so much ‘discovered’ by the scientist, but are rather human construc-
tions which fulﬁl that pragmatic function. So, for Stenger, the concept of God 
should be understood in the same way. 
 The second and third strands of Stenger’s argument proceed to demonstrate 
that the concept of God fails to fulﬁl this pragmatic function. The second is a 
critique of both the design and the cosmological arguments. He begins by 
echoing the neo-Darwinian refutation of the concept of design. ‘Evolution 
implies humanity was an accident and not the special creation of Christian 
doctrine’ (p. 52). But perhaps the most interesting and original part of his book 
is his refutation of the cosmological argument. Just as the biologist has no need 
to invoke a designer in the process of evolution, so the cosmologist has no 
reason to invoke supernatural intervention in the origins of the universe. He 
argues that ‘the total energy of the universe is zero…the mean energy density 
of the universe is exactly what it should be for a universe that appeared from 
an initial state of zero energy, within a small quantum uncertainty’. From this 
Stenger contends that, ‘There is no reason why the laws of physics cannot have 
come from within the universe itself ’ (p. 129). So both modern biology and 
physics challenge the widely held view that the design argument for the exis-
tence of God can somehow withstand post-Enlightenment scepticism.  

Book Review 
313 
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2008. 
 
 In the third strand Stenger follows up this persuasive argument with further 
evidence to suggest that there are no empirical grounds to sustain many widely 
held theological views. Contemporary cosmology does not support the idea that 
humanity is the ﬁnal glory of God’s design. We live in a universe that is largely 
hostile to human life. The claim that the scriptures of the world contain divinely 
revealed truths is countered by Stenger’s argument that these so-called reve-
lations can be understood from within the prevailing cultural traditions. The 
miraculous element recorded in the Bible, according to Stenger, lacks support 
from the evidence of history. Moreover the gratuitous suffering which we 
experience in the world is incompatible with the concept of an all powerful, all 
loving God.  
 If natural theology has traditionally acted as a sort of validation of what 
might be termed a popular belief in God, then the persuasiveness of Stenger’s 
argument causes real problems for traditional believing. Evidence for belief in 
a supernatural creator is seriously undermined. In spite of this I think that the 
comment of one reviewer, quoted on the dust jacket, is probably extremely 
apposite when he says of the book, ‘A fascinating and thought-provoking book 
that won’t convince a single “believer” but is fascinating and thought-provoking 
nonetheless’. For the most part Stenger fails to notice that religious language is 
not designed to be understood scientiﬁcally. Language relating to God has more 
to do with the existential reality of human meaning-making. It expresses, for 
example, human feelings of guilt, despair, fear, joy, delight, wonder and pur-
posiveness. It is not so much about what can be factually known about the 
world. It is more about valuing, and about the believing which seeks to create 
meaning. Stenger fails to recognise that these facets of believing have a natural 
primacy over knowing, in the ways we make meaning. However, if Stenger 
fails in this regard, then this book reminds religious believers that they often 
fail to focus critically on the legitimacy of their knowledge claims. All believ-
ing has an existential rather than a cosmic or supernatural focus.  
 This is an important book which provides a cogent attack on traditional reli-
gious beliefs. It will be a pity if religious believers do not use it to explore the 
meaning and legitimacy of their faith. 
 
John Hey 
30 Denver Road, Mickleover, Derby DE3 OPS, UK 
Email: j.hey1@ntlworld.com 

