INSIDE JEB
Honeybee clusters seethe to keep cool as air temperatures rise
Packing up to relocate is always daunting,
but imagine uprooting an entire
community and setting forth with no final
destination in mind. This is the prospect
faced by swarming honeybees as they
depart in search of pastures new. Having
located a nearby tree, the swarm settles
while scouts venture off in search of a new
home, yet the cluster continually seethes
and churnsto maintain a stable temperature
within. However, no one had detailed the
precise changes that a swarm makes as air
temperatures rise and fall. To learn more,
Jacob Peters and L. Mahadevan from
Harvard University, USA, with Orit Peleg
from the University of Colorado, USA,
secured a box containing a queen bee to an
inverted weighing scale and encouraged
the colony to swarm around her, to find out
how they adapted as the temperature rose
and fell.
However, the team quickly found that
they were best conducting their
experiments at night. ‘On warm sunny
days the bees would fly off as if to a new
nest site’, recalls Peters. So he and Peleg
warmed the clusters from 15°C to 30°C at
different rates before keeping the insects
warm for 5 h. During that time, the duo
took 360 deg snapshots of the clusters
every 4 min by swinging a camera around
the cluster, taking a picture every 9 deg,
to build a 3D profile. Then the duo
cooled the air around each cluster at the
same rate, to find out how the bees
reacted. In addition, James MacArthur
from Harvard University designed
a bespoke temperature sensor for the
bees to cluster around that recorded
the temperatures experienced within the
colony as it churned in response to the
changing air temperatures.
Reconstructing time-lapse movies of
the clusters, the team could see them
become longer and broader as the
temperature rose, almost doubling their
volume at the highest temperature. ‘A
quick look at the time lapse showed
dramatic and predictable changes’, says
Peters. However, even after 5 h at 30°C, the
swarm never achieved a stable structure,
continuing to ripple and pulse until Peters
and Peleg turned the thermostat down. Yet,
the time-lapse movies of the cooling
colonies appearing to deflate weren’t
simple rewinds of the warming
expansions. ‘The cluster shrinks quickly in
response to cooling but expands sluggishly
to its original size as it warms back up’,
says Peters.
The team also noticed that at one point
during the heating process the cluster
stopped lengthening and began
shortening instead, even though the base
continued to broaden, probably because
there is a stage when the honeybees within
are at full stretch and can no longer cling
on to each other if the cluster continues
growing longer to avoid overheating.
‘This [manoeuvre] allows them to
increase their surface area without a
dramatic decrease in density’, says Peters.
And, when the temperature around the
colony fell, the colony shortened more
rapidly than it narrowed, probably
because it is easier for bees to climb
up and down chains of their sisters than
it is for the insects to move inward
carrying their colony mates suspended
below. The colonies’ pulsating
manoeuvres also successfully maintained
relatively warm temperatures within
(30–36°C), while remaining cooler at the
periphery.
So, honeybees are able to regulate
the temperature within a cluster by
spreading apart as air temperatures rise,
but they can only go so far before the
swarm is in danger of disintegrating.
Peters also warns that if environmental
temperatures continue to rise, the forces
within expanding clusters may be too
great for resting swarms to withstand
shattering as they attempt to avoid
overheating.
10.1242/jeb.243886
Peters, J. M., Peleg, O. and Mahadevan, L.
(2022). Thermoregulatory morphodynamics of
honeybee swarm clusters. J. Exp. Biol. 225,
jeb242234. doi:10.1242/jeb.242234
Kathryn Knight
kathryn.knight@biologists.com
Cross-sections of a honeybee cluster at 15°C and 30°C. The cluster is wider and longer at higher
temperatures. Photo credit: Jacob Peters.
Inside JEB highlights the key developments in Journal of Experimental Biology. Written by science journalists, each short report gives the inside view of
the science in JEB.
1
© 2022. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Journal of Experimental Biology (2022) 225, jeb243886. doi:10.1242/jeb.243886
Journal of Experimental Biology

