JHEP11(2017)121
Published for SISSA by
Springer
Received: May 30, 2017
Revised: October 16, 2017
Accepted: October 31, 2017
Published: November 20, 2017
Superposition induced topology changes in quantum
gravity
David Berenstein and Alexandra Miller
Physics Department, University of California at Santa Barbara,
Broida Hall, Bldg 572, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, U.S.A.
E-mail: dberens@physics.ucsb.edu, apmiller@physics.ucsb.edu
Abstract: We show that superpositions of classical states in quantum gravity with ﬁxed
topology can lead to new classical states with a diﬀerent topology. We study this phe-
nomenon in a particular limit of the LLM geometries. In this limit, the UV complete min-
isuperspace of allowed quantum states is exactly given by the Hilbert space of a free chiral
boson in two dimensions. We construct this chiral boson purely in terms of combinatorial
objects associated with the permutation group. As a byproduct of this analysis, we re-
derive the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule for characters of the permutation group. We are able
to express this rule in terms of operator relations for raising and lowering operators on the
Hilbert space of states in a free fermion basis. Our construction provides a preferred notion
of bulk locality by studying an appropriate notion of D-brane state generating functions.
We describe how multi-droplet LLM geometries with diﬀerent topologies give new classical
limits of the free chiral boson, even though they can be written as superpositions of coherent
states with trivial topology. As a consequence, topology cannot be accessed by a single op-
erator measurement in this quantum system. We study other non-linear measurements in
the quantum wave-function, based on uncertainty and entanglement between modes of the
chiral boson, that can be used as order parameters to measure the topology of such states.
Keywords: AdS-CFT Correspondence, Matrix Models, Models of Quantum Gravity
ArXiv ePrint: 1702.03011
Open Access, c⃝The Authors.
Article funded by SCOAP3.
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2017)121

JHEP11(2017)121
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
The question: can topology be measured by an operator measurement in
quantum gravity?
2
1.2
The set-up: the set of half BPS states in N = 4
3
1.3
The answer: no, topology cannot be determined via a single operator mea-
surement in this model
5
1.4
The outline
6
2
Droplet geometries and the limits of semiclassical reasoning
7
2.1
Review of LLM geometries
8
2.2
Periodic LLM solutions
10
2.3
Zooming onto the edge
13
3
A Hilbert space from group theory
15
3.1
Irreducible representations and conjugacy classes
15
3.2
Fock space from the symmetric group
17
3.3
Physical interpretations
19
4
D-brane creation operators and constructing local ﬁelds
21
4.1
The D-brane
21
4.2
Field of the brane
24
4.3
The anti-brane and its ﬁeld
25
4.4
Multiple brane states
27
5
Free fermions and the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule
30
6
Multi-edge geometries: new classical limits with diﬀerent topologies
35
6.1
Fixed energy single D-brane state
37
6.2
More general one stripe geometries
40
6.3
Excitations of striped geometries
41
7
Topology from uncertainty measurements
45
7.1
Coherent states of edge oscillators
47
7.2
Beyond classical states
49
7.3
Geometries with folds
50
8
Entanglement measurements of topology
55
8.1
Entanglement measurements of geometries with folds
60
9
Discussion
61
A The Murnaghan-Nakayama rule
66
– 1 –

JHEP11(2017)121
B Assigning Young tableaux to fermions states
70
1
Introduction
1.1
The question: can topology be measured by an operator measurement in
quantum gravity?
The AdS/CFT correspondence [1] has provided a detailed model of quantum gravity in
terms of a dual quantum ﬁeld theory. This has been an incredibly helpful tool, shedding
light on several puzzles of quantum gravity. For instance, it has shown that the black
hole information paradox [2] is soluble within a quantum mechanical framework (at least
in principle). It is natural to ask what else the AdS/CFT correspondence tells us about
quantum gravity. The careful reframing of the Hawking paradox in terms of information
theory, resulting in the AMPS paradox [3], suggests that our ideas about quantum gravity
might need rather large modiﬁcations in the presence of black hole horizons. The corre-
spondence supplies a method for rigorously analyzing these questions. We can ask if basic
assumptions about the nature of gravity are actually valid or not. We will focus in partic-
ular on the problem of measuring the topology of a spacetime. Speciﬁcally, our question is:
in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, can we determine the topology of a space-
time via a simple quantum mechanical operator measurement or does it, instead, require
some other procedure?
Classically, spacetimes with diﬀerent topologies can often be characterized by diﬀerent
topological invariants, which can be computed via, for instance, the Gauss-Bonnet theo-
rem and its generalizations. Our current semiclassical understanding of quantum gravity
suggests that some states will be represented by a sum over states whose spacetimes are
topologically distinct. This should lead to a picture of spacetime that microscopically has
the attributes of a spacetime foam [4, 5]. This semiclassical quantization of gravity suggests
that the metric and the topology are observables.
The simplest example of topology change in the AdS/CFT correspondence arises from
the Hawking-Page phase transition for black holes in AdS [6]. This can be understood as a
conﬁnement/deconﬁnement phase transition in gauge theory [7]. Here, the transition leads
to a new topology of spacetime, certainly in the Euclidean ﬁeld theory. However, one can
argue that this change is hidden behind the horizon if one considers the real time dynamics
of a black hole. The Einstein-Rosen bridge of the maximal extension of the AdS black hole
geometry connects to another region of spacetime that is completely hidden behind the
horizon of the black hole and is not accessible to an observer on the boundary of AdS space
in ﬁnite time measurements. More precisely, it is expected that the eternal black hole in
AdS is equivalent to the ﬁeld theory double of the thermal state [10], so the other asymptotic
boundary of the spacetime corresponds to a copy of the degrees of freedom of the ﬁrst ﬁeld
theory that is completely independent of the original theory, except for the fact that the
state in the double ﬁeld theory is entangling the two copies of the ﬁeld theory. In this sense,
the topology change requires the addition of a hidden sector to the original ﬁeld theory.
– 2 –

JHEP11(2017)121
On the other hand, a true topology change that is not hidden behind a horizon can
be obtained when studying bubbling solutions in AdS [8]. In this case, it is possible to
show that various spacetime topologies can be supported by the same boundary ﬁeld theory.
Indeed, it is even possible to argue that the bubbles can be tiny and almost indistinguishable
from perturbative excitations of the geometry. The multi-bubbling solutions can sometimes
be interpreted as spacetime foam.
A natural question to ask is if we can measure the
geometry (and even more coarsely, the macroscopic topology) uniquely, for suﬃciently
smooth conﬁgurations and their superpositions, or if the notion of geometry and topology
is highly dependent on the state that we are studying. That is, is the topology of spacetime
a quantum observable in this minisuperspace model?
As the full theory is a complete quantum mechanical system, we can consider arbitrary
superpositions of geometries (with the same or diﬀerent topology). Under the naive rules of
semiclassical quantum mechanics, one could argue that there should be a “topology mea-
suring” operator that distinguishes the diﬀerent topologies, so that one could in principle
divide the Hilbert space into superselection sectors that are eigenstates of the topology
operator. However, Van Raamsdonk has suggested that topology and geometry arise from
quantum entanglement [9]. In that case, it would be impossible to produce such a topol-
ogy measuring operator. For example, entanglement of a factorization of the Hilbert space
can be obtained from superpositions of states, each of which has no such entanglement.
These could all have ﬁxed topology, while the new superposed state could be a state with
a diﬀerent topology. In the case studied by Van Raamsdonk, this was associated with the
double ﬁeld theory interpretation of the black hole geometry [10], but one might imagine
that this could be applicable more generally [11]. This program for understanding geom-
etry goes under the “ER=EPR” banner. One can also ask if the topology changes due to
entanglement always require black hole horizons.
The main diﬃculty in being precise about this idea is that models of holographic quan-
tum ﬁeld theories where this could be analyzed tend to be too complicated to understand
how to evaluate entanglement properties of most states, except perhaps for very special
states like the ﬁeld theory double. This is also beyond the Ryu-Takayanagi setup [12],
as that setup assumes a single background geometry: it is not known how to make it
compatible with superpositions of (macroscopically distinct) states.
1.2
The set-up: the set of half BPS states in N = 4
In this paper, we work in a venue that is free from black hole horizons, in a setup where
a complete description of the quantum states that contribute to the phenomenon can be
understood in excruciating detail: the corresponding states have been completely classiﬁed
in the dual ﬁeld theory and a complete basis for the states is known. The ﬁeld theory
in question is the theory of a chiral free boson in two dimensions.
Here, it arises as
a limit of the minisuperspace of half BPS states in N = 4 SYM, though it can also
appear in many other holographic duals in a similar limit fashion. The supergravity dual
conﬁgurations that correspond to smooth horizonless geometries with various topologies are
well known and have been classiﬁed completely by Lin, Lunin and Maldacena [8]. They can
be classiﬁed by black and white colorings of the plane, with some restrictions on the area
– 3 –

JHEP11(2017)121
of the colored regions that enforce the Dirac quantization condition. We will call these the
LLM solutions. If one quantizes the solutions around the ground state droplet (a circular
disk, which corresponds to the AdS5×S5 spacetime), one gets chiral edge excitations of the
droplet [14]. We want to analyze this system in a special limit where these edge excitations
are described exactly by a free ﬁeld.This is the inﬁnite N limit. The limit also keeps the
energy ﬁnite in fundamental units: this can be a large number, but it does not scale with N.
In this work, our calculations will all be in this limit. From the point of view of the AdS5×S5
global geometry, these are inﬁnitesimal perturbations of AdS5 of the quantum scale ℏ. To
see them we need to change coordinates to zoom into the region where they are relevant.
This is a technical device: the oscillator expansion of a free ﬁeld will be very useful for
us.
This free ﬁeld theory is interpreted as an eﬀective closed string theory that is UV
complete from the point of view of quantum mechanics: we do not need any information
from outside the free chiral boson system to compute quantum mechanical amplitudes and
probabilities. The main reason for requiring the theory to be free is that it provides us with
a canonical factorization of the full Hilbert space in terms of a mode decomposition of the
free ﬁeld. This makes it possible to compute the entanglement and uncertainty properties
of the diﬀerent modes, which we will ultimately relate to the topology of the associated
LLM geometry. Surprisingly, if we ignore the ℏsize of the excitations and we treat them
classically, one can keep geometries in the limit which have non-trivial topology and that
survive this limit. The topology changes are at a microscopic scale but they still make
sense as states with diﬀerent topology when we are careful about doing the analysis in the
quantum theory description.
To address various technical issues that are required to make the arguments more force-
ful and precise, the theory of the chiral boson is constructed in a novel way by considering
only the combinatorics of the symmetric group. This is an abstraction of the description of
the state dynamics of in the N = 4 SYM dual that is necessary in order to be able to take
the free ﬁeld limit. This construction is independent of the gravity realization, but we can
ask to what extent the gravity picture is forced on us and in particular, if the combinatorial
construction suggests to us a particular notion of locality.
We start with the idea that there are two natural basis for states. The ﬁrst basis
is what we would call the multi-trace basis in a matrix model. It can be thought of as
being built from conjugacy classes and we will often refer to it as the closed string basis.
The second basis is the set of characters of a matrix in diﬀerent representations of the
group. As this can be built by irreducible representations, we can also represent these
states by Young diagrams. We will often refer to this basis as the D-brane basis. The ﬁrst
one is approximately orthogonal from large N arguments [15]. The second one is exactly
orthogonal by direct computation [16] in N = 4 SYM, and also when used in the study
of 2D Yang Mills theory [17]. These can be described entirely in terms of group theory
without any reference to matrices. This property allows a limit that can be interpreted as
the exact N = ∞limit of a matrix model and we can show directly that it corresponds to
a free ﬁeld theory. This is the limit where we will work in this paper.
– 4 –

JHEP11(2017)121
1.3
The answer:
no, topology cannot be determined via a single operator
measurement in this model
In this paper, we argue that the topology of spacetime in quantum gravity cannot be
measured by an operator. The main argument has been presented by us already in [13].
But, here we provide all the computational details. In that work, it was explained how the
topology of simple classes of states ends up encoded in the uncertainty and entanglement of
various variables, echoing the observation of Van Raamsdonk. These computations are not
simple operator measurements. Instead, we showed how one can extract the topological
information of a large class of interesting states, including some that are not fully classical,
but have an interpretation as a state a few excited quanta on top of a classical background.
To argue for the non-existence of a topology measuring operator, we ﬁrst need to show
that the notion of geometry makes sense and emerges on its own in the Hilbert space.
Indeed, an eﬀective notion of locality emerges naturally, giving rise to a local ﬁeld theory
on a circle that is the chiral boson quantum ﬁeld theory. That is, the circle on which the
chiral boson theory lives on is deduced from the combinatorics of the symmetric group. The
simplest multi-D-brane generating series can be shown to be exactly given by a coherent
state of the chiral boson. In this sense, the natural D-brane states are classical solutions of
the free ﬁeld theory and end up being associated with states that have the same topology
as the vacuum (that is, the same topology as AdS5×S5, which we call the trivial topology–
the one that we already know).
We will then show that there are other bubbling solution states that can be interpreted
geometrically as states with a topology that is macroscopically very diﬀerent from each of
the coherent states. These are states where a similar notion of eﬀective geometry emerges,
but this eﬀective geometry has diﬀerent topology than the vacuum. These states will corre-
spond to particularly simple Young tableaux states in the ﬁeld theory. Recall that coherent
states are over-complete, so we can get any other state in the Hilbert space by superposing
them. In particular, we can superpose them to form one of these states with a diﬀerent clas-
sical topology. From this property, it follows that there cannot be any quantum observable
(in the sense of projectors in a Hilbert space) that can distinguish the two collections [13].
The states with diﬀerent topology survive the limit in the following sense: although the
geometries in question end up having Planckian features, some of the naive expectations for
understanding them as non-trivial topologies can be realized directly in the combinatorial
construction of the states. In that sense, the intuition derived from the geometric analysis
of supergravity is not only useful, but also an eﬀective description of the system and the as-
sociated notion of topology is induces from how we think about these objects geometrically.
What we show for these states is that the new bubbling states have an eﬀective dy-
namics for nearby states whose collective dynamics is given by multiple chiral bosons, so
that the states correspond to a new classical limit of the ﬁeld theory. We will call these
collective modes the IR (infrared) ﬁelds, while the original chiral ﬁeld will be called the UV
(ultraviolet) ﬁeld theory. A similar statement about multiple chiral bosons is found in the
work [18] as a suggestion for the dynamics around special sets of conﬁgurations, although
one can already intuitively understand this from the original work [8]. Here we explain
– 5 –

JHEP11(2017)121
how this works in detail in a way that lets us go beyond simple Young diagram reference
states. The work we do is aimed at being able to do computations. Our work makes it
possible to understand how an eﬀective cutoﬀin these multiple chiral bosons is generated
dynamically by the state. We also develop the tools that allow us to explore what happens
when we move beyond the cutoﬀ. This analysis beyond the cutoﬀis stronger that what
could be gleaned from a geometric analysis which breaks down at the eﬀetcive cutoﬀ.
The eﬀective dynamics of these collective ﬁelds is subject to a stringy exclusion prin-
ciple, and the UV ﬁeld modes are in the vacuum well beyond this exclusion regime. The
notion of new topology and geometry only makes sense for these states (and coherent exci-
tations of their collective dynamics) when we study their physical properties at low and in-
termediate scales. They can be regarded as semiclassical states (superpositions of quantum
excitations around a vacuum) for high energy observables. This is similar to the study of
multi-throat conﬁgurations. We are also able to study in detail the amount of entanglement
of the UV theory modes, essentially mode per mode. We use that analysis to characterize
the topology of the new classical limits. In the end we need to compute other quantities in
the quantum theory that end up being non-linear in the wave-function of the conﬁguration.
These are related to measuring how classical the state is (uncertainties), and how entangled
the state is from a canonical preferred factorization of the full Hilbert space of states.
Perhaps more important than the statement that topology is not an operator, is the
fact that it can still be computed from the wavefunction of the system for states that are
suﬃciently classical. One can check that eﬀective ﬁeld theory makes sense in the vicinity
of such states, although the cutoﬀrequired to make sense of eﬀective theory was out of
reach to the techniques used in our previous paper [13]. This paper provides the technical
details that are required to explore these ideas in a controlled setting without making any
approximations: we can analyze a complete description of the states that were studied
before in a simpliﬁed approximation, as well as other states that were not covered before.
With this information we can explore the physics of the cutoﬀdirectly. This way we will
ﬁnd that the computed value of the topology varies as we vary the cutoﬀ. In this sense, the
topology that we will assign to spacetime depends on choices that we make. These choices
are physical: a cutoﬀis usually related to the limits of an experimental setup. In the right
double scaling limit, one should see that all cutoﬀs can be pushed to inﬁnity and that the
usual classical picture of gravity is correct.
The main goal of this paper is to describe a situation where the topology of spacetime
can be well understood in what turns out to be a free ﬁeld theory model of quantum gravity.
That is, we will show that the topology of spacetime can already be argued to change in a
regime where physics should be perturbative. An advantage to having a setup in free ﬁeld
theory is that there will be a mode expansion, which will provide us with various ways of
factorizing the Hilbert space in a canonical way. This factorization makes it possible to
compute entanglement entropies that have a physical meaning.
1.4
The outline
The paper is organized as follows. In section two, we review LLM geometries, which are
dual to half BPS states in N = 4 SYM. These are the geometries we will study throughout
– 6 –

JHEP11(2017)121
the paper.
In section three, we build up the technology used to perform most of our
calculations. This comes from analyzing the Hilbert space formed by considering conjugacy
classes and irreducible representations of the symmetric group. This Hilbert space describes
the free chiral boson in one dimension, which is also known to be equivalent to the space
of half BPS states when N →∞(where we will work). In section four, we show how
to build D-branes using both the conjugacy class basis and the irreducible representation
basis. To go between these basis, one needs the characters of the group. So, in section
ﬁve, we introduce the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule, which provides a useful way to compute
these characters. Further, we explain how our Hilbert space can also be used to describe
free fermions and show how the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule encodes the fermi statistics.
In section six, we get to the real meat of the paper. Here, we study various states whose
duals form classical geometries. We show that one set of these come from coherent states of
the raising and lowering operators in our oscillator bases. However, we show that these are
not the only states that give rise to classical geometries and further, the new states have
a diﬀerent topology than the coherent states. We argue by contradiction that this leads
to the fact that there cannot be a topology measuring operator in this set-up. In section
seven, we show how uncertainty measurements can provide a method to compute topology
in not one, but several measurements. We then discuss states that should not be thought
of as having a classical dual. Further, we analyze how to make progress studying more
complicated geometries with folds. Finally, in section eight, we discuss a second method
for determining topology, this time from entanglement entropy calculations.
2
Droplet geometries and the limits of semiclassical reasoning
Half BPS states in N = 4 SYM for U(N) gauge group (at weak coupling) are described
exactly by the Hilbert space of N free fermions in a harmonic oscillator potential [16, 19].
The dynamics is fully solvable and all the states can be counted.
In the study of the
AdS/CFT correspondence, the dual geometries have also been completely classiﬁed [8]:
they are described in terms of incompressible droplets on a two plane. This is a semiclassical
description of the phase space dynamics of the free fermions, which can also be associated
with the study of the integer quantum hall eﬀect on a plane [19] (indeed, the description that
bosonizes small edge excitations of the droplets has been known previously [20]). One can
work backwards from supergravity solutions to argue for the free fermion description [14,
21], but the analysis becomes convoluted when the droplets reach the minimal quantum
size of ℏ. Indeed, there is more than one path to obtain certain solutions, especially the
ones that have diﬀerent topologies and it is not clear how the system takes care of over-
counting in the supergravity regime (see for example [22]). This is taken care of by the
“matrix model” realization of the dynamics. That is, the dual holographic CFT explains
how to take care of the overcounting.
What is clear is that the over-counting is in some sense handled by a stringy exclusion
principle [23]. This idea was used to argue that BPS states bubble into giant gravitons [24].
In the case of giant gravitons, the stringy exclusion principle is stated by saying that trace
modes become dependent for ﬁnite size matrices.
In a sense, this gives a hard bound
– 7 –

JHEP11(2017)121
on the number of modes that are available to us and turns the eﬀective dynamics of the
traces into an interacting theory. This is mainly the statement that there are constraints
related to over-counting, so that there is no unconstrained free ﬁeld theory description of
the system. The map of the states between the AdS and the CFT took much longer to
sort out, especially since the discovery of the dual giant gravitons [25, 26]. This was sorted
out eventually in [16, 27], and the geometric interpretation came out later [8, 19].
There is a set of natural questions that can be asked.
1. What is the set of states that can be accurately described by (semiclassical) droplet
geometries?
2. How is the stringy exclusion principle implemented in detail for these diﬀerent droplet
geometries?
3. Are there topology measuring operators?
4. Is there a limit of the system where the full dynamics of all the states is an uncon-
strained free ﬁeld theory?
5. Are interactions necessary for understanding the topology changes?
The last question only makes sense if the answer to the fourth question is aﬃrmative.
Indeed, all questions become more interesting if the answer to the fourth question is af-
ﬁrmative. This is because in that case one would have a UV complete free theory in the
gravity variables, rather than the N free fermion description. This would mean that there
is no intrinsic stringy exclusion principle in the dynamics, and such a stringy exclusion
principle would only appear eﬀectively on particular solutions of the theory. Moreover, it
is not clear that one can obtain a topology change in such a free theory. One is used to
thinking about free theories as having a unique classical limit. A topology change would
indicate that there is more than one possible classical limit. The main goal of the paper is
to argue that the answer to question 4 is YES, that the answer to questions 3, 5 is NO, and
to produce detailed partial answers for questions 1 and 2. In particular, we will construct
the multi-droplet dynamics from ﬁrst principles around a preferred collection of states, in
which the details of the stringy exclusion principle can be understood.
2.1
Review of LLM geometries
We will start the analysis with a review of the salient features of the LLM solutions in
supergravity [8] that we need. The solutions that preserve half the supersymmetries in
N = 4 SYM preserve an SO(4) × SO(4) × R bosonic symmetry of SO(4, 2) × SO(6). The
extra R symmetry is split evenly between the SO(2, 4) and the SO(6). A geometry with
those symmetries has the form
ds2 =−
y
q
1
4 −z2
(dt+Vidxi)2+
q
1
4 −z2
y
(dy2+dxidxi)+y
 s
1
2 −z
1
2 +z
!
dΩ2
3+y
 s
1
2 +z
1
2 −z
!
d˜Ω2
3
(2.1)
– 8 –

JHEP11(2017)121
where i = 1, 2. The two copies of dΩ2
3 and d˜Ω2
3 are three-spheres that realize the SO(4) ×
SO(4) symmetry. The metric is completely characterized by z(y, xi): the vector V satisﬁes
a diﬀerential equation that ties it to z. The function z obeys a linear elliptic sourceless PDE:
∂i∂iz + y∂y
∂yz
y

= 0
(2.2)
and requires a boundary condition at y = 0. This locus is called the LLM plane. Non-
singularity of the ten dimensional metric requires z = ± 1
2 at this locus (this forces only
one of the two spheres to shrink to zero size, while the other stays ﬁnite). From here, one
can compute
z(x1, x2, y) = y2
π
Z
z(w1, w2, 0) dw1 dw2
[(x1 −w1)2 + (x2 −w2)2 + y2]2
(2.3)
Notice that the integral is always convergent if z(w1, w2, 0) is bounded. This is guaranteed
by the non-singularity condition. We can represent the areas of ±1/2 as a two coloring of
the LLM plane. The area of each one of the two colored regions is quantized in fundamen-
tal units [8]. The topology of the spacetime that arises from each two-coloring is directly
related to the topology of the diagram. The vacuum solution will be AdS5 × S5. We will
see that this is associated with a solid disk in the LLM plane. Again, to emphasize, we
refer to this as a state with trivial topology. There are excited states with trivial topology,
which are represented by wiggles on the disk and states with non-trivial topology, which
can result from rings or additional disks, etc. The topology is deduced as follows. Each
black or white region of the y = 0 plane represents a degeneration of one of the two three
spheres of the metric (the product of the radii is y2), One can draw a non-contractible
curve around regions of a diﬀerent color, and put a dome on the corresponding curve so
that it is a boundary of a disk, where the disk touches the y = 0 plane in this curve, and
is otherwise at y ̸= 0. On each point of the dome there is a ﬁnite volume three sphere
that goes to zero size on the boundary. This is the description of a ﬁve-sphere, and the
non-contractibility of the circle makes the ﬁve-sphere non-contractible in the topology.
This is a complete description of all the LLM solutions. We are interested in taking a
limit where the areas of the regions with z = ±1/2 are both inﬁnite. Moreover, we want
the edge between the two areas to be compact. There are two ways to do so. Each of them
has their own advantages.
The ﬁrst way to do so is to consider a half ﬁlled plane, with two regions. Naively, this
is the plane wave geometry with an inﬁnite edge. To obtain the compact edge we perform
a periodic identiﬁcation with a translation along the edge. This is done without distorting
the geometry above. The disadvantage is that the asymptotic behavior of the geometry is
not the one of AdS5 × S5 geometry any longer.
The second way to do so is to consider the strict N →∞limit of excitations of
AdS5 × S5 with ﬁnite energy.
Since the edge of the droplet grows in size like
√
N in
fundamental units of the LLM area quanta, all the features of the solutions get compressed
in the radial direction. To see the topological features, we need to rescale the coordinates to
keep the coordinates of objects on the edge ﬁnite, even if the distance is eﬀectively shrinking.
This does not aﬀect the topology of the conﬁguration, but it distorts the geometry. We
– 9 –

JHEP11(2017)121
will study both of these. Both of them give rise to the same Hilbert space of states, even
if they correspond to very diﬀerent sets of geometries in ten dimensions.
2.2
Periodic LLM solutions
First, we will just study the LLM solutions that are periodic, with an inﬁnite black and
white area after the periodic identiﬁcation.
We will be particularly interested in solutions that are independent of one of the
LLM plane variables. These are stationary and represent states that do not evolve under
Hamiltonian evolution. In the semiclassical limit, these are eigenstates of the Hamiltonian.
In the geometry represented by (2.3), we can choose that variable to be w2. Then we
have that
z(x1, x2, y) = y2
2
Z
z(w1, 0, 0)dw1
[(x1 −w1)2 + y2]3/2
(2.4)
where z(w1, 0, 0) will alternate between values of −1/2, 1/2 in regions, and we will also
assume that x2 is a periodic coordinate. The master integral we need is
Z b
a
dw1
[(x1 −w1)2 + y2]3/2 = 1
y2
"
(b −x1)
p
(b −x1)2 + y2 −
(a −x1)
p
(a −x1)2 + y2
#
(2.5)
This will give us the contribution for a region a to b where z = + 1
2 (a z = −1
2 region will
simply have an overall sign diﬀerence). Notice the 1/y2 that appears here will cancel the
numerator in (2.4). Our vacuum will be the solution with
z0(w1, w2, 0) = θ(w1) −1
2
(2.6)
for which
z(x1, x2, y) =
x1
2
p
x2
1 + y2
(2.7)
The excited solutions will be determined by requiring that the domain where
∆z(w1, w2, 0) = z0(w1, w2, 0) −z(w1, w2, 0) ̸= 0
(2.8)
has compact support (remember we have imposed that w2 is periodic), and that moreover
Z
[z0(w1, w2, 0) −z(w1, w2, 0)] dw1 dw2 = 0
(2.9)
We can understand the ﬁrst condition by realizing that
z(x1, x2, y) = z0(x1, x2, y) +
X
images
y2
π
Z
D
−∆z(w1, w2, 0) dw1 dw2
[(x1 −w1)2 + (x2 −w2)2 + y2]2
(2.10)
where D is the ﬁnite support where the two can diﬀer. To implement the periodicity of w2,
we need to sum over images under discrete translation in x2 (as indicated in the sum). The
inﬁnite sum goes as 1/x3
1 asymptotically at large x1, rather than the naive 1/x4
1. This is due
to the sum over images, which is clear for translation invariant solutions in equation (2.4).
Let us explain this fact.
– 10 –

JHEP11(2017)121
The sum can be performed explicitly, by writing the sum over images in detail
z(x1, x2, y) = z0(x1, x2, y) +
∞
X
n=−∞
y2
π
Z
D
−∆z(w1, w2, 0) dw1 dw2
[(x1 −w1)2 + (x2 −w2 −2πn)2 + y2]2
(2.11)
and where we have taken the period to be 2π (this is a convenient choice).
∞
X
n=−∞
y2
π
1
[(x1 −w1)2 + (x2 −w2 −2πn)2 + y2]2
= i
y2 [cot(ϕ) + cot(−¯ϕ)]
4(2π)((w1 −x1)2 + y2)3/2 −y2
16π

csc2(ϕ) + csc2( ¯ϕ)

((x1 −w1)2 + y2)
(2.12)
where
ϕ = (w2 −x2) + i
p
(w1 −x1)2 + y2
2
(2.13)
We would like to see how this expression behaves asymptotically, at large x1. Let’s look at
the expression one term at a time. The terms of the form csc(a+ib) will decay exponentially
fast, beating out the polynomial in x1, which multiplies them. So, these terms can be
dropped. The cotangent pieces, however, can be re-expressed using
cot(a + ib) = 1 −i tan a tanh b
tan a + i tanh b
(2.14)
and again, as b →∞, we ﬁnd that tanh(b) →1 up to exponentially suppressed terms. We
then get that
z(x1, x2, y) →z0(x1, x2, y) +
Z
D
−∆z(w1, w2, 0)y2 (2)
4(2π)((w1 −x1)2 + y2)3/2 dw1dw2
(2.15)
Notice that this matches (2.4) when we make ∆z(w1, w2, 0) independent of the second
variable, and integrate over the range (2π).
This implies that z(x1, x2, y) and z0(x1, x2, y) have the same asymptotics at ﬁnite y
and x1 →±∞up to order 1/x3
1, while the second condition improves the match to a higher
order. Expanding the expression asymptotically in powers of x−1
1
we ﬁnd that
∆z(x1, x2, y) = −y2
Z
D
∆z(w1, w2, 0) dw1 dw2

1
4πx3
1
+ 3w1
4πx4
1
+ O(x−5
1 )

(2.16)
This shows how the ﬁrst term vanishes with the condition (2.9). This is a coordinate
choice: the coordinate x1 is only well deﬁned up to translation invariance, as moving the
origin of x1 changes the domain where ∆z ̸= 0.
The next term is the ﬁrst subleading term of the gravity solution and its coeﬃcient
can be interpreted as the energy (see also the similar analysis in [28])
E ∝
Z
D
∆z(w1, w2, 0) w1 dw1 dw2
(2.17)
This is positive, because ∆z ≥0 for w1 > 0 and ∆z ≤0 for w1 < 0.
We see that
compactness of D gives rise to a ﬁnite energy. The area quantization condition forbids us
– 11 –

JHEP11(2017)121
from trying to place smaller droplets very far away without incurring a large energy cost. In
principle, it is possible to produce ﬁnite energy conﬁgurations if we allow a droplet to have
a thinning ﬁnger whose width decreases as it tries to reach inﬁnity: these will inevitably
become smaller than Planck size features in the metric and we should be worried about
using those solutions in the semiclassical regime.
This set of solutions is interpreted as a set of droplets for an incompressible ﬂuid on
the x1, x2 plane (we can choose z(x1, x2, 0) = 1/2 as the liquid, and the other region as an
absence of liquid). The ﬁrst equation tells us that we have a ﬁnite energy solution, and the
second one says that the number of liquid particles is conserved. The semiclassical Dirac
quantization condition requires that the areas of the individually connected (compact)
regions with z(w1, w2, 0) > 0 and z(w1, w2, 0) < 0 both be quantized. Each diﬀerent droplet
topology corresponds to a diﬀerent spacetime topology. Our set of semi-classical coherent
states will be droplet geometries that satisfy all of these properties. In the particle/hole
language, we have both an inﬁnite number of particles and vacancies. This tells us that
there are no upper bounds on the energy of either a single particle being moved into the
vacancy region, or for a vacancy being moved into a particle region. These are “giant
gravitons” and “dual-giant gravitons.” Saying that there is no upper bound on any of their
energies is roughly stating that there is no stringy exclusion principle.
Once we have these semiclassical states, we can build a Hilbert space by taking su-
perpositions of these geometries. Notice that coherent states are usually over-complete, so
the set of solutions by itself does not tell us how this completion is supposed to work in
practice. This is what the dual gauge theory actually accomplishes. Once we resolve this
problem of what the correct theory is, we can reconstruct the geometric states and ask
questions about quantum gravity.
As discussed previously, we are also particularly interested in geometries that have an
extra translation symmetry. The translation symmetry comes from the lack of dependence
on the periodic variable x2. The black and white pattern is therefore represented by a black
and white pattern on a cylinder that is rotationally invariant. The area of a (ﬁnite) droplet
is then the size of the periodic variable 2π times the height of the region. This is quantized.
Therefore any such conﬁguration is described by a set of integers: the ordered heights of
the regions. These alternate between the two colors. Since the basic conﬁguration has
the bottom half of the cylinder ﬁlled and the top half empty, the conﬁgurations must be
asymptotically colored in the same way. This means that there are as many ﬁnite white
regions as there are ﬁnite black regions. This can be represented as in the ﬁgure 1.
It is worth noticing that no additional information than the integers ni, ˜ni is required.
This is because condition (2.9) gives an equation for the ground state level relative to the
strip conﬁguration. This level is obtained by requiring that the area in black above the
‘zero level’ is equal to the area in white under the ‘zero level’. There is only one such level.
The important point for us is that the (translationally invariant) geometry is determined
by the collection of integers n1, ˜n1, . . . . These are all unconstrained integers. In that sense,
we should think of the geometry as being free from a ‘stringy exclusion principle’ that
would limit the integers somehow.
– 12 –

JHEP11(2017)121
n
n
n
n
1
2
1
2
~
~
Figure 1. Periodic LLM solutions are characterized by strips. The quantities n1, ˜n1, n2, ˜n2 . . . are
quantized and can be taken to be integers.
2.3
Zooming onto the edge
Now, consider the case where we take N →∞, while keeping the energy ﬁxed, of an LLM
geometry that asymptotes to AdS5 × S5 (in the dual ﬁeld theory we are considering a
state with ﬁnite scaling dimension, but N →∞). We will also require that the geometry
has an extra symmetry, this time of rotations around a center of the geometry in polar
coordinates. The corresponding solutions are given by concentric rings in black and white.
Since the area of the droplet is N, when we scale N →∞the area becomes inﬁnite. It is
also important to understand that the energy of the solution is given by [8]
E = 1
2
Z
D
z(w, ¯w, 0) w ¯w d2 w −1
2
Z
D0
z0(w, ¯w, 0) w ¯w d2w
(2.18)
where the domain D is the region of the droplet covered in black. We would like to measure
the energy relative to that of the ground state, which is why we subtract oﬀthe integral
over the ground state black droplets (we label this D0). We can check that the full integral
is over the region where ∆z ̸= 0, like in the previous subsection. The region D0 is a circular
droplet centered around the origin with radius r ≃
√
N in fundamental units. Because the
radius of the droplet scales with N, the values of w, ¯w where z diﬀers from z0 also scale in the
same way. We also want to keep the areas of small subdroplets ﬁxed and of order one. To
understand these conﬁgurations, it becomes convenient to change coordinates to a variation
of angular polar coordinates y = r2/2−r2
0/2, θ that are centered near the edge of the droplet,
so that dy dθ ≃r dr dθ = d2w is the natural area element. This means that we do the change
of coordinates in a way that preserves the area measure. In this way, quantization of the
circular area droplets is given immediately by requiring that the black and white rings have
quantized y sizes. This change of coordinates was sketched in [13], but with most of the
details on scaling of coordinates ommitted. This is depicted pictorially in the ﬁgure 2.
– 13 –

JHEP11(2017)121
Figure 2.
Pictorial description of the change of coordinates (w, ¯w) →(y, θ).
The change of
variables is area preserving.
Because the area of the new region is required to have the same area as the original
droplet, one can check readily that
R
D z(w, ¯w, 0) r2
0 d2w −
R
D0 z0(w, ¯w, 0) r2
0 d2w = 0.
This way we ﬁnd that the energy is given also by a simple expression
E ∝
Z
˜D
∆z(y, θ) y dy dθ
(2.19)
This is very similar to equation (2.17) if we identify the two sets variables w1 →y, w2 →θ.
The advantage is that now we can take N →∞, keeping y ﬁxed and the areas ﬁxed.
Indeed, we ﬁnd that the description of the droplets that survive the limit become identical
to the pictorial representation in ﬁgure 1, even though the ten dimensional geometries are
very diﬀerent.
What needs to be understood is that the variable y being of order one implies that
2y ≃r2 −r2
0 = (r0 + δr)2 −r2
0 ≃1. This means that δr ≃1/
√
N.
In practice, this
means that in order to take the limit we have zoomed onto the edge of the droplet. In
the y coordinates taking N →∞is trivial, but in the regular polar coordinates r, the
shift in the radial coordinate scales as 1/
√
N relative to the edge. From the point of view
of the topology of the conﬁgurations, it should not matter how we scale the coordinates.
Topology is after all a very coarse feature.
However, from the point of view of geometry (which includes distances), the features
that we are trying to zoom in to are typically smaller than the Planck scale. The main
reason for taking the limit is that at ﬁnite N, the negative y coordinate has a ﬁnite depth
of order N. When we take N →∞we remove this constraint and can work on the cylinder.
This means that the numbers ni, ˜ni are unconstrained and there is no stringy exclusion
principle. What is important for us is that in this limit the corresponding modes of the su-
pergravity theory become free [7]. This is because the energy is of order one rather than N2.
It is important to understand that taking this limit at the level of geometries for
diﬀerent topologies is suspect. In a free limit of a quantum ﬁeld theory we would expect
that the classical solutions that survive would be related to coherent states of a ﬁeld. These
would be solutions where the edge of the droplet is deformed, but there is no topology
change. It is natural to ask if both of these types of solutions can be thought of as allowed
classical limits simultaneously in the supergravity theory or not.
This is not resolved
directly within the supergravity theory.
– 14 –

JHEP11(2017)121
The claim that topology cannot be measured by an operator in [13] depends on this
assumption being true. If both types of “classical limits” survive in the quantum theory
with diﬀerent topology, then the fact that coherent states are complete means that states
with the new topology (diﬀerent than the ground state) can be made by superposing co-
herent state geometries. The coherent states are expected to all have trivial topology. This
means that one can induce a topology change (of diﬀerent classical limits) by superposition
of solutions in one (trivial) topological class. The main goal of the paper is to explain how
this works in detail in the Hilbert space of states of the free theory that arises from the
N →∞limit of half BPS states of the N = 4 SYM theory.
A particularly important claim of the LLM setup [8] is that these concentric ring
solutions are a complete basis of states for the Hilbert space of BPS states in N = 4 SYM.
That is because these solutions can be put into 1-1 correspondence with Young tableaux.
The Young tableaux states are a complete basis of states of the dual N = 4 SYM theory [16].
Such classiﬁcation of states has been exploited in many setups (see for example [29, 31]).
It is important to notice that most of these will have topological features on scales that are
much shorter than the AdS planck scale. The typical such solution should not be treated
as classical objects in these extreme situations.
3
A Hilbert space from group theory
3.1
Irreducible representations and conjugacy classes
As is well understood in the theory of orbifolds, twisted sector states for closed strings are
assigned conjugacy classes of the group [32, 33]. Similarly, D-brane charges are associated
with representations of the group [34]. Here we will use this fact to develop technology
that we will use for the remainder of the paper. We will start by ﬁrst describing how to go
back and forth between irreducible representations and conjugacy classes in general. These
will ultimately form two bases in our Hilbert space. In section 3.2, we speciﬁcally discuss
the symmetric group, which will allow us to build a Fock space where we can create multi-
string states. The Hilbert space we build will be exactly that of the free chiral boson in one
dimension. This is exactly as desired in the inﬁnite N limit: the single particle string states
are free and there are no interactions. In this limit, the Hilbert space will be factorizable.
This will, for instance, later provide a clear way to compute entanglement entropies.
In the study of ﬁnite groups, one can use character tables to go from conjugacy classes
to projectors on representations [35]. These two sets are in one to one correspondence
with each other, and there is a linear map between the vector spaces that they generate
at the group algebra level. This linear map can be promoted into a change of basis in a
Hilbert space, so that one furnishes a model where D-branes can be understood as linear
combinations of strings. This is a model where a D-brane is thought of as a soliton for a
(closed) string theory: the D-brane state can be written directly in terms of string states.
In this toy model, we start from nothing but the group, so we might want to think of
this procedure as orbifolding the theory of a target space which is a point. Our goal is to
eventually apply this procedure to the symmetric group, where additional structures are
present and to connect this information with the study of matrix models.
– 15 –

JHEP11(2017)121
The idea is rather simple. Consider a ﬁnite group Γ, with elements σ, and the usual
transform in the group algebra
PR = 1
|Γ|
X
σ∈Γ
χR(σ) σ
(3.1)
where R labels the irreducible representations of Γ. The object PR is a projector in the
group algebra that projects into the irreducible representation R and χR(σ) is the character
of σ in the irreducible representation R. Because the characters only depend on the con-
jugacy class of σ, we can convert this sum into an equation relating the conjugacy classes
and the projectors themselves
PR = 1
|Γ|
X
[σ]∈Conj[Γ]
χR([σ]) dσ [σ]
(3.2)
where dσ is the degeneracy of the class (number of elements in the class), and this deﬁnes
[σ], which is simply the average over the elements of the class.
Now, we can promote this equation to an equation in a (ﬁnite) Hilbert space of states,
where we have two basis: one furnished by strings (conjugacy classes), and another one
labeled by irreducible representations R, which we call the D-branes. Again, these are labels
that we add to the two basis to reiterate the classiﬁcation properties of the corresponding
objects in orbifold theories. We thus write
|[R]⟩= 1
|Γ|
X
[σ]∈Conj[Γ]
χR([σ]) dσ |[σ]⟩
(3.3)
and treat both the [R] and the [σ] as non-zero elements in a Hilbert space. One can expect
that strings associated with diﬀerent conjugacy classes are orthogonal to each other (they
are diﬀerent twisted sectors), and that diﬀerent D-branes are also orthogonal to each other
(they have diﬀerent D-brane charges). Therefore, we require that
⟨[σ]|[σ′]⟩= δ[σ],[σ′] f[σ]
(3.4)
⟨[R]|[R′]⟩= δ[R],[R′] g[R]
(3.5)
This is a non-trivial set of orthogonality conditions: it is not guaranteed that they can
be made compatible. The inverse transformation, relating the conjugacy classes and the
representations is
|[σ]⟩=
X
[R]
χR([σ−1]) |[R]⟩
(3.6)
where we use the characters of the conjugacy class of the inverse elements. Remember that
χR([σ−1]) = χR([σ])∗. Using the conjugacy class of the identity (which has the identity as
its only element), we ﬁnd
⟨[id]|[R]⟩= χR([id])
|Γ|
f[id]
(3.7)
Now, expressing the vector |[id]⟩in terms of the inverse function (3.6), we ﬁnd that
X
[R′]
χR′([id])⟨[R′]|[R]⟩= χR[id]g[R]
(3.8)
– 16 –

JHEP11(2017)121
Comparing the two expressions, we ﬁnd that
g[R] = 1
|Γ|f[id]
(3.9)
so the norm of the kets associated with the representations is independent of the represen-
tation.
Similarly, we can now apply this information to the trivial representation △, which is
such that χ△([σ]) = 1 for all [σ]. We ﬁnd that
⟨△|[σ]⟩=
X
[R]
χR([σ])⟨△|[R]⟩= χ△([σ])⟨△|△⟩= g△
(3.10)
Writing |△⟩in terms of the class vectors, we ﬁnd
⟨△|[σ]⟩= dσ
|Γ|χ△[σ]∗f[σ] = dσ
|Γ|f[σ]
(3.11)
Putting these two together we get that
f[σ] = g△
|Γ|
dσ
(3.12)
So, we ﬁnd that the representations are all normalized to the same value (which we can
choose to be equal to one) and the class function kets are proportional to the inverse of
the degeneracy of the class.
Since we only used the kets |△⟩and |id⟩to normalize everything, we need to check
consistency. This is straightforward. The orthogonality of representation kets becomes
equivalent to the orthogonality of the rows of the character table. The orthogonality of
the conjugacy classes ends up being related to the orthogonality of the columns of the
character table (see [35], pp 17, exercise 2.21).
3.2
Fock space from the symmetric group
At this point, this can be thought of as a curiosity. The reason is that as written, this
exercise should be thought of as a ﬁrst quantized setup. Single string states can be reshuﬄed
via a “Fourier transform” into single D-brane states. We have made no mention of multi-
string states.
This all changes when we consider the symmetric group Sn. As argued in [36, 37], the
conjugacy classes of the symmetric group should be associated with multi-strings, rather
than single strings. Similarly, one can imagine that the representation theory left hand
side should be generically associated with multiple D-branes, rather than a single D-brane.
In essence, when we consider the symmetric group, the theory should be for all practical
purposes second-quantized. This becomes precise when we consider the more general object
generated by the symmetric group Sn for all values of n
H = ⊕n≥0HSn
(3.13)
with the Hilbert space constructed as above. We can now also add (multi-) strings to
a conﬁguration.
Consider a conjugacy class in Sn and a group element g1 ∈Sn that
– 17 –

JHEP11(2017)121
represents it. Similarly, consider another conjugacy class and a group element g2 ∈Sm
that represents it. There is a natural embedding of the product of symmetric groups into
a larger symmetric group µ : Sn × Sm →Sn+m. Here the Sn+m acts as permutations of a
set of n + m elements and the Sn acts only on the ﬁrst n elements, while the Sm acts only
on the last m elements. This gives a natural element of Sn+m for the two group elements,
namely µ(g1 ×g2) ≃µ(g1 ×1)◦µ(1×g2). Now, it is important to notice that this deﬁnes a
unique conjugacy class in Sn+m which is irrespective of the representatives g1, g2 that were
chosen. This is done as follows.
A group element of Sn can be written in a cycle presentation of permutations of the set
{1, . . . n}. As is well known, the conjugacy classes are in one to one correspondence with the
lengths of the cycle decomposition. A conjugacy class thus gives a partition of n = P
s wss
where we have ws cycles of length s. We do this for g1, so that [g1] ≃Q
s[s]ws, where we pick
the cycles of length [s] as generators, and similarly for [g2] ≃Q
s[s]w′
s. With this we ﬁnd that
[g1] ⊗[g2] ≃
Y
s
[s]ws+w′
s ≃[g1 ⊗g2] ≃[g2] ⊗[g1]
(3.14)
which shows that the cycle decomposition is irrespective of the elements of the class that
we pick. We also ﬁnd that the product of conjugacy classes is commutative, and the set is
generated by the primitive cycles of length [s]. We will call [s] := ts so that the set of states
can be thought of as (a particular completion of) the set of polynomials in an inﬁnite set
of variables {ts}. The decomposition of the Hilbert space into the diﬀerent HSn can be
thought of as being graded by n, and the grading is additive on the product we deﬁned. The
product operation we deﬁned is just the product of polynomials when extended linearly.
The degree of [s] is s. We will call this function for a monomial the energy of the state.
A conjugacy class associated to the monomial tw1
1 . . . twk
k
will be said to have w1 particles
of energy 1, w2 particles of energy 2, etc. Because in our construction diﬀerent conjugacy
classes are orthogonal, there are no overlaps between distinct states labeled by diﬀerent
values of wi. This is the most important point where the N →∞limit is taken abstractly.
The most important question for us is to address is how we are going to relate the
inner products of the diﬀerent HSn to each other. There are two routes we can take. The
ﬁrst route is to declare that the irreducible representations of all the symmetric groups
have norm equal to one. This can be twisted by the energy, so an irreducible of energy
n has norm |T|n ≃exp(E log(|T|)). A second route is to assume that the norm of a two
particle state, where the two particles have diﬀerent energy, is the product of the norms
of the corresponding single particle states. This is a factorization condition. This will be
shown to be equivalent to the ﬁrst route after a computation.
To do a computation, we need to ﬁnd both the dimension of the symmetric group
|Sn| = n! and also the number of elements in a conjugacy class dσ (remember we have
labeled these as Q
s[s]ws ≃tw1
1 . . . twk
k
with P
k wkk = n). The number of elements of a
conjugacy class of the symmetric group is known to be given by
dσ =
n!
Q
k wk!kwk =
|Γ|
Q
k wk!kwk
(3.15)
– 18 –

JHEP11(2017)121
from equation (3.12), we ﬁnd that
||tw1
1 . . . twk
k ||2 = n⟨[σ]|[σ]⟩n = n⟨△|△⟩n
|Γ|
dσ
= n⟨△|△⟩n
Y
k
wk!kwk
(3.16)
So, if we choose n⟨△|△⟩n = |T|n, the right hand side becomes equivalent to a norm on a
bosonic Fock space where to each tk we assign a raising operator of norm squared k|T|k.
That is, we associate a raising and a lowering operator pair (a†
k, ak), with commutation
relations
[ak, a†
k] = k|T|k
(3.17)
with all others vanishing. Obviously, the simplest choice is to take |T| = 1. The raising
operator acts by multiplication by tk, namely a†
k →tk, and the adjoint acts by k∂tk. The
inner product can be computed using
⟨g|f⟩=
Z Y
k
dtkd¯tk exp
 
−
X
k
tk¯tk
k
!
¯g(¯t)f(t)
(3.18)
where the normalization factor of the measure is such that
⟨1|1⟩= 1
(3.19)
If we take the factorization condition instead, we ﬁnd that
|tatb| = ab a⟨△|△⟩a b⟨△|△⟩b = ab a+b⟨△|△⟩a+b
(3.20)
for all a, b with a + b constant. This would suggest that
a⟨△|△⟩a b⟨△|△⟩b = a+b⟨△|△⟩a+b
(3.21)
but this only seems to work if a ̸= b and a, b ̸= 0.
With this, one can show that it works for all a, b.
Consider
2⟨△|△⟩2.
By the
naive factorization condition, it is independent of
1⟨△|△⟩1.
From here, we can form
3⟨△|△⟩3 =
2⟨△|△⟩2 1⟨△|△⟩1 uniquely, and similarly
4⟨△|△⟩4 =
3⟨△|△⟩3 1⟨△|△⟩1 =
2⟨△|△⟩2 1⟨△|△⟩2
1. When we get to 5⟨△|△⟩5, there is a consistency condition
5⟨△|△⟩5 = 3⟨△|△⟩3 2⟨△|△⟩2 = 4⟨△|△⟩4 1⟨△|△⟩1
(3.22)
= 2⟨△|△⟩2
2 1⟨△|△⟩1 = 2⟨△|△⟩2 1⟨△|△⟩3
1
(3.23)
Clearing out the common terms, we ﬁnd that 2⟨△|△⟩2 = 1⟨△|△⟩2
1, and one can then easily
show that we get n⟨△|△⟩n = 1⟨△|△⟩n
1 for all other n.
3.3
Physical interpretations
The Hilbert space we have constructed is the Hilbert space of a chiral boson in one di-
mension (again, this is the theory we get when we consider the inﬁnite N limit, and so is
what we wanted). We have a single oscillator of energy k and left moving momentum k for
each k. This is natural considering that in the computation of elliptic genera one builds
– 19 –

JHEP11(2017)121
an extra chiral circle [36]. We have the momentum modes of the chiral boson ﬁeld theory,
but we still need to argue that there is preferred notion of a local ﬁeld that also arises from
this construction. This will be taken up in the next section.
One should also remember that there is a straightforward relation between a chiral
boson ﬁeld theory and edge states in a quantum hall droplet [20]. The relation uses the
theory of symmetric polynomials in many variables to go from traces to Schur polynomi-
als. The Schur functions are associated with representations of the symmetric group Sk
(described by Young tableaux) , and one can directly write these in terms of free fermions.
The same combinatorics appears in the study of half BPS states in N = 4 SYM [16] and
the representation of the physics in terms of droplets made of fermions was explored in
detail in [19]. These droplets are in phase space, and each fermion occupies a ﬁxed area
in phase space. They form an incompressible ﬂuid due to Fermi statistics: one can not
pack more than one fermion in a given unit of area. The Schur functions end up being the
Slater determinant representation of fermion excitations near the Fermi sea.
Surprisingly, the description of half BPS geometries in the gravity dual of N = 4 SYM
is also in terms of droplets: a droplet conﬁguration with speciﬁed shape corresponds to
a particular solution of the supergravity equations of motion [8], as we described in the
previous section. It has also been argued recently that similar physics might control a wide
class of AdS/CFT dual conﬁgurations when one studies elements of the chiral ring that
are extremal [40]. It was this particular observation that led us to try to understand the
problem using group theory of the symmetric group without any particular matrix model
in mind. The map that realizes this correspondence to the group theory assigns a trace to
each cycle for a conjugacy class in the permutation group
Tr( ˜Zℓ) ≃tℓ
(3.24)
where ˜Z can be either an elementary matrix valued ﬁeld (like in N = 4 SYM), or a com-
posite matrix ﬁeld (this would be common in toric ﬁeld theories or some simple orbifolds).
The main reason that this works is that to any conjugacy class of the symmetric group
one naturally associates a multi-trace object constructed from the permutation itself. This
was critical in the computations of [16] that show that Schur functions associated with
diﬀerent Young tableaux are orthogonal. Here we have reversed the arguments: assuming
orthogonality of both Young tableaux and conjugacy class states together leads to a unique
consistency condition that gives precisely a free chiral boson. Thus, in this setup, by con-
struction, we do not have any non-trivial three point functions: this is the sense in which
we are strictly in the N = ∞limit where the string states are free excitations. Usually,
in large N matrix models interactions between particles (or excitations) are suppressed by
1/N, so if the interactions vanish it is equivalent to being at N = ∞. At ﬁnite N there
are overlaps and the traces become algebraically dependent on each other. There is no
Fock space interpretation with an inﬁnitude of oscillators. This is usually interpreted as
a stringy exclusion principle [24]. The counting of states is the same as that of exactly
N diﬀerent oscillators, but they are not the tk traces, because the free oscillator raising
operators would produce orthogonal states.
The free fermions that realize the correspon-
dence for the free ﬁeld that we have here are associated with a system of free fermions for
– 20 –

JHEP11(2017)121
a Cuntz oscillator. The Cuntz oscillator algebra is deﬁned by
β†|n⟩= |n + 1⟩
(3.25)
usually with β|0⟩= 0. For us, we have an inﬁnite sea of fermions, so all we require is that
the set of |n⟩is labeled by integers (both positive and negative). We set by convention
the Fermi-sea energy at n = 0. The Cuntz oscillators appear repeatedly also in the study
of open spin chain dual states to open strings in the AdS/CFT correspondence [41] and
their coherent states are especially important to describe the ground state energies of the
corresponding open spin chains [42, 43]. What we have described here corresponds to the
strict N = ∞limit of the corresponding matrix models.
In a certain sense, the picture we have been advocating above is building a bridge
between matrix string theory and an abstract version of a (holomorphic) matrix model,
in a vein similar to [44], but with very few states to consider. The picture we have is
greatly inspired by the observation that requiring orthogonality of the Young tableaux
states and a large N counting for correlators, at leading order in N produced a result
where the norm of Young tableaux states is independent of the shape of the tableaux and
only depends on the number of boxes [40]. Here we have even removed the large N counting
hypothesis and replaced it by the weaker orthogonality of multi-string states. The fact that
the harmonic oscillators that are constructed in this fashion have the correct statistics to
correctly describe quantum ﬁelds in one dimension is derived from the compatibility of the
two basis of states and the Fourier transform that relates them to each other.
4
D-brane creation operators and constructing local ﬁelds
4.1
The D-brane
It is instructive now to consider the simplest (trivial) representation of the symmetric
group, which we have labeled [△]n in the previous section. This is associated with a Young
tableaux with n boxes and only one row.
|∆⟩n =
. . . n
(4.1)
Using our polynomial formulation, we have that
|△⟩n =
X
−
→
ω ∈p(n)
Y
k
1
kwkwk!(tk)wk
(4.2)
where p(n) := { −→
ω | P
k kωk = n} are the partitions of n and we have used the fact that
all characters are one for the trivial representation. We also have included the explicit
value of the degeneracy of corresponding conjugacy classes in the sum, extracted from
equation (3.15). Notice that this is an equation relating states. In the raising/lowering
operator notation, this state would have been created by
|△⟩n =
X
−
→
ω ∈p(n)
Y
k
1
kwkwk!(a†
k)wk|0⟩
(4.3)
– 21 –

JHEP11(2017)121
which would be equivalent. From here we ﬁnd that
Λn|△⟩n =
X
−
→
ω ∈p(n)
Y
k
(Λk)
k
tk
wk
1
wk!
(4.4)
We notice that apart from the constraint P
k kwk = n, the right hand side represents a
series expression for an exponential function. It is convenient to sum over n and consider
a generating series for these representations, so that we can write
|△; Λ⟩=
∞
X
n=0
Λn|△⟩n =
∞
X
n=0
X
−
→
ω ∈p(n)
Y
k
(Λk)
k
tk
wk
1
wk! = exp
 X
k
Λk tk
k
!
(4.5)
The trivial representations of each Sn correspond to the totally symmetric representations
of the group U(N) with n boxes (as shown in equation (4.1)), and have an interpretation
as a single dual giant graviton [16].
That is, this combinatorial object has an interpretation as a single D-brane in an
AdS5 × S5 geometry. Here, we are stretching the notion of what we mean by a D-brane
to when it has zero size in AdS units. A (dual) giant graviton whose size is of the order of
the AdS geometric scale has an energy of order N which we have sent to inﬁnity. However,
giant gravitons come in a family with an arbitrary value of the energy, which is related to
the size of the D-brane [24]. When we take N →∞we can choose to keep states with
ﬁnite energy that are members of this family and still call them dual giant gravitons. What
we are stressing here is how they arise as a preferred combinatorial object (the simplest
trivial representation of the group) and we are using the label that the ﬁnite N ﬁeld theory
suggests: we are calling it a D-brane.
When we move away from thinking of Λ as formal parameter, and rather think of it
as an actual c-number, the right hand side can be interpreted as a coherent state of the
harmonic oscillators represented by tk. We will now push the idea that a special generating
series of interesting objects should be more than a formal expression and actually have
physical meaning. The reason this is a coherent state is that it is an exponential of a linear
combination of raising operators. We still need to ﬁnd the range of Λ that is appropriate
for this expression.
We can consider the norm of the state
⟨△; Λ|△; Λ⟩=
X
n
(¯ΛΛ)n =
1
1 −¯ΛΛ
(4.6)
and we see that it is convergent for |Λ| < 1. This can be similarly obtained from the
exponential and the gaussian measure (3.18). The proof is instructive. Consider
⟨△; Λ|△; Λ⟩=
Z Y
k
dtk ¯dtk exp
 
−
X
k
tk¯tk
k
!
exp
 X
k
¯Λk ¯tk
k
!
exp
 X
k
Λk tk
k
!
(4.7)
=
Z Y
k
dtk ¯dtk exp
 
−
X
k
(tk −¯Λk)(¯tk −Λk)
k
!
exp
 X
k
Λk ¯Λk
k
!
(4.8)
– 22 –

JHEP11(2017)121
where to arrive at the second line we completed the square. Shifting the integration vari-
ables, we ﬁnd that
⟨△; Λ|△; Λ⟩= exp
 X
k
Λk ¯Λk
k
!
= exp(−log(1 −Λ¯Λ)) =
1
1 −Λ¯Λ
(4.9)
where we have recognized the Taylor series for log(1 −x) in the exponential. If we didn’t
already know that the |△⟩n were orthonormal, the coeﬃcients in the Taylor series that
appear in (4.6) after expanding in (4.9) would have shown that.
The fact that this generating series produces a coherent state for the oscillators is
important in more than one way. First, it shows that the D-brane can be thought of as
a “soliton” of the free ﬁeld theory: a non-dissipating solution of the classical equations of
motion. This is how, in the weak string limit, a D-brane can be thought of as a localized
classical source for string ﬁelds, where away from the D-brane location one has a solution
of the classical equations of motion. This is usually encoded in how diﬀerent boundary
states overlap by considering how closed strings propagate from one boundary state to the
other [45]. Another example when D-branes decay into string ﬁelds can be found in [46].
Since this D-brane state is a coherent state, it is an eigenstate of the lowering operators
represented by (tk)† ≃k∂tk. We ﬁnd that for these states
⟨ak⟩∆;Λ = ⟨(tk)†⟩∆;Λ = Λk,
⟨a†
k⟩∆;Λ = ⟨tk⟩∆;Λ = ¯Λk
(4.10)
This behavior is expected from the collective coordinate treatment in setups at ﬁnite N [40,
48]. In these other approaches, the coherent states in question are described in terms of
Slater determinants of coherent states for generalized oscillator algebras.
The states we have found are also of minimal uncertainty for all the oscillators. This
will become important when we try to describe other classical limits later in the paper.
The next thing that is interesting to compute is the average energy per oscillator in
each one of these states. This is captured by
⟨Ek⟩∆;Λ = ⟨ktk∂tk⟩∆;Λ = (Λ¯Λ)k
(4.11)
so that the expectation value of the energy is
⟨E⟩∆;Λ =
X
k>0
(Λ¯Λ)k =
Λ¯Λ
1 −Λ¯Λ
(4.12)
the energy carried by the state is large in the limit where |Λ| →1, but in this limit the
state becomes non-normalizable. It makes sense to consider states near this limit, where
Λ ≃(1 −ǫ)1/2 exp(iγ) with ǫ inﬁnitesimally small and acting as a cutoﬀ. In that case, the
energy per oscillator degree of freedom goes to one, but this means that each oscillator has
on average low occupation number
⟨ˆNk⟩∆;Λ→exp(iγ) = ⟨Ek⟩∆;Λ→exp(iγ)/k = 1/k.
(4.13)
The excitations are then still a coherent state for all oscillators, and if we cut oﬀthe degrees
of freedom in the UV, we ﬁnd a ﬁnite energy lump determined by the cutoﬀ. The failure
– 23 –

JHEP11(2017)121
of the state to be normalizable is due to the inﬁnitude of modes that can be excited, not
to any one oscillator mode going bad on its own. Also, the amplitudes for the diﬀerent
modes are phase correlated. This is important. The reason is that we want to build a ﬁeld
out of the oscillators ak, a†
k. The geometry where the ﬁelds live should be on a circle (we
have argued that we have the degrees of freedom of a chiral boson in the previous section).
4.2
Field of the brane
The ﬁniteness properties and phase correlations we have found suggest that we can think
of the ﬁeld generated by the D-brane state as being a classical proﬁle everywhere except
at the position of the brane itself.
We will use this intuition to argue that there is a
preferred linear combination of the oscillators that gives nice properties for the ﬁeld proﬁle
in the limit we want. We will posit that the ﬁeld operator take the following hermitian
combination as an ansatz
ˆφ(θ) =
X
k>0
fk[ak exp(−ikθ) + a†
k exp(ikθ)]
(4.14)
where fk is a set of positive numbers.
At this stage, we are simply making an educated
guess as to the form of the operator. A posteriori we will ﬁnd that it is consistent with all
geometric expectations and declare it to have been the correct choice. Although we could
have added phases to fk, the phase correlation of the modes in the preferred D-brane state
we have suggest that we set all the phases equal to each other. Replacing the expectation
values from (4.10) and taking the limit |Λ| →1, we ﬁnd that the proﬁle associated with
the D-brane is given by
φ(θ) = ⟨ˆφ(θ)⟩∆;Λ=exp(iγ) =
X
k>0
fk[exp(ik(γ −θ)) + exp(−ik(γ −θ))]
(4.15)
The phases give (maximal) constructive interference at θ = γ, which we will call the
position of the D-brane. This is why it is important to choose all phases as we did: it
produces the maximum possible constructive interference of the proﬁle at a point. This is
tantamount to saying that we have localized the peak as much as possible. Everywhere
else, the phase sums can cancel enough that the result is ﬁnite. Scale invariance of the
chiral boson suggests that we take fk ≃1/|k|α for some exponent α which is yet to be
determined. If we choose this fk = 1/|k|α, the result can be written in terms of Polylog
functions. We will now argue that if we instead choose fk = 1, or equivalently, α = 0, the
answer becomes extremely simple, and we should therefore choose this value. This choice
will have preferable geometric consequences. We ﬁnd
φ(θ) = ⟨ˆφ(θ)⟩∆;Λ=exp(iγ) =
X
k̸=0
exp(ik(γ −θ)) = 2πδ(γ −θ) −1
(4.16)
That is, the ﬁeld away from the position of the brane becomes constant and has an exactly
ﬂat shape in the tail of the D-brane. We will promote this property to the reason why we
make this choice for the ﬁeld. This is a geometric condition. Because the ﬁeld does not
– 24 –

JHEP11(2017)121
have a mode at k = 0, it is required that
Z 2π
0
dθ φ(θ) = 0
(4.17)
which is veriﬁed readily. This is actually true for any choice of the fk, subject to convergence
at |Λ| < 1. For the particular choice we made, we have a quantization condition on the
area under the δ-function distribution, which is 2π. The energy can also be written simply
in terms of φ(θ). More precisely
E[φ] =
*X
k
a†
kak
+
=
 1
2π
Z
dθ
1
2 : ˆφ(θ)2 :

= 1
2π
Z
dθ
1
2φ(θ)2

(4.18)
where we use the normalization of the modes in (3.17) with |T| = 1. This shows that the
choice for the ﬁeld coeﬃcients in equation (4.14) is also determined by being able to write
a local expression for the energy: a single integral of the ﬁeld and a ﬁnite number of its
derivatives. The rightmost term in (4.18) is the classical contribution to the energy for a
smooth φ(θ).
There is a second natural choice for a ﬁeld.
This is the ﬁeld that is obtained by
considering |Λ| = 1 and looking for the combination of modes that appears in the exponent
of (4.5). The idea is that when we declared the generating function (4.5) to be singled out
by our representation basis and the convergence properties, the limit deﬁned a preferred
combination of modes.
It is convenient to call this ﬁeld χ and deﬁne it to be
ˆχ(θ) =
X
k>0
1
ik exp(ikθ) a†
k + c.c
(4.19)
The factor of i in the denominator is a convention we choose, which gives
|△; Λ →exp(iγ)⟩= : exp(iχ(γ)) : |0⟩
(4.20)
One easily ﬁnds that the ﬁeld χ and the ﬁeld φ are related by
∂θχ(θ) = φ(θ)
(4.21)
so that locality in the sense of χ (in terms of the smooth variable θ) ends up being equivalent
to locality in the sense of φ. Indeed, the ﬁeld χ is what we would usually call the free boson
and the ﬁeld φ is the associated current. The local energy is the standard stress tensor for
the chiral boson. This matches the derivations in [20] very well.
The ﬁeld : exp(iχ(θ)) : is usually thought of as a fermionic ﬁeld written in the bosonized
language (see [47], pp 11, eq. 10.3.10).
4.3
The anti-brane and its ﬁeld
The other natural representation of the symmetric group is the alternating representa-
tion.
This representation is also one dimensional, and the character counts how many
transpositions (modulo 2) are in a group element. For a cycle [s], the sign assigned to it is
sign[s] = (−1)s−1
(4.22)
– 25 –

JHEP11(2017)121
This is multiplicative, meaning that sign[a ◦b] = sign[a]sign[b] . When we consider the
equivalent of equation (4.2), we get that the sum over characters is
|▽⟩n = 1
|Γ|
X
[σ]∈Sn
χ▽([σ])dσ|[σ]⟩=

X
−
→
ω ∈p(n)
Y
k
1
kwkwk!((−1)k−1tk)wk
+
(4.23)
where we used the multiplicative rule on the right hand side. We have labeled the states
with ▽instead of △. In the language of Young diagrams, this representation corresponds
to a single column with n boxes.
|▽⟩n =
...
(4.24)
This also corresponds to a totally antisymmetric representation of U(N) with n indices.
These states correspond to giant graviton states [27] in the AdS/CFT correspondence. The
reason why we are allowed to keep calling them giant gravitons is the same as the one we
used before for dual giant gravitons. They have the same combinatorial structure as large
giant gravitons, but they are elements of the family of states that have ﬁnite energy and
whose energy is not scaling. These can be thought of as the limit of zero size giant gravitons.
We now want to do a similar generating function to the one in (4.5) for these states.
Consider the following
|▽, −Ω⟩=
X
n
Ωn|▽⟩n
(4.25)
=
X
n
X
−
→
ω ∈p(n)
Ωn Y
k
1
kwkwk!((−1)k−1tk)wk
(4.26)
=
X
n
X
−
→
ω ∈p(n)
Y
k
1
wk!
Ωk
k (−1)k−1tk
wk
(4.27)
=
X
n
X
−
→
ω ∈p(n)
Y
k
1
wk!

−(−Ω)k
k
tk
wk
(4.28)
= exp
 
−
X
k
(−Ω)k
k
tk
!
(4.29)
where we have made a sign convention choice in how we wrote Ωin the generating series,
versus how we wrote it in the previous state. We ﬁnd that with this convention
|▽, Λ⟩= exp
 
−
X
k
Λk tk
k
!
(4.30)
so that in the same limit as before we have that
|▽; Λ →exp(iγ)⟩=: exp(−iχ(γ)) : |0⟩
(4.31)
– 26 –

JHEP11(2017)121
which is the other fermion ﬁeld. The natural notion of locality derived from the states
|△; Λ⟩and |▽; Λ⟩are the same. It is now trivial to show that for these new solutions
⟨ˆφ(θ)⟩▽;Λ=exp(iγ) = −
X
k̸=0
exp(ik(γ −θ)) = −2πδ(γ −θ) + 1
(4.32)
There is also a symmetry that sends △↔▽. This is ‘particle-hole’ duality and is imple-
mented by χ(θ) →−χ(θ), and φ(θ) →−φ(θ). In some ﬁnite matrix models built from
microscopic fermionic degrees of freedom, this can be implemented exactly [49]. In bosonic
matrix models it can’t: there are ﬁnite fermions N, and an inﬁnite possibility of states for
each fermion, so that there are inﬁnitely many holes, so the construction of matrix models
usually has this symmetry broken explicitly.
We will call the two families of operators
B±,Λ = exp
 
±
X
k
Λk tk
k
!
(4.33)
acting on any state the D-brane creation operators. That is, up to including : exp(±iχ(γ)) :,
which is non-normalizable.
4.4
Multiple brane states
Consider acting with a D-brane creation operator on a state that already has one D-brane.
We want to show that we naturally get multi D-brane states this way. In the language
of the conformal ﬁeld theory for a free boson, this is implicit in stating that exp(iχ) is
supposed to be a fermion ﬁeld and should be thought of as a soliton. Here we see that the
combinatorics does this work and suggests the fermi statistics of the state.
At the level of the oscillator representation of states, this is straightforward. We can
write
B+,Λ1B+,Λ2|0⟩= exp
 X
k

Λk
1 + Λk
2
 tk
k
!
(4.34)
We easily ﬁnd that this is also a classical state, which results from the superposition of the
two proﬁles of the individual D-branes. The classical ﬁeld is characterized by
⟨(t†
k)⟩∆,Λ1;∆,Λ2 = Λk
1 + Λk
2
⟨tk⟩∆,Λ1;∆,Λ2 = ¯Λk
1 + ¯Λk
2
(4.35)
and
⟨ˆφ(θ)⟩∆,Λ1;∆,Λ2 = 2ℜe

Λ1e−iθ
1 −Λ1e−iθ +
Λ2e−iθ
1 −Λ2e−iθ

(4.36)
Similarly, we can write
B+,Λ1B−,Λ2|0⟩= exp
 X
k

Λk
1 −Λk
2
 tk
k
!
(4.37)
⟨ˆφ(θ)⟩∆,Λ1;▽,Λ2 = 2ℜe

Λ1e−iθ
1 −Λ1e−iθ −
Λ2e−iθ
1 −Λ2e−iθ

(4.38)
– 27 –

JHEP11(2017)121
Notice that if we take Λ1 = Λ2 in the second proﬁle, the ﬁelds cancel. This tells us that
the two types of D-brane states annihilate one another into the vacuum.1
We will now use the D-brane basis (the basis using irreducible representations of Sn),
to better understand how these generating functions behave. We will use Young tableaux
to compute the multi-brane states. The correct multiplication table is governed by the
Littlewood-Richardson coeﬃcients [16] (see also the discussion in [40]). Remember that
|∆⟩n is associated with a tableaux with n boxes in a row. These are the objects that appear
in |△, Λ⟩. We want to compute
B+,Λ1B+,Λ2|0⟩=
X
n,m
Λn
1Λm
2
. . . n ×
. . . m
(4.39)
The multiplication of two of these objects is similar to addition of angular momentum in
U(2), so that
. . . n
×
. . . m
(4.40)
=
. . .
|
{z
}
n+m
+
. . .
|
{z
}
n+m−1
+ · · · +
. . . . . . . . . n
. . . m
(4.41)
where we assume n ≥m in the second line, but we can also have the opposite ordering in
which case we exchange n, m. We see that all states have only two rows in their Young
diagrams. We will group together all diagrams with two rows of lengths r and s with r ≥s.
To ﬁnd the coeﬃcient of these, we need to consider the decomposition r + s = n + m, such
that |n −m| ≤s and to sum over these possibilities. When we perform this sum we obtain
Λr
1Λs
2 + Λr−1
1
Λs+1
2
+ · · · + Λs
1Λr
2 = Λr+1
1
Λs
2 −Λs
1Λr+1
2
Λ1 −Λ2
(4.42)
That is, we can write identically that
(Λ1 −Λ2)B+,Λ1B+,Λ2|0⟩=
X
r≥s

Λr+1
1
Λs
1
Λr+1
2
Λs
2

. . . . . . . . . r
. . . s
(4.43)
where the coeﬃcients are very easily written in terms of determinants. This suggests that
the full set of states with two classical D-branes acting on the vacuum can be interpreted
as a set of fermionic wave functions (Slater determinants), as long as we multiply them on
the left by a Vandermonde determinant made from the Λ parameters. The point is that the
complexity of the coeﬃcients of the tableaux in equation (4.43) is very small. Notice that
even though r ≥s, this implies that r + 1 > s, so the Slater determinants never vanish,
unless we have that Λ1 = Λ2 (this is trivial in the left hand side, as the full ket is multiplied
by Λ1 −Λ2). Notice that if both D-brane states are normalizable, so is their product. The
same arguments work for the product of various D-brane states, but the combinatorics of
1The more precise version of this cancellation is that the OPE expansion of the two fermion ﬁelds
contains the identity.
– 28 –

JHEP11(2017)121
multiplying the Young tableaux are more complicated. The simplest way to understand it
is through the relation between free fermions and formal matrix models for a generalized
oscillator (this is described in [40]).
We can also compute the norm of the state to obtain
||(Λ1 −Λ2)B+,Λ1B+,Λ2|0⟩||2 =
X
r≥s

Λr+1
1
Λs
1
Λr+1
2
Λs
2

2
=
X
r≥s
||Λr+1
1
Λs
2 −Λs
1Λr+1
2
||2
=
X
r≥s
||Λr+1
1
Λs
2||2 +
X
s≥r
||Λr
1Λs+1
2
||2
−
X
r≥s
Λr+1
1
Λs
2¯Λs
1¯Λr+1
2
−
X
s≥r
Λr
1Λs+1
2
¯Λs+1
1
¯Λr
2
=
X
r,s
||Λr
1Λs
2||2 −Λr
1Λs
2¯Λs
1¯Λr
2
=
1
1 −||Λ1||2
1
1 −||Λ2||2 −
1
1 −Λ1¯Λ2
1
1 −Λ2¯Λ1
where we have relabeled r, s in some of the sums in the second line, and next we add and
subtract the r + 1 = s and s + 1 = r contribution to obtain unrestricted sums that can be
evaluated explicitly on the last line. This expression is equal to
||(Λ1 −Λ2)B+,Λ1B+,Λ2|0⟩||2 = |||∆, Λ1⟩||2|||∆, Λ2⟩||2 −⟨∆, Λ2|∆, Λ1⟩⟨∆, Λ1|∆, Λ2⟩(4.44)
after we recognize the result (4.6) and we think of Λ, ¯Λ as independent variables. This
results in the typical norm for two-particle states in fermion systems: the product of the
norms minus the exchange contribution.
The multiplication rules for two B−operators will give a similar result, but with
Young tableaux with two columns, rather than two rows.This follows from the φ →−φ
symmetry, which ﬂips tableaux along the main diagonal. In the language of [27] this would
be a multiplication of two subdeterminant operators.
The other example with two branes
is what happens when we multiply B+,Λ1 and B−,Λ2. This is the most interesting example
because one can get a cancellation between the two. It is instructive to see how this comes
about from multiplying the corresponding Young tableaux, as follows
. . . n
×
...
m
=
. . . n
...
m
+
. . . n
...
m
(4.45)
and to each of these we associated the coeﬃcient Λn
+,1(−Λ−,2)m. Now, we only get two
possible tableaux on the right hand side. If we ﬁx the Young diagram to have r boxes
on the ﬁrst row and s boxes on the ﬁrst column, we get by summing over possibilities
Λr
1(−Λ2)s−1 + Λr−1
1
(−Λ2)s = Λr−1
1
(−Λ2)s−1(Λ1 −Λ2), except in the case of no boxes,
– 29 –

JHEP11(2017)121
where we get 1. That is, we ﬁnd that
B+,Λ1B−,Λ2|0⟩= 1 +
X
r≥1,s≥1
Λr−1
1
(−Λ2)s−1(Λ1 −Λ2)
. . . r
...
s
(4.46)
and now the right hand side simpliﬁes if we divide by (Λ1 −Λ2) (rather than when we
multiply by it). If we compute the norm of the state (when dividing by (Λ1−Λ2)) we get that


B+,Λ1B−,Λ2|0⟩
Λ1 −Λ2


2
=
1
||Λ1 −Λ2||2 + ||△, Λ1⟩|2||▽, Λ2⟩|2
(4.47)
and apart from the ﬁrst term, it shows that the two types of fermionic “particles” are
distinguishable. In this setup, when Λ1 →Λ2, the ﬁrst term develops a pole. That is, the
1 dominates the norm of the state, but this can be subtracted if we are careful, and then
we can get a smooth two particle state in the limit.
Formally, when we consider a state |ψ⟩, which results from applying various B± oper-
ators, we can identify the expectation values as supertraces of a complex supermatrix
⟨ψ|ak|ψ⟩=
X
Λk
+i −
X
j
Λk
−j = Str




Λ+k ...
0
. . . . . . . . . . .
0
... Λ−k



= Str[Λk]
(4.48)
where we identify the diﬀerent values Λ+,−with the corresponding eigenvalues. The values
of Λ are then interpreted as collective coordinates for the D-brane states. The interesting
prefactor of the wave functions where we multiply by
Y
i<j
(Λ+,i −Λ+,j)
Y
i<j
(Λ−,i −Λ−,j)
Y
(Λ+,i −Λ−,j)−1
(4.49)
is a super-Vandermonde determinant.
The main conclusion is that multi D-brane states act like fermions and many compu-
tations can be written compactly using (super) traces and (super)-determinants.
5
Free fermions and the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule
We see that it is rather helpful to be able to go from the conjugacy class basis to the repre-
sentation basis (Young tableaux basis) eﬃciently. Therefore it makes sense to understand
how to compute the characters χR(σ) more precisely in order to be able to make progress.
The main tool to do so is the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule, as described in appendix A. This
gives a recursive way to compute the characters of the symmetric group. We will now see
that this rule is essentially encoding the fact that the tableaux states correspond to free
fermions.
We will prove this fact now. To do so, let us analyze the main result of the appendix,
where the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule can be rewritten as an operator equation in the
– 30 –

JHEP11(2017)121
Hilbert space of states
s∂ts|R⟩=
X
hooks of length s
(−1)fhook| ˜Rhook⟩
(5.1)
where fhook is the number of rows spanned by the hook, minus one, and ˜Rhook is the
Young tableaux R with the skew hook corresponding to the hook that has been singled out
removed. A skew hook is a set of boxes at the edge of the tableaux whose removal produces
an allowed tableaux, and they are in one to one correspondence with regular hooks (see
appendix A).
Remember that s∂ts ≃as is the lowering operator of the mode s in the Fock space.
This equation above can also be read as follows
⟨˜R|as|R⟩= (−1)fhook
(5.2)
or taking adjoints
⟨R|a†
s| ˜R⟩= (−1)fhook
(5.3)
where | ˜R⟩is a particular diagram appearing in the sum with one hook removed.
For
instance, consider the state corresponding to the representation given by
|R⟩=
(5.4)
We could apply the lowering operator a3. Equation (5.1) gives
a3
=
−
(5.5)
We could then dot this with the state given by
| ˜R⟩=
(5.6)
And we ﬁnd
⟨˜R|a3|R⟩= −1 = (−1)1
(5.7)
as expected.
We will now show how this arises using free fermion intuition. Proving equation (5.2)
is equivalent to proving equation (5.1), which in turn gives a proof of the Murnaghan-
Nakayama rule.
We need to think of what a†
s is doing in terms of the eigenvalue representation (the
fermions in Matrix models). The idea is that to each eigenvalue of an inﬁnite matrix we
associate a Cuntz oscillator pair βℓβ†
ℓ= 1 (which commute with each other for diﬀerent
ℓ) and we will treat these eigenvalues as Fermions (see [40] for details on how to build
fermionic systems from general oscillators). The operator
a†
s =
∞
X
ℓ=0
(β†
ℓ)s = Tr((β†)s)
(5.8)
– 31 –

JHEP11(2017)121
is a trace of the powers of the raising operator β† thought of as a matrix. The ground state
of the multiple particle system • is deﬁned by the Slater determinant
• ≃lim
N→∞| −1/2⟩| −3/2⟩. . . | −(2N −1)/2⟩antisymm
(5.9)
where we have set the Fermi sea at energy zero, and all the (inﬁnite tower of) negative
energy states are occupied. If all the |j⟩are orthonormal, the procedure of antisymmetriza-
tion gives a normalization factor in front of the state with an N = ((N +1)!)−1/2 to obtain a
normalized state. This is common to all states in what follows. Pictorally, we will represent
our ground state as
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
(5.10)
Notice we have chosen to label the energy of each particle at half integers, rather than
ﬁlling the Fermi sea to zero and having the particles occupy integer energies. We did this
because it makes the particle/hole duality more explicit and symmetric. This is simply a
convention and everything would follow in the same way if all particle energies were shifted
by 1/2, as it is always energy diﬀerences that are measured.
A complete basis of states is given by
|{n}⟩≃lim
N→∞|n1⟩|n2⟩. . . |nN⟩antisymm
(5.11)
with n1 > n2 > n3 > · · · > nN, half integers, and for all suﬃciently large j we require that
nj = −2j−1
2 .
We will now show how to go directly from one of these states to a Young tableaux
representation, which we will associate with it.
Consider the numbers given by rj =
nj −n0
j = nj −( 1
2 −j), e.g. r1 = n1 −(−1
2), r2 = n2 −(−3
2). These numbers will give the
diﬀerences between the particles excited positions and their ground state position. We can
check easily that ri −ri+1 = ni −ni+1 −1 ≥0, since the ni are strictly decreasing integers
and moreover that ri = 0 for suﬃciently large i. We assign to this set a Young diagram
with rows of length r1, . . . rs for all the rk that are diﬀerent from zero. This is an allowed
tableaux because the integers are non-increasing. Details of the pictorial representation
of this assignment can be found in appendix B. We can clearly invert this map, because
knowing ri is equivalent to knowing the ni. Now, instead of |{n}⟩we use the tableaux | ˜R⟩.
Now we act with a†
s = Tr((β†)s) on | ˜R⟩and get that
a†
s| ˜R⟩∝lim
N→∞
N
X
ℓ=1
|n1⟩|n2⟩. . . |nℓ−1⟩|nℓ+ s⟩|nℓ+1⟩. . . |nN⟩antisymm
(5.12)
– 32 –

JHEP11(2017)121
If the state has two of the nj equal to each other, the antisymmetrization procedure will
remove the term from the sum. Now, we need to check if the new state has the ns in
decreasing order or not. If it does not, we need to reshuﬄe the ns, by moving the nℓ+s
to the left until we get a proper order. We do this by transposition of nearest neighbors,
moving nℓ+ s as we go along. Each such transposition is an exchange of two fermions, so
it costs a factor of (−1). The sign we get is (−1)#transpositions.
As an example of how this works, we would have
a†
2 (|5/2⟩|3/2⟩| −1/2⟩| −7/2⟩| −9/2⟩. . . |nN⟩antisymm)
= |9/2⟩|3/2⟩| −1/2⟩| −7/2⟩| −9/2⟩. . . |nN⟩antisymm
−|7/2⟩|5/2⟩| −1/2⟩| −7/2⟩| −9/2⟩. . . |nN⟩antisymm
+ |5/2⟩|3/2⟩| −1/2⟩| −3/2⟩| −9/2⟩. . . |nN⟩antisymm
−|5/2⟩|3/2⟩| −1/2⟩| −5/2⟩| −7/2⟩. . . |nN⟩antisymm
(5.13)
Notice the second and fourth terms have negative signs because we had to perform
one transposition on each to ﬁnd a state with the proper ordering. Notice also that we
dropped all terms that would have had two ni’s that are equal to each other and so would
go away upon antisymmeterization. Now we want to think about how the transpositions
aﬀected the Young diagrams these states correspond to.
Because various of the ni have been moved to the right, we ﬁnd that for these that have
moved we get that nnew
i+1 = nold
i
, so rnew
i+1 = nold
−1+i −(−i) = rold
i
+ 1. That is, in the Young
diagram we have moved the row i to the i+1 row and added one extra box to the right (this
is equivalent to moving the corner of the row one to the right and one down). There is still
the one that got moved to the left. This one row was moved upward by #transpositions,
and each such transposition makes the corresponding row we are tracking shorter by one
(this is the opposite of the +1 to the right that we have found for the others). The net
eﬀect is that we have added just s boxes to the Young diagram and gotten a normalized
state for each ℓthat is allowed. That is, we get that
a†
s| ˜R⟩=
X
hooks
(−1)#transpositions|Rallowed⟩
(5.14)
The motion to the right and down produces a skew hook of length s added to the original
tableaux (we just color in the new boxes in a diﬀerent color than those of ˜R). The sign we
ﬁnd is the same sign that is assigned by the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule. The number of
transpositions is the number of rows that have changed minus one!
As a simple example consider a†
5
.
What does this correspond to in the Fermi sea picture of appendix B? We have 5 units
of energy we are adding and there are several options we have for where to put them. The
– 33 –

JHEP11(2017)121
state we are starting with is
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
(5.15)
We could imagine giving all the energy to the already excited particle. This gives
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
(5.16)
which we know corresponds to a totally symmetric diagram with 8 boxes.
However, we could have made a diﬀerent choice and excited the top particle out of the
fermi sea. This would give
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
(5.17)
Notice that to get to this position, we had to pass the already excited particle (we had to
perform a transposition), and therefore had to pick up a minus sign. We ﬁnd, then, that
the negative sign, which previously was simply a part of the MN rule, actually encodes the
exchange statistics of fermions.
– 34 –

JHEP11(2017)121
Carrying on, we could imagine exciting the second particle from the fermi sea, but we
know this should not be allowed by the Pauli exclusion principle:
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
(5.18)
If we think about this in terms of Young tableau, we see that this would have corresponded
to a diagram that is not allowed. Speciﬁcally, it would have corresponded to something of
the form
(5.19)
We know that this is not an allowed diagram and that fact encodes the exclusion principle.
The end result is that
a†
5
=
−
+
−
+
(5.20)
The outcome of this computation is that
⟨R|a†
s| ˜R⟩= (−1)#transpositions = (−1)fhook
(5.21)
as we wanted to prove. Moreover, the sign of the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule is nothing
other than the Fermi statistics. The boxes colored in blue are exactly the skew hooks that
can be added to the original tableaux. These are always at the border of the tableaux such
that adding them produces an allowed tableaux.
The upshot is that rather than trying to compute the χR(σ) directly, we compute the
action of the ts and its adjoints on the basis of Young tableaux (the D-brane basis). This
algebraic action is simple and will let us establish a lot of facts in the next sections.
6
Multi-edge geometries: new classical limits with diﬀerent topologies
In this section we will think of the classical ﬁeld φ(θ) as a displacement of the geometric
interface between two ﬂuids, made of particles and holes. This is the main viewpoint in
treating the system as a set of free fermions as exempliﬁed in the description of the quantum
hall eﬀect [20]. This is a geometric interpretation that also appears naturally in studying
bubbling solutions [8], where the two ﬂuids in question arise as the two possible values of
– 35 –

JHEP11(2017)121
a function on a plane that give rise to a regular BPS geometry in ten dimensions. Some of
the treatment here follows the previous work by the authors [13].
Let us start with a simple identity for the classical energy of a conﬁguration, where we
use
E[φ] = 1
2π
Z
dθ 1
2 φ(θ)2 = 1
2π
Z
dθ
"Z φ(θ)≥0
0
h dh −
Z −φ(θ)>0
0
(−h) dh
#
(6.1)
That is, we introduced an auxiliary variable h, whose limits of integration represent the
ﬁeld, and divided the coordinate θ into the regions φ(θ) ≥0 and the regions φ(θ) < 0. This
makes sense in the classical theory for smooth functions, but not quite in the quantum the-
ory. The ﬁrst region is associated with moving particles into spaces that had been occupied
by holes, and the second one is associated with moving holes where there were particles.
Both particles and holes are conserved because
R
φ(θ) dθ = 0. We want to associate a
function with this change of occupation, that takes the value +1 when particles occupy a
hole state, and takes the value −1 when holes occupy previously occupied particle states.
The function should otherwise vanish. This function is the relative density of particles
with respect to the ground state ˜ρ(θ, h) = ρ+(θ, h)−ρ0
+(θ, h). It can also be symmetrically
constructed from the hole density with few modiﬁcations. This density ﬁeld is mostly fea-
tureless except for the edges where it changes values. These edges represent the ﬁeld φ(θ).
The energy can then be expressed as
E[φ] = 1
2π
ZZ
˜ρ(θ, h) h dh dθ
(6.2)
Notice that this formula is very similar to (2.17). The main diﬀerence is that in (2.17) one
is allowed to have arbitrary regions with ρ ̸= 0, while in (6.2) we have a description not
only with ﬁxed topology, but also with a unique height for the boundary between holes
and particles for each θ. The ﬁeld φ is given by
φ(θ) = −
Z
dh h ∂h˜ρ(θ, h)
(6.3)
This uses the fact that ρ can be written as Heaviside step functions whose derivative is a
delta function, precisely at the height of the droplet. The contribution at h = 0 vanishes.
Alternatively, we can integrate by parts to ﬁnd that
φ(θ) =
Z
˜ρ(θ, h) dh
(6.4)
and the conservation of particles and holes can be expressed as
ZZ
˜ρ(θ, h) dθ dh = 0
(6.5)
Basically, we are expressing the states as pictures on a two dimensional cylinder.
We
will use this identity together with previous observations (particularly equation (4.16)) to
understand how new classical limits can appear from diﬀerent quantum states that are not
classical in the oscillator representation.
– 36 –

JHEP11(2017)121
6.1
Fixed energy single D-brane state
Let us start with a single D-brane state, but instead of considering the coherent states (4.5),
we want to consider a state of the form |△⟩n for a ﬁxed n: a single D-brane with ﬁxed
energy, and we want to think of it formally as a superposition of non-normalizable states
|△, exp(iγ)⟩by doing a Fourier transform. The state |△⟩n is an eigenstate of the momentum
operator, so it is translation invariant. Because the state is a superposition of classical
states, it is not a classical state with respect to the usual variables a†
k, ak any longer. For
example, it does not factorize into a product of coherent states because it has a ﬁxed energy
and it is not in the vacuum. Indeed, it is possible to show that in this state ⟨ak⟩= ⟨a†
k⟩= 0,
yet the energy is not zero (as one would conclude for coherent states). The naive classical
state we would associate with this proﬁle is the ground state. Because in the end the
corresponding state is not a coherent state, we will be interested eventually in characterizing
to what extent it violates the properties of the coherent state. For example, if a state has
minimal uncertainty then it is a coherent state. Conversely, a non-trivial uncertainty serves
as a measure of how much the state diﬀers from a coherent state. Similarly, a coherent
state is a product state ( a pure state mode per mode). Entanglement between the modes
measures to what extent the mode per mode quantum state is not pure. We will take the
problem of measuring these later in the paper.
What we want to do is we want to ﬁnd an alternative classical description of this
particular state so that when we insert the right value of ˜ρ(θ, h) in equation (6.2), we get
the exact correct energy for the state. We want to declare that this state can be classical
as well, even if it is not a coherent state of the original variables. Our goal is to come up
with a prescription for how to do this consistently.
Moreover, we want the relative density to be translation invariant, so ˜ρ is independent
of θ. To be classical, it should take the same prescribed nominal values from before ˜ρ =
+1, −1, 0. In principle, a value in between can be obtained from statistically averaging
states (a density matrix state rater than a pure state). Those will not be treated as classical
states but as statistical states. Here, we want the state to be pure, so no averaging should
be performed.
Now, let us look precisely at (4.16). The idea behind building the new classical solution
is that acting with a D-brane state lowers the level of φ by a prescribed amount: −1 in our
conventions, and the area under the delta function is identiﬁed with the amount of area
that a single D-brane (particle) occupies. We need to move this occupied area somewhere
else, but we want to leave the lowering of the level interface exactly as the −1 demands:
this is after all the classical ﬁeld everywhere else away from the δ function distribution.
Because of translation invariance, we should add horizontal strips with ˜ρ = 1 to the picture
in order to conserve area. Since we are acting with a single D-brane, this horizontal strip
should be connected (a single object), and of width one because of area conservation. We
are building this picture by hand, but we are inspired by the description of states in [8].
To match the energy of the state, there is only one place where we can put the strip: the
topmost edge of the strip should be at height n.
If we use equation (6.4), we ﬁnd that the ﬁeld φ(θ) vanishes, just as expected from
the expectation values of the quantum state. However, when we analyze it from the point
– 37 –

JHEP11(2017)121
n
0
2π
Figure 3. The black and white LLM plane drawing corresponding to a D-brane with ﬁxed energy n.
of view of (6.3) we realize that the expectation value of the ﬁeld vanishes by adding three
contributions
φ =
Z
dh h (δ(h −n) −δ(h −n + 1) + δ(h + 1)) = n −(n −1) −1
(6.6)
one from each of the edges of the ρ density. That is, we should think of the ﬁeld φ(θ)
essentially as becoming a multi-valued function of θ, and the expectation value of the ﬁeld
is obtained by summing over these values with signs. We have gone from one well deﬁned
classical edge to three. This should be thought of as a topology transition. Notice that
the superposition of states that gave rise to the state we want can be performed for ﬁnite
values of Λ as well. In this interpretation, superpositions of classical coherent states with
one topology can give rise to a topology change.
Notice that this new state is macroscopically diﬀerent from each of the states that is
used to make it, even statistically. For example, all the coherent states have ˜ρ(θ, h) ≥0
strictly non-increasing as a function of h when h ≥0. So when we take a classical statistical
average of these states, this property should still hold.
The new ˜ρ does not have this
property.
If for all original classical states we assign the same topology where the edge is a circle,
then we ﬁnd that there is no operator measurement in the Hilbert space that can distinguish
the strip from the coherent states [13]. The argument is by contradiction. It proceeds as
follows: suppose ﬁrst that all coherent states are associated with a ﬁxed (trivial) topology.
Imagine now that such an operator exists. The operator should be such that all states with a
trivial topology have the same eigenvalue. We can imagine building one such operator if we
simply count the total number of edges to characterize the topology. We then get the same
number for all coherent states: 1 (because they are described by a single height function),
and so we are describing the identity operator. The strip topology state is a superposition
of these, so the operator should evaluate to 1 as well, which clearly fails to count the
number of edges appropriately. Therefore, there is no such topology measuring operator.
This means that topological type should be associated with details of a particular
classical approximation of a state, and not with measurement of an operator. Notice that
at this stage we have made no reference to entanglement as a source for topology changes [9,
11]. We are also stating that the set of classical states is even more overcomplete than
regular coherent states. That there might be an overcompleteness that exceeds the standard
– 38 –

JHEP11(2017)121
overcompleteness of coherent states has been hinted at in [51] for situations involving the
interior of a black hole. It was also argued there (following [52, 53]) that gravitational
physics requires state dependence, which implies that gravitational physics can not be
encoded in operators. These works, in some sense, already assume that the ER = EPR
conjecture is true [11], so that non-trivial entanglement measures a topology change. As
is well known, entanglement is not an operator measurement in Hilbert space, although it
can be computed in simple enough setups.
Back to our main discussion, since the strip state is not a coherent state, one can
presume it is a state with larger uncertainty on each oscillator. We can actually compute
these uncertainties using the techniques developed in section 5. We will see later that the
spirit of (6.6) can be made precise for a large number of quantum states in the ﬁeld theory,
and the microscopic quantum ﬁeld φ can be written as a sum with signs of other eﬀective
ﬁelds that appear as quantizations of small deviations away from a particular multi-strip
conﬁguration that should be thought of as a ‘ground state’ classical conﬁguration with a
coherent state excitation of its collective coordinates.
Let us ﬁnish analyzing this one conﬁguration at a large but ﬁnite energy n. The Young
diagram describing the state has n boxes and is completely horizontal.
|∆⟩n =
. . . n
(6.7)
We can evaluate the expectation values of the mode number operators Es = a†
sas, ˆNs =
s−1a†
sas by the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule (see appendix A) in a straightforward fashion
n⟨∆|a†
sas|∆⟩n = n−s⟨∆|∆⟩n−s =
(
1 if s ≤n
0 Otherwise
(6.8)
so the average energy per mode is constant up to mode n where it cuts oﬀabruptly. The
average occupation number per mode s is 1/s, exactly as in equation (4.13). This shows
why the state is a very close approximation to a regularized “fermion ﬁeld state.”
It also makes sense to ask which of the states |∆, Λ⟩is the best approximation to |∆⟩n.
The normalized probability amplitude to go from one to the other is
n⟨∆|∆; Λ⟩= Λnp
1 −Λ¯Λ
(6.9)
So that
|n⟨∆|∆; Λ⟩|2 = (¯ΛΛ)n(1 −Λ¯Λ)
(6.10)
This is maximized for
Λ¯Λ =
n
n + 1
(6.11)
For this value of Λ¯Λ, we would ﬁnd that the energy of the best coherent state approximation
to the state to be exactly n, the energy of the state. For large n, the size of the overlap is
of order (en)−1 where e is Euler’s constant. It is also easy to check the equations as = as
1
for these states, just as expected from the fact that all the coherent states that can be
superposed to obtain the state satisfy them.
– 39 –

JHEP11(2017)121
This means that the state |∆⟩n should be thought of as an overlap of order n approx-
imately orthogonal coherent states. That is roughly the number of states that would be
needed to get the probabilities P
i |n⟨∆|∆; Λi⟩| to add up to order one: what we need in
order to say that we closely approximate the state |∆⟩n.
One can use this result to state that a superposition of a large number of states in
quantum gravity might have very diﬀerent properties (even diﬀerent topology) than any of
the individual states that make up the system. This is a result that has been argued quite
eﬀectively in [54], where the goal was to show that entanglement entropy can be thought
of as an operator for a suﬃciently small superposition of classical states, but not when we
take the limit.
One can do a similar analysis with a single hole state of ﬁxed energy |▽⟩n and the
results are very similar.
Now, we can also evaluate the quantities
n⟨∆|asa†
s|∆⟩n = ⟨(as −⟨as⟩)(a†
s −⟨a†
s⟩)⟩= s + ⟨a†
sas⟩= s + 1
(6.12)
for s ≤n.
These can be thought of as the net quantum uncertainty of the solution
(including the ground state uncertainty, which is s). This shows that the state has low
uncertainty (mode per mode) and can therefore be interpreted classically.
6.2
More general one stripe geometries
Now we will turn our attention to other states that have a similar interpretation. These are
“translation invariant condensates of branes”. The idea is to look at states whose Young
diagram looks as follows
|□L,M⟩=
. . .L
... ...... ...
M
. . .
(6.13)
That is, a rectangular Young diagram with L columns and M rows.
We can visualize this state in the fermion picture (assuming L > M) as follows
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
M
n
M
n
o
(L −M)
(6.14)
where there is a gap of size L between the ﬁlled sea and the excitation, and then the
excitation has width M (this corresponds to M ﬁlled states). This is natural from identiﬁ-
cations in the ﬁgure 8 of [8] . These states are also translation invariant and share many of
the properties of the previous state |△n⟩, which would correspond to |□n,1⟩. The natural
identiﬁcation with states in the droplet picture is to extend the representation (6.14) to
a stripe conﬁguration where the holes and ﬁlled states become extended on an interval
– 40 –

JHEP11(2017)121
M
n
M
n
o
(L −M)
0
2π
Figure 4. The black and white LLM plane drawing corresponding to a rectangular Young tableaux
with L × M boxes.
(0, 2π). The gap between the ﬁlled regions is of width L, and the ﬁlled top region is of
width M. The corresponding LLM droplet picture is shown below.
Since these states are of ﬁxed energy and a†
s, as change the energy, we also have that
⟨as⟩LM = ⟨a†
s⟩LM = 0. Again, if this were a classical state in the usual classical limit of
regular coherent states we would ﬁnd that it should correspond to the vacuum. We want
to interpret this state also as a classical state, with a black and white pattern as described.
The conﬁguration now has three edges: one at the very topmost of the most excited state,
one (anti-) edge where the gap ends, and one more edge where the inﬁnitely deep sea ends.
We use the labeling edge for an edge where the ﬁlled states are below and the empty states
above. We will use the label anti-edge for the opposite set, where the empty sites are below
and occupied sites are above. The energy of this state is LM.
What we call the ﬁeld φ again becomes multi-valued, with one contribution from each
(anti-) edge. The vanishing of the (zero mode of the ) ﬁeld is governed by adding three
contributions
φ =
Z
dh h (δ(h −L) −δ(h −(L −M)) + δ(h + M)) = L −(L −M) −M
(6.15)
very similar to (6.6).
6.3
Excitations of striped geometries
In general, we expect that we could start with one of these translationally invariant striped
geometries and deform each edge independently, As shown schematically below.
Recall that the energy is given by
E[φ] = 1
2π
ZZ
˜ρ(θ, h) h dh dθ
(6.16)
Further, let us recall that φ ≃h on the edge, while ˜ρ = 1, 0, −1. We want to consider
small deformations of each height, keeping the local density at nominal values, and the
area of each region ﬁxed. This is formalizing the idea that the ﬁeld φ becomes multivalued,
with φ(θ) the height at each (anti) edge. The total ﬁeld sums over these contributions
φ(θ) = φ1(θ) + φ2(θ) −˜φ1(θ). Here, we indicate the ﬁelds in order from the top down,
with ˜φ representing the anti-edge ﬁelds. To keep the area of each region ﬁxed, we require
– 41 –

JHEP11(2017)121
0
2π
Figure 5. A schematic depicting possible independent deformations of each edge of an LM state.
that for each ﬁeld
R
dθ δφi =
R
dθ δ ˜φi = 0, and we can substitute in the energy as an area
integral to ﬁnd that
E[φ] = 1
2π
X
i
Z
dθ(φi + ˜φi)
2
(φi −˜φi) = 1
2π
X
i
Z
dθ1
2((δφi)2 −(δ ˜φi)2) + ELM
(6.17)
We ﬁnd that the energy splits into a (local) sum over ﬂuctuations of each edge indepen-
dently, but the ones associated with ˜φ have a negative sign. This is an indication that the
reference state |□L,M⟩is not the ground state. The ﬁelds ˜φ can be thought of as ghosts
(in the sense of negative energy states, not negative norm states). In the paper [18], such
states are called counter-gravitons. The ﬁelds φ(i) and ˜φ(i) will be the collective excitations
of the conﬁguration.
What we have done is formalize the suggestion of [18] that makes φ decompose linearly
into pieces that work on each (anti-)edge independently. Now, we can take the Fourier
transform to obtain the mode decomposition, as in [13].
We ﬁnd that
a†
s = b(1)†
s
+ b(2)†
s
−c(1)
s
(6.18)
where the b(i) are excitations of the edges, and the c(i) modes are excitations of the anti-
edges. We need to explain this equation. The mode a†
s increases the energy by s units.
This is the equation of motion of the mode a†
s. The modes b(1)†
s
, b(2)†
s
also increase the
energy by the same amount (which is equal to the momentum of the mode). The lowering
mode for excitations of the anti edge destroys (−s) units of energy, so it acts in the same
way to increase the energy. This is the only way to make the equations consistent with
energy conservation and with a linear expression for the modes a†
s in terms of the collective
excitations of the state |□LM⟩.
As long as we can show that the b, c have the correct
commutation relations, we ﬁnd that the equation (6.18) indicates that the UV ﬁelds (those
that are canonical modes of the chiral free ﬁeld) are related by a Bogolubov transformation
to the collective ﬁelds (which we are calling the IR theory). It is not a complete Bogolubov
transformation, because such transformations preserve the number of oscillators. The linear
transformation can be completed to a full Bogolubov transformation if we add additional
orthogonal ﬁelds to the as that are made of linear combinations of the b, c modes (we will
expand on this idea in the next section).
– 42 –

JHEP11(2017)121
The important point is that equation (6.18) is an approximation to the ﬂuctuations
about the state. It is clear that if the ﬁelds φ(i) get too large that the edges will collide
changing the topology. Our purpose right now is to actually derive this transformation from
ﬁrst principles by analyzing the physics of the state |□LM⟩independent of the geometric
intuition.
We want to show that the decomposition can actually be derived from the
combinatorial structure of the full Hilbert space of states.
The reference vacuum state |□LM⟩is deﬁned by b|□LM⟩= c|□LM⟩= 0. We will call an
excitation a classical conﬁguration if it is a coherent state excitation of the low lying modes
of b(i) and c(i), assuming that they have canonical commutation relations. This can be de-
rived semiclassically by following [14], but again, it does not explain what to do when the φ
get large, so the commutation relations are approximately true on a sector of low amplitude.
Our goal now is to construct the operators b, c explicitly in the quantum theory and
show that they have the correct (canonical) commutation relations when acting on a par-
ticular subspace of the Hilbert space of states, so that the equation (6.18) is indeed a
Bogolubov transformation. To do this, the results of section 5 and appendix A are essen-
tial. This is the point where we are able to improve the discussion in [18] substantially
because we will have no guesswork. Moreover, we will be able to understand the cutoﬀs in
ﬁeld space implicitly and to study the cutoﬀdependence of various quantities.
The idea is to consider nearby excited states relative to |□L,M⟩, where, by nearby, we
mean young tableaux states that diﬀer from |□L,M⟩by a few boxes. This is depicted in
equation (6.19).
|R⟩=
L
... ............... ...
M
(6.19)
The states |R⟩are those that diﬀer from the reference state |□L,M⟩by adding (few) boxes
in the corners marked by blue and green, and removing (few) boxes in the corner marked
by red. Each of these can be done independently at large L, M. What this means is that
the Hilbert space of nearby states factorizes into
Hnearby ≃Hblue ⊗Hgreen ⊗Hred
(6.20)
Now, each of Hblue, Hgreen, Hred can be written as a small Young diagram. For Hblue and
Hgreen this is pretty obvious. For Hred all we need to do is rotate the empty corners marked
in red by (180)o and we get a proper Young diagram.
Relative to the reference state, the Young diagrams with blue and green boxes will
have norm one, and so will the diagram with antiboxes. This is special to the original
theory being described with Young diagrams states that all have the same norm.2 Now,
we can do the Fourier transform from Young diagrams to a Fock space description with
2This is easy to modify for theories of generalized free fermions as in [40] because the norms will factorize
for each diﬀerent color of Young diagram. See also [50] and references therein for how to compute energies
of excitations in the special case of N = 4 SYM. This is not essential for this paper.
– 43 –

JHEP11(2017)121
canonical raising and lowering operators. This is essentially due to the uniqueness of the
relations discussed in section 3. For each of these, we can apply the results of the previous
section and the appendix A. We ﬁnd that
⟨R|a†
s| ˜R⟩= (−1)fhook
(6.21)
as long as the skew hook is an allowed transition from ˜R to R with s boxes. We have a
similar expression for the other colored operators. The one diﬀerence for the red boxes is
that as the red diagram is growing, the original tableaux is being chipped away, but this
is done by a skew hook that is at the interface of the red tableaux and the reference state:
it is also an allowed skew hook of length s for the complement of the red tableaux. These
are the operators that we have identiﬁed as b(i)†
s
and b(i)
s , and for the antiboxes these are
the c(i)†, c(i) operators. Because the Hilbert spaces factorize we obtain the following exact
commutation relations
[b(i)
s , b(j)†
t
] = δijsδst
(6.22)
[c(i)
s , c(j)†
t
] = δijsδst
(6.23)
and all other commutators vanish. These commutation relations are true only when eval-
uated in states that are suﬃciently close to the reference state, so that the boxes and
anti-boxes do not interfere with each other. This is implicit in the full discussion, but it is
worth emphasizing that these equations are not true for arbitrary excitations of the original
system, only so in the eﬀective ﬁeld theory of nearby conﬁgurations. The extreme value
where they could be right would be halfway along the reference state sides, so it is only
for labels that are less than L/2, M/2, and total diﬀerences of energies that are much less
than LM. Beyond this scale we would claim that the modes become related to each other
and there are fewer independent states. These give relations between the operators at high
order. We call such transitions, where the number of states is reduced relative to the very
naive counting of independent free ﬁelds, the stringy exclusion principle for the collective
dynamics in the same sense as [23, 24]. The b, c modes are very similar to the traces in
matrix models (here they are built backwards from the representation of states), and if we
choose that interpretation, the cutoﬀof the modes would be related to the eﬀective N of
the corresponding gauge theory. Remember that in a gauge theory for SU(N), one runs
into dependencies exactly at N. Moving M dual giant gravitons out of the sea corresponds
to a Higgs mechanism where we break the theory into SU(N) →SU(N −M)×SU(M) [26].
Thus we are seeing the eﬀective exclusion at M, which is usually related to how traces of
M ×M are algebraically related to each other. Obviously if we use very few excitations, we
can’t tell that k is ﬁnite by this method. Also, the factorization into independent eﬀective
modes for the b, c fails when we excite the state too much.
We will label the nearby states as follows
|□LM + R1 −R˜1 + R2⟩≃|R1⟩⊗|R2⟩⊗|R˜1⟩
(6.24)
in a way that makes it clear that we are adding and substracting Young diagrams from
each corner as is appropriate to the nature of the corner.
– 44 –

JHEP11(2017)121
From here, one can easily check that the following is true
as|□LM + R1 −R˜1 + R2⟩=
X
hooks
(−1)fhook| ˜R⟩
(6.25)
where ˜R diﬀers from the original state by removing a skew hook of length s. These can
only be removed from either of the Ri, or added to the R˜i. These are the only places where
small hooks can be subtracted (or added). This means that
as|□LM +R1−R˜1+R2⟩=
X
(−1)fhook| ˜R1⟩⊗|R2⟩⊗|R⟩˜1+
X
|R1⟩⊗(−1)fhook| ˜R2⟩⊗|R⟩˜1
+
X
|R1⟩⊗|R2⟩⊗(−1)fhook| ˜R˜1⟩
(6.26)
This translates to
as = b(1)
s
+ b(2)
s
+ c†(1)
s
(6.27)
so we get what we want in equation (6.18) up to a sign for c†
s. Following the discussion in
section 4 this sign can be changed by a particle-hole transformation, which is a symmetry
of the algebra of the raising and lowering operators that we have constructed. The choice
we make is a convention that needs to be established, and this is used to match better our
geometric intuition. There is no deeper meaning to it.
We have proven what we set out to: the UV modes can be written as a linear super-
position of the collective modes of the conﬁguration (the infrared modes) when acting on
nearby states. Moreover, the collective modes have canonical commutation relations. It is
the presence of these collective modes that lets us know for sure that we have changed the
topology. Their number dictates the number of edges (anti-edges).
7
Topology from uncertainty measurements
Now, we can further evaluate how non-classical these states are from the point of view of
the original a†
s, as oscillators, by computing quantities that appear in (6.12). That is, we
want to compute
⟨asa†
s⟩LM = ⟨a†
sas + s⟩LM
(7.1)
Using the MN rule, the ⟨a†
sas⟩are evaluated by counting all the skew hooks of length
s (this is the same as the number of hooks of length s, see appendix A). One can easily see
that each hook has its corner on a diagonal band, as in equation (7.2).
|□LM⟩≃
(7.2)
so we get that for low s (that is, s ≤min(L, M))
⟨asa†
s⟩LM = 2s
(7.3)
For simplicity we will assume that L ≥M, so that the ﬁrst place where things change is
at s = M + 1. At this point the diagonal bands are of constant length M. Things change
– 45 –

JHEP11(2017)121
again when we want very large hooks at s = L, where the available diagonal bands start
shrinking. We get the answer
⟨asa†
s⟩LM =









2s
if s ≤M
M + s
if L ≥s ≥M
M + L if L + M ≥s ≥L
s
Otherwise
(7.4)
We can also write this equation equivalently in terms of the average occupation per mode
Ns = a†
sas
s . It is convenient to do this in two diﬀerent (equivalent) ways so that
˜Ns = ⟨Ns + 1⟩LM =









2
if s ≤M
M/s + 1
if L ≥s ≥M
(M + L)/s if L + M ≥s ≥L
1
Otherwise
(7.5)
and
⟨Ns⟩LM =









1
if s ≤M
M/s
if L ≥s ≥M
(M + L)/s −1 if L + M ≥s ≥L
0
Otherwise
(7.6)
the number ˜Ns can be computed for more general multi-strip geometries for low s using
the Bogoliubov transformation. It is given by
˜Ns = ⟨asa†
s⟩multi−stripe/s ≃1
s
X
i
⟨b(i)
s b(i)†
s
⟩multi−stripe = nedges
(7.7)
while
Ns = ⟨a†
sas⟩multi−stripe/s ≃1
s
X
i
⟨c(i)
s c(i)†
s
⟩multi−stripe = nanti−edges
(7.8)
We can draw a few consequences from these equations.
First, since the numbers Ns are generally of order one, the states that we have consid-
ered so far have very low uncertainty in the ﬂuctuations, comparable in size to the usual
quantum uncertainty of the ground state. That uncertainty is multiplied by an integer
for low s. In this sense, they should be regarded as being classical, because uncertainties
are of typical quantum size. This integer that we get is exactly the number of edges. In
this sense, the number of edges is measurable in the size of the quantum ﬂuctuations of
the UV modes of the theory (those that are given a priori without any reference to the
particular state). It is important that there are a large number of modes for which this
number is the same. This means that with a simultaneous measurement of various quan-
tities that commute with each other we can do enough statistics to compute the topology
(without destroying the full information of the state, but already knowing that the state is
a rectangular tableau). We measure the topology by census-taking and ﬁnding consensus.
This is where the size of L, M actually start mattering. At roughly the same place
where the stringy exclusion principe becomes important (at modes of order L, M) the
numbers that eﬀectively measure the topology of the state start changing.
– 46 –

JHEP11(2017)121
In the large L, M limit, the number Ns becomes a continuous function of the rescaled
parameters x = s/M (or s/L) and interpolates smoothly between nedges for x ≪1 and 1
for large x. This can be interpreted as the eﬀective number of edges at the scale associated
with x. In this sense, the measurement of topology is energy dependent. Since the energy
goes like E ≃L2 at least for the square tableau, the stringy exclusion energy scales as
L ≃
√
ELM and can be eﬀectively very high.
7.1
Coherent states of edge oscillators
We can now consider general classical coherent states of the b, c oscillators and as we have
said above, we will think of these as new classical conﬁgurations. The coherent state is
deﬁned by the equations
(bs −⟨bs⟩)|CohLM⟩= 0
(7.9)
and similar for the c. These belong the small Hilbert space for suﬃciently small shifts (the
tails at high occupation number will have negligible probability). The subscript LM is to
indicate that this is a coherent state relative to the b, c oscillators of the LM state.
When we set out to compute the numbers Ns as above, they will depend greatly on the
properties of the state we pick. The occupation number itself is not robust against taking
general coherent states. What we mean by this is that we can change it by a large fraction
(even in a lot of modes). However, consider the following operators that are shifted by a
c-number
as −⟨as⟩=
X
i
b(i)
s −⟨b(i)
s ⟩−
X
j
(c(j)†
s
−⟨c(j)†
s
⟩)
(7.10)
Because the b, c operators shifted by a c-number still satisfy the canonical commutation
relations (the shift is an automorphism of the algebra of b, c operators), then we can repeat
the calculations we did before including these shifts.
We ﬁnd that for these states the same computation that we did before holds with the
shifted oscillators. That is, we ﬁnd that
1
s ⟨|as −⟨as⟩|2⟩CohLM = nedges
(7.11)
We can measure the number of edges if we measure the uncertainty, not the number
operator itself. The expectation value of the number operator is the same as the uncertainty
if the shift vanishes, but the uncertainty is not in general the number operator.
This means that to measure nedges, we end up evaluating a non-linear function of the
wave function. This is because the shift ⟨as⟩depends on the state! In a certain sense this
should not be a surprise. We already argued that the topology cannot be measured by
an operator, because all coherent states relative to the trivial vacuum (AdS5 × S5) of the
chiral boson are of the same topology. But a non-linear function of the wave function is not
an operator measurement. It is something that can be computed in quantum mechanics,
and that moreover can be recovered with a set of observations on the system with diﬀerent
variables that do not commute with each other: a polynomial function involving the number
operator and the expectation values of the raising and lowering operators. Once we measure
the expectation values of the ﬁeld ⟨φ(θ)⟩we can recover the shifts we need. Given these
– 47 –

JHEP11(2017)121
shifts, we can evaluate an eﬀective number operator for the shifted variable. This is a
protocol for measuring the topology. It just cannot be done with one single observation.
Notice also that at least in this example, even though we can measure the topology
with a few observations for low energy modes (from the UV point of view), measuring the
values of L, M themselves requires getting to the scale of the stringy exclusion principle
(although the product LM is readily measured by the energy). This is not expected to
persist in more general circularly symmetric LLM geometries, because the corresponding
generalized eﬀective Bogolubov transformation has coeﬃcients that depend on L, M, N [18]
(the details of this operation are beyond the scope of the present paper). This issue of
indistinguishability of states based on simple measurements of the energy has also been
alluded to in [55, 56], but it is also important to understand that the problem persists if we
only have the expectation value of the UV ﬁelds and the energy. To reconstruct the classical
geometry we need the expectation values of all of the b, c modes, not just the a modes. The
a modes are the naive classical data needed on the boundary of AdS to specify the classical
ﬁelds associated to φ in the bulk. The collection of a modes is the list of ‘single particle’
supergravity modes that can be excited. This description does not take into account that
the ﬁeld φ is eﬀectively multi-valued. This has been discussed recently in the work by the
authors of the present paper in [57], where it is argued that it gives an example where bulk
reconstruction from classical boundary data fails (in the sense of [58, 59]). It is not clear at
this stage if this is special to LLM states, or applicable in more general settings (formally,
it works in all cases where the states are the large N limit of the extremal chiral ring [40]).
This needs to be investigated further.
Indeed, following [56] we can consider more general operators of the low momentum
modes (of the UV theory) and we ﬁnd
⟨a†
sas1 . . . asm⟩LM = 0
(7.12)
with m > 1. This result is easily obtained by using the Bogolubov transformation and
Wicks theorem with respect to the vacuum of the b, c oscillators and it’s true as long as
s < M. What this means is that there are no obvious correlations between the low lying
modes, nor any quantum correlation that can be used to measure L, M directly without
going to high energy.
Another question that can be asked is how close this |□LM⟩state is to a regular coherent
state of the free chiral boson. A rough estimate of a similar overlap to (6.10) suggests that
|⟨□LM|⃗Λ⟩|2 ≃
1
LM ≃exp(−M log L)
(7.13)
which is exponentially suppressed at large M, L. This means that the new classical state
is very far from any one traditional classical state. Alternatively, we can say that the state
|□LM⟩can only be approximated well by an exponentially large superposition of classical
states.
On taking double scaling limits in L, M, the new classical reference state is essentially
orthogonal to all other standard classical states of the chiral boson theory and should
not be thought of any longer as a Schr¨odinger cat state, but a classical state in its own
– 48 –

JHEP11(2017)121
right. This classical state has diﬀerent topology than the standard classical states and this
automatically implies that it has a diﬀerent geometry. This is the sense in which these
new states represent diﬀerent classical limits of the chiral free boson theory. In particular,
the existence of ﬂuctuation ﬁelds δφ(i), δ ˜φ(i) with a well deﬁned action on the small Hilbert
space of the corners deﬁnes a semi-classical quantization on top of the classical state and
can be used to argue that one can do eﬀective and unitary quantum ﬁeld theory in the
background of the state |□LM⟩.
7.2
Beyond classical states
If we consider a semiclassical state (the classical coherent of the b, c oscillators state with
a few excitations of the b, c quanta), our consensus measurement can still be used to get to
the topology. The point is that the few extra quanta can only aﬀect a few of the modes for
these measurements. The majority will have the same value of the uncertainty as before,
and the majority vote will win.
Consider now a very diﬀerent type of state: the thermal state at temperature T ≫1.
This is a stand-in for the typical state of high energy. A lot of the physics associated with
this state in the LLM setup has been addressed in [29]. For us, the energy per mode is
equal to T for low enough modes, up to the cutoﬀscale (of order T), but the state also
satisﬁes ⟨as⟩= 0. This means that the occupation number per mode is Ns ≃T/s and is a
rapidly varying function with s. For us this means that the eﬀective topology that counts
the number of edges in the geometry is varying rapidly with scale: the state should not be
thought of as a classical geometric state with a ﬁxed topology (the topology can not be
measured and have a meaningful answer in the consensus part of the test).
We can also consider the triangular diagram of equation 131 in [29], given by tableaux
of the typical form
|R2step⟩=
(7.14)
with L rows. It is easy to check that there are no hooks with a length that is a multiple
3. That is, there are no hooks of length 3k for every k. So, we ﬁnd that ˜N3k = 0 for all k.
This would suggest that the topology is that of the vacuum. However, when we consider
other modes we ﬁnd that
⟨a†
sas⟩≃⟨a†
1a1⟩= L
(7.15)
where L is the number of hooks of length 1, so again the energy per mode that is not a
multiple of three is roughly ﬁxed, but the eﬀective number of edges varies wildly and we fail
– 49 –

JHEP11(2017)121
0
2π
Figure 6. An example of a state with a number of edges that is dependent on θ.
to ﬁnd consensus. Now the number of edges is not even a smooth function for the rescaling
parameter x ≃s/L. It is only states that have few corners that are deemed suﬃciently
geometrical, to the extent that one can ﬁx their topology by checking that Ns is independent
of s for all s that are small (below a suitable stringy exclusion principle energy).
These states fail to be classical also in that any attempt to produce oscillators like
the b, c oscillators fails because the naive stringy exclusion principle is very small: the
equivalent of the red corners can at most remove one or two boxes before interfering with
the addition of boxes in the anti-corners. In a sense, this is seen in that the edge of the
tableaux is rough (very jagged) rather than a straight line.
These other examples show that the geometric states |□LM⟩are essentially charac-
terized by having low, but on average essentially constant, occupation number per low
momentum (energy) mode of the UV theory. Also, the diﬀerent modes must be very cor-
related to each other in order to be able to ﬁnd ﬂuctuation ﬁelds like the b, c systems
above that implement the required partial Bogolubov transformation from the collective
dynamics to the UV modes.
7.3
Geometries with folds
Thus far, we have primarily considered only a couple classes of states: coherent states and
striped (i.e. LM) states. These are nice because we know how to write them down in terms
of oscillators and/or young tableaux, which we know how to deal with. Of course, there
are many other possible geometries in the full set of LLM states. There is a general class
that is particularly tricky, so we will touch on this class here. These are the states that
wrap in such a way that their number of edges that is a function of θ. For instance, the
state drawn in ﬁgure 6.
If one were to do a local measurement of one of these states, then one would expect to
ﬁnd that the number of edges that varies with location. Here, we would like to determine
if there is a way to compute nedges(θ) from uncertainty computations. Notice that here
we do not have an obvious candidate for the state in terms of Young tableaux. Instead
we expect the state to be complicated in that basis. The reason to say so is that such
geometries also arise in the study of the c = 1 matrix model [30] and in that case they
result from Hamiltonian evolution of more standard coherent states. But already coherent
states superpose a lot of Young tableaux, and such evolution would scramble a lot of the
– 50 –

JHEP11(2017)121
phases between the diﬀerent basis elements. The fact that such states exist point to the
non-triviality of the classical limit in the c = 1 matrix model.
The local commutation relation of our ﬁeld operator can be computed using
h
ak, a†
j
i
=
kδk,j. We ﬁnd
h
ˆφ (θ) , ˆφ
 θ′i
= i (2π)
2

∂θδ
 θ′ −θ

−∂θ′δ
 θ′ −θ

(7.16)
As before with striped states, we will want to decompose our operators into pieces that act
on each edge or anti-edge. Here, we will do this as follows
ˆφ (θ) =
nedges(θ)
X
I=0
φI (θ) −
nanti−edges(θ)
X
J=0
˜φJ (θ)
(7.17)
where, as before, the tilde refers to operators that act on an anti-edge.
Also note the
operator-denoting hats are dropped on the edge ﬁelds for notational convenience. We see
that unlike before, this decomposition is θ-dependent. That is, the range the indices run
over depends on theta, just as the number of edges does.
It is easy to see that these subﬁelds should obey the same local commutation relations
as the ﬁeld ˆφ(θ) with signs that depend on if the ﬁeld is at a regular edge or an anti-edge

φI (θ) , φJ  θ′
= i (2π)
2

∂θδ
 θ′ −θ

−∂θ′δ
 θ′ −θ

δIJ
(7.18)
and
h
˜φI (θ) , ˜φJ  θ′i
= −i (2π)
2

∂θδ
 θ′ −θ

−∂θ′δ
 θ′ −θ

δIJ
(7.19)
These signs ensure that the commutation relations of the ﬁeld ˆφ(θ) are preserved. One way
to understand this is that the coeﬃcient of the commutation relation of the φ ﬁeld can be
understood as the anomaly coeﬃcient of the chiral boson. If we normalize this coeﬃcient
to one for φ, then we ﬁnd that the φI have anomaly equal to one, and the ˜φJ have anomaly
minus one. The fact that there is one more φI than ˜φJ locally is the statement that the
combined eﬀective ﬁeld theory of the φI, ˜φJ has the same anomaly as the UV theory of
φ. In this sense, the eﬀective ﬁeld theory near our reference states has anomaly matching
between the UV representation and the collective degrees of freedom.
Now, we will call δφ the quantum ﬁeld relative to the background ﬁeld. That is, we call
δφI = φI −⟨ˆφI⟩
(7.20)
and similar for ˜φJ and ˆφ.
To proceed further, we can consider breaking our ﬁeld into raising and lowering opera-
tor pieces for each of the indices δ ˆφ = δφ+ + δφ−as was done in the multi-edge regular ge-
ometry by Fourier transforms. Our problem in this case is that we do not know the vacuum
state. In the standard multi-strip geometries this is achieved by requiring that in the trans-
lationally invariant multi-strip geometry, the Fourier modes of the operators for the edge
modes are raising/lowering operators depending on if the mode adds or subtracts energy
relative to the reference state, with a provision that changes the assignment for anti-edges
– 51 –

JHEP11(2017)121
relative to edges. This is demonstrated for the strip geometries with the explicit construc-
tion based on the Young diagram representation of states. Here we have to choose a vacuum,
because the multi-fold geometries are not translation invariant. We would still want the
raising/lowering operators of the ﬁeld φ to be locally in the same decomposition as for multi-
edge states and the lowering operators of the ˆφI, ˆφJ to act trivially on the reference states.
Combing this with our edge/anti-edge decomposition, we make the approximation that
δφ+(θ) ≃
nedges(θ)
X
I=0
δφI+(θ) −
nanti−edges(θ)
X
J=0
δ ˜φJ−(θ)
(7.21)
where we know that the lowering operator on anti-edges adds energy, so should be grouped
with the raising operator piece.
We will call this the Local Multi-Edge approximation
(LME approximation). Notice that this is a statement about raising and lowering operators
relative to the state, so we have subtracted the classical value of the ﬁelds and only included
the ﬂuctuation piece. This is important because we want to compute the uncertainty in
the measurement relative to the classical state (we did a similar step on the multi-edge
geometries when we argued that the shift by the ﬁeld vevs is an automorphism of the Weyl
algebra).
Notice that the splitting into raising and lowering operators is not really local. How-
ever, it can be approximately local under some circumstances: as long as the region over
which the splitting is done is much larger than the typical wavelength of the ﬁelds consid-
ered, the approximation makes sense. This means that the vacuum is very similar to the
multi-edge setups locally on length scales that are small relative to where the folds begin
and end. The ﬁnite size corrections should depend on the separation between the folds.
To proceed further, we start by convoluting the ﬁeld operator ˆφ with a test function
f(θ) to build a new operator
ˆφf = 1
2π
Z 2π
0
f (θ) ˆφ (θ) dθ
(7.22)
Our goal is to use these operators to estimate uncertainties and correlators with particular
choices of f. The role that f plays is to select the correct wavelengths of the modes. If
we are worried about the details where the folds are located, we can take f to be nearly
vanishing near these regions, but we will not do so here.
It will turn out that the operators given by ˆφf, ˆφg with f = eimθ and g = e−ikγ is just
what we need. Notice that, in a more familiar form, this is simply
ˆφeimθ ˆφe−ikγ = ama†
k
(7.23)
Now, let’s try to compute the expectation value of this for a folded state, which we will
call |fold⟩.
⟨fold|ˆφeimθ ˆφe−ikγ|fold⟩=
1
(2π)2
Z
dθ dγ eimθe−ikγ⟨fold|ˆφ(θ)ˆφ(γ)|fold⟩
(7.24)
We can break this up into its raising and lowering pieces
=
1
(2π)2
Z
dθ dγ eimθe−ikγ⟨fold|
 φ+(θ) + φ−(θ)
  φ+(γ) + φ−(γ)

|fold⟩
(7.25)
– 52 –

JHEP11(2017)121
Because of our choice of sign for the exponentials of f and g, if we actually write out the rais-
ing and lowering pieces, we ﬁnd that upon integration, φ+(θ) and φ−(γ) will vanish, leaving
=
1
(2π)2
Z
dθ dγ eimθe−ikγ⟨fold|φ−(θ)φ+(γ)|fold⟩
(7.26)
We can now expand this in terms of pieces that act on each edge and anti-edge
=
1
(2π)2
Z
dθ dγ eimθe−ikγ⟨fold|


nedges(θ)
X
I=0
φI−(θ) −
nanti−edges(θ)
X
J=0
˜φJ+(θ)


×


nedges(θ)
X
I=0
φI+(γ) −
nanti−edges(θ)
X
J=0
˜φJ−(γ)

|fold⟩
(7.27)
Here, if we zoom in on any small region in θ, we imagine that the folded state will look
like a striped state. So, locally, we expect that these operators will act on the folded state,
just as they would on a young tableaux state, giving
≃
1
(2π)2
Z
dθ dγ eimθe−ikγ⟨fold|
nedges(θ)
X
I=0
 φI−(θ)φI+(γ)

|fold⟩
(7.28)
We notice now that we can write this as
=
1
(2π)2
Z
dθ dγ eimθe−ikγ⟨fold|
nedges(θ)
X
I=0

φI(θ), φI(γ)

|fold⟩
(7.29)
This, again, only works in this way because of the sign of the exponentials in f and g,
causing some of the terms to vanish upon integration. Others vanish because as you zoom
in the state will look like a vacuum young tableaux state. Finally, we can use the known
commutation relation, giving
=
1
(2π)2
Z
dθ dγ eimθe−ikγ⟨fold|
nedges(θ)
X
I=0
i (2π)
2
[∂θδ (γ −θ) −∂γδ (γ −θ)] δII|fold⟩
(7.30)
Again, remember the decomposition is location dependent, with the index I running over
each edge at each location. We see then that summing over δII simply gives the number
of edges at each location.
=
1
(2π)2
Z
dθ dγ eimθe−ikγ⟨fold|i (2π)
2
[nedges(γ)∂θδ (γ −θ) −nedges(θ)∂γδ (γ −θ)] |fold⟩
(7.31)
Integrating by parts oﬀthe delta functions onto the exponentials gives
= (m + k)
2(2π)
Z
dθ ei(m−k)θnedges(θ)
(7.32)
Recalling that the original operator was equivalent to ama†
k, we ﬁnd
⟨fold|ama†
k|fold⟩≃(m + k)
2(2π)
Z 2π
0
dθ ei(m−k)θnedges(θ)
(7.33)
– 53 –

JHEP11(2017)121
So, we see that these matrix elements give the Fourier transform of the number of edges.
Notice that if we had done the same computation starting with f = e−imθ and g = exp(ikγ),
everything would have followed similarly, leading to
⟨fold|a†
mak|fold⟩= (m + k)
2(2π)
Z 2π
0
dθ ei(m−k)θnanti−edges(θ)
(7.34)
The LME approximation also produces the following two results:
⟨a†
ka†
m⟩fold = ⟨akam⟩fold = 0
(7.35)
which result from no mixing between raising and lowering operators of the same collective
ﬁelds.
As a consistency check, we get that
⟨fold|a†
mak|fold⟩= (⟨fold|ama†
k|fold⟩)∗
(7.36)
and that
⟨fold|a†
mak|fold⟩= ⟨fold|aka†
m|fold⟩
(7.37)
for m ̸= k, which follows because nanti−edges = nedges −1, so they have the same Fourier
coeﬃcients for the non-constant mode.
As a check of this proposal, we can evaluate it in the case of the multi-strip geometries.
We would then expect this to agree with our previous result for young tableaux states. Here,
we would ﬁnd a constant number of edges, giving
⟨YT|ama†
k|YT⟩= (m + k)
2(2π)
Z 2π
0
dθ ei(m−k)θnedges = mδm,knedges
(7.38)
as computed previously. And similarly for the anti-edge calculation.
The upshot of the computation is that we can argue that n(θ) is encoded in the
expectation values of ⟨fold|(am −⟨am⟩)(a†
k −⟨a†
k⟩)|fold⟩. These are non-trivial correlations
between the modes of the ﬁeld, valid for modes m that are larger than the inverse of the
separation between the folds (measured with respect to 2π). A pre-requisite for a state to
have a non-trivial topology is that n(θ) ̸= 1 someplace. This means that at least one of
these correlators (generalized uncertainties) is diﬀerent than the ones in the vacuum. If
n(θ) is non-constant, then some correlators with m ̸= k must be non-vanishing.
A test to determine if a state could in principle be geometric is that since the Fourier
coeﬃcients only depend on m−k, there has to be a large degree of consistency between the
correlations of the diﬀerent modes. That is, even for semiclassical states with multi-edges,
one can build a consensus measurement of n(θ): most of the modes that should be identical
(with the proper normalization dependent on m, k) and determine the consensus measure-
ment of the Fourier transform of n(θ), but again, it is not a single operator measurement
on the Hilbert space of states that produces the result.
At this stage we do not have a clear understanding on how to incorporate the ﬁnite size
corrections. They should be small for short wavelengths. We should also expect that there
are additional small corrections to the LME approximation related to how the transitions
– 54 –

JHEP11(2017)121
from one value of n to another are handled. At this stage the LME approximation is not
systematic and is used instead to set a benchmark for how such correlations should behave.
This issue needs to be studied further and is beyond the scope of the present paper.
Notice that eventually we also run into trouble at high frequencies, because we expect
there to be a local bound on the momentum. In the Young tableaux case this occurs when
the hooks at diﬀerent corners start interfering with each other. A similar phenomenon
should appear locally at each location of θ and should indicate a local stringy exclusion
principle.
8
Entanglement measurements of topology
The particular model we have studied, as a quantum mechanical theory is a free ﬁeld theory.
The Hilbert space is a Fock space with a natural set of raising and lowering operators (a
set of commuting algebras), and we can think of this Fock space as having a canonical
product structure
Htot ≃H1 ⊗H2 ⊗· · · ⊗H∞
(8.1)
where the Hilbert space basis is deﬁned by kets that have all but ﬁnitely many oscillators
in the ground state. The Hilbert space itself is the L2 completion of states made from this
basis. We use the monicker H∞to indicate the inﬁnite product for all suﬃciently large
Hn. Because we have this canonical factorization structure, it is possible to take a pure
state in H and ﬁnd a reduced density matrix for each of the modes, ˆρ1, ˆρ2 etc, or for more
modes grouped together ˆρij, ˆρijk etc. It is the structure under this class of factorizations
that we will try to understand for the states studied in the previous section. The total
Hamiltonian is
ˆH =
X
s
a†
sas =
X
s
s ˆNs
(8.2)
We will aim to measure the entanglement entropies for each of these density matrices to
characterize the state. The idea is to understand the entanglement structure of the state
and to try to use that structure to measure the topology of the geometry etc. In a sense,
this is putting to ﬂesh the idea that entanglement can be the source of geometry a la
Van Raamsdonk [9]. It is unclear how to implement this calculation as a calculation of
entanglement entropy in gravity by a minimal surface [12]. This is mainly studying the
momentum space entanglement in the quantum ﬁeld theory (in [60] this information is
related to the Wilsonian eﬀective action).
Consider a state that is an energy eigenstate of the full Hamiltonian (e.g. |□⟩LM, which
has energy E = ML). We can decompose any such state, singling out the jth oscillator, to
ﬁnd the reduced density matrix. If we do this, we can write the state as follows
|ψ⟩=
X
n
ξn|n⟩j ⊗|wn⟩
(8.3)
where |wn⟩includes occupation information about all the other oscillators. We can now use
ˆH|ψ⟩=
X
n
ξn ˆH|n⟩k ⊗|wn⟩=
X
n
ξn(n +
X
k̸=j
k ˆNk)|n⟩j ⊗|wn⟩= Eψ|ψ⟩
(8.4)
– 55 –

JHEP11(2017)121
We see the unevaluated part of the Hamiltonian P
k̸=j k ˆNk acts only on |w⟩n. When we dot
this with j⟨˜n|, we ﬁnd that the states |wn⟩are diﬀerent eigenstates of a Hermitian operator.
X
k̸=j
k ˆNk|w˜n⟩= (Eψ −˜n)|w˜n⟩
(8.5)
As such, they are orthogonal and can be made orthonormal. The reduced density matrix
for ρj can be obtained from tracing with any orthonormal basis and we choose the |w⟩n
themselves. We ﬁnd then that the reduced density matrix is diagonal in the energy basis
ˆρj =
X
n
|ξn|2|n⟩j j⟨n| =
X
n
pn|n⟩j j⟨n|
(8.6)
where the pn are the probabilities to ﬁnd the state |ψ⟩has the jth oscillator with occupation
n upon a measurement of ˆNj. Our goal is to compute the coeﬃcients 1 ≥pn ≥0, and
therefore the entropy
sj = −
X
n
pn log pn
(8.7)
for each mode j.
We will start by considering the state |△⟩n, for simplicity. The idea is that we can
compute quantities like
n⟨∆|a†k
1 ak
1|∆⟩n = 1
(8.8)
if k ≤n. Otherwise it vanishes. This also can equivalently be written as an+1
1
|△⟩n = 0
because there are no states with negative energy. This in particular implies that pk = 0
for k > n so we only have to determine ﬁnitely many of the pk. This results trivially from
applying the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule in operator form repeatedly.
Because this number is only made of expectation values of operators that act on H1, the
complete information is encoded in the density matrix ˆρ1. This equation can be written as
tr(ˆρ1a†k
1 ak
1) = 1
(8.9)
One can easily evaluate the matrix elements of the operator in the number basis
a†k
1 ak
1|j⟩=
j!
(j −k)!|j⟩
(8.10)
The equation (8.9) reads
n
X
j=0
pj
j!
(j −k)! = 1
(8.11)
for all 0 ≤k ≤n and together with pj = 0 for j > n is a complete linear system so all
of the pj can be determined. The ﬁrst of these equations is tr(ˆρ1) = 1. The second one
is ⟨ˆN1⟩= 1. We can preform the same computation for the other modes, say the jth.
Computing ˆρj leads to
[n/k]
X
l=0
p(j)
l
l!
(l −k)! = 1/jk
(8.12)
– 56 –

JHEP11(2017)121
which can be solved to give us the probabilities, p(j)
l
(the probability for the jth oscillator
to have occupation l).
Now, let us consider |□LM⟩states. Again, the simplest way to understand reduced
density matrices starts by understanding that the density matrices ˆρj are diagonal in the
occupation number basis. So, our job is to compute
⟨a†k
j ak
j ⟩LM = tr(ˆρja†k
j ak
j )
(8.13)
and to use these equations to compute the elements of ˆρj. It will prove helpful to use our
partial Bogoliubov transformation (6.18). From
aj = b(1)
j
+ b(2)
j
−c(1)†
j
(8.14)
where, recall that each piece now acts on a particular edge or anti-edge. The computations
can be performed for small enough k (below the stringy exclusion principle) by using Wick
contractions of the c oscillators only
⟨a†k
j ak
j ⟩LM ≃b,c⟨0|

c(1)
j
k 
c(1)†
j
k
|0⟩b,c
(8.15)
where we explicitly write the LM state as the vacuum state for the b(I)
j
and c(J)
j
oscillators.
This can be computed and gives
b,c⟨0|

c(1)
j
k 
c(1)†
j
k
|0⟩b,c = k!jk
(8.16)
for small enough k. At larger k eventually we ﬁnd that acting with too many aj kills the
state, and that generically the equation (8.16) is an upper bound for the quantities we
want. For the case of more edges, we get a similar answer
c⟨0|
 nedges
X
I=0
c(I)
j
!k  nanti−edges
X
J=0
c(J)†
j
!k
|0⟩c = k!jknk
anti−edges
(8.17)
This is because now there are nanti−edges c ﬁelds. We write this set of equations as
nanti−edges
X
J=0
pj
j!
(j −k)! = k!nk
anti−edges
(8.18)
Notice, we have the same equation for each oscillator. This can be seen easily from writing it
in terms of canonical normalization oscillators, rather than oscillators with the ﬁeld theory
normalization that was computed in equation (3.17), and this is exact below the stringy
exclusion principle. After the stringy exclusion principle is crossed we do not understand
suﬃciently well how the values on the right hand side taper oﬀand eventually vanish.
This suggests that a good approximation to the entropies can be had if we don’t impose
the stringy exclusion principle at all, assuming that for suﬃciently high values of k the
elements of the density matrix are already suﬃciently suppressed that their contribution
to the entanglement entropy is negligible when we make them slightly smaller.
– 57 –

JHEP11(2017)121
To solve (8.18) when we don’t have bounds, we consider a (thermal) partition function
given by
Z[x] =
∞
X
j=0
xj
(8.19)
where we are saying pj ∝xj. Consider acting with xk∂k
x on Z[x]. We get
xj∂k
xZ[x] =
∞
X
j=0
xkj(j −1) . . . (j −k + 1)xj−k =
∞
X
j=0
j!
(j −k)!xj
(8.20)
which is of the form we want. To normalize the answer, we should divide by the sum of
the non-normalized p and we get that the following should be true
N
X
j=0
pj
j!
(j −k)! = Z[x]−1xk∂k
xZ[x] = k!nk
anti−edges
(8.21)
with N the normalization. Now, the sums are straightforward to compute, and give
Z[x]−1xk∂k
xZ[x] = (1 −x)xkk!
1
(1 −x)k+1 = k!

x
1 −x
k
(8.22)
so that the equations are solved if
nanti−edges =
x
1 −x
(8.23)
or equivalently
x =
nanti−edges
1 + nanti−edges
(8.24)
We should take this to mean that the moments of the density matrix ˆρj are identical to
those of a thermal density matrix for all low enough moments. This means that the two
density matrices should be very similar. In the thermal density matrix the large pk are
exponentially suppressed. Indeed, the thermal density matrix is the one that maximizes
the entropy if we ﬁx the number operator ⟨ˆN⟩, so at worst we get an upper bound for the
entanglement entropy mode per mode.
Let us try to explain this. At ﬁrst sight, this seems strange. The reason why having an
approximately thermal density matrix is strange is that the state we started with |□LM⟩
has a supergravity dual that is free from horizons. However, notice that the method of
computing the moments based on (6.18) starts from a partial Bogolubov transformation
where three modes b(1,2) and c1 are mixed. We can ﬁnd the other two linear combination
of modes that gives rise to a full Bogolubov transformation. Use for example
d†
s =
1
√
2(b(1)†
s
−b(2)†
s
),
e†
s =
√
2c†
s −
 
b(1)
s
+ b(2)
s
√
2
!
(8.25)
We can compute the moments of the distribution in two diﬀerent ways. In one, we use
the oscillator basis b, c and the vacuum |0⟩bc to get the answer.
In the other way, we
integrate out the ﬁelds e, f in the vacuum |0⟩bc and compute a density matrix for the a
– 58 –

JHEP11(2017)121
modes directly. This Bogolubov transformation generically produces a squeezed state, and
integrating the d, e modes gives rise to a Gaussian density matrix.3 This Gaussian density
matrix is not pure, but thermal, as is typical in gravitational computations [2]. Notice
that this density matrix is not computed directly in the full Hilbert space H, but is rather
computed in the small (nearby) Hilbert space from equation (6.20)
Hnearby ≃Hblue ⊗Hgreen ⊗Hred
(8.26)
which is readily generalized to the other more general multi-edge solutions.
What is interesting is that the factorization of the full Hilbert space induces a factor-
ization in the nearby Hilbert space. This is because the algebra of observables a†, a acts
simply on Hnearby. That is, the operators do not take the states out of Hnearby when we
use simple observables made of few such a below the stringy exclusion principle.
Indeed, this factorization structure and the corresponding quasi-thermal structure of
the state persists even when we consider coherent states of the b, c modes. These can be
obtained by a shift in the algebra of the b, c ﬁelds. This is an automorphism of the algebra.
Similarly, the answer is simple in terms of the shifted modes as −⟨as⟩= P b(i)
s −⟨b(i)
s ⟩−
(c(i)†
s
−⟨c(i)†
s
⟩) that appeared in equation (7.10) and similar for the d, e modes. Integrating
out the d, e modes or the shifted d, e modes gives the same result. The density matrix
for the shifted a modes will still be Gaussian, and the entanglement entropy of ˆρ1 does
not change: it is independent of the choice of basis in which we perform the computations.
This entropy will only depend on the expectation value of the (shifted) occupation number.
Since this will be roughly the same for all modes below the stringy exclusion principle, we
ﬁnd that after a straightforward computation
si = (nedges log(nedges)) −nanti−edges log(nanti−edges)
(8.27)
and we can measure nedges by consensus of the entanglement entropies of the diﬀerent
modes. This is not too diﬀerent from the analysis in the previous section.
An additional interesting fact we observe is that in the small Hilbert space, the diﬀerent
a modes arise from integrating out diﬀerent d, e modes. The density matrices ˆρij, ˆρijk etc.
are factorized! This means that there is no mutual information between the diﬀerent modes
as for suﬃciently small s. One expresses this by saying that there is no entanglement
between the modes as. The entanglement occurs between these low-momentum modes and
very high momentum modes (at or beyond the stringy exclusion principle). We can say
that these geometries arise from a special kind of UV-IR entanglement, but that there is
no IR-IR entanglement contributing to the geometry.
Indeed, to the naive classical holographic observer that can only measure simple com-
binations of the low a modes, the information of the d, e modes is almost completely hidden
(except for the total energy and that they act to purify the state). This suggests that for
these backgrounds the reconstruction procedure [58, 59] will fail to construct excitations
of the d, e modes, which are clearly contributing to bulk ﬁelds of supergravity modes. The
3This is explained for example in [61] and references therein, where this statement follows from a simple
generalization of eq. 40, and see also appendix B.
– 59 –

JHEP11(2017)121
precise way in which this could happen in these geometries is very interesting but is also
beyond the scope of the present paper. A partial answer has been discussed in [57].
Another interesting calculation to do is to understand how big an overlap between a
state like |□LM⟩and a general coherent state of the free ﬁeld theory can be. The best way
to estimate this is to realize that the mode per mode entropy bounds how much overlap
there is mode per mode. As coherent states are factorized between the modes, we get
rather easily that
|⟨□LM|Coh⟩|2 ≪exp
 
−
L
X
i=1
si
!
∼exp(−Ls1)
(8.28)
which is exponentially suppressed in the dynamically generated cutoﬀ. This means that
when we think of the states |□LM⟩and other multi-edge geometries they are always an
exponentially large superposition of coherent states around the trivial geometry. This is
important in other setups with black holes [54].
8.1
Entanglement measurements of geometries with folds
We can do a similar analysis of the entanglement entropy, mode per mode, for the geome-
tries with folds. On a ﬁrst pass, because of the LME approximation, for a single mode we
ﬁnd that the uncertainty of each mode is given by
⟨(ak −⟨ak⟩)(a†
k −⟨a†
k⟩)⟩= k
2π
Z 2π
0
n(θ)dθ = knav
(8.29)
with the average number of edges denoted by nav. Moreover we have that ⟨(a†
k−⟨a†
k⟩)2⟩= 0.
The state for mode k results from a Bogolubov transformation of the collective modes
with a shift. Integrating out the ‘orthogonal’ modes, the result is a regular thermal state
for the shifted mode k. Such a thermal state is completely determined by the nav. The
entanglement entropy of such a mode is
sk = (nav) log(nav) −(nav −1) log(nav −1)
(8.30)
so again, mode per mode, the entanglement entropy of a single mode is constant and
measures the average number of edges over θ. This again makes it possible to measure
nav by a consensus measurement on semiclassical states (those that diﬀer from a folded
geometry by a ﬁnite number of collective excitations).
Now, we also ﬁnd that the LME approximation implies that there are non-trivial
correlations between the diﬀerent modes. Therefore the density matrix does not factorize
anymore. This implies that there is mutual information between the diﬀerent collections
of modes that one can produce. This is determined uniquely by the Fourier transform of
n(θ). Studying the detailed structure information of all of these correlations is beyond the
scope of the present paper.
We should note that as is usual with entanglement entropy (mode per mode) and mu-
tual information between modes, one can do unitary transformations on each of the sub-
factors without changing the answer. A particularly interesting unitary is exp(iαsa†
sas/s),
– 60 –

JHEP11(2017)121
which rotates the (shifted) s oscillator by a phase αs. These unitaries preserve the entan-
glement entropy mode per mode, but they modify the correlators as follows
⟨ama†
k⟩→⟨ama†
k⟩exp(i(αk −αm))
(8.31)
etc. Now the phase of the correlation ⟨ama†
k⟩should match the phase of ⟨am+wa†
k+w⟩, but
generically these unitaries do not do that, however, the mutual information of the factor-
ization is not changed. This means that a simple unitary operator destroys the ‘uncertainty
measurement’ of geometry without changing the entanglement entropy measurement. This
indicates that the entanglement entropy measurement of topology is much weaker than
the uncertainty measurement of topology: states that are (clearly) non geometric would
pass the entanglement entropy consensus measurement of topology, but not the uncertainty
measurement tests.
Notice also that if nav = 0, then the state is a coherent state: a minimum uncertainty
packet in each of the Hilbert spaces and the entropy for each sub-Hilbert space for a mode
k or any collection of them is zero. In general this implies that the other correlators should
vanish. This means that there are inequalities between the generalized correlators that
need to be satisﬁed. Violations of these inequalities should in general lead to ‘negative
probabilities’: violations of unitarity.
Some examples of such violations can be under-
stood in generalized half-BPS solutions of type IIB supergravity that have closed time-like
curves [62, 63]. Studying these inequalities would also be very interesting, but again, this
is beyond the scope of the present article.
9
Discussion
We have discussed topology changes in the set of LLM geometries and their dual realiza-
tion. We focused on a particular simple limit where the full mini-superspace of half BPS
geometries is quantum mechanically given by a free theory: the free chiral boson.
We found that since the coherent states of the free chiral boson are overcomplete,
any state in the quantum theory can be written as a superposition of this class of states.
These coherent states all have the same ‘trivial topology’ as the vacuum. It is curious that
one can construct states with diﬀerent topology (also known as bubbling solutions) just
by superposing states with a trivial topology, and the new topologically distinct states are
macroscopically very diﬀerent from any of the states that we are superposing. The overlaps
between the new state and the elements of the overcomplete basis of coherent states are all
exponentially suppressed. We state this by saying that topology changes can be triggered
by superposition. This is a superposition of an exponentially large number of states, not a
naive Sch¨odinger cat state that superposes just two distinct geometries.
A simple, yet deep, consequence of this fact is that topology can not be measured
by a single operator measurement. That is, the Hilbert space of states does not admit
an orthogonal decomposition into diﬀerent topological types. So if topology cannot be
measured by an operator, it seems reasonable that ﬁner geometric information might suﬀer
the same fate. This puts into question how (a seemingly unitary) eﬀective ﬁeld theory of
gravity can be compatible with this non-operator property.
– 61 –

JHEP11(2017)121
To understand the physics of our example, it became important to understand the
physical states in more than one basis of vectors for the Hilbert space of states. The set of
wave functions can be written either in an oscillator basis for the chiral modes, or in terms
of a Young tableaux basis (the free fermion realization of matrix models). We carefully
developed the dictionary between them, which is a generalized Fourier transform.
An
important result is that the set of raising and lowering operators of the free chiral boson
act simply on the Young tableaux basis. We were able to show that this action encodes
the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule for evaluating characters of the symmetric group, and the
sign that is needed for this rule is supplied by Fermi statistics.
Armed with these tools we were able to show that topology changes are characterized
by two important properties. First, a local ﬁeld in the free ﬁeld chiral boson becomes
eﬀectively multivalued so that in the simplest case
φ(θ) = φ1(θ) + φ2(θ) −˜φ1(θ)
(9.1)
The total ﬁeld, which in our case can be identiﬁed with the charge current density, can
be written eﬀectively as contributions from edges of the droplet distribution. This decom-
position is valid only for nearby states to a reference state with a diﬀerent topology from
the vacuum. The important result for us is that the ﬁelds φ1,2 and ˜φ1 on the subspace
of nearby states are each given by a chiral free boson, and they all commute with each
other. The ˜φ ﬁeld has negative energy states rather than positive energy. When we mode
expand, this decomposition is a partial Bogolubov transformation. This result puts into
ﬁrmer footing observations that have been made in [18], where we can also extend the ideas
straightforwardly to fairly general coherent states.
On the face of it, this dynamical generation of new degrees of freedom is a violation
of the Zamolodchikov c-theorem. A theory with central charge c = 1 in the UV ﬂows to a
theory which is seemingly of central charge c = 3 in the IR. It is better to write this central
charge as follows cIR = (2, 1), where we are indicating by the decomposition the fact that
the ﬁrst two act to increase the energy, and the other set of oscillators acts to decrease the
energy. This is the signature of the energy as a quadratic form, similarly as is done with
spacetime dimensions. It is the fact that we can lower the energy around the new vacuum
that allows the violation of the c-theorem: the vacuum of the new state is not stable.
This property essentially arises from trying to do eﬀective ﬁeld theory in a very special
non-vacuum state. Notice that cUV = 2 −1, so something similar to an index is preserved
in the ﬂow, indeed we found that this is the chiral anomaly of the system. The positive
energy bosons carry anomaly one, and the negative energy bosons carry anomaly (−1).
The second property of the solutions with new topology is that they are characterized
by having low uncertainty mode per mode in the mode expansion of the ﬁeld φ. In this
sense, the states can be said to be classical. We found that this uncertainty can be used as
an order parameter to measure the topology. One can also similarly use the entanglement
entropy of these modes to characterize the topology. The type of measurement that gets the
topology is either an uncertainty measurement or an entropy measurement. Numerically,
this results from measuring several quantum observables that don’t commute with each
other. We use this information to form an algebraic combination of the measurements that
– 62 –

JHEP11(2017)121
can be used to measure the topology. This ends up being a non-linear measurement on the
wave functions. To oﬀset the possibility that one or a few of the new modes is excited in a
non-classical state, the non-linear measurement needs to be performed on a large number
of modes. The majority rule decides the topology by what we have termed a consensus
measurement.
It is clear that this can be generalized beyond the simple stripe geometries we consider
for more intricate bubbles. The multi-valuedness should then be thought of on a local basis
in the coordinate θ, and the partial Bogolubov transformation should also be thought of in
terms of a local expansion. We did a partial analysis of this setup with an approximation
that describes the state as a locally multi-edge geometry. we observed that within this
approximation one could ﬁnd that generalized correlators encoded the fourier transform of
the number of edges.
Also, the partial Bogolubov transformation makes it clear that the set of nearby states
is somewhat compatible with eﬀective ﬁeld theory. The eﬀective quantum ﬁelds are the
new collective modes φI, ˜φJ. They exist on a neighborhood of the reference state. These
collective ﬁelds do not stretch all the way to the UV. They have an eﬀective cutoﬀgiven by
the stringy exclusion principle, which depends on the details of the reference state. Because
these modes only exist relative to some reference background they should be thought of
as being background dependent. This seems to get around the problem of geometry being
quantized by operators in a semiclassical approximation: the operators that are needed to
do so are state dependent in a way that depends weakly on the state, which is not too
diﬀerent from the background ﬁeld method.
To bubble or not to bubble.
Given that we can trigger changes in topology by super-
position and that we can get all possible topologies this way, we can argue that thinking of a
quantum gravity theory as a sum (or path integral) over all topologies is at best ambiguous.
There are cases where this sum over topologies is absolutely correct. For example, in
the topological string one can sum over topologies associated with crystal melting [64]. In
that case, each shape of the melted crystal is a diﬀerent topology. The limit shape of the
crystal is the geometry of the string at large distances. The partition function depends on
a probe brane and there is a parameter a that describes how far the probe brane is from
the crystal. At large a, the molten crystal can be ignored. For a ≃1 one gets the quantum
corrected stringy geometry, and for a ≃gs one is in the quantum foam regime.
We can form an analogy with this setup. The basis of Young tableaux states is a
complete basis of states. Each of these is topologically distinct in the naive classical su-
pergravity approximation. The reason for this is that even though one might have the
same spacetime topology for two conﬁgurations (same number of disks), one should also
count the quantized ﬂux through each cycle as topological data (this can not be deformed
by small amounts, but only by integers, due to the Dirac quantization condition). In this
basis, any state is in principle a superposition of an inﬁnite number of distinct topologies
that can be measured. This is not a complete set of all the possible topologies, only those
that can be realized by rotationally invariant conﬁgurations. One can expect that for suf-
ﬁciently classical states, like those that are close to our reference states, one can deﬁne an
– 63 –

JHEP11(2017)121
average (coarse-grained) topology that only counts the big corners, but not the small in-
dentations of corners (these are small semiclassical excitations around the reference state).
The distinction between geometry and excitations about a geometry depends on energy
(this replaces the parameter a of the topological string). Our consensus measurement of
topology necessitates a discussion of where we set the stringy exclusion principle. Unless
we already know the state, this is not known a priori. Indeed, in our discussion in this
paper, this is usually state dependent. When we try to go to lower energies for the probes,
the geometry appears to bubble more, while when we go to much higher energies than the
stringy exclusion principle dictates, the topology looks trivial. In our case, this is tied to
how entangled the diﬀerent long wavelength modes of the oscillators are to the UV degrees
of freedom in the free chiral boson. We can not discuss this entanglement without ﬁrst
deﬁning what we mean by long wavelength versus short wavelength.
On the other hand, we can also deﬁne the theory entirely in terms of classical coherent
states of the trivial topology as we argued in this paper. This is a diﬀerent partition of
unity (a diﬀerent choice of basis states for the Hilbert space). In this case, the deﬁnition
of topology depends on the precise superposition of states that we take. More precisely,
it is contingent on our ability to ﬁnd a reasonable nearby space of excitations to a given
reference state that can be associated to small deformations of a classical geometry. This
is a background dependent formulation of the dynamics, similar to how one treats the
background ﬁeld method.
What is curious is that the existence of the new topologies
implies that there is more than one classical limit of the free chiral boson ﬁeld theory. This
is to be understood in a double scaling limit.
In a certain sense, what we should be doing instead is to argue that the topology is
not meaningful on its own: all versions of topology that we have discussed so far should be
allowed at the same time, but most of them will not be useful descriptions of the system.
This is very familiar when we think about dualities in ﬁeld theory and string theory.
Diﬀerent duality frames are more or less useful depending on the size of particular cycles,
or in the strength of certain coupling constants. The prescription that is more classical
and permits us to get results with the least eﬀort should be the preferred duality frame. In
this sense, we should argue that at least some aspects of topology in the study of bubbling
solutions correspond to a choice of duality frame. The frame that most easily describes a
conﬁguration should be preferred. When we move away from simple conﬁgurations maybe
none of the descriptions is useful on their own, but there we have a picture of a duality
web where as we move between conﬁgurations, we get natural transitions in the topology
of spacetime without any apparent singularity.
What is obvious is that if we want to have it both ways, we are double counting. This
has implications for the fuzzball proposal [65] (see also [66]) and the counting of states in
those geometries. It might be the case that in these other setups all diﬀerent geometries
and topologies are superpositions of more basic coherent states with a ﬁxed topology.
Understanding this intriguing possibility is beyond the scope of the present work.
Decoding the hologram.
A natural question to ask is to what extent, given a state with
a diﬀerent topology than the vacuum of AdS5 × S5, is one able to recover the geometry
– 64 –

JHEP11(2017)121
from naive holographic data on the boundary. The techniques that usually permit one
to do so are elaborations on the Feﬀeraman-Graham expansion of the metric, extended to
other ﬁelds [15]. A hologram would give us the solutions for the vacuum expectation values
of single trace operators in the boundary, and that data should be useable to decipher the
geometry of the solution.
As noticed in [56], this data seems to be insuﬃcient to understand the geometry of
circularly symmetric solutions of supergravity, as there is some ambiguity in how to do that.
For us, this data is given by the expectation values of the modes of the chiral boson. For
standard coherent states around the vacuum topology, this data is suﬃcient to reconstruct
the coherent state.
For solutions around a geometric circularly symmetric solution with non-trivial topol-
ogy, it was ﬁrst noticed in [18] that the excitations of the mode expansion of the “trace”
modes on the UV theory (the free chiral boson) decompose into linear combinations of
modes at each edge. In this paper, we have proven this result and argued that the partial
Boguliubov transformation can be completed to a full Boguliubov transformation. We have
also seen that the long wavelength modes of the mode expansion of the chiral boson of the
UV theory act simply on these geometric states, and only a subset of the nearby Hilbert
space is accessible by these actions. This is a general property of having a partial Boguli-
ubov transformation. If we restore factors of N, and we have a solution with many annuli
and energy of order N2, the wavelength of the modes of the chiral boson become dependent
at energies of order N (this is the stringy exclusion principle scale). More precisely, they
fail to be planar at energies of order
√
N (see for example [67]), which are still larger than
the naive Planck scale N1/4.
A naive low energy observer would probe wavelengths up to the order of the Planck
scale. When extended to the boundary, the modes would all have long wavelengths with
respect to the stringy exclusion principle. The other modes of the Boguliubov transfor-
mation become invisible and have to be treated as being traced over. We cannot decode
the hologram with the naive boundary data. This is true even if we have measured the
approximate radii of the circular droplets. In essence, we only measure a linear combina-
tion of the geometric modes, and the other linear combinations are not accessible to the
holographic observer at inﬁnity. The modes that are visible are eﬀectively in a generalized
thermal state mode per mode and they are very entangled with the UV modes.
This suggests that the reconstruction of local ﬁelds in the bulk from the boundary,
a la [58], is generically suspect in a low energy approximation for states with non-trivial
topologies. This setup ignores the information of the transplanckian modes and the un-
derlying UV theory, which at this scale is not really geometric in the classical sense any
longer. If one acts with these types of mode operators of very high energy, one disturbs
the underlying geometry by either adding a D-brane or making excitations that make the
droplets meet with each other. A ﬂuctuation this large is non-local any longer.
Also, entanglement by itself is a very coarse description of the state and is not neces-
sarily very useful. Although we have been able to realize horizon free geometries, where
measuring the momentum space entanglement can be used as an order parameter to de-
scribe the topology, and we realize precisely some ideas in [9] in a diﬀerent context, the
– 65 –

JHEP11(2017)121
precise set of states for which we get such a geometry are not uniquely determined by
this information. It is the construction of the modes that describe the ﬂuctuations to the
nearby states to a reference state that actually represent the full details of the physics.
Final remarks.
One of the main conclusions of this paper is that even though we have a
complete Hilbert space of states in which quantum mechanics is valid, the measurement of
topology is not the result of an operator measurement. If topology is measured classically
by integrating out a density made of polynomials of the curvature of the metric over
the manifold, as we expect for gauge invariant operators in gravity, the fact that the
topology cannot be measured by an operator seems to indicate that the metric (even
modulo gauge invariance issues) is also not described by an operator. In our construction,
the metric ﬂuctuations around a suﬃciently classical state exist relative to that state, but
the construction of such operators does not extend to the full phase space of the theory.
The generic state is non-geometric, but the semiclassical analysis is valid where it should
be. This seems to be one of the properties that we need in order to claim that spacetime
is emergent and not fundamental.
The holographic modes at inﬁnity always exists.
In our case, they are the mode
expansion of the free chiral boson. These (boundary) modes give an approximation to
something that looks geometric in a Feﬀerman-Graham expansion. However, the modes in
the interior do not necessarily exist as operators. They might only be constructible around
particular classical conﬁgurations. The proposal we have for this phenomenon is inherently
non-linear: the modes that may exists in a superposition of states, do not exist in any one of
the states that we are superposing. This emergence of modes depends on the entanglement
of the soft modes with the UV and with each other. A non-linear proposal for quantum
mechanics deﬁning the physics inside of the horizon has been put forward by Papadodimas
and Raju [68]. This proposal depends crucially on this entanglement, and essentially only
on this entanglement (the state is pure but typical, so the details of the state are fairly
random). For us, the entanglement of the modes is clearly not enough. The modes that we
build are all outside the horizon and their existence depends on the state being just right.
Acknowledgments
D.B. would like to thank D. Gross, G. Horowitz, A. Puhm, S. Ramgoolam, M. Romo and
C. Vafa for various discussions, S. Raju for correspondence, and especially D. Marolf, who
has contributed enormously to our insight in this paper. Work supported in part by the
department of Energy under grant DE-SC 0011702.
A
The Murnaghan-Nakayama rule
A standard problem in the group theory of the symmetric group Sn is the computation of
the characters of conjugacy classes [σ] in a given representation R. That is, we want to
compute
χR([σ])
(A.1)
– 66 –

JHEP11(2017)121
and as is explicitly presented in section 3, we need these characters to implement the
Fourier transform relating the “string basis” and the “D-brane basis” of our Hilbert space.
The representations R of Sn will be labeled by Young diagrams with n boxes, while the
conjugacy classes will be presented in a cycle form [σ] = tw1
1 . . . twk
k
with P kwk = n. The
Murnaghan-Nakayama rule gives a recursive way to evaluate χR([σ]) in terms of χ ˜R([˜σ]),
where we have that [σ] = [˜σ]ts for some ts, and the ˜R is a set of representations of Sn−s
related to R and s in a particular way.
The rule is easiest to explain with an example ﬁrst.
Consider for example the tableaux with 10 boxes given by
(A.2)
which is a partition of 10. Assume that we want to compute the characters for splitting
into two traces (only group elements with two diﬀerent cycles) of the diagram. There are
5 such possibilities: 5 + 5, 6 + 4, 7 + 3, 8 + 2, 9 + 1. Let us compute the splitting into 5 + 5.
The ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd the hooks of the diagram, and to decorate the diagram with the
hook lengths, in the standard way
8 5 2 1
5 2
4 1
2
1
(A.3)
This will be useful, as hooks are in one to one correspondence with skew hooks, which
are of interest to us, and the corresponding pairs have the same length. We see that there
are two (skew) hooks of length 5. We ﬁrst remove one of the two length 5 skew hooks, as
shown in the ﬁgure
• • •
•
•
(A.4)
the other option is
•
• •
•
•
(A.5)
As you can see, a skew-hook is a regular hook that has been moved to the edge of the
tableaux. Like standard hooks, they do not contain a 2 × 2 squares. As previously stated,
the set of skew-hooks and regular hooks are in one to one correspondence, so one reads of
the allowed skew-hook lengths by reading the lengths of the ordinary hooks.
A sign is assigned to each such skew hook. The sign is (−1) if the number of rows
covered by the skew hook is even, or (+1) if this is odd. After removing the skew-hook
we are left with a proper partition, and we are also left with a cycle decomposition of the
– 67 –

JHEP11(2017)121
remnant of the group element (or conjugacy class). The Murnaghan-Nakayama rule states
that to obtain the character of a diagram, sum over the characters of the remnant of the
group element on the remnant tableaux with the sign of the skew-hook accounted for. Let
us do so for the example above.
To simplify, we will notate a young diagram by the length of its rows. Thus, the full
diagram is (4, 2, 2, 1, 1), and we will notate the conjugacy class by the lengths of the cycles.
That is, [5, 5].
For the example above, one skew hook has an odd number of rows and the other has
an even number of rows, so the sign is (+1) and (−1) respectively. The rule then gives
χ4,2,2,1,1([5, 5]) = χ1,1,1,1,1([5]) −χ4,1([5]) = 1 + 1 = 2
(A.6)
where the character of the remnant character is also ±1 and is determined by the number
of rows it contains. Since there are no hooks of length 6, 7, 9 (as made explicit by our
diagram with the hook lengths notated), we also ﬁnd immediately that
χ4,2,2,1,1([6, 4]) = χ4,2,2,1,1([7, 3]) = χ4,2,2,1,1([9, 1]) = 0
(A.7)
while for the last one, we ﬁnd
χ4,2,2,1,1([8, 2]) = χ1,1([2]) = −1
(A.8)
A convenient way to think about the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule is that it gives the
action of the lowering operators s∂ts on the Young diagram basis, and so it does not just
compute the characters, but the action of the lowering operator on the Hilbert space of
states. Let us discuss this with a few examples. Consider ﬁrst the state
|t1t2
2⟩=
+
−2
+
+
(A.9)
We could act on this state with the lowering operator a1. The conjugacy class states are
just Fock space states, so we know
a1|t1t2
2⟩= |t2
2⟩
(A.10)
We could further compute the necessary characters using the MN rule and expand the
new state as
|t2
2⟩=
−
+ 2
−
+
(A.11)
Alternatively, we could have considered applying the lowering operator directly to the
diagrams. Our lowering operator is a1, so it removes skew hooks of length 1 as shown
a1
=
+
(A.12)
– 68 –

JHEP11(2017)121
There were two possible ways to remove skew hooks of length 1, so we end with a sum
of the two possibilities. On the other hand, if we apply this to the trivial representation,
there is only one way to remove a hook, so we have
a1
=
(A.13)
Applying the lowering operator to the full state, we ﬁnd
a1|t1t2
2⟩= a1




+
−2
+
+




(A.14)
=
+
+
−2
−2
+
+
+
(A.15)
We see that if we simplify this, we get the same expression for the state |t2
2⟩shown above.
We would expect that if we apply any aj to our original state |t1t2
2⟩with j > 2 that
this should kill the state. Let’s see how this works diagrammatically. Of course, there are
no skew hooks of length greater than 5, as each diagram has only ﬁve boxes, so any aj with
j > 5 will kill the state. As a less trivial example, let’s consider acting with a3. This gives
a3|t1t2
2⟩= a3




+
−2
+
+




(A.16)
=
−
−
+
= 0
(A.17)
where we remember that if the height of the hook is even, then the diagram changes sign.
Notice also that there were no allowed hooks of length 3 in the third diagram, so that piece
vanishes.
Finally, we would expect that if we apply any aj on the state |tj⟩, then we should get
aj|tj⟩= j|0⟩, where the factor of j comes from the commutation rules for our raising and
lowering operators: [ai, a†
j] = δijj. We will represent the vacuum diagrammatically as •.
As an example of this, we have
a4|t4⟩= a4



−
+
−



(A.18)
= • + • + • + • = 4 • = 4|0⟩
(A.19)
where each piece was exactly a skew hook of length 4 and so became the vacuum state
when hit with a4. Also, note the sign changes come from the height of the hooks.
One can see that this is indicative of the general case. This is handled by using the
fact that
|R⟩=
X
χR[σ]
Q kw
k wk!
Y
twk
k
(A.20)
– 69 –

JHEP11(2017)121
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
Figure 7. Vacuum State of Fermi Sea.
Now, let us try to remove one ts from the above equation, by acting with s∂ts on a monomial
Q twk
k . We get swstws−1
s
. The extra factor of s and ws cancel terms in the denominator, so
that we get regular denominators as would correspond to [σ]/ts = [˜σ] for any sigma that
has a ts in it.
Now we use that χR[σ] = P(−1)∗χ ˜R([˜σ]) where (−1)∗is the sign assigned by the
Murnaghan-Nakayama rule. That is, we ﬁnd that
s∂ts|R⟩=
X (−1)∗χ ˜R[˜σ]
Q kw
k wk! (sws)[σ]/ts =
X
hooks of length s
(−1)∗| ˜R⟩
(A.21)
and because we recognize that the sum is over [˜σ] unrestricted, we ﬁnd that on the right
hand side we sum over the states ˜R with the Murnaghan-Nakayama rule sign and nothing
else.
B
Assigning Young tableaux to fermions states
The ground state of the multiple particle system • is deﬁned by the Slater determinant
• ≃lim
N→∞| −1/2⟩| −3/2⟩. . . | −N/2⟩antisymmetrized
(B.1)
where, as in the text, we shift our allowed energies so that particles sit at half integer levels.
And, as usual, the ground state has the full inﬁnite tower of negative states occupied. This
can be represented pictorially as follows, as in ﬁgure 7, where dots represent ﬁlled states
and circles represent holes.
A complete basis of states is given by
|{n}⟩≃lim
N→∞|n1⟩|n2⟩. . . |nN⟩antisymm
(B.2)
with n1 > n2 > n3 > · · · > nN, half integers, and for all suﬃciently large j we require that
nj = −2j−1
2 . This state is represented by ﬁlling in each nj energy level with a dot. If a
particular value of j is missing, it is left empty (circles in the drawings).
To each state, we will assign a Young diagram whose j-th row has rj = nj −( 1
2 −j)
boxes (and if rj = 0 we leave those rows empty and without boxes). By inverting this
– 70 –

JHEP11(2017)121
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
Figure 8. Excitation with 5 units of energy on the highest Fermion.
bc
bc
bc
bc
bc
b
b
b
b
b
Figure 9. Excitation with 1 unit of energy on the highest ﬁve fermions, or equivalent, a hole with
5 units of energy has been excited.
expression, we can go the other way, assigning a state of the Fermions to a Young diagram.
We then relate these diagrams to representations of the symmetric group.
A trivial representation (totally symmetric if considered as a representation of U(N)
instead of Sn) corresponds to an excitation out of the sea, with an energy equal to the
number of boxes. That is, the state given by
(B.3)
corresponds to the ﬁgure 8
Further, the totally anti-symmetric state corresponds to a hole, where an n-box rep-
resentation corresponds to a hole n spaces below zero. That is,
(B.4)
corresponds to the ﬁgure 9.
Basically, a tableaux is assigned by taking the highest fermion energy available and sub-
tracting the energy of the highest occupied fermion in the ground state and assigning that
many boxes to the ﬁrst row of the tableaux. We then do the same with the second highest
energy fermion, and so on until all the subsequent fermions in the excited state have the
same energy as the corresponding fermions in the vacuum, where we stop assigning boxes.
– 71 –

JHEP11(2017)121
Open Access.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC-BY 4.0), which permits any use, distribution and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
[1] J.M. Maldacena, The large-N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and supergravity,
Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38 (1999) 1113 [hep-th/9711200] [INSPIRE].
[2] S.W. Hawking, Particle creation by black holes, Commun. Math. Phys. 43 (1975) 199
[Erratum ibid. 46 (1976) 206] [INSPIRE].
[3] A. Almheiri, D. Marolf, J. Polchinski and J. Sully, Black holes: complementarity or
ﬁrewalls?, JHEP 02 (2013) 062 [arXiv:1207.3123] [INSPIRE].
[4] J.A. Wheeler, Geometrodynamics and the issue of ﬁnal state, in Relativity, groups and
topology, C. De Witt and B. DeWitt eds., Gordon and Breach, New York U.S.A., (1964)
[INSPIRE].
[5] S.W. Hawking, Space-time foam, Nucl. Phys. B 144 (1978) 349 [INSPIRE].
[6] S.W. Hawking and D.N. Page, Thermodynamics of black holes in anti-de Sitter space,
Commun. Math. Phys. 87 (1983) 577 [INSPIRE].
[7] E. Witten, Anti-de Sitter space, thermal phase transition and conﬁnement in gauge theories,
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 505 [hep-th/9803131] [INSPIRE].
[8] H. Lin, O. Lunin and J.M. Maldacena, Bubbling AdS space and 1/2 BPS geometries,
JHEP 10 (2004) 025 [hep-th/0409174] [INSPIRE].
[9] M. Van Raamsdonk, Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement,
Gen. Rel. Grav. 42 (2010) 2323 [Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 19 (2010) 2429] [arXiv:1005.3035]
[INSPIRE].
[10] J.M. Maldacena, Eternal black holes in anti-de Sitter, JHEP 04 (2003) 021
[hep-th/0106112] [INSPIRE].
[11] J. Maldacena and L. Susskind, Cool horizons for entangled black holes,
Fortsch. Phys. 61 (2013) 781 [arXiv:1306.0533] [INSPIRE].
[12] S. Ryu and T. Takayanagi, Holographic derivation of entanglement entropy from AdS/CFT,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 181602 [hep-th/0603001] [INSPIRE].
[13] D. Berenstein and A. Miller, Can topology and geometry be measured by an operator
measurement in quantum gravity?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2017) 261601 [arXiv:1605.06166]
[INSPIRE].
[14] L. Grant, L. Maoz, J. Marsano, K. Papadodimas and V.S. Rychkov, Minisuperspace
quantization of ‘bubbling AdS’ and free fermion droplets, JHEP 08 (2005) 025
[hep-th/0505079] [INSPIRE].
[15] E. Witten, Anti-de Sitter space and holography, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2 (1998) 253
[hep-th/9802150] [INSPIRE].
[16] S. Corley, A. Jevicki and S. Ramgoolam, Exact correlators of giant gravitons from dual
N = 4 SYM theory, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 5 (2002) 809 [hep-th/0111222] [INSPIRE].
– 72 –

JHEP11(2017)121
[17] D.J. Gross and W. Taylor, Two-dimensional QCD is a string theory,
Nucl. Phys. B 400 (1993) 181 [hep-th/9301068] [INSPIRE].
[18] R. de Mello Koch, Geometries from Young diagrams, JHEP 11 (2008) 061
[arXiv:0806.0685] [INSPIRE].
[19] D. Berenstein, A toy model for the AdS/CFT correspondence, JHEP 07 (2004) 018
[hep-th/0403110] [INSPIRE].
[20] M. Stone, Schur functions, chiral bosons and the quantum Hall eﬀect edge states,
Phys. Rev. B 42 (1990) 8399 [INSPIRE].
[21] G. Mandal, Fermions from half-BPS supergravity, JHEP 08 (2005) 052 [hep-th/0502104]
[INSPIRE].
[22] N.V. Suryanarayana, Half-BPS giants, free fermions and microstates of superstars,
JHEP 01 (2006) 082 [hep-th/0411145] [INSPIRE].
[23] J.M. Maldacena and A. Strominger, AdS3 black holes and a stringy exclusion principle,
JHEP 12 (1998) 005 [hep-th/9804085] [INSPIRE].
[24] J. McGreevy, L. Susskind and N. Toumbas, Invasion of the giant gravitons from
anti-de Sitter space, JHEP 06 (2000) 008 [hep-th/0003075] [INSPIRE].
[25] M.T. Grisaru, R.C. Myers and O. Tafjord, SUSY and goliath, JHEP 08 (2000) 040
[hep-th/0008015] [INSPIRE].
[26] A. Hashimoto, S. Hirano and N. Itzhaki, Large branes in AdS and their ﬁeld theory dual,
JHEP 08 (2000) 051 [hep-th/0008016] [INSPIRE].
[27] V. Balasubramanian, M. Berkooz, A. Naqvi and M.J. Strassler, Giant gravitons in conformal
ﬁeld theory, JHEP 04 (2002) 034 [hep-th/0107119] [INSPIRE].
[28] A.E. Mosaﬀa and M.M. Sheikh-Jabbari, On classiﬁcation of the bubbling geometries,
JHEP 04 (2006) 045 [hep-th/0602270] [INSPIRE].
[29] V. Balasubramanian, J. de Boer, V. Jejjala and J. Simon, The library of Babel: on the origin
of gravitational thermodynamics, JHEP 12 (2005) 006 [hep-th/0508023] [INSPIRE].
[30] S.R. Das and S.D. Mathur, Folds, bosonization and nontriviality of the classical limit of 2D
string theory, Phys. Lett. B 365 (1996) 79 [hep-th/9507141] [INSPIRE].
[31] V. Balasubramanian, J. de Boer, S. El-Showk and I. Messamah, Black holes as eﬀective
geometries, Class. Quant. Grav. 25 (2008) 214004 [arXiv:0811.0263] [INSPIRE].
[32] L.J. Dixon, J.A. Harvey, C. Vafa and E. Witten, Strings on orbifolds,
Nucl. Phys. B 261 (1985) 678 [INSPIRE].
[33] L.J. Dixon, J.A. Harvey, C. Vafa and E. Witten, Strings on orbifolds. 2,
Nucl. Phys. B 274 (1986) 285 [INSPIRE].
[34] M.R. Douglas and G.W. Moore, D-branes, quivers and ALE instantons, hep-th/9603167
[INSPIRE].
[35] W. Fulton and J. Harris, Representation theory: a ﬁrst course, Readings Math. 129,
Springer-Verlag, New York U.S.A., (2013).
[36] R. Dijkgraaf, G.W. Moore, E.P. Verlinde and H.L. Verlinde, Elliptic genera of symmetric
products and second quantized strings, Commun. Math. Phys. 185 (1997) 197
[hep-th/9608096] [INSPIRE].
– 73 –

JHEP11(2017)121
[37] R. Dijkgraaf, E.P. Verlinde and H.L. Verlinde, Matrix string theory,
Nucl. Phys. B 500 (1997) 43 [hep-th/9703030] [INSPIRE].
[38] A. Jevicki and B. Sakita, The quantum collective ﬁeld method and its application to the
planar limit, Nucl. Phys. B 165 (1980) 511 [INSPIRE].
[39] A. Jevicki and B. Sakita, Loop space representation and the large-N behavior of the one
plaquette Kogut-Susskind Hamiltonian, Phys. Rev. D 22 (1980) 467 [INSPIRE].
[40] D. Berenstein, Extremal chiral ring states in the AdS/CFT correspondence are described by
free fermions for a generalized oscillator algebra, Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 046006
[arXiv:1504.05389] [INSPIRE].
[41] D. Berenstein, D.H. Correa and S.E. Vazquez, Quantizing open spin chains with variable
length: an example from giant gravitons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005) 191601
[hep-th/0502172] [INSPIRE].
[42] D. Berenstein and E. Dzienkowski, Open spin chains for giant gravitons and relativity,
JHEP 08 (2013) 047 [arXiv:1305.2394] [INSPIRE].
[43] D. Berenstein and E. Dzienkowski, Giant gravitons and the emergence of geometric limits in
β-deformations of N = 4 SYM, JHEP 01 (2015) 126 [arXiv:1408.3620] [INSPIRE].
[44] H.L. Verlinde, Bits, matrices and 1/N, JHEP 12 (2003) 052 [hep-th/0206059] [INSPIRE].
[45] J. Polchinski, Dirichlet branes and Ramond-Ramond charges,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 4724 [hep-th/9510017] [INSPIRE].
[46] A. Sen, Rolling tachyon, JHEP 04 (2002) 048 [hep-th/0203211] [INSPIRE].
[47] J. Polchinski, String theory. Volume 2: superstring theory and beyond, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge U.K., (2005) [INSPIRE].
[48] D. Berenstein, Giant gravitons: a collective coordinate approach,
Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013) 126009 [arXiv:1301.3519] [INSPIRE].
[49] D. Berenstein, A matrix model for a quantum Hall droplet with manifest particle-hole
symmetry, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 085001 [hep-th/0409115] [INSPIRE].
[50] R. de Mello Koch, C. Mathwin and H.J.R. van Zyl, LLM magnons, JHEP 03 (2016) 110
[arXiv:1601.06914] [INSPIRE].
[51] K. Papadodimas and S. Raju, Remarks on the necessity and implications of state-dependence
in the black hole interior, Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) 084049 [arXiv:1503.08825] [INSPIRE].
[52] L. Motl, Finding and abandoning incorrect general relativity lore,
http://motls.blogspot.com/2013/06/ﬁnding-and-abandoning-incorrect.html, 11 June 2013.
[53] L. Motl, One can’t background-independently localize ﬁeld operators in QG,
http://motls.blogspot.com/2013/08/one-cant-background-independently.html, 30 August
2013.
[54] A. Almheiri, X. Dong and B. Swingle, Linearity of holographic entanglement entropy,
JHEP 02 (2017) 074 [arXiv:1606.04537] [INSPIRE].
[55] V. Balasubramanian, B. Czech, K. Larjo and J. Simon, Integrability versus information loss:
a simple example, JHEP 11 (2006) 001 [hep-th/0602263] [INSPIRE].
[56] K. Skenderis and M. Taylor, Anatomy of bubbling solutions, JHEP 09 (2007) 019
[arXiv:0706.0216] [INSPIRE].
– 74 –

JHEP11(2017)121
[57] D. Berenstein and A. Miller, Reconstructing spacetime from the hologram, even in the
classical limit, requires physics beyond the Planck scale,
Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 25 (2016) 1644012 [arXiv:1605.05288] [INSPIRE].
[58] A. Hamilton, D.N. Kabat, G. Lifschytz and D.A. Lowe, Local bulk operators in AdS/CFT: a
boundary view of horizons and locality, Phys. Rev. D 73 (2006) 086003 [hep-th/0506118]
[INSPIRE].
[59] D. Kabat, G. Lifschytz and D.A. Lowe, Constructing local bulk observables in interacting
AdS/CFT, Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 106009 [arXiv:1102.2910] [INSPIRE].
[60] V. Balasubramanian, M.B. McDermott and M. Van Raamsdonk, Momentum-space
entanglement and renormalization in quantum ﬁeld theory, Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 045014
[arXiv:1108.3568] [INSPIRE].
[61] C.T. Asplund and D. Berenstein, Entanglement entropy converges to classical entropy around
periodic orbits, Annals Phys. 366 (2016) 113 [arXiv:1503.04857] [INSPIRE].
[62] M.M. Caldarelli, D. Klemm and P.J. Silva, Chronology protection in anti-de Sitter,
Class. Quant. Grav. 22 (2005) 3461 [hep-th/0411203] [INSPIRE].
[63] G. Milanesi and M. O’Loughlin, Singularities and closed time-like curves in type IIB 1/2
BPS geometries, JHEP 09 (2005) 008 [hep-th/0507056] [INSPIRE].
[64] A. Iqbal, N. Nekrasov, A. Okounkov and C. Vafa, Quantum foam and topological strings,
JHEP 04 (2008) 011 [hep-th/0312022] [INSPIRE].
[65] S.D. Mathur, Black holes and beyond, Annals Phys. 327 (2012) 2760 [arXiv:1205.0776]
[INSPIRE].
[66] I. Bena and N.P. Warner, Resolving the structure of black holes: philosophizing with a
hammer, arXiv:1311.4538 [INSPIRE].
[67] C. Kristjansen, J. Plefka, G.W. Semenoﬀand M. Staudacher, A new double scaling limit of
N = 4 super Yang-Mills theory and PP wave strings, Nucl. Phys. B 643 (2002) 3
[hep-th/0205033] [INSPIRE].
[68] K. Papadodimas and S. Raju, An infalling observer in AdS/CFT, JHEP 10 (2013) 212
[arXiv:1211.6767] [INSPIRE].
– 75 –

