Power, Control, and Persuasion: A Discussion of The Queue 
Joanna Wickersham 
82-215 Arab Culture Through Film and Literature 
 
 
 
The Queue by Egyptian novelist, Basma Abdel Aziz, is a beautiful and thought-
provoking tale of the struggle to hold on to reality and personal truths under an autocratic 
regime, called “The Gate.” Yeyha, the protagonist, is considered to have “an irrational belief that 
he can alter reality” (102), however the novel centers around a discussion of what reality actually 
is and who defines it. In this article, I will discuss various characters and their relative ability to 
dictate reality, the effects of the regime on personal development, and the ways religion is used 
as a tool for promoting ideas and furthering social pressure. 
The Gate and his network are the most obvious examples of altering reality in the novel. An 
authoritarian government survives off of creating a sense of confusion, evading the truth, and 
convincing those who are weak and in need of answers of something invalid. The Gate protects 
itself in ways that are absurd to readers, such as by condemning those who “spread false 
allegations and therefore corruption” (133) via the High Sheik, despite doing this exact thing 
with the Disgraceful Events. By getting rid of all X-rays and torturing or arresting those who act 
against them, the Gate is able to maintain control. Many, including Amani, succumb to the 
message of the Gate because it removes a substantial pressure off of them. The methodologies of 
the Gate force everyone to “think the same way” and be “on equal ground” (90) in the queue. 
Simply by keeping people in the queue and therefore isolated from the rest of the world, the Gate 
is able to keep unrest contained. By controlling TV and news broadcasts, the only reality citizens 
are able to know is the one fed to them. 
Yehya, more than any other character in the novel, is unable to alter reality. This is because 
the reality he is attempting to reveal, or at least protect, is the physical reality the bullet 
represents. “He was carrying a government bullet inside his body. He possessed tangible 
evidence of what had really happened during the Disgraceful Events and was perhaps the only 
person still alive who was willing to prove what the authorities had done” (116). Yehya cannot 
alter his reality because the bullet is literally inside of him, killing him a little bit every day with 
“no chance that his condition would stabilize” (198). He struggles with motivation to continue 

with his goal and others around him succumb to the delusion the Gate is projecting. Giving in for 
Yehya would mean death. Holding on to his initial understanding of the Disgraceful Events is the 
only way for him to survive. 
Shalaby attempts to alter his reality but has very limited resources with which to do so. 
Shalaby remains in the queue because he wishes to have his cousin’s death warrant special 
recognition for his family. He wants to “put them on par with the landowner”(172) and therefore 
give his family some freedom and financial stability in their small town. In his many attempts to 
convince others of Mahfouz’s honor, it becomes apparent through his desperation that Shalaby is 
trying to convince himself more than anyone else. He is dedicating so much time by waiting in 
the queue and all he has to hope for is that the Gate will listen. His family’s future rests on his 
ability to alter the reality that his cousin murdered someone by confirming Mahfouz was a 
martyr and the victim a mere “troublemaker, a saboteur, out to frighten people and make their 
lives more difficult than they already were” (77). 
The woman with the short hair has one apparent goal in the story: to expose reality. She is 
the only character to fully stick to an anti- Gate campaign without wavering. She uses Um 
Mabrouk’s shop as a place to “recruit for the campaign”(168) she leads and collects, reads, and 
marks up news for other people to pay attention to. “Her presence among [the queue] irritated the 
man in the galabeya”(48), which in many ways was her exact goal: to refuse the Gate and its 
network from having the only voice. 
Um Mabrouk is special in how she alters reality for a good cause. Um Mabrouk is in the 
queue to try and get her dying child the help she needs. She doesn’t have the money on her own 
but is able to make a somewhat steady income by running her shop to serve other members in the 
queue. Beyond this, her spot becomes a gathering place and a source of comfort for others. 
People are able to have some stability and sense of community as they drink tea and listen to the 
radio, despite the hardships and absurdity of the queue. She had a “constant flow of customers” 
(168) and her “gathering place became the mouth of the river that filled the queue with news and 
rumors” (169).  Simultaneously, Um Mabrouk alters the reality of her poverty by starting a 
business and the reality of others by creating a sense of normalcy. 
 
 
Aziz utilizes the transformation of various characters throughout the novel to represent the 
effects a hierarchical power can have on behavior under regimes like the Gate. By tracing 

different reactions, Aziz is able to discuss the relative chaos that societal standards and pressures 
can create not only among groups of people, but also within one’s self. 
 
Ines represents the Gate’s ideal transformation of a person. She represents a point of 
strength in the beginning, speaking out in favor of morality and against pure obedience to the 
Gate. When Ines feels watched, however, as suggested by the recording of her speech, she grows 
paranoid of being victim to the Gate’s wrath, which would not only endanger her but the future 
of her entire family. She would be blamed “for everything she’d done, even though it hadn’t 
been intentional” (131). Ines succumbs to the ideals the Gate and is suppressed, quiet, and 
obedient due to her fears. By attending the man in the galabeya’s meetings and dressing more 
conservatively, she feels that “her fear begins to fade” (187). The Gate offers a sense of 
protection for those are weak and fearful. 
 
Amani represents what Ines fears and avoids. Amani does speak out by trying to find 
Yehya’s X-ray and is caught. She is subjected to torture, the form of which is not fully revealed 
but extremely impactful. Amani loses her drive to prove the Gate wrong and slides into a 
sedentary lifestyle. She distances herself from her friends and eventually loses her job. Her life 
and personality are in many ways irreversibly damaged. “As life in the queue went on, Amani’s 
life gradually broke down” (189). Her character represents what a lack of obedience can entail 
and sends a message to others who are witness to her a change (such as Ines) what their fate 
could be. 
 
Tarek’s character is very interesting. He suggests through his narrative that he is not 
necessarily in agreeance with the Gate and has been flagged as someone who isn’t the most 
agreeable with the Gate’s terms, but he is most focused on not getting too involved, presenting 
too strong an opinion, or “question[ing] the Gate’s definitive and crushing triumph” (8). We see 
with his development what happens when personal morals begin to put stress on this choice of 
non-action. Tarek weighs the consequences of saving Yehya with the fear of being victim to the 
Gate. His position is one of relative power in society, being a doctor, yet his power is extremely 
limited, and this suppresses his ability to help while also makes him seem to Yehya like someone 
who can. Eventually, “the constant turmoil, and his own helplessness in controlling his thoughts 
and feelings” (201) encourage him to seek Yehya out and perform the surgery. 

Aziz goes further with the novel to specifically outline the various ways religion can be 
used as a tool for fear, control and persuasion through multiple outlets: most notably within the 
self, among citizens, and across divisions of power. 
 
Within the self, religion is used to allow and justify certain behaviors and actions. There 
are many different examples of this used throughout the book. Smaller examples include the man 
who takes Yehya’s spot and claims he is able to because he must have been “fated for that spot 
(62). In a similar vein, Shalaby stands by his belief that his cousin is a martyr and not a murderer 
because “insubordination [is] a sin greater than any moral could bear” (78). Such personal 
religious beliefs can often become excuses for otherwise questionable behavior. The man in the 
galabeya also uses his dedication to scripture to assert himself as a moral role model for those in 
the queue. He judges and disgraces others for not following his exact beliefs, which eventually 
has a direct effect on characters such as Ines, who begins to dress more conservatively and attend 
his meetings. 
 
Citizens who are a part of the Gate’s network or are strong believers, such as the man in 
the galabeya, represent how someone with no realistic qualifications can become significant 
community members because of their obedience. Simply because the rhetoric he uses produces 
fear of being outcasted in the eyes of the Gate, the man in the galabeya attracts a following and 
is able to influence those around him. When his following becomes established, he able to spread 
ideas under the premise of religion regarding how women should act by “praising… modestly 
dressed believers” (185). Other community members, like the Booth worker, use religion to 
pressure Um Mabrouk to give up with her attempt to help her family by “telling her there was no 
need to go around blaming other people for her own woes” (67) if she believes in God and his 
plan. 
 
The Gate uses subtle but direct narrative to influence people via those is positions of 
power. Its messages often come from those of religious prowess that don’t directly demand 
action of anyone but use language that suggests if a person chooses not to obey, they are evil. 
This causes the individual to be responsible for their own choices and weigh the apparent 
consequences themselves. For those who rely on religion, voluntarily choosing to act against the 
Gate might be extremely challenging. The main goal of the Gate is to project blame onto others 
and appear innocent and moral in what they do. Utilizing those in religious power to support 
their control is an extremely useful tactic for impressing their views  upon others without having 

to have their own overbearing voice. The author derides religion by expressing the absurdity of it 
being intertwined with politics when the High Sheikh suggests spreading false allegations is a sin 
and can be absolved “by making seven consecutive phone calls” (133). The absurdity of this 
statement lies in how the Gate’s exact tactics are to spread rumors and in how making phone 
calls is a ridiculous form of absolving sin. 
 
This novel stands out because of its ability to pack so many important messages about the 
reality that many face under their government while still telling a literarily profound tale that is 
near impossible to put down. Its discussion of control via religion and delusion is far from 
fiction. 
 
 
 
Works Cited 
 
Aziz, Basma Abdel., and Elisabeth Jaquette. The Queue. Melville House, 2016. 
 

