Corruption and
Governance in Asia
Edited by
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

Corruption and Governance in Asia

This page intentionally left blank 

Corruption and Governance 
in Asia
Edited by
John B. Kidd
and
Frank-Jürgen Richter

Individual chapters © contributors 2003
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90
Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The authors have asserted their rights to be identified 
as the authors of this work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988.
First published 2003 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, England RC21 6XS and
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010
Companies and representatives throughout the world
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave
Macmillan division of St. Martin’s Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.
Macmillan® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom
and other countries. Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European
Union and other countries.
ISBN 1–4039–0560–6 hardback
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully
managed and sustained forest sources.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Corruption and governance in Asia / edited by John Kidd & Frank-Jürgen
Richter.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1–4039–0560–6
1. Corporate governance – Asia. 2. Business enterprises – Asia – Corrupt
practices. I. Kidd, John. II. Richter, Frank-Jürgen.
HD2741 .C785 2002
338.095–dc21
2002027075
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
12
11
10
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham and Eastbourne

Contents
Preface
vii
About the Authors
viii
1
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
1
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter
2
The Challenge to Corruption and the International 
Business Environment
27
Stephen Dearden
3
Poor Corporate Governance, Market Discipline and 
Cronyism in the 1997 Asian Crisis
43
Christopher Gan
4
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations: 
A Cultural View of Governance
61
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed
5
Understanding the Mind of the Chinese: 
A Historical Perspective
86
Sui Pheng Low
6
The Competitive Advantage with Chinese Characteristics –
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
107
Matti Nojonen
7
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism – 
An Institutional Approach to the Reform of Governance
131
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke
8
Taming the Sokaiya: Can Economic and 
Corporate Reform Eliminate Extortion in Japan?
149
Teri Jane Ursacki
9
Fighting against Corruption: The Japanese Approach 
to Reform Corporate Governance
166
Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka
v

vi
Contents
10
Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy: Is this Form 
of Governance Transferable to Other Asian Countries?
180
Jon S. T. Quah
11
A Human Resource Development Program to Foster 
Individual Moral Development in Indian Corporations: 
Aligning Corporate Governance with Natural Law
198
Dennis Heaton, Thomas Carlisle and Ian Brown
12
Corruption in Asia – A Bottom-up Approach to 
its Resolution
210
Paul Robins
13
Doing the Right Thing – Incorporating the Ethical 
Imperative into the Sustainable Development Process
225
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah
Index
251

Preface
Corruption and Governance in Asia provides a stark reminder of what
unaccountable and irresponsible business behaviour, often bordering on
the criminal, could do to the supposedly unassailable dragon and tiger
economies. If Asia is to profit from the lessons of the crisis that effectively
wiped many of our countries off the economic radar screen, we must
embrace the fact that the unbridled excesses that underpinned our bub-
ble economies were really no substitute for good corporate governance.
One of the most pressing contemporary issues facing management in
much of Asia is business ethics, or not to put too fine a point on it, cor-
ruption in business transactions which puts an unnecessary burden and
cost on investors. It is a subject that is receiving a great deal of interna-
tional attention because of heightened awareness that bad governance
contributes directly to corruption.
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter deserve our admiration and
gratitude for putting together a highly relevant and readable volume. 
It sends a clear message, a wake-up call, to those with business involve-
ment in Asia that no change or improvement in the way they manage
their business operations is possible if their attitude to good governance
is out of kilter with contemporary global trends.
It is important for us to remember that where good governance is
firmly in place, there will be less of a problem with corruption. Also
worth noting is the fact that good governance is not incompatible with
a healthy balance sheet. Business whether in Asia or elsewhere is not just
about making sound investment decisions, taking and managing risks,
and coping with economic uncertainties. Today, it is also about social
responsibility, putting all our actions under public scrutiny and respond-
ing to the concerns of those among whom we conduct business. Clearly,
Asia has to reinvent itself if it is to avoid another devastation which bad
governance is guaranteed to trigger.
In conclusion, let me just say that good governance is no longer the
luxury of the ethically correct businessmen and women; it has indeed
become a global business necessity in the fight against corruption.
TUNKU ABDUL AZIZ
Vice-Chairman,
Transparency International
Berlin
vii

About the Authors
Zafar U. Ahmed is a Full Professor of Marketing and International
Business at the Texas A&M University – Commerce, Texas, USA. He has
over 10-year industry experience earned across Africa, and 15 years of aca-
demic experience to his credit accumulated at the State University of New
York at Fredonia; Minot State University, North Dakota; Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore; Sacred Heart University, Connecticut;
Fort Hays State University, Kansas and Texas A&M University – Commerce,
Texas. He has been an advisor and consultant to numerous governmental
organizations across Africa and Asia. He has more than 100 scholarly 
publications to his credit, serves as the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of
International Business and Entrepreneurship, and is listed in the ‘Harvard
Directory of International Business and Management Academics and
Researchers’.
Ian Brown is Professor of Vedic Management at Maharishi Institute of
Management in Chennai, India, and a consultant with the Maharishi
Corporate Development Programme in Chennai. He is a frequent con-
tributor to management seminars and periodicals in India.
Thomas Carlisle has 19 years experience consulting to corporations on
the implementation and evaluation of stress management programmes
for human resource and organizational development. He has served 
as U.S. Regional Director, National Research Coordinator, and Inter-
national Director in India and in Indonesia for the Maharishi Corporate
Development Programme. He has researched and conducted courses for
MCDP in large US firms such as General Motors and Entergy, and such
Indian firms as Bhoruka Power and HMT. In addition to his doctorate in
administration, he holds a PhD in psychology and has taught both man-
agement and developmental psychology courses at university level. He
is the author of two books and is currently writing a third under the
working title of Management Beyond Ego.
He is presently residing in Chennai, India, where he is Director of the
Maharishi University of Management distance education MBA pro-
gramme covering five sites in India.
Hock-Beng Cheah researches and teaches at the School of Economics
and Management, University College, University of New South Wales.
viii

In Economics, his research interests are focused on sustainable develop-
ment and political economy in the Asia-Pacific region. In the Management
field, his teaching and research interests include Human Resource
Management, Organizational Development, and Entrepreneurship. He
was a visiting Research Fellow at the Snider Entrepreneurial Center,
University of Pennsylvania, where he proposed a new perspective of the
entrepreneurial process. He has also undertaken research at the Entre-
preneurship Development Centre, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore; Economics Research Center at Nagoya University, Japan; and
the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore.
His work has been published in a variety of monographs and journals
including: Creativity and Innovation Management, Journal of Business
Venturing, Journal of Enterprising Culture, Manchester Papers on Develop-
ment, and Labour & Industry.
Melanie Cheah (Xie Yu Lin) is presently undertaking studies at the
Foreign Affairs College, Beijing, China. She was a corporate lawyer at Allen,
Allen and Hemsley in Sydney. She received a Japanese Government
Monbusho scholarship to undertake studies at the Graduate Institute of
Policy Studies in Tokyo, Japan, from which she has recently been awarded
a Master of Public Policy. She previously worked as an intern at the
Capacity Building Unit (Africa Region) at the World Bank, Washington DC.
She has a keen interest in management, entrepreneurship and devel-
opment issues, with a particular focus on sustainable development. She
is a Director in Development Options, a new entrepreneurial venture
that is seeking to promote sustainable solutions for communities in
developing countries in Asia.
Stephen Dearden is a Lecturer in Economics at Manchester Metropolitan
University. He is Convenor of the Development Studies Associations’
European Development Policy Study Group and has published a num-
ber of articles in the area. He is Joint Editor of European Economic Inte-
gration (Longman) and editor of a forthcoming book which examines 
the European Unions’ economic relations with the Commonwealth
Caribbean.
Christopher Gan is a senior lecturer in Lincoln University, New
Zealand. He teaches financial markets, institutions and policy, advanced
microeconomic, international finance, postgraduate commercial bank-
ing, applied research methods and international finance to graduate stu-
dents. He is also a consultant with the Mekong Institute in Thailand
conducting economics and financial training courses for middle level
About the Authors
ix

management from the Greater Mekong Sub Region Countries. He
obtained a PhD in Agriculture Economics from Louisiana State University
and an MS in International Economics from the Indiana State University,
before moving to New Zealand.
Christopher has published in several areas including resource and
environmental economics, non-market valuation techniques, interna-
tional trade, eco-tourism and Asian financial crisis. His research interests
include resource and environmental economics, development econom-
ics, applied microeconomic, international trade and financial issues 
in Asia.
Dennis Heaton is Chair of the Department of Management and Public
Affairs at Maharishi University of Management, Fairfield, Iowa, USA. He
has a doctorate degree in Educational Leadership from Boston University.
His teaching activities include delivering MBA courses by distance edu-
cation at five locations in India, in conjunction with the Maharishi
Institutes of Management in Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, Lucknow,
and New Delhi. He has authored presentations and publications con-
cerning Maharishi Vedic Management in the Academy of Management,
the Organizational Behavior Teaching Society, the Business Research Year-
book, and Chinmaya Management Review.
He is co-author of the chapter ‘Awakening creative intelligence for
peak performance: Reviving an Asian tradition’, in J. Kidd, Xue Li, and
F.-J. Richter (eds.), Human Intelligence Deployment in Asian business: The
Sixth Generation project. London and New York: Palgrave (2001).
Hans Hendrischke As an associate professor he is Head of the
Department of Chinese and Indonesian Studies, and also Director of the
UNSW-UTS Center for Research on Provincial China at the University of
New South Wales in Sydney. He publishes on economic and political
reforms in China and has co-edited The Political Economy of China’s
Provinces: Comparative and Competitive Advantage, Routledge, 1999. He is
presently involved in a joint project on ‘Entrepreneurship and the emer-
gence of the private business sector in China’.
Kathryn Gordon works on investment issues at the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Her most recent
responsibilities include research relating to the fight against corruption
and, more generally, the management by international companies of
compliance with law and regulation and unwritten societal expectations
on business conduct. She also participated in negotiations that resulted in
the revised OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (non-binding
x
About the Authors

recommendations by governments to multinational enterprises cover-
ing nine areas of business conduct). In earlier positions at the OECD, she
co-ordinated the microeconomic content of the OECD surveys of mem-
ber economies. This covers a wide range of fields including taxation,
human capital, competition policy and financial markets.
Prior to moving to the OECD, Kathryn was a professor at a French 
business school (the Ecole Superieure des Sciences Economiques et
Commerciales). Although she is a citizen of the United States, Kathryn
has been a resident of France for nearly twenty years. She obtained a PhD
and an MBA in Finance from the University of California, Berkeley before
moving to France.
James P. Johnson is Associate Professor of International Business at the
Crummer Graduate School of Business, Rollins College, Winter Park,
Florida. His research interests include managing international joint ven-
tures, strategic decision-making processes in multinational corporations,
and strategic change in companies in emerging economies; he has pub-
lished in Management International Review, Journal of Business Research,
International Marketing Review, and the Journal of World Business. A member
of the Academy of Management, the Academy of International Business,
and the Ibero-American Academy of Management, he has previously lived
and worked in Britain, Spain, Finland, Yugoslavia, and Mexico.
Naresh Khatri is Assistant Professor of Strategic Human Resource
Management and Transformational Leadership in the Department of
Health Management and Informatics, School of Medicine, University 
of Missouri at Columbia. He holds a PhD degree from the State University
of New York, Buffalo and an MBA from the Indian Institute of Manage-
ment, Ahmedabad.
Dr Khatri’s research and teaching interests focus on understanding
behavioural issues at the organizational apex. Specifically, in view of the
critical role of people in the success of modern organizations, Dr Khatri
is interested in examining the proactive role of managing people dimen-
sion in achieving competitive advantage. Further, only a few organiza-
tions fully understand the impact of behavioural issues on organizational
performance; most focus on financial outcomes alone to find to their 
dismay constant erosion in their competitiveness as a consequence. 
Dr Khatri advocates ways that unleash the potential of people in organ-
izations. He has published numerous articles on the above issues in 
refereed journals, such as Academy of Management Best Papers Proceedings,
Human Relations, Human Resource Management Journal, International
Journal of Human Resource Management, Asia Pacific Journal of Management,
About the Authors
xi

Decision, International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, Personnel
Review, and International Journal of Manpower, among others. Currently,
he is working on a book project entitled ‘Critical Issues in Managing
Human Capital’.
John B. Kidd was educated in the UK and worked for several major 
UK organizations before returning to University scholarship. In the
Universities of Birmingham and now Aston Business School his research
focused on the development of IT use in SMEs; the management of proj-
ects; and the softer management issues that concern multi-national
joint ventures. He has held visiting professorships in several European
Universities, and in the China Europe International Business School,
Shanghai.
His recent books on Asian matters, co-edited with Li Xue and Frank-
Jürgen Richter, are Maximising Human Intelligence Deployment In Asia: The
6th Generation Project and also Advances in Human Resource Management
in Asia, London & New York: Palgrave (both 2001).
Barbara Krug received her PhD in Economics from the University of
Saarland, Saarbruecken; to be followed by the Habilitation Doctorate 
in Economics (venia legendi in economics), University of Saarland,
Saarbruecken, Germany. She was Guest Professor Economics Faculty,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 1983–84; Visiting Fellow, 
St. Antony’s College, Oxford University, 1988–89; Guest Lecturer,
Economics Faculty, Justus-Liebig Universitaet Giessen, 1990–91; Visiting
Member, School of Social Science, Institute For Advanced Study, Princeton,
1993–94; ETH Zuerich, Switzerland 1995–96, and is presently Head of
Department Organisation Theory and Human Resource Management,
Rotterdam School of Management where she holds a chair for Economics
of Governance.
Her publications include Chinas Weg zur Marktwirtschaft; Blood, sweat
or cheating: politics and the transformation of socialist economies in China,
the USSR and Eastern Europe’, Studies in Comparative Communism; On cus-
tom in economics: the case of humanism and trade regimes’, Journal of
Institutional and Theoretical Economics.
She is presently working on ‘Entrepreneurship and the Emergence of a
Private Business Sector in China’ in collaboration with Hans Hendrischke,
University of New South Wales, and Yao Xianguo, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou.
Sui Pheng Low is Associate Professor and Vice-Dean (Research) at the
School of Design and Environment, National University of Singapore. 
xii
About the Authors

A Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Building, he holds a BSc (Building)
(Hons) degree from the National University of Singapore and an MSc (Eng)
degree from the University of Birmingham. He also holds a PhD from 
the University of London specializing in international construction 
marketing.
He has a special interest in how cross-cultural behaviour can influence
international project management, especially in the context of China.
Dr Low has conducted extensive studies on how international cultural
differences can affect quality management systems in the construction
industry. He is acknowledged internationally as an authority on the
study of ancient Chinese philosophies and strategies for modern day
business. His latest book Asian Wisdom for Effective Management was pub-
lished in June 2001 by Pelanduk Publishers, a publishing house based in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia which specializes in Chinese and Asian titles.
Maiko Miyake is a research officer at Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA), World Bank Group where she researches on foreign direct
investment, investment insurance, risk management and various eco-
nomic developments. Previously, she held a position of project officer in
the International Finance Corporation (IFC), World Bank Group provid-
ing advisory services for companies on human resources management
strategies and corporate governance. Prior to joining the World Bank
Group, she worked at the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), where she dealt with a wide range of subjects
related to investment and multinational enterprises, such as Mergers &
Acquisitions (M&As), financial crisis, development, corruption and cor-
porate social responsibility.
Maiko, a Japanese national, has studied and/or worked in Japan, USA,
Argentina, UK, Switzerland, Brazil, Mexico, France, Guatemala and
Nigeria. She has a PhD in International Business from the University of
Bradford and an MA in Development Studies from the University of East
Anglia.
Matti Nojonen is a Sinologist and a graduate of the Department of East
Asian Studies at the Stockholm University. At the moment he is a Research
Fellow in the Department of Management at the Helsinki School of
Economics and Business Administration, Finland.
Currently, he is finalizing his PhD thesis on ‘Guanxi in three different
Chinese cities; Beijing, Shanghai and Qingdao’. In developing his thesis
Nojonen conducted ethnographic fieldwork over a two-year period
(1996–98) in these cities. Nojonen also has a more general research
About the Authors
xiii

interest in contemporary social and economic issues in China, medieval
Chinese economic history and thought, and Chinese idea history.
Jon S.T. Quah is Professor of Political Science at the National University
of Singapore (NUS), Co-editor of the Asian Journal of Political Science, and
is a member of Transparency International’s Governance Research
Council. He has published widely on corruption, civil service reform, and
public personnel management in Asian countries. His publications include
nine books and monographs, and 136 journal articles, book chapters, and
conference papers. As the lead consultant for the United Nations Develop-
ment Programme’s Mission to Mongolia from September to November
1998, he formulated the National Anti-Corruption Plan for the Govern-
ment of Mongolia. He completed an evaluation of the personnel manage-
ment of Macau’s Civil Service from September 2000 to May 2001 at the
invitation of the Government of Macau SAR. He teaches a module on
Corruption and Governance in Asian Countries at NUS and frequently
participates in workshops on corruption issues organized by the ADB,
OECD, UNDP, and the World Bank.
Paul Robins is a lecturer in the Aston Business School at Aston
University. He graduated as a Botanist, specializing in ecology, at Imperial
College, London University and spent many years as a research scientist
investigating a variety of broadly environmental topics, including the
water use of forest trees, the micrometeorology of dry prairie grasslands
and the use of technical information to support decision making of local
and national governments.
His serious concern for ethical issues arose while investigating possible
mechanisms for making technical information available to support essen-
tially political decision-making. He has continued to be concerned with
all aspects of the process of creating and presenting advice in a variety of
contexts. This concern caused him to support the study of Buddhist
ethics, which has provided the foundation for his contribution.
Frank-Jürgen Richter is the Director-in-charge of Asia at the World
Economic Forum, Geneva. He was educated in Germany, France, Mexico
and Japan. At one time he was based in Beijing for several years where he
managed the operations of a European multi-national enterprise: there 
he developed naturally a keen interest in Asian business practices. As 
a scholar–practitioner, he has written several books about Asian business,
international management and global competition. His most recent
books include The East Asian Development Model (Macmillan, 2000).
xiv
About the Authors

Iwao Taka teaches business ethics at Reitaku University in Japan. From
1991 through 1994, he studied at the Wharton School as a Fisher-Smith
visiting scholar, and later he joined the Project for Global Business Ethics
Principles initiated by the Conference Board. In 1999 he organized the
ECS2000 project to issue ‘the Ethics Compliance Management System
Standard 2000’. In early 2001, he launched a new initiative, so as to make
and release R-BEC001, an ethics-compliance oriented SRI framework.
Now, he is a member of the National Council for Consumer Policy of
the Japanese Government, an executive committee member of ISBEE,
and senior director of the Business Ethics and Compliance Research
Center at Reitaku. He has given lectures and advice upon business ethics
to a number of institutions, such as the Cabinet Office, Keidanren,
Japan’s Banking Association, Japan’s Securities Exchange Association,
and Japan’s Corporate Auditors Association.
His recent interests are anti-corruption, SRI, CSR, and pension fund
reform. His publications includes The ECS2000: A New Business Ethics
Standard (with Scott Davis, 2000), Contextualism in Business and Ethical
Issues in Japan (1998), and Business Ethics: A Japanese View (1998).
Teri Jane Ursacki has interests in Japan dating back to 1980, when she
began studying Japanese. After receiving her MBA and completing a work
exchange programme in Japan, she was employed in trade finance stud-
ies by a major Canadian bank for several years. She received her PhD in
international business from the University of British Columbia in 1991.
She is currently an associate professor at the University of Calgary in
Alberta, Canada, where she teaches international business and courses
on ‘doing business’ with Japan.
She has written extensively on a variety of aspects of Japanese 
business, including foreign banking operations, international trade,
executive succession practices, ethical issues, diversity, and women in
management.
About the Authors
xv

This page intentionally left blank 

1
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter
Introduction
This book is focused upon the governance of firms in Asia. It is a 
concept that must be extended to include all forms of ‘venturing’ since
co-joining firms seem to create conflicts between ‘us and them’ even if
operating in one’s home nation, and more so if co-joining with a firm
from abroad. However, we must say that we use the term ‘governance’
in this book to reflect those values developed ‘at home’ by governments
that will be cascaded to their indigenous firms and institutions. We do
not take a limiting view of ‘governance’ being entirely a function of cor-
porations – though the interface between the public who lose much
through poor ‘corporate’ governance has focused attention more on this
aspect in recent months. We note various drivers over recent years, such
as ‘globalization’ that has been a theme on the tongues of many man-
agers. This is emphasized by the World Trade Organization (WTO)
which stresses the transition from a national to a global economy in
many Asian countries, most notably in China. Thus, it is prudent and
timely to consider the nature of ‘governance’ – and its good and bad
aspects – to aid our understanding of what may constitute ‘better’ joint
governance in multinational firms.
We have inclined to use the word ‘oppression’ in the title of this 
chapter since there is often a feeling within the middle and lower man-
ager levels that their bosses, to a great extent, exploit their abilities. Of
course, without these good middle and lower level staff there would be
problems: the quality of output would be poor, and thus the firm would
soon lose its foothold in its marketplace. Who in this age wishes to buy
shoddy goods, even if they come cheap? So the senior staff must some-
how inculcate quality consciousness and the drive to produce goods to
1

meet time and quality specifications. In this instance, we understand 
it is not just ‘working according to the letter of the Standard’ but being
thoughtful about one’s individual work and how that meshes with the
work of others. In other words, the senior managers must support learn-
ing societies who think about their own task, wherein its members must
talk with others to exchange ideas and mental models. In many western
societies where there is much stress on the ‘me’, ‘I’ and individualism,
the Senior’s instructions to share knowledge with ones peers is often met
with derision. But even in these firms, friends will share their tips and
hints upon better ways of working – since they jointly wish to have an
easier working life – and we trust our friends not to pass this new knowl-
edge to those we don’t like. Further, our Senior managers trust us implic-
itly not to pass this knowledge to our competitors – who may thus gain,
and acquire our business.
It is imperative that we concern ourselves more about the role of
Intellectual Capital in the firm. In these modern times of exchangeable
material goods (‘when it is broken, swap in a new unit’) we see a 
tendency in building a new system to use a set of ‘black boxes’ (‘don’t
design from the basics’). Thus, the advantage of a firm usually lies in its
Intellectual Capital (its knowledge of how to build with ‘black boxes’)
that is seen as complementary to the needs of an acquiring firm. At 
the heart of any analysis of competitive advantage lies the concept of
knowledge imitability (Spender and Grant, 1996). Thus, the two firms
forming an alliance (as discussed in more detail below) will need to
exchange their unique organizational learning (OL) and have to engage
quickly in inter-organization knowledge management (KM) initiatives.
The promotion of these concepts will depend heavily on the human
resources management in each firm so as to persuade all their respective
staff to work for the (new) common good. This is not easy since it is
often the case that following a major merger, there are many redun-
dancies: so the staff work in a fundamental state of fright until the dust
settles, waiting anxiously to find if they are still employable. We suggest
the perceptions of ‘us and them’ lower down the organizational hierar-
chy will also determine the quality of OL (Kidd and Edwards, 2000) as
the ‘blue collar’ workers grapple with their perception of the ‘truths’
being discussed by their leaders. This may be strongly felt by the lower
staff when these individuals look across national boundaries, and won-
der why their firm is being led into new forms of ‘governance’, and why
therefore their CEOs are ‘oppressing’ them yet again.
In this short introduction, we have already raised many issues that
seem insoluble. These encompass, most visibly, the creation of trust
2
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

linked to the exchange of knowledge at both a task level as well at the
macroeconomics level relating to the firm’s place in the value and prod-
uct chain. There are questions about maintaining standards – both for
quality assurance as well as having set rules for performing tasks in 
the firm itself – such as maintaining audit trails, being transparent with
respect to accounting, and so on. There is also the broad issue of orga-
nizational capacity – the ability to learn. This may be more apparent in a
large organization where they have specialist staff (able to keep up with
new technology) and maybe some ‘spare’ staff able to undertake research
into new forms of governance enabled perhaps by new technology.
However, the vast majority of firms in all countries are small and medium
sized firms (SMEs) having below 250 employees, and often as few as four
or even less staff. It is the SMEs who often operate as feeder firms in the
product chain and in these we see little absorptive capacity: that is, an
ability to investigate and absorb innovation (Cohen and Leventhal,
1990).
In the UK, in 2000, there were 99 per cent of firms defined as ‘small’,
but they created 38 per cent of the nation’s turnover (DTI Statistical
News Release – P/2000/561 – 7 August 2000). There are probably grave
problems in these firms, where, in the worst case, they may be grappling
with legacy hardware, legacy software and legacy mental-ware (the
knowledge base of the managers) and so are not able to integrate in dig-
itally mediated commerce (COST, 1998; Chaston et al., 1999; Hally and
Guilhon, 1997). There is nothing in our view to suggest this is not 
the case throughout the world. Note for instance Ghani reporting on a
meeting of the Malaysian Association of SMEs – he says that the nation’s
adoption of information and communications technology (ICT) is very
low (Ghani, 2000).
Inevitably, the quality of the ‘leadership’ in firms is an important
driver: it is these chief executives (CEOs) who help shape the ‘culture’
of their firm, as well as manage the perceptions held by their staff of ‘us
and them’ in their alliances. There are clear differences in the ways in
which UK and Japanese firms, and the managers therein, manage their
day-to-day business (Kidd and Kanda, 2000). In parallel, the GLOBE
studies are revealing very interesting differences between leaders in 
the 61 different countries that have been studied (the studies are based
on a common analytic model: see their host Web site http://mgmt3.
ucalgary.ca/web/globe.nsf/index; and Kennedy and Mansor, 2000). It is
not implausible to suggest that the management team of a firm, which
is approached to join an alliance, is likely to be drawn from the local pop-
ulation, while the acquiring firm’s managers may have an international
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
3

composition. This will result in divergent leadership perceptions. Once
more it is the ‘us and them’ that will have very important consequences
for KM and OL in the alliance.
The ‘corporate’ aspect of governance
Rather often ‘governance’ is taken to mean some formal approach to
‘financial rules, accountancy, and transparency’. Of course this is in
many ways correct. There are firms that have operated with impropriety
(even under their local rules) that is associated often with embezzlement
in some form or another sometimes aided by auditors who have bent the
rules to allow the firms to practice money laundering, or tax evasion.
When caught, those at fault have been judged against local laws – and
often through the use of adept lawyers allowed to roam free. To coun-
teract this tendency, at least in the US, President George W. Bush is ‘sabre
rattling’ promising to double the gaol sentence of those found guilty of
corporate malfeasance. Here, we see an instance of the ‘sense of gover-
nance’ we wish to support through this book: with governments leading
the way, teaching, as it were, their institutions and organizations how
their members should behave. Latterly, some forms of digitally mediated
electronic-commerce conducted over the Internet have evaded local
laws, and as a consequence much international research has been under-
taken to review the limits of jurisdiction of local laws in these nebulous
cases; and conversely, the limits to which supra-national laws may be
applied locally. Naturally, there is some confusion within the European
Union in these cases, as disintermediation may or may not apply when
considering the ‘ruling of the European Parliament’ vs. local (European)
governments.
If this is the case in the almost homogenous EU what might we expect
when considering the case for a multi-national operation? Consider for
instance allowable overheads – how can they be described as ‘allowable
allocations’ against the tax of the ‘business overheads’ given that they
may also be described as bribes? At least this was so prior to the coun-
try becoming a signatory to the international convention on Bribery
and Corruption (OECD, 2000). Thus, to some extent in parallel with the
OECD discussions, we find that corruption, related to financial impro-
priety, has been a driver for the deeper study of corporate governance.
Asians deploy opaque accounting practices, they keep the data ‘in 
the family’, and they also practice ‘gift giving’ (within their system of
guanxi, which is discussed later) on a scale that seems to an American
nothing short of bribery. To combat this effect, the firms in the US, and
4
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

elsewhere in the West, press their Eastern firms (many of whom may
already be venture partners) to conform to GAAP (Generally Acceptable
Accounting Principles) although this methodology is not the only 
contender for a global standard (see the International Accounting
Standards Committee, IASC). This is quite a vexing issue and it concerns
ministers in the G7 and G8 committees as they attempt to provide a 
balanced view on accounting standards – their baseline viewpoint is 
the Basel Committee Review (see http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs70.htm).
Therefore, we must consider the meaning of ‘…generally acceptable’
since it has been shown that accounting disclosure, at least historically,
is strongly correlated with cultural measures (Gray, 1996; Salter and
Niswander, 1995; Zarzeski, 1996). These authors state generally that the
Oriental cultures are biased towards secrecy and thus non-transparency.
Yet, it seems quite reasonable to elaborate international inter-company
reports so higher managers may judge and decide on macro- as well as
micro-policy changes. It has been found however that the accounting
methods of Asian firms were not compatible with those created in their
European or US branches – or, at least, they were too divergent to illu-
minate the global decision-making process. For instance, it was a sur-
prise to UK managers to find that their Japanese senior managers in a
UK joint venture, especially in a wholly owned subsidiary, derived their
profit figure as a given – ‘…let’s say 7% this year’! A local senior Japanese
manager may have quoted this figure, whereas the professional expec-
tation in the UK is that the profit is the final figure derived from a set
of (transparent) calculations (Kidd and Teramoto, 1995).
Ultimately, one may question if different regularity practices and
more open markets in these regions will force firms to be more trans-
parent (in a GAAP sense). But perhaps it will just evince token gestures
in the short term given that many Asian countries have been unable for
years to disentangle their opaque systems from those resting on bribery
and extortion. If that is so, we must attempt to create a broader system
of trust to help develop co-operative transparency rather than press
unwilling partners into ‘compliance’ through oppressive governance
systems.
Trust between individuals
The initiation and maintenance of trust between individuals is funda-
mental to our very existence, not just to knowledge management that
is the keystone in the process of innovation upon which all companies
survive. However, it is a complex process, fraught with the possibility of
error. We have only five senses (seeing, touching, smelling, hearing and
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
5

tasting): we use them to create models of our environment. We use these
models, sometimes unconsciously, to make predictions and to ‘sense’
our future. If that model yields good results we are happy, but if the
results are in conflict with our belief we may be more or less disturbed and
have recourse to rebuilding our models. Festinger and Carlsmith (1959)
gave us the concept of ‘cognitive dissonance’ to explain our unease at
finding our mental predictions at odds with our sensual perception –
either because our model is wrong, or because we have a poor perception
of reality – as in a distorting ‘hall of mirrors’. The sensing of an ‘error’ can
lead us to trust better – either in our own abilities to model the environ-
ment that is unique to ourselves, but more especially when in a shared
space. Thus, we come to understand another person (and his or her 
environment) as they interact with us.
Naturally, there are many variations on this theme, and we must
accept we are multidimensional, even when focused on one issue. Note
that our children often say, at length, ‘I did not do it, I was not there!’
yet we find our feeling of trust in them still strong: we love our kids,
despite their words. It should be emphasized that ‘trust’ is not an
immutable construct: it is derived from snapshots of the situation at a
particular point in time. ‘Trust’ can and will change over the lifetime of
an alliance, especially in the early relationship-building stages.
The important role of HRM
In Figure 1.1 we illustrate that the CEOs will have had many talks with
the target firm upon the raison d’être of the alliance: we can say this
might take place in any pair-wise link in the supply chain. Furthermore,
the aides of the CEOs will have performed due diligence. In the case
where the alliance interface is between similar firms there can be many
discussions on the relative merits of meaningful aspects of their work:
herein the workers can quickly benefit. If the interface is between dif-
ferent sectors – such as a manufacturer and a logistics provider – then
organizational learning has some difficulty in commencing (Ring and
Van de Ven, 1994). Further, in the case of alliances between firms hav-
ing different national origins we find the cognitive modeling processes
of the individuals who ought to have conversations (in order to co-
develop their organizational learning) are often alien to each other
(Linstone and Zhu, 2000).
Often, the more active CEOs (in the KM sense) are the ones who 
also enter alliances, but they forget that their lower staff have not had
access to the high-level inter-firm conversations which have led to the
strategic alliance: these lower staff remain ignorant and fearful. Within
6
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

quickly negotiated alliances (such as those supporting e-commerce) 
a deep understanding of joint business needs is not necessarily pre-
sented to the lower level staff. They may not have been given much
information about the need for the alliance, nor will they have been
told of how it may affect them. Since it is these people, once called 
‘blue collar workers’, who are responsible for the outputs from the man-
ufacturing process in their respective organizations, their ‘happiness’ is 
a vital ingredient in the continuance of firms. They engage in their 
own initiatives in OL – but these may be in conflict with mandates of
senior managers who look to the maintenance of standard procedures,
since under standardization the codification of data becomes relatively
easy (Huber, 1991). We consider ‘manufacturing’ to include the service
industries – as all complex processes contain considerable knowledge,
there is the need to share this knowledge in an alliance.
It is vital in a learning organization that individuals volunteer their
information although Huber has recently suggested that individuals
have become unwilling to this – for several reasons, not least being their
fear of being ‘sucked dry of information’ and made redundant. Thus,
information elicitation may be described as a ‘sticky process’ (Huber,
2000); Szulanski (1996) also suggests this in a different context; and
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
7
Knowledge
management
strategy
Organizational
learning
Organizational
learning
Knowledge
management
strategy
Search for
Strategic
links
Build
operational
relationships
Organization 1
Organization 2
CEOs
HRM
Build in depth
Build in depth
Figure 1.1
Role-play by the CEO and the HRM functions

Fruin (1997) repeatedly stressed ‘stickiness’ with respect to the Toyota
workers’ exchange of ‘knowledge’ in Japan. We suggest therefore that
individuals cannot be conscripts in this process; otherwise they will
deliver data for codification that is wrong or not comprehensive enough
to be of use to others. In other words, they retain the detail of their own
knowledge as a form of job protection.
Searching for a ‘win–win’
We must recognize that an alliance is an arrangement between two par-
ties for mutual gain and that these are not charitable arrangements
(Burton, 1995; Richter, 2000). In these circumstances, we say that firms
should strive for a ‘win–win’ situation where they would become more
successful in the long term, but we find there are sometimes asymmet-
rical gains where one party essentially ‘milks the other dry’ (Inkpen,
1996; Khanna et al., 1998).
The dynamics of learning in alliances
Larson et al. have proposed a model of the dynamic framework for learn-
ing in strategic alliances (Larsson et al., 1998). They offer five categories
or modes that a firm may use to develop knowledge jointly noting the
dynamics (of learning) which may take place when two firms come
together, ostensibly to collaborate and thus to learn strategically.
An alliance within one’s culture
We note that the best situation is when both firms decide to collaborate
(Simonin, 1997) as illustrated in Figure 1.2 when both firms decide to
collaborate (the cell in the top right-hand corner). In this mode there is
a strong transfer of knowledge reciprocally from A to B and from B to A;
in addition, there is the potential for strong new knowledge creation
available jointly to both firms. The next-best modes are when one firm
wishes to collaborate while the other accepts to compromise its aims (for
the joint good). There are, in fact, three such cases in the matrix (when
one admits the compromise – compromise intersection) wherein there is
a one-way transfer of knowledge from A to B or vice versa, and some gen-
eration of new knowledge, but this is weaker than when firms fully col-
laborate. In these latter cases, there is also an asymmetric knowledge
exchange when A or B gains at the expense of the other. Finally, there is
one modal form where no learning appears to take place: when both
firms attempt to accommodate the other. Simonin points out that there
are many alliance failures – herein there may be collaborative experience,
8
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

but this is less frequent by an exchange of collaborative know-how
(Simonin, 1997). We might posit that too often the firms rush into an
agreement, fall into the trap of asymmetric learning and quickly become
acrimonious, and so dissolve their alliance.
There is one further mode that is of considerable interest: this is when
the firms are normally in competition with each other. In the past they
would not have even acknowledged the existence of the other – being
competitors. Now, under the new market conditions that extol the 
benefits of partial co-operation, we enter the mode called ‘co-opetition’.
By definition there can be no new knowledge development in this
mode, but by the CEOs directing the players to co-operate to a limited
extent – perhaps to jointly cross-market a limited product range – we
will achieve some limited learning. More perhaps than when players
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
9
 
Avoidance
Accommodation
Compromise
Competition
Collaboration
Collaboration
B > A
+c> a
a > b, b > a
+c> a, b
A >B
+ c >b
A > B
B > A
Competition
B > A
+c> a
b > a
B > A
+ c >a
Compromise
b > a
a > b, b>a
+c> a, b
a >b
a >b, b >a
+ c >a, b
Accommodation
a > b
A >B
+ c >b
A > B
+ c >b
Avoidance
Learning strategy of Firm A 
Learning strategy of Firm B 
Co-opetition
+ C>A, B 
Figure 1.2
Learning strategies in alliances having similar cultures
Notes: Capitalization (e.g. B  A) represents strong knowledge transfer, so b  a indicates less
strong transfer; C  A, B indicates that much new knowledge is being developed, and trans-
ferred to both A and to B, and c  a indicates a weaker transfer, and only to ‘a’, not ‘b’; and
finally
maps the asymmetric learning relationships.
Source: Based on Larson et al. (1998).

jointly compromise, but less than when they voluntarily co-operate in
an alliance crossing cultural boundaries.
Often firms create cross-border alliances with a global reach – we illus-
trate this in Figure 1.3 where we may posit that sometimes, too often in
fact, the partners overlook the fact they will operate with ‘others not like
themselves’ and so deny the possibility of jointly collaborating because
of mutual confusion. In this case, we might find their learning strategies
become much more restricted and indeed may become pathological if
the firms jointly deny that any collaboration can take place between
them due to lack of ‘cultural literacy’ (Merry, 2001).
Figure 1.3 has been developed from the concepts expressed above 
by Larsson et al. (1999). It may be seen that the option set has been
shifted down and inwards because the individuals are now unwilling to
collaborate. The CEOs of the firms in the alliance may have had good
exploratory meetings, and the due diligence process been enacted cor-
rectly, but the realization of the value of the merger has, in this case, not
filtered down to the operatives who make the goods. The option set
becomes more restricted given the joint avoidance options shown in
Figure 1.2 are ruled out. However, there is still the possibility of devel-
oping a co-opetition strategy although under these circumstances, with
10
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter
Avoidance Accommodation Compromise
Competition
Collaboration
Collaboration
Competition
B > A
+ c>a
b > a
Compromise
b > a
b > a
a > b
+c> a, b
a >b
Accommodation
a > b
A > B
+ c >b
Avoidance
Learning strategy of Firm A
 Learning strategy of Firm B
Co-opetition
Anomie
Shift due
to cultural
incompatibility
Figure 1.3
Restricted learning under conditions of cultural illiteracy

much suspicion at the level of the operatives, there will be considerable
opposition to ‘telling the enemy what we know’ as ‘they will steal it’.
The target mode should be a joint compromise strategy as this is likely
to yield the best results with both sides benefiting from knowledge
exchange, and with new knowledge being generated for both A and B.
However, the results here will be at a lower efficacy than those that may
have been achieved if the firms had collaborated fully (see Figure 1.2).
Under the assumption of ‘non-collaboration’ due to mutual misun-
derstanding and the lack of cultural literacy, the strategic learning modes
become quite limited (only 3 modes), when compared with the earlier
assumptions of an alliance between firms from the same culture (when
there are 10 modes in which some new knowledge is created).
We may posit further that when there is a lack of compatibility the
two firms may behave pathologically: instead of attempting to engage
in co-opetition they sink into anomie, a state in which their behavior
becomes increasingly uncertain. We suggest here that anomie is totally
undesirable in a joint alliance (in any situation in fact), but it is easy to
slip into when there is considerable cultural illiteracy. This mode will be
somewhat worse than the joint ‘avoidance’ modes since individuals in
Firms A and B will actively be angry and upset at the other firm’s mem-
bers. They will be so angry that they will forget to discharge their own
core activities. Under the ‘avoidance’ modes the operatives of both firms
will at least follow their own tasks competently, though not jointly
across the alliance. If the firm has been operating in an anomic state, its
employees should attempt to move to the shared knowledge state. They
may note that the co-opetition mode might be less fruitful than grasp-
ing for asymmetric learning (in the short term) while they learn how to
fully collaborate and achieve a ‘win-win’ situation. Powell et al. (1996:
119–20) have stressed:
The development of co-operative routines goes beyond simply learn-
ing how to maintain a large number of ties. Firms must learn how to
transfer knowledge across alliances and locate themselves on those
network positions that enable them to keep pace with the most
promising scientific and technical developments
Learning in alliances – searching for a future
Dunning (1993) defined that Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) will pro-
ceed when three conditions are perceived to be favorable to the incom-
ing firm – the ownership advantage, the location advantage and the
international advantage. Yet, these models are viewed from the outsider’s
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
11

perspective (often as a western firm looking to enter Asia – but not
exclusively – as they may be attributed to any cross-border venture).
With respect to China, Hill (2000) has discussed the location aspect with
its abundant labor force, often well skilled, and certainly willing to be
employed. From a local perspective Zhao and Zhu (2000) note an accel-
erator effect. When there is a perception of good export performance
from a city or region this knowledge attracts greater FDI to that location.
However, not all the Chinese ventures are ‘rosy’ – there are detractions
due to (a) partner-related problems, and to (b) operational-related issues
(Wong et al., 1999; Ye and Valentine, 2000) (as we noted above, in
Figures 1.2 and 1.3).
(a) With respect to Partner problems it is said that the Chinese have too
strong a political agenda that negatively impacts on the venture,
thereby reducing reciprocity. This would tend to support our obser-
vation that anomie might be one outcome in these particular firm’s
relationships, especially if the Chinese work strongly within their
guanxi networks and exclude the outsider. This has been a worri-
some point in ventures developed from a base in Hong Kong. We are
warned against becoming involved in any relationship predicated
on Chinese cultural values, such as guanxi, as we, the westerners, do
not understand the (mainland) Chinese indigenous networks (Child
et al., 2000).
(b) With respect to Operational problems we find that many Oriental
firms appear to be overstaffed against western ‘lean & mean’ stan-
dards. The filial relationships in Asian cultures allow the subordinate
to seem subservient to the masters, and these attitudes were
rewarded by lifetime employment once widely promoted by heads
of firms. There is also much in this with respect to nepotism and
cronyism – both of which the western firms are said not to support.
In addition, many western business practices seem to be conducted
in an inverse way in China, which makes them less understandable
and opaque (Martin and Larsen, 1999). Again we stumble over
the problems of co-operation, co-opetition, and over mutual com-
promise within the alliance. The development of Larsson’s model
leading to anomie, which we outlined above (Figure 1.3), looks
increasingly plausible.
Kautz and Vendelø (2001) explored the ‘gathering together’ of individ-
uals for the purpose of knowledge sharing. They refer to the work of
Hayek (1973) who described the grouping of individuals as being
‘designed’ or ‘spontaneous’. In our context, we find that Kautz and
12
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

Vendelø echo much of what has been said above – that people lower
down the organizational hierarchy are likely to strive for organizational
learning which they do spontaneously unless their leader is despotic.
Even in this extreme case, the cultural background of the players may
modify leadership pressure by permitting the ‘workers’ to survive through
their individuality or their inclination to (local) consensuality. However,
if the leaders attempt to force through a knowledge management initia-
tive, it is likely that the HRM function in each firm has to work hard to
explain why this initiative is being promoted ‘top down’ before they can
engage the ‘workers’ to jointly mesh their organizational learning. This is
especially difficult if the initiative is across organizational boundaries and
across cultural borders.
Kautz and Vendelø invoke the concepts of ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ ties
researched by Granovetter (1973). Granovetter suggested that some-
times we learn better from our weak ties (those that extend beyond the
boundary of the organization) as relative strangers introduce novelty to
our stable world. In parallel, we find that ‘chaos’ is said to be a force ‘for
the good of the firm’ (Pascale et al., 2001): bringing in outside ways that
can induce chaos. On the other hand, we may be expected to learn more
deeply from our strong ties, since we best understand the models of
those close to us.
There is thus a dilemma facing the managers of firms in an alliance.
Consider a firm that is being offered an alliance if it is, in fact, smaller
than the venturing firm which may be a multinational. The SMEs need
to survive in their milieu doing what they are good at (we will presume
this to be the case), but they need to keep up to date with forefront tech-
nology and ideas. However life-long learning is aspirational – it relies
upon a benevolent society, more especially upon CEOs who plan for and
schedule the learning and networking of their staff, since it demands
time and space on the part of the learners to acquire knowledge and to
disseminate it. One thematic model is suggested by Nonaka et al. (1994,
1995, 1998) though this model relies upon the traditions of Japan to
promote its operation. That is, for staff to be willing and able to com-
mune and network with each other for long after the 17:00 clock-off
time – perhaps in a bar, perhaps in hot springs drinking sake – not just
occasionally, but over many years. Such a role emphasis is further under-
scored by O’Reilly and Chatman (1996).
This process of differential knowledge acquisition and dissemination
is suggestive of cultural processes that may be seen to be almost
immutable over aeons. Indeed, Hofstede (1980, 1991) would suggest
that as ‘culture is the software of the mind’ we could only slowly alter
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
13

this genetic-like programming. We might also support this notion by
reference to the basic programming of the Asiatic mind with its cultural
antecedents developed from before the age of Confucius, though codi-
fied by him. Cultural role-playing, as a Confucian, has become de rigeur
in Asia, and is now second nature to those raised in this region. We 
find this reflected in the general thesis of the ‘differentiated network’
wherein outposts are allowed to operate their own management mod-
els, yet at corporate level be fully integrated (Bartlett and Ghoshal, 1989;
Nohria and Ghoshal, 1997).
One might suggest that this is potentially a reflection of the knowl-
edge transfer and creation noted by Larson et al. (ibid) portrayed in
Figure 1.2. However, it is more likely to incline to the perverse manage-
ment of KM, the abreaction illustrated in our development of the Larson
model posed in Figure 1.3, wherein cultural differences overwhelm 
the absorptive capacity of the firms involved, and individuals incline
towards anomie. Once more we may suggest there is a huge difference
between the operational model of the MNE that has the potential of
enough organizational slack to learn how to absorb and learn about cul-
tural differences, and the hard-pressed relatively tiny SME operation
(with no organizational slack or absorptive capacity). SMEs are supposed
to integrate fully with the MNEs in order to facilitate the supply chain,
but the enforcing of a model of company governance more suited to 
a large firm, especially a multinational, will seem to be ‘oppressive’.
The meta-organization
International business became an academic subject in the 1950s
through the 1960s – not because such forms of organization began then,
since international business has been undertaken for thousands of years.
Possibly, this focus came about because of the large increase of business
conglomerations noted as a new organizational form (Dunning, 1958;
Vernon, 1966). Latterly, study in this area has been enabled greatly by
the regular statistical data offered by the UNCTAD in Geneva: for
instance, we note in Figure 1.4 the rapid global growth in both FDI and
in Mergers and Acquisitions. We must heed UNCTAD who state there is
no simple correlation between these two measures of economic activity
as the underlying structural conditions are not constant over the years.
Even so, the rapid rise in both measures leads us to believe that a study
of ‘governance’ will yield beneficial results to the merging and merged
parties.
Buckley et al. state that one area they find disappointing is the unsatis-
factory integration between international business and business strategy
14
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

research (Buckley et al., 1998). They go on:
There are many bridges. And we would remember that bridges 
permit two-way traffic. These bridges include the analysis of culture,
functional aspects of management (international marketing, interna-
tional manufacturing strategy), the analysis of ‘new forms’ of doing
international business such as alliances and organizational theory
itself (ibid: 2).
We have already discussed several ‘bridges’ and wish to concentrate in
the rest of this book upon aspects of corporate governance – not now as
‘oppression’ but as a means of enlightenment through better learning of
its forms, aims and potentials. We might hope, as portrayed in Figure 1.5,
that through a better understanding of ‘governance and its purpose’ an
alliance will not rest in a state of anomie, and thus sooner or later be 
a failure. Under a generally acceptable state of ‘good governance’ the
firms’ employees should be striving to achieve a joint collaborative goal.
If the firm has operated in an anomic state its employees could move
to the shared knowledge states (following the solid arrow routes). They
might note however, that for them, the co-opetition mode may be less
fruitful than grasping asymmetric learning (in the short term) while
they learn how to fully collaborate and achieve a ‘win–win’ situation.
But this is a risky strategy as it may result in the break up of the alliance.
Of course, we must briefly note the high profile cases of corporate 
misconduct that has swept though the business press in recent months.
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
15
Global FDI Inflows and Cross-border M&A
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
US$ Billions
FDI,
M&A
Figure 1.4
Global economic activity
Source: UNCTAD Press Releases – TDA/INF/2847@15/4/2000 and TAD/INF/2875@7/12/2000.

At the end of 2001 passing into 2002 was the Enron debacle which has
resulted in clearer rules being made for the consulting firms who act for
these major corporations – they can not be both a bean-counter
‘accountants’ as well as an advisor on how to make more beans. There
is too much conflict especially as these consultants wish to be retained
for further years of lucrative work with the MNEs. Inevitably, as this
book looks to Asian matters we note that the Business Press also point
at high profile misdeeds in this region also. Here software piracy is 
rife – for instance, even though Hong Kong spends about $8 million per
annum on public awareness the piracy rate has increased by 1 per cent
to 57 per cent in 2001 (Doug Nairne: Saturday 1st June, South China
Morning Post). The Bank of China is looking towards a flotation in
Hong Kong, but it finds an embarrassing loss of $725 million due to
long-term embezzlement activity of a few former employees (David
Lague: Far East Economic Review, 20 May 2002: 26). These, and other
articles serve to illustrate that we have entered a time when it is almost
mandatory to be clear how we account for our cash flows – even though
our methods may be different, East and West. Perhaps we can close with
an old quotation which illustrates that we still have to strive to educate
our people to understand rights and wrongs and also to be better able
to discuss with others from afar their differences in frameworks and
methods – from the writings of Guanzi of 645 BC (Rickett, 1998).
16
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter
Avoidance Accommodation Compromise
Competition
Collaboration
Collaboration
Competition
B >A
+c >a
b >a
Compromise
b >a
b >a
a >b
+c >a, b
a >b
Accommodation
a >b
A>B
+c>b
Avoidance
Learning strategy of Firm A 
Learning strategy of Firm B 
Co-opetition
Anomie
The goal of
acceptable
governance
Figure 1.5
Moves towards ‘better governance’

On Ruling over a State
To govern a state it is of first importance to enrich the people. When
the people are well off, they are easily governed; when they are poor,
it is difficult to govern them. Why is this so? When the people are
well off, they are secure in their communities and they appreciate
their homes, they will refrain from crimes and respect the sovereign,
and then they can be governed easily. On the other hand, when the
people are poor, they are insecure in their communities and do not
think highly of their homes. When they are insecure in their com-
munities and despise their homes, they will be apt to commit crimi-
nal acts and to show no respect for the sovereign. When the people
resort to criminal acts and show no respect for the sovereign, they are
hard to govern…A good administrator considers it necessary to
enrich people before he can properly govern his state.
That noted we might now look to our authors in the following chapters
to suggest emergent models of governance that might be equally accept-
able to the Asian as well as the Western manager. Hopefully this will
avoid the pathologic mode of behavior achieved through poor ‘under-
standing of the other’.
The structure of the book
Part 1: A general introduction
Chapter 1, by John Kidd and Frank Richter has illustrated the broad prob-
lems besetting many aspects of corporate governance. They looked espe-
cially at the issues, which confound alliances, when groups of individuals
are brought together and who are thus supposed to learn quickly how to
work in harmony together by sharing their knowledge. It is the manage-
ment of the firm’s intellectual capital that often causes much anxiety as
the chief executive officers (CEOs) promote downwards their knowledge
management initiatives, while the lower level staff engage in their own
organizational learning processes. So, in a merger, joint venture, strategic
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
17

alliance or other forms of ‘getting together with the enemy’ there is much
confusion in the ranks as to how much to disclose to the ‘other side’.
We have suggested that disclosure, transparency, trust and so on are
the new mantra of international business linking the Oriental and the
Occidental firms as the way ahead given that the WTO is now open 
to China. But, most importantly, we all have to learn better how to 
manage this new opportunity.
Part 2: Asian governance, cronyism and culture
Chapter 2 by Stephen Dearden concentrates upon the development 
of globalization following the cessation of the ‘cold war’. He notes that
the end of the cold war resulted in a far more critical attitude emerging
amongst aid donors to the use of funds by recipient governments in the
developing world, to issues of good governance, the rule of law and effi-
cient public administration. Meanwhile, the globalization of production
and the challenges of the regulation of the movements of capital have
resulted in attempts to regulate the international financial environment.
For businesses, these demands have a profound impact upon the 
way that they operate in the global economy. Whilst the pressure upon
developing country governments to reform is driven, in part, by a desire
to improve the investment environment for the private sector, it will
also place legal constraints upon the behavior of companies in these
countries. Similarly, attempts at international regulation to prevent tax
avoidance and evasion and to prevent money laundering, will create
additional obligations upon multinational companies and international
financial institutions.
Much of the discussion on corporate governance and its development
is predicated upon the notions of corruption. Indeed, Dearden has noted
that governments can only address a number of issues. For instance, in
the UK, the House of Commons Select Committee has identified and 
has encouraged open tendering procedures for public contracts as one
important area. They argue that audit trails are essential to the monitor-
ing of the contracting process and that companies should be required 
to sign ‘integrity pacts’, undertaking not to engage in bribery, in order 
to pre-qualify for a particular contract. They have also called for the 
UK’s Export Credit and Guarantee Department (ECGD) to more rigorously
monitor companies so as to exclude those engaging in corrupt practices.
Thus, he concludes, the eradication of corrupt practices will contribute
greatly to creation of better mechanisms of corporate governance.
In Chapter 3, Christopher Gan illustrates that financial and corporate
governance restructuring is an ongoing reform program in post Asian
18
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

crisis-ridden countries. To be fully effective, corporate restructuring must
be linked to bank restructuring, which, in turn, must be linked to the set-
tlement of external debts to scale down the systemic risks. Thus, funda-
mental changes within the economy are necessary to create arm’s-length
relations between the government, corporations, and banks. Many cor-
porations in the crisis-ridden countries are over-indebted and frequently
are part of conglomerates or monopolies that are controlled by small
groups: they have non-transparent accounting and close links to gov-
ernment and financial institutions, including commercial banks. So,
here, we have a broad view of the macro effects that impinge upon firms
and which demand they put in place adequate governance at their local
level to absorb the broad effects.
In Chapter 4, Naresh Khatri, James Johnson and Zafar Ahmed show that
cronyism is a highly prevalent phenomenon in societies and organiza-
tions holding certain cultural values such as paternalism, collectivism, and
Confucianism. Despite it being cited as a major factor for Asian economic
crisis and mismanagement of the Asian organizations, it is a concept that
has not received due attention from management scholars. In order to bet-
ter our understanding of cronyism in work organizations, they present 
a two-stage model, grounded in the Chinese/Asian cultural context, of the
antecedents to cronyism, and present a number of propositions that fol-
low from it. They show that Confucian values, lack of trust, collectivism,
and high power distance elevate the importance of certain socially desir-
able behaviors – such as loyalty and close personal relationships. These
behaviors, in turn, lead to three important antecedents of cronyism,
which are an overemphasis on loyalty, an overemphasis on relationships,
and the formation of strong ingroups. This raises the inevitable conse-
quence following the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s – the negative
effects of cronyism on economic activity in southeast and eastern Asia
have come under greater scrutiny, resulting in demands from western
businesses and governments, and from supranational organizations such
as the WTO and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), for greater trans-
parency in business, economic and political affairs. In this chapter they
unravel some of the cultural complexities that hinder a ‘modernization’
of corporate governance in China and Asia in general.
Part 3: Comparative analyses of governance processes
Reflections on China
In Chapter 5, Sui Pheng Low broadens the discussion to look at the
‘mind’ of the Chinese. He notes that the Orient is often viewed with 
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
19

a tinge of mysticism that made it almost culturally impossible for 
westerners to perceive. For these reasons, while there are no lack of strate-
gic thinkers and philosophers in the East, their thoughts and philoso-
phies are still not well disseminated, let alone popularized, throughout
the world. With the economic opening up of China, an appreciation of
its strategic oriental thinking and use of philosophies is of increasing
importance for managerial practice. Apart from the eminent military
strategist Sun Tzu, one would note the eminent philosophers, Confucius
and Lao Tzu, whose teachings have had a tremendous influence on
Chinese civilization and culture. Interestingly, these three great Chinese
thinkers were all contemporaries in Chinese history some 2500 years
ago. The tumultuous activities of this time appeared to be the main 
trigger for them to reflect and form their thoughts, philosophies and
strategies. Perhaps in today’s flux it is also opportune to reflect on their
philosophy?
Matti Nojonen, in Chapter 6, continues the Chinese theme noting
how, in the malfunctioning market and institutional environment of
China more often than not a competitive edge is gained through exten-
sive personal connections (guanxi). Gift-giving is perhaps the most 
consequential method used to create and to deploy guanxi. On many
occasions gift-giving is simply associated with bribing and corruption.
However, this chapter illustrates that by approaching the ethically
loaded and yet theoretically and, by definition, controversial issue of cor-
ruption from a gift-giving approach, one is able to unearth the compli-
cated logic, risks and advantages involved in Chinese business networks.
He notes in detail that in expanding and utilizing guanxi networks in the
increasingly competitive environment Chinese businessmen are actively
competing with each other by differentiating their gifts in the most imag-
inative ways, thus forming a hidden marketplace of gifts. The emphasis
is laid on illustrating the prerequisite and exacting choreography, social
mechanisms and logic of action of various forms of gift-giving practices,
namely ‘ordinary business gift’, ‘hand-grenades and machine guns’ and
‘guided missiles’ as gifts, that take place behind the cloak of visible net-
working (guanxi).
Chapter 7, by Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke focuses on a case
in China where money, power and family relationships became entan-
gled in a web of deceit and corruption. This led to indictments and exe-
cutions – harsh perhaps, but this is one of the realities in China where
(as we have said before) the State officials wish to be seen to be carrying
out anti-corruption programmes. In part, this may be political – as 
an appeasement of the US officials who complained ahead of the 
20
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

World Trade Organization accession that China should not be granted
entry to this club. But harsh measures also, these same officials may
explain, must be meted out as a deterrent as China is developing very
fast from one in which corruption – it could be argued – was endemic
from the time of Confucius, 2000 years ago.
Reflections on Japan
In Chapter 8, Teri Jane Ursacki describes the role of the sokaiya in
Japanese business and their involvement in corporate extortion. She
notes the persistence of the sokaiya phenomenon and considers the
changes that would be necessary to eradicate it. In particular, she focuses
on the impact of economic reform, and suggests that the nature of the
reforms required to stamp out sokaiya activity would go well beyond tin-
kering with regulations concerning corporate governance. For instance,
she notes that employing sokaiya is part of a wider strategy employed by
poorly performing executives to keep themselves in their jobs and their
companies afloat.
Economic reform must proceed far, so that uncompetitive companies
have no alternative but to fall by the wayside if such dark-side strategies,
of which the use of sokaiya are only a part, are to be made obsolete. A
detailed case study of Mitsubishi Motors provides a concrete illustration
of how sokaiya were used as part of a broader strategy to cover up under-
performance. Her conclusions deal with the prognosis for current efforts
to eliminate corporate extortion in Japan.
Chapter 9 by Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka reviews
the procedures being put in place in Japan to ensure ethical compliance
based on a survey of corporate responsibility conducted by the Asahi
Newspaper Foundation. Their first section discusses the conceptual def-
inition of corruption and the legal implication of such a definition; and
it also describes briefly the legal environment surrounding Japanese cor-
porations. Their second section analyzes the voluntary initiatives on
anti-corruption compliance and their third section provides findings
from the survey that gives a snapshot of Japanese companies’ efforts to
achieve corporate conduct with higher business integrity. In conclusion,
they suggest initiatives that will aid anti-corruption compliance man-
agement in Japan – in part supported further by comparative data from
research in the OECD of corporate governance.
Part 4: The development of an ethical perspective
Chapter 10, by Jon Quah, is focused strongly on the strategies adopted
by Singapore to clean up its own State processes and how these may be
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
21

models for other nations. He notes that corruption (in Singapore)
became an offence in 1871, however, nothing much was done upon this
issue by the British colonial government for the next 66 years until it
enacted the Prevention of Corruption Ordinance (POCO) on 10 December
1937. Since then much progress has been made, and it is widely accepted
that Singapore’s comprehensive anti-corruption strategy is effective as it is
perceived to have been the least corrupt country in Asia during 1995–2001.
Whether Singapore’s effective anti-corruption strategy can be success-
fully transplanted to other Asian countries depends on two important
factors: the nature of their policy context, and whether they possess the
political will to implement the required reforms. So far, only Hong Kong
and Malaysia have adopted Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy. The
chapter looks carefully at the impediments to a wider acceptance across
Asia of these strong governance policies.
In Chapter 11, Dennis Heaton, Thomas Carlisle and Ian Brown relate
how the problem of corruption can be approached from each of three sets
of factors that influence ethical behavior in organizations – individual
characteristics, organizational factors, and opportunity. They emphasize
individual characteristics in this chapter – in particular the development
of the consciousness of the individual, including the individual’s level of
moral development. It is through this Vedic tradition, they suggest, that
a strong moral code can be developed that will enhance corporate behav-
ior and thus governance to meet international standards. They discuss
how the Maharishi Corporate Development Program has applied this
approach in numerous corporate settings in India and around the world
to improve the overall effectiveness, well-being, and right action of
managers and employees.
In Chapter 12, Paul Robins outlines how a Buddhist viewpoint can
offer a framework upon which to base better governance and to measure
its effectiveness. Buddhism is an example of an ancient and trusted tra-
dition that places particular emphasis on the practical issues of living a
moral life. It provides a source of well-founded guidance for both the
individual and the organization wishing to become more moral, without
being dependent on the acceptance of a particular theistic or philosoph-
ical dogma. It should therefore be possible to extract from these princi-
ples useful and practical guidelines for organizations of whatever kind.
His analysis seeks to understand the Eastern perspective although
escaping from Western thought patterns is hardly complete. It is intended
to offer useful guidance for those with a Western background, but it may
also help to focus the minds of those with an Eastern background whose
working environment has come to be influenced, if not dominated, by
Western customs and practice.
22
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

Finally, in Chapter 13, Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah discuss
the dilemmas facing many governments in the region. For many, their
development strategies rest on a model of corporate governance in which
excessive emphasis has been placed on orthodox economic aspects. How-
ever, it is a model that is not meaningful for a large proportion of the
world’s population, as it has been seen to generate significant inequities.
Further, it is a model that may not be sustainable in the longer term.
These concerns have provoked a critical questioning of present forms
and processes of development, and have led to a search for better and
more viable alternatives.
The authors categorize these problems and their concerns under 
a rubric of issues related to an ethical imperative in the development
process. In so doing, they suggest that an appropriate framework for sus-
tainable development must focus as much attention on issues that relate
to the ethical imperative, as on issues related to other kinds of gover-
nance imperatives.
Notes
Figure 1.1 was created by John Kidd and John Edwards (both at Aston Business
School) who have offered it in several papers and presentations. It has been used,
as here, to make clear the relationships between the CEO, the HRM function, and
the management of knowledge and organizational learning within and between
organizations.
Figure 1.2 is based on the fundamental work of Larsson, Bengtsson,
Henriksson and Sparkes (1998) – we are grateful for their ideas and conceptual-
ization. We have to say that the subsequent development of this model through
the rest of the chapter is solely the responsibility of the authors.
Within the ‘Structure of this book’ sections above we have quoted proper
names in the manner of the west with the family name last.
References
Bartlett, C. A. and Ghoshal, S. (1989) Managing Across Borders, London: Century
Business.
Buckley, P. J., Burton, F. and Mirza, H. (1998) The Strategy and Organization of
International Business, London: Macmillan Press.
Burton, J. (1995) Partnering with the Japanese: Threat of opportunity for
European businesses? European Management Journal 13(3): 304–16.
Chaston, I., Badger, B. and Sadler-Smith, E. (1999) Organizational Learning:
research issues and application in SME sector firms. International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research 5(4): 191–203.
Child, J., Chung, L., Davis, H. and Ng, S. H. (2000) Managing Business in Mainland
China: A Guidebook, Hong Kong: Hong Kong Chamber of Commerce.
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
23

Cohen, W. M. and Leventhal, D. A. (1990) Absorptive capacity: a new per-
spective on learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1):
128–52.
COST 330 Action (1998) Trends in Information Systems and Communications in
European Ports, Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European
Communities. ISBN 92-828-3679-7. EUR 18284.
Dunning, J. H. (1958) American Investment in British Manufacturing Industry,
London: George Allen & Unwin.
Dunning, J. H. (1993) The Globalization of Business, London: Routledge.
Festinger, L. and Carlsmith, J. M. (1959) Cognitive consequences of forced 
compliance. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 58: 203–10.
Fruin, W. M. (1997) Knowledge Works: Managing intellectual capital at Toshiba,
London: Oxford University Press.
Ghani, R. A. (2000) Few SMIs embrace ICT. New Straits Times, Computimes,
30/11/00: 5.
Globe Project (1999) Cultural influences on leadership and organizations.
Advances in Global Leadership 1: 171–233.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973) Strength through weak ties. American Journal of Sociology
78(6): 1360–80.
Gray, S. J. (1996) International comparisons of business performance: measure-
ment and disclosure issues. International Review of Business 1(1): 1–15.
Hally, A. and Guilhon, A. (1997) Logistics behaviour of small enterprises: per-
formance, strategy and definition. International Journal of Physical Distribution
and Logistics Management 27(8): 475–95.
Hayek, F. A. V. (1973) Law, Legislation, and Liberty: Vol 1: Rules and Order, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Hill, C. W. L. (2000) International Business: Competing in the Global Marketplace,
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hofstede, G. (1980) Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-related
Values, London: Sage Publications.
Hofstede, G. (1991) Cultures and Organisations: Software of the Mind, London:
McGraw-Hill.
Huber, G. P. (1991) Organizational learning: the contributing processes and the
literatures. Organizational Science 3(3): 383–97.
Huber, G. P. (2000) ‘Transferring sticky knowledge: Suggested solutions and
needed studies’, in J. S. Edwards and J. B. Kidd (eds), Knowledge Management
Beyond the Hype: Looking Towards the New Millennium. Proceedings of KMAC
2000, Aston Business School, 17–18th July: 12–22.
Inkpen, A. (1996) Creating knowledge through collaboration. California
Management Review 39(1): 123–41.
Kautz, K. and Vendelø, M. T. (2001) ‘Knowledge sharing as spontaneous order-
ing: On the emergence of strong and weak ties’, in C. Carter, H. Scarbourough
and J. Swan (eds), Managing Knowledge: Conversations and Critiques. Leicester
University, 10–11th April.
Kennedy, J. and Mansor, N. (2000) Malaysian culture and the leadership of organ-
isations: A GLOBE study. Malaysian Management Review, December 2000.
Khanna, T., Gulati, R. and Nohria, N. (1998) The dynamics of learning alliances:
Competition, co-operation and scope. Strategic Management Journal 19(3):
193–204.
24
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

Kidd, J. B. and Edwards, J. S. (2000) ‘Fast moving global supply chains: how orga-
nizational learning may offer bridges in crossing cultures’, in the proceedings
of ECKM 2000. D. Remenyi (ed.), First European Conference on Knowledge
Management; Bled, Slovenia. October 26–7: 49–59.
Kidd, J. B. and Kanda, M. (2000) Organizational learning in practice: the behav-
iour of senior production managers in Britain and Japan. Management
International 4(2): 61–70.
Kidd, J. B. and Teramoto, Y. (1995) ‘Can the Japanese localise? – A study of
Japanese production subsidiaries in the UK’, in S.-J. Park and M. Jovanovic
(eds), What is behind the Japanese miracle? Megatrends I.E.C., London, 
pp. 136–52.
Larsson, R., Bengtsson, L., Henricksson, K. and Sparks, J. (1999) The interorgani-
zational learning dilemma: collective knowledge development in strategic
alliances. Organizational Science 9(3): 285–306.
Linstone, H. and Zhu, Z. (2000) Towards synergy in multiperspective manage-
ment: An American–Chinese Case. Human Systems Management 19: 25–37.
Martin, B. and Larsen, G. (1999) Taming the Tiger: Key success factors for trade
with China. Journal of International Economics 10(May): 151–75.
Merry, P. (2001) ‘Cultural literacy – its link to business success in Asia-Pacific’, 
in J. B. Kidd, X. Li and F.-J. Richter (eds), Maximizing Human Intelligence
Deployment in Asian Business: The Sixth Generation Project, London & New York:
Palgrave.
Nohria, N. and Ghoshal, S. (1997) The Differentiated Network, San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Nonaka, I. (1994) A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation.
Organizational Science 5(1): 16–35.
Nonaka, I. and Konno, N. (1998) The concept of ‘Ba’: building a foundation for
knowledge creation. California Management Review 40(3): 40–50.
Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. (1995) The Knowledge-creating Company, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
O’Reilly, C. and Chatman, J. A. (1996) Culture and social control: Corporations,
cults and commitment. Research in Organizational Behavior 18: 157–200.
OECD (2000) No Longer Business as Usual: Fighting Bribery and Corruption, Paris:
OECD Press.
Pascale, R., Millemann, M. and Gioja, L. (2001) Surfing the Edge of Chaos, 
New York: Texere.
Powell, W. W., Koput, K. W. and Smith-Doerr, L. (1996) Interorganisational col-
laboration and the locus of innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology.
Administrative Science Quarterly 41: 116–45.
Richter, F.-J. (2000) Strategic Networks: The Art of Japanese Interfirm Co-operation,
New York: Haworth Press.
Rickett, W. A. (Translator) (1998) Guanzi: Political, Economic, and Philosophical
Essays from Early China, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ring, P. S. and Van de Ven A. H. (1994) Developmental processes of cooperative
interorganisational relationships. Academy of Management Review 19(1):
90–118.
Salter, S. B. and Niswander, F. (1995) Cultural influences on the development of
accounting systems internationally. Journal of Intelligent Business Studies 26(2):
379–98.
The ‘Oppression’ of Governance?
25

Simonin, B. L. (1997) The importance of collaborative know-how: An empirical
test of the learning organization. Academy of Management Journal 40(5):
1150–74.
Spender, J.-C. and Grant, R. M. (1996) Knowledge and the firm: Overview.
Strategic Management Journal 17: 5–9.
Szulanski, G. (1996) Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of
best practice within the firm. Strategic Management Journal, Special Issue, Winter,
27–44.
Vernon, R. (1966) International investment and international trade in the
product cycle. Journal of Economics 80: 190–207.
Wong, Y., Mather, T. E., Jenner, R., Appell, A. and Hebert, L. (1999) Are joint
ventures losing their appeal in China? S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal
64(1): 4–12.
Ye, A. L. and Valentine, S. (2000) More haste, less speed: the secret to investing
in China. International Financial Law Review 19(1): 17–19.
Zarzeski, M. T. (1996). Spontaneous harmonisation effects of culture and market
forces on accounting disclosure practices. Accounting Horizons 10, March:
18–37, American Accounting Association.
Zhao, H. and Zhu, G. (2000) Location factors and country-of-origin differences:
an empirical analysis of FDI in China. Multinational Business Review 8(1): 10–11.
26
John B. Kidd and Frank-Jürgen Richter

2
The Challenge to Corruption and the
International Business Environment
Stephen Dearden
Two factors have turned the attention of the governments of the 
developed world to the problems of corruption, the end of the cold war
and the trends to globalisation. The end of the cold war has resulted 
in a far more critical attitude emerging amongst aid donors to the use
of funds by recipient governments in the developing world, to issues of
good governance, the rule of law and efficient public administration.
Meanwhile, the globalisation of production and the challenges of the
regulation of the movements of capital have resulted in attempts to 
regulate the international financial environment. For businesses, these
demands will have a profound impact upon the way that they operate
in the global economy. Whilst the pressure upon developing country
governments to reform is driven, in part, by a desire to improve the
investment environment for the private sector, it will also place legal con-
straints upon the behaviour of companies in these countries. Similarly
attempts at international regulation to prevent tax avoidance and evasion
and to prevent money laundering, will create additional obligations upon
multinational companies and international financial institutions. This
article will review the rationale for these developments and outline the
various strands that are creating a new international environment for 
the new century.
This paper will begin by considering the nature of corruption and the
attempts to evaluate its impact upon those economies in which it is
endemic. It will then turn to a review of the response of the interna-
tional community, especially the OECD, the World Bank and the EU.
The next section examines the particular problems of money launder-
ing and the rise of Off-Shore Financial Centres (OFC). Finally, the paper
considers the likely new demands upon the private sector, and the areas
of action by the UK government, the EU and other global institutions.
27

The nature of corruption
Corruption can take many forms. It may include payments to govern-
ment officials or politicians to obtain access to a public service to which
an individual or company may, or may not, be entitled, to obtain gov-
ernment contracts or to avoid regulatory controls and liabilities. It may
involve the demand for employment of relatives or the provision of 
a benefit indirectly to a public official.
Corruption has usually been defined as ‘the abuse of public office for
private gain’. This definition has been widened recently, as attention has
turned to corruption within the private sector, to cover ‘giving or receiv-
ing undue advantage in the course of business activities leading to acts
in breach of a person’s duties’ (Transparency, 1999). However, it can be
argued that the role of the public sector is more significant, since it is
here that the opportunities for corruption are most extensive. Also pub-
lic administration creates the opportunities for corruption in the private
sector by creating the necessary institutional and market conditions. In
both cases, corruption can be viewed as an example of the Principal–
Agent problem, where the core difficulty lies in the mechanism to mon-
itor the actions of those to whom authority is delegated but where the
information is possessed asymmetrically by the agent.
One distinction that is often made is that between petty and grand
corruption. Petty corruption is often accompanied by uncertainty – who
to pay, when and how much. Such payments raise costs and will inhibit
the efficient functioning of the market and the delivery of public serv-
ices. They are likely to have a particularly adverse impact upon the poor.
They appear to be associated with low levels of public sector pay, where
petty bribes become an important, and sometimes unofficially recog-
nised, source of income.
Although petty corruption is often all pervasive in many developing
and transitional economies, most attention has focused upon ‘grand’
corruption. Community Information Empowerment and Transparency
(CIET) has observed that grand corruption ‘…has long been recognised
as an issue in development at the macro level, with large amounts of
money being stolen by corrupt senior officials and political leaders in
developing countries, and large bribes being paid by international con-
cerns in order to secure business opportunities’. It has been estimated
that, worldwide, businesses pay bribes totalling $80 bn. every year.
Grand corruption does not just lead to the direct diversion of funds into
private hands but also distorts investment priorities. Clare Short, as UK
Secretary of State for Development, believed that the debt problem
28
Stephen Dearden

could be directly related to the long run impact of persistent grand 
corruption.
Attempts to evaluate the economic impact of corruption are fraught
with difficulties because of its multifaceted nature. Corruption can both
increase or decrease the production costs faced by the firm, or the prod-
uct costs faced by the individual. Bribes paid to expedite government
regulatory activities, to obtain import licenses or to win government
contracts, will all raise costs. By contrast, bribes paid to circumvent gov-
ernment regulations – for example health and safety, environmental
requirements, taxation – may reduce the net cost to the company, even
if it imposes social costs. In the extreme case of payments made to gain
access to a valuable state resource – for example mining concessions, pri-
vatised enterprise – the existence of the enterprise itself may depend
upon such payments. A government policy of protectionism, often
adopted by developing and transitional economies, usually creates con-
ditions of monopoly/oligopoly and therefore substantial economic rent
for exploitation.
From the perspective of the public sector, corruption will impose both
financial and economic costs. Corruption resulting in tax evasion will
clearly reduce the governments’ tax revenues, but corruption may also
add to the governments’ costs through the allocation of contracts to
higher priced contractors. Such increases in prices will be essential to
meet the costs of the bribes that are paid. But the economic costs may be
even more substantial as projects may be undertaken merely to generate
bribes rather than as a reflection of economic development priorities.
Such major capital investment projects, which were never economically
viable, may remain a drain on the scarce resources of developing coun-
tries for many years.
From the broadest economic welfare perspective corruption encour-
ages inefficiency in the delivery of public services, to extract additional
payments, distorts prices throughout the economy, with the cost of
bribes passed onto the final consumer, and it creates delays in economic
transactions and additional uncertainty, which may be a crucial element
in undermining investment and encouraging capital flight. With
domestic capital formation ten times the level of foreign direct invest-
ment its retention is essential for long run economic development.
Attempts to establish empirically the causes and costs of corruption
have presented serious problems. Most statistical studies employ survey
measures of the ‘perception of corruption’ in their cross-country analy-
sis. These qualitative assessments raise questions of consistency and
interpretation. Nonetheless some broad conclusions can be drawn.1
The Challenge to Corruption
29

Johnson et al. (1998) confirmed the expected relationship between per-
ceived corruption and the size of the informal sector or ‘black economy’,
which in turn was encouraged by high levels of regulation and high 
perceived tax levels. Rijkeghem and Weber (1997) found a relationship
between corruption and low levels of public sector pay. Although other
studies have failed to confirm this relationship it has become a widely
accepted view (see House of Commons, 2001). Leite and Weidemann
(1999) established a clear relationship between corruption and the impor-
tance of an abundant natural resource to a country’s economy; provid-
ing hard currency and opportunities for rent seeking. Finally, Ades and 
Di Tella (1997) employed various measures to proxy the degree of gov-
ernment ‘interventionism’ in industrial policy – for example indices for
the openness of public procurement, equality of fiscal treatment, the size
of public subsidies to public and private enterprises – and found a posi-
tive correlation with the extent of corruption. Other studies have focused
upon the institutional causes of corruption. The 1997 World Develop-
ment Report suggested that the predictability of the judiciary was an
important factor, while Mauro (1995) found a high correlation with
assessments of judicial integrity, bureaucratic efficiency and political 
stability.
Studies attempting to establish the impact of corruption have identi-
fied a clear adverse influence upon economic growth. Hall and Jones
(1999) found a negative correlation between output per worker and cor-
ruption indices, while Kaufmann and Wei (1999) found an adverse
impact upon GDP per capita. Keefer and Knack (1995), Poirson (1998)
and Leite and Weidmann (1999) all confirmed the significance of cor-
ruption levels for growth rates. Mauro (1995) identified reduced invest-
ment as the mechanism whereby growth is diminished by the influence
of corruption. However, Wheeler and Mody (1992) and Alesina and
Weber (1999) were unable to establish any adverse impact upon the
level of foreign direct investment, although this was contradicted by
Wei’s (1997) study of capital flows for 1990/91. A Worldaware survey of
UK based companies found that they ranked corruption as a greater bar-
rier to direct investment than either political stability or lack of infra-
structure. Similarly, a survey of multinational companies by UNCTAD
(1999) suggested that the extent of extortion and bribery were by far the
most important factors in influencing investment decisions in 44
African countries. As for aid, Alesina and Weder (1999) could find no
relation between OECD aid provision and the level of corruption, except
for Scandinavian donors.
30
Stephen Dearden

The international response
With the changing international political environment, the demands
for more effective and poverty-focused aid programmes and the concern
for the rapid integration of the transitional economies into the interna-
tional economy have led various bodies to address the problems of 
anti-corruption measures. Here, I will be focusing principally upon the
OECD, the Council of Europe and the European Union.
So far the most significant international agreement addressing the
problem of corruption has been that of the OECD ‘Convention on
Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
Transactions’. This was adopted in November 1997 and came into force
in February 1999. By 2000, 20 countries, including seven within the EU,
had ratified the Convention, which requires the signatories to make it 
a criminal offence to offer bribes to public officials in order to obtain 
a business advantage. It also encourages States to end the ability of firms
to treat bribe payments as business costs that are tax deductible.
However, it does not cover payments to foreign political parties, bribery
through foreign subsidiaries nor bribes offered to private individuals or
firms. The success of these measures is being monitored by an OECD
working group on Bribery in International Business Transactions.
The UK government ratified the Convention in 1998 on the basis of
existing statutes and common law. However, in the subsequent phase 1
peer-review by the OECD, UK legislation and reliance on existing case
law was found to be seriously inadequate. In the face of substantial crit-
icism of its failure to implement the Convention with new legislation
the government has now committed itself to the introduction of a Bill
in the new Parliament. This legislation will include a clear definition of
the concept of corruption, applicable to both the public and private sec-
tors, and would be extraterrritorial, allowing the prosecution of British
nationals even where bribes are paid abroad. It is hoped that the new
law will meet all of the UK’s obligations under the various Conventions,
including that of the Council of Europe, and end the existing ambigu-
ity in the treatment of the tax deductibility of the costs of bribes paid
abroad.
The UK situation has been contrasted with the relative effectiveness
of the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act passed in 1997. However, even
this legislation allows payment of bribes through joint ventures and for
‘facilitation payments’ and US companies appear to be willing to
employ off-shore arrangements to circumvent these controls. Although
The Challenge to Corruption
31

there have been few prosecutions it has been argued that the legislation
has forced US companies to adopt clear compliance procedures.
The Council of Europe has also adopted two Conventions covering
Criminal and Civil Law. These cover Central and Eastern Europe as well
as the EU. The Criminal Law Convention extends the definition of cor-
ruption to include the activities of the private sector, while the Civil Law
Convention provides for compensation for individuals suffering a loss
as a result of corrupt practices by an official. Both Conventions require
legal protection for ‘whistleblowers’. By 2000, twelve Member States of
the EU had ratified the Criminal Law Convention, but only five the
Civil Law Convention. The EC will be able to accede to the Conventions
in its own right once the Conventions come into force.
Beyond the legal framework of the Conventions, international and
national bodies have adopted various anti-corruption mechanisms. The
World Bank, the largest international aid donor, has improved its pro-
curement requirements and project management techniques in recent
years. It also maintains a list of firms and individuals disbarred from pro-
curement contracts on the grounds of corrupt or fraudulent practices.
The Bank also has arrangements to pass evidence of criminal activity to
the prosecuting authorities in which companies are registered. Further
efforts are being made to facilitate information exchanges with other
international financial institutions. The World Bank also maintains 
a successful hotline for collecting allegations of corruption and provides
guarantees of protection for informants. However, the regional devel-
opment banks have room for improvement in their practices. The Asian
Development Bank enforces only an optional ‘no bribery pledge’ on
large contracts and the African Development Bank has yet to seriously
address the issue in its procurement procedures.
The European Union
Within the EU, two anti-corruption Conventions have been drafted.
The July 1995 Convention is concerned with the protection of the EU’s
financial interests and the May 1997 Convention with corruption
amongst EC officials or officials of the Member States. However, neither
has been ratified by all of the EU’s Member States. In 1997 the Commis-
sion had outlined its anti-corruption strategy in a policy paper – ‘A
Union Policy Against Corruption’ (COM(97)192) – and in October 1998
the European Parliament accepted the Bontempi Report on combating
corruption. Following this, in December, the Council committed the
Member States to ‘Joint Action’ against corruption in the private sec-
tor through national legislation. Progress has been made on Public
32
Stephen Dearden

Procurement Directives, the role of the Statutory Auditor and in the area
of foreign aid. Public Procurement within the EU has been subject to
review (COM(98)143), with the possibility of the introduction of anti-
corruption pledges by all parties to contracts and the development of 
a coherent scheme for ‘blacklisting’ companies and individuals who can
be identified as engaging in corrupt practices. The role of the Statutory
Auditor in deterring and detecting corruption was explicitly recognised
in a Green Paper (1996) and the Commission is working through the
Committee on Auditing to establish the self-regulatory framework for
the profession.
In terms of the EU’s external relations the Common Service Relex 
(now Euroaid), which is responsible for executing most of the EU’s devel-
opment aid programme, has adopted ‘ethical clauses’ in its Manual 
of Procedural Rules for its procurement procedures. The possibility of
‘blacklisting’ companies or individuals who infringe these rules has, for
the first time, been introduced. Unfortunately, this Manual only covers
the contracting phase and the complementary rules covering the imple-
mentation phase have yet to be adopted. The Commission has however
taken general powers to suspend or cancel aid if partner governments fail
to take satisfactory action to combat corruption when it is discovered.
The abolition of the tax deductibility of bribes, which had been a fre-
quent practice within EU States, will be required with the adoption of
the OECD Convention. Associated with this practice has been the issue
of the treatment of the costs of bribery as part of Export Credit
Insurance. Bribery has been estimated to add 10 per cent to 20 per cent
to the costs of any contract and these export guarantees are usually ulti-
mately government funded. As the EU has competence in regard to
external trade responsibility clearly falls upon the Commission to insti-
gate action in this area.
The heightened priority being given by the EU to the problem of cor-
ruption in developing countries and the general approach that is being
taken, is best illustrated by examining the new Partnership Agreement
(Cotonou) between the EU and the ACP states that succeeded the Lomé
Conventions in 2000. In this Agreement ‘the respect for human rights,
democratic principles and the rule of law’ are regarded as ‘essential ele-
ments of the partnership’ while a commitment to ‘good governance’ is
a further ‘fundamental element’. In Article 8, where the process of ‘polit-
ical dialogue’ is outlined, specific reference is made to the ‘regular assess-
ment of the developments concerning the respect for human rights,
democratic principles, the rule of law and good governance.’ Under
Article 9 the Agreement recognises that ‘democracy based upon the rule
The Challenge to Corruption
33

of law and transparent and accountable governance are an integral part
of sustainable development’. Specifically, ‘the structure of government
and the prerogative of the different powers shall be founded on the rule
of law, which shall entail in particular effective and accessible means of
legal redress, an independent legal system guaranteeing equality before
the law and an executive fully subject to the law’. Good governance is
defined as ‘the transparent and accountable management of human, nat-
ural, economic and financial resources for the purpose of equitable and
sustainable development. It entails clear decision making procedures at
the level of public authorities, transparent and accountable institutions,
the primacy of law in the management and distribution of resources and
capacity building for elaborating and implementing measures aiming in
particular at preventing and combating corruption’ (Article 9.3).
The introduction of good governance into the Agreement had faced
considerable opposition from the ACP States. As Adamou Salao of Niger
commented ‘the main contention concerns its inclusion as an essential
element in the future agreement…none of the ACP countries want 
to see good governance become an essential element, which, if violated,
would trigger the non-execution clause and potentially lead to sanc-
tions’ (The Courier No. 177 Oct.–Nov. 1999). The ACPs were willing to
strengthen the political dialogue, affirming their ‘adherence to the prin-
ciples of democracy, the rule of law, human rights and good governance.
Nonetheless these principles should not be used by the EU to suspend
development assistance unilaterally or render it conditional’. The result
of the negotiations was a compromise solution distinguishing between
‘essential’ (i.e. human rights, democracy, rule of law) and ‘fundamental’
(i.e. corruption) elements of the Agreement, with two separate proce-
dures created to address cases where there has been violation of these
principles. In the case of corruption there is a consultation procedure
and a strong reserve power for the EC – ‘in cases of special urgency
appropriate measures may be taken without prior consultation’. But 
the Agreement is qualified. Only ‘serious cases of corruption, including 
acts of bribery leading to such corruption, as defined in Article 97, con-
stitute a violation of the Agreement’. But ‘if the consultations do not
lead to a solution acceptable to both Parties or if consultation is refused,
the Parties shall take the appropriate measures. In all cases, it is above all
incumbent on the Party where the serious cases of corruption have
occurred to take the measures necessary to remedy the situation immedi-
ately. The measures taken by either Party must be proportional to the seri-
ousness of the situation. In the selection of these measures priority must
be given to those which least disrupt the application of this agreement.
34
Stephen Dearden

It is understood that suspension would be a measure of last resort’
(Article 97.3).
The Agreement also qualifies the regular assessment of the ACPs
progress in the ‘promotion of human rights, processes of democratisa-
tion, consolidation of the rule of law and good governance’ in that it is
to ‘take account of each country’s economic, social, cultural and histor-
ical context’ (Article 9.4).
Money laundering
Corruption is intimately linked with the problem of money laundering.
The IMF estimated that money laundering totalled between $590 bn.
and $1500 bn. in 1996, equal to between 2 per cent and 5 per cent of
world GDP. The OECD, the EU and G7 are all collaborating in address-
ing this problem. The Inter-governmental Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), created by the G7 in 1989, is composed of representatives from
all of the major international financial centres and produces recom-
mendations for anti-money laundering legislation and procedures. It
encourages the harmonisation of national legislation and information
exchange. In 1990 it produced 40 recommendations to counter money
laundering and these were updated in 1996. FATF reviews compliance
with these recommendations and maintains a ‘black list’ of states who
fail to maintain adequate anti-money laundering controls. It also assists
in the establishment of similar agreements in other regions of the world
and one such has already been established in the Caribbean.
Within the EU the Money Laundering Directive (91/308/EC) provides
the legislative framework. This requires all financial institutions to know
their customers when opening accounts, to keep records of any trans-
actions exceeding €15000, and to report suspicious transfers. It requires
all Member States to establish anti-money laundering programmes and to
suspend bank secrecy when illegal activities are suspected. In September
2000, the EU Finance Ministers agreed to extend the monitoring require-
ments to cover the proceeds of all serious crime and to extend the legal
obligations beyond banks to include lawyers and accountants. Further
action is also to be taken to improve information exchange and cooper-
ation between the Member States. In the UK, the EU’s requirements have
been embodied principally in the Criminal Justice Act 1993, the Money
Laundering Regulations 1993 and the Financial Services and Markets Act
2000. The Financial Services Authority has the prime statutory responsi-
bility to combat financial crime and has a Joint Money Laundering
Steering Group addressing this particular problem.
The Challenge to Corruption
35

Off-Shore Financial Centres
Closely related to the problems of money laundering has been the role 
of Off-Shore Financial Centres (OFC) or tax havens. There are now more
than 100 such centres worldwide and it is estimated that $6 trillion to
$7 trillion is now held in them, a sum equivalent to one-third of world
GDP, and split roughly equally between individuals and companies. For
example OFCs account for 26 per cent of US multinationals’ assets and
31 per cent of their profits. Tax havens offer two advantages to interna-
tional investors and international criminals alike – secrecy and low tax
regimes for non-resident customers. OFCs include not only the tradi-
tional island states of the Caribbean, Pacific and Indian Oceans, but also
territories such as the Channel Islands, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg and
Switzerland.
As well as providing the principle avenue for money laundering OFCs
have enhanced tax competition between countries, undermining the
ability of states to sustain their tax base from corporate taxation. In the
last ten years, OECD countries have seen the average corporate tax rate
fall by ten per cent, shifting the tax burden to indirect and personal tax-
ation. For developing countries, it has been estimated that capital flight
to OFCs costs them $50 bn. per annum (Oxfam, 2000) in lost tax rev-
enues. OFCs also contribute to the distortion of international competi-
tion, offering competitive advantages to those multinational companies
(MNC) that exploit the opportunities that they offer for tax avoidance
and tax evasion. Finally, OFCs are seen as contributing to the increased
instability of the international financial system. The significant growth
in assets and liabilities held in OFCs and the inter-bank nature of the
off-shore market, all increase the risk of increasing instability in cur-
rency and capital markets. The recent crisis in East Asia demonstrated
the problems that can now arise from rapid capital flows and the cur-
rency instability that accompanies it.
In 1998, the UN had published a report on ‘Money Laundering’, 
followed up in 1999 by the ‘Offshore Initiative’ of the UN Global Pro-
gramme against money laundering. This identified a ‘white list’ of well
regulated OFCs that were cooperating with the international organisa-
tions. Those not included were to be encouraged to adopt anti-money
laundering legislation and to increase their cooperation. But the main
player in international action on OFCs has again been the OECD. 
In 1988, it had been instrumental, together with the Council of Europe,
in negotiating the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in
Tax Matters. This provided for the exchange of information necessary 
36
Stephen Dearden

to counter tax evasion, but it was only available to members of the two
organisations. In 1998, the OECD published a report on unfair tax com-
petition (Harmful Tax Competition: an Emerging Global Issue) that
identified a ‘black list’ of tax havens that facilitate unfair international
tax competition. In the wake of the Asian financial crisis it went further
and formed a Financial Stability Forum (FSF) which had examined the
degree of supervision and cooperation with other jurisdictions of OFCs.
In its Harmful Tax Competition Initiative it has attempted to distinguish
between tax havens and ‘normal’ international financial centres that
offer harmful preferential tax regimes to foreign deposits. For the latter,
the OECD will publish a list of such practices, with an obligation upon
its members to amend their tax laws by 2003. However, for those states
identified as uncooperative tax havens, they will join a ‘black list’, with
the threat of ‘defensive measures’ by OECD members. In June 2000, the
OECD published an initial ‘black list’ of 35 countries which were to be
required by the OECD to commit themselves to changes in the opera-
tions of their OFCs by July 2001. Opposition ensured that the deadline
for compliance was delayed until March 2002.
In response, 17 OFCs, including the Cayman Islands, the Channel
Islands, Malta, Mauritius, the Seychelles, St. Vincent, Antigua and
Bermuda, have made serious efforts to improve their regulations and trans-
parency. However, vociferous opposition amongst the remaining non-
OECD states to this attempt to impose reform has continued and 21 
have yet to indicate a willingness to cooperate. For many small island
economies, their OFC represents an important contributor to their
economies. The demands of the OECD for transparency, exchange of
information and non-discrimination (applying the same tax regime to
both domestic and foreign customer), is seen as fatally undermining any
comparative advantage that these states offer for international deposits.
There is also considerable criticism of what is seen as differential treatment
of OECD OFCs and those of non-OECD states. The extreme example of
this is the situation of Switzerland and Luxembourg, both of whom have
failed to sign up to the OECD action and therefore are not liable to listing.
Following a meeting of Commonwealth ‘listed’ countries in Barbados in
January 20012 a joint working party of seven tax havens and six OECD
states was set up to address their concerns. The non-OECD states proposed,
at the first Working Group meeting, the creation of a global tax forum
which was to agree to a programme of common global standards by
December 2001, embodying the OECD’s three principles of transparency,
information exchange and non-discrimination. However, the OECD has
shown little interest in this proposal nor in continuing negotiations.
The Challenge to Corruption
37

But divisions within the OECD have been emerging as the US has
begun to take a more hostile line in regard to the OECD’s proposals.
While continuing to support action to establish a global environment
that allows action against money laundering and tax evasion through
information exchange, the US is far more critical of any attempt to
impose tax harmonisation. ‘I am troubled by the underlying premise
that low taxes are somehow suspect and by the notion that any coun-
try, or group of countries, should interfere in any country’s decisions
about how to structure its own tax system…. The work of this particu-
lar OECD initiative must be refocused on the core element that is our
common goal: the need for countries to be able to obtain specific infor-
mation upon request in order prevent the illegal evasion of their tax
laws by the dishonest few’ (US Treasury Secretary, Paul O’Neill, May
2001). By contrast the EU continues to be far more concerned about the
erosion of its states’ corporate tax base by the tax competition offered
by the OFCs.
Even within the requirements of the OECD code, ‘onshore’ OFCs in
OECD states, such as the City of London, continue to offer tax advan-
tages to non-resident foreign investors. In 1984, the US had encouraged
such deposits by abolishing its witholding tax on foreign investors, who
are expected to meet their tax obligations in their country of residence.
This has created an international environment where the imposition of
witholding taxes has become increasingly problematic. Attempts by the
EU to impose such a tax across the Community has been frustrated by
the UK government, under pressure from the City of London which
wishes to maintain its competitive position for foreign deposits. Most
OECD countries attempt to counter any tax evasion and avoidance by
multinational companies given their use of intra-company transactions
through foreign subsidiaries by the treatment of such affiliates as
Controlled Foreign Corporations. But even for OECD tax authorities this
can often present serious difficulties.
The way forward
The role of the private sector
The conduct of the private sector in general, and large MNCs in partic-
ular, will be central to any attempt to tackle the pervasive problem of
corruption. MNCs can influence the societies in which they operate 
not only through their resistance to the demands for bribes, but also
through their relations with their own subcontractors and suppliers.
38
Stephen Dearden

Some MNCs have found that a great deal can be achieved in influenc-
ing local business ethics by working with organisations such as the local
chamber of commerce. But a prior requirement is that the MNCs them-
selves have adopted best practice.
This will require clear codes of conduct and accounting transparency,
with good internal controls and external audit. In 1999, the OECD had
published ‘Principles on Corporate Governance’ outlining the desirable
improvements in the legal and institutional environment in which
companies should operate. But even this does not address all of the
problems. There is a need, for example, to clarify the treatment of facili-
tation payments. The US Foreign and Corrupt Practices Act allows such
payments, where these are not locally illegal, but requires that they be
explicitly recorded. This precedent has been followed in the OECD Con-
vention, although not in that of the Council of Europe. But the House of
Commons Select Committee (2001) regards the distinction between facil-
itation payments and bribery as entirely spurious and called for the OECD
Convention to be amended to outlaw them. However, this will still leave
the issue of commission payments unresolved. As part of company law
reform it has also been recommended that it should be obligatory to
include in annual reports any allegations of corrupt practice and assess-
ments of the internal controls in place to prevent corruption.
But, in addition to legal sanctions, it has been argued that voluntary
Codes of Conduct have an important role to play. Again, the OECD
‘Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises’, agreed in June 2000, provides
the framework. But to be successful such codes must be supported by
adequate training to ensure compliance and monitoring within the
companies.
Governments
A number of issues, however, can only be addressed by governments.
The House of Commons Select Committee identified the encourage-
ment of open tendering procedures for public contracts as one impor-
tant area. They argued that audit trails were essential to the monitoring
of the contracting process and that companies should be required to
sign ‘integrity pacts’, undertaking not to engage in bribery, in order 
to pre-qualify for a particular contract. They also called for the UK’s
Export Credit and Guarantee Department (ECGD) to more rigorously
monitor companies so as to exclude those engaging in corrupt practices.
But clearly the ECGD can only act when it has sufficient evidence of 
corrupt practices to defend itself against any legal challenge. Inclusion
in the World Bank’s list of debarred companies is regarded as just such
The Challenge to Corruption
39

evidence. The ECGD does require all companies to subscribe to an anti-
corruption warranty and in 2000 introduced a set of Business Principles
that included references to corrupt practices.
As for the EU, there have been calls for it to encourage its members to
ratify and implement, in national legislation, the various Conventions
to which they have subscribed. This includes not only the OECD and
Council of Europe Conventions, but also the instruments already agreed
by the EU itself. There are also a number of areas where the EU, in its own
right, is seen as being able to make a particular contribution. In 1999, the
European Council proposed that the EU should establish a justice unit to
liaise between national prosecutors and the police in the fight against
transnational organised crime while, more recently, the Committee of
Independent Experts on Reform of the Commission suggested the cre-
ation of a European Public Prosecutor and a single European Prosecution
Office. Both these proposals, if implemented, would make a major contri-
bution to international action against corruption and money laundering.
The EC should also have a central role in the establishment of any
‘black list’ to sanction corrupt companies. It makes little sense for indi-
vidual Member States to be maintaining their own lists given the
requirements of EU wide tendering and the increasing importance of the
EC’s aid programme. An EU wide ‘black list’ would represent a far more
significant sanction for any company and would result in the develop-
ment of consistent and legally robust criteria. The temptation for
national governments to turn a blind eye to corrupt practices by their
own national companies would be severely reduced. The distortions to
the single European market arising from corrupt practices are sufficient
justification for EU wide action.
Similarly, the EU should be urgently addressing the tax treatment of
bribe payments and the role of export credit guarantees. In both cases,
the EC must insure uniform treatment across the Community. In the
case of the tax deductibility of bribes, if these become illegal then tax
deductibility is no longer a possibility. However, the use of ECG may
prove more problematic, as governments champion their national com-
panies in international competition for exports, especially in such sen-
sitive areas as defence. Again, an enhancement in the role of the EC in
‘black listing’ could make a significant contribution to excluding com-
panies, guilty of colluding in corrupt practices, from ECG support.
Finally, the EU also has an important role in promoting best practice
across the community. Short of legislation the EC will need to closely
monitor the European accountancy profession as it develops common
accountancy and auditing standards under self-regulation. Similarly, the
40
Stephen Dearden

EC should encourage the development of a common approach to
‘whistleblowing’ across the Community under national legislation.
As for the broader global dimension three areas of development suggest
themselves. First, further improvements in the international arrange-
ments for sharing information, with a greater emphasis upon combating
tax evasion as well money laundering. The OECD’s Convention on
Mutual Assistance in Tax Matters provides a useful model. More radically,
the international community might address the issue of agreement upon
a common tax base applicable to MNCs. This would not infringe the 
sovereignty of individual states in setting tax rates. The OECD Fiscal
Committee has already introduced a loose definition of the tax base in its
discussions about tax avoidance. Finally, this might be further developed
into a system of global unitary taxation for MNCs, as has been mooted by
the UN and the IMF. Transfer pricing within such companies offers sub-
stantial scope for tax avoidance and evasion. Global unitary taxation
would require MNCs to identify the earnings of local subsidiaries as a pro-
portion of the earnings of the company as a whole. A formula (e.g. based
upon the value of national sales) would allocate the global profits to 
individual states, who could then apply their national tax rates.
Clearly, some of these proposals represent a considerable challenge to
the national interest and national sovereignty, but it is clear that the
international climate is rapidly changing. The threat of international
organised crime, the scale of money laundering, with the concomitant
problems of financial instability, the erosion of national tax bases and
the failure of decades of international aid, compromised by endemic
corruption, are all issues that are rapidly rising up the international
political agenda. The environment in which multinational companies
operate is inevitably going to change quite radically and they would be
well advised to be ‘ahead of the game’.
Notes
1
For a detailed review of the empirical evidence see Lambsdorff (1999) or
Dearden (2000).
2
The non-OECD tax havens have formed themselves into the loose grouping
of the International Tax and Investment Organisation.
References
ACP-EU Courier (1999) October, No. 177.
Ades, A. and Di Tella, R. (1997) Champions and corruption, some unpleasant
interventionist arithmetic. The Economic Journal 107: 1023–42.
The Challenge to Corruption
41

Alesina, A. and Weber, B. (1999) Do corrupt governments receive less foreign aid?
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 7108.
Commission of the European Community (1997) Policy against corruption
(COM(97)192).
Commission of the European Community (1998) Public procurement in the EU
(COM(98)143).
Dearden, S. J. H. (2000) Corruption and economic development. European
Development Policy Study Group, Discussion Paper 18.
Hall, R. and Jones, C. (1999) Why do some countries produce so much more 
output per worker than others. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 83–116.
House of Commons (2001) Select Committee on International Development:
Fourth Report.
Johnson, S. et al. (1998) Regulatory discretion and the unofficial economy. 
The American Economic Review 88: 387–92.
Kaufmann, D. and Wei, S.-J. (1999) Does ‘Grease money’ speed up the wheels of
commerce? Washington, DC: World Bank Publications.
Keefer, P. and Knack, S. (1996) Institutions and economic performance, cross-
section tests using alternative institutional measures. Economics and Politics 12:
207–27.
Lambsdorff, J. G. (1999) Corruption in empirical research – a review:
Transparency International Working Paper. See also Internet Centre for
Corruption Research: Contribution 5, November.
Leite, C. and Weidmann, J. (1999) Does mother nature corrupt? Natural
Resources, Corruption and Economic Growth: International Monetary Fund
Working Paper 99/85.
Mauro, P. (1995) Corruption and growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110:
681–712.
Mauro, P. (1997) ‘The effects of corruption on growth, investment and govern-
ment expenditure; a cross country analysis’, in Corruption and the Global
Economy. Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Oxfam (2000) Tax Havens: Oxfam Policy Papers, No. 6/00.
Poirson, H. (1998) Economic security, private investment and growth in devel-
oping countries: International Monetary Fund Working Paper 98/4.
Rijkeghem, C. and Weber, B. (1997) Corruption and the rate of temptation. Do
low wages in the civil service cause corruption?: International Monetary Fund
Working Paper 97/73.
Transparency International (1999) Fighting corruption: what remains to be done
at EU level: Working Paper.
Transparency International (1999) The role of export credit insurance in the fight
against and the prevention of corruption in international business transactions
with public-sector partners. September.
United Nations Development Programme (1997) Corruption and integrity
improvement initiatives in developing countries.
UNCTAD (1999) World Investment Report. Geneva, UNCTAD.
Wheeler & Mody (1992) International location decisions: the case of US firms.
Journal of International Economics 33: 57–76.
Wei, S. (1997) How taxing is corruption on international investors: National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 6030.
42
Stephen Dearden

3
Poor Corporate Governance, Market
Discipline and Cronyism in the 1997
Asian Crisis
Christopher Gan
Introduction
Corporate governance refers to the rules of the game that enables 
stakeholders to exercise appropriate oversight of a company to maximize
its value and profits. Both financial and corporate governance restruc-
turing is an ongoing reform program in the post Asian crisis-ridden coun-
tries. To be fully effective, corporate restructuring must be linked to bank
restructuring, which, in turn, must be linked to the settlement of exter-
nal debts to scale down the systemic risks. Fundamental changes within
the economy are necessary to create arm’s-length relations between the
government, corporations, and banks. Many corporations in the crisis-
ridden countries are over-indebted and frequently are part of conglom-
erates or monopolies that are controlled by small groups: they have
non-transparent accounting and close links to government and financial
institutions, including commercial banks (Iskander et al., 1999).
This chapter examines the impact of corporate restructuring and 
governance in the aftermath of the 1997 Asian crisis in East Asia. That
crisis caused an immediate clarion call to re-evaluate the issues of the
market cultures and corporate governance in East Asian economies, in
which the quality of governance is a key determinant to rehabilitate
their financial institutions. This chapter thus addresses itself towards
answering some of the questions that policy-makers themselves must
answer as they strive to undertake comprehensive reforms to promote
better governance. They are looking to reduce excessive risk-taking with-
out causing distress in the financial markets; thereby they hope to 
minimize the chances of a second wave of crisis.
43

For almost a decade (1987–96), a phenomenal record of economic
growth had been posted in the East Asian region. Countries such as
South Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and
the Philippines all achieved remarkable rates of growth, hosting high
quality manufacturing industries in a wide range of products, from
clothes to computers. The region recorded GDP growth rates ranging
from 10 percent in Singapore to 4.5 percent in Philippines (von Leffern
and Cheng, 1998). These economies were achieving high growth rates
in what was considered a stable economic environment, with relatively
low inflation and outward-oriented policy regimes. Since the 1980s, the
introduction of export-oriented foreign direct investment in the region
stimulated exports and import growth. The economic fundamentals
were substantially strong as the region enjoyed high saving rates, 
relatively low inflation, and sound fiscal policy (Kawai, 1998).
However, the growth picture in East Asia has been dismally filled with
corruption, cronyism and poor governance. Growth in the region was
based on the “borrow and grow now, pay later” philosophy. With growth
came wealth and with wealth came greed, cronyism, structural weak-
nesses and mismanagement. The East Asian economies mishandled the
“easy money” that flowed into the region. The capital markets and finan-
cial systems did not keep pace with the extraordinarily high growth in
the region: they were simply not ready for such growth.
During the region’s boom, corruption and cronyism overrode laws
and regulations for personal self-interest and gains giving rise to over-
ambitious tycoons, megalomaniac dictators, and the financiers who
foolishly lent them the money (Engardio and Clifford, 1999). The pri-
vate sector borrowed recklessly, while financial institutions borrowed
heavily offshore with exchange rate impunity. This resulted in, among
other things, the construction of apartment buildings, which were sub-
sequently left empty and unsold as the market became glutted with
excessive numbers of real estate properties. In any society, we suggest,
there should be a set of laws and regulations that serve productive social
objectives, such as building codes, environmental controls, and prudent
banking sector regulations.
The anecdotal evidence of the 1997 Asian crisis demonstrated that
obscure insider lending practices diminished discipline in the financial
systems, and poor corporate governance contributed to the collapse of
many banks and corporate firms in Thailand, Malaysia, South Korea and
Indonesia. Discipline in the financial system was being sacrificed in the
place of quick wealth and prosperity. Without doubt, a financial system
without discipline is a financial system without control – an invitation
44
Christopher Gan

to financial disaster, as demonstrated in the 1997 Asian crisis. The lack
of financial discipline highlighted certain institutional idiosyncrasies
such as implicit government guarantees given to financial intermedi-
aries encouraging them to engage in excessive risk-taking (Mushkat,
1998). Krugman calls this “pangloss value” which is a competition
among over-guaranteed and under-regulated banks leading bankers to
finance risky projects based on returns in ideal circumstances instead 
of a project’s expected returns (The Economist, 1998: 70). International
capital mobility may not always maximize economic efficiency if gov-
ernments implicitly bailout banks’ losses.
In trying to comprehend the magnitude and contagion effects of the
1997 Asian financial crisis, investors and policy makers from crisis-
ridden countries (particularly Thailand and Malaysia) have shifted most
of the blame to George Soros’ speculative activities. No one can deny the
fact that currency traders (such as Mr Soros) and hedge funds played a
role in accelerating the financial crisis in Asia. There are many unscrupu-
lous currency speculators and global fund managers in the financial
market and likewise many “George Soros.” There is no international law
in the financial market to stop speculators from profiting in the market
regardless of their actions. Neither is it illegal or immoral to speculate in
the financial market.
Is Mr Soros solely responsible for the social ills of the 1997 Asian
financial crisis? Or, is it the elite and cronies, whose substantial wealth
has been eroded by the financial crisis, trying to lay the blame on an
international money speculator rather than their imprudent and undis-
ciplined fiscal behavior in the financial market? The poor weren’t
directly affected by the financial crisis since they do not have the wealth
to be big players in the financial market. We suggest Mr Soros is simply
a scapegoat of political failures. It is easier to shift the blame to others
than admit one’s errors and mistakes.
It became abundantly clear during the 1997 Asian crisis that the gov-
ernance structure in East Asian economies needed to be improved in
many aspects if good performances of corporations were to be sustained
and financial distress to be avoided. As a result, the governments in the
region have to be disciplined in maintaining market integrity and to
restore investor’s (domestic and foreign) confidence in the region. The
aftermath of the 1997 Asian crisis clearly demonstrates heavy losses
being sustained by many large corporations. This was heightened by
revelations of dishonest or self-serving directors in the 64 failed finan-
cial institutions in Thailand who maximized their own interests at the
expense of their companies. The accounting rules were lax, and the
Poor Corporate Governance in the 1997 Asian Crisis
45

auditors entrusted with the task of checking the bankbooks and proce-
dures were not vigorous and consistent: and that list is by no means
exhaustive.
What is corporate governance?
As has been said, corporate governance refers to the rules of the game
that enable shareholders to exercise appropriate oversight of a company
to maximize its value and profits. It is a set of provisions that enables
the shareholders through voting power to compel those in operating
control of the firm to respect their interests (Scott, 1998). Corporate gov-
ernance is an indirect mechanism in reducing the agency costs and trans-
action costs imposed by managers acting in their own interests at the
expense of the companies and shareholders. However, good governance
should not be judged within the shareholders–managers relationship
alone. Instead, good governance should take into account actions or con-
duct of the company on other “parties” such as employees, suppliers,
customers, auditors, regulators and the community at large (Scott, 1998;
Koh, 1999). They are characterized as stakeholders, and a good gover-
nance system should be judged by how well all interests are protected
by the contract.
The inescapable characteristics of good governance should include
competence, integrity and empowerment.
G
Corporate directors will be required to demonstrate competency in
understanding of the business involved. This requires that they pos-
sess appropriate education and training to command international
respect (Copp and Letza, 1998). For example, the Dresdner Bank in
Britain published their directors’ qualifications in their annual report
as part of good governance practice.
G
Integrity requires corporate directors to practice ethical values in
business. This can be achieved through accountability and sanctions
against fraudulent and unethical behavior.
G
Empowerment should free directors from restrictive rules and regula-
tions that could hinder their performances. Empowerment does not
guarantee better governance unless the responsible public agencies
are competent.
Thus, the regulatory framework must be drawn clearly to punish those
who step out of bounds (Copp and Letza, 1998).
Good corporate governance integrates three coherent principles
namely, process and structure, business prosperity and accountability.
46
Christopher Gan

This is to ensure transparency in the accounting and auditing standards
and practices. Transparency, integrity and accountability in the running
of a company reflect good corporate culture and governance. Good 
corporate governance reflects good management practices, conforming
to the needs of stakeholders and the ability to challenge and absorb
dynamic changes in the line of commerce such as external macro shocks
(Shunglu, 1998). According to the Sir Adrian Cadbury 1992 Report:
The country’s economy depends on the drive and efficiency of its com-
panies, (their boards) must be free to drive their companies forward,
but exercise that freedom within a framework of effective accountabil-
ity. This is the essence of any system of good corporate governance.
(Tsang, 1999: 61)
Both financial and corporate governance restructuring is an ongoing
reform program in the post Asia crisis-ridden countries. The harsh eco-
nomic climate during the 1997 Asian crisis demands restructuring, and
changes are needed in the economy which present a challenge to crisis-
ridden countries to improve the standards of corporate governance prac-
tices so as to sustain economic growth. The quality of good governance
is a key determinant to rehabilitate the financial institutions of these
countries. To be fully effective, corporate restructuring must be linked 
to bank restructuring, which, in turn, must be linked to the settlement
of external debt problems to minimize systemic risks. Fundamental
changes within the economy are necessary to create arm’s-length rela-
tions between the government, corporations, and banks. Many corpo-
rations in the crisis-ridden countries are over-indebted and frequently
are part of conglomerates or monopolies that are controlled by small
groups (like utilities, transportation and food supplies in Indonesia) 
and practice non-transparent accounting closely linked to government
and banks. This results in cozy relationships between some politicians and
their friends, which are incompatible with competitive market invest-
ment decisions.
Corporations face governance and external financing problems
because different stakeholders have different preferences over how a
firm should operate. For example, shareholders want their wealth to be
maximized without regard to debt. Creditors want to be repaid, which
implies firms taking on less risky projects than shareholders would
expect. Managers, on the other hand, would like to maximize their ben-
efits to themselves rather than outside investors (Prowse, 1999). This
could sometime result in managers shirking their responsibilities, engag-
ing in embezzlement and fraud.
Poor Corporate Governance in the 1997 Asian Crisis
47

In the western world, company directors’ obligations go beyond max-
imizing the shareholders’ wealth. They have a social responsibility to
employees, creditors, consumers and other stakeholders (Lee, 1996).
Legal actions can and have been instigated not only by shareholders but
also by employees and creditors. For example, insurance claims against
directors has been reported on the rise in the US, England and Australia
(Lee, 1996). In Singapore and Canada, it is compulsory for public com-
panies to have audit committees and the New York Stock Exchange
requires companies listed to have audit committees too (Lee, 1996).
Camdessus, the outgoing IMF chief told a summit of the 10th United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) that for eco-
nomic growth to be sustainable in the East Asian region it requires fun-
damental changes in the financial and corporate sectors and old styles
of governance should be restructured or abandoned (New Straits Times,
14 February 2000: 21).
How would one undertake to measure, in a rigorous way, the effec-
tiveness of corporate governance in the post Asian crisis region? Is there
an appropriate framework to promote better corporate governance prac-
tices among companies? One response would be for the government of
crisis-ridden countries to establish a prudent framework designed to
encourage companies to adopt sound ethical business practices. The
framework should be a set of general principles and rules supported by
as small a number of detailed provisions as possible (Longstaff, 1998).
This includes transparency and proper disclosure of matters such as
related party transactions, and auditors having access to external and
internal books. It also requires that a board of directors have effective
power to oversee and monitor the management’s performances on a
continuous basis (Lee, 1996). It must also examine closely their incen-
tives to act and observe their performance in actual practice.
Corporate governance problems in East Asian economies
Good governance is one of the fundamental prerequisites for sustain-
able economic growth in a volatile financial world. When discussing
governance, most people think of prominent politicians or other lead-
ing figures in authority. The quality of political leadership does play an
important role in establishing the goals and the moral tone of leader-
ship. However, the quality of a country’s civil service entrusted with the
responsibility of managing the tasks of governance that directly and
indirectly affect the citizen’s lives, is in essence far more important for
the achievement of economic growth than the leadership of a few
prominent political leaders (Evans et al., 1997).
48
Christopher Gan

The ingredients of good governance such as transparency and account-
ability in the structure, which enable firms to weather through crises was
missing among East Asian corporate firms during the 1997 Asian crisis.
In addition, East Asian economies lack the right mechanism and regula-
tory agencies to handle detailed rule making and non-legal administra-
tive enforcement such as financial disclosure and proper accounting
standards and practices (Prowse, 1999). There is also a shortage of well-
qualified accountants and competent auditors (e.g. Thailand and
Indonesia), and the professional self-regulatory agency is inherently
weak (Alba et al., 1998). Regulators lacked the expertise to monitor bur-
geoning markets, while loan officers relied on personal relationships to
analyze credit risk, steering funds to the same over-leveraged oligarchs,
which resulted in high loan defaults (Engardio and Clifford, 1999). The
classification of non-performing loans was weak and inefficient allowing
most banks to conceal their weaknesses. For example, the Korean banks
who bought Indonesian junk bonds or lent to insolvent chaebol (con-
glomerates) with implicit government guarantee created a fertile ground
for default loans (Delhaise, 1998).
The East Asian governments had pursued an aggressive export-
oriented strategy providing incentives such as subsidized loans and tax
relief to exporters (The World Bank, 1999), but the equity markets were
inadequate and not well developed thereby forcing firms to borrow
heavily offshore to sustain such an ambitious strategy. The lack of 
market discipline, plus a government safety net against systemic and
external shocks, led to increased loans to firms with high leverage and
low profitability. This demonstrates that corporate and financial sector
governance were tolerant in allowing poor performing firms to borrow
excessively given their already high degree of leverage. Foreign institu-
tional investors were also caught in the trap of the East Asian govern-
ment “too-big-too-fail” policy causing them to overlook or disregard the
deficiencies in governance practices in East Asia.
Market-oriented critics also blamed the crisis on moral hazard: the
inclination of creditors and borrowers to accept excessive risk because of
implicit government guarantees of rescue should their businesses fail
(Lachica, 1999). Many of these economies were dominated by conglom-
erates, non-transparent accounting practices and close relationships
between the corporate and financial sectors (Iskander et al., 1999). The
1997 Asian crisis also exposed the hazards of corruption and cronyism
and business conducted on the basis of “guanxi capitalism” (or connec-
tions) led to grotesque misallocation of funds (Engardio and Clifford,
1999). Such relations-based financial practices were cultivated over the
years and have long been accepted as a business norm and culture in the
Poor Corporate Governance in the 1997 Asian Crisis
49

East Asian corporate world. For example, Petroliam Nasional Berhad, 
or Petronas (a state-owned oil and gas company) helped buy debt-
burdened shipping assets controlled by the Malaysian Prime Minister’s
eldest son, and was also prepared to buy the cash strapped national car
maker, Proton (Jayasankaran, 1999). The buy back of Malaysian Airline
(MAS) at over twice the current market price of MAS’s shares by the gov-
ernment is a violation of business ethics and good governance practices
(Holland, 2001). In 1997, the top ten families in Indonesia controlled
businesses worth more than half the country’s market capitalization; in
South Korea, the majority of the loans are made to Chaebols (well con-
nected corporate manufacturing conglomerates) (Iskander et al., 1999).
Corporate governance is not a revolutionary concept and is a well-
established global issue. Good corporate governance has a multiplier
effect generating benefits not only to individual companies, but also to
the country as a whole. Since the 1997 Asian crisis, there has been an
outburst of comprehensive corporate restructuring and improved cor-
porate governance in the crisis-ridden countries to enhance economic
performances to keep pace with globalization of corporate entrepre-
neurship and the regulatory regimes of other nations’ corporate entities.
Importance of market discipline and good governance in the
East Asian economies
Rapid economic growth in a liberalized financial world without market
discipline is not sustainable. Strong regulatory and legal infrastructures
are needed for the financial system to be robust and withstand macro
shocks and economic distress. In designing an effective safety net for the
financial system, the marketplace must be allowed to discipline financial
risk-takers. It may do this by allowing insolvent and troubled financial
institutions to fail and by imposing severe penalties on institutions close
to failing, thus increasing overall market discipline in the financial systems
(Helfer, 1999). Furthermore, shareholders should lose their equity in a
failed bank. This adds to the level of market discipline by undermining the
“too big too fail” philosophy. Over time, managers of financial institutions
will be more cautious and pay more careful attention to risk-taking during
periods of economic distress, knowing that they may lose their jobs and
any investments they have in their bank if it fails (Helfer, 1999).
Restructuring and improvement of corporate governance is essential to
reduce excessive debt and risk-taking. This involves a comprehensive and
integrated approach linking corporate restructuring to bank restructuring
50
Christopher Gan

in settling external debt problems (Iskander et al., 1999). Fundamental
changes within the relationships between the government, corporate
firms and banks are required. This should diminish “relation-based”
finance practices while restoring confidence in the financial system 
with a new and effective legal, regulatory, accounting, and institutional
framework. In turn, this would lead to a competitive corporate and fin-
ancial system that minimizes excessive risk-taking in a disciplined fash-
ion. It would install equitable risk sharing and responsibility among
creditors, borrowers, and the government, enhancing market discipline
in the financial markets (Iskander et al., 1999). There should be no arti-
ficial advantages in the financial markets in any form. Credit should be
made on the principle of a borrower’s ability to repay and not on some
special relationship with the creditor.
Indeed, the efficiency of financial systems must be set within a disci-
plined legal and regulatory framework. Regional banks often lack ade-
quate internal, market and regulatory discipline to deal with financial
distress. A system of effective and reliable laws and regulations is required
to stipulate the contractual rights and responsibilities of market partici-
pants so as to encourage discipline and prudent behavior. Effective bank-
ruptcy laws must be legally enforced to ensure that unviable firms do not
continue to absorb credit. The presence of an effective bankruptcy sys-
tem should help create a disciplined climate for monitoring risk taking
between creditors and borrowers in the financial market.
Effective and stable political institutions and bureaucrats are being
recognized as prerequisites in achieving good corporate governance in
an economy. This requires monitoring the performance of public agen-
cies and authorities actively penalizing bureaucratic abuses and ineffi-
ciencies (Landell-Mills and Serageldin, 1991). Public authorities have a
critical and indispensable role in establishing cost-effective policies gov-
erning economic activity. Local governments should remain the pri-
mary and core institutions in local governance and cannot delegate
their responsibilities in public policy making and planning to others.
According to a UN consultant at a workshop on promoting good gover-
nance, there are nine characteristics to improve governance. These
include strategic vision, effectiveness and efficiency, responsiveness,
participation in governance, consensus-orientation equity, and rules of
law, transparency and accountability (New Straits Times, 21 February
2000: 2). Improvement in local governance will emerge if the above
characteristics are adhered to and there is co-operation between private
business and civil society organizations.
Poor Corporate Governance in the 1997 Asian Crisis
51

There is ample evidence that the long-term survival of any financial
system in an economy depends on good corporate governance practices
that adequately protect outside investors (Prowse, 1999). Countries that
enjoy higher and sustainable economic growth are countries, which
have good corporate governance and well-established capital markets.
For example, the Toronto Stock Exchange Disclosure Requirements
(1995) serves as a guideline and benchmark in establishing governance
structure which includes giving flexibility in corporate boards, so direc-
tors have the opportunity to design the governance system that work
best for their corporations. A study on the governance code by Dey
(1999) reveals that the Canadian boards of directors and their share-
holders have taken a more proactive role in issues pertaining to gover-
nance. The Hong Kong Stock Exchange provides board guidelines to
public listed companies and they too believe that self-regulation by
boards of directors is more effective and efficient than the imposition of
excessive and rigid regulations in enhancing good corporate governance
practices. In promoting good corporate governance, the Hong Kong
Company Registry monitors closely, and enforces, the disclosure of
information about directors and companies (Tsang, 1999).
Poor standards of corporate governance can be positively linked to
overvalued assets, inappropriate lending, and a host of other imprudent
behaviors that were said to cause the collapse of the East Asian economies
(Longstaff, 1998). In a climate of harsh economic conditions how might
this problem be addressed? One immediate response would be for the East
Asian financial institutions as a whole to establish a prudential framework
via the central bank, or monetary authorities, to encourage banks to prac-
tice good governance. The framework should make it an annual manda-
tory exercise for each bank to report the steps it has taken to conform to
proper governance practices. The banks, in turn, should address the
creditworthiness of companies to whom they lend and thereby imple-
ment a corporate governance-rating scheme. This could be the driving
force in determining accessibility to financing for companies and for the
monitoring of corporate behavior.
The corporate governance restructure mechanism will be a mere
clanging of cymbals unless it is designed to protect outsiders (share-
holders and creditors) against managerial self-denial. As stated elegantly
by Milton Friedman, the social responsibility of corporate managers is
wealth maximization for its shareholders while respecting the law and
local customs (Cragg, 1999). Anything beyond this objective is a misuse
of power that potentially could cause the firm to fail and impede its own
responsibilities.
52
Christopher Gan

The globalization of trade and the advances in IT and telecommunica-
tions have intensified the competitive environment in the daily run of
commerce (Copp and Letza, 1998). The “global village” is a reality, and
this means that legislation with strong regulations and high ethical stan-
dards will promote good governance behavior among companies.
Information is increasingly aggressive and pervasive in a globalized world.
Computer technology can revolutionize company decision-making pro-
cesses, which can lead to greater accountability and flexibility. In the
developed nation, open governance within knowledge-based companies
is now the norm, and they always desire more information about other
companies’ activities, further, they are more conscious of ethics-related
issues (Copp and Letza, 1998). The timely disclosure of information 
is an important asset in a corporate society – shareholders need to be
informed in a timely fashion on matters pertaining to their interests.
Government intervention could also act as a catalyst to promote good
governance through education and training, proper disclosure, account-
ability and the imposition of sanctions against imprudent practices. It
can promote the awareness of good corporate governance practice
through exposing dishonest and self-interested directors who enrich
themselves at the expense of their companies (Lee, 1996). In Malaysia, a
report on corporate governance recommended that prior to a company
being listed on an exchange, its directors must attend a mandatory 
training program pertaining to board-related issues such as the director’s
role in strategic planning and in implementing positive changes (Cheah,
1999). This is an efficient way to bring onboard people who are cap-
able and competent to act as directors of listed companies, to increase
investors’ confidence and to contribute to the country’s growth. In
Thailand, the government will provide training in aspects of corporate
bankruptcy and formal corporate reorganizations for judges and
receivers, trustees-in-bankruptcy company managers, lawyers, account-
ants and others to improve corporate governance practices (Dirou, 1998).
Approaches to corporate restructuring in the 
East Asian economies
Promoting good governance practices in the East Asian economies is 
a challenging and long-term process especially as the costs to taxpayers
in accomplishing this task are to be minimized. In East Asia, the imme-
diate task is to make fundamental cultural and institutional changes 
to create transparent relations between the government, corporations 
and banks while diminishing “relation-based” financing practices
Poor Corporate Governance in the 1997 Asian Crisis
53

(Iskander et al., 1999). The challenge for policy-makers is to fend off
pressures from all parties so as to restore credibility in the financial sys-
tem and to build a competitive corporate environment that will increase
the investors’ confidence. It requires the government to be proactive, 
to eliminate any obstacles to restructuring, and to establish a better and
more effective legislative framework to ensure that any company in
financial distress either gets reorganized as efficiently as possible, or if not,
is liquidated as soon as possible. Transparency is crucial for accountabil-
ity and the government has one imperative and immediate task. This is
to upgrade accounting and auditing standards to be consistent with inter-
national practices, and in parallel revise relevant legislation and regula-
tions to make it mandatory that the statements of public companies be
audited in accordance to international standards (Dirou, 1998; Landell-
Mills and Serageldin, 1991).
Thailand, Malaysia, Korea and Indonesia have all recognized that
urgency and have committed to corporate restructuring to improve gov-
ernance. The extent of their restructuring schemes and the progress dif-
fers among countries. They are influenced by the share of corporate debt
held by domestic banks versus foreign banks, whether domestic banks
are viably strong to engage in active restructuring, and the extent of
non-performing loans in the country (Iskander et al., 1999).
A different route was followed in Korea – under the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) restructuring bailout program the Korean govern-
ment nationalized banks to protect depositors. It also agreed to open up
its financial industry to foreign investors to undertake the bank’s turn-
around (Lee, 2000). For example, in December 1998, the government
chose Newbridge Capital of the United States to acquire 51 percent of
Korean First Bank (KFB) entrusting the managerial control to Horie, an
American financier of Japanese descent (Lee, 2000). One of Mr Horie’s
restructuring schemes was to transform KFB into an efficient and 
customer-oriented financial institution, instead of lending money to
inefficient companies at the government’s request and thus increasing
market share through reckless expansion. The objective of Mr Horie’s
restructuring scheme was to change the KFB bureaucratic image to be
business-oriented, which had been plagued by cronyism and poor gov-
ernance. It is hoped that Mr Horie’s restructuring scheme would send a
strong signal that any attempt in the future by government to intervene
in lending decisions is unacceptable.
The Korean government has demonstrated that no company is too big
to fail: the family controlled and operated Hyundai has been swept
away. A reformist government has helped reduce the chaebol’s once 
54
Christopher Gan

limitless supply of soft bank loans. It has also sold major stakes in steel,
oil-refining, aluminum, rolling stock and chemical plants (Clifford and
Engardio, 1999).
The Malaysian government has taken several steps to promote and
implement good corporate governance practices to protect minority
interests and to ensure that there is timely disclosure of information to
the market. In March 1998, the government and several key industry
representatives got together to establish a framework for corporate gov-
ernance and the setting of best practices for the industry at large (Yap,
1999). The framework comprises over 70 principal recommendations to
raise standards in corporate governance. An Implementation Project
Team was established to oversee and enforce the implementation of the
recommendations. For example, to prevent abuses by controlling share-
holders of publicly listed firms, the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange
(KLSE) implemented changes to Section 176 of the Company Act requir-
ing the consent of creditors before applications can be made to court to
seek protection from creditor claims (Yap, 1999). Work has also begun
in forming the Minority Shareholder Watchdog group to achieve greater
transparency of ownership and disclosure in corporate transactions. The
private sector has also taken an initiative to form the Malaysian Institute
of Corporate Governance to promote awareness of good governance
practices. In addition, the Securities Commission (SC) is committed to
prosecute companies publicly where corporate activities and behaviors
contravene the securities laws or exchange listing requirements. The SC
is also proactive in resolving the problems of distressed brokers, and has
introduced several prudent measures to strengthen the stockbroking
industry as a whole.
In August 1998, the Thai government announced a comprehensive
restructuring scheme on the financial sector and corporate debts. This
restructuring scheme focused on a wide range of measures to resolve
immediately Thailand’s banking crisis, and to promote better gover-
nance practices among the industries at large. Some of the schemes
include restructuring and strengthening Thailand’s core financial insti-
tutions, redefining the role of financial players in a modernized Thai
financial sector, strengthening market discipline to enhance trans-
parency, developing appropriate legislative and institutional frame-
works for corporate bankruptcies and reorganizations, improving the
quality and reliability of key financial information provided by public
corporations to regulators, shareholders and the general public, and
improving accountability of boards of directors and management of
public companies (Dirou, 1998).
Poor Corporate Governance in the 1997 Asian Crisis
55

The lack of transparency in Thai financial institutions has dramatically
undermined the ability of both supervisors and investors to assess, in a
timely fashion, the weaknesses and risks borne by their financial institu-
tions, which ultimately caused distress in Thailand’s financial industry.
The Bank of Thailand and the Ministry of Finance are, under the restruc-
turing scheme, committed to introducing transparency by developing
accounting, external auditing and disclosure standards more in line with
best international practices. This include reviewing the roles and func-
tions of the Institute of Certified Accountants and Auditors of Thailand
(ICAAT) to become an independent self-regulatory professional body
consistent with international best practices. ICAAT will issue revised
accounting standards for financial statement disclosures, asset classi-
fication, marketable securities, and loss recognition as well as deriving
new standards for attestation, debt restructuring and impairment of
assets.
Cleaning up balance sheets is just one of the many steps that the Bank
of Thailand hopes will bring their banks up to global standards. But it
must build a pool of professional bankers and loan officers whose lend-
ing must be based on borrowers’ risk and cash flow rather than personal
ties and collateral (Clifford and Corben, 1999). Thus, the role of foreign
financial expertise and capital is essential. Recently, ABN Amro of the
Netherlands paid approximately $185 million for a majority stake in 
the Bank of Asia. The Thai Danu Bank is half-owned by Singapore’s 
DBS Bank. Standard and Charter has bought 75 percent of Nakornthon
Bank, and Singapore United Overseas Bank is close to buying a 75 per-
cent stake in Radanasin Bank, while HSBC is a front-runner to take over
Bank Metropolitan Bank (Ellis, 1999).
The Stock Exchange Thailand and the Securities Commission Exchange
will conduct a comprehensive review of the duties and appointment
process of corporate directors, responsibilities of officers, and sharehold-
ers rights of public companies including listed companies, as well as the
contingent liability. The objective is to strengthen the effectiveness and
monitoring role of the boards of directors and to enhance shareholders
rights (Dirou, 1998). The Thai government is also committed to reducing
the debt burden of the corporate sector which has risen sharply during
the crisis. Thus, the establishment of the Corporate Debt Restructuring
Advisory Committee seeks to promote market-based corporate debt
restructuring and enacted legal changes to its bankruptcy law to enhance
economic growth and promote good governance practices (Dirou, 1998).
In Indonesia, most corporate debt is held by foreign private banks 
signifying the importance of foreign banks as key players in the 
56
Christopher Gan

restructuring process. Recently, the elected President Abdurraham Wahid
was committed to reforms and rebuilding investors’ confidence (though
more recent events, in mid-2001 when he was effectively stripped of his
powers might cause some alarm with respect to these matters). Even 
so, the Indonesian government has adopted a corporate restructuring
scheme that consists of a framework to facilitate corporate restructuring,
a new bankruptcy system, and a mechanism that enables debtors and
creditors to hedge against exchange rate risk (Iskander et al., 1999). The
Jakarta Initiative Task Force was established in 1998 to provide a mecha-
nism for out-of-court settlement between domestic and foreign creditors
in a non-discriminatory manner. Necessary and relevant revision was
made to the bankruptcy law, together with the Special Commercial Court
to ensure that bankruptcy proceedings will be efficient and transparent.
Receivers and administrators overseeing the debtors’ assets against
insider and fraudulent transactions will be appointed from the private
sector to protect creditors from losing out (Iskander et al., 1999).
Conclusions
The “global easy money” available through 1990 to 1996 has virtually
fled from most of the East Asian economies, crippling their governments
with huge debts and highly devalued currencies (Cheo, 1999). The mes-
sage seems to be that a sound economic policy and money alone is inad-
equate to support high economic growth. The common symptoms
among the crisis-ridden countries were long periods of growth financed
with unhedged foreign borrowing and poor risk management (Delhaise,
1998). Domestic liberalization of the financial sector did not keep pace
with changes in the globalized financial world. Their disclosure of finan-
cial information was below that acceptable at international level. What
is needed across Asia is a clear agenda that is transparent to all, politi-
cians who are seen to be trustworthy, and governments that have real-
istic and achievable goals and projects. The government should be seen
as a stabilizing force, rather than a driving force in the creation of
wealth, stability and harmony in the economy (Cheo, 1999).
The global financial market will continue to be volatile, risk will not be
completely eliminated, and crises will continue to occur. The best each
country can do is to improve its risk management practices to limit severe
economic fluctuation. The challenge for East Asian policy makers is to
promote good governance practices and develop effective regulatory
frameworks for financial institutions with the hope of gaining credibility
in the international financial markets. This includes enforcing existing
Poor Corporate Governance in the 1997 Asian Crisis
57

laws, passing new ones on money laundering, and coming down hard
on white-collar criminals perpetrating acts such as corporate fraud
(Granitas, 2001). This also requires policy measures to restructure the
corporate sector and untangle the solvent firms from the insolvent, and
to stabilize and rehabilitate viable firms (World Bank, 1999). Banks and
market participants should take a more precautionary financial lever-
aged approach in maximizing their wealth, given the inherent global
financial risks. There are no easy solutions to the Asian financial market
sector deficiencies, and rigorous restructuring and reforms must address
the deficiencies adequately and quickly.
There is no single approach or golden rule to good corporate governance
practices. Countries should be given the flexibility to derive their own pol-
icy options, restructuring and reform of the financial sector at a pace sus-
tainable by their own markets. It is important for the East Asian economies
to build their own surveillance system to monitor the flow of funds and
be disciplined in the financial market. They should learn from the crisis
mistakes that borrowing from abroad without hedging against exchange
rate risk is equivalent to committing the country to suicide. There must
also be greater collaboration and co-operation across agencies, sectors and
borders, which positively contribute to transparency and accountability.
Nothing has fundamentally changed in the global economy to prevent 
a second wave of the crisis from happening again. However, we suggest
that a disciplined financial market will be stronger, and probably more
able to react quickly and positively towards future needs.
References
Alba, P., Claessens, S. and Djankov, S. (1998) Thailand’s corporate financing and
governance structures: Impact on firms’ competitiveness. Mimeo, Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Cheah, F. S. (1999) Training of corporate directors. The Star August 24th: 9.
Cheo, R. K. S. (1999) In Shifting Sands: Examining the Loss of Business Confidence in
Asia, Singapore: McGraw-Hill.
Clifford, M. L. and Corben, R. (1999) Putting banks on the road to recovery.
Business Week November 29th: 76–7.
Clifford, M. L. and Engardio, P. (1999) Rebuilding Asia. Business Week November
29th: 68–70.
Copp, S. and Letza, S. (1998) New century, new boardroom. Accountancy
International August: 44–5.
Cragg, W. (1999) Two models of corporate governance. Banker’s Journal Malaysia
109: 71–6.
Delhaise, P. F. (1998) Asia in Crisis: The Implosion of the Banking and Finance
Systems, Singapore: Wiley.
58
Christopher Gan

Dey, P. (1999) “Post the governance code: Positive and negative,” Corporate
Governance International, Vol. 2, pp. 104–11.
Dirou, P. (1998) Financial Sector Reform: Policy Matrix. Banking and Financial
Sector Management Reform, Mekong Institute, Course A5, August–September:
1–62.
Ellis, E. (1999) Foreigners hired to repair Asia’s banks face a tough and thankless
task. Time November 29th: 39.
Engardio, P. and Clifford, M. L. (1999) Where Asia went wrong. Business Week
November 29th: 82–4.
Evans, D. E. R., Angela, R. and Rigoli, R. (1997) “Governance and civil service
reform: Mali,” in S. C. Smith (ed.) Case Studies in Economic Development, 2nd
edn Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 228–33.
Granitas, A. (2001) Are your employees ripping you off? Far Eastern Economic
Review March 8th: 42–5.
Gray, C. and Kaufmann, D. (1999) Corruption and development. Finance and
Development March: 7–10.
Helfer, R. T. (1999) What deposit insurance can and cannot do? Finance and
Development March: 22–35.
Holland, L. (2001) Shaking the party grip on power. Far Eastern Economic Review
March 1st: 16–8.
Iskander, M., Meyerman, G., Gray, D. F. and Hagan, S. (1999) Corporate restruc-
turing and governance in East Asia. Finance and Development March: 42–5.
Jayasankaran, S. (1999) “Saviour Complex.” Far Eastern Economic Review August
12th: 10–13.
Kawai, M. (1998) The Asian currency crisis: Causes and lessons. Contemporary
Economic Policy 16: 157–72.
Koh, P. T. (1999) Responsibilities of corporate governance and control of corpo-
rate powers. Banker’s Journal Malaysia 109: 77–90.
Lachica, E. (1999) Asian financial crisis sparks blame game: Economists are
extending finger-pointing to include markets, investors. Asian Wall Street
Journal January.
Landell-Mills, P. and Serageldin, I. (1991) Governance and the development
process. Finance and Development September: 14–17.
Lee, C. S. (2000) Makeover at the bank. Far Eastern Economic Review March 2nd:
42–3.
Lee, F. M. (1996) Towards good corporate governance practices. Banker’s Journal
Malaysia February–March: 24–6.
Longstaff, S. (1998) Moving beyond the rhetoric of corporate governance.
Banker’s Journal Malaysia 106: 45–7.
Mushkat, M. (1998) What really caused Asia’s crisis? Times March 9th: 21.
New Straits Times (2000) IMF Chief proposes shake-up: Move to address criticism
leveled against globalisation. February 14th: 21.
New Straits Times (2000) UN consultant outlines nine characteristics of good 
governance. February 21st: 2.
Prowse, S. (1999) Corporate governance and corporate finance in East Asia: What
can we learn from the industrialized countries? Banker’s Journal Malaysia 109:
3–22.
Scott, K. (1998) The role of corporate governance in South Korean economic
reform. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 10(4): 8–15.
Poor Corporate Governance in the 1997 Asian Crisis
59

Shunglu, V. K. (1998) The role of auditor in promoting good governance.
International Journal of Government Auditing 25: 1–2.
The World Bank (1999) East Asia: The road to recovery. Washington, DC: The
World Bank.
Tsang, D. (1999) Opening address. Corporate Governance International 2: 61–3.
Von, L. E. and Cheng, K. Y. (1998) The Asian economic crisis: Causes and impact.
The Journal of Lending and Credit Risk Management 80(7): 50–6.
Why did Asia crash? The Economist January 10th: 70.
Yap, P. P. Y. (1999) Towards good corporate governance. The Star September 7th: 78.
60
Christopher Gan

4
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in
Organizations: A Cultural View of
Governance
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed
Introduction
The recent Asian upheaval revealed the macroeconomic risks and 
damages associated with political cronyism, a type of favoritism shown
to associates without regard to their merit/qualifications. Cronyism is a
very prevalent phenomenon in societies and organizations with certain
cultural values such as paternalism, collectivism, and Confucianism.
Despite it being cited as a major factor for Asian economic crisis and mis-
management of the Asian organizations, it is a concept that has not
received due attention from management scholars. In order to better 
our understanding of cronyism in work organizations, we present a 
two-stage model, grounded in the Chinese/Asian cultural context, of the
antecedents to cronyism, and present a number of propositions that 
follow from it.
First, we briefly examine the origin of the term cronyism and its rele-
vance to political life and to organizations, and we provide a definition
of cronyism and distinguish it from other related concepts. We argue
that Confucian values, lack of trust, collectivism, and high power dis-
tance elevate the importance of certain socially desirable behaviors: loy-
alty and close personal relationships. These behaviors, in turn, lead to
three important antecedents of cronyism: an overemphasis on loyalty
and relationships, and the formation of strong ingroups.
61

The antecedents of cronyism in organizations:
a cultural perspective
Crony capitalism, or the granting of economic favors to friends and
privileged associates, is widely believed to be one of the contributory
factors of the Asian financial crisis of 1997 (Dale, 1999). Although the
term was coined in 1981 by a journalist at Time magazine (Safire, 1998),
it did not become widely used until 1997. Cronyism is one of the “4 Cs”
(collusion, cronyism, corruption and complacency) held to be responsible for
undermining competition in Asia (Vogl, 1999); cronyism accounted for
financial institutions extending excessive credit to those with special
connections, and for governments providing financial support for failing
businesses. However, this type of mentality is nothing new in business,
whether in Asia or elsewhere (Asiaweek, 1999); it is the basis of the
Japanese keiretsu and the Korean chaebols, which have been widely cred-
ited for producing the Asian economic miracle of the 1970s and 1980s.
Societies in Asia often turned a blind eye to such behavior until the asso-
ciated dangers and economic damages were brought to surface by the
recent Asian upheaval.
In politics, cronyism is often used synonymously with corruption.
The World Bank broadly defines corruption as “the abuse of public office
for private gain” (Bottelier, 1998), which “creates favorites, loopholes,
connection-based advantages, and fosters an unpredictable and opaque
rule of personality” (Suite 101 Articles, 1998). Recent news articles have
applied “cronyism” to political contexts as far apart as Britain, Russia,
Mexico, and Indonesia. What triggered our interest in the topic is the
application of cronyism, a commonly used term in politics, to the orga-
nizational context. Cronyism has been used to describe relationships in the
upper echelons of the management of companies. For example, an AFL-
CIO (American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organization)
study documents how cronyism, personal friendships, and interrelation-
ships between top executives and corporate compensation commit-
tees and boards contributed to runaway executive salaries (Washington
Report, 1998). Another study has shown that individuals who are well
connected have higher career attainment than those who are not
(Hurley et al., 1997).
In spite of these studies, and notwithstanding the presumed impact
of cronyism on global business, cronyism has been a neglected topic in
business literature. This conceptual study examines the phenomenon of
cronyism in the context of business organizations. We start by offering
a definition of cronyism and we distinguish cronyism from other related
62
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

concepts. We then develop a two-stage model grounded in the
Chinese/Asian cultural context, since the cultural values associated with
the Chinese – especially the overseas Chinese – seem to be conducive to
the emergence of cronyism: however, as we indicate later, the model
might apply to other, more distant societies.
A definition of cronyism
The origin of cronyism
Cronyism is a derivative of the word crony, which probably originated 
in the seventeenth century as a slang term among undergraduates at 
the University of Cambridge, meaning close friend. Crony comes from
the Greek word khronios meaning “long-standing” (Oxford English
Reference Dictionary, 1995). The original idea was that “someone was a
crony if you had been friends with them a long time, or even perhaps if
you were exact contemporaries of theirs” (World Wide Words, 1998).
Around 1840, the meaning of “cronyism” evolved to “the ability to make
friends, or perhaps the desire to do so” (World Wide Words, 1998). It first
came into use in political parlance around 1946 when a Washington
columnist described as cronyism President Roosevelt’s practice of appoint-
ing to public office people of doubtful competence, on the basis of per-
sonal relationships (The Oxford English Dictionary, 1989). Later, the
Truman administration was similarly accused of appointing friends to gov-
ernment posts regardless of their qualifications. Thereafter, crony became
a pejorative term; nowadays, it often encompasses a derogatory sense of 
a friendship associated with preferential advancement and/or political
corruption (World Wide Words, 1998).
For the purpose of this study, we view cronyism as a form of organi-
zational politics, a broad concept that comprises varied political behav-
iors. In order not to dilute the meaning of cronyism, it is important to
emphasize that not all political behaviors involve cronyism. Generally,
cronyism is preferential treatment shown to select associates, without regard
to their qualifications, with an expectation of reciprocity. For example, an
employee with a good performance record might not obtain a promo-
tion or pay increase because the supervisor favored another person on
the basis of a friend–friend, informal relationship. What differentiates
cronyism from favoritism is that the former implies mutual dependence
and reciprocity – a quid pro quo expectation that need not be present
when favoritism occurs. This can occur even where there is a clear 
power difference between the two parties, because an expectation of 
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
63

reciprocity arises from a shared history, such as school ties, or an exist-
ing personal or family friendship.
The friend–friend and other informal relationships can override orga-
nizational charts; they involve an element of “power-seeking,” where
individuals exchange favors to further individual goals that cannot be
met through formal channels. Such interpersonal connections often
result in the formation of “cliques” (Trice and Beyer, 1993) or exclusive
ingroups. We propose that cronyism is dynamic in nature since the rela-
tionships among cronies may change; for example, one may leave one
crony group and join another when one sees an advantage in doing so,
in particular when one’s self-interests can no longer be satisfied by the
existing crony group. Hence, cronyism does not necessarily reflect a
long-standing relationship.
In addition, we wish to highlight the dynamic nature of cronyism from
another perspective. According to Walder (1983), a particularistic reward
system provides fertile ground for the growth of pervasive networks of
informal ties and favoritism. Indeed, the politicization of reward systems
brings about unintended consequences by creating strong material incen-
tives for subordinates to exhibit the proper attributes in front of their
superiors. Due to the ability of superiors to reward subordinates flexibly
and subjectively, subordinates in turn attempt to cultivate personal ties
with superiors and conform to their preferences proactively in order to
improve or secure their positions. Often, the relationship between supe-
riors and subordinates is one in which active loyalty is exchanged for
reward.
Cronyism in organizations
Organizations can be seen as “complex systems of individuals and coali-
tions, each having its own interests, beliefs, values, preferences, perspec-
tives and perceptions” (Ott, 1989: 165). Hence, political behavior results
as they compete with each other continuously due to scarcity (i.e. lim-
ited resources, opportunities, and options in the organizations) (Pepper,
1995) and conflicting interests (Pinto, 1996; Ott, 1989). In many 
ways, organizational politics is highly similar to “real” politics (Warshaw,
1998); interpersonal alliances and networks are a source of power as indi-
viduals seek some form of mutually beneficial exchange organizations
(Morgan, 1986). Political activity, then, is a natural part of organizational
life (Graham, 1998). Thus, cronyism may be considered as a form of orga-
nizational politics in which individuals seek to enhance or protect 
their own or their group’s interests. Beneath the cloak of formal rela-
tionships in every organization, there is a more complex system of social
64
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

relationships, which emerges spontaneously as people associate with
one another. Unlike the formal structure, which emphasizes official posi-
tions in terms of authority and responsibility, the informal structure
emphasizes people and their unofficial relationships (Newstrom and
Davis, 1993). According to Furnham (1997), the informal system evolves
to fulfill needs that cannot be met by the formal system. Indeed, devel-
oping informal relationships with the right people, who may include orga-
nizational subordinates, peers, and superiors, can prove a useful means of
acquiring power (Johns, 1992). Often, such informal relationships in the
organization bring about more influence and power than the formal rela-
tionships (Jenks, 1990).
Distinguishing cronyism from other related constructs
Having defined cronyism, we distinguish it from related concepts in 
the organizational context such as favoritism, nepotism, and guanxi.
Favoritism involves subjectivity or bias based on personal preferences
(Prendergast and Topel, 1993); favoritism is broader in scope than
cronyism since favoritism does not specify the connections and the
reciprocal expectations that cronyism does. Nepotism is derived from 
the Latin word “nepot,” meaning nephew. The negative connotation of
the word dates back to the Renaissance era, when Popes used to find
high-level clerical offices for their nephews without regard to their qual-
ifications (Abdalla et al., 1998). Thus, nepotism is similar to cronyism in
that it involves favoritism, but it is narrower in scope as it is solely based
on familial ties. Guanxi literally means “relationship” or “connection.”
It can be best translated as friendship with implications of continued
exchange of favors (Pye, 1992). Guanxi is a long-term relationship and
it, too, implies reciprocal obligations by the parties involved. A guanxi
base must exist which comprises either a blood base or a social base,
where the former includes only familial connections while the latter
encompasses other social (i.e. non-familial) connections (Tsang, 1998).
Guanxi may be seen as synonymous with cronyism in that it involves
interpersonal obligations and is based on relationships rather than
objectivity. However, it extends beyond our definition of cronyism, as it
comprises both familial and non-familial relationships, while our defi-
nition is confined to non-familial, informal relationships in the organ-
ization. Furthermore, guanxi is of a long-standing nature since guanxi
relationships can persist long after relevant social groups are dissolved
(Goodwin and Tang, 1996). In contrast, cronyism is not necessarily
long-standing.
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
65

In the following section, we develop a two-stage model of the
antecedents of cronyism (see Figure 4.1). We argue that certain cultural
values provide an environment conducive to behaviors that lead to the
immediate antecedents of cronyism. Although the values that foster
cronyism exist to some extent in all cultures, the Chinese/Asian culture
is especially conducive for crony behavior. In the first stage, we discuss
how the cultural values Confucianism, lack of trust, collectivism, and high
power distance/paternalism lead to certain socially desirable behaviors. In
the second stage, we discuss how these behaviors contribute to the
immediate antecedents of cronyism: ingroup phenomenon, overemphasis
on relations, and overemphasis on loyalty.
Stage 1: The cultural antecedents of cronyism
In the first stage of our model, we link four cultural values (Confucian
values, lack of trust, collectivism, and high Power Distance/paternalism)
with two highly desirable behaviors: an emphasis on loyalty and an
emphasis on personal relationships.
Confucian values
Chinese culture is characterized by its stress on human interaction as
the “fundamental groundwork of its philosophical systems” (Chan,
66
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed
Cultural  factors
Cronyism
Stage Two
Stage One
Overemphasis
on personal
relationships
Ingroup
phenomenon
Overemphasis
on loyalty
Culture
cronyism
Cultural
values
Desirable
behaviors
Immediate
antecedents
Confucian values
Lack of trust
Collectivism
High Power Distance/
Paternalism
Emphasis
on personal
relationships
Emphasis
on loyalty
Emphasis
on personal
relationships
Emphasis
on loyalty
Emphasis
on personal
relationships
Emphasis
on loyalty
 
Figure 4.1
The antecedents of cronyism

1963, 1967; Fung, 1983). The teachings of Confucius, often termed
Confucian values, are a primary influence on Chinese culture and shape
much of contemporary Chinese behavior (Ralston et al., 1997). Gabrenya
and Hwang (1996: 309) note that the Chinese social behavior is “a reflec-
tion of Confucian ideological beliefs.” Confucianism emphasizes the
importance of societal, group, and hierarchical relationships within a
society (Ralston et al., 1997). According to Confucius, there are five 
fundamental cardinal relationships, known as wu-lun, in which power 
and status differentials are prescribed: emperor–minister, father–son,
husband–wife, brother–brother and friend–friend (Gabrenya and Hwang,
1996; Chen, 1995; Goodwin and Tang, 1996). Of these, voluntarily con-
structed friend–friend relationships are most relevant to the study of
cronyism, since we have confined our scope to non-familial relations.
Confucian philosophy assumes that different relationships imply 
different norms of interaction; thus, social interaction is determined by
the rules governing relationships. Similarly, the cultivation of external
relations (beyond the family) is also governed by humanistically ori-
ented emotions, which can be seen as the guiding spirit of Chinese cul-
tural life. To the Chinese, being part of an integrated network of social
relationships is of utmost importance (Chang and Holt, 1994). Three
cultural mechanisms, guanxi, renqing, and relational personalism, are 
used to extend familial support beyond the domestic setting (Current
Anthropology, 2000).
Guanxi is the key concept for understanding Chinese behavior in
social, political, and organizational contexts (Bond and Hwang, 1986).
According to Hwang (1987), interpersonal relationships in Chinese soci-
ety can be classified into three categories: expressive ties, instrumental
ties, and mixed ties. Of these, mixed ties are the most applicable in an
organizational context since they are considered as “the guanxi outside
an individual’s immediate family” (Bond and Hwang, 1986: 224). In this
kind of relationship, the affective component of the ties overshadows 
the instrumental part of the relationship. Due to this strong affective
component, individuals seek to influence others by means of renqing.
Renqing indicates “the emotional responses of an individual con-
fronting various situations of daily life” (Gabrenya and Hwang, 1996: 
313). It denotes a set of social norms that one has to abide by in order to
establish and maintain favorable relationships with other people. As
such, resources are distributed according to the renqing rule instead of
the equity rule. Special considerations apply if any of the parties involved
in a social exchange is someone in power (Hwang, 1987). The manipu-
lation of such interpersonal relationships has long been a strategy for
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
67

attaining desirable resources in Chinese society (Bond and Hwang, 1986).
The rule of renqing is a “derivative of the norm of reciprocity” (Hwang,
1987: 956). Individuals are influenced by the Confucian view that inter-
personal relationships consist of an element of reciprocity (bao), that is,
the recipient of a favor should repay it (Gabrenya and Hwang, 1996).
In an organizational context, Chinese culture places greater emphasis
on seniority, relationships, and family ties (Kipling, 1996). The employ-
ment relationship is relationship-oriented rather than contract-oriented
(Hampden-Turner and Trompenaars, 1997). The dyadic relationship
between the superior and the subordinate is governed by their interper-
sonal ties rather than contractual obligations. Thus, within an organi-
zation, there is a clear demarcation between members of ingroups and
outgroups (Goodwin and Tang, 1996). This phenomenon is an applica-
tion of “relational personalism” in an organizational context (Gabrenya
and Hwang, 1996: 311).
Personalism refers to “the mechanism used by a society to establish
reliable connections for the conduct of everyday affairs” (Redding and
Hsiao, 1993: 177). The exercise of personalism in interpersonal rela-
tionships allows the Chinese to overcome the problem of insecurity due
to a lack of institutional systems such as laws. This traditional mecha-
nism still persists (Redding and Hsiao, 1993).
Therefore, an emphasis on interpersonal relationships in Confucian
teaching results in the development of complex networks of guanxi and
the use of personalism in social interaction (see Figure 4.2a). This allows
individuals to utilize relationships in the most beneficial way. Since
cronyism is a phenomenon that involves using one’s connections to
obtain special privileges, its existence can be understood in culture that
emphasizes the importance of personal relationships, such as a culture
that is influenced by Confucian values. Hence, the following argument:
Proposition 1. The more a culture emphasizes Confucian values, the
greater the importance that is placed on personal relationships.
Lack of trust
Trust is of central importance to social networks, especially in Chinese
society (Redding, 1990). Trust is defined as “a willingness of a party to
be vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the expectation
that the other will perform a particular action important to the trustor,
irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that party” (Mayer et al.,
1995: 712). The traditional Chinese society is structured in such a 
way as to negate the support of trust in institutions. Instead, trust is
68
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
69
a: Confucian values
Emphasis on personal relations
b: Lack of trust 
Emphasis on personal relations
Importance of social relations
Guanxi
Renqing
Relational personalism 
Emphasis on personal relations
Cultivation of friend–friend relations
Maintenance of favorable relationships


Lack of trust
Emphasis on personal relations
 Importance of trust
 Feelings of insecurity
 General distrust towards 
outsiders
 High importance placed on individual
trustworthiness
 Personal networks established on trust
greatly reduce risk of uncertainty
Extension of familial support beyond
domestic setting
c: Collectivism
Emphasis on loyalty
d: High Power Distance/
Paternalism 
Emphasis on loyalty
Collectivism
 Emphasis on the group
and the maintenance of
ascribed interpersonal
relationships
Emphasis on loyalty
 Reinforces the concepts of
unquestionable loyalty
Lack of trust
Emphasis on loyalty
 Acceptance of unequal
distribution of power by
subordinates and exercise of
discretionary power by
superiors
 Granting of favors in
exchange for loyalty
Figure 4.2 (a–d)
The link between cultural values and desirable behaviors

transacted over elaborate webs of personal connections or relationships,
that is, guanxi networks (Redding et al., 1994). Trust is an essential 
condition for building and maintaining guanxi in a relationship-based
society (Yeung and Tung, 1996). The Chinese have great difficulty in
relationships that are of a neutral and objective nature because they can-
not easily “read” trustworthiness (Redding, 1990). This implies that, 
for the Chinese, business relationships may evolve from their personal
guanxi only when the counterparties are perceived as trustworthy
(Tsang, 1998). In guanxi networks, the risks of “vulnerability” or uncer-
tainty can be greatly reduced since opportunism is checked by trust
(Bjorkman and Kock, 1995), which tends to be exclusive (Redding,
1990). Here, trust is limited to partners in the bond and it works on the
basis of personal obligations, the maintenance of reputation, and “face.”
Redding et al. (1994) identified two prominent features of societal
trust processes among the Chinese: (1) the high importance placed on
individual trustworthiness, and (2) the highly selective nature of the
bonds in a general environment of mistrust. Therefore, to the average
Chinese, the social world comprises those few whom they can trust to
a very high degree, and the remainder who are not trusted at all. In gen-
eral, the Chinese do not trust strangers. This characteristic of lack of
trust can be attributed to the feelings of insecurity experienced by the
Chinese. Hence, personal networks established based on trust become
appropriate tools for the Chinese to overcome their fear of insecurity
and provide comfort in the face of uncertainty (Krackhardt, 1990).
In the Chinese culture, an individual is a self-created center of an ever-
expanding set of relationship “circles” (Fei, 1947). In an organizational
context, interpersonal relationships can be represented by concentric
circles: the central circle is the family itself and the next circle is the
protofamily, whose members are treated as honorary family members,
for trust bonding also extends to non-kin members (Redding et al.,
1994). Wong (1988) noted that bonding is “a matter of the degree of per-
sonalism in the connections” regardless of the existing family ties. The
outer circle consists of the remaining employees or co-workers.
Thus, the Chinese lack of trust in others (outsiders) results in an
emphasis on relationships as a mode for individuals to obtain the
resources they desire (see Figure 4.2b). The development of networks
based on personal relationships helps to solve the problem of insecurity
in the Chinese cultural system. Hence, the following proposition:
Proposition 2. In societies where lack of trust in others is widespread,
there is greater emphasis on developing and maintaining personal 
relationships.
70
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

Collectivism
Collectivism defines and shapes the relationships among people in a
culture and the social structure they operate in (Hofstede, 1980; Earley,
1997). In this section, we discuss how an emphasis on loyalty can be traced
to this important cultural dimension. Hofstede (1980) defined collec-
tivist societies as those where since their birth people are integrated into
strong, cohesive ingroups that continue to protect them throughout their
lifetime in exchange for unquestioning loyalty. Collectivism emphasizes
the group and the maintenance of ascribed and interpersonal relation-
ships (Kim, 1994).
In a collective society, individuals are attached to a group or groups
(Redding and Wong, 1986), and the sense of attachment and group
identity is very strong (Triandis et al., 1993). Collectivists are inclined to
behave differently depending on whether or not the other party is a
member of their ingroup. If the other party is an ingroup member, the
behavior would be very associative (Triandis, 1994), such as providing
support and assistance to that person (Triandis et al., 1993). In fact,
“socioemotional inputs” may be accorded a relatively stronger role than
task-related inputs in the determination of payoffs and in contributing
toward group maintenance (Bond et al., 1982: 187). Since “loyalty to 
the leader is usually tied to the need of belonging and of finding group
identity…” (Pye, 1985: 332), it follows that the need for attachment
brings about a display of loyalty from the subordinate to the superior.
In collectivist cultures, where the emphasis is on people, ingroup rela-
tionships are intensive and interdependence is high (Triandis et al.,
1988). Hence, in a collectivist work unit, the employment relationship
resembles a family relationship with mutual obligations of protection in
exchange for loyalty (Hofstede, 1991). Therefore, there is a greater possi-
bility that collectivists would select, evaluate, and promote individuals
based on their loyalty and seniority rather than on their merit and com-
petence (Triandis, 1995). Also, since collectivist individuals value rela-
tionships with their groups, a collectivist’s sense of attachment is highly
pronounced. Favoritism shown by the superior towards the subordinate
and the unquestioning loyalty displayed in return characterizes the
ingroup relationship found in collectivistic societies (see Figure 4.2c).
Proposition 3. In collectivist societies, individuals in organizations
place great emphasis on loyalty.
High Power Distance/paternalism1
Power Distance is the extent to which the less powerful members of
institutions and organizations within a society expect and accept that
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
71

power is distributed unequally (Hofstede, 1991). Paternalism refers to a
system in which superiors give favors to their subordinates in exchange
for their loyalty (Husted, 1999). According to Bond (1991: 86), such
“granting of ‘favors’ is an important component of paternalism, as it
builds a network of people tied to someone in authority out of indebt-
edness and obligation.” This distribution of resources beyond the supe-
rior’s normal responsibilities is possible because paternalism is highly
pronounced in high Power Distance societies (Husted, 1999).
In high Power Distance cultures, the less powerful individuals in organ-
izations are willing to accept unquestioningly the unequal distribution of
power (Blunt, 1993). The employees are at ease with the paternalistic style
of management and there is no strong felt need for them to be involved
in decision-making (Banks and Waisfisz, 1994). They accept the inequal-
ities inherent in the organizational hierarchy and expect to be told what
to do by their superiors. In addition, their ideal boss is a benevolent auto-
crat (Banks and Waisfisz, 1994; Hofstede, 1991). Hence, the superiors
have considerable discretionary power as they are seldom required to jus-
tify their decisions openly. Furthermore, there is a greater possibility for
mechanistic law to give way to human judgment (Bond, 1991).
One form of paternalistic behavior present in high Power Distance
societies is the downward influence that can be observed in resource
control, whereby individuals with control over key resources achieve the
highest levels of control within an organization. Thus, “power differen-
tials” enable the actual, unequal distribution of resources to be legiti-
mated (Earley, 1997: 148). In such downward influencing tactics, both
parties have strong obligations towards the concern and fulfillment of
each other’s interests (Chen et al., 1998). Moreover, decisions are made
based on the balance between favors and loyalty rather than merit
(Husted, 1999). In paternalistic organizations, the preferential treatment
shown by superiors to subordinates and the latter’s obligation to return
the favor is a characteristic of cronyism. In this process, loyalty is 
displayed as a valued obligation to the superiors.
In Chinese enterprises, those in positions of power and control allo-
cate resources mostly according to their personal likes and dislikes
(Cheng, 1999). In dealing with superiors, one tends to focus more on
personal kinds of power tactics (Fairholm, 1993). Therefore, in order to
cater to their individual agendas, subordinates may seek favors from
those in key positions and, in return, provide them with personal attrib-
utes such as loyalty. In this connection, Sinha (1996) commented that
power within an ingroup flows freely and that the more powerful per-
son (the superior) shows love, affection, and care, and even takes the 
72
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

liberty to impose himself or herself in the interests of the favored sub-
ordinate. Further, the latter reciprocates by being personally loyal,
dependent, and submissive. This reinforces the “unquestioning loyalty”
that ingroup members are willing to display towards those in positions
of power (see Figure 4.2d).
In light of the above arguments, we propose:
Proposition 4. In high Power Distance/paternalistic societies, there is
strong emphasis on personal loyalty.
To summarize, the values of the Chinese give rise to two socially desir-
able behaviors: emphasis on relationships and loyalty. Confucian values
and lack of trust result in an emphasis on close personal relationships,
while collectivism and higher Power Distance/paternalism result in an
emphasis on loyalty. In the next stage of the model, we propose that under
certain conditions these socially desirable behaviors can become dysfunc-
tional, leading to three phenomena that are immediate antecedents to
cronyism: ingroup formation, overemphasis on relations, and overem-
phasis on loyalty.
Stage 2: Immediate antecedents of cronyism
Ingroup phenomenon
Cronyism is likely to occur whenever subjective judgment, based on 
personal preferences and relationships, is preferred over an objective
evaluation of a person’s ability. This is reflective of personalism or partic-
ularism, which is the tendency to allow personal criteria and relation-
ships to enter into decision-making and action (Redding, 1990). Since
relational personalism begins with a distinction between ingroup and
outgroup (Goodwin and Tang, 1996), we propose that the ingroup 
phenomenon is inherent in cronyism and classify it as an immediate
antecedent of cronyism (see Figure 4.1). In this section, we discuss two
major properties of the ingroup phenomenon: selection of ingroup mem-
bers and ingroup bias.
Selection of ingroup members.
The concept of ingroup/outgroup has
been illustrated by Graen and his associates (Dansereau et al., 1975;
Graen and Cashman, 1975) in the vertical dyad linkage theory of lead-
ership, in which an individual’s relationship to the workgroup is largely
a function of the individual’s association with an ingroup or outgroup.
According to this theory, leaders develop relationships of varied degrees
of closeness and distance with their subordinates. They usually establish
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
73

special relationships with a small number of trusted subordinates (the
ingroup), to whom they pay relatively more attention than to their
remaining subordinates (the outgroup); the selection of the ingroup
members is made on the basis of subordinate competence and depend-
ability. However, this Western leadership theory is instrumental in
nature and emphasizes the exchange of mutual benefits between indi-
viduals, while the formation of ingroups is based on ability and mutual
trust. In contrast, the Chinese model of leadership is influenced by bao
(reciprocity), which has a considerable degree of affective content over
and above instrumental content. Thus, in Chinese societies, ingroups
are determined more by hierarchical status in social relations and bao
(Liu, 1999).
Cheng (1999) contends that Chinese CEOs categorize their employees
according to three criteria:
1 relationship (guanxi) – whether they are ethnically related by kinship
or parakinship;
2 loyalty (zhongcheng) – whether they possess unfailing loyalty and
unreserved obedience to the CEO; and
3 competence (chaineng) – whether they have the ability and motiva-
tion to fulfill the goals assigned to them.
The CEO’s personal values or preferences would result in differential
weighing of the three aspects (i.e. relation, loyalty and competence) in
employee categorization, and subsequently in dividing the employees
into ingroups and outgroups.
In view of this Chinese leadership model and our earlier discussion of
the cultural values underlying the importance of personal relationships
and loyalty in cronyism, we propose that the selection of ingroup mem-
bers is premised on relationship and loyalty. That is, given a choice
between an employee who has a close relationship and high loyalty but
low competence, and another employee who has high competence but
a distant relationship and low loyalty, the former would be favored and
recognized as an ingroup member (see Figure 4.3a).
Proposition 5. An emphasis on ingroups in Chinese culture, whereby
relationships and loyalty take precedence over one’s ability and compe-
tence, is a major source of crony behavior.
Ingroup bias.
Studies have suggested that the mere act of categorizing
people into ingroups and outgroups tends to result in favoritism toward
one’s ingroup (Tajfel et al., 1971; Turner et al., 1983). Indeed, due to this
tendency to differentiate among subordinates (either knowingly or
74
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

unknowingly), bias is inevitable and is reflected in various organizational
behaviors. In particular, superiors tend to be more human-relation ori-
ented towards ingroup subordinates and more task-oriented towards 
outgroup subordinates (Cheng, 1999). In addition, ingroup members
enjoy considerable benefits, while outgroup members are denied valu-
able opportunities (Vecchio, 1997). Graen and Cashman (1975) have
suggested that ingroup members are given high levels of trust, interac-
tion, support and rewards, while outgroup members receive low levels of
each. Since the distinction between ingroups and outgroups is at the very
root of people’s consciousness, such preferential treatment of one’s
ingroup is seen as natural and sound (Hofstede, 1991).
Proposition 6. Where the ingroup phenomenon is widespread, ingroup
bias leads to crony behavior.
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
75
Overemphasis on relationships
Due to strong uncertainty avoidance
coupled with lack of transparency and
institutional framework, the role of
relationships overshadows that of
formality
 
 
 
Cronyism
• Operates on informal relations
  among organizational members
Ingroup phenomenon
Selection of ingroup members on the
basis of relations and loyalty
 
Cronyism
Development of ingroups, which
tend to be exclusive
Overemphasis on loyalty
Cronyism
• Rewarding people based on
  loyalty rather than ability and
  competence
a: Ingroup phenomenon
Cronyism 
Cronyism
Cronyism
b: Overemphasis on relationships
c: Overemphasis on loyalty 
 
 
 
Emotional aspect – demonstration of
unswerving loyalty from the “core” of the
ingroup due to true-hearted gratitude
• Ingroup bias
• Behavioral aspect – individuals tend to
  display loyalty to project a favorable
  image “impression management” 
• Favoritism is involved, without
  regard to merit and competence   
Figure 4.3(a–c)
The link between immediate antecedents and cronyism

Overemphasis on personal relationships
As discussed earlier, both Confucian values and lack of trust give rise to an
emphasis on personal relationships. This emphasis results in the forma-
tion of strong personal ties among the Chinese, and such ties constitute 
a basis of trust that can provide comfort in the face of uncertainty
(Krackhardt, 1990). In our earlier discussion of Hofstede’s Collectivism and
Power Distance dimensions, we argued that the values underpinning these
dimensions lead to an emphasis on loyalty; in this section, we highlight
the role of uncertainty avoidance, suggesting that when an emphasis on
personal relationships is combined with strong uncertainty avoidance, the
result can be an overemphasis on relationships (see Figure 4.3b).
Uncertainty Avoidance is defined as “the extent to which members of a
culture feel threatened by uncertainty or unknown situations” (Hofstede,
1991: 113). It reflects the level of tolerance for ambiguity within a given
culture. Thus, individuals in societies with strong Uncertainty Avoidance
feel more comfortable in a structured environment due to strong prefer-
ences for written rules and regulations (Hofstede, 1980). Hence, the emo-
tional need for a proper institutional framework, if not satisfied, can result
in the use of alternative obligation networks to fulfill that need. Chinese
society, in particular, is one where the role of relationships often surpasses
that of formality (Yeung and Tung, 1996).
In an organizational context, Uncertainty Avoidance relates to “for-
malization: the degree to which people feel the need for formal structure
in the social or work environment” (Banks and Waisfisz, 1994: 81).
Organizations characterized by strong Uncertainty Avoidance are more
resistant to change, and there is a desire for well-established organizational
structures in which clearly expressed rules and regulations are obeyed
(Blunt, 1993). Thus, there is a preference for a proper institutional frame-
work and a more transparent system in organizations. However, Chinese
organizations are characterized by a lack of transparency. Management
processes are neither clearly defined nor formalized. Employees’ responsi-
bilities are often left unspecified and ambiguous (Redding, 1980). Further-
more, due to a general distrust towards outsiders, disclosure is low in
organizations and company policies, decisions, and plans are not openly
shared and communicated to all. Hence, a lack of transparency results in
the face of such ambiguity and poor disclosure.
In political contexts, the lack of transparency has been established as
a major contributing factor to corruption (Suite 101 Articles, 1998).
Similarly, in the organizational context, uncertainty or ambiguity has
been highlighted as one of the principal conditions under which 
76
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

political behavior occurs (Ferris et al., 1993). Since we have identified
cronyism to be a form of political behavior, this phenomenon is likely
to exist in organizations where there is a lack of formality. Thus, when
the need for a formal structure by organizational members cannot be
met, they attempt to reduce the uncertainty they face through the main-
tenance of close relationships with key figures in the organizations. In
this way, strong Uncertainty Avoidance along with a lack of trans-
parency and a weak institutional framework results in an overemphasis
on relationships over time. Instead of relying on formal rules and pro-
cedures, organizational members often rely on the backdoor relation-
ships they have established to achieve their goals. Hence:
Proposition 7. Strong Uncertainty Avoidance, coupled with a lack of
transparency and a weak institutional framework, leads over time to an
overemphasis on relationships, which in turn leads to crony behavior.
Overemphasis on loyalty
Having examined how an overemphasis on relationships can lead to
cronyism, we explore loyalty in a similar fashion. In our view, although
loyalty itself is a virtue or a desirable behavior, overemphasis on loyalty
can lead to dysfunctional consequences. Pye (1985: 297) noted that “the
virtue of loyalty unquestionably enjoys a loftier position in the Chinese
political system than it does in liberal Western politics….” In a Western
context, Becker et al. (1996) distinguished identification and internal-
ization as the two major dimensions of loyalty. However, Chen et al.
(1998) found that in the Chinese organizational context the dimensions
of loyalty to one’s supervisor include a uniquely Chinese dimension that
reflects one’s personal attachment to and gratitude towards the supervi-
sor. In addition, Chinese societies are characterized by personalism and
paternalism, suggesting that loyalty to supervisor (person) rather than
loyalty to organization (system) plays a more important role in driving
employee behaviors (Redding, 1990).
To explore further the concept of loyalty, we extend the discussion to
Chi’s (1999) study of chin-shins (confidantes) who hold special positions
in their superiors’ relational networks. Chin-shins are more than ingroup
members; to be more exact, they are the “core” of an ingroup. The rela-
tionship between chin-shin and superior goes beyond instrumental
social exchange. A chin-shin perceives the superior as someone who
deserves sincere gratitude and in turn s/he demonstrates unreserved loy-
alty to the superior. Indeed, the unreserved devotion and unswerving
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
77

loyalty that are expected of employees are based on the link between
patronage and gratitude (Cheng, 1999), where patronage is the act of dis-
pensing favors to individuals regardless of their abilities (Redding and
Baldwin, 1991).
The same principle appears to be entrenched in cronyism. Cronies are
tied by bonds of obligation in which patronage downwards and loyalty
upwards are exchanged. This explains why traits such as loyalty and “fol-
lowership” are valued more than ability and competence in cronyism.
At this point, it is important to highlight that loyalty has two dimen-
sions, that is, the emotional aspect and the behavioral aspect (Goman,
1991). Although the above literature regarding the demonstration of
unswerving loyalty from the core of the ingroup due to sincere gratitude
provides some support for the emotional aspect of loyalty in cronyism,
we cannot overlook the role of the behavioral aspect. Since emotions are
invisible, Goman (1991) suggests that one’s loyalty is often evaluated
through the behavioral dimension. Hence, with an overemphasis on
loyalty, whereby people are rewarded based on their demonstrated loy-
alty rather than ability and competence, individuals are encouraged to
display loyalty (McGrath et al., 1995) in order to capture benefits such
as favorable evaluations and more rapid promotions. Such a projection
of a favorable image to orient oneself to the achievement of desirable
ends may be termed broadly as “impression management,” which refers
to the process by which individuals attempt to control the impression
others have of them. Indeed, one way to gain rewards or desired ends is
to appear as though one is enacting appropriate and desirable attributes
and conforming to the preferences of supervisors (Turner, 1991). Thus,
to elicit the desirable attribute of loyalty, individuals may adopt various
impression management tactics such as ingratiation, generally defined
as “an attempt by individuals to increase their attractiveness in the 
eyes of others” (Liden and Mitchell, 1988: 572). In view of the above 
discussion, we believe that the “right amount” of loyalty is laudable;
however, an overemphasis on loyalty perpetuates cronyism in organi-
zational life (see Figure 4.3c). Hence, we propose the following:
Proposition 8. In societies where demonstrated loyalty is rewarded, an
overemphasis on loyalty leads to crony behavior.
Discussion and conclusions
We have defined cronyism and discussed the antecedents of cronyism in
organizations. A two-stage model explained the antecedents of cronyism,
78
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

using a particular cultural perspective in order to examine the interplay
of various factors that give rise to cronyism. The rationale was that four
cultural values present in Chinese societies – Confucianism, lack of
trust, collectivism, and high Power Distance/paternalism – give rise to
two socially desirable behaviors in organizations: strong loyalty to supe-
riors and an emphasis on personal relationships. These two desirable
behaviors lead, in turn, to three immediate antecedents of cronyism:
formation of strong ingroups, an overemphasis on personal relation-
ships, and an overemphasis on loyalty. Our model illustrates the effect
of cultural values on cronyism in the context of societies in which the
teachings of Confucius strongly influence individuals’ behavior in
organizations. Since the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, the neg-
ative effects of cronyism on economic activity in southeast and eastern
Asia have come under greater scrutiny, resulting in demands from
Western businesses and governments, and from supranational organi-
zations such as the World Trade Organization and the International
Monetary Fund, for greater transparency in business, economic, and
political affairs. In this chapter, we have attempted to show that crony-
ism in Chinese societies has deep cultural roots. Although culture forms
the underlying basis of the model, we are not implying that culture
alone can explain cronyism, but rather we are suggesting that certain
cultural values can magnify this behavior. As nations succeed in build-
ing sound political, financial and legal institutions that people can trust
to be effective and impartial, individuals’ dependence on ingroups and
reciprocal favors is likely to diminish. However, as Hofstede (1980) has
pointed out, societal values change at a very slow pace, over generations,
so it is over-optimistic and simplistic to assume that cronyism is likely
to disappear in a short time at the behest of outsiders.
To assess the generalizability of the model, however, we need to look
at two basic elements that lead to cronyism in the model: emphasis on
personal relationships and loyalty. Whenever there is overemphasis on
personal relationships or on unreserved loyalty or both in an organiza-
tion, cronyism is a likely outcome. The strength of cronyism will be
determined by the strength of personal relationships and loyalty orienta-
tion. It is not necessary for both factors to be present to cause cronyism.
The presence of one factor, if sufficiently strong, can lead to cronyism,
although classic crony behaviors in organizations will be observed in
organizations where both personal relationships and loyalty orientation
are strong. This brings us to the notion of variants of cronyism; that is,
crony behaviors observed in Asia and the West may be somewhat differ-
ent. Although loyalty is a desirable attribute in all cultures, it has a much
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
79

loftier position in Chinese societies (Earley, 1997). Loyalty will not be
desired and rewarded in the Western context to the same degree as in
the Chinese context. The other element of cronyism, personal relation-
ships, can occur in all sorts of cultures and organizations, though the
underlying dynamics is likely to be different from one culture to another.
For example, in collectivist cultures, the relationship of the individual to
the ingroup is stable: even when the ingroup makes harsh demands on
the individual, the latter tends to stay with the group. The individualist,
on the other hand, belongs to multiple ingroups and has a tendency to
change group membership and status (Triandis et al., 1988). The other
major difference lies in the goal of personal relationships. In the West, a
relationship is likely to be based more on instrumental considerations.
In Chinese culture, the relationship serves many purposes, such as 
providing emotional support, protection, and instrumental gains.
An obvious extension of this study is to examine the model empiri-
cally and to examine the organizational consequences of crony behav-
ior, which would be most appropriate in an Asian context. However, it
should also be possible to adapt the model to other non-Confucian soci-
eties where crony behavior is common. Russia and much of Latin
America are relatively collectivist societies where Power Distance is high
and paternalism is evident. In Latin America, as in Chinese societies,
there is a strong emphasis on personal relationships (Lenartowicz and
Johnson, 1999), suggesting that the cultural roots of crony behavior
would be observed in that region. By modifying the model presented
here or proposing new ones, researchers will enhance our understand-
ing of this important and prevalent phenomenon.
Note
1
We assume high Power Distance and paternalism to be concurrent phenom-
ena and thus have used them interchangeably in this paper.
References
Abdalla, H. F., Maghrabi, A. S. and Raggad, B. G. (1998) Assessing the perceptions
of human resource managers toward nepotism: A cross-cultural study.
International Journal of Manpower 19: 554–70.
Asiaweek (1999) Editorials: Curb the cronies, 25(6): 14–16.
Banks, P. and Waisfisz, B. (1994) “Managing inter-cultural teams: A practical
approach to cultural problems,” in H. Shaughnessy (ed.), Collaboration
Management – Inter-Cultural Working: New Issues and Priorities, New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
80
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

Becker, T. E., Billings, D. M., Eveleth, D. M. and Gilbert, N. L. (1996) Foci and
bases of employee commitment: Implications for job performance. Academy of
Management Journal 39: 464–82.
Bjorkman, I. and Kock, S. (1995) Social relationships and business networks: The
case of Western companies in China. International Business Review 4: 519–35.
Blunt, P. (1993) “Cultural consequences for organization change in a Southeast
Asian state: Brunei,” in P. Blunt and D. Richards (eds.), Readings in Management,
Organization and Culture in East and South East Asia, Darwin, Australia: Northern
Territory University Press.
Bond, M. H. (1991) Beyond the Chinese Face: Insights From Psychology. Hong Kong:
Oxford University Press.
Bond, M. H. and Hwang, K. K. (1986) “The social psychology of Chinese people,”
in M. H. Bond (ed.), The Psychology of the Chinese People, Hong Kong: Oxford
University Press.
Bond, M. H. Kwok, L. and Kwok, C. W. (1982) How does cultural collectivism
operate? The impact of task and maintenance contributions on reward distri-
bution. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 13: 186–200.
Bottelier, P. (1998) Corruption and Development. Remarks for International
Symposium on the Prevention and Control of Financial Fraud, Beijing (19th
October). (http://www.worldbank.org/html/extdr/offrep/eap/pbsp101998.htm)
Chan, W. T. (1963) A Sourcebook in Chinese Psychology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Chan, W. T. (1967) “Chinese theory and practice, with special reference to
humanism,” in C. A. Moore (ed.), The Chinese Mind, Honolulu, HI: University
of Hawaii Press.
Chang, H. C. and Holt, G. R. (1994) “A Chinese perspective on face as inter-
relational concern,” in S. Ting-Toomey (ed.), The Challenge of Facework: Cross-
Culture and Interpersonal Issues, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Chen, M.-J. (1995) Asian Management Systems: Chinese, Japanese, Korean Styles of
Business, New York: Routledge.
Chen, Z. X., Farh, J. L. and Tsui, A. S. (1998) Loyalty to supervisor, organizational
commitment, and employee performance: The Chinese case. Academy of
Management Proceedings.
Cheng, B. S. (1999) “Chinese CEOs’ employee categorization and managerial
behavior,” in H. S. R. Kao, D. Sinha, B. Wilpert (eds.), Management and Cultural
Values: The Indigenization of Organizations in Asia, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Chi, S. C. (1999) “The role of chin-shins of top managers in Taiwanese organiza-
tions: Exploring Chinese leadership phenomena,” in H. S. R. Kao, D. Sinha, 
B. Wilpert (eds.), Management and Cultural Values: The Indigenization of
Organizations in Asia, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Current Anthropology (2000) Guanxi: A nestings of groups. Current Anthropology
41(1). (http://orion.oac.uci.edu/~dbell/html/body_guanxi.html)
Dale, R. (1999) Crisis stills apologists for corruption. International Herald Tribune,
January 21st. (http://www.egroups.com/group/beritamalaysia/5560.html)
Dansereau, F., Graen, G. and Haga, W. J. (1975) A vertical dyad linkage approach
to leadership within formal organizations: A longitudinal investigation of 
the role making process. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 13:
46–78.
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
81

Earley, P. C. (1997) Face, Harmony, and Social Structure: An Analysis of
Organizational Behavior Across Cultures, New York: Oxford University Press.
Fairholm, G. W. (1993) Organizational Power Politics: Tactics in Organizational
Leadership, Westport, CT: Praeger.
Fei, H. T. (1947) Country China, Shanghai, China: Observatory Publishing Co.
Ferris, G. R., Brand, J. F., Brand, S., Rowland, K. M., Gilmore, D. C., King, T. R.,
Kacmar, K. M. and Burton, C. A. (1993) “Politics and control in organization,”
in E. J. Lawler, B. Malkovsky, K. Heimer, J. O’Brien (eds.), Advances in Group
Processes, Vol. 10. Greenwich, CT: Jai Press.
Fung, Y. I. (1983) A History of Chinese Psychology, Vol. 1 (D. Boddie, Trans.),
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Furnham, A. (1997) The Psychology of Behavior at Work: The Individual in the
Organization, Hove: Psychology Press.
Gabrenya, W. K. and Hwang, K. K. (1996) “Chinese social interaction: Harmony
and hierarchy on the good earth,” in M. H. Bond (ed.), The Handbook of Chinese
Psychology, New York: Oxford University Press.
Goman, C. K. (1991) The Loyalty Factor: Building Trust in Today’s Workplace, 
New York: MasterMedia Ltd.
Goodwin, R. and Tang, C. S. K. (1996) “Chinese personal relationships,” in 
M. H. Bond (ed.), The Handbook of Chinese Psychology, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Graen, G. and Cashman, J. F. (1975) “A role making model of leadership in for-
mal organizations: A developmental approach,” in J. G. Hunt and L. L. Larson
(eds.), Leadership Frontiers, Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.
Graham, G. (1998) Eliminate office politics and end many problems in compa-
nies. Wichita Business Journal (9th February). (http://www.amcity.com/wichita/
stories/020998/newscolumn4.html)
Hampden-Turner, C. and Trompenaars, F. (1997) Mastering The Infinite Game: How
East Asian Values Are Transforming Business Practices, Oxford: Capstone.
Hofstede, G. (1980) Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-related
Values. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Hofstede, G. (1991) Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Hurley, A. E., Fagenson-Eland, E. A. and Sonnenfeld, J. A. (1997) Does cream
always rise to the top?: An investigation of career attainment determinants.
Organizational Dynamics 26(2): 65–71.
Husted, B. W. (1999) Wealth, culture, and corruption. Journal of International
Business Studies 30: 339–60.
Hwang, K. K. (1987) Face and favor: The Chinese power game. American Journal
of Sociology 92: 944–74.
Jenks, V. O. (1990) Human Relations in Organizations, New York: Harper and Row.
Johns, G. (1992) Organizational Behavior: Understanding Life At Work. New York:
Harper Collins Publishers.
Kim, U. (1994) “Individualism and collectivism: Conceptual clarification and elab-
oration,” in U. Kim et al. (eds.), Individualism and Collectivism in Cross-Cultural
Research and Methodology Series, 18. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Kipling, R. (1996) East meets West: East is East and West is West and ne’er the twain
shall meet. An Arthur Anderson Business Consulting Report: A Survey of
Management Culture, Styles and Practices in Asia and the West.
82
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

Krackhardt, D. (1990) “The strength of strong ties: The importance of philos in
organizations,” in V. Nohria and R. G. Eccles (eds.), Networks and Organizations:
Structure, Form and Action, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Lenartowicz, T. and Johnson, J. P. (1999) Managerial values in Latin America: 
A twelve nation comparative study. Presented at the Seventh Cross Cultural Research
Conference, Cancún, Mexico.
Liden, R. C. and Mitchell, T. R. (1988) Ingratiatory behaviors in organizational
settings. Academy of Management Review 13: 572–87.
Liu, C. M. (1999) “The concept of ‘bao’ in organizational research,” in H. S. R. Kao,
D. Sinha and B. Wilpert (eds.), Management and Cultural Values: The
Indigenization of Organizations in Asia, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H. and Schoorman, F. D. (1995) An integrative model of
organizational trust. Academy of Management Review 20(3): 709–34.
McGrath, N., Janssen, P. and Hulme, D. (1995) Scheming workers can ruin
business. Singapore Times (1st September). (http://web3.asia1.com.sg/timesnet/
data/ab/docs/ab0429.html)
Morgan, G. (1986) Images of Organization, Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Newstrom, J. W. and Davis, K. (1993) Organizational Behavior: Human Behavior 
At Work, 9th edn, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ott, J. S. (1989) The Organizational Culture Perspective, Chicago, IL: Dorsey 
Press.
Oxford English Reference Dictionary (1995) Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Pepper, G. L. (1995) Communication in Organizations: A Cultural Approach,
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Pinto, J. K. (1996) Power and Politics in Project Management. Project Management
Institute, Sylva, NC.
Prendergast, C. and Topel, R. H. (1993) Favoritism in Organization. NBER Working
Paper No. 4427, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Pye, L. W. (1985) Asian Power and Politics: The Cultural Dimensions of Authority,
Cambridge: Becknap Press.
Pye, L. W. (1992) Chinese Commercial Negotiating Style, New York: Quorum Books.
Ralston, D. A., Holt, D. H., Terpstra, R. H. and Yu, K. C. (1997) The impact of
national culture and economic ideology on managerial work values: A study of
the United States, Russia, Japan and China. Journal of International Business
Studies 28: 177–207.
Redding, S. G. (1980) Cognition as an aspect of culture and its relation to 
management processes: An exploratory view of the Chinese case. Journal of
Management Studies 17: 127–48.
Redding, S. G. (1990) The Spirit of Chinese Capitalism, Berlin, Germany: Walter de
Gruyter.
Redding, S. G. and Baldwin, E. (1991) Managers for Asia/Pacific: Recruitment and
Development Strategies, Hong Kong: Business International Asia/Pacific Ltd.
Redding, S. G. and Hsiao, M. (1993) “An empirical study of overseas Chinese
managerial ideology,” in P. Blunt and D. Richards (eds.), Readings in
Management and Culture in East and South East Asia, Darwin, Australia: Northern
Territory University Press.
Redding, S. G., Norman, A. and Schlander, A. (1994) “The nature of individual
attachment to the organization: A review of East Asian variations,” in 
H. C. Triandis, M. D. Dunnette and L. M. Hough (eds.), Handbook of Industrial
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
83

and Organizational Psychology, 4, 2nd edn. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.
Redding, S. G. and Wong, G. Y. Y. (1986) “The psychology of Chinese organiza-
tional behavior,” in M. H. Bond (ed.), The Psychology of the Chinese People,
Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
Safire, W. (1998) Crony capitalism. New York Times Magazine, February 1st: 16.
Sinha, J. B. P. (1996) “Indian perspectives on leadership and power in organiza-
tions,” in H. S. R. Kao and D. Sinha (eds.), Asian Perspectives in Psychology in
Cross-Cultural Research and Methodology Series, 19. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Suite 101 Articles, (1998) Corruption and democracy. Part Four of a five-part series
on The Clash of Capitalism and Democracy in East Asia, Suite 101 Articles (3rd
April). (http://www.duke.edu/~jason1/s980403.htm)
Tajfel, H., Flament, C., Billig, M. G. and Bundy, R. F. (1971) Social categorization
and intergroup behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology 1: 149–77.
The Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edn (1989) Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Triandis, H. C. (1994) Culture and Social Behavior, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Triandis, H. C. (1995) Individualism and Collectivism, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Triandis, H. C., Bontempo, R., Villareal, M. J., Asai, M. and Lucca, N. (1988)
Individualism and collectivism: Cross-cultural perspectives on self-ingroup
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54: 323–38.
Triandis, H. C., Brislin, R. and Hui, C. H. (1993) “Cross-cultural training across
the individualism-collectivism divide,” in Blunt, P. and Richards, D. (eds.),
Readings in Management, Organization and Culture in East and South East Asia,
Darwin, Australia: Northern Territory University Press.
Trice, H. M. and Beyer, J. M. (1993) The Cultures of Work Organizations, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Tsang, E. W. K. (1998) Can guanxi be a source of sustained competitive advantage
for doing business in China? Academy of Management Executive 12(2): 64–73.
Turner, J. C. (1991) Social Influence, Milton Keynes, UK: Open University Press.
Turner, J. C., Sachdev, I. and Hogg, M. A. (1983) Social categorization, interper-
sonal attraction and group formation. British Journal of Social Psychology 22:
227–39.
Vecchio, R. P. (1997) “Are you in or out with your boss?” in R. P. Vecchio (ed.),
Leadership: Understanding the Dynamics of Power and Influence in Organizations,
Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Vogl, F. (1999) Business ethics: Asian crisis stimulates establishment pressures for
fundamental reforms. Earth Times (16–28 February). (http://www.egroups.com/
group/reformasitotal/6851.html)
Walder, A. G. (1983) Organized dependency and cultures of authority in Chinese
industry. Journal of Asian Studies 43: 51–76.
Warshaw, M. (1998) The good guy’s (and gal’s) guide to office politics. Issue 14,
(April). (http://www.fastcompany.com/online/14/politics.html)
Washington Report (1998) Cronyism bloats corporate CEO pay. Washington
Report 38 (May 15). (http://www.uaw.org/publications/wash__report/3809/
wr380902.htm)
84
Naresh Khatri, James P. Johnson and Zafar U. Ahmed

Wong, S. L. (1988) Emigrant Entrepreneurs: Shanghai Industrialists in Hong Kong,
Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
World Wide Words (1998) Topical Words: Cronyism. (http://clever.net/
quinion/words/topicalwords/tw-cro 1.htm)
Yeung, I. Y. M. and Tung, R. L. (1996) Achieving business success in Confucian
societies: The importance of guanxi (connections). Organizational Dynamics
Autumn: 54–65.
A Two-Stage Model of Cronyism in Organizations
85

86
5
Understanding the Mind of the
Chinese: A Historical Perspective
Sui Pheng Low
Introduction
In the West, the English language has popularized western management
thinking, but the same cannot be said of eastern beliefs and philoso-
phies. Apart from being constrained by the Chinese language that is 
neither spoken nor written in most parts of the world except Asia, the
Orient is often viewed with a tinge of mysticism that made it almost 
culturally impossible for westerners to perceive. For these reasons, while
there are no lack of strategic thinkers and philosophers in the East, their
thoughts and philosophies are still not well disseminated let alone pop-
ularized throughout the world. With the economic opening of China,
an appreciation of its strategic oriental thinking and use of philosophies
is of increasing importance for managerial practice. With her rich
wealth of history and talents, China has never been short of strategic
thinkers and great philosophers. Apart from the eminent military strate-
gist Sun Tzu, there were the eminent philosophers – Confucius (and his
disciple, Mencius), and Lao Tzu (and his disciple, Chuang Tzu) – whose
teachings have had a tremendous influence on Chinese civilization and
culture. Interestingly, these three great Chinese thinkers – namely Sun
Tzu, Confucius and Lao Tzu – were all contemporaries in Chinese his-
tory some 2500 years ago. The tumultuous activities of this period
appear to have been the main trigger for them to reflect and form their
thoughts, philosophies and strategies. Socrates, in Europe, was a con-
temporary of Confucius, though in fact he lived some 80 years later.
However, European philosophy and thought developed along lines 
different to those emerging in the Orient.
The history of China is besieged with bitter encounters with for-
eigners since Marco Polo’s visit to China during the Ming Dynasty 

Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
87
(AD 1368–1644). More recently, China was humiliated by the 1842
Nanjin Treaty, the 1858 Tienjin Treaty, the burning of the Summer
Palace in 1860, as well as the invasion of China by French, British and
Russian troops shortly thereafter and the so-called Rape of Nanjin by
Japanese troops in 1937. Yet, from long before Marco Polo’s time, China
has always received foreign guests with politeness. Naturally, the events
of the last century have created a deep but understandable distrust of
foreigners by China. All these unfortunate events of the last century
have collectively molded the Chinese to become practitioners of Lee
Zhong Wu’s Thick Black Theory: forced by their circumstances in order
to thrive, win and succeed in all their dealings in their marketplace.
Having been peppered by numerous hardships throughout the history
of China, the Chinese people have developed within themselves the 
stoicism for hard work, pain and suffering. A “typical” Chinese would
therefore find within himself a conflict as he struggles to remain morally
upright (Lao Tzu’s teachings) and deport himself as a gentleman (Con-
fucius’ teachings) – and yet at the same time, be a person who strives 
to protect his self-interests both strategically (Sun Tzu’s Art of War) and
ruthlessly (Thick Black Theory). This natural struggle in the minds of 
the Chinese people must be remembered and assimilated by those who
venture into China.
This chapter will examine the teachings of Confucius, Lao Tzu and
Sun Tzu. It will also, in the process, extrapolate how the value systems
of these sages have influenced the cultural values of the Chinese people
in their day-to-day activities. The chapter will also highlight the Thick
Black Theory to explain how the Chinese value system has evolved over
time to what it is today. An appreciation of this philosophical evolution
in Chinese history is essential for understanding current Chinese busi-
ness practices not only in China but also in countries with sizeable over-
seas Chinese communities. What may initially come across as cronyism
or corrupt practices from the viewpoints of western developed nations
may be, in the final analysis, a phenomenon that is peculiar to the
Chinese people by virtue of their historical circumstances.
The Confucian philosophy
It is not the intention of this chapter to cover the teachings of Confucius
in an all-encompassing manner as different eminent scholars, both in
the East and the West, have examined his writings on many occasions.
Confucius was born in 551 BC in the State of Lu in modern Shantung
(Dollinger, 1988). The golden rule of the Confucian tradition has 

88
Sui Pheng Low
been: “Do not do to others what you do not want others to do to you.”
Reciprocity and consideration are emphasized in all relations, and the
way of loyalty and compassion is the thread that holds together all the
core values in one’s dealings with others. Hence, every man should
always pursue self-cultivation through learning to become a responsible
contributor towards the achievement of a moral society. This ethical
philosophy has, over a long period of time, formed the Asian culture
that regards Jen, based on mutual trust, as the binding force of society.
Four core areas can be identified as important aspects of Confucianism:
1 Education – The Confucian philosophy views education reverently:
it stresses the importance of pursuing learning, not only as an end in
itself, but also as a vehicle to self-betterment. More importantly,
through education, one can optimize one’s contributions to society.
2 Commitment – Ethics can be taught to most people, but it will be the
people that make the difference. Thus, there has to be individual
commitment to adopt and use ethics in everyday business activities
if ethics is to be part of an organization.
3 Collective responsibility – This stems from the tradition of distrust-
ing formal rules and regulations, and a dislike of written contracts:
both activities emphasize ethics rather than the general adoption of
legal norms of conduct.
4 Mutuality and respect – The major thrust of Confucian teaching is
that human society should be constructed on the basis of humanism:
this attitude always emphasizes conciliatory human relations as a
basis of mutual understanding.
The Confucian philosophy is often cited as the major factor deter-
mining the Chinese approach to doing business in the modern world
today. Consequently, Chinese contracts are typically sketchy three- or
four-page affairs, that pay more attention to trust and personal relation-
ships than western-type contractual obligations and penalties (Knutt,
1997). While this is so, the mind of the Chinese may not be as simplis-
tic as it seems to be. Mr Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore’s Senior Minister
observed that, “You have to be flexible. We are not going to change
them; they are not going to change us. But if we want to do business in
China, this is something we have to remember. It’s different from doing
business in other countries because the Chinese are clever people, in fact,
too clever” (Lee, 1998). The complexity inherent in trying to understand
the Asian style of management (or for that matter, the Chinese style 
of management) led Speece (2001) to query if there is indeed such a 
style and if so, what is it? The problematic issues that can arise were

Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
89
important enough for Kidd (2001) to observe that there is a lack of
understanding of how East–West differences might collide in the daily
execution of conjoint management practices. It is therefore crucial to
understand aspects of inter-personal networking or guanxi from the
Chinese viewpoint. Kidd (2001) pointed out that the Western notion of
“networking” or dealing with people is far removed from the Chinese
guanxi and that when Westerners copy guanxi, they do so without the
finesse understood by the Chinese. This observation arose because the
silent communication associated with intangible guanxi is somewhat
unfathomable for the Westerner. It is a well-known hypothesis that the
concept of guanxi is tacitly embedded within the Confucian philosophy
and that it subtly defines the Chinese moral code. Leung and Wong
(2001) posit that the Confucian social hierarchical theory concerning
the five relationships of emperor–subject, father–son, husband–wife,
brother–brother and friend–friend (referred to as wu-lun in Chinese) 
has been perpetuated to influence modern China. The Chinese word 
lun describes concisely the guanxi among these five relationships.
Consequently, an individual will fall into a natural guanxi web in his/her
socialization process after he/she is born. If every individual subsumes
his/her proper position, social harmonization can be achieved in a 
country – even one as vast as China (Leung and Wong, 2001). It is for
this reason that the Social Hierarchical Theory has prompted many
Chinese rulers in the past to adopt Confucianism as a strategic tool to
achieve social stability in their country (Man and Cheng, 1996).
However, it should be noted that the traditional Confucian concept and
modern practice of guanxi have significant differences. The former advo-
cates a set of moral codes that can be manipulated by Chinese rulers and
political leaders to regulate the Chinese people into achieving ideal social
harmonization. The modern practice of guanxi, on the other hand, treats
it as a strategic tool to achieve business goals: it may, in effect, be bought
and sold through alliance making. Leung and Wong (2001) conclude
that the modern day concept of guanxi could be looked at from the 
four dimensions of opportunism, dynamism, business interaction and
protectionism.
Kidd (2001), therefore, argued rightly that when management gurus
from the West “tell” Chinese managers that they should forget history
and do as Americans do – that is, to venture as though there were no
historical encumbrance – they overlook the innate sense of history
sensed as a living force, that is totally real for most Chinese, which
makes them hesitate. It is important to remember that the teachings of
Confucius has suggested a way of life that has been internalized over

90
Sui Pheng Low
2000 years in China during which time there has been a continuing
debate about yi and li – where yi is ethical value (justice) and li is eco-
nomic value (profit) as determined within society. Thus, for the Chinese
people, their ethical value structure is related to a utility informed by
moral norms: yi may be thought of as li “in conformance with moral-
ity.” But there is another form of li – Kidd (2001) explained that the
Chinese people connect yi and li through a publicly declared li (as they
obey the rule by law, accepting the declaration of a chief). Thus, the
clever leader may use deep-seated Confucianism to control his subordi-
nates. Acquiring an understanding of the internalization process is an
important first step to penetrating the Chinese mind of rationalizing,
analyzing and decision-making.
Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching
While historical records about Lao Tzu have remained sketchy and are
still debatable today (Chan, 1963), the Tao Te Ching was said to be 
written by a man named Lao Tzu (551–479 BC). He was a native of the
Chu Jen Hamlet in the Li village of Hu Hsien in the State of Chu. Lao
Tzu was a “pen name” whereas his family name was Li, his personal
name was Erh and he was styled Tan. He was the Historian in charge of
the archives in Chou. The records kept by the Official Historian, Ssu-ma
Chien, showed that Confucius once dubbed Lao Tzu a dragon for his
wisdom, insightfulness and virtue.
As the Historian in charge of the archives in Chou, Lao Tzu was able
to cultivate the way (Tao) and virtue aimed at self-effacement. He lived
in Chou for a long time but departed on seeing its decline. When he
reached the Pass (or City Gate), the Keeper there was pleased and said to
him, “As you are about to leave the world behind, could you write a book
for my sake?” As a result, Lao Tzu wrote a tome in two books, setting out
the meaning of the way and virtue in some 5000 characters, and then he
departed. None knew where he went to in the end (Lau, 1963).
The text of Lao Tzu is divided into two books. There are a total of 81
chapters – 37 in Book I and 44 in Book II. Specifically, Book I was known
as the Tao Ching and Book II the Te Ching. There is nothing unusual
about this division except for the simple fact that the first word in Book
I is Tao while the first word in Book II is Te.
As a contemporary of Confucius, Lao Tzu was the founder of Taoism,
one of the most influential philosophies in Chinese civilization.
Confucianism, the dominant system in Chinese history and thought,
emphasizes social order and an active life. Taoism, on the other hand,

Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
91
concentrates on individual life and tranquility, thus suggesting that
Taoism plays a secondary role to Confucianism in the Chinese society.
Lao Tzu was a wise man who not only taught people to have a gentle
and meek presentation, but also to be motiveless, selfless, pliant, yield-
ing, pure-minded and natural. It is generally difficult for people to
accept Lao Tzu’s thoughts because most will only notice the superficial
features and not their essence. Because Lao Tzu’s thoughts are abstract
(e.g. “The Tao is an empty vessel; it is used but never filled”), or illogi-
cal (e.g. “Give up learning, and put an end to your troubles”), most peo-
ple would tend to dismiss his teachings as being irrelevant in their daily
lives (Tsai, 1989). The emphasis on simplicity has also led people to
regard the teachings of Lao Tzu as negative and defeatist. Its focus on
primitivism and renunciation of civilization, taken literally, is entirely
contrary to modern civilization (Chan, 1963): yet the Tao Te Ching
teaches man how to live, embracing ethics, government and diplomacy.
When Tao Te Ching is compared with Confucianism, it can be noted that
there are more similarities than differences between Confucius’ and Lao
Tzu’s teachings. Both are primarily interested in moral, social and polit-
ical reforms; they cherish the same basic values such as humanity, right-
eousness, deep love and faithfulness; they oppose the use of force and
punishment; and they esteem highly the integrity of the individual and
social harmony even though their approaches are different. In short,
both emphasize the goodness of human nature and the potentiality of
everyone to become a sage. It is because of these similarities that Taoism
and Confucianism exist harmoniously in parallel throughout Chinese
history so that every Chinese is at once a Taoist and a Confucianist
(Chan, 1963).
Tao is simply the Way of Life. It is about living naturally, effortlessly,
spontaneously and correctly. Te can be translated to mean virtue or
morality. Translated literally, Tao Te Ching can be taken to mean the Book
(Ching) of how (Tao) things happen or work (Te). While it is difficult to
define what Tao is, the Book itself has three topics:
G
The natural law or how things happen.
G
A way of life or how to live in conscious harmony with natural law.
G
A method of leadership or how to govern or educate others in accor-
dance with natural law (Heider, 1992).
The main focus of Tao Te Ching is concerned with man: 80 per cent 
of this Book is devoted not to the substance of Tao but to its function,
particularly to its operation in society.

92
Sui Pheng Low
The desirable leadership style advocated by Lao Tzu is basically gra-
cious and non-competitive. The virtues propounded in the Tao Te Ching
include meekness, purity of heart, selflessness, righteousness, faithful-
ness and one’s unfailing love for others. These are useful virtues and 
attitudes that can be valuable for leaders in managing people in general,
and personal conflicts/stresses in particular.
While Lao Tzu’s sayings hold a wealth of wisdom in so far as leader-
ship qualities are concerned, it should be noted that not all his ancient
sayings are relevant in the modern-day context. In effect, some of Lao
Tzu’s teachings may be defeatist and negative when viewed today. For
example, one cannot imagine a modern-day leader who is without
motive, and who will sit back and wait for events to unfold: modern-
day leadership is projected as being dynamic and proactive, but the Tao
Te Ching suggests passivity. Likewise, while modern-day leaders demand
constant feedback and communication, the Tao emphasizes silence as a
desirable virtue. Perhaps we might interpret this as a suggestion that
leaders should be thoughtful?
Nevertheless, the most defeatist of Lao Tzu’s teachings (e.g. to give up
all of one’s worldly possessions) is not meant for the modern man to
attain. It is only for him to strive towards as an ideal, and to consciously
keep this ideal continuously in mind if he aims to achieve fair play and
inner peace. Likewise, although Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching may has its ori-
gin in China, its influence on Chinese societies may not be entirely fool-
proof today because of the infusion of more liberal and individualistic
teachings diffusing from the West into Chinese societies. While Taoism
and Confucianism may still predominately form the basic social fabric
of Chinese communities, exposure to and reception of western ideals
have already caused some erosion to occur in Chinese societies in so far
as the practice of Taoism and Confucianism is concerned.
Sun Tzu’s Art of War
Despite the argument over its authorship, it is generally believed that the
Art of War was written by Sun Wu (or more frequently called Sun Tzu) in
the 5th Century BC which coincides with the then Period of the Warring
States in China. Although Sun Tzu’s strategic thoughts are of immense
importance in the Chinese military arena, and the Art of War is reputedly
the oldest and best known military treatise among the Chinese classical
works, relatively little is known about Sun Tzu, or when he wrote the Art
of War. According to the SiMa Qian’s Shi Ji (Records of the Historian), Sun
Tzu was a native of the Qi State. However, the Art of War was specially

Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
93
written for Prince He Lu of the Wu State. When Sun Tzu wrote the 
Art of War some 2500 years ago, the Prince of Wu, He Lu, was so
impressed by what he read that he granted an audience to Sun Tzu.
Although he was clearly impressed by what he had read Prince He Lu
wanted to test Sun Tzu’s ability in drilling troops to the limits – but
using women. For this purpose, Prince He Lu sent for 180 ladies from
his palace. Sun Tzu was, however, undaunted by this task. He divided
the ladies into two companies, each headed by one of the Prince’s two
most favorite concubines.
Upon arming all the ladies with spears, Sun Tzu asked, “Do you know
what is front and back, right and left?” When all the ladies replied in
the affirmative, Sun Tzu went on to instruct them, “When I give the
command ‘front’, you must all face directly ahead; ‘turn left’ and you
must all face to your left; ‘turn right’ and you must all face to your right;
‘turn back’ and you must all turn around towards your back.” As all the
ladies replied in the affirmative, Sun Tzu laid out the executioner’s
sword to show his seriousness for discipline. Thereafter, the drill began
as usual with the sounds of drumbeats and shouts of command. None
of the ladies, however, moved. Instead, they burst into laughter.
Sun Tzu patiently told the ladies that it would be the commander’s
fault if the commands were vague and not thoroughly understood 
by the troops. He then proceeded to instruct them once more. When 
the drums were beaten a second time and the commands repeated, the
ladies again burst into laughter. Thereupon, Sun Tzu said, “It would be
the commander’s fault if commands are vague and not thoroughly
understood by the troops. But when the commands are clear and the
soldiers nevertheless do not carry them out, then it is the fault of their
officers.” Having said this, Sun Tzu then ordered out both leading con-
cubines for execution.
Prince He Lu who was observing the drill from a raised pavilion was
greatly alarmed when he saw his two leading ladies were about to 
be executed. The Prince immediately sent an aide to Sun Tzu with the
message, “I believe the general is capable of drilling troops. However,
without these two concubines, my food and drink will be tasteless. It is
therefore my wish that they be spared.”
Sun Tzu replied that since he had received the royal commission to
lead the troops in the field, he could disregard any of the ruler’s com-
mands as he saw fit. Thereafter, Sun Tzu ordered the two concubines to
be beheaded as a deterrent, and accordingly appointed the two ladies
next in line to replace them as company leaders. Subsequently, the drill
proceeded smoothly with every women turning left, right, front or back,

94
Sui Pheng Low
kneeling or rising, with perfect harmony and precision and without
uttering any dissent. Sun Tzu then dispatched a messenger to Prince 
He Lu to inspect the troops, which he declared as having been prop-
erly drilled, disciplined and prepared to go through fire and water 
for the Prince. When Prince He Lu declined, Sun Tzu remarked, “The
Prince is only fond of words which he cannot put into practice.” Greatly
ashamed by what he had heard and recognizing Sun Tzu’s general-
ship ability, Prince He Lu promptly appointed Sun Tzu as the supreme 
commander of the Wu armies.
Sun Tzu proved his extraordinary ability in actual warfare after he
became a general of the Wu State. From 506 BC, Sun Tzu led a total of
five expeditions against the State of Chu that had regarded Wu State as
a vassal. He defeated the armies of Chu and forced his way into the 
Chu capital, Yingdu, causing King Zhao to flee for his life. For almost 
20 years thereafter, the Wu armies continued to gain victories over their
neighbors, the States of Qi, Qin and Yue. After the death of Sun Tzu, his 
successors however did not follow his strategies as recorded in the Art of
War. Thus, following defeat after defeat, the Kingdom of Wu was finally
exterminated in 473 BC.
The thirteen chapters of Sun Tzu’s Art of War deal with the funda-
mentally ideological system of strategy. A summary of these thirteen
chapters is listed in Table 5.1.
Sun Tzu’s Art of War is a very short book. It contains less than 6200
characters of classical Chinese literary writing – its longest chapter 
has about 1070 characters, while the shortest chapter has only about
250 characters (Low and Yeo, 1993). Sun Tzu had long recognized the
Table 5.1
Sun Tzu’s Art of War – its chapter headings
1
Planning
Proper planning of strategy
2
Waging war
Avoidance of protracted campaign
3
Strategy
Subdue enemy without fighting
4
Depositions
Grasp enemy’s vulnerability
5
Forces
Exploitation of situation
6
Opportunism
Unpredictability of strategy
7
Maneuvers
Relief of enemy’s vigilance
8
Variations
Adaptability of strategy
9
Marches
Exploration of enemy’s situation
10
Terrain
Diligence in command
11
Battleground
Stimulation of subordinates
12
Incendiarism
Caution in completing tasks
13
Espionage
Use of human intelligence

Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
95
importance of a general’s leadership qualities and classified these quali-
ties into the six categories: wisdom, sincerity, benevolence, courage,
strictness and composure (ibid). We expand on these below:
1
Wisdom
The general who wins a battle makes many calculations in his tem-
ple before the battle is fought. The general who loses a battle makes
but few calculations beforehand. Many calculations lead to victory,
and few calculations to defeat; how about no calculation at all? By
this measure, I can foresee victory or defeat (Planning).
A leader must therefore have the relevant knowledge and experience in
the area he is leading. The ability to plan is crucial:
The adept in warfare seeks victory from the situation, and does not
rely on the efforts of individuals. Thus he is able to select suitable
men to exploit the situation (Forces).
The leader must be able to select the right persons and the right
methods to do the right job at the right time and right location:
Military tactics are similar to water. As flowing water runs away from
high places and speeds downwards, an army avoids strengths and
strikes weaknesses. As water shapes its course according to the ground,
an army works out its victory in relation to the enemy it faces. There-
fore as water retains no constant shape, there are no fixed conditions
in warfare. He who can modify his tactics according to the enemy’s 
situation and thereby succeed in winning may be called a divine
(Opportunities).
2
Sincerity
Sincerity means the general must have the complete trust of his ruler
and of his subordinates. Likewise, the leader must have the complete
trust of all the parties involved in his plans. He must maintain objec-
tivity and impartiality in judgment.
3
Benevolence
Regard your soldiers as your children, and they will follow you into
the deepest valleys. Look at them as your own beloved sons, and they
will stand by you even unto death (Terrain).

96
Sui Pheng Low
However, a general who is overly concerned with the welfare of the 
layman is likely to encounter difficulties:
If over compassionate to the people, he can easily be harassed
(Variations).
The leader must guard against being overly benevolent which others
may interpret as a weakness.
4
Courage
The general who advances without seeking fame and who retreats
without fear of being punished, and whose main concern is for the
welfare of the people and the interests of the ruler, is the jewel of the
State (Terrain).
He who exercises no forethought but makes light of his opponents is
sure to be captured by them (Marches).
Decisions should not be made based on courage alone but on informa-
tion gathered, and after due consideration of the pros and cons of each
possible course of action.
5
Strictness
If the general pampers his troops but cannot use them; if he loves
them but cannot enforce his commands; if the troops are disorderly
but he cannot discipline them – then they are like spoilt children and
are useless (Terrain).
When discipline is regularly enforced, they will be obedient. When
discipline is not regularly enforced, they will not be obedient. When
orders are consistently executed, it is because of the mutual trust
between the commander and his men (Marches).
The leader must exercise discipline to control his resources that are
required to ensure successful implementation of his plans.
6
Composure
A ruler should not start a war out of anger. A general should not fight
a battle out of resentment. Move only when it is in the interests of
the State to do so. Quit when it is to its detriment. Anger can be
restored to happiness, and resentment can become pleasantness. 

Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
97
A State once destroyed can never be restored, nor the dead be brought
back to life (Incendiarism).
The leader must not be ruffled easily by any dispute. He needs to main-
tain his posture at all times.
Thick Face, Black Heart
Although Lee Zhong Wu’s Thick Black Theory was first disseminated 
in 1911, its application to modern living in Chinese societies remains
relevant today (Low, 1997). Lee Zhong Wu was a social philosopher and
critic, and his purpose in developing and disseminating the Thick Black
Theory was to describe the symptoms of an illness in the Chinese soci-
ety of the time. He described in the Thick Black Theory the methods by
which men obtain and hold on to power, and how they use their power
and wealth to accumulate even more power and wealth. The methods,
and the lengths to which men would go to achieve their own ends, are
the major thrusts of the Thick Black Theory. Lee Zhong Wu had originally
intended to publish the Thick Black Theory in a series of three articles in
The Chengdu Daily in 1911. However, the violent reaction that erupted
after the first article was published led to a cancellation of the series.
Consequently, friends of Lee Zhong Wu published the series of three arti-
cles, of about 2000 words in total, in a single volume in Beijing. Eventually,
it was reprinted several times between 1934 and 1936. Despite the con-
troversy contained in the book, and the negative image it portrayed of the
Chinese people, each edition sold out immediately before being banned
eventually by the government.
The ban came about because many people felt uncomfortable by the
true observations made by Lee Zhong Wu. Fundamentally, they were
not used to seeing the ruthlessness and hypocrisy underlying many
entrenched Chinese institutions laid bare. By merely mentioning these
things, Lee Zhong Wu was perceived to be at best muckraking, and at
worst, actually advocating the immorality he depicted. Having been
banned for so long, the Thick Black Theory is relatively unknown to
many Chinese today. In Taiwan, the book was banned during the thirty-
eight years of martial law from 1949 to 1987. Even after the lifting 
of the ban, in the post-martial law years, the Thick Black Theory was 
not widely read. Lee Zhong Wu’s work is better known in Hong Kong
where copies were made available. The Thick Black Theory has never been
translated. Even if it were to be translated faithfully, it will remain

98
Sui Pheng Low
incomprehensible to most non-Chinese because of the highly context-
oriented nature of the Chinese language. Lee Zhong Wu died in 1943
when the Japanese army was still in control of much of China.
Before examining the relevance of the Thick Black Theory for dealing
with the Chinese people in business transactions, we will present the
thrust of some of Lee Zhong Wu’s thoughts. These deal with ways of
obtaining and keeping an official position, and of taking care of busi-
ness (Chu, 1988, 1992).
Six ways to obtain an official position
Historically, holding a government position is considered a prestigious
occupation in Chinese societies. A high-ranking government official is
thus placed at the top of the social and economic hierarchy; as a con-
sequence, most people would constantly strive to secure an official
appointment within the government bureaucracy. In the Thick Black
Theory Lee Zhong Wu discusses the six steps involved in getting an
appointment as a government bureaucrat. Although his discussion was
set within the context of Imperial China, much of his observations con-
cerning human nature remain relevant even today.
a. Emptiness
The first requirement is to empty a person’s mind of everything that
does not help in securing the appointment being sought. He must have
no other goals and no other thoughts, and must concentrate on the
appointment and meditate on it daily.
b. Boring in
A person must seize every little opportunity to advance his prospects.
c. Self-praise
A person must constantly seek to bring out his qualifications and impor-
tance to the attention of those who are in positions to help him.
d. Flattery
A person must ingratiate himself with those who can help him. He must
praise them to others who will in turn carry his praises back to them.
e. Threats
A person must be very subtle with his threats because he may unknow-
ingly threaten people who have the ability to harm him. Instead, threats
should develop naturally out of his self-praise.
f. Bribery
Bribes should be given not only to the man who has the power to
appoint a person, but also to his relatives and friends.

Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
99
Six ways to keep an official position
The Thick Black Theory observes that a government official would need
to be seen to act virtuously and to smear himself with a layer of false
benevolence while at the same time, pretending to be a religious and
morally upright man. The six ways to keep one’s official position
include:
a. Emptiness
A person should say and do nothing. He should instead talk about
everything, but say nothing and do nothing.
b. Be obsequious
A person must bow, bend and nod before his superiors.
c. Be imperious
A person should cultivate a haughty and disdainful attitude toward his
inferiors, and must be seen to be unapproachable by his subordinates.
d. Be ruthless
A person must be ruthless in pursuing his objective. However, in exploit-
ing the vulnerability of others, one must continue to maintain a virtu-
ous image.
e. Be deaf and blind
A person must not listen to criticism and worse still, be affected by it.
One must therefore not see the reproaching looks of others. Reproaches
must be allowed to pass him by without pricking his conscience.
f. Harvest
The purpose of a person getting his post in the first place was to put him
in a situation where others would pay for his favors, just as he previ-
ously paid for the favors of others. One does not expend all his effort
simply to acquire a job; he does it to enable himself to sell his influence.
Two methods for taking care of business
As noted above, the Thick Black Theory emphasizes the importance of
avoiding accountability or responsibility for one’s actions, and for mak-
ing one’s actions seem much more important or impressive than they
really are. The two methods for achieving these objectives are:
1 to defer accountability by trying to do as little as possible, and always
try to make someone else finish the job. Nobody cares if something
goes wrong so long as the blame can be laid on whoever gave the
final approval or finished the job.

100
Sui Pheng Low
2 to make a situation a little worse than it actually is in order to 
persuade others to appreciate your work even more (Low, 1997).
Power of endurance
The description Thick Face, Black Heart is used to describe the “must
have” quality of Chinese political and business leaders as espoused by
Lee Zhong Wu in his Thick Black Theory. This attitude is not a recent cre-
ation in Chinese societies but is a result of centuries of internal turmoil
and disturbances caused by external forces in China. Chu (1988), in par-
ticular, points to the bitter distrust the Chinese people have towards 
foreigners. The relevance of the Thick Black Theory for daily life was sub-
sequently expanded by Chu (1992) into the doctrine of “Thick Face, Black
Heart.” In line with other ancient Chinese strategic and philosophical
treatises, Chu (1988) urged businessmen from the West to gain an under-
standing of this doctrine before making their forays into China.
Chu defines Thick Face as a shield to protect a person from the criti-
cism and negative opinions of others. A thick-faced practitioner refuses
to accept the limitations that others have tried to impose on him. Chu
sees Black Heart as the equivalent of a spear used to do battle with 
others as well as oneself. While the black-hearted practitioner has the
courage to fail, he also focuses his attention on his goals and ignores the
cost. Together with a well-defined killer instinct, the ultimate courage of
a Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner is dispassion. He has the courage to
fight in spite of fear and is able to detach himself from the emotions asso-
ciated with defeat so that its presence does not thwart him (Chu, 1992).
Like Lee Zhong Wu’s Thick Black Theory, the doctrine of “Thick Face,
Black Heart” was also examined by Chu (1992) from numerous perspec-
tives, including the deceptive, mysterious and spiritual perspective. The
lessons which one can learn from Chu’s (1992) Thick Face, Black Heart
doctrines are therefore numerous. For the purpose of using the lessons
that businessmen from the West may learn from Thick Face, Black Heart
while making their forays into China, the following will, however, only
focus on “endurance” as a strategy for dealing with the Chinese.
To achieve his goals, the Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner develops
the power of endurance even in the face of criticism and ridicule. The
ultimate victory belongs to him who endures and persists to the end,
particularly in the face of a crisis. The Chinese word for “crisis” com-
bines two characters: those of danger (wei) and opportunity (ji). Hence,
the wise Chinese recognizes that the true nature of a crisis is actually an

Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
101
opportunity in disguise. Chu (1992) argues that opportunity always
exists within a crisis situation but when one loses the fighting spirit in
a devastating crisis, he will be blinded by his own emotions. The nature
of the thing is that when one is able to calmly endure the unendurable,
the opportunity for a better alternative will eventually surface and reveal
itself. While endurance is never easy, it is an essential element for over-
coming crises.
Some of the enduring strategies that can be adopted for flowing along
with the endurance characteristic of the Chinese were identified by Chu
(1992). These are:
G
Give up struggling
G
Allow a solution to make itself clear
G
Work through agony and grief
G
Do not display your vulnerability
G
Let the dark night pass
G
Be inactive to conquer chaos
G
Live your life as if it were someone else’s.
Discussion
The background of the Thick Black Theory and its subsequent extension
into the Thick Face, Black Heart doctrine espoused by Chu (1988, 1992)
was described above to link them to the current business context. It is
hoped that a clear explanation of how the Chinese mind functions has
been made possible. Thus, we have explained the characteristics of the
Chinese people from the deceptive, mysterious and spiritual perspec-
tives, and both theory and doctrine suggest that a working knowledge
of their respective principles would be beneficial for managers ventur-
ing into China.
Having been peppered with numerous hardships throughout the his-
tory of China, the Chinese people have developed within themselves
the endurance for hard work, pain and suffering. This enduring charac-
teristic of the Chinese people has, inevitably shifted into the market-
place. Therefore, in dealing with the Chinese, it is suggested that people
from the West should at least pace their own level of endurance against
that of the Chinese. Instead of counteracting endurance with impa-
tience, people from the West must learn to flow along with the endur-
ing characteristic of the Chinese people. Thick Face, Black Heart is, after
all, about the state of the mind.

Conclusions
This study is an attempt to understand the mind of the present-day
Chinese people from a historical perspective. All too often, the Chinese
way of thinking has been assumed to be confined within a single para-
digm – the Confucian perspective. While it may be true that the Chinese
mind is influenced to a very large extent by Confucian teachings and
philosophies, this is not the only conceptual paradigm within which a
satisfactory understanding of the Chinese mind should be garnered.
That approach is perhaps too simplistic. While Lee Zhong Wu’s Thick
Black Theory provides a better framework to understand how the
Chinese mind thinks and works, it does not explain how its concepts
came about – except for the fact that these evolved from the tumultous
period the author lived through during the early 1900s in China. While
the difficult times could have accounted for Lee Zhong Wu’s interpreta-
tions leading to the Thick Black Theory, it could not account for the other
major events that occurred over the last 2500 years of Chinese civiliza-
tion. During this time, the early major thinkers and philosophers aptly
put their thoughts to paper (and bamboo strips) to be passed down from
one generation to another to exert influence upon the Chinese mind –
either subtly or overtly. Apart from the teachings of Confucius which
have already been examined so many times before by scholars both from
the East and West, this study has presented two other major works – 
Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching and Sun Tzu’s Art of War – to illustrate what had
transpired and had been passed down from ancient China concurrently
with Confucian teaching. While this chapter deals only with Lao Tzu and
Sun Tzu, this is not to say that they (and Confucius) are the only 
significant thinkers and strategists hailing from ancient China. There
are also other notable strategic thinkers such as Zhuge Liang who con-
tributed the Art of Management (Low and Lee, 1997) as well as Tao
Zhugong who provided the Golden Rules For Business Management (Low,
2000). The need to encapsulate various strands of thinking and philoso-
phies into a single treatise was long recognized by the Chinese, for
example, the 36 Chinese Classical Strategies of War was compiled into 
a single volume to encompass all warfare strategies that were used 
in ancient China, and which are found to be still relevant today for
modern day retail business (Low, 1998). This chapter therefore consid-
ers the approach to gaining an understanding of the Chinese mind from
a historical perspective-suggesting it can only be seen as a multi-faceted
and not a unitary approach. The thrust of this hypothesis is shown in
Figure 5.1.
102
Sui Pheng Low

The Chinese mind, as postulated in the center of Figure 5.1, is sub-
jected to constant internal and external turmoil and hardships as
recorded by history. Along the way, the Chinese mind is exposed to dif-
ferent strategic thinking and philosophies, which manifested them-
selves according to the events of the day throughout the history of
China. As these thoughts and philosophies were passed down from one
generation to another, either through self-learning or taught and exam-
ined in schools, they were absorbed – to be internalized within the
Chinese mind. There is, firstly, a desire to act in a gentlemanly manner
and to engross oneself with life-long learning as advocated by
Confucius. There is also a concurrent desire to be in harmony with
nature and to look upon emptiness as the Tao or way to happiness and
fulfillment. In essence, the Chinese mind is taught to be compassionate
and righteous. But, alas, this was not to be the case given the internal
strife and civil wars between rival feudal warlords that the Chinese peo-
ple have had to endure throughout history. The Chinese mind, as nur-
tured within the realms of Confucius and Lao Tzu, was shattered into
thinking differently following the bad experience of cruelty, suffering
Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
103
The Chinese
Mind
Good versus Evil
External turmoil
and hardships
Internal turmoil
and hardships
1990s–present day
Historical perspective
Lee
Zhong
Wu’s
Thick
Black
Theory
Thick
Face,
Black
Heart
The
Future
(?)
Confucius’
teachings
Lau Tzu’s
Tao Te Ching
Sun Tzu’s
Art of War 
Plus other notable Chinese
philosophers and strategists:
Zhuge Liang, Tao Zhugong, etc
36 Chinese
Classical
Strategies of War
Figure 5.1
Understanding the Chinese mind from a historical perspective

and loss arising from internal strife and the civil wars. Wars were often
fought and won by feudal warlords at all costs and without any recourse
to civility and gentlemanly manners. Deception and treachery were
often adopted to fight and win battles. Faced with this heart-wrenching
reality, the positive aspects of the Chinese mind as nurtured in the mold
of Confucius and Lao Tzu can no longer hold their ground. The mind
begins to flicker, sway and strategize. As Sun Tzu so aptly put it, the hall-
mark of a great general is not in him winning the war. Instead, the true
hallmark of a great general lies in him winning the war without going
into battle. To do this, Sun Tzu advocates that it is necessary for one to
know one’s own strengths and weaknesses as opposed to those of the
enemy’s. Over time, the 36 Chinese Classical Strategies of War recorded
strategies such as “Borrowing a knife to kill someone,” “Crossing the sea
under camouflage,” “Beauty trap,” and so on (Low, 1998). The “pure”
mind of the Chinese following that of Confucius and Lao Tzu, it seems,
is now undermined and placed in a dilemma!
On the one hand, the Chinese mind wants to embrace fairness and
equity (in today’s terms). On the other hand, there is a pull towards
guarding and protecting one’s own self-interests through deception and
ruthless strategies and tactics. Hence, Lee Zhong Wu’s Thick Black Theory
and its interpretation for the modern day Thick Face, Black Heart practi-
tioner by Chu (1992) appears to be justified. There remains a conflict in
the Chinese mind as to the choice between “good” (as manifested
through the teachings of Confucius and Lao Tzu) and “evil” (as mani-
fested through Sun Tzu’s Art of War and Lee Zhong Wu’s Thick Black
Theory). Many of the thoughts associated with these teachings and
philosophies are now internalized in the mind of the modern Chinese
today, and one hears of constant references to these teachings in every-
day life. Examples such as “knowing oneself and the enemy to win every
battle (Sun Tzu’s Art of War)” and “Empty city ploy (36 Chinese Classical
Strategies of War),” as well as Taoism, continue to attract a large follow-
ing from Chinese communities, including Chinese sojourners outside
China.
However, this internalization is gradually being eroded as electronic
communications and mass media technology become increasingly
accessible to the Chinese – even in remote parts of mainland China. The
advent of satellite television and the Internet, as the “global village,”
suggests that western influence will now influence the Chinese mind
and its way of thinking, although the extent of this influence on the
internalization process as described above is still relatively unknown.
There are also other major events and developments in recent times that
104
Sui Pheng Low

have given China an added boost to its stature on the world platform.
Favorable events, such as the return of Hong Kong and Macau to China,
by the United Kingdom and Portugal respectively may further reinforce
the Chinese mind into thinking that its developments arising from 
its cultural/historical heritage are still intact, and that China is not 
a pushover after all. Its large population base, its growing economic
prowess in the region and beyond, as well as its increasingly sophisti-
cated military machinery may yet condition the Chinese people to
reject the internalized mode of historical thinking described in this study.
How the Chinese mind will evolve in the future, in the light of these
recent phenomena, remains a question which only time can tell.
References
Chan, W. T. (1963) The Way of Lao Tzu. Tao Te Ching, New York: The Bobbs-Merrill
Company Inc.
Chu, C. N. (1988) The Chinese Mind Game. The Best Kept Trade Secret of the East,
Oregon: AMC Publishing.
Chu, C. N. (1992) Thick Face, Black Heart. The Path to Thriving, Winning and
Succeeding, Oregon: AMC Publishing.
Dollinger, M. J. (1988) Confucian ethics and Japanese management practices.
Journal of Business Ethics 7: 575–84.
Heider, J. (1992) The Tao of Leadership. Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching Adapted for a New
Age, Kuala Lumpur: Eastern Dragon Book.
Kidd, J. B. (2001) Discovering inter-cultural perceptual differences in MNEs.
Journal of Managerial Psychology, Special Issue on Asian Management Style,
16(2): 106–26.
Knutt, E. (1997) China: building the economic miracle, Building 7: 18–23.
Lau, D. C. (1963) Lao Tzu. Tao Te Ching, London: Penguin Books.
Lee, K. Y. (1998) When contract marks start of talk. The Straits Times 6 January
1998, p. 2.
Leung, T. K. P. and Wong, Y. H. (2001) The ethics and positioning of guanxi in
China. Marketing Intelligence and Planning 19(1): 55–64.
Low, S. P. (1997) Thick Face, Black Heart and the marketing of construction serv-
ices in China. Marketing Intelligence and Planning 15(5): 221–6.
Low, S. P. (1998) Applying the 36 Chinese Classical Strategies of War for retail 
marketing and planning. Marketing Intelligence and Planning 16(2): 124–35.
Low, S. P. (2000) An East–West business management framework for construction
based on anecdotal cases from “Building” magazine. The Malaysian Surveyor
35(2): 69–77.
Low, S. P. and Lee, B. (1997) Management grid and Zhuge Liang’s Art of
Management: Integration for construction project management. Management
Decision 35(5): 382–91.
Low, S. P. and Yeo, K. K. (1993) Sun Tzu’s Art of War and its strategic relevance for
construction project management, RICS Research Paper Series, Paper No. 20,
London: Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Understanding the Mind of the Chinese
105

Man, C. F. and Cheng, C. Y. (1996) The Chinese Guanxiology, Institute of Asian
Pacific Studies, Chinese University of Hong Kong (in Chinese).
Speece, M. (2001) Guest Editorial, Journal of Managerial Psychology, Special Issue
on Asian Management Style, 16(2): 1–10.
Tsai, C. C. (1989) The Silence of the Wise. The Sayings of Lao Zi, Singapore: Asiapac
Publication.
106
Sui Pheng Low

6
The Competitive Advantage with
Chinese Characteristics – The
Sophisticated Choreography of 
Gift-Giving
Matti Nojonen
Introduction
Every firm has a competitive strategy, whether explicit or implicit, that
is employed to gain a competitive advantage over competitors. In the
malfunctioning market and institutional environment of China, more
often than not, the competitive edge is gained through extensive per-
sonal connections (guanxi). Gift-giving is perhaps the most consequen-
tial method in creating and employing guanxi. On many occasions
gift-giving is simply associated with bribing and corruption. However,
this chapter illustrates that by approaching the ethically loaded and yet
theoretically and, by definition, controversial issue of corruption from a
gift-giving approach one is able to unearth the complicated logic, risks
and advantages involved in Chinese business networks. Based on ethno-
graphic data, this chapter attempts to provide an insider point of view on
the complex mechanisms of gift-giving in Chinese businesses. It shows
that, in expanding and utilizing guanxi networks in the increasingly com-
petitive environment, Chinese businessmen are actively competing with
each other by differentiating their gifts in the most imaginative ways,
thus forming a hidden marketplace of gifts. The emphasis is laid on illus-
trating the prerequisite and exacting choreography, social mechanisms
and logic of action of various forms of gift-giving practices, namely 
‘ordinary business gift’, ‘hand-grenades and machine guns’ and ‘guided
missiles’ as gifts, that take place behind the cloak of visible network-
ing (guanxi). This chapter attempts to avoid the definitional pitfalls of 
corruption by approaching the issue from a gift-giving perspective. 
107

This enables one not only to depict how, in the marketplace of gifts,
agents seek competitive advantage over each other by deploying correct
social behaviour, choosing the right gift; but also in the outcome, com-
plicate Bourdiue’s notion of time in gift-giving (Bourdieu, 1990).
Why observe gift-giving and not corruption?
Contemporary research and the Press converge and point out that
Chinese society operates through the realm of long-term and personal
relationships, that is, guanxi. The reforms in China have not managed
to create a reliable legal system. Thus, the officials still work in an arbi-
trary fashion, and so guanxi takes on an ever more important role as
agents attempt to minimize uncertainties in society, on the one hand.
Yet, on the other hand, guanxi is often seen as the root of corrupt prac-
tices in Chinese society. As a consequence, the Chinese themselves do
not comprehend guanxi simply as the root of corruption, but rather refer
to it in a more positivist manner as ‘the science’ or ‘the art’ of network-
ing – guanxixüe. The suffix -xüe connotes the English suffix -logy, like in
biology, which translates into Chinese as shengwuxüe.
Conducting an ethnographic fieldwork on gift-giving has certain
advantages over inquiring upon corruption practices directly. The study
of corruption is plagued with analytical and practical difficulties
(Chabal and Daloz, 1999). First, it is virtually impossible to agree on a
workable definition of corruption. Most studies on corruption analyse
the issue from a normative perspective. To discuss the issue in moral
terms based on our Western bureaucratic ideals, which we assume to be
universal, or to observe the question in other ethical terms that are not
analytically neutral: we not only risk distorting observations of the 
phenomena, but we are also unlikely to further our understanding of
how Chinese society is actually functioning. Second, it is difficult to
empirically observe deeds of corruption in a scientifically meaningful
way. This is particularly so in the case of China. In China, the judicial
system is mercilessly dealing with corruption, even carrying out capital
punishment, so the inquiry into the actual practices of corruption
becomes indubitably infeasible. As a consequence, most of the studies
on corruption in China deal with the question at the macro-level, with-
out paying attention to the actual processes of bribing or of corruption.
Furthermore, there is a tendency to concentrate attention on the wrong-
doings at the top, or among the princelings of the Communist leaders
(Goodman and Hooper, 1994).
108
Matti Nojonen

Hence, in order to avoid the obstacles of observing the actual practices
and the definitional problems of corruption that can result in ethical,
normative and judicial confusion, this study will approach the issue of
corruption from the gift-giving angle and thus avoid ethical and nor-
mative judgements. Furthermore, it is notable that in collecting the
data, interviewing Chinese businessmen on their personal guanxi expe-
riences, the interviewees themselves did not utilize, in their narratives,
words relating to bribing (xinghui) or corruption (fubai), or any other
words connoting corruption. This may be due to the harsh judicial pun-
ishments on crimes of corruption. Instead, their narration captured
elaborate tactics and vocabulary recapitulating the choreography of gift-
giving, thus providing descriptions of the logic and practice of the com-
monly used categories of gifts in the Chinese business world, namely
‘ordinary business-gifts’, ‘hand-grenades and machine guns’ and ‘guided
missiles’ as gifts.
Conceptual background
Gifts
Gifts, gift-giving, and exchange have been a frequent topic of inquiry
within the field of anthropology. Recently, gifts and gift-giving have also
interested other disciplines of social science and humanities (Schrift,
1997; Hendry, 1993). Marcel Mauss first addressed the problematic issue
of the gift in his work Essai sur le don (1924) in which he theorized on
the gift. According to Mauss’ thesis, gifts appear free and disinterested,
but in reality they are obliged and interested. Namely, gifts are parts of
persons. Hence, donors do not separate themselves from their gifts com-
pletely, and recipients do not own them totally, since recipients are still
bound by obligation to the donor. Levi-Strauss (1997) further explicated
Mauss’ thesis of the gift by presenting a three-part structural analysis of
gift-giving – giving, receiving and reciprocating.
Based on the theory of practice, Bourdieu (1990, 1997) generates a
thesis, on gifts, which departs from Mauss’ phenomenological and Levi-
Strauss’ structuralist theories on gifts. In his thesis, Bourdieu focuses on
the theme of time, specifically on the time lag between gift and coun-
tergift. According to Bourdieu, ‘in every society it may be observed that,
if it is not to constitute an insult, the countergift must be deferred and
different, because the immediate return of an exactly identical object
clearly amounts to a refusal’ (Bourdieu, 1997: 198). Yet, the delaying or
neglecting to respond can be interpreted in various ways, to be a signal
of refusal, arrogance, cowardice and entailing dishonour (Bourdieu,
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
109

1997: 238). Hence, Bourdieu recognizes an important factor that agents
manipulate – time.
In this chapter, the theory of gift follows the basic logic presented by
Mauss, where the seemingly disinterested object of gift is never totally
separate from the donor, not is it ever totally owned by the receiver.
Combining this psychological insight of Mauss with the three-phase
structural analysis of the gift-giving process: giving, receiving and recip-
rocating the gift, presented by Levi-Strauss, does not only enable us to
illustrate, to bring into life the process of gift-giving in this study, but
also creates an illuminating and yet simple theory of the gift-giving
process. However, gift-giving is not purely a mechanistic process of 
giving and receiving, which then simply binds the agent to reciprocate,
as is put forward by Mauss 1997. In fact, in the process of gift-giving,
agents manipulate resources and circumstances, adapt personal style
and charm and control time.
A gift, in this study, is understood to be a physical object which in the
process of giving and receiving incorporates an additional psychologi-
cal dimension that binds the receiver to reciprocate towards the donor,
and in this process both the donor and the receiver bring into play the
whole repertoire of collectively shared and created tacit and conversant
knowledge and manipulate time in an attempt to achieve a favourable
outcome. In contemporary China, an asymmetric power difference
between arbitrary state officials and the subject, institutional insecurity
and potential to enrich oneself, create an urge for the subject to estab-
lish a personal relationship with the official, and gift-giving is a legiti-
mate and traditional pattern of doing it.
Guanxi and gifts
The importance of guanxi in Chinese society is evident. Scholars who
study the business culture (Redding, 1990), business systems (Whitley,
1994) or the institutional arrangements of the Chinese economy (Nee,
1992; Boisot and Child, 1999) illustrate the relationships between firms
and markets, and how the legitimacy of the institutional environment
conditions agents to create and rely on guanxi. Moreover, the affects 
of guanxi have been vividly studied. Luo and Chen (1997) illustrate how
guanxi affect financial outcomes, Tsang (1998) elaborates on the rela-
tionship between guanxi and competitive advantage, Davies et al. (1995)
research the market benefits of guanxi, and recently Luo and Park (2001)
have described the impact of guanxi on firm performance.
Scholars have unquestionably revealed the central function of guanxi-
connections in Chinese society and market transactions. Due to the
110
Matti Nojonen

highly volatile institutional environment, agents ‘share a high level of
engagement in transactional networks based on relational contracting’
(Boisot and Child, 1999: 622). The dynamics of this ‘network capitalism’
is based on the ‘networked relations based on interpersonal reciprocal
obligations’ (ibid: 612). According to scholars, guanxi constitutes a key
strategic factor affecting firm performance and is one of the major
dynamics in Chinese society (Redding, 1990). Guanxi is the key deter-
minant of business success in China: as Luo and Park (2001: 457) point
out ‘in China, transactions often follow successful guanxi, while in the
West a relationship follows successful transactions’. In addition, mar-
keting people have found the concept of guanxi important, especially in
regard to relationship marketing (Wong and Chan, 1999).
Given the amount of research done on guanxi, it is striking to note
that the great bulk of academic work done by management scholars on
China is focused on describing the reasons causing guanxi, or the possi-
ble effects of guanxi on businesses. This must be contrasted against how
little scholarly attention has been paid to divulge the actual complexi-
ties and social manoeuvres, whether it be gift-giving or bribing. This
study attempts to illustrate that establishing and cultivating a success-
ful guanxi-connection is not a straightforward and simple act, but a com-
plex and resource-consuming process, more often than not involving
the complexities of gift-giving.
The Chinese society is a network/relationship-based society (guanxi
benwei shehui). Fei Xiaotong (1991), the pioneer of Chinese sociology,
depicted the Chinese society by the analogy of concentric circles, like
ripples of waves inside each other. The individual and his/her family
form the core of the rings. The ripples around the core form a structure
of various relationships. The relationships that exist at the distant rip-
ples are plagued by low trust and instrumentality. Conversely, relation-
ships at the ripple boundaries close to the core are more trusted and
emotionally laden. When a situation arises that is beyond one’s own
capacity, guanxi strings are pulled to accomplish the desired results (Fei,
1991; Liang, 1999).
Guanxi is tightly bound together with the concept of face (mianzi),
best understood as social capital, which can be lost, protected and
enlarged in guanxi interaction. Interacting within the guanxi network,
agents pay attention to giving face to others, and paradoxically, by 
giving face to the other people one gains face oneself. Hence, the key
rule of dynamics and smoothness of guanxi interaction is the impor-
tance of sustaining one’s own face by giving face to the other party
(Huang, 1988).
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
111

Agents carry out the pulling of strings, creating or cultivating guanxi,
through providing a renqing. The word renqing has three meanings –
‘gift’, ‘human feelings’ and ‘favour’. When Chinese people establish or
cultivate guanxi they literally mobilize renqing (zuo yige renqing), which
can be translated either as ‘to give a gift’, or as ‘to do a favour’. Further-
more, the expression of ‘owing a renqing’ (qian yige renqing) is frequently
used in the Chinese language. The Chinese art of gift-giving or provid-
ing a favour embodies a strong indigenous idea of reciprocity (bao) and
striving to maintain balance in the interpersonal flow of gifts and recip-
rocal favours. ‘Face’ is the guarantor in the process of ensuring eventual
reciprocation of the renqing. In failing to reciprocate properly, one might
endanger one’s own face, and on the other hand, reciprocating gives
face to the actor (Huang, 1988).
In addition, the expression of ‘not understanding renqing’ (ta bu dong
renqing) refers to a person who is poor in managing interpersonal rela-
tionships, thus being socially handicapped. This kind of person lacks the
necessary social skills of expanding and cultivating guanxi; being uncul-
tivated to provide favours and gifts and thus being unable to weave peo-
ple into a durable web of dependence. At worst, this kind of person can
be accused of ‘not having any renqingweir’, literarily the ‘flavour of
human feelings’. In that case he/she is lacking a sense of humanity and
basic human feelings – being a non-human. In other words, in inter-
personal relationships, one needs not only to have renqingweir, but more
importantly one needs to exchange renqing – gifts and/or favours
(Huang, 1988).
According to Lovett et al. (1999) ‘…guanxi is a relationship in which
the participants quickly begin to cement their ties through exchange of
respect and affection, as well as material objects or specific favours’.
Hence, gift-giving as a part of networking practices possesses strategic
importance in the increasingly competitive environment of the Chinese
market; therefore it is worth the attention that ought to be given to it.
However, due to linguistic differences, the separation of gifts from favours
is not that straightforward in China. It is intriguing to note that while in
the Germanic languages the contemporary words ‘present’ and ‘poison’
derive from a common etymological word – ‘the gift’ – the Chinese words
for gift all share positive connotations. The word renqing constitutes two
characters; ren a man, human being; and qing feeling, sentiment, affection
and favour. Tentatively reasoning, due to the ambiguous meaning of 
renqing, human feeling, favour and gift, the Chinese are not drawing and
creating a strong polarisation between gifts and favours, which is in con-
trast to the Occidental notion of reciprocating a gift with another gift.
112
Matti Nojonen

Chinese people are more flexible in reciprocating gifts and favours. In
social interaction, one can often hear the Chinese say ‘song ge renqing’,
which can be understood as ‘to give a gift’, ‘to give a favour’ or ‘give a
piece of human feeling’.
However, there are two other words for gift in the Chinese language;
lipin and liwu, both sharing positive connotations. Namely, the charac-
ter li in both words has the meaning of ‘a ceremony, ritual’, ‘etiquette’,
‘gift’, while pin and wu stand for ‘an article, a product’ and ‘a thing, mat-
ter’ respectively. Hence, li shares the meanings of showing the correct
etiquette, ceremonial ritual in offering the gift. Even more importantly,
li is one of the central Confucian concepts, through which one can
become a superior man and control the society. The Chinese society was
kept in order through institutional forms of rituals, ceremonies and
offerings (li), which were carried out in families, religious rites and social
and political life. The most powerful ministry in Imperial China was the
Ministry of Rites (Moore, 1967).
Even today, Chinese people show great aptitude in providing ‘tradi-
tional’ ritual gifts. When Chinese people provide ritual gifts it is possi-
ble to observe how agents reproduce the models and perceptions of
proper social conduct. They carry out, in what seems to a foreigner, a
well-orchestrated social play involving offering the gift by two hands, in
some cases raising the present above one’s own head, whilst if standing
bowing (jugong), or if sitting kowtowing (ketou), a bow of the head or
deeper bow by the upper part of the body. This performance is not
meant to show subordination, but rather it is a means of expressing
respect (jingyi) in a traditional form (Kipnis, 1997).
Gifts are provided as a ritual on the occasions of birthdays, funerals,
national festivals, on a child’s 100-day birthday, and for graduations and
so on. The ritualized gift exchange provides a practical means not only
to map one’s guanxi network, but also to scan the motives of donors.
‘Mapping’ is the common phenomenon by which the Chinese people
measure their own and other’s social fame by the number and kind of
gifts received. ‘Scanning’ refers to the practice whereby, in providing a
ritualized gift, it is common that the donor writes his/her own name on
the gift, thus making it clear who bought the gift. Thus, when the
receiver receives an exceptionally valuable or desired gift he/she knows
to whom he/she should direct gratitude and counter-favours (Yan, 1996;
Kipnis, 1997).
In summary, one can state that the economic and social reforms in
China (re)generate not only the institutional conditioning conditions,
perceptions and practices of guanxi activities (Nee, 1992; Boisot and
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
113

Child, 1999), but also produce and reproduce the blossoming of gift-
giving (Kipnis, 1997; Wank, 1999). In other words, the contemporary
political, social and institutional environment of China conditions
agents to rely on and create circumstances that allows them to expand
their guanxi networks. In this process, gift-giving has proved to be the
most common and effective method. As gifts are never separated from
the donor, gift-giving connects two agents together with a sentiment,
which the Chinese refer to as renqing, and as/when gifts are reciprocated.
Thus, the whole process of gift-giving weaves neatly together past, pres-
ent and future, forming a dyadic guanxi tie. In a similar fashion, the li
(gift, ritual, etiquette) in Confucian China was the actual manifestation
of the most important social contract that secured social stability, pro-
vided continuity of the past, content to the present, and predictability
to the future for individuals and society, that is, the whole process of
being a human and more precisely, a Chinese.
As the reforms have gathered pace without notably changing the arbi-
trariness of the state officials, agents have developed their gift-giving
practices and expanded their gift-giving networks in the most imagina-
tive manners. In the following analysis, indigenous categories of gifts
are introduced; and it is illustrated how these gifts are given, received,
reciprocated and what role time plays in the process. The data will show
that, in addition to the importance of the time lapse between gift and
countergift (Bourdieu, 1977, 1990), the mastering of the timing of gift-
giving also plays a crucial role in a successful gift-giving process.
Gifts in the contemporary Chinese business world
The competitive advantage of the Chinese market is achieved through
efficient management of guanxi, and gifts possess an essential function
in establishing and utilising guanxi networks. In expanding guanxi net-
works in an increasingly competitive environment that is plagued by
institutional insecurity, the Chinese have developed elaborate tactics
and vocabulary describing the choreography of gift-giving. In this chap-
ter, the descriptions of the logic and practice of the commonly used 
categories of gifts in the Chinese business world are provided, namely
‘ordinary business gifts’, ‘hand-grenades and machine guns’ and ‘guided
missiles’.
Ordinary business gifts
Ordinary business gifts refer to the small presents that are exchanged
during the first encounter with a potential client or business partner.
114
Matti Nojonen

These gifts are most commonly non-expensive ‘small things’ (xiao dongxi)
such as pens, calendars, watches, or some other decorative small items
that have been labeled with the company name. These gifts are provided
as signals of goodwill and to promote the image of the company.
There seems to exist a commonly shared understanding of when one
should be prepared to provide the ordinary business gift. However, it is
common that agents depart from these rules of the thumb. As was stated
by a salesman working in Shanghai, ‘I have always with me some gifts
in case someone gives me a small gift (xiao lipin). It is not comfortable
to receive a gift without being able to return a gift. However, in these
days it is not common that businessmen give gifts to each other when
they meet for the first time’. However, after the interviewee continued
to elaborate on the nature of gift-giving, he stated that if you have
invited a person to visit your own company it is ‘civilized to provide a
gift for him visiting our company’. This statement confirms my personal
experience of the practice of receiving and exchanging gifts when visit-
ing Chinese companies for the first time.
If the companies are located far away from each other, like in differ-
ent cities, there seems to be an unwritten rule that both parties are pre-
pared to provide gifts during their first encounter. Usually, in this case,
parties have been negotiating with each other through phone and fax
and thus have formed a basis of familiarity with each other prior to the
first meeting. As one interviewee noted, ‘It is a question of hospitality
and respect. It is important to express renqing. I take them out to eat
local food and give them small gifts to make them feel at ease’.
Furthermore, it is necessary to be prepared to give a gift when 
management-level personnel meet for the first time, either to negotiate
or to conclude a deal. Especially, if people meet to sign a contract, the
gift-giving is a highly ritualized action that is carefully carried out in 
a transparent manner. Rituals regulate the gift-giving process, courtesy,
speeches and toasting followed by counter-speeches, gifts and toasting,
making the eulogies appear to continue without an end. For these kinds
of occasions, an ordinary business gift is carefully chosen. It should 
be valuable, but not too valuable, so that it is clearly distinguished from
a bribe.
In Western business guides on China a lot of attention has been given
to the etiquette of gift-giving and wrapping of the gifts. According to the
business guides, the gift should be beautifully wrapped in red paper.
Furthermore, opening the gift in front of the donor should be avoided
as the act signals greed and material lust, rather than showing inter-
est in the person who gave the gift. However, based on my data and
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
115

observations, the ordinary business gifts are not wrapped anymore, but
are offered in red-cloth decorated storage-boxes, and the boxes are
opened in front of the donor and other people. In inquiring further into
this habit, business people explained that they, as well as the state offi-
cials, were careful not to accept anything too valuable in front of other
people. Receiving an expensive gift in public was hazardous, and it was
avoided. State officials and representatives of state-owned companies
(SOE), on the one hand, did not like to end up in a judicially risky situ-
ation, while on the other hand, they avoided the entrapment of falling
into a reciprocal debt to the donor.
The social practice of exchanging ordinary business gifts has been sub-
ject to change. Not only is the role and function of providing gifts evolv-
ing, but also the etiquette of gift-giving, wrapping and opening the gifts
is changing. The development of domestic production of consumption
products, eventual explosion of cheap mammon coinciding with the ris-
ing incomes combined with the institutional practice of gift-giving have
inevitably undermined the possibility of generating true renqing – the
feeling of indebtedness and gratitude – with the ordinary business gift.
And yet, even as the local businessmen all share a collective under-
standing of the deflated nature of the ordinary business gift, one should
still be ready to reciprocate ‘ordinary gifts’ at any moment.
Under these circumstances, in minimising the time-gap between
receiving and reciprocating the ordinary business gift one cannot expect
to receive a ‘deferred or different’ counter-gift. The immediate return of
an identical small item (xiao dongxi) is an important signal of courtesy,
respect expressed in the process of maintaining one’s own face and to
avoid causing the loss of the other party’s face. Contrasting Bourdieu’s
(1997) thinking of ‘swapping’ of identical gifts ‘amounts to a refusal’ or
‘insult’, the exchange of identical gifts in China is a highly ritualized
social action which generates collectively shared meaning and creates 
a string of commonality between two agents. More importantly, the
exchange of small business gifts does not only lay the first cornerstone
of the successful business, but eventually is the first stepping stone in
the escalating competitive exchange of renqing in Chinese business.
‘Hand-grenades’ and ‘machine-guns’
As the reforms and economic development have deflated the potential
of ‘ordinary business gifts’ to generate true feelings of gratitude, and
thus have changed the basic logic of gift-giving into a ritual of courtesy,
agents have invented new categories of gifts. These new categories of
gifts are colloquially called ‘grenades’ (shouliudan) and ‘machine-guns’
116
Matti Nojonen

(jiguangqiang), commonly referring to the brand-name of liqueur and
ten-packs of cigarettes, respectively.
The logic of these ‘armament’ gifts – the establishment of familiarity
with the other party, correct timing of giving, receiving, and reciprocat-
ing the gift, departs from the function and logic of the ordinary busi-
ness gift. In contrast to ordinary business gifts, ‘armature’ gifts are not
provided as an act of courtesy, but are already calculated, carefully
manipulated social and economic actions aimed at gaining competitive
advantage over competitors by successfully generating a strong feeling
of renqing debt and eventually, of receiving a favourable countergift or
service.
The peculiar militarist names for these gifts derive from the actual
function of the gifts. These gifts are used to dig foxholes or to win over
an insider (neiburen) in the other party’s organisation. With the help of
these foxholes or insiders, companies gain information, licenses or make
important shortcuts in the red-tape processes. They eventually establish
long-term strategic friendship relationships, thus gaining competitive
advantages over their competitors in the malfunctioning Chinese mar-
ket. It is not surprising then that companies exert much effort in devel-
oping this kind of relationships.
However, as the names of the armament gifts indicate, charging
trenches is always risky, takes time, consumes resources, and creates a
demand for certain skills. As one interviewee, a man in his late 40s, stated
about the competitive forces of the ‘armament gift’, ‘What can you do?
Our competitors do it – we have to do it. It takes a lot of time and gives
a lot of headache. You see, people are different, companies are different.
What is working in one company, does not work in another company.
There is no pattern in this’. The interviewees shared a collective under-
standing on the necessity of competing in the marketplace of armament
gifts. Furthermore, there seems to be a clear difference between people
working in SOEs and other sectors of the economy. Interviewees stated in
a convergent fashion, that individuals working for government organiza-
tions took advantage of their position, and were reluctant to co-operate
without receiving face, attention and renqing.
Despite the difference between different sectors of the economy, the
crucial question is how to know to whom to give this kind of gift.
Interviewees informed that some of the potential receivers themselves
indicate their needs by demanding certain presents for counter-favours;
so saying they referred to officials or clerks working in the state sector.
Most of the businessmen disdained themselves and did not trust this
kind of person. Some indicated their interest in more indirect ways by
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
117

hiding their appeal in other forms of signals. The most commonly used
signal is to tell that ‘we need to do some research (yanjiu yanjiu) before
any action is carried out’. However, yanjiu yanjiu has a homonym, in cig-
arettes (yan) and alcohol (jiu), hence agents indicate in an indirect direct
way the need to provide tobacco, liqueur and entertainment.
The actual competitive challenge and risk in offering the ‘armament
gift’ arises from identifying the right person and creating ideal circum-
stances where the gift receiver has difficulties in refusing to accept the
gift. The circumstances have changed and become more complicated
from the late 1980s and early 1990s when it was rather common to estab-
lish an ‘insider’ relationship with the car drivers (company chauffeurs).
As the economic reforms began in the early 1980s, government depart-
ments and SOEs rushed to purchase imported Japanese and Western cars.
However, there was still a shortage of good drivers. Consequently, driv-
ers were treated with special care and they even participated in banquets
and dinners together with the people they were transporting. Hence,
drivers were strategically situated in the organization. Furthermore, 
as was stated by an interviewee, ‘When have you ever seen a driver 
who does not smoke? All you need to do is to ask someone from your
company, like your own driver or someone else, first to talk, chit-chat
(liaotiaor), to give face and express renqing. Only after this can one give
the cigarettes’. However, since that epoch, the social status of drivers has
decreased and they are not invited to dinners or banquets anymore, but
rather wait in the vicinity of their cars. According to the interviewees
the importance of drivers as insiders has decreased in recent years. Even
so, drivers are still often invited to dine with little demarcation between
a social or business meal: yet, conversely are often excluded from par-
ticipating in a meal and thus be deprived of insider information. What
determines this decision – to include or exclude – seems to depend on
the political (one’s rank) as well as the social levels (the driver may be
assigned as a bodyguard, for example).
Gender also plays an important role in establishing foxholes in the
other party’s organization. If the guanxi target is a man, it is advisable to
send a woman to deal with him. This is done in accordance with a tra-
ditional Chinese expression ‘even the hero has difficulties in dealing
with a beauty’ (yingxiong nanguo meiren guan). On the contrary, if the
guanxi target is an older woman it is advisable to send a younger man
to deal with her. In addition, young women feel less constrained talking
to other young women, but it is not smart to send a young woman to
soften up an older woman (Yang, 1994: 83). As was stated by an inter-
viewee, ‘We knew that the secretary of the official was a young woman
118
Matti Nojonen

so we asked one young woman from our department to go over to 
handle the affair’. However, providing a bottle of brandy or ten-pack of
cigarettes for a woman would overstep the bounds of decency in con-
temporary China, therefore women are instead given DVD movies and
free-of-charge beauty parlour sessions, among other things.
In addition to age and gender, individual character also plays an
important role in establishing a successful preliminary contact and there-
after being able to advance with the gift, if necessary. Some individuals
have an eye for reading people and circumstances better than others, 
as was illustrated in a group interview with two Chinese businessmen, 
Mr Yü and Mr Ma, working for the same company. Mr Yü, working in the
finance department, in referring to his friend Mr Ma, mentioned that he
was extremely good at establishing guanxi with people. He characterized
Mr Ma as ‘very experienced in generating renqing’ (renqing lianda). Mr Ma
was working in the public relations (PR) department, where his responsi-
bility was to cultivate good relationships with government and munici-
pal agencies, mainly with the harbour authorities and customs officials.
According to Mr Ma, it is extremely difficult to know to whom or how
to provide the ‘armament gift’. The only rule of the thumb is to spend
time together, to ‘shoot the breeze’ (liaotiao), generate and express ren-
qing by talking about things the other party likes, to take the other party
out to eat his/her favourite dishes and so on, while simultaneously
observing the other party’s reactions and signals. However, Mr Ma said
that he ‘could only feel, and not express himself in words’ (zhi ke yihui,
bu ke yanchuan) about how to identify the right signals, how to know
the right string to pull in various situations, and how to be successful in
charging the trenches. Even so, Mr Ma said that there were two other
things that were important for succeeding – ‘the more you have guanxi
the easier it is, and finally it is always a question of luck’. In contrast to
the ordinary business gift, the ‘armament gifts’ are not usually given in
front of other people.
It is important to generate circumstances where rejecting the offered
gift is difficult. One effective way is to intentionally create from the first
instance a relaxed atmosphere, spend time together, chat, and gradually
establish a ‘friendship’ relationship. As stated by Mr Ma ‘after one has
“shared the joys and sorrows” (tonggan gongku) it is difficult to refuse to
receive a gift’. In practice, this means that just before departing from the
joys of a long and ‘wet’ restaurant evening, one deliberately purchases 
a bottle of nice liqueur or brandy and then while leaving the restau-
rant gives it to the other party. In providing the bottle of liqueur the 
skilled gift-giver offers the gift to the other party in a contemplatively
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
119

disinterested and undeliberate manner playing down the importance of
the gift by bringing into play conventional cultural dispositions and
models stating that ‘this is just a small expression of renqing, please take
it’, while simultaneously, appealing to feelings, referring to friendship,
to the joyful time shared together and to future similar evenings that
they will spend together strengthening their friendship. Hence, the care-
ful choice and construction of the occasion together with seemingly
unintended and disinterested acts of gift-giving binds together the past
and the mutually shared joyful evening of the present. The emotional
construction of the social arena, and the future expectations, make it
harder for the receiver to turn down the gift.
The commonly used Chinese expression ‘eating from others makes your
mouth softer, taking from others makes your hand shorter’ (chi renjia zui
ruan, na renjia shou duan) illustrates the acme of timing and tactic involved
in the case described above. The first part of the expression describes a 
situation where after a nice banquet one has difficulty refusing the request
expressed by the other side. Hence, how much more difficult it is for the
guest who has been treated well to refuse the request of the host when the
host appeals the guest to receive the bottle, not as a gift but as a signal of
friendship, gratitude and time he had spent with the host?
In an attempt to simplify the logic of this process, let us imagine two
individuals, A the host, and B the donor – the guest and the receiver.
First, A entertains B, in other words gives renqing to B. Consequently, B,
after being the guest of honour, owes a renqing to A. Thus, B is psycho-
logically bound to reciprocate to A. However, when A appeals for the
reciprocal favour, A in effect asks B to accept his small gift, not as a gift,
but as a signal of gratitude, almost as a reciprocal favour for the time and
friendship A has shared with B. As A treated B in the restaurant, B owes
A a renqing favour. Therefore, B faces difficulties in rejecting the appeal
of A, subtly coated in expressions of gratitude. Nevertheless, by accept-
ing the gift, B does not balance his/her renqing debt to A because B has
now received a gift. Hence, A binds B even stronger into feelings of
indebtedness. In other words, B has entered the reality described in the
second part of the expression ‘taking from others makes your hand
shorter’. Hence, after receiving the gift B faces even more difficulties in
refusing to help A.
The need to rely on and expand guanxi networks, as in establishing
insider relations, creates a need for people who possess the qualifica-
tions needed for ‘working on guanxi’ (gao guanxi). Several interviewees
stated that people who were good in ‘working on guanxi’ usually worked
in the PR departments. In fact, business organizations in China are hit
120
Matti Nojonen

by the fashion of establishing PR departments, or as the Chinese say,
there is a ‘fever of public relations’ (gongguan re) in China (Pan, 1995:
197). However, the conventional notion of PR in China is purely related
to the notion of ‘working on guanxi’ with government departments.
Several interviewees stated that people who worked for PR departments
usually were male workers in their late 20s and early 30s, and that these
people were particularly skilled in ‘working on guanxi’. As a matter of
fact, these people had received their own nickname – ‘an artful slippery
fellow’ (huatou, or huatou huanao). Several interviewees referred in a less
respectful manner to PR people as ‘slick and sly’ (yuanhua).
Last but not the least important is the organization that one is 
dealing with. According to the interviewees, there is a great differ-
ence between bureaucrats and representatives of SOEs and the other 
sectors of the economy. Generally, the businessmen whom I interviewed
explained that the people working in the state-sector were ‘greedy and
always hungry’. Especially officials who were working in certain crucial
‘spots’ (quan dian) of control: for instance, controlling the licensing, or
people with special authority of supervision. Hence, in meeting with
government authorities agents were more prone to pick up the con-
cealed messages. Agents understand that these kinds of activities were
determined by the asymmetrical power relationship, which Walder
(1986) has discussed under the ‘patron–client relationship’ framework.
On the one hand, interviewees referred to this as ‘the power-economy’
(quanli jingji), which can create a lot of risks. Namely, there was a risk that
the representatives of SOEs or other government bureaucrats became
concierges blocking the way to information or to other important peo-
ple, while they expected to be treated favourably. As was stated by 
an interviewee, ‘You have to please them, but you never know whether
it will get you anywhere’. This is reminiscent of the Qing-dynasty
(1644–1911) practice where business people had to pay off at each stage
of the bureaucracy before being able to establish a relationship with 
people who possessed the real power (He, 1998: 127).
This practice is also known as ‘the exchanging power to money’ (quan
qian jiaoyi). On the other hand, interviewees stated that providing this
kind of ‘rather inexpensive gifts’ was an effective way of expressing ren-
qing. Furthermore, it is in line with the historical legacy of how mer-
chants worked with officials. As one interviewee stated, ‘it is the special
character of China that “officials thousand miles away are seeking
wealth” (qian li zuoguan wei qiu cai). You help them and they help you.
Of course it is wrong, but “the legal apparatus cannot punish the
masses” (fa bu ze zhong)’.
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
121

In addition, offering an armament gift is an effective means of gener-
ating the feeling of a renqing debt and is not directly considered a bribe.
As was stated by an interviewee, ‘paying back a debt of renqing is much
more difficult than paying back a debt of money, because you never
know how to count the monetary value of a renqing debt’. His statement
was in accordance with the commonly used expression ‘it is easy to pay
off the monetary debt, but difficult to pay off debt of renqing’ (qianzhai
hao huan, renqing zhai nan huan).
The development of competitive advantages is always a challenging
task. The enlargement of a guanxi network does not make an excep-
tion in this regard. Contrary to the conventional perception (Tung and
Yeung, 1996; Li, 1998; Luo and Chen, 1997) of the smooth expansion
of guanxi networks, the actual enlarging of one’s guanxi base is a chal-
lenging task usually involving the complicated ritual of gift-giving. In
providing the gift, several things need to be taken into consideration;
choosing the right person, gender, age, personal and professional qual-
ifications. Furthermore, the person has to bind his/her resources into
establishing, maintaining and cultivating the relationship, and has to be
capable of not only creating appropriate circumstances but also be able
to decide the timing of the gift-giving in such a manner that rejecting
the gift is difficult. It is also increasingly important to differentiate the
gift from competitors’ gifts. Hence, the competitive factor has forced 
the participants to develop even more delicate techniques in choosing
the gift object and timing the gift-giving. The ‘guided missiles’ as gifts
are an outcome of this competition.
‘Guided missiles’
The ‘guided missile’ (daodan) gift is the most complex and resource-
consuming pattern of gift-giving in the Chinese market. The actual
name ‘guided missile’ is not, at least to my knowledge, widely used. As
a matter of fact it was Mr Ma who used the category of ‘guided missile’
when he illustrated the fascinating complexities involved in the whole
process of choosing the target of the ‘missile’, deciding the gift object,
and deciding on the time and pattern of gift-giving.
A ‘guided missile’ should be of special importance and value for the
receiver, who has been identified in advance. The gift item can be any-
thing that people collect and subjectively appreciate; traditional deco-
rative stones, stamps, minority people shoes, an art book, a traditional
painting and so on. It can also be a personal favour – basically anything
that is believed to generate a strong feeling of renqing. However, it is not
122
Matti Nojonen

a prerequisite to know the person in advance. Nevertheless, it is impor-
tant to find out his/her desires and hobbies, which are then made use
of in the gift-giving process. Hence, before one is able to provide the gift,
it is necessary to carry out ‘pre-networking’, identifying the right person
and finding the correct gift for him or her. As a matter of fact, gather-
ing information begins from the first encounter with the other party. In
this process, it is important to find an insider who can reveal the infor-
mation on the key personnel of the company, then identify the real
decision-maker in the organization.
Information is gathered not only from the ‘insider’. One important
stage in receiving information is through banquets. Banquets are the
most common and natural platform where this kind of information is
gathered and exchanged. Banqueting is one mechanism to establish
guanxi; it is also an important stage where social exchange takes place
(Yang, 1994). During banquets people socialize freely and business talk
is traditionally tuned down. As one interviewee stated, ‘one should try
to remember everything that was said by the opposite side. Sometimes
I go to the toilet to make notes on what they said’. Several interviewees
believed that the more you knew of the other party, even personal mat-
ters, like hobbies, birthdays, marital status, names and birthdays of chil-
dren, close friends and so on, the better off you are. As a matter of fact,
this was usually stated by quoting Sun Tzu ‘know your enemy and know
yourself and your victory won’t be threatened’ (zhi bi zhi ji zhe, bai zhan
bu dai).
An interviewee, Mr Pan, a businessman from Fujian province, illus-
trated the challenges involved in giving the ‘guided missile’ gift. Mr Pan
had established a company in Beijing, attempting to lease office equip-
ment in the capital. According to him, the competition in the market
was fierce. Through his local associate he had managed to establish an
insider relationship with one company, which could become his first big
client in the business. During the first few weeks Mr Pan negotiated with
various people in the organization, but without much progress. Mr Pan
came to the conclusion, that ‘his insider’ did not have enough power
within the organization. Finally, Mr Pan got the chance to meet with
the person, Mr Zhou, who was in charge of the possible purchase.
Eventually, Mr Pan found out that Mr Zhou was fond of minority peo-
ple shoes. During the Cultural Revolution, Mr Zhou had been sent down
to the remote countryside and during his stay in the south-western 
parts of China he had been in frequent contact with the local minority
people. Since his return to the capital he had gradually begun to collect,
as a hobby, minority people art, dresses and shoes. Mr Pan, desperate in
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
123

reaching the deal, activated his network of friends to find certain minor-
ity people shoes for Mr Zhou, who was very pleased to receive the gift.
However, at the time of the interview they were still negotiating the deal
so the outcome of this gift-giving is not yet known.
I also encountered other similar stories illustrating the complexities
involved in the ‘guided missile’ gift-giving. Another interviewee, Mr Wei,
stated that he had found out that his ‘target’ was collecting stamps.
Hence, Mr Wei ‘activated’ his own network and eventually found a friend
who was also a philatelist. On the recommendation of this friend, Mr Wei
not only purchased stamps to be given as the gift, but also learned 
some basic things about stamp collecting. In the words of Mr Wei, this
was ‘to catch two flies with one stroke – you do not only give the gift
(songli), but you also give a feeling (ganqing)’. When the gift was received,
Mr Wei continued, ‘he immediately appreciated the effort that I had
taken for him’.
Even though the ‘guided missile’ is understood to be an effective means
of generating a strong sense of renqing debt, agents have invented, an
additional, even more effective path of providing the ‘guided missile’. As
was stated by an interviewee, ‘people are careful not to accept gifts. But if
you give the gift to their children, they have more difficulties in saying
no. This is what I call “different means,” but equally satisfactory outcome
(yiqu tonggong)’. The preliminary work is similar, only that this time it is
necessary to inquire into the family-life of the potential decision-makers.
In order to gain this kind of information, one should have an insider who
is well connected and knows or can find out the necessary information
on hobbies, birthdays of family members or other family anniversaries.
Usually, in generating the feeling of renqing debt by giving the gift to
a child, one should invent an occasion for the gift-giving. As pointed
out by Yan (1996), agents are inventing new opportunities for gift-
giving. An interviewee in Shanghai, who in addition to commonly used
gift-giving occasions, like birthdays and graduations, created a new
opportunity for legitimate gift-giving. Ms Feng found out that the son
of the person in charge was going to participate in the national univer-
sity entrance exam. For this occasion, she ordered a special cake, bought
a painting and fresh flowers, and took these gifts to the official the night
before the exam and wished good luck to the whole family. This was,
what Ms Feng called ‘to use feeling to substitute the gift-object’ (yi gan-
qing daiti liwu). She actually provided three objects, but she considered
that the expression of feeling in her conduct was the decisive factor, not
the gift items. This expression of feeling helped Ms Feng to get the
approvals she was applying for.
124
Matti Nojonen

Thus, the logic of providing the ‘guided missile’ complicates Bourdieu’s
notion of time – the important time lag between receiving and recipro-
cating the gift (ibid, 1997: 198). In many cases, especially for those peo-
ple who lack the organizational backing or the leveraging power of their
own personal network of people, the donor makes the decision on the
time lag or interval and not the receiver, as is described by Bourdieu. For
instance, Ms Feng first provided the gifts and then retreated and waited
for almost two weeks before she went back to see the official at his
bureau. Ms Feng considered this to be appropriate and wise, since other-
wise, directly waiting for or asking for immediate reciprocation would
have ruined her apparently disinterested act of gift-giving, her symbolic
and ritualized expression of attachment and concern in the way that 
she performed the gift-giving. Hence, in the Chinese context, time is 
not only the resource of the receiver. On the contrary, time is a crucial
resource that is carefully used by the donors in deciding on the timing
of gift-giving and on deciding the length of the interval between giving
and asking for the reciprocal favour.
In addition, the traditional festivals, especially the Spring Festival 
and Mid-Autumn Festival, are used as excuses in launching expensive
‘guided missile’ gifts. These expensive gifts, in contrast to the rather
inexpensive, but still subjectively valuable ‘guided missiles’ described
above, are clearly regarded as bribes. Due to the intense anti-corruption
campaign the donors have recognized that the ‘guided missile’ pattern
of providing the bribe is very efficient and safe, and thus have intensi-
fied the usage of ‘guided missiles’. Furthermore, interviewees shared a
collective belief that the police and prosecutors would not interfere in
gift-giving during national holidays and festivals, or if they did, they
would be more lenient than usual.
The ‘guided missile’ as a gift is the most complex and resource-
consuming pattern of gift-giving in China. It usually demands extensive
pre-networking aimed to gather together puzzles of information about
the potential target and his/her preferences. Receiving the decisive
information can take place through exchanging information during
banquets or is provided by the ‘insider’, or sometimes it is entirely a
matter of chance. When the other party feels that it is necessary to influ-
ence a decision-maker, they can utilize the information about the oppo-
site party to provide him with a ‘guided missile’ that is valuable to the
receiver. Depending on the nature of the gift it can be given in front of
other people, but usually, at least according to the data available for this
research, it is provided behind the stage of the visible networking. Due
to the subjective value of the gift and due to the relatively low judicial
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
125

risks of receiving the ‘guided missile’, it is an effective way of generat-
ing a feeling of renqing indebtedness and thus binds the receiver into 
a dyadic relationship with the donor.
Conclusion
This chapter illustrated the complicated and sophisticated art of gift-
giving that forms an additional marketplace where Chinese companies
compete with each other. Contrary to the conventional perception of
unconstrained utilization and smooth expansion of guanxi, the enlarg-
ing of the guanxi base is a challenging task involving more often than
not the complicated practice of gift-giving.
Furthermore, gift-giving can also be seen to follow an escalating pat-
tern of competition. The first step is to give the ‘ordinary business gift’ 
in establishing the necessary basis of familiarity. As one establishes famil-
iarity and recognizes the potential for business, one might attempt to
establish ‘an insider’ relationship by advancing with the ‘armament gift’.
Often one has ‘planted an insider’ in the organization, so, if necessary
one can launch ‘the guided missile’ to gain the favour of the decision-
maker. Each process has its own logic of giving, receiving and recipro-
cating. Likewise, the role and function of time also differs at each stage.
It is obvious that the mere complexities of gift-giving in Chinese net-
working question the conventional perception of smooth guanxi practice.
In addition, the empirical findings of gift-giving in a Chinese con-
text makes more problematical the conventional Western notions 
of exchanging gift-object with another gift-object, and complicates 
the notion of time in the gift-giving process. The Chinese notion of gift-
giving, exchanging renqing, does not mean that the transaction neces-
sarily occurs in the conventional Western pattern, that is, the given and
reciprocated gift as an object. In the Chinese context, it can be the
exchange of a favour with another favour; a gift-object can be recipro-
cated with a favour. A favour can be reciprocated with a gift-object, and
a gift-object reciprocated with a gift-object. The ambiguous word ren-
qing, connoting to gift-object and favour, is frequently used in the
process of providing and reciprocating favours/gifts, thus urging us to
expand our conventional theory on gift-objects to include favours as
well, the non-physical products.
Bourdieu (1997: 198) states that gift-giving follows a certain universal
pattern where in every society it may be observed that, the counter-gift
must be deferred and different, because the immediate return of an
126
Matti Nojonen

exactly identical object clearly amounts to a refusal or to an insult.
Hence, according to this theory the ‘swapping of identical gifts’ harms or
even destroys the relationship between the agents. However, exchange
of ‘the ordinary business gifts’ in China questions this notion of
Bourdieu. In fact, ‘ordinary business gifts’ are small items, pens, calen-
dars and so on, labeled with the company name and logo, which by
their nature and actual monetary value are more or less identical. In the
Chinese context, the exchange of ‘identical’ ordinary business gifts fol-
lows a different logic. The importance of exchanging identical ‘ordinary
business gifts’ lies in the fact that it tends to project the relationship into
a more advanced level, facilitating feelings of commonality among
agents, which is a basic requirement of co-operation and even future
gift-giving. The exchange of ordinary business gifts divulges that both
parties have and can give renqing – human feelings and/or favours,
which is the essence of Chineseness.
Time has a central role in gift-giving. According to Bourdieu (ibid,
1997: 198–9), time lags between giving and reciprocating are essential
in gift-giving. ‘The relationship between gift and counter-gift is what
allows a relation of exchange to appear as irreversible, yet is both forced
and self-interested, so be seen as reversible’. To abolish this interval is
also to abolish the strategy of gift-giving. However, as was discovered in
this study, gift-giving has several dimensions that need to be taken into
consideration, and time is only one of them.
Hence, in providing the ‘armament’ and ‘guided missile’ gifts, time
has additional functions that complicate Bourdieu’s notion of time in
gift-giving – the time lag between giving and counter-gift. Correct tim-
ing in gift-giving is an effective way of not only generating a stronger
feeling of indebtedness and gratitude, but can also make it harder for
the receiver to deny the gift. It is common to time gift-giving to coin-
cide with personal anniversaries, thus making the gift appear to be more
personal and disinterested. An additional ploy is to provide gifts for fam-
ily members as an act of genuine care and attention, attempting to drive
the receiver into a corner, where he has fewer opportunities to reject the
gift. Furthermore, the time-lag between the giving and the reciprocating
of the gift is in certain circumstances the reverse in China. If the agent
does not have a strong organizational backing or extensive personal
guanxi base he/she needs to apply a different strategy, namely, after 
one has provided the gift of ‘guided missile’, one should retreat and wait
for an appropriate time before advancing and asking for a reciprocal
favour.
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
127

In summary, in gift-giving, time has at least three different roles. First,
the time interval between giving and reciprocating. Here, the receiver controls
time. Second, choosing and mastering the timing of gift-giving, which is
naturally done by the donor. Third, controlling the appropriate time differ-
ence between gift-giving and asking for the reciprocal favour. The donor, who
does not enjoy organizational backing in facing the bureaucracy, does
this. In fact, most of the Chinese do not have the access to organiza-
tional support that could equal the monumental state apparatus and
Communist Party of China. Probably, the total time spent on the gift-
giving process could also be taken as the ‘fourth’ aspect of time in 
gift-giving, as it can restrict the deployment of resources.
This then is the context within which Chinese business people have
to manage. This study is an attempt to provide an insight, to see the
process from the various perspectives, of the importance and logic of
gift-giving in Chinese business. As a result of the institutional setting
and dependency on guanxi, a completely different mindset and range of
competences is being demanded of Chinese businessmen. The compet-
itive advantage of Chinese businesses constitute successful management
and deployment of gifts in guanxi networks. In addition to the delicate
sensitivity of controlling time, crucial for the successful gift-giving 
are the manipulation of circumstances and ‘style’. In providing the
‘armament’ or ‘guided missile’ gifts, gender, individual skills and choice
of style are decisive factors. Due to the countless possible variables
involved, displayed, conditioned and yet spontaneously created at the
stage of gift-giving, it is hard to draw an abstract theory on gift-giving
acts. Some individuals are more skilled than others at networking and
gift-giving. They are more ingenious in reading the postures, gestures of
the body and picking up linguistic nuances. They are more nimble 
in their reactions, guided by intuition and observation. They are able 
to choose the right words, adapt their style and eventually create ideal
circumstances and favourable timing for gift-giving. It is a matter of 
timing, creation and manipulation of style and circumstances con-
ducive to successful gift-giving. The same act of giving the gift can have
completely different meanings at different times and even giving the
right gift at the right moment, but with a wrong style can be disastrous.
References
Boisot, M. and Child, J. (1996) From fiefs to clans and network capitalism:
Explaining China’s emerging economic order. Administrative Science Quarterly
41: 600–28.
128
Matti Nojonen

Boisot, M. and Child, J. (1999) Organizations in adaptive systems in complex
environments: The case of China. Organization Science 10: 237–52.
Bourdieu, P. (1997) Selections from the Logic of Practice. Quoted in Schrift, A.
‘Introduction: Why Gift?’ in Schrift, A. (ed.), The Logic of the Gift, London:
Routledge, 190–230.
Bourdieu, P. (1997) Marginalia – some additional notes on the Gift. Quoted in
Schrift, A. ‘Introduction: Why Gift?’ in Schrift, A. (ed.), The Logic of the Gift,
London: Routledge, 231–44.
Bourdieu, P. (1990) The Logic of Practice, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Chabal, P. and Daloz, J.-P. (1999) Africa Works: Disorder as Political Instrument, The
International Africa Institute, Indiana: University Press.
Chen, M. (1995) Asian Management Systems; Chinese, Japanese and Korean Styles of
Business, London: Routledge.
Cheung, P. (1996) ‘The Political Context of Shanghai’s Economic Development’,
in Y. Yeung and Y. Sung (eds), Shanghai, Transformation and Modernisation under
China’s Open Policy, Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press.
Child, J. (1996) Management in China during the age of reform, Cambridge
University Press.
Davies, H., Leung, T. K., Luk, S. and Wong, Y. (1995) The benefits of guanxi: The
value of relationships in developing the Hciese market. Industrial Marketing
Management 24: 207–14.
Fei Xiaotong (1991) Xiangtu Zhongguo, Xianggang: Sanlian shudian.
Goodman, D. and Hooper, B. (1994) China’s Quiet Revolution: New Interactions
between State and Society, Cheshire: Longman.
He, Qinglian (1998) Xiandaihua de xianjin – dangdai Zhongguo de jingji shehui wenti
(The Pitfall of the Modernisation – economic and social problems of contem-
porary China) Jinri Zhongguo chubanshe.
Hendry, J. (1993) Wrapping Culture: Politeness, Presentation and Power in Japan and
Other Societies, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Huang, G. (1988) Renqing yü mianzi: Zhongguoren de quanli youxi (Renqing and
Face: The Chinese Power Game), in G. Yang (ed.), Zhongguoren de xinli, (The
Psychology of the Chinese People), Taibei.
Kipnis, A. B. (1997) Producing Guanxi, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Levi-Strauss, C. (1997) ‘Selections from Introduction to the Work of Marcel
Mauss’, in Schrift, A. (ed.), The Logic of the Gift, London: Routledge.
Li, P. P. (1998) Toward a geocentric framework of organizational form: A holistic,
dynamic and paradoxical approach. Organizational Studies 19(5): 829–61.
Liang, S. M. (1999) Zhongguoren: shehui yu renshen. Zhongguo wenlian 
chubanshe.
Lovett, S., Simmons, L. C. and Kali, R. (1999) Guanxi versus the market: Ethics
and efficiency. Journal of International Business Studies Summer, 30(2): 1–11.
Luo, Y. (1997) Guanxi: Principles, philosophies and implications. Human Systems
Management 16(1): 43–51.
Luo, Y. and Chen, M. (1997) Does guanxi influence firm performance? Asia Pacific
Journal of Management 14: 1–16.
Luo, Y. and Park, S. (2001) Guanxi and organizational dynamics: Organizational
networking in Chinese firms. Strategic Management Journal 22: 445–7.
Mauss, M. (1924) Essai sur le don. Forme et raison de l’échange dans les sociétés
archaïques. Paris, l’Année Sociologique, seconde série, 1923–4.
The Sophisticated Choreography of Gift-Giving
129

Mauss, M. (1997) ‘Gift, Gift’, in Schrift, A. (ed.), The Logic of the Gift, London:
Routledge.
Moore, C. A. (1967) The Chinese Mind – Essentials of Chinese Philosophy and Culture.
University of Hawaii Press: Hawaii.
Nee, V. (1992) Organizational dynamics of market transaction: Hybrid forms,
property rights, and mixed economy in China. Adminstrative Science Quarterly
37: 1–27.
Pan, G. (1995) Hewei ‘fuwu’ (what is the meaning of ‘service’), in Gongzhong
guanxixüe (The Art of Public Relationship). Beijing: Beijingdaxüe Chubanshe.
170–202.
Redding, G. (1990) The Spirit of Chinese Capitalism, Berlin: De Gruyter.
Schrift, A. (1997) ‘Introduction: Why Gift?’, in Schrift, A. (ed.), The Logic of the
Gift, London: Routledge.
Tsang, E. (1998) Can guanxi be a source of sustained competitive advantage for
doing business in China? The Academy of Management Executive 12(2): 64–73.
Tung, R. L. and Yueng, I. Y. (1996) Achieving business success in Confucian soci-
eties: The importance of Guanxi. Organizational Dynamics 25: 54–65.
Walder, A. (1986) Communist Neo-traditionalism, Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Wank, D. (1999) Commodifying Communism, business, trust and politics in a Chinese
city, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
White, L. and Li, C. (1993) ‘China Coast Identities: Regional, National and
Global’, in L. Dittmer and S. Kim (eds), China’s Quest for National Identity, Ithica,
Io: Cornell University Press.
Whitley, R. (1994) Business Systems in East Asia; Firms, Markets and Societies,
London: Sage Publications.
Wong, Y. H. and Chan, R. Y-K. (1999) Relationship marketing in China: Guanxi,
favouritism, and adaptation. Journal of Business Ethics 22(2): 107–18.
Yan, Y. (1996) The culture of guanxi in a North China village. The China Journal
35: 5–16.
Yang, M. (1989) The gift economy and state power in China. Society for
Comparative Study of Society and History 31(1): 25–54.
Yang, M. (1994) Gifts, Favours, And Banquets; The Art of Social Relationships in
China, Ithica, Io: Cornell University Press.
130
Matti Nojonen

7
The Economics of Corruption and
Cronyism – An Institutional Approach
to the Reform of Governance
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke
Introduction
Moral outrage was the response of the Chinese press, when Cheng Kejie,
one of the country’s highest officials, Vice-Chairman of the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress and former Governor of
the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, was arrested on grounds 
of corruption on 25 April 2000. Cheng’s arrest came amidst a spate of
serious corruption cases that reached into the top echelons of China’s
state leadership (China Aktuell, 2000). His case attracted wide public
attention in national and international Chinese media because of his
high office, the number of officials implicated, and the involvement of
his lover Li Ping (dubbed the “Jiang Qing of Guangxi” by the Hong Kong
and overseas Chinese press) (Ming Pao, 2000), daughter-in-law of his
predecessor in the position of Governor of Guangxi, and for years the
most influential woman in Guangxi. This was not just a case of a local
official embezzling public funds, but a story of love and greed of a pop-
ular political leader, who had achieved much for his province. This was
also not the story of an anonymous mistress, but of an ambitious, intel-
ligent and attractive woman using the position of, first, her father-in-law,
then her lover, to systematically, and on a long-term basis, exploit the
powers vested in the office of provincial governor. The accusation against
them focused on three crimes: appropriation and sale of real estate
development and construction rights, sale of publicly subsidized goods
at market prices and promotion of trusted allies into official positions 
of power. While the personal details of Cheng’s deeds and his final 
131

execution in September 2000 fascinated the Chinese and Hong Kong
press, his case also demonstrates how corruption works in China today
(Hendrischke, 2001).
Research on China’s major corruption cases, such as the one involving
a Beijing mayor Chen Xitong, and the still unsolved case in the city of
Xiamen, has often linked them to power struggles and factional alliances
within the top leadership (Wedeman, 1996). More general analysis points
to the Leninist state-party system that is not bound by its own rules as the
deeper cause of continuing corruption (Manion, 1997). The reasons for
corruption are particularly vexing issues in all societies, open to cultural,
psychological and political analysis (Holmes, 1993, chap. 5) as well as
anthropological (Rocca, 1992), or more focused economic explanation
(Rose-Ackermann, 1999, chap. 3). On the other hand, Chinese researchers
tend to emphasize the moral dimension (Yang Xiliang, 1997).
This study presents an economic analysis of corruption, with particular
focus on cronyism and nepotism as a network-based form of corruption
open to institutional analysis, as one group of actors positively discrimi-
nate against “outsiders” in favor of members of their own group. In effect
it will take the form of an extended “case study.”
Talking about cronyism
Forms of corruption and cronyism have been observed in most societies;
however, their importance differs between countries and periods. Some
economies seem to be almost completely run by cronyism, like Marcos’
Philippines, while in others, like Switzerland, cronyism seems to be
“unknown” – although one must be careful about definitions as there
are always exceptions – note the secrecy of Swiss banks, and also the
large differences between their cantons on many matters, not least
women’s liberal rights. In general, the people most concerned about cor-
ruption and cronyism seem to be politicians and journalists: they treat
them as either legal issues or as moral scandals. From the perspective of
political science corruption and cronyism are considered to be institu-
tional issues, mainly occurring in transforming or weak political systems
as they are often to be found in developing countries. Institutional
analysis usually relates them to clienteles or patronage and focuses on
the given dependency of those involved in, for example, clan systems.
Consequently, corruption and cronyism in these institutional environ-
ments are not looked at in terms of voluntary exchange (Eisenstadt and
Lemarchand, 1981).
132
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke

Surprisingly, corruption and more specifically cronyism are rarely dealt
with in economics (Boycko et al., 1995). They occasionally appear in eco-
nomic history concerned with changes in property rights or specific allo-
cation systems that preceded the emergence of market economies (North,
1981). On the other hand, the literature on the shadow economy and
related corrupt activities rather concentrates on the question why people
find it profitable to leave the official sector, but stops short of investigat-
ing the individual calculus for engaging in corruption and cronyism
(Cassel, 1986; Rose-Ackerman, 1978; Weck et al., 1984; Haslinger, 1986).
These explanations look at corruption and cronyism from a macro 
(-economic) point of view. Yet, since both arise from the decision of indi-
vidual actors, it might be useful to turn to the microeconomic perspec-
tive as first developed by Becker (Becker, 1971 and 1982; Shleifer and
Vishny, 1993; Krug, 1988; Fan and Grossman, 2001). We start by con-
testing that preference for relatives; people from the same origin or com-
rades are the only determinants for cronyism. Instead, by arguing that
institutions matter, we can revisit questions such as, what are corruption
and cronyism and what are their causes. Do different institutional set-
tings constrain cronyism, either by reducing incentives or by exercising
more efficient control? Can the prevalence of corruption and cronyism
observed in a country such as China be linked to the co-existence of a
socialist and a market sector? Can it be concluded from this analysis that
cronyism is the result of a weak institutional context rather than the
newly emerging market sector?
This chapter is organized as follows: First, the question of honesty is
addressed in order to clarify the relation between corruption and crony-
ism. Next, corruption and cronyism as problems in the public sector
labor market will be dealt with followed by an analysis of corruption
and cronyism as economic or rent-seeking problems. The final section
shows that the need to “network” turns corruption and cronyism into
a problem that is shaped by the interdependency of the political market
and the economic sector.
Corruption and cronyism as a problem of morality
Usually, corruption refers to the sale of state provided goods by a gov-
ernment official in return for private gains. An individual will engage in
such a scheme, if by doing so s/he can expect a higher income than by
acknowledging procedural rules and working for promotion.
In moral terms, what makes a politician or bureaucrat honest is their
resistance to the temptation of increased income by working in the
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism
133

“public interest” only. Yet, from an economic point of view, a bureau-
crat does not need to be intrinsically honest; it would suffice to be indif-
ferent to the distributional consequences of state-organized allocation
of goods. For example, as long as s/he follows the usual bureaucratic
practice of “first-come-first-served,” her/his personal morality is not an
issue. The problem starts the moment the bureaucrat “cares” who gets
what. Cheng Katie’s commitment to Li Ping was based on personal affec-
tion and infatuation with her refinement and cosmopolitan flair that
transcended his provincial horizon. His hope was to marry her eventu-
ally, to which she agreed, provided that they would together be able to
earn enough money to lead an independent life. As part of their arrange-
ment, Li Ping took care of their finances and transferred her illegal gains
to Hong Kong under her name. In Cheng’s view, this was meant to pro-
vide for their later life after his retirement. This commitment by Cheng
Kejie makes the corruption case special, because money gained with his
support flowed primarily to his lover, to some of his family members, but
hardly to himself, who was still on a nominal monthly salary of 900 yuan.
Thus, love or caring is the defining element of cronyism and nepo-
tism as a special form of corruption. For the purpose of the following
analysis the two terms will be defined as follows: Cronyism describes the
willingness to break procedural rules and to forego revenues/income
appropriable in a system of corruptive practices in order to provide bet-
ter income earning opportunities to people for whom one cares. If those
cared for people belong to one family, then we talk about nepotism.
This caring leading to positive discrimination can be based on emo-
tions for certain people, can be subject to pressure of interest groups on
whose support a bureaucrat’s political or professional survival depends,
or can be based on the expectation that the beneficiaries will “pay back”
the favor in kind or money. In other words, cronyism and nepotism
caused by affections is based on intrinsic motivation while the two lat-
ter cases point to extrinsic (monetary) incentives at the base of corrupt
behavior. Unfortunately, from an analytical point of view, both can also
be a mixture of all three elements as the following analysis and the story
of Cheng shows.
One way to model cronyism is to conceive of it as a gift (Neilson,
1999; Yang, 1994). If most members of the society were honest, that is,
immune against the monetary incentives corrupt practices promise,
cronyism and nepotism would be limited to gifts between relatives,
friends, or, indeed, lovers. In the Cheng case, at least two groups of 
people who might fit this description can be singled out. First, his lover
Li Ping and the Hong Kong business man Zhang Jinghai, who as her
134
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke

Hong Kong lover received large sums of money from her, which he con-
verted into Hong Kong investment. Another, very broad group is the
Zhuang population in Guangxi’s border regions to Vietnam, a national
minority population to which Cheng Kejie belonged. By successfully
lobbying the central leadership in Beijing, Cheng Kejie succeeded to get
a six-lane motorway financed, which connects the minority counties,
but could hardly be justified on technical or economic grounds. By sup-
porting border trade as a provincial policy and turning a blind eye to
large-scale smuggling along the Sino-Vietnamese border, he created
major economic benefits for the minorities in these areas, which had
been long neglected (Hendrischke, 1997). From a personal, moral per-
spective one could argue that had Cheng been indifferent to Li Ping’s
charm and to the needs of the minorities, he probably would not have
become engaged in corruption.
The problem with that kind of argument is that it is hard to judge
from the outside what the real motives were that prompted Cheng’s
behavior. One might be prepared to believe that he was “truly” in love
with Li Ping and wanted to see her well off. His caring for the minorities 
is harder to judge. Turning a blind eye on smuggling could have been
prompted by a wish to help the border minorities, by enforcing a devel-
opment policy that made the development of the poorer regions at the
border to Vietnam part of his programme (Hendrischke, 2000), or his
ability to create a new revenue source from which he personally profited.
In any case, the comment in the Chinese press, that he was somebody,
who had “developed an ideological style of money worship, hedonism,
and extreme individualism” (FBIS-CHI-2000-0420) is premature, to say
the least. Moreover, such moral judgement cannot explain how Cheng
could go on with his acts of corruption for such a long time; neither can
it explain how he became Vice-president of the NPC.
For this Institutional Economics suggests another way of modelling.
Instead of concentrating on the motives of individual actors, that is, why
they embark on corruptive practices, such an analysis concentrates on the
ability to do so, and on the institutional setting that allows individuals to
hand out gifts, or take bribes. The following two sections will therefore
analyse the conditions that allow corruption and cronyism to emerge.
Cronyism as a labour market problem in the public sector
Not all employees working in the public sector can hand out state 
provided goods in return for bribes or change the allocation rules. The
ability to do so requires a certain amount of power as described below.
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism
135

The government official needs to hold effective property rights,1 in the
sense that he can first exclude anybody from using (or transferring) the
assets under his control. Second, he must be able to make the use of an
asset dependent on his approval. Basically, s/he controls and allocates
the right to use a resource. It is the trade in permits and approvals, which
in most cases dominates corruption. As officially all goods provided by
the public sector are in state ownership in China, effective property
rights executed by officials indicate weak institutions. Consider the fol-
lowing example from the Cheng/Li file which relates to a piece of land
that was originally assigned to the provincial-level Nationalities Affairs
Commission for development. Cheng, as the local Governor, was able
to reverse this allocation and transfer the development rights for the 
site to his lover who sold them for a huge sum to an associate of the
Governor. This is one side of weak institutions; in a setting with strong
legal institutions, the Commission could have filed a case against the
Governor for interference in administrative procedures. Another side is
that the beneficiary of the land deal can also not be sure if his payment
for the development rights secures the necessary property rights, which
will still rest with the bureaucracy. Contracts between the bribe taker,
that is, the person in control of state provided goods, and bribe payer,
the individual who complies with the payment, are unenforceable in
any political system, resulting in a (high) risk premium. In our case,
enforceability was secured through the promotion of personal allies of
the governor into bureaucratic positions in charge of development
approvals and allocation of goods.
The official also enjoys managerial discretion2 – which quantity (or
quality) to sell to whom, or which permit/approval to give to whom. In
the Cheng/Li case goods and permits were first offered to his lover as a
middle person and to associates. In this case, cronyism refers to weak gov-
ernment rather than weak institutions. It is a problem of principal–agent
relations in which the principal, that is, the central government, can-
not monitor the provincial agents closely enough to enforce behavior. 
The most striking feature of the Cheng/Li case is certainly that Cheng 
as the provincial Governor was entitled to monitor the behavior of 
the provincial state administration, in other words he would have been
entitled to monitor and punish himself, or to make sure that appro-
priate legislation would limit the managerial discretion of people like
himself. It is this blurred distinction between the principal, that is, leg-
islation, and the executive side of the government as the agent, which
offers the chance to embark on corruption to beneficiary groups. These
groups then ensure through networks of cronyism that their members
136
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke

occupy positions, which allow them to engage in corrupt practices at
low costs.
As the revenue from corruption also depends on the monopolistic posi-
tion, the ability to limit the number of competing suppliers of the same
good is crucial (Olson, 1965: chaps 1–2). Otherwise s/he has to share the
monopolistic rent, with the threat that competition will drive the bribe-
price down. An easy way to do so is to control production of the good in
question. As long as a few large state firms are the only suppliers of certain
goods, control of these firms allows appropriation of the monopolistic
rent. Another way is to design regulation for local jurisdiction, or control
export/import licences. In all cases, the strength of the monopoly depends
not only on the ability to block “market entry” of other suppliers but also
on the mobility of resources that are subject to regulation.
Cheng was able to exclude lower level bureaucrats from the process of
issuing land development rights and from the distributive mechanism
for centrally subsidized scarce goods, such as edible oil and white sugar.
As will be shown presently, the effectiveness of such a corruptive net-
work will ultimately depend on a proper job placement policy. Personal
sympathy might play a role as, for example, when Cheng made Li head
of the Guangxi trade representation in Hong Kong. Another condition is
that the person will collaborate with the corruption practices estab-
lished so far. Otherwise, the fine-tuned system of bribes might collapse
or at least become harder to enforce. It might be fatal to place a kins-
man who is honest into a position where he is expected to collaborate.
This is basically the reason why it is so hard to judge from outside to
which extent single acts of cronyism indicate “caring” or self-interest.
Simple microeconomics can show how corruptive practices work.
Corruption and cronyism as a problem of 
(mis-)appropriating rents
In the Cheng case, the press summarized the costs of his behavior as
shown in Table 7.1. These sums represent the costs from a legal point of
view, namely the income earned by illegal behavior. An economic analy-
sis does not limit itself to the actual money transfers but includes the
distributional effects as well as the indirect costs that accrue out of the
misallocation of resources. In order to understand corruption in China
it is essential to distinguish between “rights,” first the control right over
the operational side of a business or bureaucratic procedures and the
“property” right over net return or cash flow.
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism
137

Take the following example from the Cheng/Li file, where corruption
occurred in the distribution of sugar and oil. In general the following
practices can be distinguished.
Assume that sugar is controlled by a state agency and distributed at a
fixed price (P1) so that x1 consumers can be served (Figure 7.1). The light
shaded area is the consumer rent that all buyers enjoy who would have
been willing to pay a higher price. By asking for a bribe, which raises the
total price for sugar to P2, the bribe taker can appropriate part of the con-
sumer rent, the dark shaded area. The higher total price works like a tax
and will lead to a decline in total demand depending on price/income
elasticities. Thus, if white sugar is regarded as essential for cooking then
the drop in demand will be low. This explains why corruption concen-
trates on goods whose demand is relatively inelastic, such as energy,
138
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke
Table 7.1
An indication of corruption flows
Years
Item
Foreign currency
RMB Yuan
amounts
1994–97
Real estate development
HK$8040000
17 300 000
and contract construction
8 603 000
2 200 000
1994–98
Promotions of officials
595 000
US$35 000
290 000
HK$20 000
21 400
1992–97
Quotas and allocations
9 030 000
Total
US$4 583 000
38 040 200
Source: Central News Briefing on the “Cheng Kejie Corruption Case”, Beijing Xinhua Hong
Kong Service in Chinese, 20/4/2000, FBIS-CHI-2000-0420. Xinhua Hong Kong service the
Chinese press agency in Hong Kong.
x
P
P1 
P2 
 x1 
x2 
Figure 7.1
Price vs. consumers

water, food, housing and so on. In this case the bribe taker (Cheng)
would have acknowledged the property right of the national treasury
which would see the revenues generated by the sale of sugar at the state
fixed price transferred. The loss for the treasury would be the difference
between the lower demand (x2x1) multiplied by the state price. At a
general level, the consumer would not be hurt as long as the number 
of people who had been willing to offer a higher price does exceed the
number of consumers no longer able (or willing) to pay the higher price.
The bribe taker gains from the appropriation of the consumer rent.
In the Cheng/Li case rent seeking involved the conversion of govern-
ment allocations of subsidized goods and import quotas into options
that could be sold on the market. Such allocations to the provincial 
government are routinely channelled from the central State Planning
Commission to the provincial Planning Commission, which is in charge
of distributing them to local import/export firms, which in turn have to
provide the goods to provincial users. This process normally takes place
in March/April every year. Items for which such import quota are allo-
cated are essential goods in short supply on the domestic market, such
as fertilizer, edible oil, and indeed, refined sugar. Local sources state that
Li Ping became involved in this type of business activity in 1993 by trad-
ing allocations of low-priced refined sugar when there was a shortage of
sugar in the market leading to high market prices.
Another situation occurs when the state agency in control of the sales
of sugar acts as a monopolist. Then we have a case of corruption plus
embezzlement of funds. In this case, the state agency would ask for a
monopolistic price, and appropriate the whole monopolistic rent. In
other words, the bribe taker will not respect the property rights of the
national treasury over the revenues generated by the sales of sugar. He
will not transfer revenues from the sale of sugar at the state fixed price
but instead keep everything himself. Subsequently, both the consumers
and the national treasury are hurt. The bribe taker needs to pay atten-
tion to two constraints. In order to keep his (local) monopoly he must
be able to limit competition from other state agencies (or private firms)
offering the same product or a close substitute. As his profit depends 
on (marginal) costs for the input, that is, white sugar “bought” within
the state controlled bureaucracy, he has to make sure to know people
willing to sell him the sugar even if they know his business practices.
One way to ensure a steady supply of low priced sugar is to agree to share
the monopolistic rent with the supplier agency. Another way is to make
sure that like-minded people are appointed to those agencies that allo-
cate sugar within the bureaucratic system. The same means need to be
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism
139

employed to keep out competitors. Provincial legislation/regulation
offers powerful tools to limit entry to local markets by means of taxation,
regulation, or registration. Offers to share the monopolistic rent here,
too, is an attractive means to “buy votes,” that is support, in the provin-
cial, or county, administration. In the latter case, the regulation can be
advertized as a policy to protect local farmers, local (infant) industry, or
certain groups such as minorities. As in all cases of protectionism the dis-
tributional effects are such that the producers benefit to the detriment of
the consumers (plus the national treasury).
In both cases, corruption with or without embezzlement, the ability
to appropriate part of the consumer or the monopolistic rent, depends
on the ability to coerce others into collaboration or to “buy” their sup-
port. The minimum requirement is that the state controlled price agreed
upon in the political arena is lower than the market price. Otherwise
there would be no rent to appropriate (Cheung, 1996). Coercion turns
corruption into a political problem, buying support turns corruption
into a problem of a malfunctioning bureaucracy, that is, a principal–
agent relation problem in economic parlance. The analysis shows that
corruption, in order to survive, needs to expand and include more and
more people in positions that are able to limit free trade.
For this reason, in the long run, the social costs of corruption and
cronyism need to include the re-allocation of resources to those oppor-
tunities that offer high gains. Thus, for example, it can be expected that
goods and regulation which private economic agents cannot avoid, that
is, low price and income elasticities, will be favored. This might explain
better the focus by Cheng/Li on sugar and oil deals, as they are two
ingredients in Chinese cooking for which substitutes are hard to find.
Other examples are prestigious large-scale infrastructural investment
projects to which the national budget has itself committed. The large
sunk costs that would have to be accepted if the investment should fail
allows participating (construction) firms to heavily overcharge the gov-
ernment as customer. Part of the gain from overcharging can be used for
bribing those who decide which company will be involved. At the same
time construction firms are also willing to offer bribes for getting con-
tracts, knowing that they can retrieve these costs by later overcharging
the government as a customer. Knowing this, one no longer wonders
how the six-lane motorway in the province fits into this picture.
Another example, and the one that led to the demise of Cheng Kejie,
was Li Ping’s involvement in the construction of the Nationalities
Palace. This brought her into conflict with the provincial Party School.
The Nationalities Palace was one of the government projects for the
140
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke

50th anniversary of the People’s Republic of China in 1999. It was built
in the center of Nanning on land that was partially owned by the Party
School. Because it was a government project, the Party School could not
raise any objections against losing its apartment buildings on the site.
However, when it turned out that Li Ping, with the consent of Cheng
Kejie, had become involved and had transferred the construction con-
tract from the Nationalities Affairs Commission to her ally Zhou Kun,
who in turn included members of Cheng’s family in the project, the
Party School started to pressure the Central Discipline Inspection Com-
mission in Beijing to get involved in the case. Reportedly, this case was
also initially referred back to Guangxi and suppressed by Cheng Kejie.
The Party School finally approached the Head of the Central Party School
and required his personal intervention. As a result, in May 1999, one of
the Deputy Secretaries of the Commission was sent to Guangxi to per-
sonally head the investigation. After the conclusion of her investiga-
tions, Cheng Kejie was put under a specific form of house arrest (lianggui
or shuanggui), which restricted his movements and contacts.
The other long-term effect is that private investment will be crowded
out by corruption. The difference between control rights over the oper-
ational side of a business and the property rights over net return or cash
flow are crucial in this case, too (Shleifer and Vishny, 1993). Assume a
company where the management has complete rights with respect to
production, investment, price, and output. It has to pay taxes on profit,
but is free to allocate net returns according to its own policy, for exam-
ple, using part of its profits for paying dividends, part for re-investment,
part for upgrading technology or research, and part for intra-firm con-
sumption. In short, after tax, the company enjoys full property rights
over its revenues. These property rights are respected by state agencies 
at all levels. Even if one state agency, say a city government, were to ask
for an additional tax or fee, companies could cope with this as long as the
additional fee is low enough to allow the company to stay in business and
as long as the fee can be anticipated and remains stable. Corruption again
would take the form of a local tax, affecting total production costs which,
depending on price and income elasticities, can be transferred to con-
sumers and clients of the company. The negative effect would be shared
between consumers and producers, the bribe takers could appropriate
part of the producers’ rent. Corruption becomes destructive when part 
of the net profit is confiscated by local authorities asking for part of the
cash once they become aware of the profit situation of the company.
That can take the form of “voluntary contributions” to the building of
local roads or a new football stadium, cash hand outs to state officials,
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism
141

or participation in intra-firm consumption budgets by obtaining invita-
tions to banquets, access to the firm’s car park, free airplane tickets, or
seeing relatives of officials employed by the firm. Empirical surveys have
shown that the more corrupt a country, the lower the level of private
investment.
Another form is regulation concerning the use of cash flow. When, for
example, state agencies force companies to re-invest in infrastructure,
such as housing, or research, the state agency might not directly profit
(in monetary terms) from the regulations. Yet, the property rights of the
company over net profit are affected nevertheless.
So far, the analysis suggests that with increasing liberalization and
deregulation, corruption would disappear. That is, indeed, how many
Western economists argue (Stigler, 1988: chaps 6–8). Yet, this kind of an
analysis overlooks the interdependency between the economic sector
and politics. It is within the political “market” that monopolies are 
created or broken up. As long as bureaucrats are not controlled by a 
government – the executive or parliament – or a strong constitution the
principal–agent problem will not disappear. The effectiveness of corrup-
tion and cronyism under such a condition will then depend on running
an effective network of co-ordinated price policy.
Cronyism as a network for discrimination
So far, the analysis offered a static view of corruption and cronyism. In
order to understand the dynamics of corruption, the supply side in the
market of corruption needs to be analysed further. As was said before, to
the extent that a bureaucrat cannot control a monopoly over goods
and/or over lucrative positions within the bureaucracy (is not an inde-
pendent “price setter”), s/he needs to rely on collaborators. Thus, Li Ping
entered this business by establishing a network of local officials who had
the power over land allocations and building approvals. The core mem-
bers of this network were arrested at the same time as Cheng Kejie. Their
ranks were at the provincial departmental level – corresponding to 
state-level ministers. As will be seen presently the kind of relationships
between collaborators (or competitors) strongly influences the level and
content of corruption.
It was argued before that contracts between bribe takers, that is, bureau-
crats in control over state provided goods and their customers are not
legally binding or otherwise (socially) enforceable. The same is the case
when two or more bribe takers on the supply side need to co-ordinate
their action. In this case too, all partners in the network of corruption
142
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke

cannot rely on binding contracts. This “institutional weakness” is an
inherent feature of corruption and cronyism, which leaves the system
of bribes and cronyism a fragile construction. In order to understand
this, consider the following cases:
In order to avoid competition, (bribe) price setters must carve out local
monopolies whose heads pledge to stay within the territory assigned to
them at the beginning. Different cost structures or demand might then
lead to different monopolistic prices. There is, therefore, an incentive to
shirk the original agreement and move the “business” to the territory
that offers the highest rent. As in all cartels, compliance with the origi-
nal agreement is hard to enforce.
Officials are able to “create” complementary state provided input on
whose use the total value of assets depends. One example would be 
the acquisition of land for the purpose of building a factory. The land
remains “useless” if in order to do so permission needs to be “bought”
from other state agencies. One state agency might ask for a bribe for the
permission to build the factory, another for firm registration, a third for
access to water and electric power, each of which knows that without
this permission the whole venture might collapse. The chain reaction
that can be observed starts when the bribe revenues appropriated by one
agency will attract the attention of another branch of the bureaucracy,
which will invent another monopoly in the form of licenses and per-
missions. This chain reaction finds its end only if the total sum of bribes
to which the customers are (over-)charged will lead to a drop in total
demand. Then, by ignoring cross-elasticity in demand, the result will be
that all interdependent bribe takers are worse off. In order to avoid this,
a strategy of joint profit maximization is needed. Once more, the prob-
lem of co-coordinating the action of different bribe takers shows up as
the crucial one, if unilateral increases in bribes are to be avoided. It is
worth emphasizing that the final breakthrough for an enquiry against
Cheng and Li by the Central Discipline Inspection Commission did not
come as the result of State and Party watchdog institutions pursuing
their duties, but when economic interests of powerful institutions were
negatively affected.
As Institutional Economics has shown, the co-ordination problem
knows a monitoring and an enforcement aspect. The fact that corrup-
tion and cronyism are illegal makes secrecy an essential pre-condition
for their functioning (Posner, 1980: 1–53). One effect is that not only
law-enforcing agencies, but also all collaborating members face high
costs for detecting a violation of rules. In the first case, the violation 
of rules refers to the illegality of corruptive practices, in the latter the
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism
143

violation of rules refers to the original agreement between all partners
in the network of bribes and cronyism. As such networks cannot rely 
on the “official” law enforcement agencies, they need to “police” them-
selves with the effect that the costs for running a system of corruption
increase progressively over time and with increasing number of mem-
bers at the supply side.3 One way to keep the monitoring costs down 
is to employ only people on whose trustworthiness one can rely as a
“police force.” These people might be relatives, members of the same eth-
nic groups, or those bound together by special pledges of allegiance. The
“mafia” still serves as the proto-type of such an organization (Gambetta,
1993). In the case of Cheng, it is known that he used the powers of his
office to appoint a network of officials to those positions where their
trustworthiness was crucial for his corrupt dealings. It is no wonder that
the official report on corruption would later claim that “All major policy
decisions, the appointment or dismissal of leading cadres (…) must be
fully discussed by the collective, and no individual or small group is
allowed to take arbitrary decisions” (FBIS-CHI-2000-0420).
Yet, even if the individual behavior of network members can be effec-
tively monitored at low costs, there is still the enforcement problem.
Here again, the Mafia-organizational structure and policy can serve as
a model (Posner, 1981, chaps 5 and 8). When no recourse to the law
is possible, then three other institutional devices are available: first,
revenge with or without violent means that works as a deterrent; sec-
ond, hierarchy within the network of corruption and cronyism, to the
effect that one person controls the network while other members com-
ply to his/her commands; third, an alliance with politicians that allows
to prosecute rule-violators with the help of the official law enforcement
agencies. Thus, Cheng during his time as provincial governor acted as a
“Godfather” for the network of corruption and cronyism. In this case,
he did not need to seek an alliance with politicians since he himself held
the top political position in the province. Therefore, he could use or
threaten to use official law enforcement agencies for controlling the net-
work. In the Cheng/Li case, there were reportedly large numbers of let-
ters of complaints to the Central Discipline Inspection Commission
from county level officials concerning the sale of quota. While Cheng
was the Governor, these letters were sent back and suppressed at the
provincial level, where institutions could not act against the Governor.
Other examples of institutional complaints from the provincial level
that were not followed through are reports by the Head of the Guangxi
Customs Office to his headquarters in Beijing on Li Ping being caught
on many occasions taking cash and gold to Hong Kong. In such cases,
144
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke

the Governor’s personal secretary had to interfere on her behalf to
secure her release and prevent further prosecution.
It is noteworthy, that Cheng became vulnerable only when he left the
province in order to become the Vice-chairman of the Standing Com-
mittee of the National People’s Congress in Beijing, a move for which 
he had to give up his position as provincial Governor, and subsequently 
his “godfather” position. Hierarchy as a way to co-ordinate the net-
work failed once he got promotion, as did his ability to buy support for
covering up schemes.
Conclusions
An economic analysis shows what the real life case so vividly illustrates:
Institutions matter. Regardless of what the motives are, love, greed, pas-
sion or caring, corruption and cronyism depend on institutions that cre-
ate the opportunity. Clearly defined property rights are essential as are
state regulated prices and state controlled “monopolies” over licences,
permissions, and approvals. Consequently, market liberalization via the
introduction of private property rights and free prices plus deregulation
would destroy the rents that can be appropriated by corruptive prac-
tices. The total profit from corruptive practices would decline, so would
the number of people who might find it profitable to embark into such
activities.
As the analysis further shows, however, two other institutions need to
be taken into account for explaining corruption and cronyism. There is
first the bureaucracy, more precisely the principle–agent relation prob-
lem that characterizes bureaucratic discretion at all levels of state admin-
istration. There is second, the political sector, which can be modelled as
the political market where the supply of and demand for regulation,
state monopolies, and national price policy is co-ordinated.
Through its dynamics corruption creates a costly economic system. It
drives resources to such investment opportunities, and into sectors that
promise the highest net gain from corruptive practices, instead of direct-
ing the resources to their “best use” as allocative efficiency would expect.
Second, networks for corruption are costly co-ordination devices. In
order to protect the networks’ rent-seeking powers, more and more peo-
ple need to be taken in, which in turn leads to actively searching for more
and different opportunities. Moreover, the co-ordination of activities 
of individual network members also asks for an institutional solution. 
As Cheng was to learn, the moment he lost his position as provincial
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism
145

Governor of Guanxi, he became vulnerable. He, but not all of his former
cronies, came under investigation and was prosecuted.
The ultimate loss might be seen in the fact that Li Ping could have
contributed to the development of China’s emerging private sector in
terms of cleverness and innovativeness. She undoubtedly had entre-
preneurial talent, and demonstrated this over ten–fifteen years as she
superbly and systematically exploited the institutional weaknesses of
China’s economic and political system.
Notes
1
The following is based on the conceptual frame as developed first by Demsetz,
1967; Fama and Jensen, 1983; and the contributions in: Furubotn and
Pejovich, 1974.
2
The seminal papers are Arrow, 1985; Niskanen, 1974; Pratt and Zeckhauser, 1984.
3
It is worth mentioning that this mechanism can help to explain why
economies relying on cronyism and/or nepotism, such as Indonesia or the
Philippines can survive for some time, but at one point implode. The “implo-
sion occurs when the costs for maintaining the corruption system exceeds the
gains in the official sector.” For other cases see Sanchez and Waters, 1974.
References
Arrow, K. J. (1985) “The economics of agency,” in J. W. Pratt and R. J. Zeckhauser
(eds), Principals and Agents: The Structure of Business, Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press, 37–54.
Becker, G. S. (1971) The Theory of Discrimination, 2nd Pd., Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Becker, G. S. (1982) Der ökonomische Ansatz zur Erklärung menschlichen Verhaltens.
Tübingen: Siebeck/Mohr.
Boycko, M., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. (1995) Privatizing Russia, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Cassel, D. (1986) Funktionen der Schattenwirtschaft, im Koordinations – 
mechanismus von Markt – und Planwirtschaften. ORDO 37: 73–104.
Cheung, S. N. S. (1996) A simplistic general equilibrium theory of corruption.
Contemporary Economic Policy 14(3).
China aktuell (2000) Kampagne zur Korruptionsbekaempfung in Guangxi: harte
Massnahmen gegen Cheng Kejie und andere hochrangige Partei- und
Regierungsmitglieder. April: 367–8.
Demsetz, H. (1967) Toward a theory of property rights. American Economic Review
57: 347–58.
Eisenstadt, S. N. and Lemarchand, R. (eds) (1981) Political Clientelism, Patronage
and Development, Beverley Hills/London: Sage.
Fama, E. and Jensen, M. C. (1983) Separation of ownership and control. Journal
of Law and Economics 26: 301–25.
146
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke

Fan, S. and Grossman, H. I. (2001) Zhongguo jingji tizhi gaige zhong de jili yu fubai
(incentives and corruption in the reform of China’s economic system), in Hu Angang
(ed.). Zhongguo: Tiaozhan fubai (China: Fighting against Corruption). Hangzhou,
Zhejiang Remnin Chubanshe: 149–63.
FBIS-CHI-2000-0420. RMRB commentator slams Party Corruption. Beijing Xinhua
Domestic Service, 20/04/2000.
Furubotn, E. G. and Pejovich, S. (eds) (1974) The Economics of Property Rights,
Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Gambetta, D. (1993) The Sicilian Mafia: The Business of Protection, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Haslinger, F. (1986) Reciprocity, loyalty, and the growth of the underground
economy. European Journal of Political Economy 1(3): 309–23.
Hendrischke, H. (1997) “Guangxi: towards Southwest China and Southeast Asia,”
in D. S. G. Goodman (ed.), China’s provinces in reform – Class, community and
political culture, London and New York: Routledge, 21–47.
Hendrischke, H. (2000) Smuggling and bordertrade on the South China Coast.
China Perspectives. November–December: 22–35.
Hendrischke, H. (2001) Corruption, networks and property rights; the demise of a local
leader through love and greed. Bochum, Festschrift Helmut Martin (forthcoming).
Holmes, L. (1993) The End of Communist Power – Anti-Corruption Campaigns and
Legitimation Crisis, Carlton: Melbourne University Press.
Krug, B. (1988) “The Economics of Nepotism,” in K. Alewell and A. Bohnet (eds),
Leistungswille und Leistungsanreize im Systemvergleich. Giessen: Justus Liebig
University.
Manion, M. (1997) Corruption and Corruption Control: More of the Same in
1996. China Review 33–56.
Ming Pao, Hong Kong, 1/6/2000. “Ren cheng Guangxi Jiangqing,” qingfu gangdao
yong haozhai (the mistress, who people call the Jiang Qing of Guangxi, owns a
luxury apartment on Hong Kong Island).
Neilson, W. S. (1999) The economics of favours. Journal of Economic Behaviour &
Organization 39: 387–97.
Niskanen, W. A. (1974) “The peculiar economics of bureaucracy,” in 
E. G. Furubotn and S. Pejovich (eds), The Economics of Property Rights,
Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 187–99.
North, D. (1981) Structure and Change In Economic History, London/New York:
Norton.
Olson, M. (1965) The Logic of Collective Action, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Posner, R. A. (1980) A theory of primitive society, with special reference to law.
Journal of Law and Economics 1: 1–53.
Posner, R. A. (1981) The Economics of Justice, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Pratt, J. W. and Zeckhauser, R. J. (1984) “Principals and agents: An overview,” 
in W. Pratt and R. J. Zeckhauser (eds), Principals and Agents: The Structure of
Business, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School, 1–36.
Rocca, J.-L. (1992) Corruption and its shadow: An anthropological view of 
corruption in China. The China Quarterly 130(2): 402–16.
Rose-Ackerman, S. (1978) Corruption: A Study In Political Economy, New York:
Academic Press.
The Economics of Corruption and Cronyism
147

Rose-Ackerman, S. (1999) Corruption and Government – Causes, Consequences, and
Reform, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sanchez, N. and Waters, A. R. (1974) “Controlling Corruption in Africa and Latin
America,” in E. G. Furubotn and S. Pejovich (eds), The Economics of Property
Rights, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 279–95.
Shleifer, A. and Vishny R. W. (1993) Corruption. NBER Working Paper 4372,
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Smart, A. (1998) Gifts, bribes, and guanxi: A reconsideration of Bourdieau’s social
capital. Cultural Anthropology 8: 388–408.
Stigler, G. J. (1988) Chicago Studies in Political Economy, Chicago/London:
University of Chicago Press, chapters: 6–8.
Weck, H., Pommerehne, W. W. and Frey, B. S. (1984) Schattenwirtschaft. München,
WISO-Studien.
Wedeman, A. (1996) Corruption and politics, China Review 61–94.
Yang, M. (1994) Gifts, Favors, and Banquets: The Art of Social Relationships in China,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Yang, X. (1997) Fubai lun (a theory of corruption), Beijing: Zhongguo shehui
kexue chubanshe.
148
Barbara Krug and Hans Hendrischke

8
Taming the Sokaiya: Can Economic
and Corporate Reform Eliminate
Extortion in Japan?
Teri Jane Ursacki
Introduction
Sokaiya literally means “general meeting handlers.” More specifically,
they are corporate extortionists with (typically small) holdings of shares
in targeted companies who extract payments from them in exchange 
for ensuring their annual shareholders’ meetings proceed quickly and
smoothly. If not paid off, they may harass company executives at the
meeting for hours with embarrassing questions about real or imagined
corporate or personal shortcomings or wrongdoings. If paid off, they
will not only refrain from causing trouble at the meeting themselves,
but may also use verbal or physical intimidation to ensure no one else,
including ordinary shareholders with grievances, is able to raise a ques-
tion. It is illegal for the sokaiya to request such payments and for com-
panies to provide them, yet many companies have been caught doing
so in recent years, and some sokaiya groups still operate quite openly.
Sokaiya activity has been a well-known part of the seamier side of the
Japanese business world for decades, but attempts to control them have
been sporadic, with relatively few arrests and seemingly rather lenient
punishments both for corporate executives and the sokaiya themselves.
In 1997–98 there was a major crackdown that revealed a large number
of scandals involving many of Japan’s top companies. Over 100 execu-
tives and many sokaiya were arrested, and most have subsequently been
convicted. The companies involved included the Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank,
one of the nation’s largest, all four (now three) big securities companies,
and a wide cross-section of other firms from retailer Matsuzakaya and
149

food processor Ajinomoto to electronics giants Toshiba and Hitachi, and
automaker Mitsubishi Motors.
There was a high profile for this crackdown, which was front-page
news for months, and there were widely publicized campaigns by the
National Police Agency and business organizations such as Keidanren.
Despite this, and despite a stiffening of the penalties for sokaiya-related
infractions, surveys continue to show that a large (though declining)
number of firms employ the services of the sokaiya. Moreover, several
more firms have since been embroiled in sokaiya scandals, including
Japan Airlines, Kobe Steel and heavy equipment manufacturer Kubota.
Known sokaiya continue to show up at many shareholders’ meetings;
and there is at least one major sokaiya group that maintains a clearly
marked headquarters and a web site.
This study considers the persistence of the sokaiya phenomenon and
the nature of the changes that would be necessary to eradicate it. In par-
ticular, it focuses on the impact of economic reform, and suggests that
the nature of the reforms required to stamp out sokaiya activity would
go well beyond tinkering with regulations concerning corporate gover-
nance. Employing sokaiya is part of a wider strategy employed by poorly
performing executives to keep themselves in their jobs and their com-
panies afloat. Economic reform must proceed far enough so that uncom-
petitive companies have no alternative but to fall by the wayside if such
dark-side strategies, of which the use of sokaiya are only a part, are to be
made obsolete.
We begin by clarifying the origins and nature of sokaiya operations. 
A brief history of attempts to control this form of criminality and an
overview follows a variety of alternative explanations for the existence
of the sokaiya in Japan. A detailed case study of Mitsubishi Motors pro-
vides a concrete illustration of how the sokaiya were used as part of a
broader strategy to cover up under performance. We conclude with the
prognosis for current efforts to eliminate corporate extortion in Japan.
Origins
Szymkowiak (1994) traces the origins of sokaiya activity to the Meiji era
and the pre-modern take-off of Japanese industrialization in the late
nineteenth century. The notion that in the new, joint-stock companies
shareholders were anything more than passive sources of funds were
slow to take root. Companies were quick to turn to those with connec-
tions who could prevent “interference” with managerial prerogatives.
150
Teri Jane Ursacki

Although sokaiya influence was deeply ingrained even before World
War II, it was only in the 1960s and 1970s that their numbers took off
with the influx of large numbers of thugs who had learned an impor-
tant lesson from social activists. Protestors at that time were opposed to
the pollution emitted by companies such as Chisso Corp. (the source of
mercury-induced Minamata disease). Others were against the involve-
ment of major Japanese corporations, such as the Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries in supplying the US military in Vietnam. These protestors had
successfully used the strategy of buying one share each in order to be
able to attend the companies’ meetings. They then turned these meet-
ings into a forum for the airing of their grievances. Targeted companies
turned to established sokaiya for protection from these “invasions” and
low-class thugs quickly realized that threatening to disrupt the share-
holders’ meeting was an easy way to extort cash payments from major
companies with little risk. As a result, the number of active sokaiya
swelled from a few hundred to 6783 by 1982 (Sokaiya no Shinso, 1997).
Subsequent countermeasures have returned the number of active sokaiya
to a few hundred. But those holding out have deep roots in the busi-
nesses – they are not the mere “hangers-on” who crowded in during the
brief heydays when the sokaiya could be seen in major business districts
lining up around the block to receive their annual envelopes of cash.
Thus, the decline in reported numbers considerably overestimates the
actual impact countermeasures have had to date.
Modus operandi
By definition, a sokaiya must own, or have the wherewithal to credibly
threaten to buy, at least enough shares in a company to gain access to
the company’s shareholders’ meeting. At one time, this might have been
as little as one share, but today this generally means 1000 shares, the
minimum specified by the Commercial Code of Japan. In some cases,
the sokaiya have purchased large shareholdings in targeted companies
in order to obtain access to privileges such as speaking rights and insider
information. Firms sometimes use the euphemism “tokushu kabunushi”
(special shareholders) to refer to the sokaiya.
Typical sokaiya operations would include some combination of the
following functions:
(a) gathering information about poor corporate performance;
(b) gathering information about misconduct by firm managers such as
embezzlement;
Taming the Sokaiya
151

(c) gathering information about the private actions of managers or their
families (a manager’s extra-marital affair, a son’s drug addiction, a
daughter’s unplanned pregnancy, etc.);
(d) suppressing the results of their own research into corporate or per-
sonal wrongdoing;
(e) preventing the release of any of these kinds of information by other
sokaiya by buying them off or intimidating them;
(f) preventing ordinary shareholders from asking awkward questions
through verbal or physical intimidation, or simply by filibustering;
and
(g) providing support to cooperative managers in internal power struggles.
At least some of these functions may at times have the potential to be 
of positive value to society. For example, as West (1999) points out,
Japanese financial statements are typically very opaque and provide
much less disclosure than those of comparable US companies. The upper
echelons of sokaiya use their skills in financial analysis to distill infor-
mation about the true performance of the company, including where
investments may be under performing or be complete failures. In prin-
ciple, the revelation of such information could be a useful public service
as the resulting changes in stock prices and corporate management could
result in a superior allocation of capital. However, since the sokaiya only
generate such information in order to extract a payment for not reveal-
ing it, this potential benefit remains largely unrealized. In other cases,
the information is obtained by more surreptitious means, such as by
eavesdropping on inebriated or disgruntled company employees in bars,
or by the use of private detectives. And of course, where the information
concerns private personal matters that are not criminal, but merely
embarrassing, the public interest is in no way served.
The sokaiya who threaten disruption themselves are referred to as
“yato sokaiya” (“opposition party sokaiya”), while those who offer to
ensure the silence of other sokaiya and/or legitimate shareholders
through payoffs or verbal or physical intimidation are referred to as
“yoto sokaiya” (“incumbent party sokaiya”). Many firms have long his-
tories of using yoto sokaiya, and in some cases a firm has been “passed
down” from a sokaiya nearing death to one of his proteges.
The use of sokaiya is one of several tactics that ensure most share-
holders’ meetings in Japan are of extremely short duration – by North
American standards. Other methods include the use of phalanxes of uni-
formed security officers and company personnel with security armbands
to dissuade potential disrupters from entering, and packing meetings
152
Teri Jane Ursacki

with “reliable” company employee shareholders who swiftly, positively
and loudly respond to any suggestions by the management. Most com-
panies also hold their meetings on the same day in late June to ensure
sokaiya and other potentially troublesome shareholders are unable to
attend more than one meeting even if they own shares in several com-
panies (this phenomenon will be discussed in greater detail later). A total
duration of 30 minutes for the annual general meeting of a major cor-
poration is typical, and meetings of 15 minutes or less are quite common.
The main exceptions are a few companies such as electric utilities that
are continually harangued by environmentalists, and some that have
adopted Western-style, free-wheeling meetings as part of a more investor-
friendly style. Apart from these rarities, companies with meetings of over
an hour in duration are usually reported prominently on the front pages
of Japanese daily newspapers. West (1999) used an event-study method-
ology to find that firms that typically have short meetings, but suddenly
have long ones, suffered small but significant drops in their stock prices.
Thus, there may be reasons beyond avoiding embarrassment for Japanese
executives to want short meetings.
Although easily confused with yakuza (Japanese “mafia,” i.e. organ-
ized crime groups) in the popular mind, in fact NPA (National Police
Agency) documents suggest only about 10 percent of sokaiya are actu-
ally members of yakuza groups (more officially known as boryokudan, or
“violent groups”). Many do, however, maintain links with figures from
the underworld. Such connections can give added poignancy to sokaiya
threats, as numerous cases of violence directed at executives, including
shots fired at homes, fire-bombings, slashing of family members and
occasionally murders, have been linked to firms’ attempts to cut sokaiya
ties. Yakuza-affiliated entertainment establishments may also be good
listening posts for the latest rumors on the less savory aspects of corpo-
rate activities.
The part of the company that is generally used to deal with sokaiya is
the “general affairs” department. As mentioned earlier, at one time it
was common to see the sokaiya lined up at companies’ headquarters to
receive their annual “retainers” in cash. These sums varied from a few
hundred to many thousands of dollars, depending on the individual’s
reputation and history with the firm. However, since it was formally
made illegal to pay off the sokaiya in 1982, more cunning ways have
been devised to reward them. Payments are often disguised as inflated
payments for goods or services, for instance, the rental of potted plants,
advertising in sokaiya-controlled publications or billboards, the use of 
a beach house or a training center for company employees or, most 
Taming the Sokaiya
153

commonly, subscriptions to newsletters and magazines. During the
1997–98 series of scandals, it was revealed that some firms were paying
for subscriptions to hundreds of sokaiya-run “newsletters,” many of
which existed for no reason other than to serve as a cover for illicit pay-
ments. Retailers have often given gift certificates, while in the case of
financial firms rewards have included preferential access to “loans,”
which were never repaid, or compensation for losses on stock portfolios.
The latter, which is illegal in Japan, is an example of the peripheral
crimes which managers are often drawn into when they try to hide pay-
ments to the sokaiya. Other common examples of such crimes are falsi-
fication of accounting records and tax evasion by misreporting payoffs
as legitimate expenses.
The sokaiya often attempt to paint themselves as shareholder activists.
One major organization which has had associates linked to numerous
scandals is Rondan Doyukai. In 1999, their headquarters indicated that
they were the headquarters of a “shareholder rights” group, and their
web page included links to legitimate shareholder rights groups around
the world (photo and web page printout are on file with author).
Why do the Sokaiya exist in Japan?
Explanations for why the sokaiya exist in Japan can be categorized as
cultural, economic or universalist.
Cultural factors
A cultural explanation points to traditions and customs in Japan with
deep historical roots. It does not suggest that the traits of a given cul-
ture result in more or less crime than any other, but rather that these
traits may shape the nature of the crimes committed. Ursacki (2000) has
summarized several aspects of the cultural explanation for the sokaiya
phenomenon as follows:
G
The importance of saving face and preserving harmony in Japanese
culture makes individuals there vulnerable to blackmail.
G
Sempai–kohai (senior–junior) relationships make it difficult to resist
organizational pressures for conformity to norms of illicit behavior
(Chikudate, 2000).
G
Customs such as gift-giving and extravagant entertaining provide a
convenient cover for illicit payments.
G
Relativistic ethical reasoning allows managers to justify to themselves
the breaking of rules and laws if there is a higher good at stake. Thus,
154
Teri Jane Ursacki

steeped as they are in a group-oriented culture, the perceived need to
protect the group (their company) where they have spent all of their
working lives is held to be such a higher good.
Economic factors
West (1999: 781–96) provides a detailed exposition of the reasons for 
the existence of the sokaiya based on the economics of information as
commonly used in the economic and financial literature on corporate
governance. West argues that institutions in Japan such as extensive
cross-shareholding between group firms (in the keiretsu) and the main
bank system mean that important stakeholders can be informed of
important developments without the necessity for market-wide release
of the news. Because such “stable” shareholders hold around 70 percent
of the shares in many companies, the float of shares that actually trade
is small, and stock prices can be highly volatile in the face of unexpected
news. The fact that most Japanese boards of directors are comprised
exclusively of insiders (company executives) also ensures companies are
better able to prevent leaks of negative information than their Western
counterparts. Japanese disclosure law is not only weak, but also little
enforced, so managers have little to fear when they keep secrets. Indeed,
West argues that the regulatory bureaucracy is often so concerned with
industry stability that it facilitates an implicit agreement among firms
not to disclose certain negative information.
Through ties to the yakuza, the sokaiya are able to obtain such nega-
tive information. Due to legal and institutional barriers they are largely
unable to profit from it by the means typically used in other countries,
such as lawsuits, greenmail, or short-selling. This combination of struc-
tural conditions in Japan leads them to engage in extortion.
Universalist argument
A third explanation emphasizes that sokaiya payoffs are simply a
uniquely Japanese manifestation of the worldwide phenomenon of poor
managers misusing company resources to try to keep their jobs. In South
Korea and Italy, there are somewhat similar actors known as chongheog-
gun and disturbatori, due to similarities in their national institutions. 
In other countries a variety of actors try to derive profits from informa-
tion they have in ways that reflect the specific circumstances of their
operating environments. More familiar mechanisms to North American
observers would be greenmail, options trading and lawsuits. In some
cases (e.g. options trading, short-selling), the individual with the nega-
tive information does not have to deal with the target firm’s managers
Taming the Sokaiya
155

directly, while in other cases (greenmail, lawsuits), there may be direct
contact which makes the parallel to the sokaiya phenomenon more strik-
ing. However, in each case, the essence of the situation is the same: the
firm’s managers have negative information about the firm that they do
not want to reveal while someone outside the firm finds out about it, 
and tries to profit from it; thus shareholder wealth is transferred to the
discoverer.
Attempts to control Sokaiya activities
Under 1982 revisions to the Commercial Code of Japan, it became ille-
gal for companies to convey benefits to shareholders in connection with
the exercise of their rights as shareholders. Rieki kyoyo, the legal name for
this practice, was forbidden under Article 294-2. Directors could be sued
for the amount of such illegally conveyed benefits under Article 266-2.
Conviction for violations carried a maximum sentence of six months
imprisonment or a fine of up to 300000 yen. In a series of sokaiya scan-
dals in 1997–98, over a hundred executives from the nation’s largest
companies in the banking, securities, retailing, automobile, electronics
and food processing sectors were arrested. Almost all were subsequently
convicted, however, the executives concerned invariably had their sen-
tences suspended, as did the vast majority of convicted sokaiya. While
this may appear lenient, as Haley (1991) has noted, Japan sends very few
of its convicts to prison, and few of those that do go spend much time
there. The arrests were followed by a major campaign to shame compa-
nies into publicly committing to abandoning ties with the sokaiya.
Major business organizations encouraged members to make such decla-
rations and prominent signs on entrance doors announcing that the
sokaiya were not welcome rapidly appeared throughout Kabuto-cho,
home to the Tokyo Stock Exchange and to most of Japan’s leading secu-
rities companies. The penalties for requesting or making sokaiya pay-
ments were also stiffened, becoming effective by 23 December 1997.
Demanding or making such payments now carries a maximum penalty
of three years or a fine of three million yen.
A uniquely Japanese response has been a tendency for companies 
to hold their shareholders’ meetings on the same day so that sokaiya
resources are spread too thin to affect many companies. With encour-
agement from the authorities, the number of companies holding their
meetings on the same day in late June rose sharply starting in the 1980s.
By 1998, over 2000 listed companies met at 10 AM on the same day,
including 95 percent of those listed on the First Section of the Tokyo
156
Teri Jane Ursacki

Stock Exchange: this is an elite group which includes almost all the
nation’s leading corporations. The meetings proceeded under the pro-
tection of more than 10000 police officers as well as countless private
security personnel and corporate “volunteers.”
The scandals of 1997–98 led many major corporations to adopt 
policies intended to increase the transparency of their shareholders’
meetings. Some were even broadcast on the Internet. Criticism of the
“meeting day” phenomenon also led to a decline in the number of simul-
taneous meetings: by June 2001 the number had declined for four con-
secutive years, with a drop of 56 in 2001 over 2000. Even so, there were
still over 2000 companies holding their meetings in this “traditional”
way – including 1345 First Section TSE firms.
The impact of these countermeasures is difficult to assess. The num-
ber of sokaiya officially recorded in NPA statistics dropped from 6783 in
1982 to 1682 in 1983 following the introduction of the Commercial
Code reforms. This appears to have reflected primarily a re-classification
of extortionists from the sokaiya to other categories as some failed to
meet the new, higher minimum number of shares required to attend
meetings (Szymkowiak, 1994). Moreover, in most cases, securities firms
had begun restricting odd-lot sales and selling only in units of 1000
shares even before the reforms. Thus, what may have led many periph-
eral sokaiya to withdraw was the signal that greater attention to sokaiya
activities on the part of authorities had increased the likelihood of
arrest. A similar drop from around 1100 or 1200 down to 600 was noted
following the 1997–98 crackdown, which signaled that the authorities
were once again focusing on this issue after many years of neglect.
It is difficult to ignore the fact that for many years the sokaiya had
operated with relative impunity as the authorities turned a blind eye to
their activities. When major companies were able to go for years at a
stretch without a single shareholder question, when many were able to
wrap up their annual meetings in 15 minutes or less, when companies
were attacked for hours at one year’s meeting only to have the next
meeting last less than 30 minutes, and when surveys published in major
newspapers reported large percentages of public companies admitting 
to dealing with the sokaiya, it is simply not credible to believe that the
authorities were unaware of the scale of the problem, or that the roughly
two dozen cases prosecuted between 1982 and 1997 were anything but
the tip of the iceberg.
Indeed, with the heat of the 1997–98 scandals dying down and a 
spate of recent corporate scandals providing ample fodder for criticism,
sokaiya activities appeared to rebound. NPA statistics showed that the
Taming the Sokaiya
157

number of sokaiya attending meetings dropped from 202 individuals at
139 meetings in 1999 to 113 persons at 58 meetings in 2000. However,
early figures for 2001 show a reversal of this trend. After declining from 86
sokaiya at 46 companies on the “meeting day” in June 1999 to a low of 43
at 31 companies in 2000, the number rose to 64 individuals at 44 compa-
nies on the “meeting day” in June 2001. At 13 of these 44 meetings, a total
of 20 sokaiya spoke, double the number in 2000. This confirmed a trend
noted earlier in the year when 46 sokaiya attended 30 meetings between
January and April 2001, up from 11 meetings attended the previous year.
The persistence of the sokaiya in the face of efforts to control them is
also evidenced by the results of polls conducted by the National Center
for the Elimination of Boryokudan (violent groups), an affiliate of the NPA.
In the 2001 survey of listed firms 1977 (about two-thirds) responded, and
513 (26.9 percent) of those were the recipients of demands by sokaiya.
Almost half of the demands were for less than 100000 yen, but 28 were
for over 10 million yen, including eight that exceeded 100 million yen.
These figures showed little change over surveys conducted by the same
organization in 1995 and 1999 (The Japan Times Online, 16 March 2001).
A closer look: Mitsubishi Motors Corporation and the sokaiya
Understanding the operations of the sokaiya may be facilitated by 
a detailed look at one specific case. A string of incidents involving
Mitsubishi Motors Corporation between 1997 and 2001 were chosen for
this purpose. This selection is not intended to imply that this particular
case was any more egregious than others that came to light around the
same time. Rather, the case has enough richness to illustrate some basic
aspects of sokaiya operations while still being simple enough to sum-
marize in a case study of reasonable length. (Unless otherwise indicated,
the facts of these incidents have been summarized from press reports 
in English and Japanese from the newspapers listed in the references. 
All Japanese personal names are reported in Western style, i.e. with the
family name last.)
By late 1997, the Japanese media were full of reports of several major
sokaiya scandals. A well-known yoto sokaiya named Ryuichi Koike had
borrowed a massive sum from the Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank and had used
the money to buy 300000 shares in each of Japan’s top four securities
companies, Nomura, Nikko, Daiwa and Yamaichi: he then used these
shareholdings to extort a variety of benefits from these companies. After
all five companies had been raided by the police, numerous executives
were arrested for paying off Koike. Yamaichi would later fail as it was
158
Teri Jane Ursacki

revealed that it had hidden over US$2 billion in losses through a prac-
tice known as tobashi (shifting worthless assets from one affiliate to
another so no one ever held them at year end and hence no one was
required to declare the losses). Earlier in the year, top food processor
Ajinomoto had been caught making payoffs, and the courts were still
dealing with the fate of those arrested in a 1996 incident involving
Takashimaya, a leading department store.
Against this background of an apparent crackdown, on 22 October
1997 the police raided Mitsubishi Motors Corporation’s (MMC) head-
quarters and ten private residences in a search for evidence of sokaiya pay-
offs. Yuichi Ueki, 43, the head of the general affairs department, Atsushi
Ueba, 56, his predecessor, and Yoichi Shima, 38, a senior member of the
general affairs department, were all arrested under suspicion of violation
of the Commercial Code. They were followed the next day by Yasuo
Shimizu, 59, a managing director of the firm and president of the Urawa
Red Devils, a J-League professional soccer team owned by MMC. Also
arrested were Terubo Tei (a.k.a. Teiji Nakamoto or Jo Mo Chung), 53, and
his assistant Kaoru Hamada, 40. Tei was the head of Nakamoto Sogo
Kikaku (“Nakamoto General Planning”), a long-established sokaiya group.
The timing of the news was particularly unfortunate for MMC, as its
President was forced to hold two news conferences on 22 October to deal
with the two waves of arrests – this on the very day that the Tokyo Auto
Show was to open. News of the arrests forced the company to scale back
its presentation at the show, and cancel most of the advertizing for 
a month at this key point in the sales season.
These arrests soon led to others, once it became known that around
thirty companies had been paying off Tei, including Mitsubishi Electric,
Mitsubishi Estate and several other members of the Mitsubishi keiretsu
(industrial group), as well as electronics manufacturers Hitachi and
Toshiba. Tei’s wife owned Honma International, an auto repair and sales
company that ran a beach house (umi-no-ie) in Fujisawa, a resort town
southwest of Tokyo. The companies involved had been paying substan-
tial sums to Honma for the use of this beach house, though in most
cases few if any employees used the facilities. Tei had reportedly received
between 200 and 300 million yen from these companies in the years
after the beach house was opened in July 1986. Hitachi and Toshiba had
been paying Tei since before the beach house was opened, and it (the
beach house) simply became the vehicle through which their payments
were channeled.
MMC had been spun off from its parent, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries,
in December 1988, at which time Tei purchased 3000 shares. Although
Taming the Sokaiya
159

he never attended the company’s annual meetings, he began to receive
payoffs from the company in 1989 after submitting a list of questions
to the management and requesting three million yen. Shimizu, the then
head of general affairs, began by paying him two million yen in 1989.
This was subsequently raised to 2.5 million yen in 1991 and three mil-
lion yen in 1994. His successors in the “general affairs” office – Ueba and
Ueki – continued the payments and reported them to Shimizu, by then
their superior. The payments were reported as “special entertainment
expenses” to the tax authorities, as this category requires no receipts. Tei
appears to have delivered the peaceful meetings that the management
was seeking. From the initial shareholders’ meeting in 1989 to the break-
ing of the scandal in 1997, not one meeting lasted over 30 minutes, and
after 1994 not a single question was asked from the floor.
The Umi-no-Ie case, as it came to be known, came to light as a result
of a 1993 sokaiya incident involving Kirin Beer, then Japan’s largest
brewer and a fellow member of the Mitsubishi keiretsu. In the process of
investigating the various sokaiya Kirin had been paying off, police found
that the company had been delivering beer to the beach house owned
by Honma International, which was known to be owned by the wife of
a sokaiya. Further research showed that many other companies had been
making payments to Honma International, supposedly for the use of the
beach house. These payments were suspicious because it became appar-
ent that most of the companies were not using the facilities, and the
payments were concentrated around the date in June when most listed
companies hold their annual shareholders’ meetings. Most such beach
houses receive their corporate payments in September, when figures on
actual usage by the firms’ employees have been established. Moreover,
unlike most others in the area the beach house in question did not put
up a list of companies with whom it had contracts for the benefit of 
visiting employees. Finally, Tei was found to own shares in a dozen
Mitsubishi group companies, most of whom were transferring funds to
the beach house.
In 1996, the Metropolitan Police Agency advised companies that had
been paying off sokaiya that they would not be prosecuted if they imme-
diately stopped payments, and in 1997 about half those that had been
paying off Tei ceased their support. However, MMC among others, 
continued to pay Tei into 1997. On 28 October 1997 Shimizu admitted 
initiating payments to Tei. Two days later, MMC President Takemune
Kimura and Chairman Hirokazu Nakamura, who had been president
from 1989 to 1995, announced that they would resign from their posi-
tions to take responsibility for the scandals as soon as successors could
160
Teri Jane Ursacki

be named. They also announced the establishment of an internal inquiry,
as well as a department to ensure all sokaiya contacts were permanently
ended. In fact, however, while Nakamura was replaced as president in
November 1997, Kimura was “promoted” to chairman and held the posi-
tion, which in Japan is largely ceremonial though still highly prestigious,
until 1999.
The investigation of the Umi-no-Ie affair quickly led to further revela-
tions. On 18 November Noriyoshi Sakamoto, the head of Sakamoto Kigyo
Chosakai (“Sakamoto Enterprise Research”), was arrested for allegedly
receiving payments of some 1.3 million yen from MMC. On 24 November
sokaiya Sunao Kakihara, 44, was arrested for allegedly receiving 1.9 mil-
lion yen in car loan payments between 1995 and 1997 in exchange for
staying away from the company’s meetings. On 4 February 1998, sokaiya
Taichiro Otake and his wife were arrested for receiving payoffs from a
number of companies, including MMC, under the guise of payment for
advertising in a newsletter for would-be stewardesses published by his
wife. Half the cost went to Otake himself directly as an “introduction fee.”
MMC’s June 1998 annual meeting took place under tight security. A
police van was parked just around the corner, and numerous security
officers and employee “volunteers” were positioned outside to deal with
any unwelcome visitors (by first-hand observation of the author).
The trials of those arrested took place during 1998. Due to the statute
of limitations, only offences during the last three years could be consid-
ered. On 13 February MMC executives Ueba, Ueki and Shimizu pleaded
guilty. They were sentenced on 16 April to four months each, suspended
for two years in the case of Ueba and Ueki, and three years in the case of
Shimizu. Judge Hisaharu Yasui sentenced sokaiya Otake to eight months
in prison on 15 September and exactly three months later sokaiya Tei
received eight months (prosecutors had asked for nine months in both
cases). Hamada, Tei’s accomplice, got four months of prison time.
Press reports seldom mention the exact nature of the information that
sokaiya were paid not to publicize. In some cases, this information is
public knowledge which management would prefer to see forgotten,
and in other cases it is insider information, which it hopes will not
become public. MMC had an abundance of information of both types.
As a fourth or fifth-ranked firm behind Toyota, Nissan, Honda and
(usually) Mazda, MMC had to struggle to stay alive. Its overall domestic
market share hovered in the 4–6 percent range, with a strong position
only in minicars (vehicles of less than 660c.c.), which also were sliding
in popularity after some of their regulatory advantages had been 
withdrawn. The company had been listed when it was spun off from 
Taming the Sokaiya
161

its parent, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, in 1988, just before the Japanese
stock market bubble reached its peak and crashed. It was an oppor-
tune time to sell shares, but investors who bought them suffered badly: 
from a peak of 1440 yen in December 1988, shortly after listing, the
shares declined to 549 yen in August 1992. They recovered partially, but
then plunged again, hitting 208 yen in October 1998, a decline of over 
85 percent from the 1988 peak. The firm’s interest-bearing debt load, at
36 percent of total assets, was more than seven times industry leader
Toyota’s ratio (of less than 5 percent). Profitability also languished, with
return on sales never exceeding half that of Toyota. Return on sales 
had sunk to just over one-sixth that of Toyota in the fiscal year ended 
31 March 1997, and substantial losses were due to be reported in March
1998. These problems resulted in Moody’s downgrading the firm’s long-
term debt to Baa3 in August 1998, a rating just one notch above junk
bond status. By April 2001 the firm’s losses would result in Daimler-
Chrysler taking a 34 percent stake in the firm, in effect, taking it over.
In addition to these financial indicators, the firm was dogged by
reports of corporate misbehavior, including a sexual harassment suit at
its US subsidiary in 1996, and revelations in 2001 that since the firm’s
inception it had hidden more than sixty thousand customer complaints
from the Japanese Ministry of Transport in order to avoid costly and
embarrassing vehicle recalls.
Clearly, this was a firm that had a lot of things it would rather have not
seen brought to the public’s attention, and in general it is not clear exactly
which problems were related to which sokaiya incidents. However, MMC’s
problems with concealing customer complaints about defective vehicles
played a very clear role in an incident which came to light on 18 June
2001 with the re-arrest of sokaiya Sunao Kakihara, who had been a minor
player in the 1997 series of scandals. Police alleged that he phoned MMC
on 14 December 2000 to say that he was going to complain about the
firm’s defective cars at the 26 June 2001 annual meeting, and that the
next day he called the head of general affairs to say that he was going 
to post material about defective cars on a website. Company officials did
not cooperate, but rather brought in the police to deal with the alleged
threat.
Conclusions and prognosis
The MMC case suggests several tentative conclusions with respect to
why the sokaiya exist and how their activities might be eliminated, or at
least minimized.
162
Teri Jane Ursacki

Paying off a sokaiya can be regarded as part of an “image management”
program. In the case of a very strong firm, such image management may
simply spare management some embarrassing moments. Cultural pro-
pensity to avoid loss of face and so on may be the dominant factor influ-
encing managerial behavior. In this case stricter enforcement of existing
laws and/or improvements in corporate governance through measures
such as better financial disclosure and more outside directors may be
somewhat effective in reducing illegal behavior. However, in the case 
of a weaker player such as MMC, such payments could reasonably 
be argued to be a part of a rational, overall strategy to stay alive in an
intensely competitive market. Clearly, even direct police warnings of a
crackdown had proven inadequate to persuade management to cut its
sokaiya ties. The pattern of deception ran deep and was not limited to the
use of the sokaiya: for decades the firm had been hiding customer com-
plaints and making false reports to the tax and transportation authori-
ties. This pattern of behavior is not uniquely Japanese. Weak and failing
firms the world over have tried to stave off the inevitable by keeping the
truth of their situations from becoming known. This assessment suggests
that the economic and “universalist” explanations of sokaiya activity
outlined above may be more applicable in the case of weak firms.
If sokaiya influence is to be rooted out of the weaker companies as 
well as from the strong, the economic environment must make it more
difficult for firms to maintain the façade that they are doing an accept-
able, even if not excellent job. In the past, the whole drift of Japanese 
economic policy has been to support the weaker players to avoid the dis-
ruption of bankruptcies, job losses, and so on. This facilitated the cover-
up strategies of weak firms in many ways. For example, near-zero interest
rates meant that the burden of unproductive assets was much lighter and
hence firms that had incurred heavy losses could limp along for years, or
even decades. However, after many years of stalling and avoiding glaring
problems, the pace of change in Japan seems to have picked up. The new
millennium has seen an increase in reports of rapid unwinding of cross-
shareholdings, increased involvement of foreign investors in Japanese
companies, new accounting rules forcing firms to account for failed
investments and true pension liabilities, and plans by the Koizumi gov-
ernment to press for a more rapid resolution of the long-festering prob-
lems in the financial sector. Each of these measures is likely to reduce the
business opportunities available for the sokaiya by reducing the viability
of the overall strategies weak firms have used to stay afloat.
As cross-holding of shares by firms declines, their ability to placate 
top shareholders through private disclosure of key information lessens.
Taming the Sokaiya
163

“Ordinary” investors will demand that information be in the pub-
lic domain, and once public there will be no premium on its non-
dissemination. Foreign firms have now bought large stakes in Japanese
firms in many industries including insurance, banking, automobiles and
so on. These foreign investors are used to higher levels of disclosure and
are less culturally averse to confronting angry shareholders, including
the sokaiya. They will simply not countenance the level of illegal activ-
ity that may have prevailed in their takeover targets. For example, when
Renault took over Nissan, Japan’s number two automaker, the company
refused to pay sokaiya and suffered through a turbulent first meeting in
June 2000 that lasted several hours. However, the next year the sokaiya
gave up and the proceedings went smoothly. (We might suggest that
given Daimler-Chrysler’s expanded role in MMC, it seems unlikely there
will be any new incidents there.) New accounting rules will require 
firms to acknowledge pension liabilities and losses on their investments,
thereby minimizing the ability of firms to present questionable finan-
cial reports without clearly breaking the law. While some executives
might not be deterred by the potential to violate the law, auditing firms,
which may have cooperated as long as the practices could be considered
as falling into a gray area, are likely to be much less flexible now that
they are unambiguously forbidden. The move to have banks accurately
report the true quality of their loans will push more marginal firms to
the breaking point where no amount of deception can hide their fail-
ures. Thus, under a reformed economy, if it actually materializes, there
will be less possibility of keeping secrets and fewer firms that see paying
the sokaiya as a way to survive.
Economic reform can help, but must go beyond adjustments to the
Commercial Code to outlaw this or that practice. It must establish an
environment where market forces do not allow weak firms who are vul-
nerable to blackmail to limp along for decades, as Japan has previously
done. As long as reform is timid then weak or corrupt companies can
stay in business by buying off their critics – but with the stiff wind of
deregulation-induced competition, and with positive real interest rates
that put pressure on value-destroying corporations, these illicit practices
should be less possible. Vigilance in enforcement will still be necessary,
as periodic scandals in the West continue to show, but at least such
efforts will stand a fighting chance. As the losses of dollars, jobs, and in
some cases even lives have shown, tolerance of past patterns of corpo-
rate behavior is not a harmless proposition.
However, the sokaiya have shown themselves to be highly adaptable.
It is likely that rather than disappearing, they will shift to other forms
164
Teri Jane Ursacki

of blackmail outside the highly visible shareholders’ meeting arena and
will target their activities at sectors where such reforms are lagging, such
as regional banks and life insurance companies. In an economy the size
of Japan’s, there will always be enough managers with things to hide, to
keep at least a few enterprising extortionists in business.
References
Asahi Shimbun, paper and online editions, various dates.
Chikudate, N. (2000) A phenomenological approach to inquiring into an 
ethically-bankrupted organization: A case study of a Japanese company. Journal
of Business Ethics 28: 59–72.
The Commercial Code & The Audit Special Exceptions Law of Japan, EHS Law Bulletin
Series, Vol. II (1994). Tokyo, Eibun-Horei-Sha Inc.
The Globe and Mail, various dates.
Haley, J. O. (1991) Authority Without Power: Law and the Japanese Paradox, 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Japan Times, paper and online editions, various dates.
Kobayashi, K. (1998) Rieki Kyoyo no Kinshi to Kaisha Taio no Subete (everything a
company needs to know about coping with the ban on payoffs). Tokyo: Torii
Shobo.
Mainichi Shimbun/Mainichi Daily News, paper and online editions, various dates.
Nihon Keizai Shimbun, paper and online editions, various dates.
Nikkei Weekly, various dates.
Sokaiya no Shinso (The Truth about Sokaiya), Shukan Daiyamondo (The Diamond
Weekly), May 10, 1997: 24–33.
Szymkowiak, K. (1994) Sokaiya: An examination of the social and legal develop-
ment of Japan’s corporate extortionists. International Journal of the Sociology of
Law 22: 123–43.
Ursacki, T. (2000) “Restoring the legitimacy of Japanese business in the post-
bubble era: Can good economics make good Ethics easier?” in P. Bowles and
L. T. Woods (eds), Japan After the Economic Miracle: In Search of New Directions,
London: Kluwer Academic.
West, M. D. (1999) Information, institutions and extortion in Japan and the
United States: Making sense of Sokaiya racketeers. Northwestern University Law
Review 93: 767–817.
Taming the Sokaiya
165

166
9
Fighting against Corruption: The
Japanese Approach to Reform
Corporate Governance
Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka
Introduction
The legal framework and enforcement apparatus used in the fight
against bribery are being steadily improved in many countries. The pub-
lic and private sectors in Japan have participated in this trend. This
chapter provides an overview of changes in the anti-corruption legal
framework and a snapshot of corporate initiatives to fight against cor-
ruption in Japan.
The chapter is based on a survey of corporate responsibility conducted
by the Asahi Newspaper Foundation.1 The first section of the chapter dis-
cusses the conceptual definition of corruption and the legal implication
of such a definition; this section also briefly describes the legal environ-
ment surrounding Japanese corporations. The second section analyses
the voluntary initiatives on anti-corruption compliance and the third sec-
tion provides findings from the survey that gives a snapshot of Japanese
companies’ efforts to achieve a corporate conduct with higher business
integrity. In the fourth section, the authors refer to a similar study in
order to derive a global perspective. In conclusion, the fifth section intro-
duces initiatives that will aid anti-corruption compliance management in
Japan.
Corruption
Definitions and concepts in Japan
The World Bank defines corruption as “the abuse of public office for pri-
vate gain” (Bottelier, 1998). It is clear from the words – bribery, corruption

Fighting against Corruption
167
and abuse – that they refer to transactions that are in some sense “bad.”
However, the economics literature and studies of anti-bribery commit-
ment (Gordon and Miyake, 2001) show that companies, business associ-
ations and civil society groups are having difficulty moving from general
characterizations of corruption – such as that proposed by the World
Bank – to a more operational definition. It can be difficult to define the
frontier between a corrupt transaction and other forms of quid pro quo
and networking that are essential to any social intercourse, including 
the conduct of business relations (Williamson, 1979; Rose-Ackermann,
1999). In addition, difficult questions of responsibility emerge when, as
the business community often points out, companies fall victim to the
crime of extortion. Finally, defining corrupt transactions is made more
difficult by the fact that interpretations of appropriate practice are, to
some extent at least, culturally conditioned.
Japan is often said to be a relatively less diverse society in which the
population still shares the similar cultural value based on Confucianism,
Buddhism and the original religion of Japan (Taka, 1994). Such a het-
erogeneous society tends to rely less on contractual relationships and
more on establishing long-term relationships by reciprocal “favors”
(Scott, 1995). This tendency has been further enhanced throughout 
the development of the political economy in Japan, which emphasizes
“co-operation” between the many government agencies and businesses
(Wade, 1992). It is thus that close ties have developed between the pub-
lic and certain businesses in this environment for a number of decades
in Japan. This backdrop may help to explain the particular orientation
of Japanese legislative strategy, which tends to view the fight against
corruption very much through the lens of prohibiting anti-competitive
practices.
Following a series of corruption scandals in Japan and the recent 
ratification of the OECD Bribery Convention, significant revisions were
made to the law governing corruption. In response to the OECD
Convention, the Japanese government made amendments to the Unfair
Competition Prevention Law (Fusei Kyousou Boushi Hou) that came into
force on February 1999. Domestic bribery offences are regulated under
article 198 of the Penal Code. The Japanese treatment of bribery of 
foreign public officials under the aegis of its domestic unfair competi-
tion law, rather than under the law regulating domestic bribery, is not
common among adherents to the OECD Bribery Convention.
There are other laws, such as the Code of Criminal Procedure and 
the Commercial Code that contain provisions relevant to other obliga-
tions under the Convention. The seizure of the bribe and its proceeds,

168
Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka
especially those subject to money laundering, are governed under the
Law Concerning Punishment of Organized Crimes, Control of Crime
Proceeds and other Matters (the Anti-Organized Crime Law).
Article 8 of the Bribery Convention requires maintenance of books 
and records, financial statement disclosures and accounting and audit-
ing standards. It prohibits the making of falsified or fraudulent accounts,
statements and records for the purpose of bribing foreign public officials
or of hiding such bribery. In Japanese law, under article 32 bis (1) of the
Commercial Code, it is found that every “trader” “shall prepare account-
ing books and balance sheets for making clear the conditions of business
properties and profit and loss” (OECD, 2000).
It is also worth observing that an increasing number of companies are
trying to control “private to private” corruption – that is, corrupt acts
that occur between two or more private actors.2 Sixty-four per cent of
companies refer to private-to-private business relationship in their codes
of conduct, often using the words “bribery” to refer to the act. In the
Japanese legal framework, it is governed under anti-competition law as
it is seen as the intent or the act to obtain undue advantage that is not
available in a market place.
Though it takes two partners to undertake a corrupt transaction,
countries have different views on who should be punished more
severely: this can be manifested in the laws regulating either of the par-
ties, making it harsher for one than the other. In some countries, bribe
payers are treated more harshly than recipients. In contrast, some coun-
tries do not even criminalize the payment of bribes. In the case of Japan,
the recent change in the Code of Civil Servants provides for more severe
treatment of the recipients of bribes if they are public officials.
Figure 9.1 depicts the Japanese legal framework on anti-corruption. 
As seen, a corrupt act often leads to the violation of a number of laws
besides “anti-corruption” laws. Lack of accurate record keeping for the
purpose of concealing bribery is in violation of the Commercial Laws,
while misappropriation of company’s asset for personal use is in viola-
tion of article 252 and 253 of the Penal Code (ouryou). In order to reflect
the particular wording of Japanese laws governing corruption, the sur-
vey asked whether the following items were mentioned in their codes
of conduct. It might be useful to relate “corrupt” acts with applicable
laws (Table 9.1).
Figure 9.2 shows anti-corruption related subject mentioned in codes of
corporate conduct of Japanese companies.3 Although the codes started to
address a wide range of subjects concerning business integrity, the spe-
cific language catering specifically to public–private relationship is still

Fighting against Corruption
169
under development. “Reception and offering of gifts and entertainment”
is quite widespread as an attribute in corporate codes in Japan, with 
56 percent of the codes mentioning it. Unfortunately, the language in
the Asahi survey questionnaire does not differentiate public–private from
private–private relationships.
Other laws governing business integrity 
including private–private business relationships
Laws relevant to the OECD Bribery Convention
“Anti-bribery” Laws
Figure 9.1
Anti-corruption laws in Japan
Table 9.1
Attributes on anti-corruption and governing laws
Attributes
Governing laws
Reference to relationship with
Unfair Competition Prevention Law
foreign government officials
Reference to political contributions
Law to Curtail Political Contribution
Reference to relationship with
Article 25 of the Penal Code
government officials
Reference to auditing and
Commercial Code
accounting responsibility
Reference to the use of company
Article 252 and 253 of the Penal Code
assets for private purposes
Reference to reporting obligation
Article 38 of the Penal Code
of expenses
Reference to reception and offering
Unfair Competition Prevention Law,
of gifts and entertainment
Fair Trading Law

170
Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka
Anti-corruption management systems
The emergence of global due diligence in the fight 
against corruption
From the perspective of legal enforcement, anti-corruption legislation
faces formidable challenges. It is becoming more common in enforce-
ment circles to recognize that what companies do in the fight against
bribery is as important to the successful outcome of that fight as the
actions taken by public enforcement officials. The biggest challenge is to
establish patterns of compliance or well-defined expectations so that
both internal and external parties can judge a company’s compliance
efforts. These agreed patterns of management practice in the corporate
fight against bribery might be thought of as “due diligence” in the fight
against bribery. Precisely because of the difficulty to do so, governments
often adopt cooperative enforcement strategies or quasi-voluntary meas-
ures to regulate areas where it is hard for outside monitors to determine
the degree of corporate compliance (e.g. Haas, 2000 or OECD, 2001). 
69.0
67.0
59.0
56.0
50.0
47.0
46.0
40.0
39.0
37.0
23.0
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
Anti-trust
(in per cent)
Insider trading
Treatment of business
information
Reception and offering of
gifts and entertainment
Use of company assets
for private purposes
Auditing and accounting
responsibility
Obligation to report
expenses
Protection of client’s
information
Relationship with
government’s officials
Political contribution
Relationship with foreign
officials
Figure 9.2
Attributes in codes of corporate conduct (percentage of codes men-
tioning attribute)

Fighting against Corruption
171
This has been increasingly the case in anti-corruption enforcement,
which often stresses initiatives taken by the private sector.
While the merging and co-ordination of private and public enforce-
ment efforts is located on the cutting edge of regulatory strategy in much
of the OECD area, its Japanese equivalent has been around for a long
time. The history of economic development in Japan is often identified
with the close relationship between the government and large corpora-
tions. Companies are often directed by “administrative guidance” which
has no enforceability. The companies follow the guidance in order to
avoid the adverse effect as a result of non-compliance – for example the
loss of discretely preferential treatment. Such practices, as some argue,
fostered adoption of semi-voluntary initiatives among Japanese cor-
porate societies (e.g. OECD, 1998). On the other hand, more cynical
observers argue that the business sector has been safeguarding the stan-
dard by pre-empting the government to enact new regulations
(Matthews and Mayes, 1994).
Drawing on an international sample of company codes, Gordon and
Miyake (1999) show that a global model of due diligence seems to be
emerging. This de facto standard for management practice in the fight
against bribery placed heavy emphasis on record keeping, commitment
by top management, internal monitoring, and whistle-blowing facili-
ties. Voluntary initiatives to improve corporate conduct are translated
into the introduction of a company-wide campaign to improve busi-
ness integrity. Developing a comprehensive “anticorruption” compli-
ance program as part of a company’s standard business practice – and
that of its foreign subsidiaries – may limit a company’s risk and help 
avoid potential costs. An anticorruption compliance strategy can also
help to protect the company’s reputation, minimize its liability, and
maintain its long-term viability (adapted from US State Department,
2001: 4).
Formulation of anti-corruption compliance program follows disci-
plines found in strategic management literature. It involves the follow-
ing: (1) formulating and articulation of corporate strategy that is in line
with internal and external conditions that the firm faces; (2) imple-
menting the strategy with clear and standardized guidance; (3) tracking
the strategy, detecting problems and making necessary adjustments
(Pearce, 1992; Band and Scanlan, 1995). Their elements are translated
into certain actions in the framework of the anti-corruption compliance
program that enhances “institutionalization” of anti-corruption culture
in a company (see Box 9.1).

172
Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka
Japanese managerial practice in the fight against corruption
This section provides an overview of anti-corruption compliance pro-
grams implemented by Japanese companies as reported in the survey of
the Asahi Newspaper Foundation.4 Here, instead of the total number of
companies in the sample, 187, the denominator is 119, the number 
of companies that responded in the survey that they have an anti-
corruption compliance system which specifically deals with one or more
of the following subject – reception and offering of gifts and entertain-
ment, political contribution, relationship with foreign officials, and
relationship with government officials.
Since the introduction of codes of corporate conduct by Keidanren, the
number of companies adopting the codes has increased enormously. 
In 1990, only 30 percent of large companies had written codes5 and over
70 percent did not have any monitoring system (Japan Productivity
Center, 1991). Below is a snapshot of corporate efforts to implement the
anti-corruption compliance program in recent years. In reading the sta-
tistics, one needs to keep in mind that the sample is large, of well-known
corporations in Japan, but it does not necessarily represent the universe
of Japanese companies (see Annex).
Code of conduct:
83.2 percent of companies replied that they distribute
a code of corporate conduct to all employees. It is evident that compa-
nies adapt various approaches to disseminate policy statement – some
employ codes of conduct, while others rely on compliance manuals, 
or in some cases they have both. 77.1 percent of companies made a 
compliance manual.
G Full support of senior management
G Establish and adhere to a written corporate code of conduct
G Establish an organizational compliance structure
G Provide anticorruption training and education seminars
G Undertake due diligence: self monitoring, monitoring of suppliers and
reports to the BOF
G Auditing and internal accounting controls
G Compliance mechanisms: confidentiality and non retaliation, whistle
blowing
G Disciplinary measures
Box 9.1
Core elements of anti-corruption compliance program – suggested by
the US Department of State

Fighting against Corruption
173
Control of implementation:
87.4 percent of companies responded that
they have some units in charge of the implementation; 18.5 percent of
them specialized, 23.5 with multiple responsibility and 45.4 percent 
of companies have several units.
Sensitivity training:
84.8 percent of companies provide some kind 
of sensitivity training about business integrity to some portion of their
employees.6 37 percent of companies said they provide seminars for
selected members (either certain sections or certain levels). 45.8 percent
responded that they provide seminars for everyone in the company.
Resource-bank availability:
68.1 percent of companies responded that
they make resources available for employees. 64.7 percent of companies
said that they have a place for employees to go and talk about these 
subjects. 26.1 percent of them widely disseminate telephone numbers
or EM addresses. 11.8 percent of respondents mention the protection of
inside informers in their codes of conduct, while 65.1 percent refers 
to disciplinary action. 11.8 percent of companies make records and 
documents available for reference.
Monitoring mechanisms:
67.8 percent of companies implement mon-
itoring mechanisms. 30.5 percent of companies have a specialized unit
to monitor whether policy statement and codes of conduct are complied
87.4
84.8
83.2
77.1
68.1
67.8
65.1
61.3
53.0
29.1
12.8
11.8
7.7
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
100.0
Compliance officer/unit
(in per cent)
Sensitivity training
Distribute codes of
conduct
Compliance manual
Hotline
Monitoring
Disciplinary action
Record keeping
External audit
(strengthen)
Other external services
Government
surveillence
Protection of informer
Parent surveillence
Figure 9.3
Compliance mechanisms

174
Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka
with. 37.3 percent of companies have a unit that has a dual responsi-
bility to carry out compliance monitoring.
Supervisors:
82.2 percent of companies allocate supervisors for com-
pliance program. 8.5 percent assigned a member of the senior manage-
ment to oversee especially the program. Another 61 percent assigned a
senior level manager to oversee the program along with other responsi-
bilities. 5.1 percent have a manager especially in charge of the program,
while 7.5 percent of companies have a manager overseeing the program
while having other responsibilities.
Record-keeping:
61.3 percent of companies refer to record keeping, 
53 percent refer to external audit, 29.1 percent consult with other exter-
nal services such as lawyers, 12.8 percent use government surveillance,
7.7 percent receive surveillance from parent companies.
Figure 9.3 illustrates these breakdown.
Comparing Japanese and international management practice
This section provides information on how Japanese management prac-
tices, as captured in the Asahi survey, compare with international stan-
dard practices, as measured in the analysis of corporate codes conducted
by Gordon and Miyake (2000). Since sampling and research method-
ologies are substantially different between the two studies, these com-
parisons provide only rough indications of differences or similarities.7
The most robust result that emerges from this comparison of the two
studies is that Japanese management practices seem to be similar to
global practices. Aside from a stronger emphasis on anti-bribery train-
ing, there is no evidence in the Asahi survey of any distinctive
“Japanese” managerial approach to the fight against bribery.
Record keeping:
63 percent of companies mentioned record keeping in
their codes of conduct. 61.3 percent of Japanese companies responded
to the survey that their codes mention the responsibility for good record
keeping.
Disciplinary actions:
26.1 percent of codes studied mentioned disci-
plinary actions. 65.1 percent of Japanese respondents said their codes
mention disciplinary actions.
Use of compliance manuals:
32.6 percent of codes studied mention
compliance manual, while 77.1 percent of Japanese companies said they
have a compliance manual.
Whistle blowing facility:
41.3 percent of companies mention the exis-
tence of “hotline” where people can talk in confidence. 68.1 percent of

Fighting against Corruption
175
Japanese companies responded that they provide access to hotlines,
although only 11.8 percent clearly state protection for informers.
Compliance offices:
34.8 percent of codes studied said that they have
a compliance office/unit/committee, 87.4 percent of Japanese compa-
nies responded that they have a compliance office/unit/committee.
Monitoring:
56.5 percent of codes mention internal monitoring,
while 67.8 percent of Japanese companies responded that they have
internal monitoring.
Training:
13 percent of codes mention training for compliance, 
84.8 percent of Japanese companies responded that they have training.
Overall, the frequency of mentioned attributes is higher in the Japanese
survey than in OECD survey. However, this is probably largely due to 
the differences between Asahi’s survey-based methodology and Gordon/
Miyake’s codes-based approach. Nevertheless, a few observations can still
be made. First, the extent that the training has been used in Japan is
much higher than found in the OECD survey. Second, the extent that
record keeping is mentioned in the two surveys came very close.
Considering differences recorded in other attributes, this is notable.
Concluding remarks
This study explored the recent changes in Japan’s legal framework con-
cerning anti-corruption and the private sector’s response to the change.
Compared to a decade ago, it seems that Japanese companies are more
actively adopting anti-corruption compliance programs. Their effort is
comparable to that of other OECD member countries, and may exceed
in some areas, such as provision of sensitizing training programs. How-
ever, observers in Japan warn that a vast improvement is still required.
The effort to mitigate corruption vis-à-vis foreign officials is still in its
infancy, for example, it is largely limited to the introduction of anti-
corruption programs into their codes of conduct. The few companies that
have launched active anti-corruption programs focus on the provision of
sensitizing training for their staff before taking up an overseas post. Such
an effort should have some impacts to curtail corruption since a majority
of Japanese companies still sends expatriates to occupy senior manage-
ment positions in their subsidiaries. However, the question of how to 
sensitize local staff still remains.
It is worth noting that there has been an active debate for sensitiz-
ing public awareness for ethics management. We note below recent
developments.

176
Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka
G
In response to the debate, Ethics-Compliance Management Systems
Standard 2000 (ECS2000) was introduced in 2000, which provides a
detailed guideline on how to implement a management system that
was prone to corruption. Many of the elements found in the system
are aligned with subjects discussed in this paper.8
G
The Business Ethics and Compliance Research Center at Reitaku
University introduced R-BEC001, a screening framework for selecting
social responsible investment last year (2001), in an attempt to raise
awareness in the public9 (Nikkei, 18 July 2001).
G
A large-scale survey on ethics compliance based on R-BEC001 frame-
work is currently being undertaken by the research firm IntegreX.
This covers all the listed companies – over 3500 (Nikkei, 10 August
2001). And in December 2001, the Business Ethics and Compliance
Research Centre at Reitaku University (R-BEC) published an English
version of the ethics-compliance management system standard and
its guide. R-BEC will soon publish its Chinese version too.
G
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter announced that it would establish a new
trust to manage ethical investment funds, to be called Morgan
Stanley Asset Management Trust (Nikkei, 8 August 2001). The trust
will develop an ethical investment fund based on information 
supplied by IntegreX, and is expected to be launched in spring 2002.
These attempts are intended to involve a wider range of social agents 
to enforce a company’s voluntary initiative, as it is believed that such
voluntary initiatives best function when a wider range of monitoring
and reporting mechanisms are available.10
What this study could not demonstrate, and in fact very little has
been published thereon, is the impact of anti-corruption compliance
programs on the fight against corruption. Such a study is extremely dif-
ficult for two reasons. First of all, it is difficult to establish a causal link
between the implementation of the program and the decrease in corrup-
tion. Second, which relates to the first difficulty, it is hard to observe the
number of potential corrupt acts and corruption that is “deterred” as a
result of a compliance program. We also acknowledge that the answer to
the question of effectiveness of compliance systems cannot be divorced
from the policy and enforcement environment in which the compliance
systems are implemented. Nevertheless, it will be useful to introduce fur-
ther studies on the effectiveness of compliance in order to expand the
body of knowledge in this field. Such studies will also help to refine the
current understanding as to what type of compliance program works
more effectively and what the prerequisites for the successful implemen-
tation of compliance programs are.

Fighting against Corruption
177
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Mr Shigeo Inagaki of the Asahi Newspaper
Foundation for his generosity to share the data and Ms Mikari Kashima of
the Bank of Japan for her valuable inputs.
The data reported in this article are aggregations – made by the
authors – of firm-level data supplied by Asahi Newspaper Foundation.
The views and data interpretations expressed here are those of the
authors and are not necessarily shared by the World Bank, OECD or
Reitaku University.
Notes
1
Yuryoku Kigyo no Shakai Kokendo 2000, Asahi Newspaper Foundation
(2001) PHP Kenkyusha.
2
See Gordon and Miyake (2000).
3
The survey asked whether the following attributes were mentioned in the
company’s codes of conduct. For more about research methodology, see
Annex.
4
Yuryoku Kigyo no Shakai Kokendo 2000, Asahi Newspaper Foundation
(2001) PHP Kenkyusha.
5
Some argue that 30 percent is overstated given the fact that codes of conduct
and compliance manual were still foreign concepts in the early 1990s in
Japan. Many respondents have probably interpreted policy statement, which
is a mere expression of corporate policy, as codes of conduct.
6
Eighteen percent of companies said there was no sensitizing training. Hence
the rest is assumed to have some training.
7
The OECD study relies on the results of encoding actual codes of corporate
conduct by researchers, while the study by Asahi foundation is based on
responses to a questionnaire. See Annex of Gordon and Miyake (2000) and
of this chapter for more detail.
8
Documents can be downloaded from http://ecs2000.reitaku-u.ac.jp.
9
Information is fully available to the public. See http://ecs2000.reitaku-
u.ac.jp.
10
Brown Weiss (2000) discusses the importance of the “reputation” factor in
inducing acceptance of a norm that has not yet been fully internalized by
the community or of complying with an established but uncodified norm.
For the reputation factor to be important, the author argues, there must be
a consensus about the worth of engaging in or abstaining from a specific act,
a risk that someone will detect engagement in the act, and that this detec-
tion will be publicized throughout the relevant community.
11
Japan Corporate Governance Forum.
References
Asahi Newspaper Foundation (2001) Yuryoku Kigyo no Shakai Kokendo 2000
(Corporate Responsibility of Large Corporations), Tokyo: PHP Kenkyusha.

178
Maiko Miyake, Kathryn Gordon and Iwao Taka
Band, D. and Scanlan, G. (1995) Strategic control through core competencies.
Long Range Planning 28(2): 102–14.
Bottelier, P. (1998) Corruption and Development. Remarks for International
Symposium on the Prevention and Control of Financial Fraud.
Brown Weiss, E. (2000) “Conclusions: Understanding compliance with soft law,”
in D. Shelton (ed.), Commitment and Compliance: The Role of Non-Binding Norms
in the International Legal System, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gordon, K. and Miyake, M. (1999) Deciphering Codes of Corporate Conduct: A Review
of their Contents. Paris, OECD Directorate of Financial, Fiscal and Enterprise
Affairs. Working Paper 99/2.
Gordon, K. and Miyake, M. (2000) “Instilling an anti-bribery corporate culture,”
in No Longer Business as Usual: Fighting Bribery and Corruption, OECD: 185–99.
Gordon, K. and Miyake, M. (2001) Business Approaches to Combating Bribery: 
A Study of Codes of Conduct. OECD Working Papers on International Investment
Number 2000/1. Forthcoming in the Journal of Business Ethics.
Haas, P. (2000) “Choosing to comply: theorizing from international relations and
comparative politics,” in D. Shelton (ed.), Commitment and Compliance: The
Role of Non-Binding Norms in the International Legal System, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Matthews, D. and Mayes, D. G. (1994) The Role of Soft Law in The Evolution of
Rules for a Single European Market: The Case of Retailing. National Institute of
Economic and Social Research, Discussion Paper no. 61.
Nikkei Newspaper Morning Edition, 18 July 2001: 19.
Nikkei Newspaper Morning Edition, 8 August 2001: 1.
Nikkei Newspaper Morning Edition, 10 August 2001: 15.
OECD (2001) Corporate Responsibility: Private Initiatives and Public Goals, Paris:
OECD.
OECD (2000) Japan: Review of Implementation of the Convention and 1997
Recommendation, Paris: OECD.
Pearce II, J. (1992) The company mission as a strategic tool. Sloan Management
Review Spring: 15–24.
Rose-Ackermann, S. (1999) Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and
Reform, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scott, W. R. (1995) “Institutions and organizations: Toward a theoretical syn-
thesis,” in W. R. Scott and J. W. Meyer (eds), Institutional Environments and
Organizations: Structural Complexity and Individualism, Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Taka, I. (1994) Business ethics: A Japanese view. Business Ethics Quarterly 4(1):
53–78.
Taka, I. (ed.) (2001) ECS2000 Konoyouni Rinrihoureijunshu Management System o
Kouchiku Suru (ECS2000 The Way to Establish Legal Compliance Management
System). Tokyo, Nikkagirenshuppansha.
Taka, I. Kou, I. and Tadasi, K. (2001) Yokuwakaru Compliance Keiei (Compliance
Management for Dummys). Tokyo, Nihon Jitsugyo Shuppansha.
United States Department of State (2001) Fighting Global Corruption: Business Risk
Management. Washington, DC.
Wade, R. (1992) East Asia’s economic success: Conflicting perspectives, partial
insights, shaky evidence. World Politics 44 (January): 270–320.
Williamson, O. (1979) Transaction-Cost economics: The governance of contrac-
tual relations. Journal of Law and Economics 22: 233–61.

Fighting against Corruption
179
Annex: Notes on methodology
The data used in this article is a result of the 10th annual survey on corporate
responsibility conducted by the Asahi Newspaper Foundation in 2000. For the
year 2000 survey, a questionnaire was sent to 187 companies that are well known
or have great exposure to consumers in Japan. It should be noted that the pur-
pose of the survey is to draw public attention to corporate social responsibility
by providing ranking of these companies and hence the sampling methodology
is less vigorous. The sample also includes subsidiaries of non-Japanese multina-
tional enterprises operating in Japan. The secretariat of the foundation sends out
a questionnaire and follows up with telephone calls.
The purpose of the survey and the bias towards large companies might have
resulted in providing much higher frequency. It is evident when compared to the
recent survey on corporate governance, which covers 543 listed companies.11 The
survey demonstrated that only 54.5 percent of companies have codes of conduct
and/or compliance manuals. However, the sample might be an adequate com-
parison to the OECD study mentioned in the text, which also focused on multi-
national enterprises that tend to be large and relatively well-known.
While the survey addresses a wide range of issues on corporate responsibility,
the article concentrated on the data related to corruption extracted under the
subject heading business ethics (kigyo rinri).
A word of caution is required for non-respondents bias of this survey. Although
the total sample size is 187, for some questions, sample size is much smaller. That
is to say, there were firms that chose to respond only to selected questions.
Among the 187 companies, 2 companies did not respond at all, and further 125
responded to selected questions. The study adopts a conservative assumption – it
assumes that all non-respondents do not engage in the activity mentioned.

180
10
Singapore’s Anti-Corruption 
Strategy: Is this Form of Governance
Transferable to Other Asian 
Countries?
Jon S.T. Quah
Introduction
Corruption refers to “the misuse of public power, office or authority for
private benefit – through bribery, extortion, influence peddling, nepo-
tism, fraud, speed money or embezzlement” (UNDP, 1999: 7). Defined
thus, corruption is a serious problem afflicting many countries around
the world with its own local manifestations (Jacoby et al., 1977: 6–7). In
its cover story on “Corruption: The Asian Lubricant” in September 1974,
the Far Eastern Economic Review (FEER) observed: “With pathetically few
exceptions, the countries in this region are so riddled with corruption
that the paying of ‘tea money’ has become almost a way of life.” In
another cover story on “Corruption: Reform’s Dark Side” in the March
20th 1997 issue of the FEER, Aparisim Ghosh et al. (1997: 18) wrote:
Looking back on the Year of the Rat [1996] some time in the future,
historians may well marvel at how much Asian newsprint and tele-
vision time was devoted to reports and discussions on corruption in
government. From Pakistan to Japan, corruption was the year’s
biggest story.
Today, corruption is still a serious problem in many countries in the
Asia-Pacific region, judging from the recent annual surveys conducted by
the Hong Kong-based Political and Economic Risk Consultancy Ltd
(PERC) and the Berlin-based Transparency International (TI). According
to TI’s Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), which is a “robust” index that
“combines several measures of political corruption for each country”

Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
181
(Lancaster and Montinola, 1997: 28), Singapore is the least corrupt
country in Asia from 1995 to 2001. Table 10.1 indicates the CPI ranking
for the 12 Asian countries surveyed by TI during 1995–2001. Similarly,
Table 10.2, shows the PERC’s ranking for 12 Asian countries from 1998
to 2000, which confirms Singapore’s ranking as the least corrupt Asian
nation.
However, corruption was rampant during the 140 years of British
colonial rule in this island State. It was made an offence in 1871 with
Table 10.1
Ranking of 12 Asian countries on Transparency International’s 
Corruption Perceptions Index, 1995–2001
Country
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Average
Singapore
3
7
9
7
7
6
4
6
Hong Kong
17
18
18
16
15
15
14
16
Japan
20
17
21
25
25
23
21
22
Taiwan
25
29
31
29
32
28
27
28
Malaysia
23
26
32
29
32
36
36
31
S. Korea
27
27
34
43
50
48
42
39
Thailand
34
37
39
61
68
60
61
52
China
40
50
41
52
58
63
57
52
Philippines
36
44
40
55
54
69
65
52
India
35
46
45
66
72
69
71
58
Pakistan
39
53
48
71
87
NA
79
63
Indonesia
41
45
46
80
96
85
88
69
Source: Compiled from Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index,
1995–2001.
Table 10.2
PERC’s ranking of 12 Asian countries, 1998–2000
Country
1998
1999
2000
Average
Singapore
1
1
1
1
Hong Kong
2
2
2
2
Japan
3
3
3
3
Taiwan
4
5
5
4.7
Malaysia
5
6
4
5
Philippines
8
4
8
6.7
Thailand
7
8
7
7.3
South Korea
11
7
6
8
China
6
10
9
8.3
Vietnam
10
9
10
9.7
India
9
11
11
10.3
Indonesia
12
12
12
12
Source: Richardson (2000: 16).

182
Jon S.T. Quah
the introduction of the Penal Code of the Straits Settlements. An analy-
sis of the English newspaper, Straits Times, from 1845 to 1921 found that
bribery was the most common form of police corruption in Singapore
then as it constituted nearly two-thirds of the 172 reported cases (Quah,
1979: 17–24). The prevalence of corruption in the police force in Singapore
was confirmed by the 1879 and 1886 Commissions of Inquiry (Quah,
1982: 161). During the Japanese occupation (1942–45) rampant inflation
contributed to corruption, as civil servants could not survive on their low
salaries. The situation deteriorated during the post-war period as “corrup-
tion had also become a way of life for many people” to enable them to
cope with their low salaries and rising inflation (Yoong, 1973: 55–6). In his
1950 annual report, the Commissioner of Police, J. P. Pennefather-Evans,
indicated that “graft was rife” in many government departments (Quah,
1982: 161–2).
How was Singapore able to minimise the problem of corruption? In
his doctoral thesis, S. C. Mohan (1987: ii) wrote: “In contrast with most
Asian and African nations, the Republic of Singapore has often been
cited as a model state where bureaucratic corruption is minimal. What
then is the secret of Singapore’s success at corruption control?” The pur-
pose of this chapter is two-fold: (1) to explain how Singapore has suc-
ceeded in minimising corruption by describing the major features of 
its comprehensive anti-corruption strategy; and (2) to assess whether
Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy can be successfully transferred to
other Asian countries to assist them in their anti-corruption efforts.
Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy
Phase I: Incremental strategy (1871–1959)
As indicated earlier, corruption became an offence in 1871. However,
nothing was done for the next 66 years by the British colonial govern-
ment until it enacted the Prevention of Corruption Ordinance (POCO) on
10 December 1937. However, the POCO was ineffective as the penalty
imposed for corruption was a prison term of two years and/or a fine of
S$10000. The short prison term of two years for those found guilty of cor-
rupt offences meant that “such offences were not seizable ones, thus lim-
iting the powers of arrest, as warrants for search and investigation were
required before arrests by the Police could be made” (Quah, 1978: 9).
The agency responsible for implementing the POCO was the Anti-
Corruption Branch (ACB) of the Criminal Investigation Department

Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
183
(CID). However, the ACB was ineffective for three reasons. First, as 
a small police unit, it was entrusted with a difficult task to perform, that
is, the elimination of corruption in the entire civil service. Second, as
part of the CID, the ACB had to compete with the other sections of the
CID for limited manpower and other resources. More specifically, anti-
corruption activities constituted only one of the 16 duties of the CID’s
Assistant Commissioner in May 1952. Finally, the ACB was ineffective
because it could not curb corruption in the police force. This was illus-
trated by the discovery that senior police officers were involved in the
robbery of S$400000 worth of opium in October 1951 (Quah, 1978:
14–15).
The involvement of senior police officers in the opium hijacking scan-
dal made the British colonial government realise the importance of estab-
lishing an independent anti-corruption agency that was separate from
the police. Accordingly, the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (CPIB)
was formed in October 1952 to curb corruption in Singapore. In short,
Singapore became the first Asian country to establish an independent
anti-corruption agency (Quah, 2000: 103).
Phase II: Comprehensive strategy (1960–present)
The People’s Action Party’s (PAP’s) commitment to the elimination of cor-
ruption in Singapore contributed significantly to its victory in the May
1959 general election. After winning the December 1957 City Council
election on its platform of curbing corruption, the PAP launched its elec-
toral campaign by revealing that the Labour Front’s Minister for
Education, Chew Swee Kee, had corruptly accepted political funds from
the United States government to defeat the PAP in the 1959 general elec-
tion. The Chief Minister, Lim Yew Hock, appointed a commission of
inquiry to investigate the Chew Swee Kee affair. Chew admitted during
the investigation that he had received, with his party’s knowledge, a total
of S$700000 (about US$233000 at the time) on two occasions from the
United States government. Chew’s confession of his corrupt dealings
sealed his party’s fate and enabled the PAP to win the May 1959 general
election (Quah, 1995: 394).
In his memoirs, former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew (2000: 182–4)
explained his government’s commitment to curbing corruption thus:
When the PAP government took office in 1959, we set out to have a
clean administration. We were sickened by the greed, corruption and
decadence of many Asian leaders…we had a deep sense of mission

184
Jon S.T. Quah
to establish a clean and effective government. When we took the
oath of office at the ceremony in the city council chamber in June
1959, we all wore white shirts and white slacks to symbolise purity
and honesty in our personal behaviour and our public life…we made
sure from the day we took office in June 1959 that every dollar in rev-
enue would be properly accounted for and would reach the benefici-
aries at the grass roots as one dollar, without being siphoned off along
the way.
As the British colonial government had not succeeded in curbing cor-
ruption, the PAP government decided to replace the incremental anti-
corruption strategy with a more comprehensive one. As corruption had
become a way of life in Singapore and was perceived by many to be “a
low risk, high reward” activity, the PAP government’s mission was a chal-
lenging one: to minimise corruption and to change the public perception
of corruption to “a high risk, low reward” activity. In 1960, the PAP 
government strengthened the anti-corruption law by introducing the
Prevention of Corruption Act (POCA), and gave more powers to the CPIB.
The PAP government’s new anti-corruption strategy is based on the
“logic of corruption control” (Gardiner and Lyman, 1989: 827) that is,
as corruption is caused by both the incentives and the opportunities to
be corrupt, “attempts to eradicate corruption must be designed to min-
imise or remove the conditions of both the incentives and opportuni-
ties that make individual corrupt behaviour irresistible” (Quah, 1989:
842). This strategy is comprehensive because of its emphasis on reduc-
ing both the opportunities and incentives for corruption.
The Prevention of Corruption Act (POCA)
As Singapore’s gross domestic product (GDP) per capita in 1960 was
S$1330 or US$443 (Republic of Singapore, 1983: 7), the PAP government
was compelled to launch its anti-corruption strategy by strengthening the
existing laws to reduce the opportunities for corruption and to increase
the penalty for corrupt behaviour as it could not afford to increase the
wages of the civil servants.
The Minister for Home Affairs, Ong Pang Boon, clearly stated the 
PAP government’s commitment to curb corruption in the Legislative
Assembly on 13 February 1960, when he moved for the second reading
of the Prevention of Corruption Bill:
The Prevention of Corruption Bill is in keeping with the new
Government’s determination to stamp out bribery and corruption in

Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
185
the country, especially in the public services. The Government is deeply
conscious that a Government cannot survive, no matter how good 
its aims and instructions are, if corruption exists in its ranks and its 
public services on which it depends to provide the efficient and effec-
tive administrative machinery to translate its policies into action….
Therefore, this Government is determined to take all possible steps to
see that all necessary legislative and administrative measures are taken
to reduce the opportunities of corruption, to make its detection easier, and
to deter and punish severely those who are susceptible to it and who
engage in it shamelessly (State of Singapore, 1960: cols. 376–7).
The POCA was enacted on 17 June 1960, and it contained the fol-
lowing five features to rectify the POCO’s weaknesses and to strengthen
the CPIB by giving it additional powers for performing its duties:
1 The POCA’s scope is broader than the POCO with 32 sections in con-
trast to the POCO’s 12 sections.
2 Section 2 of the POCA defines corruption in terms of various forms
of gratification, and identifies for the first time the CPIB and its
Director.
3 The penalty for corrupt behaviour was increased to imprisonment for
five years and/or a fine of S$10000.
4 A person found guilty of accepting an illegal gratification had to pay
the amount he had taken as a bribe in addition to any other punish-
ment imposed by a court.
5 The POCA gave the CPIB these powers: its officers could arrest and
search arrested persons; its Director and staff could investigate “any
bank account, share account, or purchase account” of any person sus-
pected of having committed an offence; and its officers can inspect a
civil servant’s banker’s book and those of his wife, child or agent, if
necessary (Quah, 1978: 10–11).
The PAP government ensured the POCA’s effectiveness by introduc-
ing, whenever necessary, amendments (in 1963, 1966 and 1981) or new
legislation (in 1989) to deal with unanticipated problems. In 1963, the
POCA was amended to give CPIB officers the power to require the atten-
dance of witnesses and to examine them. The aim of this amendment
was to enable the CPIB officers to obtain the co-operation of witnesses
to help them in their investigations. Two amendments were introduced
in 1966: the first amendment (section 28) stated that a person could be
found guilty of corruption even though he did not actually receive the
bribe, as the intention on his part to commit the offence would provide

186
Jon S.T. Quah
sufficient grounds for his conviction. The second amendment (section 35)
was directed at those Singaporeans working in embassies and other gov-
ernment agencies abroad as Singaporeans would be prosecuted for corrupt
offences committed outside Singapore and would be dealt with as if such
offences had occurred in Singapore. In 1981, the POCA was amended to
increase its deterrent effect by requiring those convicted of corruption to
repay all the money received besides facing the usual court sentence.
Those who could not make full restitution would be given heavier court
sentences (Quah, 1995: 395–6).
On 14 December 1986, the Minister for National Development, Teh
Cheang Wan, committed suicide. This was 12 days after two senior CPIB
officers interrogated him for 16 hours regarding two instances of alleged
corruption brought against him by a building contractor. Teh was accused
of accepting two bribes amounting to S$1 million in 1981 and 1982 from
two developers to enable one of them to retain his land, which had been
acquired by the government, and to assist the other developer in pur-
chasing State land for private development (Republic of Singapore, 1987:
1 and 36).
One of the consequences of the Commission of Inquiry that followed
was the enactment of the Corruption (Confiscation of Benefits) Act
1989, on 3 March 1989. Section 4 of this Act stated that the court should
issue “a confiscation order against the defendant in respect of benefits
derived from him from corruption if the court is satisfied that such ben-
efits have been so derived.” If a defendant has deceased, the court would
issue a confiscation order against his estate (Republic of Singapore, 1989:
107 and 110).
The Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (CPIB)
The British colonial government entrusted the enforcement of the POCO
to the ACB of the CID in the Singapore Police Force. However, the ACB’s
failure to deal effectively with police corruption as manifested in the
October 1951 opium hijacking scandal: this forced the colonial authori-
ties to establish the CPIB as an independent anti-corruption agency.
The CPIB was formed in October 1952 as the de jure anti-corruption
agency in Singapore. More specifically, it performs the following three
functions:
1 to receive and investigate complaints alleging corrupt practices in
both the public and private sectors;
2 to investigate malpractices and misconduct by public officers; and

Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
187
3 to examine the practices and procedures in the public service to 
minimise opportunities for corrupt practices (CPIB, 1990: 2).
Its size has grown by 15 times, from five officers in 1952 to its present
establishment of 77 officers, with a budget of S$10.7 million (Mohan,
1987: 607 and Republic of Singapore, 2001: 489–90). The CPIB is divided
into three branches: the Investigation Branch, the Data Management
and Support Branch, and the Administration Branch. The Investigation
Branch is the largest and most important branch and is responsible for
conducting the CPIB’s operations. The investigators submit their com-
pleted investigation papers to the CPIB’s Director, who is required by the
POCA to consult the Public Prosecutor and recommend appropriate
action on the basis of the available evidence. However, if there is inad-
equate evidence to prosecute a case in court, the Director will refer the
matter to the head of the department concerned for disciplinary action
after obtaining the Public Prosecutor’s agreement (CPIB, 1990: 3–4).
The CPIB’s computer information system comes under the purview of
the Data Management and Support Branch, which screens candidates for
public appointments and their subsequent promotions, scholarships and
training courses, as well as screening applicants for citizenship, and con-
tractors competing for government contracts. The Research Unit analy-
ses the work procedures of corruption-prone government departments
and identifies the administrative weaknesses that cause corruption. It
also examines completed cases to ascertain the modus operandi of cor-
rupt civil servants and recommends the necessary preventive measures.
Finally, the Intelligence Unit collects intelligence for the operational
needs of the Investigation Branch (CPIB, 1990: 4).
How effective is the CPIB in curbing corruption in Singapore? Mohan
(1987: 575–6) contended that the CPIB’s “success as a law enforcement
body has been almost phenomenal, and it has gained both the respect
and confidence of the public.” Furthermore, it is also reputed to be “one
of the most efficient anti-corruption agencies in the world and regularly
helps train officers from many parts of Asia and Africa, including Hong
Kong, Malaysia, Brunei, Zambia and Tanzania” (Mohan, 1987: 576). He
concluded that the CPIB has been “successful in its work” judging from
the nature and extent of its law enforcement activity, the success in its
investigations, the conviction rate of those it has prosecuted, its repu-
tation, and the degree of public support and confidence it commands
(Mohan, 1987: 631–2).
A more recent analysis by Tan Ah Leak (1999: 64), the CPIB’s Deputy
Director, contends similarly that the CPIB “has earned the public’s 

188
Jon S.T. Quah
confidence and support in its fight against corruption. It is generally
regarded as an effective agency and is reputed for its single-minded effi-
ciency.” According to Tan (1999: 64), the CPIB’s success can be attributed
to the following factors: Singapore’s cultural climate which is strongly
opposed to corruption; a well-paid civil service, which discourages civil 
servants from being corrupt; such effective administrative measures as
“disciplinary proceedings by the Public Service Commission, close scrutiny
of government expenditures by the Auditor-General’s Department and the
Public Accounts Committee of Parliament, and control of public spending
by the Ministry of Finance;” a highly literate and sophisticated society,
which readily reports corrupt behaviour with no fear of reprisal; and the
CPIB’s ability to investigate prominent persons has also enhanced its 
credibility among Singaporeans.
Improving civil service salaries
The PAP government was only able to implement the second prong of
its anti-corruption strategy – the reduction of incentives for corruption
by improving salaries and working conditions in the civil service. This
was in 1972, twelve years after the enactment of the POCA in 1960.
When it assumed office in June 1959, the PAP government was forced
to reduce expenditure as it inherited “national coffers [which were] 
seriously depleted.” Accordingly, the Cabinet Budget Committee on
Expenditure recommended serious cuts in public service expenditures
“including the removal of the cost of living allowance payable to civil
servants in the middle and upper salary brackets” (Bogaars, 1973: 80).
Goh Keng Swee, the then Minister for Finance, said that the govern-
ment’s drastic decision to remove these variable allowances was because
of the anticipated budgetary deficit of S$14 million. If the allowances
were not removed, the government would be forced to increase taxes or
face financial bankruptcy (Seah, 1971: 90).
As the Singapore economy improved in the 1970s, the higher salaries
in the private sector contributed to a brain drain from the civil service.
Consequently, civil service wages were revised to curb the loss of talent.
The National Wages Council (NWC) was created by the PAP government
in February 1972 as an advisory body to formulate general guidelines on
wage policies, to recommend annual wage adjustments, and to advise
on incentive systems for improving efficiency and productivity (Then,
1998: 220–1). The NWC recommended the payment of the Annual
Wage Supplement (AWS) [or the 13th month salary] to supplement the
employee’s annual salary and minimise the gap in salaries in the public
and private sectors.

Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
189
In 1973, the salaries of senior civil servants were increased substantially
to reduce the gap with the private sector. However, as the gap between
the salaries of the high-flyers in the public and private sectors remained,
the salaries in the Administrative Service were further improved in May
1979. Perhaps, the most eloquent justification of the PAP government’s
approach to combating corruption by reducing or removing the incen-
tives for corruption through the improvement of the salaries of political
leaders and senior civil servants was given by the then Prime Minister, Lee
Kuan Yew, in Parliament on 22 March 1985, when he explained why the
wages of his cabinet ministers deserved to be raised.
Lee contended that political leaders should be paid the top salaries that
they deserved in order to ensure a clean and honest government. And,
Singapore needed a corruption-free administration and an honest polit-
ical leadership to preserve its most precious assets. Otherwise, if they
were underpaid, they would succumb to temptation and indulge in 
corrupt behaviour. He concluded that the best way of dealing with 
corruption was “moving with the market,” which is “an honest, open,
defensible and workable system” instead of dealing in hypocrisy, which
results in duplicity and corruption (Straits Times, 1985, 23 March: 14–16).
In March 1989, civil service salaries were substantially revised to
increase recruitment to and minimise resignations from the Adminis-
trative Service. In October 1994, a White Paper on Competitive Salaries
for Competent and Honest Government was presented to Parliament to jus-
tify the pegging of the salaries of ministers and senior civil servants to
the average salaries of the top four earners in six private sector profes-
sions: accounting, banking, engineering, law, local manufacturing com-
panies, and multinational corporations. The adoption of the long-term
formula suggested in the White Paper not only eliminated the need for
justifying the salaries of ministers and senior bureaucrats “from scratch
with each salary revision,” but also ensured the building of an efficient
civil service and a competent and honest political leadership.
During the most recent salary increase in June 2000, the benchmark
was extended from the four top earners to the top eight earners in six pro-
fessions, the variable component of annual salaries was increased from 
30 to 40 per cent, and a performance-related component was included in
the total wage package of each senior civil servant. Table 10.3 shows that
the salaries of the Singaporean ministers and senior civil servants are the
highest in the world.
In addition to reducing the incentives for corruption, the PAP govern-
ment had to improve the salaries and working conditions in the civil serv-
ice for another reason: to stem the brain drain of competent senior civil

190
Jon S.T. Quah
Table 10.3
Salaries of selected ministers and senior civil servants in
Singapore, June 2000 (S$)*
Grade
Monthly 
Annual
Ranking among
salary (S$)
salary (S$)
top earners**
Prime Minister
85300
1.94 million
63
Minister
55700
1.42 million
137
Staff Grade II
49900
1.27 million
180
44600
1.13 million
239
Minister
47400
1.21 million
206
Staff Grade I
37900
968 000
367
Superscale B
39800
1.01 million
318
28800
736 000
699
Superscale G
18800
390 000
 1000
17500
363 000
 1000
** The exchange rate in August 2001 was US$1  S$1.75.
** This refers to the ranking among the top earners in Singapore.
Source: Straits Times, 2000, 30 June: 53.
servants to the private sector by offering competitive salaries and fringe
benefits to reduce the wage gap between the public and private sectors.
Transferability of Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy
Is Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy transferable to other Asian coun-
tries? And further, what can other Asian countries concerned with min-
imising corruption learn from Singapore’s experience? Writing in 1887,
Woodrow Wilson supported “the idea of looking into foreign systems 
of administration for instruction and suggestion” as “we can borrow the
science of administration with safety and profit if only we read all fun-
damental differences of condition into its essential tenets. We have 
to filter it through our constitutions, to put it over a slow fire of criti-
cism and distil away its foreign gases” (p. 15). Similarly, Wallace S. Sayre
(1967: 354) astutely observed that as “bureaucratic models are not pack-
ages ready for export or import; they provide illustrations of options and
styles for consideration in their separate parts, and for adaptation before
acceptance in a different context.”
In addition to the above advice by Wilson and Sayre, two caveats 
must be noted in discussing the relevance of Singapore’s anti-corruption
strategy to other Asian countries. First, the extent of transferability 
of Singapore’s experience to other Asian countries depends on the con-
textual differences between these countries and Singapore. Second, the

Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
191
relevance of Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy to other Asian coun-
tries depends on whether the governments in these countries have the
political will to pay the price required to implement reforms.
Differences in policy context
The extent to which Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy is transferable
to other Asian countries depends on how similar these countries are to
Singapore. Table 10.4 shows the differences in policy context among the
twelve Asian countries.
Singapore is the smallest country in terms of land area and popula-
tion, and the second richest country in Asia after Japan. Of the other
eleven countries, Hong Kong is the most similar to Singapore as it is also
a city-state, but has a larger territory (by 392.3sq. km.) and population
(by 2.69 million), with a lower GDP per capita (by US$6510). While the
Table 10.4
Policy contexts of 12 Asian countries
Country
Land area
Population
GDP per
Political
(sq. km.)
(million)
capita (US$)
system
Singapore
682.7
4.01
30 170
Parliamentary
democracy
Hong Kong
1 075
6.70
23 660
Democracy;
SAR of China
Japan
377 727
126.3
32 350
Constitutional
monarchy
Taiwan
36 179
21.9
12 040
Parliamentary
democracy
Malaysia
332 665
21.4
3 670
Constitutional
monarchy
South Korea
99 274
46.1
8 600
Parliamentary
democracy
Thailand
513 115
60.3
2 160
Constitutional
monarchy
China
9 560 900
1255.7
750
Communist
Philippines
300 000
72.9
1 050
Presidential
democracy
India
3 287 263
982.2
440
Parliamentary
democracy
Pakistan
803 940
148.2
470
Military
regime
Indonesia
1 904 443
206.3
640
Parliamentary
democracy
Source: The Economist (2000: 120, 140, 144, 146, 158, 162, 176, 180, 192, 200, 208, and 210).

192
Jon S.T. Quah
other ten countries are much larger than Singapore in area and popula-
tion but poorer, except for Japan.
Hence, it is not surprising that Hong Kong has adopted Singapore’s
anti-corruption strategy by establishing the Independent Commission
Against Corruption (ICAC) in February 1974. Though this was nearly six
years after a study team visited Singapore and Ceylon (as Sri Lanka was
known then) in 1968 to examine how their laws worked in practice.
Among other things, the study team was impressed with the independ-
ence of the anti-corruption agencies in these countries, and attributed
Singapore’s success in curbing corruption to the CPIB’s independence
from the police (Wong, 1981: 47). Furthermore, the knowledge gained
from the study tour contributed to the formulation of their Prevention
of Bribery Bill on 16 October 1970 and its enactment as an ordinance
on 15 May 1971 (Kuan, 1971: 29).
The only other Asian country that has followed Singapore’s footsteps
in curbing corruption is Malaysia, which established the Anti-Corruption
Agency (ACA) in October 1967, fifteen years after the formation of the
CPIB. As in the case of Singapore, the task of fighting corruption was 
the responsibility of the Police before the creation of the ACA (Quah,
1982: 169). Even though Malaysia is larger in area and population than
Singapore and Hong Kong, it has adopted a similar anti-corruption strat-
egy possibly because it was also a British colony. However, unlike
Singapore and Hong Kong, Malaysia has been less successful in curbing
corruption, as reflected in its lower ranking on TI’s 2001 CPI: it is ranked
36th compared to Singapore’s fourth ranking and Hong Kong’s four-
teenth ranking. Indeed, Malaysia’s lower ranking since 1999 indicates
that the ACA is less effective than the CPIB and ICAC. Apart from the
growing problem of money politics, the ACA has been criticised for 
not investigating corruption cases impartially involving “big fish.” The
1999 corruption trial of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim
was politically motivated, as other “big fish” were not similarly targeted.
Political will needed to implement reforms
Kpundeh (1998: 92) has defined “political will” as “the demonstrated cred-
ible intent of political actors (elected or appointed leaders, civil society
watchdogs, stakeholder groups, etc.) to attack perceived causes or effects
of corruption at a systemic level.” Indeed, without political will, “govern-
ments’ statements to reform civil service, strengthen transparency and
accountability and reinvent the relationship between government and

Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
193
private industry remain mere rhetoric” (Kpundeh, 1998: 92). Similarly,
Pope (1999: 115) concluded that “at the end of the day, all anticorrup-
tion efforts will be in vain if leaders are not committed, and the public
does not have confidence in the reformers’ sincerity and ability to effect
change.”
Indeed, the most important prerequisite for the success of any anti-
corruption strategy is political will, which is crucial for minimising 
corruption in a country. Singapore’s experience in curbing corruption
shows clearly that the political leaders must be sincerely committed to
the eradication of corruption by their exemplary conduct and modest
lifestyle. Anyone found guilty of corruption must be punished, regard-
less of his position or status in society. If the “big fish” (rich and famous)
are protected from prosecution for corruption, and only the “small fish”
(ordinary people) are caught, the anti-corruption strategy will not be
credible – but also doomed to failure.
For example, when Kim Young Sam became the first civilian president
in South Korea in February 1993, he launched an intensive anti-corruption
campaign, which included, inter alia, the voluntary disclosure of his per-
sonal and family assets, the introduction of the Real-Name Financial Trans-
action System to replace the use of anonymous financial accounts, the
giving up of golf (as it was a symbol of corporate–government cronyism)
and the exchange of corrupt gifts. Kim’s anti-corruption drive was hin-
dered by the 17 May 1997 arrest of his son for bribery and tax evasion in
the Hanbo loan scandal and his sentencing to three years’ imprisonment
five months later. Nevertheless Kim has clearly demonstrated his commit-
ment to eliminating corruption by not obstructing the legal arrest and 
sentencing of his son. However, the Hanbo scandal and his son’s arrest 
and imprisonment have seriously undermined Kim’s legitimacy, and jeop-
ardised the continued success of his anti-corruption campaign (Quah,
1999: 181–2).
In contrast, even though the Philippines has the most numerous anti-
corruption laws and agencies in Asia, it has failed to curb corruption
because its political leaders lack the necessary political will. When Corazon
Aquino replaced Ferdinand E. Marcos as president in February 1986, “there
was high expectation that the end of the culture of graft and corruption
was near” (Varela, 1995: 174). However, according to Carino, “Aquino’s
honesty has not been matched by the political will to punish the corrupt”
(quoted in Timberman, 1991: 235).
In May 1992, Fidel Ramos was elected president of the Philippines and
he created the Presidential Commission Against Graft and Corrup-
tion (PCAGC) in 1994. However, three years later, PCAGC’s chairman,

Eufemio Domingo, lamented that “the system is not working” because
the anti-corruption “laws, rules and regulations are not being faithfully
implemented” (Balgos, 1998: 267).
Joseph Estrada succeeded Ramos as president in 1998 and in June 2000,
the Financial Times reported “perceived corruption in the Philippines
reached its highest levels for two decades during 1998 and 1999 – the first
two years of the Estrada administration” (Lande, 2001: 92). In October
2000, Estrada was accused of receiving large amounts of money from ille-
gal gambling. Impeachment proceedings were initiated against him but
ended on 16 January 2001, when the prosecutors walked out and the
Senate president resigned. The Senate’s failure to act resulted in five days
of massive demonstrations (Lande, 2001: 94). On 20 January 2001, Gloria
Macapagal-Arroyo was sworn in as president by the chief justice and
Estrada agreed to resign when “his” military withdrew its support.
Apart from the critical importance of political will, Singapore’s experi-
ence in combating corruption also shows that the anti-corruption agency
must be incorruptible, and corrupt civil servants and political leaders must
be punished to make corruption a high-risk, low-reward activity. Also
opportunities for corruption in vulnerable government agencies must be
reduced, in part by paying adequate salaries to political leaders and civil
servants to reduce their temptation (Quah, 1995: 408–9). Indeed, if polit-
ical will is absent, none of these requirements can be attained.
Conclusion
Singapore’s comprehensive anti-corruption strategy is effective, as
Singapore was perceived to be the least corrupt country in Asia during
1995–2001. Its enviable record in curbing corruption can be attributed
to the commitment of the political leaders, the periodic review of the
POCA to rectify its loopholes, the impartial enforcement of the POCA
by the incorruptible CPIB, the reduction of opportunities for corruption
in the vulnerable government departments, the punishment of corrupt
officials, and the improvement of salaries for civil servants and political
leaders to reduce their temptation to be corrupt.
Whether Singapore’s effective anti-corruption strategy can be success-
fully transplanted to other Asian countries depends on two important
factors: the nature of their policy context, and whether they possess the
political will to implement the required reforms. So far, only Hong Kong
and Malaysia have adopted Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy, as they
are also former British colonies. However, Hong Kong has been more
194
Jon S.T. Quah

effective than Malaysia in combating corruption, as it is a rich city-state
and has the political will to implement the anti-corruption measures
impartially. Indeed, Malaysia’s experience shows that the ACA’s lack of
independence from the political leadership in recent years has tarnished
its public image and also its effectiveness in curbing corruption.
Otherwise we see that Singapore’s effective anti-corruption strategy
cannot be successfully transferred to the other nine Asian countries
because of their contextual differences and the absence of political will.
In this context, Johnston (1999: 225) concluded that while “ICACs
(Independent Commissions Against Corruption) are unlikely to be right
for every country,” they do demonstrate that “permanent, independent
agencies addressing corruption as a deep-rooted problem, making soci-
ety a partner in reform, and developing careful strategies for prevention
may be a promising way to confront serious corruption.” Nevertheless,
these Asian countries can emulate and adapt some features of Singapore’s
anti-corruption strategy to suit their own needs, provided that their
political leaders, civil servants, and the population are prepared to make
the required changes.
References
Balgos, C. C. A. (1998) “Ombudsman,” in S. S. Coronel (ed.), Pork and Other Perks:
Corruption and Governance in the Philippines, Metro Manila: Philippine Center
for Investigative Journalism, 245–71.
Bogaars, G. E. (1973) “Public services,” in Towards Tomorrow: Essays on
Development and Social Transformation in Singapore. Singapore, National Trades
Union Congress, pp. 73–83.
“Corruption: The Asian Lubricant.” (1974) Far Eastern Economic Review,
September 6: 3, 22–31.
CPIB (1990) The Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (An Introduction). Singapore.
The Economist (2000) Pocket World in Figures 2001. London: Profile Books.
Gardiner, J. A. and Lyman, T. R. (1989) “The logic of corruption control,” in 
A. J. Heidenheimer, M. Johnston and V. T. LeVine (eds.), Political Corruption: 
A Handbook. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 827–40.
Ghosh, Aparisim et al. (1997) Corruption: Reform’s dark side. Far Eastern Economic
Review March 20: 18–20.
Jacoby, N. H. et al. (1977) Bribery and Extortion in World Business, New York:
Macmillan.
Johnston, M. (1999) “A brief history of anticorruption agencies,” in A. Schedler,
L. Diamond and M. F. Plattner (eds.), The Self-Restraining State: Power and
Accountability in New Democracies, Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 217–26.
Kpundeh, S. J. (1998) “Political will in fighting corruption,” in United Nations
Development Programme. Corruption and Integrity Improvement Initiatives in
Developing Countries. New York: UNDP, 91–110.
Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
195

Kuan, H-C (1971) “Anti-corruption legislation in Hong Kong – A history,” in 
R. P. L. Lee (ed.), Corruption and Its Control in Hong Kong, Hong Kong: The
Chinese University Press, 15–43.
Lancaster, T. D. and Montinola, G. R. (1997) Towards a Methodology for the
Comparative Study of Political Corruption. Unpublished paper.
Lande, C. H. (2001) The return of ‘People Power’ in the Philippines. Journal of
Democracy 12(2): 88–102.
Lee, Kuan Yew (2000) From Third World to First: The Singapore Story: 1965–2000.
Singapore, Times Media.
Mohan, S. C. (1987) The Control of Corruption in Singapore. Ph.D. thesis, School of
Oriental and African Studies, University of London, 2 Volumes.
Pope, J. (1999) “Enhancing accountability and ethics in the public sector,” in Rick
Stapenhurst and Sahr J. Kpundeh (eds.), Curbing Corruption: Toward a Model for
Building National Integrity. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 105–16.
Quah, J. S. T. (1978) Administrative and Legal Measures for Combatting Bureaucratic
Corruption in Singapore. Singapore, Department of Political Science, University
of Singapore, Occasional Paper No. 34.
Quah, J. S. T. (1979) Police corruption in Singapore: An analysis of its forms,
extent and causes. Singapore Police Journal 10(1) (January): 7–43.
Quah, J. S. T. (1982) Bureaucratic corruption in the ASEAN countries: A compar-
ative analysis of their anti-corruption strategies. Journal of Southeast Asian
Studies 13(1) (March): 163–77.
Quah, J. S. T. (1989) “Singapore’s experience in curbing corruption,” in 
A. J. Heidenheimer, M. Johnston and V. T. LeVine (eds.), Political Corruption: 
A Handbook, New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 841–53.
Quah, J. S. T. (1995) Controlling corruption in city-states: A comparative study of
Hong Kong and Singapore. Crime, Law and Social Change 22: 391–414.
Quah, J. S. T. (1999) Singapore’s anti-corruption strategy: Some lessons for South
Korea. Korean Corruption Studies Review 4 (December): 173–93.
Quah, J. S. T. (2000) “Accountability and anti-corruption agencies in the Asia-
Pacific Region,” in Combating Corruption in Asian and Pacific Economies, Manila:
Asian Development Bank, 101–24.
Republic of Singapore (1983) Economic and Social Statistics Singapore 1960–1982.
Singapore, Department of Statistics.
Republic of Singapore (1987) Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Investigations
Concerning the Late Mr Teh Cheang Wan. Singapore, Singapore National Printers.
Republic of Singapore (1989) Government Gazette Acts Supplement. No. 13.
Singapore, Singapore National Printers.
Republic of Singapore (2001) The Budget for the Financial Year 2001/2002. Cmd. 3
of 2001. Singapore, Ministry of Finance.
Richardson, M. (2000) Fighting graft brings a net advantage, survey says.
International Herald Tribune March 23: 16.
Sayre, W. S. (1967) “Bureaucracies: Some contrasts in systems,” in Nimrod
Raphaeli (ed.), Readings in Comparative Public Administration, Boston: Allyn and
Bacon, 341–54.
Seah, C. M. (1971) Bureaucratic Evolution and Political Change in an Emerging
Nation: A Case Study of Singapore. Ph.D. thesis, Faculty of Economic and Social
Studies, Victoria University of Manchester.
196
Jon S.T. Quah

State of Singapore (1960) Legislative Assembly Debates. First Session of the 
First Legislative Assembly. Vol. 12. Singapore: Government Printing Office, 
13 February.
Tan, A. L. (1999) “The experience of Singapore in combating corruption,” in Rick
Stapenhurst and Sahr J. Kpundeh (eds.), Curbing Corruption: Towards a Model for
Building National Integrity, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 59–66.
Then, Y. T. (1998) “The national wages council and the wage system in 
Singapore,” in Lim Chong Yah and Rosalind Chew (eds.), Wages and Wages
Policies: Tripartism in Singapore. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing
Company, 219–29.
Timberman, D. G. (1991) A Changeless Land: Continuity and Change in Philippine
Politics. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
United Nations Development Programme (1999) Fighting Corruption to Improve
Governance, New York: UNDP.
Varela, A. P. (1995) “Different faces of Filipino administrative culture,” in 
D. Proserpina Tapales and N. N. Pilar (eds.), Public Administration by the 
Year 2000: Looking Back into the Future. Quezon City, College of Public
Administration: University of the Philippines, 161–77.
Woodrow, W. (1978) “The Study of Administration,” in Jay M. Shafritz and Hyde
Albert C. (eds.), Classics of Public Administration, Oak Park: Moore Publishing
Company, 3–17.
Wong, J. K. H. (1981) “The ICAC and its anti-corruption measures,” in P. L. Rance,
Lee (ed.), Corruption and Its Control in Hong Kong, Hong Kong: The Chinese
University Press, 45–72.
Yoong, Siew Wah (1973) Some aspects of corruption. National Youth Leadership
Training Institute Journal January: 54–9.
Singapore’s Anti-Corruption Strategy
197

198
11
A Human Resource Development
Program to Foster Individual Moral
Development in Indian Corporations:
Aligning Corporate Governance with
Natural Law
Dennis Heaton,Thomas Carlisle and Ian Brown
Introduction
The problem of corruption can be approached from each of three sets 
of factors that influence ethical behavior in organizations – individual
characteristics, organizational factors, and opportunity. This paper empha-
sizes individual characteristics – in particular, development of the con-
sciousness of the individual, including the individual’s level of moral
development. We review these stages of moral development, as identified
by psychological research. At pre-conventional stages individuals are
tempted by opportunities for personal gain. In conventional stages, indi-
viduals may go along with corruption to fit in with the norms of their
social group. At post-conventional stages individuals have the independ-
ence of character to resist corruption and to act according to what they
hold to be universal principles of right and wrong. We describe a highest
state of moral development – a natural law orientation – in which indi-
viduals spontaneously act to promote the general good. Natural-Law Based
Management is presented as an approach that employs techniques to cul-
tivate individual development in the direction of a natural law orientation.
The Maharishi Corporate Development Program has applied this approach
in numerous corporate settings in India and around the world to improve
the overall effectiveness, well-being, and right action of managers and
employees.

Aligning Corporate Governance with Natural Law
199
Addressing the problem of corruption
Corruption in India takes on five forms:
1 criminal corruption, that which is legally punishable;
2 legalized corruption, laws to benefit those who make and then 
justify them;
3 market corruption, including the extreme example of the black 
market;
4 emotional corruption, with the misuse of trust under the defense of
caveat emptor in the market place; and
5 patronage corruption, the institutionalization or long-term entrench-
ment of corrupt practices.
Why does corruption, in its various forms, exist? What can be done to
curb it? Pride and Ferrell’s (2000: 92–5) model of three factors influenc-
ing ethical behavior in organizations is one framework for conceptual-
ization of the problem and for possible interventions. The three factors
are social influences within the organization, opportunities for unethi-
cal behavior, and individual factors (Figure 11.1).
Anti-corruption programs primarily address the issues of opportunities
and social influences. For example, new government policies seek to elim-
inate incentives and opportunities for corruption by increasing financial
transparency, ending tax deductibility for bribes, curtailing money laun-
dering, and cleaning up public procurement practices (OECD, 2001).
In our view, a focus on individual factors is fundamental to and essen-
tial for substantial progress in reducing and preventing corruption –
since behavior is an expression of an individual’s inner development. 
Individual
factors
Ethical
decision-
making
Opportunity
Organizational
factors
Figure 11.1
Factors that influence ethical decision-making in organizations

200
Dennis Heaton,Thomas Carlisle and Ian Brown
To paraphrase the famous axiom on war from the United Nations’
Charter, “Corruption begins in the minds of men.” Unless there is inner
change of individuals, the values and behaviors upheld by the informal
organization are not likely to change. The cultivation of high moral devel-
opment in individuals will be expressed into the social environments
through the influence of developed individuals.
Stages of moral development
Developmental psychologists observe that moral development is one
aspect of the holistic cognitive and affective maturation that individu-
als undergo throughout their life span (Alexander and Langer, 1990).
Kohlberg and Ryncarz (1990) have identified stages of moral develop-
ment which progress from morality based on punishment and obedience
(pre-conventional level), to morality based on mutual expectations and
conformity (conventional level), to principled moral reasoning (post-
conventional level). In addition, they theorize about a still more mature
stage of human development in which morality is based on a natural law
orientation, a stage in which “we identify ourselves with the cosmic 
or infinite perspective and value life from its standpoint” (Kohlberg and
Ryncarz, 1990: 192). One who is developed to the natural law orienta-
tion, would spontaneously act to promote the general good. Kohlberg
and Ryncarz find evidence of the natural law orientation in Western
thinkers including Spinoza, Socrates, Marcus Aurelius, Aquinas, and
Martin Luther King, Jr. They associate this orientation with mystical
experiences in which the individual identifies with the whole of nature.
Less mature stages of development are generally observed in younger
children. Yet, even among adults, a variety of development positions 
are observed, and very few individuals are found at the highest levels 
of development. Evidence indicates that most adults do not progress to
post-conventional levels. Of the two large surveys of adults of various
ages, only 2–3 percent of adults scored at or above the Autonomous level
of personality development, as measured by Loevinger’s projective test
(Loevinger and Wessler, 1970, N  1640; Cook-Greuter, 1990, N1996).
On Kohlberg’s interview measure about one-eighth of US males in their
thirties scored at Kohlberg’s post-conventional stages 5 and 6, or at the
transitional stage 4/5 (Colby and Kohlberg, 1987: 101).
This research from developmental psychology is significant to the
phenomenon of corruption. To have the independence of character to
act according to what one holds to be universal principles of right and
wrong, regardless of potentially corrupting influences of their social 

Aligning Corporate Governance with Natural Law
201
surroundings, requires post-conventional development. Conventional
individuals may go along with corruption to fit in with the norms of
their social group; the majority of individuals will go along with what
peers and co-workers do or what they perceive the organization wants
them to do (Ferrell et al., 2000). Individuals at pre-conventional stages
of moral development, by nature, will be tempted toward corruption by
opportunities for personal gain.
If it were possible to promote psychological development in individu-
als, then organizations and society as a whole could intervene to promote
ethical behavior by stressing the individual factor. Let us now consider
evidence of a human resource development program – the Transcenden-
tal Meditation program – that has had success in promoting individual
transformation in the direction of higher stages of holistic development,
including moral development.
A human resource development program to 
promote moral development
The Transcendental Meditation® (TM®) is said to be easy to learn and to
require no change in life-style or beliefs (Roth, 1987). It is normally prac-
ticed for 20 minutes twice daily sitting quietly with the eyes closed. The
technique directs attention to experience progressively deeper and finer
levels of thinking until thought is completely transcended in the state
of Transcendental Consciousness – “a state of inner wakefulness with 
no object of thought or perception, just pure consciousness aware of its
own unbounded nature” (Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, 1976: 123).
Over five hundred prior studies have found evidence of distinct 
effects during the practice of the TM technique, as well as long-term 
psychological and physiological benefits from the practice. Research on
physiological markers of self-reported episodes of Transcendental Con-
sciousness during the TM practice has found evidence of decreased skin
conductance, reduction in volume and rate of respiration, and EEG (brain-
wave) changes (Farrow and Hebert, 1982; Travis and Wallace, 1997). Fur-
ther, there is an increased ability to maintain restful alertness during
activity (Dillbeck and Orme-Johnson, 1987), reduced anxiety (Eppley 
et al., 1989), increased creativity (Travis, 1979), improvements on intelli-
gence tests (So and Orme-Johnson, 2001). Even improved cardiovascular
health (Schneider et al., 1995; Castillo-Richmond et al., 2000), and reduced
health care expenditures (Orme-Johnson, 1987; Orme-Johnson and
Herron, 1997; Herron et al., 1996).

202
Dennis Heaton,Thomas Carlisle and Ian Brown
The impacts of the Transcendental Meditation technique on people in
business settings around the world have been reviewed by Schmidt-Wilk
et al. (1996). Findings include enhanced employee effectiveness, job 
satisfaction, and work/personal relationships (Alexander et al., 1993),
reduced symptoms of ill health (Haratani and Henmi, 1990), and
enhanced vitality, psychological well-being and organizational contri-
bution (DeArmond, 1996), reduced absenteeism and improved com-
pany productivity (Schmidt-Wilk et al., 1996).
Executives report that they grow in mental clarity and alertness – the
ability to focus on the details and, at the same time maintain broad com-
prehension. An investigation in Sweden found that a group of meditat-
ing managers grew in holistic thinking and became more aware of the
important issues facing the company (Gustavsson, 1992: 31). Herriott 
et al. (2001) reported a qualitative study of business people who had prac-
ticed the Transcendental Meditation technique for more than 20 years.
The subjects reported an increasing inner sense of being anchored to an
inner, spiritual core – and experiences of awareness of inner and outer
wholeness – expressed in more universal values that embraced the wider
interests of the community and environment.
If corruption is an expression of narrow, self-interested awareness, then
findings suggest that the Maharishi Corporate Development Program,
which teaches the TM technique in business settings, may counter cor-
ruption by cultivating a more holistic vision in executives and employ-
ees. Specific evidence of the impact of TM on moral development, and
other dimension of personality growth, are reviewed next.
Impacts of the TM program on moral development
Why might such a practice be considered a possible intervention to 
promote moral development toward the post-conventional and natural
law orientations? The Transcendental Meditation technique facilitates
experience of deeper intrinsic levels of the mind and of Transcendental
Consciousness, the “I” or subject of experience. This experience brings
about a shift in the frame of reference of the individual to a more inner-
directed orientation in which the individual begins to experience ideals
and values as coming from “inside,” for example, as intuition, instead
of orienting to rules and norms that are “outside” of oneself.
Moreover, the TM program is described as leading to the highest lev-
els of human development, at which administrators can achieve “admin-
istration as problem-free, ever-progressive, and ever-evolutionary as the
administration of the universe through Natural Law” (Maharishi Mahesh

Aligning Corporate Governance with Natural Law
203
Yogi, 1995: 8). The Transcendental Meditation technique is said to gradu-
ally attune individual psychology with the wholeness of “Natural Law” –
“that infinite organizing power that sustains the existence of everything
in the universe, automatically maintaining the well-coordinated relation-
ship of everything with everything else” (Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, 1995:
8). The application of this approach to human development has been
offered as a solution to the problem of corruption in India and other coun-
tries (Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Vishwavidyalaya, 1997; Brown, 2000).
A number of research studies provide evidence that the twice-daily
practice of this technique does, over time, bring about developmental
changes that are not otherwise observed in adult subjects. Alexander and
Orme-Johnson (in press) report that prisoners practicing the TM tech-
nique underwent a three-stage advancement in moral reasoning, using
Kohlberg’s instrument. These prisoners basically went from reasoning,
“Do what you want to do, but don’t get caught,” to “I guess I shouldn’t
do that to him, since I don’t want him to do that to me.” Regular medi-
tators also decreased significantly in aggression, schizophrenia, and trait-
anxiety, compared to controls (Alexander et al., in press). No longitudinal
changes were found in other treatment groups or demographically simi-
lar controls wait-listed to learn the TM technique. The behavioral conse-
quences of these personality changes are that prisoners who learn the TM
technique have 33 to 43 percent lower recidivism rates, or rates of return
to prison, than other prisoners (Alexander et al., in press; Rainforth et al.,
in press).
In a cross-sectional study on the TM program and moral development
in college students, Nidich (1975) found that TM practitioners scored
higher than students who had not learned the TM program. Also,
longer-term meditators scored higher than short-term practitioners, and
that there were no differences between non-meditators who were inter-
ested in starting the practice and other non-meditating students.
Chandler et al. (2001) explored the effects of the Transcendental
Meditation (TM) technique on self development as measured by
Loevinger’s Washington University Sentence Completion Test of ego
development, McAdams’ measure of intimacy motivation, and Rest’s
measure of principled moral reasoning. A ten-year longitudinal data indi-
cated that TM subjects increased markedly in ego development in con-
trast to three control groups matched for gender and age over the same
time period (N136, p.0000004). At post-test 38 percent (N34)
scored at or beyond the post-conventional Autonomous level versus 1
percent of controls (p  .0001). TM subjects also increased to very high
levels of principled moral reasoning (p.002) and intimacy (p.02).

204
Dennis Heaton,Thomas Carlisle and Ian Brown
Nidich et al. (forthcoming) have presented evidence associating tran-
scendental experiences during the TM technique with expressions of 
a natural law moral orientation, as conceived by Kohlberg and Ryncarz
(1990). Such findings are consistent with the theory of Natural-Law
Based Management, which calls for bringing individuals into alignment
with natural law through systematic experience of the transcendental
Unified Field of Natural Law (Harung et al., 1999).
The theory of natural-law based management
Corruption is not just the breaking of man-made law; it is even more
fundamentally the breaking of natural law. Natural law is commonly
understood to be the orderly principles, generally expressed mathemati-
cally, which are at the basis of the consistent patterns of behavior observed
in the universe (Carlisle, 2001). In philosophy, natural law has been spo-
ken of as eternal and unchanging moral principles common to all people
by virtue of their nature as human beings.
Management writer Stephen Covey (1991) has argued that natural
laws are not invented by humans, but are the laws of the universe, a part
of human consciousness. Other visionary management writers encour-
age executives to consider the beautiful order and dynamic growth that
nature displays – in its management of the universe – as a model for
their organizations. Some current management writers also expound a
natural law – “a natural law perspective.” Ray writes of a new paradigm
of business based on “wholeness and connectedness” and “doing busi-
ness from our most profound inner awareness and in connection with
the consciousness of others and the earth” (Ray, 1993: 4–5). Wheatley
(1992) has explored the management implications of new scientific the-
ories of the self-evolving order interconnecting everything in nature.
Hagelin (1998) presents a quantum physicist’s perspective that the uni-
fied field and pure consciousness are identical. He further argues that
the holistic intelligence of the most basic level of nature can be har-
nessed in the administration of human institutions by promoting the
experience of Transcendental Consciousness. These authors argue that
by enlivening the deepest level of consciousness within us, the admin-
istration of business and government can be the flow of that natural
order through us, rather than an imposition of our dominion over
nature. Such writers share an understanding that the laws that structure
the universe need to be incorporated into the principles that govern
business and public administration (Carlisle, 2001).

Aligning Corporate Governance with Natural Law
205
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1995) defines Natural Law as that invincible
force that maintains the existence, integration, and evolution of every-
thing. He articulates the traditional Vedic understanding that by bringing
individual awareness to the level of pure, transcendental consciousness,
one can become spontaneously aligned with natural law and thereby can
achieve the most holistic success:
When Transcendental Consciousness is fully enlivened in indivi-
dual awareness and physiology, individual intelligence is sponta-
neously aligned with Cosmic Intelligence and life is lived in harmony
with Natural Law. Individuals cease creating mistakes and violat-
ing Natural Law. (Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
Vishwavidyalaya, 1997: 40)
Success of administration depends on success of education. For admin-
istration to be free from corruption, education must be capable of culti-
vating wisdom. While modern education has contributed to material
progress, the objective approach of knowledge has also led to many short-
comings, including growing stress and health problems, anti-social behav-
ior, and environmental degradation. A subjective approach of awakening
to natural law within is required to counterbalance the weaknesses of 
modern education, and create a foundation for eliminating corruption.
Conclusion
In their analysis of business ethics, Pride and Ferrell (2000: 92–5) posit
that ethical or unethical behavior is influenced by three factors: social
influences within the organization, opportunities for unethical behavior,
and individual characteristics. On the other hand, the anti-corruption
programs primarily address the issues of opportunities and social influ-
ences. Herein the focus of this paper has been on the individual factor.
In our view, the individual approach is fundamental to any attempt to
change ethical behavior through social influences because the influence
of leaders and peers in one’s social environment can only be an expres-
sion of the individual development of each of them. If there is no inner
change of individuals, then the values and behaviors that they uphold
through the informal organization will not change, despite pious poli-
cies and resolutions that may be pronounced in their organizations.
Similarly, we feel, enforcement programs to reduce opportunity for cor-
ruption can never be fully effective unless the individuals are growing in

206
Dennis Heaton,Thomas Carlisle and Ian Brown
the ability to spontaneously act in accord with national law and natural
law. When discussing reform on the national level, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
commented, “Any number of laws can be enacted, but they will remain
on paper and the people in charge will do what they will – corruption and
crime all motivated to gain money” (ibid, 1998: 6).
The approach of developing individual consciousness through the 
TM technique is not about making laws, but it is an approach through
which the purpose of law can be achieved by enlivening the full poten-
tial of natural law latent in everyone. The findings from studies in psy-
chology and education provide evidence that the Transcendental
Meditation program systematically develops individuals toward more
autonomous personality, principled moral reasoning, and personal car-
ing. Individuals with pre-conventional moral development may exploit
opportunities to obtain personal gain, and conventional individuals
may go along with the prevailing practices among their peers. However,
post-conventional individuals gain their bearings from an inner sense 
of right and wrong – from an attunement of their consciousness to the
natural law that is lively in their physiologies and in the cosmos.
This notion that spontaneous right behavior is possible by aligning
the individual awareness with the Cosmic Intelligence of Natural Law 
is a central tenet of India’s ancient Vedic tradition. Indeed, the key to
moral and cultural integrity in India, and effective management in gen-
eral, may well be found in reestablishing its own spiritual roots. Otherwise,
the practice of management in India will be distorted and dominated by
foreign management systems (Maharishi’s Programmes in India, 2001a).
Evidence suggests that the Transcendental Meditation programs have
been well received in Indian companies. The utilization of the TM tech-
nique in Indian corporations is mentioned in press articles published 
in India, such as Businessworld (1995) and Economic Times of India (Kumar,
1997). The Maharishi Corporate Development Program in India
(Maharishi’s Programmes in India, 2001b) reports that Transcendental
Meditation has been taught to 20 000 managers and employees of Tata 
Tea and 6000 of Tata Chemicals. Other companies who have implemented
programs include Associated Cement, Indian Aluminum, Reckitt &
Colman, Oriental Bank of Commerce, SRF, Eveready, Tata Unisys, BHEL,
Jindal Polyester, Indian Petro Chemicals Ltd., Anand Group, DCM
Shriram, Finolex, Hewlett Packard India, DCM Financial Services, Indian
Sugar and General Engineering Corporation, SWIL, Williamson Magor and
Co., Kribhco, and South India Research Institute Ltd. This program, which
is described as something that “comes naturally to the people of India”
(Dr. B. K. Modi, Chairman and President of ModiCorp, quoted in

Aligning Corporate Governance with Natural Law
207
Maharishi’s Programmes in India, 2001c), may provide India with a
solution to the problem of corruption from its own tradition of devel-
oping higher consciousness.
Note
® Transcendental Meditation, TM, and TM-Sidhi are registered trademarks
licensed to Maharishi Vedic Education Development Corporation and used under
sublicense.
References
Alexander, C. N., Heaton, D. P. and Chandler, H. M. (1994) “Advanced human
development in the Vedic Psychology of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi: Theory and
research,” in M. Miller and S. Cook-Greuter (eds), Transcendence and Mature
Thought in Adulthood. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Alexander, C. N. and Langer, E. J. (eds) (1990) Higher Stages of Human Development:
Perspectives on Adult Growth, New York: Oxford University Press.
Alexander, C. N. and Orme-Johnson, D. W. (in press) Walpole study of the 
TM program in maximum security prisoners II: Longitudinal study of devel-
opment and psychopathology. Journal of Offender Rehabilitation.
Alexander, C. N., Rainforth, M. V., Grant, J. D., von Stade, C. and Walton, K. G.
(in press) Walpole study of the TM Program in maximum security prisoners III:
reduced recidivism. Journal of Offender Rehabilitation.
Alexander, C. N., Swanson, G. C., Rainforth, M. V., Carlisle, T. W., Todd, C. C.
and Oates, R. (1993) Effects of the Transcendental Meditation program on
stress-reduction, health, and employee development: A prospective study in
two occupational settings. Anxiety, Stress, and Coping 6: 245–62.
Alexander, C. N., Walton, K. G. and Goodman, R. S. (in press) Walpole study of
the TM program in maximum security prisoners I: Cross-sectional differences
in development and psychopathology. Journal of Offender Rehabilitation.
Brown, I. (2000) “Natural law-based corporate governance,” in P. Asthana (ed.),
Corporate Excellence through Corporate Governance: Background Papers,
Presentations & Proceedings. ICSI-Centre for Corporate Research and Training,
CBD-Belapur: Navi Mumbai, December.
Businessworld (1995) Meditation is the new mantra. October: 4–17.
Carlisle, T. (2001) Maharishi Corporate Development Program: Natural Law-Based
Management. Mult-media presentation. Fairfield, Iowa: Maharishi University of
Management.
Castillo-Richmond, A. B., Schneider, R. H., Alexander, C. N., Cook, R., Myers, H.,
Nidich, S., Haney, C., Rainforth, M. and Salerno, J. (2000) Effects of stress
reduction on carotid atherosclerosis in hypertensive African Americans: A pilot
trial. Stroke 31: 568–73.
Colby, A. and Kohlberg, L. (1987) The Measurement of Moral Judgment. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

208
Dennis Heaton,Thomas Carlisle and Ian Brown
Cook-Greuter, S. R. (1990) “Maps for living: Ego development theory from 
symbiosis to conscious universal embeddedness,” in M. L. Commons, 
C. Armon et al. (eds), Adult development: Models and methods in the study of ado-
lescent and adult thought 2: 79–104. New York: Praeger.
Covey, S. R. (1991) Principle-Centered Leadership. New York: Summit Books.
DeArmond, D. L. (1996) Effects of the Transcendental Meditation Program on
Psychological, Physiological, Behavioral and Organizational Consequences of Stress
in Managers and Executives. Doctoral Dissertation Maharishi University of
Management. Dissertation Abstracts International.
Dillbeck, M. C. and Orme-Johnson, D. W. (1987) Physiological differences
between Transcendental Meditation and rest. American Psychologist 42: 879–81.
Eppley, K. R., Abrams, A. I. and Shear, J. (1989) Differential effects of relaxation tech-
niques on trait anxiety: A meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychology 45: 957–74.
Farrow, J. T. and Hebert, J. R. (1982) Breath suspension during the Transcendental
Meditation technique. Psychosomatic Medicine 44: 133–53.
Ferrell, O. C., Fraedrich, J. and Ferrell, L. (2000) Business Ethics, Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Gustavsson, B. (1992) The Transcendent Organization. Doctoral Dissertation,
Stockholm, Sweden: University of Stockholm, Department of Business
Administration.
Hagelin, J. S. (1998) A manual for a perfect government, Fairfield, Iowa: Maharishi
University of Management Press.
Haratani, T. and Henmi, T. (1990) Effects of Transcendental Meditation (TM) on
health behavior of industrial workers. Japanese Journal of Public Health 37: 729.
Harung, H. S., Alexander, C. N. and Heaton, D. (1999) Evolution of organizations
in the new millennium. Leadership and Organization Development Journal 20(3):
198–206.
Herriott, E., Schmidt-Wilk, J. and Heaton, D. (2001) Spiritual dimensions of entre-
preneurship in long term practitioners of the Transcendental Meditation and TM-Sidhi
Program. Academy of Management Annual Meeting, Washington, DC.
Herron, R. E., Hillis, S. L., Mandarino, J. V., Orme-Johnson, D. W. and Walton, K. G.
(1996) Reducing medical costs: The impact of the Transcendental Meditation 
program on government payments to physicians in Quebec. American Journal of
Health Promotion 10(3): 206–16.
Kohlberg, L. and Ryncarz, R. (1990) “Beyond justice reasoning: Moral develop-
ment and consideration of a seventh stage,” in C. N. Alexander and E. J. Langer
(eds), Higher Stages of Human Development, New York: Oxford University Press.
Kumar, M. (1997) Yogi’s corporate mantra The Economic Times of India,
September 25.
Loevinger, J. and Wessler, R. (1970) Measuring Ego Development 1: Construction and
Use of a Sentence Completion Test, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1976) Creating an Ideal Society: A Global Undertaking, West
Germany: MERU Press.
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1995) Maharishi University of Management: Wholeness on
the Move, Vlodrop: Maharishi Vedic University Press.
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1998) Celebrating Perfection in Administration: Creating
Invincible India, India, Age of Enlightenment Publications.
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Vishwavidyalaya (1997) Constitution of India Fulfilled through
Maharishi’s Transcendental Meditation, India: Age of Enlightenment Publications.

Aligning Corporate Governance with Natural Law
209
Maharishi’s Programmes in India (2001a) Vedic Management. HYPERLINK
http://www.maharishi-india.org/programmes/p8/vedic_management.html
(September 20, 2001).
Maharishi’s Programmes in India (2001b) Case Studies. HYPERLINK http://
www.maharishi-india.org/programmes/p8/case_studies.html (September 20,
2001).
Maharishi’s Programmes in India (2001c). Reports from Executives. HYPERLINK
http://www.maharishi-india.org/programmes/p8/executives.html (September 20,
2001).
Nidich, R. J., Nidich, S. I. and Alexander, C. N. (forthcoming) Moral development
and natural law. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality.
Nidich, S. I. (1975) A study of the relationship of the Transcendental Meditation pro-
gram to Kohlberg’s stages of moral reasoning (Doctoral dissertation, University of
Cincinnati). Dissertation Abstracts International, 36: 4361A–4362A.
OECD (2001) No Longer Business As Usual: Fighting Bribery and Corruption.
Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Orme-Johnson, D. W. (1987) Medical care utilization and the Transcendental
Meditation program. Psychosomatic Medicine 49: 493–507.
Orme-Johnson, D. W. and Herron, R. (1997) An innovative approach to reducing
medical care utilization and expenditures. American Journal of Managed Care
3(1): 135–44.
Pride, W. M. and Ferrell, O. C. (2000) Marketing: Concepts and Strategies, Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Ray, M. L. (1993) “Introduction,” in M. Ray and A. Renzler (eds), The new para-
digm in business: Emerging strategies for leadership and organizational change. Los
Angeles. Jeremy P Tarches/Pergee.
Rainforth, M. V., Alexander, C. N. and Cavanaugh, K. L. (in press) Effects of the
Transcendental Meditation Program on Recidivism Among Former Inmates of
Folsom Prison: Survival Analysis of 15-Year Follow-Up Data. Journal of Offender
Rehabilitation.
Roth, R. (1987) Transcendental Meditation, New York: Donald I. Fine.
Schmidt-Wilk, J., Alexander, C. N. and Swanson, G. C. (1996) Developing 
consciousness in organizations: The Transcendental Meditation program in
business. Journal of Business and Psychology 10(4): 429–44.
Schneider, R. H., Staggers, F., Alexander, C. N., Sheppard, W., Rainforth, M. V.,
Kondwani, K., Smith, S. and King, C. G. (1995) A randomized controlled trial
of stress reduction for hypertension in older African Americans. Hypertension
26(5): 820–7.
So, K.-T. and Orme-Johnson, D. W. (2001) Three randomized experiments on the
holistic longitudinal effects of the Transcendental Meditation technique on
cognition. Intelligence 29(5): 419–40.
Travis, F. (1979) Creative thinking and the Transcendental Meditation technique.
The Journal of Creative Behavior 13(3): 169–80.
Travis, F. and Wallace, R. K. (1997) Autonomic patterns during respiratory sus-
pensions: Possible markers of Transcendental Consciousness. Psychophysiology
34: 39–46.
Wheatley, M. J. (1992) Leadership and the New Science: Learning About Organization
from an Orderly Universe, San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

210
12
Corruption in Asia – A Bottom-up
Approach to its Resolution
Paul Robins
Introduction
It is decided that the moral status of an organization is to be improved.
That is to say that management procedures and decisions will be imple-
mented to ensure that corruption and bad practice no longer feature in
the organization or are a likely possibility. How is this to be achieved?
What guidance is there for making the change? How do you manage the
moral development of an organization? These question are not easy to
answer and are the focus of this paper.
Traditional moral theory should help but there are problems in apply-
ing moral theory to business practice as suggested by Derry and Green
(1989) who complained of ‘a serious lack of clarity about how to apply the
theories to cases and a persistent unwillingness to grapple with tensions
between theories of ethical reasoning’. Other critics of a philosophy-
dominated approach include Brady and Logsdon (1988) and Taket (1994)
who criticize mainstream ethical theory as being too idealistic and pointed
to the work of feminist and/or non-Western philosophers who offer use-
ful alternative avenues for exploration. This is one of the reasons for inves-
tigating an Eastern tradition, that of Buddhism, in this paper.
In order to overcome the identified shortcomings, some writers have
chosen to move away from a single theory by, either combining a num-
ber of theories into a single model, or developing a methodology for
selecting between different theories according to circumstances. These
models, however, have tended to be of limited practical value. In his
review of several such models, Howes (1993) concludes that up to now
they have either tended to be overly pragmatic and not well founded 
in theory, or overly descriptive thus unsuited to providing practical
guidance.

Corruption in Asia
211
In an attempt to overcome many of these difficulties the work
reported here is based on an analysis of the Buddhist spiritual tradition
as an alternative to Western philosophy. Buddhism is an example of an
ancient and trusted tradition that places particular emphasis on the
practical issues of living a moral life. It provides a source of well-founded
guidance for both the individual and the organization wishing to
become more moral, without being dependent on the acceptance of 
a particular theistic or philosophical dogma. It should therefore be pos-
sible to extract useful and practical guidelines for organizations of what-
ever kind. The following analysis seeks to understand the Eastern
perspective although escaping from Western thought patterns is hardly
complete. It is intended to offer useful guidance for those with a Western
background but it may also help to focus the minds of those with an
Eastern background whose working environment has come to be influ-
enced, if not dominated, by Western customs and practice.
Pre-requisites for managing moral improvement
There are two basic management requirements of an organization wish-
ing to manage moral development. The first is an ability to determine,
at any chosen moment, its moral status, which it will wish to be able to
compare with earlier assessments and targets that may have been set.
The second is an ability to use status knowledge to select and implement
changes that will result in an improved moral status in the future. In
practice, this may also involve setting target values which will need to
be practical (i.e. they must be demonstrable by measurement) and they
must be related to planned actions. Targets by themselves have limited
managerial use.
This study examines these two issues and outlines the basis of a prac-
tical guide for the assessment of moral status and identifies processes
that may be introduced or modified in order to stimulate the moral
development of an organization. The analysis is based on an examina-
tion of the Buddhist view of moral growth. Moral hierarchies based on
an interpretation of the principles of Buddhism are formulated for indi-
viduals and organizations or groups. These enable moral assessments to
be made and provide guidance on the kinds of actions that may be
employed or required for an individual or organization to improve their
moral status.
A key design element of this approach is that it should avoid 
ex-cathedra statements of what is good and what is bad, either as an
activity or a status. For any guidance to work in many parts of the world

212
Paul Robins
it is essential that it is not merely an expression of a particular culture
or school of thought as this could easily lead to conflicts with the basic
traditions of minority groups. This is a considerable challenge, but one
that it is thought that the characteristics of Buddhism make a practical 
possibility.
The value of a Buddhist approach
The key aspect of the Buddhist approach to morality that gives rise to
the sought-after qualities is the central role that motivation and under-
standing has in the tradition. The actions of a person are traditionally
described as being of two kinds, ‘skillful’, and ‘unskillful’. Unskillful
actions are defined as being rooted in the negative mental states of
greed, hatred and mental ignorance; and skillful actions as being moti-
vated by the opposite qualities of generosity, compassion and mental
clarity. The quality of an action is therefore dependent on the interac-
tion of motivation or intention and knowledge or understanding of the
world, or in Buddhist terms, Enlightenment.
Terms such as ‘good’ and ‘bad’, ‘right’ and ‘wrong’, have no absolute
meaning in Buddhism. This highlights the difference between morality
based on insight (the Buddhist view) and that based on the Western tra-
dition, which is typically based on rules or power. Morality based on
rules or power is determined by those with the power to make the rules,
whether founded on the commandments of God, or on the laws of a rul-
ing elite (who in some cases may claim God’s authority). Morality based
on Insight in the Buddhist sense is based on an understanding that sees
everything in the universe as interdependent and recognizes the aspira-
tions and needs of all the inhabitants of the universe.
It is impossible to do full justice to the Buddhist tradition in a short
space and the above is a brief outline of some aspects of it. A more
detailed treatment of Buddhist cosmology and philosophy can be found
in Howes (1993); furthermore one has to say that this chapter is written
from the perspective of the authors’ western agnostic viewpoint, seek-
ing an understanding of the essential elements of Buddhism.
A hierarchy of individual moral development
Implicit in this view of morality is the existence of a continuum or hier-
archy of moral states ranging from the very unskillful to the completely
skillful. The notion that a person can move up the hierarchy by devel-
oping increasingly skillful mental states is accepted by all schools of

Corruption in Asia
213
Buddhism although different schools may employ different languages
to describe the process.
In earlier works (Howes, 1993; Howes and Robins, 1994) this hierar-
chy has been formalized into five discrete categories to provide the
means of assessing the moral standing of an individual which enables
these ideas to be applied to the modern Western individual. These five
categories of the moral hierarchy may also be recognized as stages of
development. They are
1 Egoistic or pre-moral stage
2 Conventional morality
3 Emerging individuality
4 Genuine altruism
5 Transcendental morality.
They are expressed in terms that are compatible with secular Western
psychology and to some extent mirror the work of Maslow and Kohlberg
although their theories fall short of the Buddhist view by not taking into
account what might be called the transcendental dimension of moral
development (Maslow, 1943; Kohlberg, 1981). Each category is viewed
as a segment of the pathway to enlightenment and are further described
in the following sections.
Stage 1. Egoistic or pre-moral stage
This is hardly a level of morality at all, but is a state where an action will
be performed only where a reward is promised, or a punishment threat-
ened. It is perhaps the stage of the infant or of animals where basic need
satisfaction for food and shelter are the primary motivators.
Stage 2. Conventional morality
This is the stage of socialization where the norms and values of the
group are key. Individual action becomes much less overtly egocentric,
and is based much more on what is acceptable to significant others, such
as parents, peer groups or teachers.
Stage 3. Emerging individuality
This is a stage of progressive autonomy, where a person starts to emerge
from the milieu of (often unconsciously adopted) group norms. It is a
stage of ‘emerging individuality’ where an individual begins to develop
his or her own views and values. Increasingly, these may be independ-
ent of the need for group approval.

214
Paul Robins
Stage 4. Genuine altruism
There comes a point where a genuine concern for the needs of others
becomes at least equal to a concern for the fulfillment of one’s own
needs (but without denying such needs), and at this point it can be said
that one has entered the stage of genuine altruism. As a person devel-
ops a stronger sense of self-worth, he or she becomes much less preoc-
cupied with the fulfillment of limited egoistic needs and much more
concerned with the greater good. It should be stressed that this stage of
moral development is very difficult to reach, and cannot be judged by
any propensity to do good acts.
Stage 5. Transcendental morality
This is the highest level of spiritual attainment in which a person has
transcended human egoistic limitations altogether. He no longer per-
ceives a difference between subject and object or givers and receivers.
According to Buddhism, only rarely in human history has anybody
achieved this. However, it is the existence of this possibility in an assess-
ment scale, and having an end point that is important.
The morality of groups
The moral hierarchy or pathway is inevitably defined in terms of an
individual’s interaction with the world around him and most impor-
tantly the significant people or groups that he interacts with. As most
of us spend a significant part of our adult lives at work the most signif-
icant group influences are provided by our companies and the work
environment. It follows that the choice of company to work for is 
crucial for any individual wishing to live a more moral life. Similarly,
where a company aspires to be more moral, its choice of employee has
equal importance.
Linking Buddhist ideas about the moral nature of groups with an
analysis similar to that described above has enabled a formalization of
a moral hierarchy for organizations. It yields a five part typology and is
as follows:
1 Egoistic-elite group – the non-group
2 Coercive group
3 Contractual group
4 Co-operative group
5 Spiritual community.
The basis of this hierarchy is described in the following section.

Corruption in Asia
215
Basis of group morality
As might be expected the Buddhist tradition supports the view that col-
lective moral growth (which presupposes some form of collective moral
hierarchy) and individual moral growth go hand in hand. An important
aspect in this context is the commitment to the Spiritual Community
of individuals who follow the teachings of the Buddha and who have
either attained, or aspire to, Enlightenment. This commitment is sup-
ported in three principle ways:
1 Material and spiritual support: This is a commitment to collectively
provide support to group members to help them to create positive
conditions for individual growth.
2 Maintaining a strong altruistic focus: This is viewed as a commitment
to anything that stresses the trans-personal nature of spiritual prac-
tice and thus counters the tendency towards spiritual individualism.
It supports and encourages individuals to develop the ability to tran-
scend their limited selfish needs.
3 Encouraging personal responsibility: As well as encouraging self-
transcendence, support is given to less developed members to help
them develop their individuality by overcoming significant group
conditioning. In practice, this means encouraging individual thought
and action to overcome conditioned behavior.
A hierarchy of group moral development
In the best of groups all of these aspects of group morality are assembled
together, thereby providing the greatest possible support for the moral
development of its individuals. In groups where none of this support is
found individuals develop in spite of the group rather than being sup-
ported and encouraged by it. A moral hierarchy based on these aspira-
tional ideas is particularly important for providing guidance and advice
about how the moral standing of an organization may be assessed and
improved. The natures of the five groups in the hierarchy (listed earlier)
are elaborated below.
1. Egoistic-Elite Group: the non-group
The Egoistic-Elite Group is the equivalent of the Egoistic or Pre-moral
stage in the individual moral hierarchy, and is a group where one or a
small number of people (an elite) enjoys absolute power. The concerns
and goals of the group are those of the elite. This is not, therefore, truly
a group at all. This type of group is (arguably) quite rare in today’s fairly

216
Paul Robins
open and democratic Western society, although, in those parts of the
world where dictatorship prevails, it may well be the norm.
2. Coercive Group
As in the previous group, the Coercive Group is dominated by a power-
ful elite, but without absolute power. The elite of this group must, there-
fore, resort to other means of getting its own way. In extreme cases,
actual physical violence may be used or some other form of manipula-
tion. This type of group is not a rare occurrence. For example, it is com-
mon among nuclear families to function as a coercive group with the
abuse and violent treatment of one family member by another being
commonplace. Likewise, in many work groups a coercive mentality pre-
vails as with the Japanese Sokaiya, for instance.
3. Contractual Group
In the Contractual Group there is recognition that a degree of formal co-
operation may provide the best mechanism for achieving the purposes
of the elite. Here a degree of fair play will be evident, with efforts being
made to clarify the expectations that the group has towards its individ-
ual members and also the benefits that each member might expect in
return. Typically, at this level of group morality a legalistic rule-based
ethos dominates.
4. Co-operative Group
There is no dominating elite in the Co-operative Group. Instead there is
emphasis on a shared (rather than imposed) world-view. Responsibility
for decision-making, whilst still tending to be taken by its stronger
members is more widely dispersed with every member being encouraged
to participate fully in this process. The growth and development of indi-
viduals is a primary concern of the group. Its ethos is one of facilitating
and encouraging so that everybody develops a sense of responsibility
and concern for the welfare of others, whether strong or weak, influen-
tial or not.
5. Spiritual Community
In the Spiritual Community individual goals are essentially those of the
group. The use of the term ‘community’ here rather than ‘group’ is 
significant. It emphasizes the move away from satisfying the goals or
aspirations of an elite to the maintenance of a particular set of group
norms. The boundaries of the group have in essence expanded to
include those not formally members of the group. Co-operation and col-
lective responsibility are the prime characteristics of this group; and any

Corruption in Asia
217
form of coercion becomes an anathema. At its best the Spiritual
Community follows the principle of ‘give what you can, take what you
need’. While the group in functioning in the real world may require
leadership, each group member is encouraged to contribute to that role.
The moral characteristics of business groups
In general terms, moving upwards through the five categories is seen as
an increasing tendency to support members developing an ability to act
skillfully. The hierarchy is reviewed below in terms of three principle
characteristics that can easily be related to the nature of business 
organizations:
1 the group’s aims and objectives;
2 the distribution of power and responsibility;
3 the extent to which the group actively encourages individual growth.
1. The group’s aims and objectives
A considerable gulf exists between the way that aims and objectives 
are determined in groups at each end of the hierarchy. The Egoistic-Elite
Group has no interest in the concerns of anyone outside its elite,
whereas the Spiritual Community is wholly concerned with the welfare
of others. The aims and objectives of the Egoistic-Elite Group are likely
to be heavily influenced by
(a) greed, a concern for maximizing group profit (pecuniary or other-
wise), selfish pleasure and power,
(b) hatred, a concern for minimizing the influence of all that gets in the
way of the group’s profit, pleasure and power and
(c) delusion, the belief that such goals are in the best interest of the
group as a whole.
The Spiritual Community is more likely to show
(a) generosity, the process that empowers its members and supports
their growth,
(b) loving-kindness, providing support for members moving away from
their limited selfish concerns, and
(c) insight, encouraging a view of the inter-dependent nature of all
things and providing the foundation for general well-being and 
skillful action.

218
Paul Robins
2. The distribution of power and responsibility
In the Egoistic-Elite Group the power of its significant personalities is
absolute and therefore their wishes and needs prevail without question,
whereas within the Spiritual Community power and responsibility are
shared among its members and common aims pursued. The Spiritual
Community is distinguished by the existence of many rather than few
significant personalities, all of whom influence its functioning and
direction.
3. The extent to which the group actively encourages individual growth
The extent to which a group actively supports the development of its
members or creates barriers is a critical distinguishing characteristic. It
determines the potential for both individual and group development.
Practical categorization depends on, for example, the extent to which
the group encourages or discourages the taking of new initiatives among
its members, and the proportion of its resources that it devotes to help-
ing individuals develop. The extent to which the conditions exist for
new significant personalities to emerge is significant. The Egoistic-Elite
Group has no concern for creating such conditions, whereas, they are
an integral feature of behavior in a Spiritual Community.
Clearly, there are marked differences between the groups. Adopting
slightly different terms, Kennedy has contrasted the two extremes, using
the terms positive and negative to indicate the extremes (Kennedy,
1985). In his Buddhist Vision he suggests that, whereas the positive
group may encourage healthiness and happiness in its members and is
upheld by a higher vision, the negative group holds together only out
of the overlapping self-interest of its members and the unwholesome
states that predominate within it. He visualizes the transition from
greed, hatred and delusion to love, generosity and awareness is the
replacement of what has been called the ‘power mode’ with the ‘love
mode’. The person in power mode is regarded as immature and sees the
world solely in terms of his or her own needs and their ability to dom-
inate and impose, seeing everything, other people included, as objects
of gratification. People in the ‘love mode’ on the other hand would not
exploit or manipulate others but try to relate to them as independent,
feeling and thinking beings.
Assessing the moral status of an organization in practice
Armed with the two hierarchies described above it is possible to begin
to meet the requirements of managers wishing to manage moral 

Corruption in Asia
219
development. Each hierarchy may be used as an assessment scale – 
providing a means for categorizing individuals, organizational units 
or entire organizations. An organization is treated as an independent
entity separate from the individuals that it is composed of (this is the
position of the ‘methodological individualist’ – see, for example, Flew,
1985). Such an entity has aims, objectives and behavioral characteris-
tics, which are determined by its formal and informal structures and
procedures, and by the way that these distribute decision-making,
responsibility, information and freedom of choice amongst its member-
ship. There are therefore three elements to be assessed, namely:
1 the moral status of the organization as an entity interacting with its
environment (especially its aims and objectives);
2 the moral status of an organization based on the quality of its inter-
nal processes (particularly the distribution of decision making and
responsibility); and
3 the moral quality of the contributions made by individuals within
the organization.
In spite of focusing on the organization as an entity there remains 
a significant concern for individuals and their status. They, of course, are
the significant elements of the whole and the channels through which,
singly or in groups, organizational improvements flow.
Core qualities in relation to individuals
The starting point of our analysis is the basic Buddhist goal of develop-
ing skillful action. The three core qualities of the Buddhist tradition that
support this are:
1 a commitment to moral improvement
2 a striving towards skillful moral motivation and
3 an awareness of the moral consequences of actions.
In the following sections theses qualities are examined with a view 
to providing guidance for making practical use of the hierarchies. The
examination begins with the assessment of individuals partly in recog-
nition of the essentially individual focus of Buddhist tradition and partly
to ensure that the members of the organization are not overlooked. This
is followed by an extension of the ideas to the organization.
1. Commitment to moral improvement
Commitment to moral improvement is central to Buddhist morality, 
for without it and the constant reaffirmation of such commitment,

220
Paul Robins
Buddhist morality has no practical meaning. Sangharakshita emphasizes
this by saying that the development of insight and the eventual attain-
ment of Enlightenment is ‘the central preoccupation of Buddhism’
(Sangharakshita, 1977: 14). Traditionally, Buddhists speak of Going for
Refuge to the Three Jewels, which are three central ideas of Buddhism,
namely the Ideal of Enlightenment, the Ideal of the Path to Enlightenment
and the Ideal of the Spiritual Community.
Put in more secular terms one could say that a person wishing to
become more moral would need to:
G
acknowledge, both in him/herself and in others, the possibility of
‘something morally higher’,
G
believe in the possibility of moving towards a higher moral state and
be committed to achieving it, and
G
recognize the impossibility of ‘going it alone’ and accepts the guid-
ance, example and friendship of others.
2. Striving towards skillful moral motivation
Establishing the true nature of an individual’s motivation is difficult 
as they are generally poor at making sound judgments about their 
own motivation; and a judgment by others is notoriously difficult. 
As pointed out above, good action does not necessarily imply skillful
motivation.
A partial resolution of this difficulty is made possible by adopting 
an indirect approach. The fundamental Buddhist notion that, at root,
moral development is concerned with developing a ‘way of seeing’
which will eventually lead to Enlightenment implies that the way an
individual ‘sees’ the world, his world-view, is at the center of his or her
mental processes. Thus, the quality of their ‘world view’ may be used as
an indicator of their moral status. A very similar idea is found in
Checkland’s approach to Soft System Analysis where the ‘World View’
or ‘Weltanschauung’ is posited as a framework for giving meaning to the
elements of the systems being analyzed (Checkland, 1981; Checkland
and Scholes, 1990).
Here, it is the breadth and quality of the ‘world view’ that are the cru-
cial features. At the lowest, the pre-moral level on the moral hierarchy,
we expect to find a world-view which is typically small, tightly defined
and closed, where the individual tends to understand the world in terms
of simple cause and effect relationships with the major actors (including
the individual his or herself) often being seen in two dimensional, cari-
caturized forms. The language of this level is the simplistic, polarizing, 

Corruption in Asia
221
as with the terminology of low-grade tabloid newspapers, with behav-
ioral responses being largely egotistical and self-seeking, based on a
‘what’s-in-it-for-me?’ attitude.
At higher levels in the hierarchy we expect to find progressively 
more complex world-views, with an increased openness to views that
are different to those of the individual concerned. At the stage of
Conventional Morality, individual motivation and behavior is largely
conditioned by the values and language of the group and there is a ten-
dency to look to an external authority for guidance and approval.
Beyond Conventional Morality the need for external approval becomes
much less, and personal choice and responsibility become much more
important in determining behavior. Here, laws and rules, whether
socially imposed or ‘God-given’, are only seen as a guide to behavior
rather than a fixed edict from ‘on high’.
As an individual’s motivation moves towards Genuine Altruism his or
her behavior will be typified by co-operativeness, by kindly and helpful
speech and by an ability to recognize and evaluate alternative view-
points. At the highest level (Transcendental Morality) we have an all
embracing, completely open world-view, which comprehends the real
nature of ‘things’ and their complex and interdependent nature.
So, while motivation may not be assessed or promoted directly the
quality of world-view (the model of the world) can both be assessed, and
also extended and improved. Further, the dynamic use of the world-
view may be considered to create additional approaches to assessment.
Thus, the indirect assessment is based on:
G
the size and complexity of world-view as assessed directly,
G
the quality of interaction and communication skills as a reflection 
of the world-view in use, and
G
the openness to alternative viewpoints as an indication of growth
potential.
3. Concern for consequences of actions
Given that it is always difficult to make an objective assessment of one’s
own (let alone another person’s) moral motivation, Buddhism acknowl-
edges another, in many ways more practical, approach. This assesses
moral action by evaluating the moral consequences of an action or
group of actions. Clearly, this is not completely separate from moral
motivation, but rather, a linked aspect of it. It has the advantage of
being simple to apply but also has clear limitations. For, according to
Buddhism, making judgments on the basis of the moral consequences

of an action has no intrinsic value per se but only insofar as such judg-
ments have a positive effect on a person’s moral motivation and future
behavior.
However, there is a set of five moral precepts which traditionally are
seen as reflecting the way an Enlightened person would act and which
provide a particular working-out of that most fundamental of all
Buddhist (not to say humanistic) injunctions ‘not to cause harm of any
sort’. These training principles list actions or outcomes to be avoided.
They are to refrain from:
G
taking life (or more generally, from causing any harm),
G
taking the not-given (this is more than stealing, and includes all
forms of exploitation),
G
sexual misconduct,
G
false speech,
G
taking substances that intoxicate or cloud the mind.
In addition, to avoid the error of seeing the bare application of these
principles as morally sufficient, Buddhists are also encouraged to develop
their positive counterparts: loving-kindness, open-handed generosity,
contentment, truthfulness and mindfulness.
Core qualities in relation to an organization
It is fortunate that the ‘inner life’ of an organization is in large measure
open to scrutiny. The individuals in an organization are co-ordinated by
the rules, procedures and practices of the organization. There may also
exist mechanisms for the whole to protect itself against malfunction in
the individuals. As with individuals, processes in an organization should
show commitment and support for moral development and improve-
ment. Using the principles described above these include:
(1) Collective commitment to moral improvement:
The organization is
overtly and publicly committed to making moral progress. There will be
active encouragement by fostering:
G
acknowledgement and search for moral improvement,
G
efforts to move towards a higher moral state,
G
example guidance and mutual support.
(2) Collective moral motivation:
This category uses an indirect assess-
ment of moral motivation similar to that for individuals. The categories
222
Paul Robins

are re-named as:
breadth and complexity of management world-view: was there a single 
narrow goal guiding decision-making or broader more complex ones?
quality of communication channels: are they mostly one-way, top-down
or extensive, two-way communication not significantly limited by
organization role or responsibility?
corporate flexibility: is the organization open to growth, responding to
imaginative input from any source?
(3) Collective concern for consequences:
To be true to the spirit of Buddhist
morality attention must be focused on the positive (doing good) aspects
as well as on the negative (doing harm) aspects of the actions and the
general behavior of the organization. Specific guidance is provided by
transforming the precepts identified for an individual into analogous
strictures for an organization. Thus, an organization should:
G
promote benefit and avoid harming its environment,
G
promote benefit for and avoid harming its members,
G
give equal respect and consideration to all (individuals and 
organizations),
G
use clearly defined processes and procedures that are open to
scrutiny,
G
adopt management practices that are guided by information and
understanding.
Final words
The above remains a summary analysis but it shows the possibility of
linking basic Buddhist ideas to practical management terms and ideas. 
As mentioned earlier, the details of the analysis is described in Howes
(1993). There, an attempt was made to assess the applicability of these
ideas in practice by using them as a basis for making an ethical audit of
an organization. As a pilot investigation the result was positive, although
it brought to light a number of issues needing attention before routine
use was thought to be possible. These remain under consideration.
However, the increasing use of computer information systems may
mean that much of the administrative burden of the process (which was
a significant problem in the pilot study, being a tentative, iterative man-
ual process) is removed, and that creating a system that works for much
of the time in the background is possible. While this may be a benefit
Corruption in Asia
223

to those striving to manage the quality of their management systems 
it may also become the source of difficulties. Such systems may be used
as intelligence gathering systems rather than as systems for the broader
sharing of data, knowledge and wisdom. This is particularly likely where
organizations operate as collaborators where there is a blurring of the
boundaries between them. What would pass between them is knowledge
of possible problems; weaknesses and motivation that might, as intended,
aid understanding but might also inform competitive positioning.
References
Brady and Logsdon (1988) Zimbardo’s ‘Stanford Prison Experiment’ and the
Relevance of Social Psychology for Teaching Business Ethics. Journal of Business
Ethics 7: 703–10.
Checkland, P. and Scholes, J. (1990) Soft Systems Methodology in Action, Chichester:
Wiley.
Checkland, P. (1981) Systems Thinking, Systems Practice, Chichester: Wiley.
Derry and Green (1989) Ethical theory in business ethics: A critical assessment.
Journal of Business Ethics 8: 521–33.
Flew, A. (1985) Thinking About Social Thinking, Oxford: Blackwell.
Howes. M. A. (Satyapala) and Robins P. C. (1994) A Theory of Moral Organization: 
A Buddhist View of Business Ethics, Aston Business School Research Institute
Howes, M. A. (Satyapala) (1993) Changing the Corporate Mind: a Buddhist
Perspective on business morality. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Aston,
Birmingham.
Kennedy, Alex (Dharmachari Subhuti) (1985) The Buddhist Vision, London: Rider.
Kohlberg, L. (1981) The Philosophy of Moral Development, San Francisco: Harper
& Row.
Maslow, A. H. (1943) A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review 50:
370–96.
Sangharakshita, Ven (1977) The origin and development of the Bodhisattva ideal.
Mitrata 56 Windhorse, Glasgow, October.
Taket, A. (1994) Undercover agency? – Ethics, responsibility and the practice of
OR. Journal of the Operational Research Society 45(2): 123–32.
224
Paul Robins

13
Doing the Right Thing: Incorporating
the Ethical Imperative into the
Sustainable Development Process
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah
…the government has promoted stupid development processes
which cause disasters both in terms of forest resources and 
suffering for the generations to come. This catastrophe is the
result of both expert consultants and the government appara-
tus adhering to inherently flawed knowledge which also has
resulted in the economic crisis, political crisis, food crisis, for-
est fires crisis, and moral crisis.
(Barber and Schweithelm, 2000: 40)
Introduction
For many developing countries, the difficulties with orthodox develop-
ment strategies lie not just in the relatively slow and uncertain pace of
the development process but more significantly, in the very nature of the
development model that has been adopted so far. It is a model in which
excessive emphasis has been placed on the economic aspects, a model
that has generated significant inequities, a model that is not meaningful
for a large proportion of the world’s population, and a model that may
not be sustainable in the longer-term. These concerns have provoked 
a critical questioning of present forms and processes of development,
and have led to a search for better and more viable alternatives.1
In 1987, the World Commission on Environment and Development
(WCED) promoted a concept of sustainable development that postulated
that economic, ecological and social development should be placed on
an equal footing.2 Since then, sustainable development has become an
225

increasingly important concern among researchers, governments, NGOs
and development organizations.
At the same time, there has been an increasing concern, fostered most
recently by the IMF and the World Bank, about impediments to devel-
opment caused by corruption in developing countries. However, it is
arguable that these problems extend beyond corruption per se, and appro-
priate concern should also extend to violations of corporate social respon-
sibility, human rights violations and other developments and practices
that provide the capacity for individuals or organizations to cause signifi-
cant harm and suffering to others.
We may categorize these problems and concerns under the rubric of
issues related to an ethical imperative in the development process. These
problems and concerns should be provided more direct attention. They
should be incorporated into the main conceptual framework, and
should be monitored as closely as other aspects of the sustainable devel-
opment framework, because they also exert very significant influence
on the overall viability of the development process. In short, an appro-
priate framework for sustainable development must focus as much
attention on issues that relate to the ethical imperative, as on issues
related to other kinds of relevant imperatives.
Sustainability: from ecology to the quadruple bottom line
The rising interest in issues relating to sustainable development corre-
sponded with growing concerns that the previous dominant focus on
economic growth, in general, and the gross national product, in partic-
ular, have been severely inadequate, unbalanced and even deceptive
(Cobb et al., 1995, 1999). Initial concerns over sustainability centered on
the issues relating to environmental and ecological sustainability, result-
ing from concerns raised, among others, by Carson (1962), Meadows 
et al. (1972) and Lovelock (1979).3
Subsequently, the WCED helped to expand sustainability concerns 
to include economic and social aspects. This led to the concept of the
“triple bottom line,” a significant extension beyond the traditional con-
cerns solely with commercial profitability (the conventional “bottom
line”) of business enterprise. In this regard, Robinson and Tinker (1998:
14, 22) identified the economy, the ecological system, and human soci-
ety as three interconnected, overlapping and coequal “prime systems,”
with corresponding imperatives, namely: the economic imperative is 
to ensure and maintain adequate material standards of living for all 
226
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

people; the ecological imperative is to remain within planetary bio-
physical carrying capacity; and the social imperative is to provide social
structures, including systems of governance, that effectively propagate
and sustain the values that people wish to live by.4
Robinson and Tinker (1998) pointed out that these three imperatives
are interconnected and mutually reinforcing, with direct and indirect
effects on each other, such that “any attempt to address one system in iso-
lation not only runs the risk of intensifying problems in the other systems,
but also may give rise to feedback effects from the other systems which
overwhelm the effects of the first intervention” (p. 24), and “addressing
any of these issues in isolation, without considering their interacting
effects, can give rise to unanticipated higher order consequences in other
realms, which cause problems of their own or undercut the initial poli-
cies” (p. 12).5 Furthermore, they claimed, “anthropogenic stress generated
on a global scale is increasing in all three prime systems” (p. 17), and that
“accurately predicting system change in response to stress…requires
greater knowledge than we have at present. Such change often goes in
counter-intuitive directions” (p. 18).
From this perspective, the crux of sustainable development lies in the
fact that satisfying any one imperative without also satisfying the other
two is unsustainable; because each is independently crucial to societal
functioning, each is urgent in light of the scope and scale of problems
currently being faced in the world, and each of the three imperatives are
interconnected. Consequently, “addressing any one of the three imper-
atives in isolation virtually guarantees failure. Nevertheless, this is 
what current policy-making commonly does” (Robinson and Tinker,
1998: 24).6 Specifically, “the current tendency is to concentrate on the
economic imperative combined with a post hoc attempt to reconcile
this with the ecological imperative, while ignoring the social imperative
and its questions of North–South and intra-country equity” (p. 35). In
contrast, Robinson and Tinker see the necessity for an integrated
approach that explicitly and jointly addresses all three prime systems in
a complementary manner that can generate positive synergies.7
However, whilst Robinson and Tinker have significantly enhanced 
the analytical foundations of the sustainable development framework,
they have not included an explicit recognition and incorporation of 
an ethical imperative in that analytical framework, and in the sustain-
able development process. Indeed, recognition of the need to include
ethical concerns in sustainable development programs and efforts is, 
at best, at an early stage. This can be demonstrated by considering three
major frameworks or indices that have been introduced in recent years.
Doing the Right Thing
227

First, there is the “comprehensive development framework,” being 
promoted by the World Bank (Wolfensohn, 1999). Among other dimen-
sions, this framework has introduced a focus on corruption, good gover-
nance and judicial reform. These aspects have a significant connection to
ethical issues. Through them, the CDF has encouraged a broader devel-
opment focus than the orthodox perspective that was provided for many
years principally by its “world development indicators,” presented in its
annual World Development Reports. The world development indicators
have predominantly and traditionally focused on quantifiable macro-
economic aspects of the development process.
Second, there is the ‘human development index’ introduced by the
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), and presented annually
in its Human Development Report. The UNDP sought to provide a
broader assessment of the development process, by including indicators
for levels of income, literacy, and life expectancy, which form the prin-
cipal components of the index. The annual reports have provided more
emphasis on social issues such as poverty. In recent years, the UNDO
have added the Human Poverty Index, the Gender-related Development
Index, and the Gender Empowerment Measure. The 2000 annual report
introduced a focus on human rights. These additions are welcome, and
useful in examining significant aspects of the development process in
different countries. Moreover, the newer indicators also have a close
connection with the ethical dimension in the development process.
However, neither the World Bank’s comprehensive development
framework, nor the UNDP’s human development index is designed
specifically to focus on the concept of sustainable development. That
task and principal responsibility falls to the United Nations Commission
for Sustainable Development, which has oversight of the creation of a
“sustainable development index” (SDI). The SDI currently has four prin-
cipal themes, titled: “social,” “environmental,” “economic” and “insti-
tutional.” None of these principal themes has a significant focus on
ethics. Within the SDI’s “social” theme, there is a sub-theme for “crime”
(measured by one indicator: number of recorded crimes per 100000
population), and a sub-theme for “social and ethical values.” However,
there is no specific indicator designed to directly monitor aspects related
to “ethical values” in the SDI. This is a gap that it would be important to
close. To do so, it is necessary to note that this lapse may be related
directly to the initial failure to include a specific focus on ethics in the
sustainable development conceptual framework. This has led to it becom-
ing submerged and, subsequently, neglected and lost within the “social”
theme.
228
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

Yet, the evidence presented below will demonstrate that unethical
practices undermine significantly the efficacy and viability of the over-
all development process. Such considerations highlight the need to
extend the original three-dimension sustainable development analytical
framework to include explicitly an ethical dimension focusing on the
“value system.” Furthermore, the quest for sustainable development at
the national and international (macro) level requires a corresponding
concept, “sustainable management,” at the organizational and enter-
prise (micro) level; that is, management directly focused on the creation
and effective management of economically, ecologically, socially and
ethically sustainable enterprises. Where business enterprises had previ-
ously focused their concerns and activities largely or completely on
competitiveness and the creation of material wealth (measured by vari-
ous indicators of profitability),8 in the future, enterprises will need to
adopt broader and more balanced foci to include concerns for habit-
ability (measured by various indicators of eco-efficiency), community
(measured by various indicators of quality of life), and legitimacy (meas-
ured by indicators of corporate reputation, corporate social responsibil-
ity, and ethical investment).9 The specific foci and criteria for these four
dimensions are identified in Table 13.1.
Thus, an extended sustainable development framework would incorpo-
rate four principal dimensions: (a) the economic imperative, that is, busi-
ness activities must be economically profitable, (b) the ecological
imperative, that is, the activities must also be ecologically friendly and not
damaging to the environment, (c) the social imperative, that is, in addi-
tion to individual or private gain, the activities must also promote com-
munity and societal well-being, for instance by reducing social divisions,
inequity and conflict, and (d) the ethical imperative. The ethical impera-
tive may be defined simply and positively as a moral responsibility to “do
the right thing,” or alternatively as the admonition to “do no harm.”10
Various aspects of current development efforts have an adverse impact
on development outcomes, are harmful to others, or are morally repre-
hensible. For those reasons, the ethical imperative must be a relevant
consideration in the assessment of development efforts. In addition to
the economic, ecological and social imperatives currently included in
the sustainable development framework, the ethical imperative must be
added to this framework to encourage individuals, organizations and
governments to incorporate these four imperatives into their planning
and operational activities in a more deliberate and integrated manner.
Failure to do so, illustrated by the evidence presented below, impairs the
viability of development processes in the longer-term.
Doing the Right Thing
229

Transgressions of the ethical imperative in Asia and their
adverse impact on development
The ethical imperative, defined above as a moral responsibility to “do the
right thing,” or alternatively as the admonition to “do no harm,” may
be further defined as the necessity (a) for organizations to observe and
practice “corporate social responsibility,” (b) for individuals and organi-
zations to avoid corrupt practices, (c) for all peoples and governments to
uphold the tenets contained in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and (d) for the avoidance of other possible acts of commission or
omission that have the likelihood of causing significant harm to others.
Violations of corporate social responsibility
According to Watts and Holme (1999: 3), “Corporate social responsibil-
ity is the continuing commitment by business to behave ethically and
contribute to economic development while improving the quality of life
of the workforce and their families as well as of the local community
and society at large.”17 Kenichi Ohmae provided one recent example of
disregard for corporate social responsibility at the expense of employees.
He reported his observations of the accelerating vitality of economic
230
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah
Table 13.1
The Quadruple Bottom line – dimensions, foci and performance 
criteria for sustainable management and sustainable development
Dimension
Focus
Corporate
Societal
Global
performance
performance
performance
criterion
criterion
criterion
Economic
Competitiveness
Corporate
Societal
Global
imperative
profitability
wealth11
wealth
Ecological
Habitability
Corporate
Societal
Global
imperative
eco-efficiency12 eco-efficiency
eco-efficiency
Social
Community
Corporate
Societal
Global
imperative
reputation13
quality of 
quality of 
life14
life
Ethical
Legitimacy
Corporate
Societal
Human
imperative
values
values
values
All
Combined
Sustainable
Sustainable
Sustainable
dimensions
foci
management
development
development
index15
index16
index

development in China as follows:
I saw the implications of this recently on a visit to a 3-year-old 
manufacturing plant in China. This plant had 50000 workers – all
young women, and none wearing eyeglasses.
“Don’t you have any employees with bad eyesight?” I asked the
manager.
He replied: “We fire them when their eyes go bad. They can find
another job – that’s not my problem. There are plenty of other peo-
ple who want to work for us.”
From the perspective of industrialized nations, practices like this are
brutally cruel and would not exist in any other nation of China’s
stature due to labor laws. But in Shengzhen, Shanghai, Suzhou, Dalian
and many more Chinese cities, where hundreds of millions of people
eagerly flock to urban jobs from the hinterlands, such practices are
taken for granted (Ohmae, 2001).18
Earlier, in Japan, management failings at the Nippon Chisso
Company chemical plant at Minamata city caused severe mercury poi-
soning among the population in that area. Indeed, Ui (1992), noted that
“The Chisso Minamata complex, being representative of Japan’s chemical
industries during the post-war years…achieved the highest economic
growth-rate in Japan and at the same time caused the greatest environ-
mental destruction that the country has ever seen.” This was compounded
by inept government actions, and their efforts to conceal or downplay the
problems.
More recently, poor management and unsafe work practices led to an
accident at the nuclear material processing plant at Tokaimura in Japan,
on 30 September 1999 (Lyman and Dolley, 2000). This was compounded
by ineffective regulation by the relevant authorities as well as poor lead-
ership by the government in dealing with the fundamental causes of the
problems.
In August 2000, reports revealed that managers and workers at
Mitsubishi Motors had knowingly and systematically concealed defects in
the design and manufacture of its cars and trucks over a 20-year period.
This led to the recall of more than 620 000 vehicles in Japan and abroad,
and legal action against the company (Kageyama, 2000; Millett, 2000;
Kunii, 2000a). This case raises serious questions about the integrity of this,
a major, Japanese corporation.19 Also see Chapter 8 in this book (eds.).
An example of corporate social irresponsibility by a foreign-owned
firm occurred during the massive gas leaks from the Union Carbide 
Doing the Right Thing
231

factory in Bhopal, India in 3 December 1984. Thousands of people died
and, subsequently, many more suffered on-going medical problems and
disabilities. Kharbanda and Stallworthy (1986: 50) noted that “the
Bhopal disaster was a man-made tragedy. It occurred as a result of faulty
design, poor maintenance and faulty plant operation. It could and
should have been prevented.”20
Other more recent instances of alleged exploitative practices by for-
eign companies, their subsidiaries, subcontractors or franchisees in Asia,
include the employment practices of Nike, and other sports wear and
clothing manufacturers (Goodman, 1993; Greenhouse, 1997; Connor,
2000; UNITE, 2000; Osborn, 2000; Wong, 2000). These and other exam-
ples of corporate social irresponsibility demonstrate that transgressions
of the ethical imperative can have serious adverse personal, social, eco-
nomic and environmental consequences.
Corruption
Corruption may be defined as an effort to obtain private gain through
unethical means that causes harm to others.21 While corruption is not
unique to Asia, its burdens are borne by more people in Asia than any
other region of the world. However, the great variation in world rank-
ings, based on the corruption perception index (of Transparency Inter-
national in Berlin), means that further generalizations are difficult
because countries in Asia rank among the highest and lowest in the world
(see Table 13.2). However, as a group, countries in South Asia (India,
Pakistan and Bangladesh) have performed particularly poorly in these
rankings.
A recent report portrayed a very bleak picture of the situation in South
Asia, suggesting that “corruption has ‘floated upwards’ – from petty cor-
ruption in the 1950s, to mid-level corruption in the 1960s and 1970s,
to corruption at the very highest levels of the state in the 1980s and
1990s” (Haq, 1999: 96). Its distinctive characteristics are: it occurs “up-
stream” and distorts strategic decisions on development priorities, poli-
cies and projects; it has “wings” and leads to substantial capital flight
abroad; it leads to “promotion, not prison” as the powerful are seldom
called to account; and it occurs in a context of widespread poverty, and
so it compounds the massive human deprivation and the extreme
income inequalities (Haq, 1999: 99; Gill, 1998).
Other Asian countries also encounter serious problems with cor-
ruption. For instance, reports have indicated that poverty combined 
with corruption led to the sale of body parts or blood by impoverished
232
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

people – and the use of infected instruments has resulted in a massive
AIDS epidemic in Henan province in China (Rosenthal, 2001).
The problems also extend deeply into government agencies. In 2000,
state auditors in China discovered from an extensive investigation of gov-
ernment and Communist Party officials and managers of state-owned
companies that $11 billion of public funds had been embezzled or seri-
ously misused in the last two years (Wingfield-Hayes, 2000). While China
has episodically conducted anti-corruption campaigns and sought to
curb excesses, some fundamental causes may be traced to the inadequate
accountability of the government itself (Havely, 2000).
In this regard, the recent strong efforts to promote privatization and
deregulation, emanating from the World Bank, the IMF, Western gov-
ernments and mainstream economists, have led to mixed and even 
questionable outcomes, such as an increase in the opportunities for 
and the incidence of corruption (Haq, 1999). Specifically, it has been
Doing the Right Thing
233
Table 13.2
Corruption Perception Index, 2000 and 2001
Country
2000
2001
CPI
World
Regional
CPI
World
Regional
score
rank
rank
score
rank
rank
Singapore
9.1
6
1
9.2
4
1
Hong Kong
7.7
15
2
7.9
14
2
Japan
6.4
23
3
7.1
21
3
Taiwan
5.5
28
4
5.9
27
4
Malaysia
4.8
36
5
5.0
36
5
South Korea
4.0
48
6
4.2
42
6
China
3.1
63
8
3.5
57
7
Thailand
3.2
60
7
3.2
61
8
Philippines
2.8
69
9
2.9
65
9
India
2.8
69
9
2.7
71
10
Vietnam
2.5
76
11
2.6
75
11
Pakistan
na
—
—
2.3
79
12
Indonesia
1.7
85
12
1.9
88
13
Bangladesh
na
—
—
0.4
91
14
Notes: The Corruption Perception Index (CPI) ranges from 10 (highly clean) to 0 (highly 
corrupt). World rank is based on 90 countries in 2000, and 91 countries in 2001. Regional 
rank in Asia is based on 12 countries in 2000, and 14 countries in 2001. na: not available
(also —).
Source: Transparency International.

contended that:
If corruption is growing throughout the world, it is largely a result of
the rapid privatization (and associated practices of contracting-out
and concessions) of public enterprises worldwide. This process has
been pushed by Western creditors and governments and carried out
in such a way as to allow multinational companies to operate with
increased impunity. Thus multinationals, supported by western gov-
ernments and their agencies such as the World Bank and the Inter-
national Monetary Fund frequently put forward anti-poverty and
‘good governance’ agendas, but their other actions send a different
signal about where their priorities lie (Hawley, 2000).
Such processes also run counter to the expressed objectives of the 1977
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act in America, and the 1997 OECD-sponsored
Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in
International Business Transactions.22 At the macro level, it has also been
suggested that similar pressures from the same sources, quoted above,
urging Asian governments to promote rapid economic liberalization,
contributed to the economic crisis in several Asian countries during
1997–98; which was subsequently blamed on domestic deficiencies, such
as weak financial and regulatory institutions and “crony capitalism.”23
These problems and controversies illustrate the close connections
between corruption and the viability of the development process.
Human rights violations
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides the principal state-
ment of major rights that have been internationally recognized (UNDP,
2000: 14–18). They represent a very significant aspect of the moral stan-
dards that should guide human activities, and the authors of the Human
Development Report 2000 also contended “the divide between the
human development agenda and the human rights agenda is narrow-
ing” (UNDP, 2000: 2).
Recognition of human rights provides support to the development
agenda by conveying moral legitimacy to the objectives of human devel-
opment, and by incorporating civil and political rights as integral parts
of the development process. Numerous agencies have emerged to moni-
tor, report and sometimes protest against human rights violations.24
However, these have not prevented some of the worst human rights vio-
lations from being committed in Asia.
Diplomacy and adherence to the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of another sovereign country have led to a reluctance
234
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

among many governments to take a firm stand against ethically ques-
tionable or unconscionable practices elsewhere. On the contrary, it has
been argued that the adoption of more accommodative policies would
achieve better results. This was the approach adopted by the ASEAN
countries towards the despotic ruling regime in Burma [Myanmar] (Bello,
1997; Inbaraj, 1997).
An appeal to “Asian values” also helped to provide an argument for 
a greater emphasis on pragmatism, and reduced emphasis on human
rights.25 Despite the fact that prominent contributors to the basic tenets
of values upheld by Asians (and non-Asians), such as Confucius, Buddha
and others, placed great emphasis on moral virtues, and ethical behav-
ior, the principal proponents of Asian values placed less emphasis on
such aspects and more emphasis on other aspects that directly and indi-
rectly support wealth creation, authoritarian rule and realpolitik. In this
respect, the Asian values debate has also functioned as an attempt to
define, maintain and protect the legitimacy of current authorities and
their adopted policies.
However, Asian values did not prevent the economic crisis of the
1990s from befalling all the Asian countries, from Japan to Indonesia.
They did not prevent the occurrence and continuation of widespread
corruption within Indonesia, the Philippines, and other Asian countries.
Indeed, the persistence of gross violations of the ethical imperative in
various Asian countries has undermined significantly the legitimacy of
their governing regimes and the (peculiar) values that they espoused.26
To summarize, the phenomena associated with transgressions of cor-
porate social responsibility, corruption, human rights violations, as well
as other events that have the capacity to cause significant harm and suf-
fering may, in many instances, be intertwined in both their causes and
their effects. In addition to their ethical consequences, they may also have
economic, environmental and social ramifications. For instance, corrup-
tion, leading to illegal logging in tropical rain forests may cause signifi-
cant environmental damage, and disrupt the livelihoods of indigenous
communities residing in those locations, so leading to their impoverish-
ment, and an increased competition and conflict over the remaining
resources. These kinds of dynamics and interactions further justify the
adoption of a more comprehensive and integrated approach to the pur-
suit of sustainable development.
Unsustainable development: the case of Indonesia
An illustration of the interrelated dynamics in the development process,
mentioned above, may be observed in the case of Indonesia under the
Doing the Right Thing
235

rule of past President Suharto. An assessment based on the four imper-
atives for sustainable development provides the following perspective
on Indonesia’s development experience from 1965–98:
Ethical imperative
General Suharto came to power in 1967, following murky circumstances
beginning in October 1965, in which an estimated 500 000 (even up 
to one million) people were killed, with American involvement, during 
a wave of anti-communist hysteria (Scott, 1985). With Suharto’s ascen-
dancy, the Indonesian military came to play a major political role in the
country, in a manner that undermined genuine democratic practices. 
The human rights record of Indonesia during the period of Suharto’s rule
was far from exemplary.27 Corruption was also a significant feature in
Indonesia during this period, and vested business interests linked to mem-
bers of the political leadership, to the military and, specifically, to mem-
bers of Suharto’s family, thrived in a situation appropriately described as
“crony capitalism.” These and other transgressions of the ethical impera-
tive were associated with major economic, ecological and social develop-
ments in the country.
Economic imperative
Suharto’s “strong-man rule” was viewed positively in various domestic
and international circles as providing the security and stability necessary
for “investor confidence” that would lay the foundations for sustained
economic development. Indeed, Indonesia experienced a period of rising
economic growth from 1967–96. It benefited from its exports of petro-
leum and natural gas, as well as primary commodities such as coffee,
tea, timber, and palm oil, the growth in tourism, and its promotion of
low-labor-cost manufacturing industries such as textiles, garments, ply-
wood, and electrical appliances with support from foreign multinational
companies. It was widely regarded as a “second-generation” newly
industrializing country.28 These positive developments encouraged the
conviction and the rationalization that concerns over human rights and
other ethical lapses should not be pressed or should be postponed, as
economic development would lay the foundations for such transgres-
sions to be diminished or to be eliminated in the future.
Such support helped Suharto to entrench his control and to dominate
the Indonesian political scene for three decades. His family members
gained substantial financial benefits from this situation, through the many
236
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

business ventures that they initiated, were co-opted into, or were associ-
ated with, directly and indirectly. These numerous business activities
ranged from the domestic arena to international ventures, with a web
of connections among them (Aditjondro, 1998; Celarier, 1998, Head,
1998; Root, 2000: 230–3).
Selected local and foreign business interests benefited from, and
directly and indirectly supported, the consolidation of this structure. As
a consequence, a group of wealthy Indonesian businessmen emerged,
with close connections to Suharto and his family. Foreign business inter-
ests also established links with Suharto’s family, and foreign govern-
ments provided economic and political support, as well as other links,
such as military supplies and training (Inbaraj, 1997).
The extreme fragility of this structure was only widely recognized ex
post, during the so-called “Asian crisis,” when foreign investors took
fright and withdrew financial investments from Indonesia in 1997. As 
a consequence, the currency lost 80 percent of its value relative to the
US dollar, the stock market crashed, and per capita income dived from
$1300 to $340 per annum (Root, 2000: 228). Many business ventures
failed and the country’s banks were left with high levels of bad debts.
Several decades of development progress had been reversed within two
years.
In this situation, the government was compelled to turn to the IMF
for assistance. Following its normal practice, the IMF imposed stringent
conditions that required policies of economic and financial tightening,
involving reductions in government expenditure, cuts in subsidies for
essential goods, as well as public assumption of responsibility for bad debts
incurred by the private sector. These efforts compounded the economic
distress in the country, and impacted most severely on the poorer groups
in the population (Oxfam International, 1998). However, even after his
resignation from the presidency under public pressure in May 1998, sig-
nificant portions of the Suharto family business empire have survived
(Shari, 1999; Delaney, 2000).
Ecological imperative
The most glaring illustration of the harm caused to the environment by
policies and practices traceable to Suharto and his government was the
forest fires that blighted substantial areas in Sumatra and Kalimantan,
and blanketed vast areas of Southeast Asia with haze and smog (Glover
and Jessup, 1999; Aditjondro, 2000; Barber and Schweithelm, 2000). 
In relation to Indonesia’s environment and ecology, the connections
between the Suharto administration’s policies, his family’s business 
Doing the Right Thing
237

ventures, other local and foreign vested interests, and a variety of 
corrupt practices, paralleled the situation depicted for the economy.
Specifically,
In the forest and natural resources sector, the New Order political
economy was characterized by a heavily centralized bureaucracy and
industry, effectively dominated by a small number of corporate con-
glomerates with close connections to top politicians. These business
groups and their bureaucratic cronies were essentially above the law
for three decades, seeking short-term profits at the expense of the
environment and local communities while enjoying the protection
of a legal and political system in which neither industry nor the
bureaucracy could be held accountable.
Indonesian forest policies have provided powerful legal incentives
for ‘cut-and-run’ resource extraction and have failed to create effec-
tive mechanisms for enforcing even minimum standards of forest
resource stewardship (Barber and Schweithelm, 2000: 1).
Thus, in this arena too, the ethical failures of the regime caused sub-
stantial harm to its people and to the country (Sari, 1999). Among those
most severely afflicted were the indigenous groups who resided in areas
where logging concessions, new timber and oil palm plantations, and
other development projects were located. They lost land and livelihoods,
with little or no compensation in return.29
Social imperative
In concert with the rise in economic growth rates following Suharto’s
ascendancy to power, living standards also improved generally in
Indonesia from the 1960s to the 1990s, before the economic crisis. Poverty
levels declined from estimates of 60 percent in 1970, to 28 percent in 1980,
to between 15 to 17 percent in 1996. However, following the crisis, they
rose to 27 percent in February 1999 (Root, 2000: 229; Suryahadi et al.,
2000: 23).
Furthermore, beneath the appearance of rising social well-being, there
were increasingly serious and intense social divisions and resentments in
many parts of Indonesia. These were being fueled by discrimination
against minorities, official and unofficial expropriation of property and
resources especially in the regions, from Aceh to Kalimantan to Irian Jaya
to East Timor; as well as by poorly formulated and badly implemented
transmigration and other development programs. The tensions led to
outbreaks of conflict in which the massacres that occurred in East Timor,
conducted by militia with direct and indirect support from the military,
238
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

were only the most publicized of a host of extra-judicial attacks, retali-
ations, and rebellions that occurred and that continue in the country.30
Thus, the moral lapses of the regime in power, eventually infected the
whole country, and created a contagion that preceded the economic cri-
sis, and undermined its capacity to respond correctly and effectively to
the crisis. While that crisis had larger causes beyond Indonesia (Dieter,
1998; Cheah, 2000), the foundations of Indonesian economy, society,
polity and, in particular, its value system, had been significantly eroded
such that, arguably, some trigger would eventually have sparked an
unraveling of the situation (see Clad, 1996). In short, that form of devel-
opment in Indonesia was not sustainable.
Other factors that contributed to transgressions of 
the ethical imperative
Why has the ethical imperative not been more explicitly incorporated
as an integral element in the promotion of sustainable development?
There has been an overwhelming pre-occupation with commercial
concerns at the expense of moral principles in the development process.
In business organizations, this resulted in active pursuit or tacit condon-
ing of corrupt practices, exploitation of employees, neglect of safety pro-
visions and other activities, justified by a narrow definition of “the bottom
line.” At the national level, similar pre-occupations with economic growth
resulted in priorities being downgraded for non-economic concerns.
Some consequences included the suppression of workers rights, disregard
for employee health and safety, political repression, and torture of alleged
dissidents and subversive elements. Two major reasons may be offered
here for these practices.
First, perceptions of national interests led rulers in various countries 
to adopt policies aligned with the “realist” theory of politics. This pre-
occupation with national economic, political and security interests was
often at the expense of moral principles.31 For instance, after World War II,
the onset of the Cold War against the Communist Bloc led American politi-
cians to support dictatorships such as that in the Dominican Republic, 
led by General Rafael Molino Trujillo, a leading Latin American anti-
communist. The US Secretary of State, Cordell Hull, summed up this 
attitude when he said of Trujillo, “He may be a son-of-a-bitch, but he is our 
son-of-a-bitch.”
In Asia, this attitude and practice led to CIA collaboration in the mas-
sacres of alleged PKI supporters in Indonesia (National Security Archive,
2001: 386–7), as well as their support for corrupt and dictatorial rulers,
Doing the Right Thing
239

such as Suharto in Indonesia and Marcos in the Philippines. It also led
to occasions of US indifference or acquiescence to human rights viola-
tions in Asia (Chomsky and Herman, 1979; Chomsky, 2000). Within Asia
itself, leaders from Mao Zedong to Suharto and others engaged in ruth-
less politics for their proclaimed national causes (see Mirsky, 1999; Tanter,
1998; Templer, 1998). The reality of such gross transgressions of the eth-
ical imperative span the political spectrum, from the political right to the
political left, from the East to the West, despite the grand pronounce-
ments to the contrary by national leaders and prominent statesmen (see
Bryce, 2000). Realpolitik has often been the norm, and this has under-
mined the practice of principled politics and, consequently, the integrity
of development efforts in the past decades.
Second, we may also relate the neglect of the ethical imperative to the
nature of the evolution of Economics, which now dominates so much of
governmental policy formulation and business decision-making. When
the followers of Adam Smith (1776) lauded The Wealth of Nations and
championed the practice of laissez faire, that promotes private interests
over common interests, purportedly guided by an “invisible hand,”32
they neglected or ignored the restraints and the balance that Adam
Smith (1759) had himself emphasized earlier in The Theory of Moral
Sentiments (Bronk, 1998). From that point, Economics was increasingly
divorced from Moral Philosophy and, arguably, lost its soul. The loss of
this moral ballast; specifically, the failure to temper self-interest with
sympathy for others, that Adam Smith felt to be necessary, contributed
to many economic practices that may be regarded as extremely self-
interested and selfish, exploitative and, increasingly, destructive.33 This
has led to growing public opprobrium towards, and loss of legitimacy 
for many private corporations (Bernstein, 2000; Kunii, 2000b; Dawson,
2001), national agencies and even international organizations.34
Recently, there have been a growing number of efforts to re-emphasize
various aspects of what has been termed here as the ethical imperative
(see Goulet, 1995; Fukuyama, 1995; Galbraith, 1996; Sen, 1987 and 1999).
We may view these as attempts to assist Capitalism to find or regain the
soul it lost. Similar efforts have been directed at corporations as well as
governmental agencies.35
Towards sustainability: the twenty-first-century challenge
Increasingly, governments and business organizations must partici-
pate in efforts to incorporate sustainability issues into their planning 
and operational activities. Sustainability, or the concern for long-term 
240
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

viability, must include at least four main dimensions: economic sus-
tainability, that is, business activities must be economically profitable;
ecological sustainability, that is, the activities must also be ecologically
friendly and not damaging to the environment; social sustainability,
that is, in addition to individual or private gain, the activities must also
promote community and societal well-being, for instance by reducing
social divisions, inequity and conflict; and ethical sustainability, that is,
the necessity to act responsibly, and to avoid causing significant harm
to ourselves, to others and to the environment.36
While there has been growing concern over corporate social respon-
sibility, corruption and human rights, these heightened concerns need
to be more explicitly incorporated as an integral aspect of the analytical
framework so that, by this means, sustainable management and sustain-
able development can provide the more integrated, holistic and balanced
approach necessary for creating genuinely sustainable enterprises and
societies. Finally, while Goulet (1971) had characterized the development
process as involving unavoidably a “cruel choice,” the ethical imperative
has the power to confer the wisdom needed to “do the right thing” in
making such choices.
Notes
1
See, among others, Myrdal (1968), Illich (1973), Schumacher (1974), Brandt
Commission (1983). Mollison (1990), Meadows et al. (1992), Brookfield and
Byron (1993), Khandker (1998), Kaul et al. (1999), UNRISD (2000) and Social
Development Department (2000).
2
The concept of sustainable development has been broadly defined as devel-
opment that “meets the needs of the present without compromising the abil-
ity of future generations to meet their own needs…Sustainable development
is not a fixed state of harmony, but rather a process of change in which the
exploitation of resources, the direction of investments, the orientation of
technological development, and institutional change are made consistent
with the future as well as present needs” (WCED, 1987). See also UNCED
(1992) and Wheeler et al. (2000).
However, Barraclough (2001: 1–2) pointed out that the concept had 
earlier origins and applications. He offers a serious critique of the concept,
noting various conceptual flaws, methodological difficulties and operational
problems associated with it. He argues that “Any interpretation of ‘sustainable
development’ implies dealing both with profound non-commensurabilities
and great uncertainties. Conflicts of interest resulting from such divergent
perceptions can only be resolved politically, usually through some combina-
tion of compromise and compulsion” (Barraclough, 2001: 6). However, while
such “realist” practices may apply successfully a “might is right” solution in 
Doing the Right Thing
241

many conflicts, such resolutions based on the current power relationships
can and do raise serious questions about the ethical foundations of the out-
comes, and may lead to moral challenges to those outcomes (see Goulet,
1971: 335–41). This brings into sharper focus the role of the ethical impera-
tive in the development process.
3
These concerns have continued with more recent work by Leakey and Lewin
(1995), Colborn et al. (1996), and others.
4
It may be suggested that specific concerns for morality and the ethical imper-
ative could receive appropriate attention in this sphere. However, in practice
they have not, and other social concerns relating to poverty, inequality, and
other matters have dominated this space, to the exclusion of specific atten-
tion to values and ethics.
5
They provide the example that “raising energy prices significantly to reduce
energy emissions will disproportionately affect poorer citizens, thus increas-
ing income disparities and contributing to social unsustainability”
(Robinson and Tinker, 1998: 12).
6
In this regard, Oxfam International (1998: 8) emphasized that “it is crucial that
the artificial separation of social and economic policy be ended. Human devel-
opment and poverty considerations should be integral parts of the macro-
economic policy framework, which is currently dominated by narrow – and
deeply flawed – financial targets. Second, an institutional framework must 
be created within which the IMF and the World Bank can provide a more 
integrated response to financial crisis. The alternative is for the World Bank to 
continue its present policy of arriving after the event in a largely futile effort
to counteract the negative consequences of IMF prescriptions.”
7
They suggest that this integrated approach should incorporate two sets of
policy measures that aim to promote “dematerialization” of the economy
and “resocialization” of the society. The former involves the uncoupling of
(a) economic growth and improvements in living standards (consumption of
goods and services) from (b) increased consumption of energy and materials
(for instance, by further development and greater utilization of more envi-
ronmentally benign technologies). The latter involves the uncoupling of 
(c) human well being from (a), for instance, by greater participation in the
informal economy.
8
In this regard, the maxim that “greed is good,” pronounced by the fictional
Wall Street financier, Gordon Gecko, is matched by China’s former Premier,
Deng Xiao Ping’s exhortation, “to get rich is glorious.”
9
From this perspective, there has been an excessive dominance of Economics
and the profession of economists in the public policy arena, as well as the
excessive emphasis on competitiveness by Business Schools and the man-
agement profession in the corporate arena.
10
Confucius expressed it as follows: “Do not do unto others what you would
not have them do unto you” (Analects 15:23); while the Judeo-Christian 
tradition advised followers to “Do unto others as you would have them do
unto you.” More recently, Immanual Kant’s Categorical Imperative advised
that “we should act in such a way that we could wish the maxim of our
action to become a universal law.”
11
An improved version of, or an alternative to, the orthodox gross national
product (GNP) should be formulated for the societal (global) wealth indica-
tor (SWI). At the very least, the gross national product should be converted
242
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

to a net national product, after appropriate offsets of the associated costs 
and disbenefits imposed on people and society by certain aspects of wealth
creation and related activities.
12
See WBCSD (1999).
13
See Fombrun (1986); Kahn et al. (1999).
14
This should take into account the “human poverty index” (UNDP, 2000).
Another relevant concept is the “index of social progress” (Estes, 1992). See
also Hirschhorn (2000).
15
See the sustainability reporting guidelines presented by GRI (2000).
16
Existing relevant concepts include the “human development index” (UNDP,
2000) and the “genuine progress indicator” (Cobb et al., 1999). Another
intriguing concept in this regard is the “gross national happiness,” used in
Bhutan.
17
See also Holme and Watts (2000).
18
Ohmae, himself, excused such practices by referring to precedents in
Dickensian England and the “robber baron” era in America.
19
The case is reminiscent of an earlier crisis associated with the Ford Pinto, that
brought Ralph Nader into public prominence in America. See Nader (1965)
and Dowie (1977).
20
See also Cohen (1999) and Sen (2000).
21
It ranges from bribery, extortion, fraud, trafficking, embezzlement, to nepo-
tism and cronyism. “Even…advantages, such as membership of an exclusive
club or promises of scholarships for children, have been used as ‘sweeteners’
to clinch deals” (Quiñones, 2000). See Bowles (2000) for a recent survey of
the relevant literature.
22
However, Hines (1995) contended that the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of
1977 weakened the competitive positions of American firms, without signif-
icantly reducing the importance of bribery to foreign business transactions.
23
For non-orthodox perspectives on these issues, see Johnson (1999) and
Henderson (1999).
24
The agencies range from NGOs such as Amnesty International and Human
Rights Watch, to various United Nations agencies, to governmental agencies
such as the US Department of State, and the British Foreign and Common-
wealth Office. These organizations have regularly issued reports on the
human rights situation in various countries and regions.
25
See the rebuttals by Fukuyama (1999) and Sen (1997). Indeed, Sen (1999)
goes further, and advances the thesis of “development as freedom.”
26
Fukuyama (1999) noted that “legitimacy was built on economic success 
and the view that authoritarian government was better at producing growth
than democracy. The Asian crisis has…demonstrated the weakness of this
position.” See also Habermas (1976).
27
See various reports by Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, US
Department of State, United Nations Commission on Human Rights, and
others.
28
One account noted that “This populous, resource-rich country was the 
flagship model of assisted development…. The World Bank endorsed 
the Indonesian model with $25 billion over three decades. International
investors interpreted the World Bank’s enthusiasm to lend as a sign that
Indonesia was a prime investment environment. Foreign investment peaked
at $18 billion in 1996” (Root, 2000: 228).
Doing the Right Thing
243

29
For descriptions of the gross outcomes of some megaprojects undertaken in
Kalimantan and Irian Jaya, see Barber and Schweithelm (2000: 33–7).
30
“At the root of instability in Indonesia are not the insurgent movements but
rather the impunity of the Indonesian armed forces which fuels these move-
ments.” This observation was made by Hendardi, the founder and director
of Legal Aid Indonesia, at the inaugural conference for the Indonesian
Human Rights Network, in Washington, DC on 28 February 2001.
31
“Political realism is a theory of political philosophy that…takes as its
assumption that power is (or ought to be) the primary end of political 
action…. Political realism in essence reduces to the political–ethical princi-
ple that might is right” (Moseley, 2001).
32
Specifically, two of Smith’s often-cited passages proclaimed that:
“It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker,
that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We
address ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never
talk to them of our own necessities but of their advantages” Wealth of
Nations, Book I, Chapter 2, paragraph 3; and
“[The individual] generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public
interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it.…he intends only his
own security; and…he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in
many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was
no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it
was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that
of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it”
Wealth of Nations, Book IV, Chapter 2, paragraph 9.
33
See, among others, Galbraith (1958), Harrington (1962), Strange (1986),
Blumberg (1989), Omerod (1994), Herman (1995), Korten (1996), Harrison
(1997), Lappe et al. (1998), Vidal (1998), Forrester (1999), Douthwaite (1999),
Hayward (2000).
34
See Bello et al. (1982), Danaher (1994), Chossudovsky (1997), Krugman
(1998), Tobin and Ranis (1998), Hellinger (2000), Woodroffe and Ellis-Jones
(2000), Stiglitz (2000), and Bello (2001).
35
See Fombrun (1986), Robin and Reidenbach (1989), Chappell (1993),
Anderson (1997), Harmon and Porter (1997), UNDP (1998), Kahn et al. (1999),
Watts and Holme (1999), Cottrell and Rankin (2000) and Utting (2000).
36
In this regard, the ethical imperative is also ‘the imperative of responsibility’
emphasized by Jonas (1984). According to Jonas, the vast expansion of human
powers creates the necessity for a new ethic, one that takes into consideration
not just the present, but also the needs of future generations.
References
Aditjondro, G. (1998) Suharto & sons (and daughters, in-laws & cronies). The
Washington Post, 25 January: C01.
Aditjondro, G. (2000) Indonesian forest fires. Ecopolitics: Thought and Action 1(1).
244
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

Anderson, C. (1997) Values-based management. Academy of Management Executive
11(4): 25–46.
Barber, C. and Schweithelm, J. (2000) Trial by Fire: Forest fires and forestry policy in
Indonesia’s era of crisis and reform, Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.
Barraclough, S. (2001) Toward integrated and sustainable development? UNRISD
Overarching Concerns Paper no. 1.
Bello, W. (1997) ASEAN’s fateful choice: to ‘enlarge’ or to ‘deepen’? Focus on Trade,
July, 16.
Bello, W. (2001) 2000: the year of global protest against globalization. Focus on
Trade, January, 58.
Bello, W., Kinley, D. and Elinson, E. (1982) Development Debacle: The World
Bank in the Philippines, San Francisco, Institute for Food and Development
Policy.
Bernstein, A. (2000) Too much corporate power? BusinessWeek, 11 September.
Blumberg, P. (1989) The Predatory Society: Deception in the American Marketplace,
Oxford: OUP.
Bowles, R. (2000) “Corruption,” in B. Bouckaert and G. De Geest (eds),
Encyclopedia of Law and Economics, 5, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Brandt Commission (1983) Common Crisis North–South: Co-operation for world
recovery, London: Pan.
Bronk, R. (1998) Progress and the Invisible Hand: The Philosophy and Economics of
Human Advance, London: Little Brown.
Brookfield, H. and Byron, Y. (1993) Southeast Asia’s Environmental Future: The
Search for Sustainability, New York: United Nations University Press.
Bryce, R. (2000) Realpolitik. The Austin Chronicle, 19 May.
Carson, R. (1962) Silent Spring, Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Celarier, M. (1998) The road to excess. CFO Magazine, 1 November.
Chappell, T. (1993) The Soul of a Business: Managing for Profit and the Common
Good, Bantam Press.
Cheah, H. B. (2000) “The Asian Economic Crisis: Three perspectives on the
unfolding problems in the global economy,” in F. Richter (ed.), The East Asian
Development Model: Economic Growth, Institutional Failure and the Aftermath of the
Crisis, London: Macmillan.
Chomsky, N. (2000) Rogue States: The Role of Force in World Affairs, Cambridge,
MA: South End Press.
Chomsky, N. and Herman, E. (1979) The Washington Connection and Third World
Fascism, Cambridge, MA: South End Press.
Chossudovsky, M. (1997) The Globalisation of Poverty: Impacts of IMF and World
Bank Reforms, London: Zed Books.
Clad, J. (1996) The end of Indonesia’s New Order. Wilson Quarterly, Autumn.
Cobb, C., Goodman, G. and Wackernagel, M. (1999) Why Bigger isn’t Better: The
Genuine Progress Indicator – 1999 Update, San Francisco: Redefining Progress.
Cobb, C., Halstead, T. and Rowe, J. (1995) If the GDP is up, why is America down?
Atlantic Monthly, October.
Cohen, G. (1999) Bhopal and the Age of Globalisation, Global Policy Forum,
November.
Colborn, T., Dumanoski, D. and Myers, J. P. (1996) Our Stolen Future: Are We
Threatening Our Fertility, Intelligence, and Survival? A Scientific Detective Story,
New York: Dutton.
Doing the Right Thing
245

Connor, T. (2000) Like Cutting Bamboo: Nike and Indonesian Workers’ Right to
Freedom of Association, Community Aid Abroad – Oxfam Australia Briefing
Paper no. 27.
Cottrell, G. and Rankin, L. (2000) Creating Business Value through Corporate
Sustainability, Sydney: PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Danaher, K. (ed.) (1994) 50 Years is Enough: The Case Against the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, Cambridge: South End Press.
Dawson, C. (2001) At long last, lawsuits. BusinessWeek (International edition) 
5, February.
Delaney, R. (2000) Business almost as usual for the Soeharto clan. Sydney Morning
Herald, 19 May.
Dieter, H. (1998) Crises in Asia or crisis of globalisation? Center for the Study of
Globalisation and Regionalisation, Working Paper no. 15/98, Coventry: CSGR.
Douthwaite, R. (1999) The Growth Illusion: How Economic Growth has Enriched the
Few, Impoverished the Many and Endangered the Planet, Gabriola Island: New
Society Publishers.
Dowie, M. (1977) Pinto madness. Mother Jones, September–October: 18–32.
Estes, R. (1992) At the Crossroads: Dilemmas in Social Development Toward the Year
2000 and Beyond, New York: Praeger.
Fombrun, C. (1986) Realising Value from the Corporate Image, Boston: Harvard
University Press.
Forrester, V. (ed.) (1999) The Economic Horror, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Fukuyama, F. (1995) Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, London:
Hamish Hamilton.
Fukuyama, F. (1999) Asian Values in the Wake of the Current Crisis. A paper pre-
sented at the Conference on Democracy, Market Economy and Development, at
Seoul, Korea in February 1999.
Galbraith, J. K. (1958) The Affluent Society, London: Hamilton.
Galbraith, J. K. (1996) The Good Society: The Humane Agenda, Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Gill, S. (1998) The Pathology of Corruption, New Delhi: Harper Collins.
Glover, D. and Jessup, T. (eds.) (1999) Indonesia’s Fires and Haze: The Cost of
Catastrophe, Ottawa: International Development Research Centre.
Goodman, P. (1993) Reebok, Nike and Levi Strauss on the prowl for cheap labour
in Indonesia. The Progressive, 26 June.
Goulet, D. (1971) The Cruel Choice: A New Concept in the Theory of Development,
New York: Atheneum.
Goulet, D. (1995) Development Ethics: A Guide to Theory and Practice, London: 
Zed Press.
Greenhouse, S. (1997) Nike shoe plant in Vietnam is called unsafe for workers.
New York Times, 8 November.
GRI (2000) Sustainability Reporting Guidelines on Economic, Environmental and Social
Performance, Boston: Global Reporting Initiative.
Habermas, J. (1976) Legitimation Crisis, London: Heinemann.
Haq, K. (1999) Human Development in South Asia 1999, Oxford: OUP.
Harman, W. and Porter, M. (eds.) (1997) The New Business of Business: Sharing
Responsibility for a Positive Global Future, London: Berrett-Koehler Pub.
Harrington, M. (1962) The Other America: Poverty in the United States, New York:
Macmillan.
246
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

Harrison, D. (1997) Greed fuels disaster of world-wide proportions. The Observer,
7 October.
Havely, J. (2000) Corruption: End of China’s party? BBC News Online, 13 September.
Hawley, S. (2000) Exporting corruption: privatisation, multinationals and
bribery. The Corner House, June.
Hayward, H. (2000) Costing the Casino: The Real Impact of Currency Speculation in
the 1990s, London, War on Want.
Hazlitt, (1964) The Foundations of Morality (1972 edition), Los Angeles: Nash Pub.
Head, M. (1998) Australian business and the Indonesian regime. World Social Web
Site, 26 May.
Hellinger, S. (2000) World Bank ignores own failure. The Financial Times, 23 June.
Henderson, C. (1999) Cronies and booty capitalism, Asia Pacific Management
Forum, September.
Herman, E. (1995) Triumph of the Market, Cambridge, MA: South End Press.
Hines, J. (1995) Forbidden payment: Foreign bribery and American business after
1977. NBER Working Paper no. 5266.
Hirschhorn, J. (2000) Growing Pains: Quality of Life in the New Economy,
Washington, DC: National Governors Association.
Holme, L. and Watts, P. (2000) Corporate Social Responsibility: Making Good Business
Sense, Geneva: World Business Council for Sustainable Development.
Illich, I. (1973) “Outwitting the ‘developed’ countries,” in H. Bernstein (ed.),
Underdevelopment and Development, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Inbaraj, S. (1997) The Geopolitics of East Timor: A Media Perspective. A paper pre-
sented at the Conference on Alternative Security Systems in the Asia-Pacific,
Bangkok, 27–30 March.
Johnson, C. (1999) Let’s revisit Asia’s ‘crony capitalism’. Los Angeles Times, 
25 June.
Jonas, H. (1984) The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics for the
Technological Age, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kageyama, Y. (2000) Mitsubishi admits defect cover-up. Columbus Dispatch, 
23 August.
Kahn, H., Peters, G. and Ponemon, L. (1999) Reputation Assurance: The Value of 
a Good Name, re: Business, PricewaterhouseCoopers, February.
Kaul, I., Grunberg, I. and Stern, M. (1999) Global Public Goods: International
Cooperation in the 21st Century, Oxford: OUP.
Khandker, S. (1998) Fighting Poverty with Microcredit: Experience in Bangladesh,
Oxford: OUP.
Kharbanda, O. and Stallworthy, E. A. (1986) Management Disasters and How to
Prevent Them, Aldershot: Gower.
Korten, D. (1996) When Corporations Rule the World, West Hartford, CT: Kumarian
Press.
Krugman, P. (1998) The confidence game: How Washington worsened Asia’s
crash. The New Republic, 5 October.
Kunii, I. (2000a) A cover-up at Mitsubishi? BusinessWeek (International edition), 
9 October.
Kunii, I. (2000b) Can Japanese consumers stand up and fight. BusinessWeek, 
11 September.
Lappe, F., Collins, J. and Rosset, P. (1998) World Hunger: Twelve Myths (2nd ed.),
Oakland, CA: Grove Press.
Doing the Right Thing
247

Leaky, R. and Lewin, R. (1995) The Sixth Extinction: Biodiversity and its Survival,
New York: Doubleday.
Lovelock, J. (1979) Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth, Oxford: OUP.
Lyman, E. and Dolley, S. (2000) Accident-prone: The trouble at Tokaimura.
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 56(2): 42–6.
Meadows, D. H., et al. (1972) The Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome’s
Project on the Predicament of Mankind, New York: Universe Books.
Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L. and Randers, J. (1992) Beyond the Limits:
Confronting Global Collapse, Envisioning a Sustainable Future, Post Mills: Chelsea
Green.
Millett, M. (2000) Police prepare case against car makers. The Age, 29 August.
Mirsky, J. (1999) Nothing to celebrate: China’s wasted half century. The New
Republic, October.
Mollison, B. (1990) Permaculture: A Practical Guide for a Sustainable Future,
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Moseley, A. (2001) Political Realism, The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Myrdal, G. (1968) Asian Drama: An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations,
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Nader, R. (1965) Unsafe at Any Speed: The Designed-in Dangers of the American
Automobile, New York: Grossman.
National Security Archive (2001) Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–68,
vol. XXVI, Washington, DC: George Washington University.
Ohmae, K. (2001) Asia’s next crisis: ‘Made in China’, Japan Times, 30 July.
Omerod, P. (1994) The Death of Economics, London: Faber and Faber.
Osborn, A. (2000) Adidas attacked for Asian ‘sweatshops’. Guardian Unlimited, 
23 November.
Oxfam International (1998) East Asian ‘recovery’ Leaves the Poor Sinking, Oxfam
International Briefing, October.
Quiñones, E. (2000) What is corruption? OECD Observer, 12 May.
Robin, D. and Reidenbach, R. (1989) Business Ethics: Where Profits Meet Value
Systems, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Robinson, J. and Tinker, J. (1998) “Reconciling ecological, economic and social
imperatives: Towards an analytical framework,” in J. Schurr and S. Holtz (eds),
The Cornerstone of Development: Integrating Environmental, Social and Economic
Policies, London: Lewis Publishers.
Root, H. (2000) “Suharto’s tax on Indonesia’s future,” in F. Richter (ed.), The East
Asian Development Model: Economic Growth, Institutional Failure and the
Aftermath of the Crisis, London: Macmillan.
Rosenthal, E. (2001) China’s dark secret: AIDS and corruption in a poor province.
International Herald Tribune, 31 May.
Sari, A. (1999) Environmental policy and crisis in Indonesia. NIPA Review,
Summer.
Schumacher, E. F. (1974) Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People
Mattered, London: Abacus.
Scott, P. (1985) The United States and the overthrow of Sukarno, 1965–1967.
Pacific Affairs, Summer, 58, 239–64.
Sen, A. (1987) On Ethics and Economics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Sen, A. (1997) Human rights and Asian values. The New Republic, 217(2–3).
248
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

Sen, A. (1999) Development as Freedom, New York: Knopf.
Sen, A. K. (2000) 120,000 survivors are in desperate need of medical attention.
The Asian Age, 29 May.
Shari, M. (1999) Suharto billions may be sneaking back. BusinessWeek
(International edition), 26 July.
Smith, Adam (1759) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1982 edition), Indianapolis:
Liberty Classics.
Smith, Adam (1776) The Wealth of Nations (1937 edition), New York: Modern
Library.
Social Development Department (2000) New Paths to Social Development:
Community and Global Networks in Action, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Stiglitz, J. (2000) The insider: What I learned at the world economic crisis. 
The New Republic, 17 April.
Strange, S. (1986) Casino Capitalism, Oxford: Blackwell.
Suryahadi, A., Sumarto, S., Suharso, Y. and Pritchett, L. (2000) The Evolution of
Poverty during the Crisis in Indonesia, 1996 to 1999. World Bank Working Paper
no. 2435, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Tanter, R. (1998) Suharto, war criminal. Inside Indonesia, no. 55.
Templer, R. (1998) Shadows and Wind: A View of Modern Vietnam, London: Little
Brown.
Tobin, J. and Ranis, G. (1998) Flawed fund: the IMF’s misplaced priorities. The
New Republic, 9 March.
Ui, J. (1992) Industrial Pollution in Japan, Tokyo: United Nations University Press.
UNCED (1992) Agenda 21: Report of the United Nations Conference on Environ-
ment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, New York: United
Nations.
UNDP (1998) Corruption and Integrity Improvement in Developing Countries, 
New York: UNDP.
UNDP (2000) Human Development Report 2000, New York: Oxford University
Press.
UNITE (2000) Sweatshops Behind the Swoosh, New York: Union of Needletrades,
Industrial and Textile Employees.
UNRISD (2000) Visible Hands: Taking Responsibility for Social Development, Geneva:
UNRISD.
Utting, P. (2000) Business Responsibility for Sustainable Development. Geneva 2000
Occasional Paper no. 2, Geneva: UNRISD.
Vidal, J. (1998) McLibel: Burger Culture on Trial, New York: New Press.
Watts, P. and Holme, L. (1999) Corporate Social Responsibility: Meeting Changing
Expectations, Geneva: World Business Council for Sustainable Development.
WBCSD (1996) Environmental Assessment: A Business Perspective, Geneva: WBCSD.
WBCSD (1999) Eco-efficiency Indicators and Reporting, Geneva: WBCSD.
Wheeler, D. et al. (2000) Greening Industry: New Roles for Communities, Markets and
Governments, Washington, DC, World Bank.
Wingfield-Hayes, R. (2000) China audit finds billions stolen. BBC News Online, 
27 October.
Wolfensohn, James (1999) A Proposal for a Comprehensive Development Framework.
A statement to the Board, Management and staff of the World Bank group, 
21 January.
Doing the Right Thing
249

Wong, M. (2000) Children toil in sweatshop. South China Morning Post, 27 August.
Woodroffe, J. and Ellis-Jones, M. (2000) States of unrest: resistance to IMF poli-
cies in poor countries. World Development Movement Report, September.
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) Our Common
Future: From One Earth to One World, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
250
Hock-Beng Cheah and Melanie Cheah

Index
251
accountability, 49, 51, 54, 58, 99
accounting transparency, 39
Annual Wage Supplement (AWS), 188
anomie, 11–12, 14
anti-bribery commitment, 167
anti-competition law, 168
anti-corruption 
activities, 183
compliance programs, 171–2, 175–6
laws, 168–9
management systems, 170
programs, 199
strategy, 22, 180, 182, 184, 188,
190, 193–5
Anti-Corruption Agency (ACA), 192
Anti-Corruption Branch (ACB), 182
‘armament gifts’, 117–19, 122, 126,
128
Art of War, 92–4, 102, 104
ideological system of strategy, 94
Asahi Newspaper Foundation, 166,
172
‘Asian crisis’, 237
‘Asian values’, 235
asymmetric learning, 9, 11, 15
audit trails, 18
balance sheets
cleaning up, 56
banqueting, 123
Barraclough, S., 241
Becker, G. S., 133
benevolence, 95–6
‘black economy’, 30
‘blue collar workers’, 7
Boryokudan (violent groups), 158
Bottelier, P., 166
Bourdieu, P., 108–9, 114, 126–7
bowing (jugong), 113
brain drain, 188–9
from the civil service, 188
bribery, 33, 39, 98, 180, 184
bribery offences
domestic, 167
bribes
tax deductibility of, 40
bribe takers, 139, 141–2
bribing (xinghui), 107, 109
buddhist approach, 212
to morality, 212–14
Burton, J., 8
business gift, 116
business groups
moral characteristics of, 217–18
business interaction, 89
“4 Cs”, 62
capital mobility, 45
Carlisle, T., 204
Chabal, P., 108
chaebols, 62
Chang, H. C., 67
Chan, W. T., 91
Cheo, R. K. S., 57
Cheung, S. N. S., 140
the Chinese business world, 114
gifts in, 114–26
the Chinese mind
understanding, 102
chin-shins (confidantes), 77
chit-chat (liaotiaor), 118
Chomsky, N., 240
Chu, C. N., 101
civil service salaries, 188
improving, 188–90
Clifford, M. L., 44
“cliques”, 64
code of conduct, 172
‘cognitive dissonance’, 6
Cohen, W. M., 3
Cold War, 239
collective responsibility, 88
collectivism, 19, 61, 71, 76
collusion, 62
competence (chaineng), 74
competition, 164
competitive advantage
analysis of, 2
complacency, 62
compliance manuals, 174
compliance offices, 175
composure, 96
comprehensive strategy, 183
anti-corruption strategy, 183–4

Confucianism, 19, 61, 92, 167
the Confucian philosophy, 87–90
Confucian values, 66–8
Confucius, 20, 87
consensus-orientation equity, 51
control of implementation, 173
conventional morality, 213, 221
‘co-opetition’, 9
mode, 11, 15
corporate extortionists, 149
corporate fraud, 58
corporate governance, 15, 18, 43,
46–8, 50, 166
poor, 1
corporate governance practices, 53
corporate–government cronyism, 193
corporate restructuring, 43, 47, 53, 57
in the East Asian economie, 53
corporate social responsibility, 230
violations of, 230–2
corporations
value destroying, 164
corruption, 28–9, 44, 49, 62, 107,
109, 131–3, 137, 139, 143–5, 166,
172, 180, 184–5, 199, 210, 232
addressing the problem of, 199
in Asia, 210
economic analysis of, 132
economic impact of, 29
fight against, 172–4
in India, 199
nature of, 28–30
network of, 144
as a problem of morality, 133
various forms of gratification, 185
Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI),
180–1
corrupt practices, 40
Corrupt Practices Investigation
Bureau (CPIB), 183, 186–8
courage, 96
Covey, S. R., 204
Cragg, W., 52
criminal corruption, 199
‘crony capitalism’, 62, 234, 236
cronyism, 12, 18–19, 43–4, 49, 54,
61–4, 66, 73, 79, 131–5, 137,
142–5
in Chinese societies, 79
cultural antecedents of, 66–73
immediate antecedents of, 73–8
as a labour market problem, 135
as a network for discrimination,
142, 144
origin of, 63–4
as a problem of morality, 133
in work organizations, 19, 61–2
two-stage model of, 61
cultural factors, 154–5
for sokaiya existence, 154
cultural literacy
lack of, 10
Daloz, J. P., 108
dark-side strategies, 21
debt restructuring, 56
‘dematerialization’ 
of the economy, 242
deregulation, 233
Dey, P., 52
Dirou, P., 55–6
disciplinary actions, 174
dispassion, 100
“due diligence”, 170–1
global model of, 171
Dunning, J. H., 11
dynamism, 89
Earley, P. C., 71, 80
East Asian economies, 48–50, 57
corporate governance problems,
48–50
ecological imperative, 229, 237–8
economic factors
for sokaiya existence, 155
economic imperative, 229, 236–7
economic reform
deregulation-induced, 164
economic sustainability, 241
Edwards, J. S., 2
embezzlement, 47, 139, 151, 180
emerging individuality, 213
emotional corruption, 199
emptiness, 98
endurance
power of, 100
Engardio, P., 44
the Enron debacle, 16
the ethical imperative, 226, 229–30,
236 
transgressions of, 230, 239–40
equitable risk sharing, 51
equity markets, 49
ethical behavior
in organizations, 198
ethical decision-making, 199
ethical failure, 238
ethics compliance, 176
ethics management, 175
the European Union, 32–5
252
Index

exploitative practices, 232
extortion, 180
face (mianzi), 111
‘facilitation payments’, 31, 39
Fairholm, G. W., 72
favoritism, 63, 65
feeling (ganqing), 124
Fei Xiatong, 111
Ferrell, O. C., 199
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), 35
financial institution
customer-oriented, 54
Financial Stability Forum (FSF), 37
financial transparency, 199
flattery, 98
Flew, A., 219
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), 11
foreign investors,  38, 54, 164
in Japanese companies, 163
withholding tax, 38
fraud, 47
‘friendship’ relationship, 119
Fruin, W. M., 8
GAPP (Generally Acceptable
Accounting Principles), 5
Gender Empowerment Measure, 228
Gender-related Development Index,
228
genuine altruism, 213–14, 221
Ghani, R. A., 3
gift (songli), 124
gift-giver
skilled, 119
gift-giving, 4, 20, 107–8, 114, 122,
126–8, 154
in Chinese businesses, 107
complexities of, 126
notion of time in, 108, 126–8
sophisticated choreography of, 107
global economy, 1, 18
Goman, C. K., 78
Goodwin, R., 65
Gordon, K., 167, 174
governance
‘corporate’ aspect of, 4
cultural view of, 61
oppression of, 1
government ‘interventionism’, 30
Graham, G. 64
grand corruption, 28
Granitas, A., 58
Granovetter, M. S., 13
Grant, R. M., 2
‘grenades’ (shouliudan), 116
group moral development
hierarchy of, 215–16
group-oriented culture, 155
guanxi, 4, 65, 67, 70, 89, 107, 110–11
and gifts, 110–14
networks, 12, 113–14, 122
in a relationship-based society, 70
“guanxi capitalism”, 49
‘guided missiles’, 107, 109, 122,
125–6, 128
as gifts, 122–5
Hagelin, J. S., 204
Haley, J. O., 156
‘hand-grenades’, 107, 116
new categories of gifts, 116
‘hand-grenades and machine 
guns’, 109
Haq, K., 233
Hayek, F. A. V., 12
Heider, J., 91
Helfer, R. T., 50
Hendrischke, H., 135
He, Q., 121
Herman, E., 240
high Power Distance, 80
Hill, C. W. L., 12
Hofstede, G., 13, 71
Holland, L., 50
Holme, L., 230
Holt, G. R., 67
Howes, M. A., 212
Huang, G., 111–12
Huber, G. P., 7
‘human development index’, 228
‘human poverty index’,  228, 243
human rights violations, 234
Husted, B. W., 72
Hwang, K. K., 67
illegal gratification, 185
“image management” program, 163
incremental strategy, 182
anti-corruption strategy, 182–3
Independent Commission Against
Corruption (ICAC), 192
influence peddling, 180
information and communications
technology (ICT), 3
information elicitation, 7
ingroup members, 73
selection of, 73–4
Inkpen, A., 8
insider (neiburen), 117
Index
253

institutional barriers, 155
institutional investors, 49
“institutionalization”, 171
‘integrity pacts’, 39
intellectual capital
role of, 2
internalization, 104
International Accounting Standards
Committee, IASC, 5
international management 
practice, 174
Japanese management practices, 174
Japanese stock market bubble, 162
Jayasankaran, S., 50
Jen, 88
Kali, R., 112
Kanda, M., 3
Kautz, K., 12
Kawai, M., 44
keiretsu, 62
Kidd, J. B., 2–3, 5, 89–90
Kim, U., 71
Kipnis, A. B., 113
knowledge imitability, 2
knowledge management (KM), 2
Knutt, E., 88
Koh, P. T., 46
Korean First Bank (KFB), 54
kowtowing (ketou), 113
Kpundeh, S. J., 192
Krackhardt, D., 70
Krugman, 45
Lachica, E., 49
lack of transparency, 76
contributing factor to 
corruption, 76
Lao Tzu, 20, 86–7, 90–2
founder of Taoism, 90
Lau, D. C., 90
learning in alliances
dynamics of, 8, 11–14
Lee, C. S., 48, 54
Lee Zhong Wu, 97
legalized corruption, 199
leninist state-party system, 132
Leung, T. K. P., 89
Leventhal, D. A., 3
Levi-Strauss, C., 109–10
li (profit), 90
Liang, S. M., 111
Linstone, H., 6
Longstaff, S., 52
Lovett, S., 112
Low, S. P., 94, 97, 102
loyalty (zhongcheng), 74, 77
overemphasis on, 77–8
loyalty upwards, 78
‘machine guns’ (Jiguangqiang), 107, 116
new categories of gifts, 116
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, 201, 205
mainstream ethical theory, 210
management, 204
natural-law based, 204–5
market corruption, 199
market discipline, 43, 50
market liberalization, 145
Mauro, P., 30
Merry, P., 10
‘methodological individualist’, 219
the mind of the Chinese
understanding, 86
sokaiya, 158 
Mitsubishi Motors Corporation, 21,
150, 231
Miyake, M., 167, 174
Mohan, S. C., 187
money laundering, 18, 27, 35, 41, 58,
168, 199
curtailing, 199
monitoring mechanisms, 173
monopolistic rent, 139
Moore, C. A., 113
moral development, 200, 202–3, 211
impact of TM on, 202–4
stages of, 200–1
moral hazard, 49
moral hierarchy, 213–14
moral improvement
collective commitment to, 222
morality
based on mutual expectations, 200
moral reasoning
principled, 200, 203
Morgan Stanley Asset Management
Trust, 176
Mushkat, M., 45
National Wages Council (NWC), 188
natural law, 204
Neilson, W. S., 134
nepotism, 12, 65, 132, 134, 180
‘network capitalism’, 111
“newsletters”
sokaiya-run, 154 
North, D., 133
254
Index

OECD Bribery Convention, 167
Off-Shore Financial Centres (OFC),
27, 36–8
open governance, 53
within knowledge-based 
companies, 53
opportunism, 89
‘ordinary business gift’, 126–7
‘ordinary gifts’, 116
organizational learning (OL), 2
Ott, J. S., 64
out-of-court settlement, 57
Pan, A., 121
“pangloss value”, 45
participation in governance, 51
passivity, 92
paternalism, 19, 61, 77, 80
patronage corruption, 199
patronage downwards, 78
‘patron–client relationship’, 121
payoffs, 161
Pepper, G. L., 64
personal connections (guanxi), 20
personal relationships
over emphasis on, 76
personalism, 77
Petronas, 50
petty corruption, 28
Pinto, J. K., 64
political cronyism, 61
“political will”, 192
poor governance, 44
Posner, R. A., 144
Power Distance, 76
‘the power-economy’, 121
pre-moral stage, 213
Prevention of Corruption Act 
(POCA), 184–6
Prevention of Corruption Ordinance
(POCO), 22, 182
Pride, W. M., 199
principal–agent problem, 28
principal–agent relations, 136, 140,
145
private sector, 38
role of the, 38–9
“private to private” corruption, 
168
privatization, 233
protectionism, 89
Proton, 50
Prowse, S., 47, 49, 52
public procurement practices, 199
Quah, J. S. T., 182–3
Rape of Nanjin, 87
Ray, M. L., 204
reciprocal “favors”, 125, 127–8, 167
reciprocity, 88
record-keeping, 174
Redding, S. G., 68, 73, 77, 111
reformed economy, 164
reform of governance
an institutional approach, 131
“relational personalism”, 67–8
relationship (guanxi), 74
renqing (to give a gift), 67–8, 112,
117–18, 121, 127
renqing debt, 122
renqing favour, 120
‘resocialization’
of the society, 242
resource-bank availability, 173
respect (jingyi), 113
return on sales, 162
Richter, F.-J., 8
Rickett, W. A., 16
Ring, P. S., 6
ritual gifts
‘traditional’, 113
ritual of gift-giving, 122
Rose-Ackermann, S., 167
Roth, R., 201
Sangharakshita, Ven, 220
Sari, A., 238
Scott, K., 46
Scott, P., 236
Scott, W. R., 167
Securities Commission (SC), 55
self-praise, 98
sempai–kohai (senior–junior)
relationships, 154
sensitivity training
about business integrity, 173
shengwuxüe, 108
Shleifer, A., 141
Simmons, L. C., 112
Simonin, B. L., 8
sincerity, 95
small and medium sized firms 
(SMEs), 3
the social imperative, 229
sokaiya, 21, 151–2, 158, 160–1, 163,
216
modus operandi, 151–4
paying off a, 163
Index
255

sokaiya activities, 149, 156, 163
attempts to control, 156
sokaiya “general meeting handlers”,
149
sokaiya payoffs, 155
sokaiya phenomenon, 21
sokaiya-related infraction, 150
sokaiya scandals, 156, 158
Spender, J.-C., 2
state of anomie, 14
strictness, 96
Sun Tzu, 20, 86–7, 92
supervisors, 174
sustainable development, 225–6, 229,
235, 241
a process of change, 241
‘sustainable development index’
(SDI), 228
‘swapping of identical gifts’, 127
Szulanski, G., 7
Szymkowiak, K., 150
Taka, I., 167
Tang, C. S. K., 65
Taoism, 91–2, 104
Tao Te Ching, 90–2, 102
Teramoto, Y., 5
‘the art’ of networking–guanxixüe, 108
The Wealth of Nations, 240
the Thick Black Theory, 87, 97, 99,
101–2, 104
Thick Face, Black Heart, 100–1
doctrine of, 100
state of the mind, 101
“tokushu kabunushi” (special
shareholders), 151
training
for compliance, 175
transcendental consciousness, 
201, 204–5
transcendental meditation programs,
201, 206
transcendental meditation technique,
202, 203
transcendental morality, 213–14, 221
transitional economies, 29, 31
transparency, 49, 51, 54, 58
Transparency International (TI), 180,
232
Triandis, H. C., 71
trust, 5
between individual, 5–6
Tsai, C. C., 91
Tsang, D., 52
Tsang, E. W. K., 65
Umi-no-Ie affair, 161
Umi-no-Ie case, 160
uncertainty avoidance, 76
United Nations Development
Program (UNDP), 228
universalist argument, 155–6
for sokaiya existence, 155
unsustainable development, 235
Ursacki, T., 154
Van de Ven, A. H., 6
Vendelø, M. T., 12
Vishny, R. W., 141
Vogl, F., 62
voluntary Codes of Conduct, 39
“voluntary contributions”, 141
Wade, R., 167
Walder, A. G., 64
Watts, P., 230
‘Weltanschauung,’ 220
West, M. D., 152–3
‘whistleblowers’, 32
‘whistleblowing’, 41
whistle blowing facility, 174
white-collar criminals, 58
Wie, S., 30
Williamson, O., 167
‘win–win’ situation, 8, 11, 15
Wisdom, 95
Wong, Y. H., 89
‘working on guanxi’, 120, 121
World Commission on Environment
and Development (WCED), 225
‘world view’, 220
wu-lun, 67, 89
yakuza (Japanese mafia), 53
Yan, Y., 113, 124
Yang, M., 118, 123, 134
Yap, P. P. Y., 55
“yato sokaiya” (“incumbent party
sokaiya”), 152
Yeo, K. K., 94
yi (justice), 90
Zhu, Z., 6
256
Index

