John Carmack Archive - Interviews
http://www.team5150.com/~andrew/carmack
August 2, 2008

Contents
1
John Carmack Interview
5
2
John Carmack - The Boot Interview
12
2.1
Page 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Page 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Page 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Page 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Page 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6
Page 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.7
Page 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.8
Page 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
John Carmack - The Boot Interview (Outtakes)
28
4
John Carmack (of id Software) interview
48
5
Interview with John Carmack
59
6
Carmack Q&A on Q3A changes
67
1

John Carmack Archive
2
Interviews
7
Carmack responds to FS Suggestions
70
8
Slashdot asks, John Carmack Answers
74
9
John Carmack Interview
86
9.1
The Man Behind the Phenomenon . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
9.2
Carmack on Money . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
9.3
Focus and Inspiration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
9.4
Epiphanies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
9.5
On Open Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
9.6
More on Linux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
9.7
Carmack the Student . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
9.8
Quake and Simplicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
9.9
The Next id Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
9.10 On the Gaming Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
9.11 id is not a publisher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
9.12 The Trinity Thing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
9.13 Voxels and Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
9.14 Looking at the Competition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
9.15 Carmack’s Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
9.16 Miscellaneous Bits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
10 John Carmack Interview
113
11 Knee Deep in John Carmack
116
CONTENTS

John Carmack Archive
3
Interviews
12 GameSpy @ E3 - Q & A with John Carmack
131
13 John Carmack on DOOM3 rendering
136
14 GameSpy @ QuakeCon 2003 - A Conversation With John Car-
mack
141
15 DooM III Preview
147
16 Doom 3, basketball and the future of everything
153
17 Interview with id Software’s John Carmack on Doom3
158
18 ”Meet the Graphics Guy” - PC Gamer interviews John Carmack
on the future of iD.
162
19 MegaTexture Q&A
171
20 CES 2007: John Carmack And Todd Hollenshead Speak
182
20.1 Part One
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
20.2 Part Two
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
21 QuakeCon 2007: John Carmack Talks Rage, id Tech 5 And More 201
22 John Carmack on the Nintendo DS
209
23 The id Mobile Interview
215
24 Carmack on id Mobile, Crap Games, and Why iPod Sucks
223
25 1UP Interviews John Carmack on id Mobile
230
CONTENTS

John Carmack Archive
4
Interviews
26 Gamasutra interviews John Carmack and Katherine Anna Kang240
27 John Carmack on id Tech 6, Ray Tracing, Consoles, Physics and
more
246
27.1 Ray tracing for more than rendering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
27.2 Hybrid rendering, graphics APIs and mobile ray tracing . . 252
27.3 Multi-GPU graphics and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 255
28 Carmack frees Quake
261
29 Quake Live: Frantic and Free
265
30 id Software’s John Carmack and Marty Stratton Talk Quake Live,
PC Gaming, and More
275
31 E3 ’08: Carmack IDs Quake Live
284
32 E3 2008: The John Carmack Interview
294
33 Quelling The Rage
300
CONTENTS

Chapter 1
John Carmack Interview
This interview was conducted by Bone for Blues News on Jan 08, 1997.
http://www.bluesnews.com/cgi-bin/articles.pl?show=11
Interview
Prologue
I originally sent my questions to American McGee with the ﬁrm intention
of wrapping an article around them. American, it seems, was too busy to
do interviews at this moment, so I risked bothering John Carmack with
the same questions. I did not do this lightly, taking about 5 days to con-
sider whether he should be bothered or not. However, I thought my ques-
tions were sufﬁciently well thought out enough that John might actually
WANT to answer them. Boy was I surprised when I looked in my email
this morning.
I originally thought I’d get a sentence or two in response to my questions
and base my article on those answers. It looks like John Carmack decided
to write the article for me. I want to thank him for the time it took to
answer my questions so thoroughly. He is an incredibly busy man who
5

John Carmack Archive
6
Interviews
has a very active fanbase that sends him 50 emails a day. Please take
note of his PS note at the bottom. Respecting this, I will ask for no more
interviews from him until at least 1998 :). I think he would appreciate it if
everyone else took his caution to heart and not start sending him a lot of
email with questions.
This interview and further editorial articles will be posted on Dark Re-
quiem’s homepage as soon as DR |2| has enough free time to devote to
the new ”Dark Tribune” section of the page. This has been in the works
for a while, and already has several articles ready to go. DR |2| is also a
busy man, and his professional concerns take precedence over the ”Dark
Tribune”. It’ll be up ”when it is ﬁnished” :)
Questions
Bone: Just a recent development. Shawn Green has left id for Ion Storm.
It seems that there have been a LOT of defections from id over the past
few months. How does this affect id in terms of workload? Id has always
been a small development community, but aren’t you guys reaching crit-
ical mass where the workload becomes too much?
John Carmack: Lots of people will read what they like into the the de-
partures from Id, but our development team is at least as strong now as
it has ever been.
Romero was pushed out of id because he wasn’t working hard enough.
We have hired Paul Steed, a new artist.
That is the balance of changes to our development team. I believe that
three programmers, three artists, and three level designers can still create
the best games in the world.
The other departures have been from our biz/support side, which doesn’t
have anything to do with product creation. We are scaling back our pub-
lishing biz so that we are mostly just a developer. This was always a major
point of conﬂict with Romero – he wants an empire, I just want to create
good programs. Everyone is happy now.
CHAPTER 1. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
7
Interviews
Bone: As always, id leads the industry in technical terms, and others fol-
low behind. However, isn’t there a boundary to how much more you can
do given current input/output technologies? Doesn’t it then fall to the
point of ”artistry”? What prompts this question is many of the screen-
shots I’ve seen of Unreal. Some of the texture-mapping and monsters are
just stunning in their artistry. How can id compete with companies that
employ dozens of artists in their 3d efforts? It just seems that the ”push
the technology farther” answer is simply not much of an option anymore
until the next input/output technological breakthrough comes along.
John Carmack: The ofﬁcial codename for the next generation game en-
gine is ”trinity”. There is no information to be gleaned from that, we just
need something to call it when it is discussed.
The architecture for trinity is well underway, and it will be dramatically
better in many ways. In fact, this next generation has more distinction
than any before it, because it is the ﬁrst of the transition from the pixel to
the texture mapped triangle. Assumptions change and new capabilities
arise beyond what a simple processor speed increase would have given.
Pushing the technology is a long way from over, trust me.
As far as unreal goes, we can’t compete with an unreleased product, be-
cause a non existent product does everything you dream of and has no
faults. Think back to what everyone thought quake was before anything
was released. I wish Epic well, in any case. Unlike some other compa-
nies, the principle developers at Epic have not involved themselves in
any mudslinging.
It is also a mistake to think that Id’s games ride on technology alone.
DOOM and Quake aren’t just the minimum work required to make a 3d
and networking engine a game – they are the right game elements as well.
A user always wants more of everything – more features, more artwork,
more levels. The assumption that hiring more people gives a better prod-
uct is often incorrect. It might (but not always) get you MORE product,
but not necessarily BETTER product.
Bone: In the heyday when Quake was about to be released id had a strong
presence on the net with informative .plan ﬁles, and romero would actu-
ally appear on the undernet sometimes to brave the IRC nightmare to
CHAPTER 1. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
8
Interviews
answer questions and just be involved. It seems that id has closed up
since then and not been as involved with communicating with their end-
users. Some of the people complain that id has stopped being interested
in getting the community *involved* with the process of software devel-
opment. They feel left out. I have not felt this personally, since I was part
of the beta program for QW, but I was in the extreme minority. Is this lack
of info simply because you are too busy with Quake II or is it a reaction to
the fact that the main ego at id (Romero) had left and there simply wasn’t
a spokesperson left?
John Carmack: Romero was going on IRC when he should have been
working, from my point of view.
I listen a lot to the user community, but I make no apologies for prior-
itizing heavily. A suggestion or opinion from Blue, Scary, Disruptor, or
one of the many people that publicly devote much time and effort to the
quake community gets orders of magnitude more weight than Joe Ran-
dom User’s one-liner on IRC.
I get about 50 emails a day, which chews up quite a bit of time that could
be used for programming. I’m not willing to sacriﬁce any more of my
time to be active on newsgroups or IRC.
BTW, I rejected two other interviews today.
Bone: I know that the Next Generation Technology is tightly under wraps,
and probably you have only the vaguest feel for what you to do next, and
I will not ask about speciﬁcs. However, there are certain limitations that
seemed to have been introduced into Quake while trying to make it work
on a 486 with 8 megs of RAM. Due to the fact that the Pentium has taken
off and that RAM prices have gotten so low that 16 megs is standard and
32 megs is VERY common, those limitations seem to be not needed any-
more. There is one overriding example of this that I can come up with
off the cuff. You can’t see into water or out of water, yet the Unreal pic-
tures show that realistic looking pools of water CAN be made. Other,
more nebulous limitations, include size of the levels, speciﬁcally I have
seen levels with HUGE open spaces that ”gray out” due to limitations in
VIS-ing those large areas. Also dynamic shadows seems to have been in-
cluded in Unreal but are static in Quake. Is there any plans at all to get
rid of these limitations by increasing processor speed requirements and
CHAPTER 1. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
9
Interviews
RAM requirements?
John Carmack: Note that it is easy for an enthusiast to have a rather self
centered view of the market. 32 meg systems are NOT common in the
general population right now. Basically, everyone wants the games to
be designed for their own systems. :-) The system spec for trinity would
probably sound excessive to you right now. Your current system almost
certainly isn’t up to par, but you will probably buy a new system be the
time a game ships.
Quake will have some new features added to the engine during Quake 2,
but it will not change drastically. Drastic changes are in new technology
generations.
I start fresh with a blank edit window for each generation, and architec-
turally the next generation will bear about as much resemblance to quake
as quake did to doom. This is the right way (as I see it, in any case) to add
features: a cohesive whole that is deigned to offer a well balanced expe-
rience, not one feature at a time just to play catchup or leapfrog.
Glquake has shadows and mirrors, but those are novelty features and not
rigorously implemented. The game wasn’t designed around them, and
we won’t exploit them.
I could add transparent water to glquake pretty easy, but the vis infor-
mation in the current maps breaks at water boundaries (it saves a LOT
of polys in many scenes), so you would never be able to see it in existing
maps without re-vising them with a different utility.
< ok, I just went and added optional transparent water to glquake and
the utilities (American had been bugging me about that for a while as
well...). You can set r blendwater 1 and run either a novised map or a
map processed with qbsp2 -watervis. Yes, it looks sort of neat. No, it’s not
earthshaking. I’ll release a test map when glquake goes public. >
The greyouts in huge scenes don’t happen in glquake, and can be avoided
in software by increasing the surfaces and edge arrays. That was a tough
balancing act to run on 8 meg systems. Actually, building those large in-
termediate tables was probably not The Right Thing in the quake engine.
I feel that could have been done a little better with a different approach.
CHAPTER 1. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
10
Interviews
We might try some other things out in quake 2.
Bone: While there is no doubting that Quake excels at DeathMatch play,
and indeed might be the best DeathMatch game ever created, people
were really expecting some more ”world dynamics” to coin a phrase. The
lack of interactive elements in the game had somewhat marred single-
player Quake games (but oddly enough provided just the right balance
between simplicity/complexity for DeathMatch). Are there any plans in
the future for making future levels more dynamic in single player mode?
I hesitate to give any examples here since it is a question of game de-
sign and purely your province. Perhaps more ambient sounds? (gurgling
pools, dripping water, metal tapping against rocks) Not my strong suit,
so I’ll just leave it at that.
John Carmack: I will always take an aggressively simple approach to
things, but yes, I agree that we should add more interactive elements in
the future.
Another major way to improve the single player experience is with more
skill and timing based actions, but the wide range of computer perfor-
mance in our audience makes that a lot dicier than on a ﬁxed game con-
sole platform. I intend to multi-thread the control in trinity, which should
allow proper timing based maneuvers on any speed system.
Bone: Aside from the base desire for dominance and violence, do you
have any higher goals for the technology that is being developed for Quake?
I once read an article where it was stated the Mike Abrash was lured away
from Microsoft by the promise of using the Quake technology to advance
his goal of creating a ”Snow Crash” type of environment with a virtual
world that people can ”live” in and create avatars to walk around in. I
myself ﬁnd this scenario somewhat compelling. Sort of a graphical, 3D
realtime IRC. With Quake this seems to be tantalizingly within our grasp.
What are your thoughts about using Quake for communication purposes
other than just a game?
John Carmack: There will probably be some work in this area by other
people with quake technology. Trinity will be even more ﬂexible in this
regard.
Bone: Clans seem to be a totally unexpected phenomenon in the history
CHAPTER 1. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
11
Interviews
of computer gaming. It’s predecessors in MUDs seem to totally pale in
comparison in terms of popularity. Although id played somewhat of a
bystander role in the development of clans, are there any plans to be-
come more involved with the clan phenomenon?
John Carmack: It was so odd the way it happened – internally, we had
talked of clans of warriors before the game was released, but I don’t think
we ever publicly talked about it, and to have the same terminology ap-
parently spontaneously evolve in the user community was pretty weird.
I love it.
I don’t want id to ”involve” itself in much of anything on an ofﬁcial basis.
I want to make the tools and capabilities available to the user commu-
nity and let them self organize. We would need more people at id to stay
involved with all the cool stuff going on, and I really don’t want to grow
the company.
John Carmack
ps: this really did take quite some time and effort to answer, so please
don’t take my response as an invitation to regularly interview me – I don’t
like refusing people, but it just becomes necessary.
CHAPTER 1. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

Chapter 2
John Carmack - The Boot
Interview
This interview was conducted by Alex St. John for Boot Net on Nov 25,
1997.
http://web.archive.org/web/19980130151620/www.bootnet.com/youaskedforit/
lip_16_outtakes.html
Interview
Prologue
Be sure to log onto the bootNet site everyday and read these exclusive,
never-before-seen outtakes from boot magazine’s interview with id soft-
ware’s John Carmack and Brian Hook.
The interview was conducted by the architect of DirectX, Alex St. John, a
monthly columnist for boot.
At the end of the countdown, the entire Lip interview that ran in the print
version of the magazine will be posted. Be here!
12

John Carmack Archive
13
Interviews
Questions
2.1
Page 1
Alex St. John: Lets talk about DirectX.
John Carmack: DirectX had all the right goals and, for the most part, it
achieved those goals. Certainly it didn’t turn out perfect, and there’s lots
of things that could have been improved, right? But the things that were
absolutely necessary–DirectDraw, DirectSound–they basically work.
Alex St. John: Is John being a little gratuitous in his praise here?
Hook: He’s being nice.
Alex St. John: Do you have a problem with DirectX?
Hook: No. But you should have been here last night while we were try-
ing to work out some DirectDraw stuff–I don’t think John would’ve been
liking DirectX pretty much then, right?
John Carmack: It could be better. But I’m glad it’s there, rather than
nothing at all. I would separate Direct3D as a totally separate issue be-
cause that wasn’t part of the original spec.
I’m on the side of it being really simple and doing it right. And Microsoft
has a lot of pressure to drift toward supporting everything and the kitchen
sink approach. But it’s just like the issue of software reliability and usabil-
ity: The further down there you go, the more things fall apart.
Alex St. John: I’ve read a bunch of the e-mail boot gets from people rav-
ing about D3D sucking and OpenGL being awesome. And then they sub-
stantiate it with really weak paraphrasing of all the stuff John has said in
his plan ﬁle.
John Carmack: You wind up getting this sense of partisanship or just
taking sides. It’s human nature, I suppose, but when it gets away from a
strict technical discussion, then you start getting your ”army of follow-
ers.” I suppose that’s part of having inﬂuence, but it’s not a part that I’m
particularly comfortable with.
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
14
Interviews
Hook: That does bother me, because there are a lot of people who will
mindlessly listen to what John and I say, and say, ”Yeah, yeah. Com-
pletely.” And they haven’t stopped to apply the critical thinking the way I
would like it. And they’re free to disagree because I’m not a God. I don’t
have some comprehensive understanding of the Universe that no one
else does. So what I say is deﬁnitely going to be incorrect at times, and
people need to stop and think about that.
Quake followers are sort of understandable but it’s so weird seeing prod-
ucts like Prey and Unreal that already have rabid followings, but they
haven’t even been released. Not that they don’t deserve it, but the fact
that people can band together behind something that hasn’t happened
yet is kind of weird. And it shows this aspect of human nature to I don’t
even know what aspect it shows.
John Carmack: There are people on the Unreal or Prey bandwagon that
just write off anything we say out of hand because we’re the enemy. That’s
just screwed up.
2.2
Page 2
Alex St. John: Brian, we understand you weren’t John’s ﬁrst choice for the
job. Are you Mike Abrash’s replacement?
Hook: I’m not Mike Abrash’s replacement–let’s get that real clear.
John Carmack: We don’t have job slots. We have talented people that
work to achieve the best product we can. And Brian ﬁts in differently
than Michael did.
Alex St. John: Brian used to work at 3Dfx, right?
Hook: Yeah. After 3Dfx I went and contracted for eight months or a year.
And that was fun, but it kind of sucks working at home. There’s none of
the camaraderie, you can’t talk to people, bounce ideas around. It’s cool
because it’s really the most relaxing thing in the world, working 20 hours a
week and making twice as much as you did working 80 hours a week. But
after awhile, you just get bored. And miraculously about that same time,
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
15
Interviews
I got e-mail from John saying, ”Would you be interested in contracting
down here for like a week or two?” And that was going a little too slowly,
so he said ”Well, would you be willing to come down here and interview
and meet some people and maybe talk about a job?” And then like a day
later he said ”Fuck, do you want the job or not?” And I was like ”Oh shit,
that puts a spin on things.” And I said ”I guess.” And, boom, I was here.
Everybody has this picture of how id is the most wonderful place to work
but I came from a different perspective. There were issues... everybody
was abandoning id, right? So I was a little distressed and I called up
Michael and said ”Before I commit, I need to know the reason you’re
leaving id.” And he was like ”Dude, I would work for id if they were in
Seattle.” That sold me.
John Carmack: Two years ago I had the actual honest thought that ”You
know, it’s really good when we get these sharp new people in here. Maybe
there should just be this plan to ﬁre the little man on the totem pole every
year and bring in fresh blood.”
Alex St. John: So how is Brian holding up here?
John Carmack: Brian’s done really well because he’s probably working
the longest hours of anyone here like 90 hours a week. I’ve been holding
my 70 hours for six years now. Two years ago, I was the only person here
at night. It’s just wonderful now to have some other people that are here
as much as I am, working hard on things.
Hook: It really isn’t necessarily the number of hours you work–it’s the
how productive you are. When I ﬁrst got here, I wasn’t particularly pro-
ductive even though I worked long hours. There’s a huge ramp-up phase
where you can’t get much work done because you don’t understand the
system, and you don’t know how the code base works. Now we’re on the
same wavelength and I’m a forced multiplier, right? It’s just like John and
I agree on so many things. And it’s spooky. I’ll be sitting there trying to
change OpenGL drivers on-the-ﬂy, and at the exact same time we’ll both
say, ”Hey, that’s cool!” It’s trivial, but the fact that we can swap going from
3Dfx to the Intergraph on-the-ﬂy, and we’re both thinking ”Yes, that’s so
cool!” It’s just really neat working in an environment like that.
Alex St. John: How do you feel about the phenomena of female Quake
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
16
Interviews
players?
John Carmack: I was really shocked by the size of the female Quake play-
ers.
Alex St. John: Shocked by the size of them? [everyone laughs]
John Carmack: Shocked by how many... I never would have guessed that
there were so many women that played Quake. And the fact that some
are so damn good, like out of the top 10 or 20 players, probably two or
three of them are female. Figuring about 1% of the players are females,
but maybe 10% of the very best players are female. That’s interesting.
2.3
Page 3
Alex St. John: What do you think of the Talisman architecture?
John Carmack: The Talisman architecture is based on a fundamental as-
sumption that turned out to be wrong: memory prices and speeds and
densities are going along this slow stable, path where all the processing
elements are drastically outpacing them.
Now we’ve got 100+MHz SDRAMs at $3/MB for commodity prices.
But even if their assumptions were right, there are different critiques that
can be made of the architecture. The most classically Talisman thing is
the compositing of multiple layers to produce a scene, saving time by
caching one layer and reusing it. Now I’ve worked on a couple of things
similar to that. With Atari Jaguar programming, there was a way you
could program their video controller to do layers, similar in a primitive
way to what Talisman could do. A chain of layers could be combined,
they could be scaled and translated, but they couldn’t be rotated, they
weren’t anti-aliased. But the concepts are identical. You can build some-
thing with that.
Alex St. John: So the industry is stuck on an old Atari concept?
John Carmack: Yeah. And it was really a pretty clever concept in the con-
straints of 2D games, especially because you’ve got your parallax layers
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
17
Interviews
and they had this neat way of generalizing a sprite-based architecture. It
was a more general-purpose architecture where you could use the same
thing for your background as for your objects. And for 2D games it had
wonderful advantages, but in a 3D environment a lot of those assump-
tions on reusability do not follow nearly as well.
Alex St. John: Do you feel the Talisman architecture will become the per-
vasive 3D chip technology?
John Carmack: I don’t think it will because it’s more expensive than other
things which do the job right. And if you don’t speciﬁcally optimize for
layers, what you’ve got is a 3D accelerator with compressed textures and
anistropic ﬁltering, which are both good things that I expect everyone
to eventually adopt. But if you look at their chunked architecture, the
performance has some interesting things you can say about it. PowerVR
does a lot of the things that Talisman hopes to do some time in the fu-
ture. In some cases it performs better than I’d expect. But in the end,
it’s fundamentally not going to be as good as something you directly feed
vertexes to, because it involves chunking, copying, and scatter gathering
to memory. All these things compromise it at the high-end.
We investigated an amazing number of things in Quake. One was, ”Al-
right, rendering these 3D models composed of several hundred triangles
takes a lot of time and we can’t have these huge scenes all the ﬁre ﬁghts
like we had in Doom. And that’s a bad thing.” So one thing we looked at
was ”Well, let’s cache it into a sprite and then re-use that sprite for a few
times.” That’s exactly the Talisman architecture. Now we went and put
it in, and not only did we notice all these visual anomalies. One of the
most wonderful things in Quake is that you’re there in the 3D world. But
if you’re caching a sprite and re-using it, it’s not like that.
We saw that technology and it kind of sucked. And then we ran into all
these other things we hadn’t even thought about, like where you place
the sprite projection plane. If you put it at the front, then it actually ex-
tends below the ground on there. You run into these weird clipping prob-
lems. And turning a 3D object into a 2D poster then integrating with a 3D
world is trickier than it might look. Lighting is obviously not going to be
right any time you re-use it. That may not be a big deal, but the inter-
penetration occlusion is the biggest part. And what we found is you just
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
18
Interviews
can’t re-use it for many frames.
Alex St. John: So what should Microsoft do with Talisman?
John Carmack: It should just quietly go away, because there’s wrong fun-
damental assumptions. There’s some really great thinking and engineer-
ing that went into it, but if you start with this straightjacket of memory,
it’s just going to get worse by this horrible bandwidth problem. We need
to be really clever to get around it. You can defend a lot of these things by
saying ”If we need this level of performance and quality and we cannot
have this memory, then this may be the only way to achieve it.” There
may be other viable things–caching and all that–and I can respect a lot of
the science that went into it, but the world changed and it’s not appro-
priate anymore.
The key to Talisman was layering, which was just a bad idea. Then they
had a bunch of things like shadow buffer algorithms and foretelling how
important a multipass was going to be, and those are all right on. There’s
a lot of right things in there.
The jury is still out on chunking–it may or may not be a good thing. Pow-
erVR and Oak are following that line and 3Dfx is not. And they both seem
to be doing well. So that’s a debatable point.
2.4
Page 4
Alex St. John: What do you think of Sega’s decision to use PowerVR in-
stead of 3Dfx for its next-generation console?
John Carmack: Well if you compare the two, interesting trade-offs are
being made. Look at it in the PC space: 3Dfx costs almost twice as much
as the PowerVR. So in a console space, $100 difference could be cru-
cially signiﬁcant. You can say that’s a strong argument for PowerVR, but
that’s not really a truthful case. PowerVR is only cheaper because it uses
other components already in the PC–the video scan out, main memory
for chunking buffers, and all this stuff–which would have to be present
in a console anyway. It does use a less aggressive memory subsystem, so
the PowerVR system might have a slight cost edge. But one hidden cost is
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
19
Interviews
that chunking requires a large main memory buffer to specify your entire
scene database in Primitive. To get maximum performance, you have
to do double buffering. You have to have enough memory to get two
entire scenes worth of rendering commands in main memory. In a PC
with 32MB and games that only have 5,000 triangles, that’s not that bad.
It’s a few hundred K. But look at the performance we’re going to expect
of these next-generation chips, we’re going to have games that are do-
ing 15,000 or 20,000 or 30,000 polygons a second and reasonable frame
rates. Now, run through the numbers. 30,000 triangles at 100 bytes per
triangle. That’s quite a bit right there. And then you have to double buffer
it. Chunking imposes, on average, a 25% penalty. And now it’s like ”Wow!
To do this high-performance game, I need 3MB just in memory.” And
consoles don’t have that much memory. They’re certainly going to go up
in the next generation. I don’t know how much it’s going to be, but a
good guess would be 16MB. And you’re going to cut-off three megs just
because you’re using this architecture chip? I think that’s a bad call.
Alex St. John: How do you feel about the possibility of Sega’s operating
system being a Windows CE subset of DirectX?
John Carmack: An operating system on game consoles does not help you
get better games. I stand by that quite resolutely.
Alex St. John: Very few best selling games on the PC don’t use 3D–Myst,
Diablo, Barbie, Scrabble, Monopoly.
John Carmack: 3D is going to be separate from the operating system is-
sue. An operating system does not provide 3D, really. It may provide an
API. For a good example, look at the OS on the 3DO. It was a horribly bad
idea. It sucked-up resources, it kept programmers from doing the most
impressive things and going directly to the hardware, it had this vague
notion of being portable across multiple implementations and evolving.
And none of that really panned-out. And I don’t think it ever will.
What a game developer would most like to see is an architecture exposed
to the metal and then lots of libraries. Developers don’t want to write a
TCP/IP stack for a modem. It would be a ton of work and it wouldn’t re-
ally be that good. By the same token, they’d like to have that provided,
but they don’t want an operating system that’s going to disable write per-
mission to the hardware registers. ”Oh developers shouldn’t be touching
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
20
Interviews
those things.”
That’s throwing away the best beneﬁt of consoles.
You can just optimize the hell out of consoles and you don’t have that on
the PC because you’ve got this staid, mushy, amorphous space to work
on. So it makes people lazy. You can always say ”Well, we slipped a little
bit here, but computers are getting faster and we’ll just let it slide.” On
the console you say ”We’re missing our frame rate here. This sucks right
here–you need to make it better.” And you’ve got the low-level access,
you’ve got a memory map, you’ve got registers you can go down, and
you can get a level of tuning that’s just not possible on the PC. At least
not in any economically viable sense. The few people that do that, like
the demo crews, don’t make money at it because it’s tightly constrained.
And it would be a criminal shame to just turn the console into a weak,
underpowered PC with no hard drive.
Alex St. John: But wouldn’t it make the transition from one generation of
console to the next better if existing content continued to run on it?
John Carmack: I don’t think that is beneﬁcial to the consumer. Having
last year’s games on your new system doesn’t really help. They tried that
before, like the Sega Master System plug-in for the Genesis. Nintendo
was going to have compatibility with the Super Nintendo. They chose the
same processor generation and all, but in the end it never happened and
nobody cared because nobody cares about last year’s games. And for the
consumer, it’s not like they have to throw away their old game machine
when they upgrade.
Each generation of console is like 5 times better than the previous one
and there are scalability limits to all projects. Everybody talks about inﬁ-
nite scalability, but it doesn’t exist because you choose a target and then
do something appropriate for that. And maybe you’ve got a factor of 5
scalability, but that’s really pushing it and it’s clearly not that appropriate
on the end of your spectrum. So content is not going to scale over two
separate hardware generations. If consoles turn the same thing as the
PC, where you’ve got this amorphous mess with ”This is a 166MHz and
this is a 200MHz,” then it’s just back to being a cheap PC.
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
21
Interviews
2.5
Page 5
Alex St. John: id doesn’t permit magazines to distribute the demo Quake
shareware.
John Carmack: Right.
Alex St. John: So you guys kind of pioneered the whole shareware thing.
What happened to the ”share” part?
John Carmack: Well, okay. We found out that all these people are making
tons of money, in some cases millions of dollars, distributing our games.
It really started sinking in that people are buying this CD just because
it’s got our product on it. We looked at that and said ”Okay, you’re going
to have to pay us $6 per CD.” And we did that for a little while and that
was something that we didn’t do particularly well for a large number of
reasons.
But it turned out that people were willing to pay for it.
Alex St. John: You’re not a shareware company anymore.
John Carmack: Free distribution is great because the more people that
see this stuff, the better. And the Internet distribution is still free. On the
Internet, no one else is making money from it. Part of it is, ”Well, that’s
our money!” And that’s caused a number of arguments at id about how
far we pursue that analogy, because it can get us into all sorts of areas
that I personally don’t want the company getting into. But it turns out
that we made a quarter of a million dollars on top of everything else. It
was just, ”Well, why not?”
Alex St. John: So you won’t allow boot to publish the shareware, because
it helps sell the magazine, and it should be you getting the money?
John Carmack: To a degree. It always used to be presented like, ”Look,
we’re doing you guys a favor by distributing your software.” And we looked
at it like ”No, we’re doing you a favor,” and there’s no good rational reason
why we should do that because we still got free distribution on the net.
We get the money. It’s not a religious issue one way or the other. We’ve
just kind of started doing it.
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
22
Interviews
2.6
Page 6
Alex St. John: When are you going to do a Java version of Quake?
John Carmack: Java has a lot of wonderful advantages as a program de-
velopment language and I do plan, after we ﬁnish Quake 2, to go off and
develop something signiﬁcant in Java to feel-up the language. I haven’t
done hands-on work with Java, but I think there’s really something there
to be gained. We don’t have a lot of ties holding us back at id and we de-
veloped on this crazy NextStep platform for a long time and we’re willing
to push OpenGL or maybe jump to Rhapsody. And if Java pans out the
way I think it might, then we might write a lot of things in Java.
Alex St. John: Do you think Java is fast enough for games?
John Carmack: This is one thing that I don’t really understand about the
whole Java marketplace and the way it’s being presented. It also ties to
this bytecode portability stuff and there’s no damn good reason for that.
Why don’t we just have Java and X86 compilers? I like the language–I
don’t care about bytecode.
Alex St. John: The portability of Java isn’t a feature. It’s just a language,
and it would be nice to have a better compiler.
John Carmack: Exactly. I think it’s a language that in many ways is better
than
C++ and I’d rather develop something in that, but it’s all tied-up in this
non-proprietary, run-anywhere type of thing, which is not what I care
about.
Alex St. John: The whole Java virtual machine thing doesn’t turn you on?
John Carmack: No, not at all. I like the language.
In general, I’m willing to spend performance to make a better product.
And that’s one thing that has taken me awhile to kind of mature to be-
cause all game programmers start off on ”I can do this in 10 cycles!” And
games have gotten so complex where Quake is practically an operating
system. It’s this architecture, with all these different things that plug-in
different ways, and it’s not just this little thing that draws to the screen.
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
23
Interviews
So design and the implementation of things in robust ways is really im-
portant. And we’ve still got lots that we can improve here. I’m trying to
learn and teach myself to be better in these ways, but performance is not
the only criteria.
When it comes to this sort of thing, I think Nintendo and Sega can make
a better consumer network computer than like Oracle or Sun can. They
know what they’re doing better in that segment and the computers are
certainly powerful enough. An Ultra 64’s got a 100MHz processor, several
megabytes of memory, excellent display output. You can do great things
with that. And I think modem peripherals are going to be extremely sig-
niﬁcant in this coming generation. I know they’re on the current genera-
tion of Saturns and whatever, but it’s not the cornerstone yet. But when
it becomes the cornerstone that’s when things are going to get interest-
ing. There’s some wonderful things people can do if they own modems.
There’s certain modulation things they can do at a hardware level to get
rid of some of the crap that goes on the PCs, so you get a better connec-
tion to play real-time games.
They can do things asynchronously on their end.
And then there’s wonderful possibilities if they cut a deal with say Ascend
or one of the digital emulation modem banks that ISPs use and you can
negotiate a real-time protocol that gets less bandwidth but at much less
latency.
Alex St. John: Communicating directly through the POPs, without going
over the net?
John Carmack: Yeah. You still have to go analog to handle the POP line,
but you can avoid going back on the ISP side, which is what 56K modems
are talking about doing. Those are still optimized for bandwidth. If you
took the same decisions, the same technical bases, and optimized for
latency–not caring about dropped packets or bandwidth–that would be
wonderful for games. And it could even be done with total compatibility.
The things I think are going to be sticky are the political realities of Sega
and Nintendo. They’re closed boxes, and they make all their money by
forcing anyone running on their platform to pay through the nose. And I
absolutely hate it. But the net is 180 degrees away from that. If a browser
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
24
Interviews
supports Java or something, then all of the sudden, you’ve got people
writing programs on that system. Sure, they’re not accessing their hard-
ware, they’re not efﬁcient... but still, it’s like this horrible foot in the
door that I’m sure is going to make all of them really sick to think about.
You have somebody running a program and that money is not funneling
through them in a license. And I’m afraid that’s going to make them do
so horribly wrong.
Alex St. John: Proprietary technology will prevent any of that.
John Carmack: And that is so appallingly wrong. It’s hard to express how
wrong that really is. I’ve got this feeling things like that are going to hap-
pen. I don’t think Sega has the guts to be this network computer that does
all these wonderful things in addition to just play games.
2.7
Page 7
Alex St. John: How do you feel about the top 10 list of PC games being
saturated with non-3D games such as Scrabble, Barbie Fashion Designer,
and Myst?
John Carmack: We’ve never claimed to represent the majority of the mar-
ket. It’s not something that we even care about. We don’t want to write
Myst or something like that, and even if somebody said ”Look, we can
give you ﬁve times as much money to do that” It’s not enough draw. We’re
not trying to own the market. It’s nice to have millions of people like the
product and all, but not if you’re doing something you don’t care about,
you’re just selling out to please the most number of people.
Alex St. John: Certain large game companies seem to attempt to domi-
nate every inch of the game market by generating a product that ﬁts each
niche.
John Carmack: I had this really bizarre conversation once with a cou-
ple of lawyers and they were talking about ”How do you pick your target
market? Do you use focus groups and poll people and all this?” It’s like
”No, we just write games that we think are cool.” They’re from such a
different world that they fundamentally did not get that. We are not run-
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
25
Interviews
ning things the way a business should be run, that that’s just not the way
things work. It can’t work like that, but it does. It works that way for us.
There’s plenty of starving artists that are probably talented and hard work-
ing, they’re just doing something that nobody cares about. I happen to
be good at something that makes me millions of dollars.
2.8
Page 8
Alex St. John: I understand that when you guys saw the Into the Shadows
demo, you were pretty traumatized.
John Carmack: I looked at that and said, ”Their characters look better
than ours.” But even though it was an impressive demo, it’s a perfect ex-
ample of the difference between a technology demo and a shipping prod-
uct. And shipping a product is just horrid. People don’t realize it. You get
so many people that are from an EEU background and don’t know what
they’re talking about. And they think just because, ”Wow I did my senior
project on this, I know everything it takes to do a game...” The graphics
technology everybody looks at is only a quarter of Quake’s code, and it’s
not even the hard part of it. Look at the things that are really unglam-
orous but really important, like the ﬁle extension architecture in Quake:
I rewrite everything down to my disk reads and ﬁle I/Os between technol-
ogy generations. And the decisions I made on Quake were just crucially
important because I looked at what we’ve been doing in the past, and I
made the right decisions in the data structure ﬁle system to allow it to be
extended completely.
Hook: Quake is far more popular today than when it was released. Eas-
ily. And you almost never see that. Games have that spike in popularity.
Everybody solves it, then it drifts away.
John Carmack: Yeah, like Diablo. There was a huge spike where every-
body was playing Diablo and now? It’s basically gone.
Hook: And with Quake, the number of people of playing it has just kept
rising and rising and rising as people get turned on to it on the Inter-
net. You should see these add-ons! There’s Quake Rally, Quake Golf, and
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
26
Interviews
there’s Quake Soccer. It’s just crazy what these people are doing. People
are just going insane! There’s even that Descent clone people did with
Quake.
John Carmack: And Quake 2 is going to be even better, because all the
things that frustrated people in the architecture of Quake are ﬁxed now.
Things like exact control over the view camera. That was always short-
circuited on the camera. But now you can take precise control over that.
Mostly it’s a matter of making the client dumber and moving more con-
trol onto the server side where they can use it.
Alex St. John: So what platforms will you support with Quake 2?
Hook: Just to quickly go through: We’re supporting Win32, x86, Win32
DEC Alpha, Linux x86, Rhapsody–both PowerPC and Intel.
John Carmack: It’ll probably wind up on all the crazy Linux ﬂavors, al-
though some of those get really debatable. The intersection of people
that run Quake on Linix, SPARC, and Light [?] is probably a dozen peo-
ple. But if it’s just a matter of compiling, we’ll do it anyways.
Hook: And we do this, not because it makes any particularly good busi-
ness sense, but because it’s cool. All this is an ego thing. The more plat-
forms you port to, the more people are playing your game. And it’s a cool
thing that someone can say ”Yeah, I was playing Quake 2 on a SPARC
Linux box.”
John Carmack: It doesn’t make good business case, but it does help us to
be better programmers.
Alex St. John: What do you think of AGP?
John Carmack: AGP is not going to make any difference on titles ship-
ping right now, but in two years, it’s going to be absolutely necessary just
for command bandwidth. The use of texturing over AGP is kind of a sep-
arate issue, where AGP can be looked at as just a multi-clock CPI. And in
that case, it’s clearly a pure beneﬁt. Nothing in the world wrong with it.
AGP’s not going to provide tangible beneﬁts to people right now, but it’s
going to enable the evolution of everything that’s going to be signiﬁcant
in the future.
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
27
Interviews
Opening up 32MB of main memory for textures will be good.
Some of the main memory bandwidth is going to have beneﬁts, or some
drawbacks that you won’t see in a benchmark. A benchmark you’ll just
see like raw ﬁll rate. And they can clearly do pretty well there, but there’ll
be some other drawbacks. The highest performance things will still have
dedicated texture buses. The biggest problem we have on 3Dfx right now
is texture paging. Not triangle rate, not ﬁll rate, it’s textures.
And that broaches on another issue. We had a version of Quake that used
portals. In fact, a month before Quake shipped I had a brainstorm that
I thought might cause me to rewrite the engine along passages, which is
kind of an extension of portals, and I tried it. In some cases it worked
well, but overall it wasn’t as good as what I was doing.
Alex St. John: When you say ”portal,” do you mean a teleporting base?
John Carmack: No, portal technology is being in an area and only draw-
ing the area after it if you can see the portal that leads between the two
areas. It’s valid, and it’s something that I’m going to re-evaluate again for
Trinity because the situation has changed, but with the Quake level of
technology, it was not the right thing. There are a few cool tricks you can
do with portal, you can have your window sitting in space and you can
walk around and you see another area through it. There are good techni-
cal reasons for doing that, but 3D Realms and the press wound up touting
portals. They say things like ”The previous-generation VSP technology
and current-generation portal technology.” It’s not really a matter of one
being more advanced than the other, but this what non-technical peo-
ple spin it as because they need something to talk about. You need some
controversy, you need the sound bite that people will associate with. And
you can’t have this long thing about the technical trade-offs between do-
ing things with statically computed things vs. dynamics because most
people don’t care enough to really get it. It’s the job of the marketing per-
son to condense it all down into one word.
CHAPTER 2. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW

Chapter 3
John Carmack - The Boot
Interview (Outtakes)
This interview was conducted by Alex St. John for Boot Net on Nov 25,
1997.
http://web.archive.org/web/19980130151620/http://www.bootnet.com/
youaskedforit/lip_16_outtakes/lip_16_all.html
Interview
Prologue
On the ﬁrst day, id Software created Wolfenstein 3D– the debut ﬁrst-
person shooter to confront the issue of 3D on the PC. And it was good.
Soon, the small Texas-based startup had a shareware megahit with the
legendary game Doom, and the game world began paying attention. Am-
bitiously, id set out to break its raycast bonds and create the ﬁrst true 3D
game. Thus was born Quake, arguably the best PC game to date, and
nothing would be the same again.
Along the way, the technological idealists at id faced opposition. Mighty
28

John Carmack Archive
29
Interviews
Microsoft, via outspoken evangelist Alex St. John, began pushing Di-
rect3D as the dominant API. But id had other preferences, and company
owner/lead programmer John Carmack has rallied developers against
D3D and become alternate API OpenGL’s... Ad Hoc Evangelist
Questions
Alex St. John: If a Microsoft recruiter came down here and said ”We’d like
to hire you all to come ﬁx DirectX” would you guys go?
Hook: I’d probably go. John wouldn’t.
Alex St. John: So what would you do with Direct3D if you were in charge?
Hook: Hold it, hold it. There’s too much speculation here. Having talked
to enough ex-Microsoft employees, I know it’s a very political landscape.
It doesn’t matter how good you are technologically, because there are
people up there right now who have the capability to solve this prob-
lem, but politically do not. So you don’t need me to go up there–what
you need is someone up there willing to dictate on strategy, end of story,
that’s it.
John Carmack: Well, I don’t know if I agree. I undervalue the strength
of politics. I am a technical idealist at heart and I think that if you put
someone up there that knows what the hell is going on, and they have
authority over the code base, they can ﬁx it. The ﬁnal word is what gets
built into the executables.
Hook: I think a pretty much infallible case has been made for OpenGL
and Microsoft has effectively come back and said ”Screw you.”
John Carmack: [laughs] Brian’s current conspiracy theory is that Microsoft
is investing in Apple to force them to adopt D3D or something.
Alex St. John: That’s not the most irrational thing we’ve heard. So, what
do you two think about Microsoft showing GLQuake running on top of
Direct3D?
John Carmack: It was worthwhile, although it’s like you adopt OpenGL
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
30
Interviews
and write some emulation layer to run all the crappy games–such as Mon-
ster Truck Madness.
I’ve stated from really early on that the APIs are close enough in function-
ality that there’s not a difference. The difference is in how you access that
functionality.
Alex St. John: I understand the performance is pretty similar.
John Carmack: It’s pretty close because it’s a heavily ﬁll-limited game,
so you’re bound-up by what the hardware can do. If the driver is not
totally brain dead, it’s feeding the hardware, and you wind up waiting for
the hardware. So assume that you have a non-brain-dead driver, then
you could put a layer of emulation between it. And that works ﬁne on
this generation of games, but it’s not going to work in the future. If you
scaleup the performance ladder– like where SGI is–then every access to
memory is a performance drain. If you start saying ”I want to render ﬁve
million triangles,” an emulation layer is not acceptable.
Hook: And Microsoft didn’t tell us they were going to do an emulation. If
they had simply asked ”We’re going to do this, do you mind?” We would
have said OK, because we’re just into cool technical stuff. There wouldn’t
have been a problem, but they didn’t even do that.
Alex St. John: It was my job to get your approval, but they ﬁred me before
I could do it!
Hook: Look, this is my view of the people who work at Microsoft. You
have a choice. If you’re good enough, you have a choice of where you
work. You have to realize that what you’re doing is bad for the industry.
And what you’re doing is only good for your personal ego and your per-
sonal power trip and your stock options. If you’re doing stuff that you
don’t even agree with and you do it for the money–we have a word for
that.
Alex St. John: So what’s that word?
Hook: A whore. And I’ve never done that. I can sleep well at night. Those
people can’t.
Alex St. John: Are there particular people that you have in mind?
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
31
Interviews
Hook: No, I’m not even singling out the D3D team. I’m saying in general
that you can have a certain level of honor and integrity, but not a lot of
people exhibit that.
John Carmack: One thing the D3D/GLQuake demonstration did was
draw the lines of battle. Microsoft is always trying to be friendly and put
on a good face and saying ”We’re doing what the ISVs want” and every-
thing. But that’s really just a front. There’s a well-deﬁned agenda that
D3D shall rule the universe; OpenGL shall crumble and die.
But Microsoft can’t quite come out and say that. And I would respect
them a hell of a lot more if they actually did, but they’re trying to have
your cake and eat it too. And it’s just not that way.
Hook: Their D3D developer-relations guy sends e-mail asking if there’s
anything he can do. And then something happens and he’ll say ”Oh, I
had nothing to do with that.”
It’s like ”Fuck you! You work there.” That’s not my problem and I don’t
respect you for coming up with excuses when you come down here and
start saying ”Oh, we really want to work with you...” and then pull a stunt
like that. You come off as two-faced, you come off as a hypocrite. If you
want to work with us, pay attention to us. But it’s not what they want to
do. They say ”Try D3D–you’ll like it,” And I kept saying ”I don’t want to
use D3D. I have something else I like.” To me, the analogy was like going
to a fast food place and saying ”I want a hamburger,” and them saying,
”We’ve got a really good chicken sandwich.”
You know, we’re not supposed to do what Microsoft wants. Microsoft is
supposed to enable us to deliver content on their operating system, but
they’re not doing that. They’re ﬂat-out ignoring us to a large degree. And
I’ve heard private comment from members of the Direct3D group where
they just categorically ignore anything John Carmack says. Not because
they don’t believe in him, but because he disagrees with them. It’s not
John Carmack, it’s anyone who disagrees with them. They’ve done this
with hardware people. ”Yeah, even though they’re the fastest, they don’t
have enough volume. We don’t really need to work with them...” And they
do that across the board.
Alex St. John: SGI can’t make much money licensing the OpenGL tech-
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
32
Interviews
nology, so they really need to make an NT deal with Microsoft. How does
that make you feel?
John Carmack: This is where I can just be righteously indignant and dis-
gusted about them. I am a technical idealist and the wrong things are
happening. I understand the reasons why some of them are happening
and I’ll probably learn to live with them, but it doesn’t keep me from be-
ing pissed-off about it.
Alex St. John: So even if OpenGL dies, will you remain its torchbearer?
John Carmack: No. We’re not going to crusade off a cliff. I am pragmatic
at the end; there is a limit as to how much I will let idealism damage me
because I can adapt to whatever is necessary and Direct3D with Draw
primitive doesn’t suck.
D3D sucks!
There’s just nothing charitable you can say about it. Over the years, Mi-
crosoft will make D3D suck less, but they’re dragging us through the mud
along with them as they ﬁgure it out.
But in the end, if SGI did give up on OpenGL, we would give it up. I sup-
pose the gentlemen’s bet would be that they’re not going to bow out in
the next couple of years.
Alex St. John: I’ll make that gentleman’s bet: I predict SGI will become
less interested in providing a consumer API on the PC for OpenGL...
John Carmack: Certainly, but they’re not going to start running D3D on
Inﬁnite Reality.
Alex St. John: At least not for a while. On the other hand, their product
mix might increasingly become whatever Microsoft supports under NT.
John Carmack: And I think that’s wonderful. If we could buy Inﬁnite Re-
ality and plug into an NT workstation, we’d do so. I’d write that $100,000
check right now because I don’t like Irix. I don’t like their desktop and
their operating systems.
Alex St. John: Do you see hardware companies making a special effort to
build drivers just for Quake as a problem?
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
33
Interviews
John Carmack: They aren’t just for Quake. A couple are just for Quake
now–the 3Dfx and PowerVR ones–although they both intend to evolve to
a full version. There are a lot of great things people can do with them.
D3D is not being exercised in application mode. And this is where every-
body has always had these vague notions that 3D is going to be important
on the desktop. And while I don’t think that’s really near-term, in gen-
eral, it’s true: You are going to integrate 3D in your desktop experience
... and that’s what OpenGL was designed for. It runs full-screen. That
was kind of a side-effect, but doing applications on a simple level–such
as our map editor and the tools we write here–are things I can whip-out
really easily in OpenGL and they work really well. And there are going to
be consumer-level things like that which are interesting, and you’ll want
a robust, full OpenGL driver for.
Alex St. John: So you think people will be using OpenGL in Excel-type
applications?
John Carmack: Actually, yes–drawing 3D graphs and everything in spread-
sheets is an excellent use for something like that, rather than writing your
own 3D transport clip project pipeline to do those little things. But the
obvious things of the graphics tools, modelers, map creators, and things
like that. It’s silly not to write those to an API.
In fact there’s a funny thing... Somebody sent me back an e-mail that I
had written at least a year ago, where I said, ”You should use a commer-
cially available API like Direct 3D.” That was before I had done any Di-
rect3D programming. This guy sent it back to me, and it’s like ”You said
this?” It was like, ”Yeah, I did say that. I stand by the sentiment that you
should use someone else’s library.” After actually doing a bunch of D3D
programming, we recommend using OpenGL, for sure. But at the time, I
hadn’t used either.
It’s important to note that some people have this misconception that
we’re just being recalcitrant and not wanting to learn something new. But
I did Direct3D programming and Brian’s done a lot. The thing is: I’ve only
learned OpenGL over the last two years. It’s not like I’m some guy at SGI
who’s been doing it for a decade. I learned it after I left NextStep and
then I learned D3D later because I had the best of intentions. I went into
it with eyes wide open, and it just sucked.
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
34
Interviews
Alex St. John: But clearly SGI isn’t making a big effort to get drivers done
and making sure that all the hardware manufacturers are uniﬁed...
Hook: They’re working with every major IHV that I’ve been talking to.
They’re in constant negotiations. Their team is almost the size–in terms
of programmers–of the Direct3D team up at Microsoft. They’re taking
this very seriously.
John Carmack: Sure, it could be better. It’d be great if they had an evan-
gelist like you were for Microsoft. But we’re still like this bug splat to Mi-
crosoft, and we can’t get them to do what we think is right. This is the ﬁrst
time I’m really trying to use what inﬂuence I do have to do something I
think is proper and forward-looking for the game industry. And I know
I’m not really hurting anyone by doing this. I think that the long-term
beneﬁts of trying to push something that’s right are good. At the very
least, even if we fail, we have put pressure on D3D to examine some of
the issues that they wouldn’t have otherwise.
And I do get mail from people. Most of them really don’t understand
the issues technically. They think when GLQuake is running on their S3
ViRGE, ”If it just supported D3D...”
I didn’t know any better two years ago, before I used OpenGL. I clearly re-
member laughing about this e-mail saying how OpenGL is going to take
over the world, and there are going to be OpenGL accelerators in the con-
sumer space, and anyone would be able to write stuff on those. And I was
laughing because the misconception I had was, ”Yeah, anyone that runs
a $50,000 SGI workstation.” Something that’s appropriate there just can’t
be efﬁcient, because they’re throwing all this hardware at it. And I was
just wrong.
I just didn’t know the issues and I learned better. And a lot of game devel-
opers haven’t been in the position where they’ve had the opportunity to
learn some of these things and they just take what’s available and it’s been
bad. It’s bad for the industry that what’s available hasn’t been as good as
it should have been. But people really don’t know there’s an option.
Hook: People point out how OpenGL is designed on high-end worksta-
tions, but keep in mind that the ”high-end” workstation OpenGL was de-
signed on didn’t even have hardware texture mapping. And a lot of them
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
35
Interviews
are signiﬁcantly less powerful than a Pentium 166–even today.
John Carmack: So it’s like they had all these years of evolution and we’re
now at a point where we can say ”They’ve spent a lot of time getting it
to work on this hardware. And now our hardware is pretty damn similar.
Let’s just take all this. Let’s not re-invent everything.”
And if you’re going to re-invent the wheel, don’t make it square.
Alex St. John: What would you think if SGI were to ﬁnd a way to ship a
PC version of OpenGL with Microsoft and doing the NT license for that
workspace?
Hook: I personally can’t believe it. It’s a rumor. When it becomes a reality,
I’ll stress about it.
John Carmack: We have like plan A, B, C and D on what could happen
with OpenGL.
The best plan would have been if Microsoft played ball and got behind us.
That would have been best for everybody. But it didn’t happen. So plan
B is working with SGI. And if that falls through, the other ones probably
really aren’t worth pursuing as a long-term strategy. It would be strictly a
rear-guard action.
If Microsoft does manage to effectively squash SGI’s involvement, it may
be time to pack up and move on.
Alex St. John: Will there be a Mac version of Quake 2 ?
John Carmack: Quake 2 is not going to be on MacOS 8, because I’m tak-
ing my idealist stand and saying Quake 2 will be available on Rhapsody.
Give up the crusty old Mac stuff! I’m going to personally port the stuff
to Rhapsody and make it a high-quality implementation for people that
want to take a step into the future of Apple. I have no respect for the
MacOS, none at all.
There’s a chance that if Apple doesn’t curl up and die and Rhapsody turns
out to be everything that it looks like it’s going to be, then next year we
might jump ship and develop on Rhapsody and port to Windows. There’s
a lot of good reasons to not have your target platform be your develop-
ment platform. It keeps you from accidentally doing things that aren’t ro-
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
36
Interviews
bust and portable. And that was one thing during Doom and Quake, we
developed exclusively on NextStep because cross-compiles were ported
to DOS.
Alex St. John: Apple didn’t come to you and say ”Please put Quake 2 on
Rhapsody”?
John Carmack: I have some issues with Steve Jobs. When he was running
Next, I tried so hard to get any publicity I could for Next but, from what I
hear third-hand, Steve Jobs just was not interested in any of that. And it’s
defensible in a workstation company, although it still would have been
good free PR that they could have used. But I’m getting the vibe that
he’s squashing some things that are important at Apple, and he has no
justiﬁcation for doing that in a consumer operating system company. I’ve
never met him–I’d like to some time, but I don’t think he’s exactly on my
side.
Alex St. John: Brian, what do you think of 3Dfx’s future prospects now
that you don’t work there?
Hook: I’ve always felt 3Dfx will do amazing stuff. I keep hearing rumors
that there’s political stuff in the semiconductor industry that will always
hold small, fabless semiconductor companies like 3Dfx back. But I can’t
comment on that because I don’t know enough to really say if that’s a
factor.
But remove that from the equation and I think 3Dfx Voodoo is still the
best. Now that everybody’s gone through multiple generations, this one
architecture has lasted for a year. The boards are $180 for a 6MB version
now, and you can get others for $150, and it’s still competitive with brand
new chips coming out from Invidia and Rendition.
John Carmack: They had a 4x performance lead when they came out.
That is just so rare, they need to be lauded just for doing that, because it
was an amazing thing.
Now I don’t think they’re going to have a 4x performance lead in the fu-
ture, because eventually everyone is going to be working with the same
memory subsystem, the same type of SDRAM, but I think they’re still go-
ing to maintain a good 2x lead–and it’s because they’re really damn good.
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
37
Interviews
And I think they’ll be successful. I don’t think they’re going to put S3 out
of business, but I’m happy with the performance.
Alex St. John: That’s a pretty strong statement. What don’t you like about
S3?
John Carmack: Well the ViRGE was the whipping child of the 3D industry
because it was so bad. Just like 3Dfx was so good, ViRGE was so bad.
Alex St. John: You’re pretty hopeful that S3 isn’t going to be predominant
in the marketplace?
John Carmack: Well anyone can turn it around. We’ve got a wonderful
example with NVidia. The NV1 was the most stupid, wrong-headed thing
anybody could have possibly built at that time. It was so bad it would
have poisoned the industry if it had become a predominant thing– it was
horrible. And now NV3 is probably the single-best chip solution available
right now. They did the wrong thing, they recognized it, and then they
did the right thing. So S3 may very well do that. I hope they do because
they certainly still have a commanding presence and I just want lots of
good chips in lots of people’s hands, but I don’t want lots of lousy chips
in people’s hands.
And it was funny, id Software had written off 3Dfx because when all the
chip vendors came down and paraded through, 3Dfx said, ”We’re going to
be $400.” And we said, ”You’re not relevant!” We were behind Rendition
because we felt they had the right feature set and they were going to be
at the right price. But then RAM prices tumbled and, all of the sudden,
3Dfx is relevant. And not only are they relevant, they’re so much better!
Memory is now cheap enough to use aggressively for graphics... and
that’s why 3Dfx is viable. If memory hadn’t gone down, I’m not sure 3Dfx
would still be in business.
Hook: 3Dfx’s original business plan was not predicated upon having any
presence in the consumer space for the ﬁrst couple of years. They were
going for massive arcade sales in order to keep the business going. Then
they could get the prices down and work out the technology necessary to
run in only two megabytes. But when the bottom fell out, all of a sudden
3Dfx was a consumer company. The arcade stuff became irrelevant, and
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
38
Interviews
they spun-off their board division, Quantum 3D, because it’s like, ”We
need to focus on the consumer space. This arcade stuff is not going to
be nearly as important to us now as we thought it was going to be three
years ago.” It was smart because if you’re just selling chips into arcades,
the volumes are nothing. And 3Dfx makes the same amount of money
whether they’re selling chips to Gateway or Dell or Compaq as they would
if they were selling to Konami or Midway or whoever else.
John Carmack: Well, that’s one of those things that I can just look back
on. I thought it was too expensive for us to be paying a lot of attention to
consumer boards. But a lot of it was us believing what these people were
telling us about their board’s performance. Everyone said ”Oh, we’ll do
25 to 33 megapixels”–and we believed that!
Hook: They were running their SGI software emulation of what they would
be capable of rendering.
John Carmack: And 3Dfx was saying ”We’ll do 45 megapixels” and we
thought, ”they’re only 50% faster than these people but they’re twice as
expensive” and it’s just not worth it. Then it turned out that the prices
changed, everything became a lot cheaper. And everyone else under-
delivered. And 3Dfx did not. They did what they said they would do and
they did it well.
Alex St. John: What about non-Intel processors, what do you think of
them?
John Carmack: The ﬂoating-point issue has really hurt them. We had
AMD and Cyrix down here while we were developing Quake, and we said,
”Look, ﬂoating point’s going to be important,” but because there weren’t
any benchmarks or any applications they’d used at that time, they brushed
it under the rug.
AMD and Cyrix both have non-pipeline FPUs, which is their Achilles’
heel. In terms of integer performance a lot of them are on par or, even
in some cases, better than Intel, but we optimize for Intel because the
Pentium’s got the FXCH change trick to pipeline all these things. And
it’s pretty tweaky but it pervades all of our assembly language code for
Quake.
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
39
Interviews
So we’re de-optimized for non-Intel chips, but it was the only sensible
thing to do.
Hook: Intel was the best processor at the time. The K6 had not shipped
yet, so it’s hard to optimize for the K6 or the Cyrix M2 or whatever. They
just didn’t exist yet. So it’s not favoritism towards Intel, it was just being
pragmatic.
Alex St. John: What do you think of Intel buying-up interest in the major
3D chip companies?
John Carmack: Intel’s a smart company, and Intel’s turning themselves
into this gigantic, monolithic company has been good for us. We have
beneﬁted very strongly by Intel’s ramming through things like PCIs, tak-
ing over the motherboard chip and the L2 caches. Because every time
they’ve done something like that, our life has gotten better, our systems
have gotten more stable, more standardized. And they’re moving into the
3D market with their Auburn part and I think that’s going to be great. I
think they’re going to do a solid job. And if Intel murders S3, I don’t think
I’m going to shed too many tears. If we get a better part from a reliable
supplier that’s going to be on the motherboard of everything, wonderful!
Hook: And contrast that with Microsoft. You have two companies in
similar positions: One in software and one in hardware. Intel is doing
the right thing. PCI was better than VLB. Them owning the chipsets is a
smart thing. They’re doing CPUs that no one even thought technically
possible with an x86 architecture. Contrast that with Microsoft, which
has just made a habit of screwing things up. Making good business de-
cisions, but screwing things up technically. If Microsoft was like Intel, it
would have adopted OpenGL.
Alex St. John: I heard a rumor that id had a deal with Rendition requiring
you to support their API only and that you couldn’t ship anything else,
except OpenGL.
John Carmack: Oh, OK, yeah. Originally we didn’t have anything in place
when we did VQuake. And in the end, my God, that took far more ef-
fort than we expected because of the performance required. The perfor-
mance was really only good in some situations, and not the situations
that it turned out we had to use, which included Z-buffering.
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
40
Interviews
Alex St. John: So what Verite chip problems are you responsible for...?
John Carmack: We were originally saying, ”Z-buffering is important but
you shouldn’t have to run all these other APIs and everything, so Quake
is not going to do Z-buffering.” I said that and they probably still have
the e-mail. And then halfway through Quake I said, ”Well I changed my
mind. We are using Z-buffering, even in software, because it turns out
that it’s the most effective thing for us to do.”
And they’re like ”Oh great. We have Z-buffering, but it runs at half the
speed of our non-Z-buffered algorithm.” We did ﬁnally get VQuake run-
ning on their 3D stuff, because all through Quake we were concentrating
on, ”OK, how are we going to hook out hardware for this?” But when we
implemented it that way, the performance was just wretched, totally not
acceptable, even at low resolution.
We did ﬁnally get good performance out of VQuake. And I still ﬁnd that
a technical accomplishment. We took an architecture that had certain
strengths and we leveraged it as well as was possible.
Alex St. John: Did you sign a contract restricting what kinds of technol-
ogy you could do ports for?
John Carmack: We got some bundled deals, some things. Rendition of-
fered us... I don’t even know exactly what the speciﬁcs were, but I think
there was like some stock involved or something, if we would sign an ex-
clusive hardware agreement for a certain time frame. And we were look-
ing at that saying ”Well, we’re not going to do anything else in that time
frame, so we might as well.”
Alex St. John: So that agreement stated that you can only ship 3D-hardware-
accelerated software for a Rendition chip?
John Carmack: It was like no chip-speciﬁc ports or anything inside the
space of three months or something. The only thing on the radar at that
time was a Glide port. And I was like, ”Well, maybe we could be talked
into doing this because it is really cool.” There’s all this disinformation
saying I did GLQuake for 3Dfx. In fact, I did it because I have an Inter-
graph workstation in my ofﬁce that runs OpenGL and I wanted my game
on my workstation. And 3Dfx was like, ”You know, we could just write an
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
41
Interviews
OpenGL subset that catches all that and it will run on our hardware.”
Alex St. John: So the only way 3Dfx could get Quake running on their
hardware was to write an OpenGL driver, because you could only ship an
OpenGL version?
John Carmack: I forget exactly what the timing was on all this. We talked
about letting them do a Glide port because they had a lot of the work
done and we ﬁgured we’d give them the codebase and probably wouldn’t
even have to be involved in it much. But there were issues with the Verite
port– if I could go back in time, I wouldn’t have done it. It was too much
work, too much distraction for Michael Abrash. And we were afraid of
that happening again with another proprietary port. But the OpenGL
stuff seemed to be the right thing.
And when I did the OpenGL version, I realized that even with all this
sweat and labor, the Verite version was just awful–the OpenGL version
was a pleasure to do.
I tried just a couple of features, like transparency or shadows and reﬂec-
tions. And they just dropped in–it was so wonderful. And that was what
really got me crusading for OpenGL. It was like, ”This helps me. This is
not me laboring to produce something to deliver to the consumer. This
is something that’s letting me be more creative and try out more things to
produce a better architecture than we would have had otherwise.” And at
that point I went and tried D3D and found out that it wasn’t helping me
do creative things. But I really learned something: A good API can help
you produce better products.
Alex St. John: How do you handle third-party developers when you li-
cense your engines?
John Carmack: It’s, ”Here’s a CD. Thank you for the half-million dollars.
Have a nice life.”
Alex St. John: Any truth to the rumor that Mindscape’s upset about their
licensing deal with you guys right now?
John Carmack: Mindscape had the very ﬁrst Quake license and they
signed a really nice contract where they got the codes, development, ev-
erything for cheap. They never got a team together and now they’re try-
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
42
Interviews
ing to say, ”Well, we don’t want to pay you this last $200,000 because we
didn’t do a game.” And we’re like, ”Tough luck. You signed a contract.
That’s your fault.”
Alex St. John: How important is software rendering to games these days?
John Carmack: I don’t think software rendering has a future, especially
once the hardware people get their shit together and are actually helping
us instead of being this anchor that you get paid to support, like it is right
now.
Trinity will not have a software renderer. Guaranteed. Well, theoretically
you could have a software renderer, if you hook that up as an OpenGL
bag. And who knows, maybe processors with unique architectural fea-
tures will make it possible to do hardware-like rasterizing on a software
level, but I doubt we’ll have a pixel-level interface.
Now that means giving up a ton of stuff, but it’s an architectural transi-
tion point and we have to lose some things to make the right steps in the
future.
Hook: Adding power suits into Quake 2 took an hour and a half to get
something we all agreed looked really good in hardware. Then to do the
software version took four or ﬁve hours, even after the research was done
on the OpenGL version. And the same with these translucent beams we
do. OpenGL was ”Boom, done!” Software, I had to go through and write
new primitives. That took over a day.
Alex St. John: Bottom line, what should the next-generation 3D hard-
ware accelerator be?
John Carmack: It should be a 3Dfx with integrated 2D and video-IN.
That’s the concise deﬁnition of what future hardware should be. And
there’s a couple coming out now that ﬁt that bill. The NVidia RIVA 128,
the Rendition V2200 and, to a lesser degree, the PerMedia P2. They’re all
single-chip cards that basically use the same memory and provide most
of the features. In the case of the Rendition, they provide everything.
They provide a wider feature base than 3Dfx without some of the limita-
tions on texture aspects and format sizes. And they also provide accept-
able 2D video.
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
43
Interviews
With all these pluses and minuses, I thought for sure there would be the
clear winner by now. I remember thinking in January that in a couple
of months the three survivors would be Voodoo Rush, the Verite V2200,
and the PerMedia. It turned out that the PerMedia 1 had really bad visual
ﬁdelity. V2200 still hasn’t shipped, delayed forever. And Voodoo Rush has
limits, and they wound-up crippling some of the 3Dfx performance for
architectural reasons. So they took a step forward and a step back.
Alex St. John: Is id going to have to start patenting its technologies to
protect you from other people patenting things they use in their games?
John Carmack: Well, we get to the idealistic thing. The only time I’ve ever
had to actually put my foot down at id was over a patent.
Alex St. John: You asserted your authority?!?
John Carmack: Yeah. The only time I have ever had to do that over other
people’s wishes was over software patents. Things were coming up about
patenting things for protection, licensing, whatever, just for the reasons
that lawyers give you. They were coming up and I said ”No!” a bunch of
times, and then they were being talked about when I wasn’t there. And I
delivered an ultimatum that said if id Software patents anything, they’re
going to be doing it without me because I will leave. And the fallout from
that was not pretty. Everybody was pissed off at me, and I don’t want to
do that again. But that was something I felt strongly enough about that
I, quite literally, would have left the company. I would’ve gone off and
programmed on my mountaintop someplace.
Alex St. John: What if somebody patents the technology you want to use
in Trinity ?
John Carmack: I really don’t want to think about it. I’m sure eventu-
ally we’ll get a demand letter from someone. I’ll throw a lot of money at
lawyers and say ”Make this person go away,” and we’ll see how it goes.
It’s something that’s really depressing because it’s so horribly wrong for
someone who’s a creative engineering type to think about patenting a
way of thinking. Even if you had something really, really clever, the idea
that you’re not going to allow someone else to follow that line of thought...
All of science and technology is built standing on the shoulders of the
people that come before you. Did Newton patent calculus and screw the
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
44
Interviews
hell out of the other guy working on it? It’s just so wrong, but it’s what
the business world does to things, and certainly the world is controlled
by business interests. And technical idealists are a minority, but it doesn’t
mean that I have to drag myself to do things that I don’t consider right.
Hook: It’ll just be unfortunate when John comes up and says ”Man, I
came up with this really cool idea to do something, but some guy patented
something that sounds sort of like this in a real general way, and we may
not be able to use it.” And what could’ve been the basis for a whole new
completely cool architecture, and a new revolution in gaming is off lim-
its.
John Carmack: Well, the argument is that we could always license it from
them. That’s what patents are supposed to protect.
Alex St. John: I know that’s the specter raised by the whole Messiah con-
troversy.
Hook: Dave Perry’s comments would make sense if he were talking about
copyrights. It’s apparent that whoever’s been educating him about this
has not been doing a good job because the things he’s talking about a
patent protecting are not what a patent protects. He says, ”We don’t want
people stealing our code.” Well, copyrights protect you from that. It’s im-
portant for the people at Shiny, or whoever else is doing software patents,
to understand the difference between a software patent and the copy-
right because copyrights protect you in all the important ways that you
really need to be protected.
We’ve even had people say ”id shouldn’t sue people for pirating your soft-
ware because you’re against software patents.” That’s a completely sepa-
rate topic.
Alex St. John: If you could just hire anybody from the 3D world, who
would you hire?
John Carmack: Well there’s a big difference between who I consider the
most talented and who I would necessarily hire, because you have to hire
people that ﬁt right. If I had to pick who I think is just the most talented,
it would probably be Ken Silverman, the guy that did the BUILD engine.
He does engines and tools. He’s great as an editor. He writes all the code
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
45
Interviews
for everything, and he’s just extremely talented. I think it was 3D Realms’
worst decisions not to coddle him, or whatever it took, to keep him on
board. I think if he was still working directly for 3D Realms, they would
have a Quake-type game shipped by now, just because he’s extraordinar-
ily good. There’s maybe a half dozen people that are top-notch A-level 3D
programmers. I’m not going to give you a list because I’d leave somebody
off and they’d be all pissed off at me.
Alex St. John: You’ve already left off 90% of them by naming Ken Silver-
man.
John Carmack: All the people doing things that people are talking about
now are pretty talented. The Epic people have been working on it for a
long time. They’ve gone through a big learning process, but they’ve got
the issues under control and they’re going to ship a product.
Alex St. John: So you think one day Tim Sweeney might grow to be as
successful as you.
John Carmack: It’s hard to become successful by following in footsteps.
This is probably going to come out sounding demeaning, but Epic wants
Unreal to be Quake. Everything they did with Unreal, they did because
they wanted it to be like what Quake turned out to be. And they’re going
to achieve a lot of that, because they’re doing a lot of things well, but
you’re just never as big when you’re second in line.
Hook: Just like Dark Forces and Duke were both phenomenal games,
they still deﬁnitely didn’t have the impact of Doom simply because they
just weren’t ﬁrst out the gate.
John Carmack: Like Prey, there’s a lesson to be learned, something a lot
of companies don’t really ever learn. You hear it from the fan base a lot.
”Do it right. We’ll still be here. We’ll wait,” and it’s tempting to just let
things slip. But that’s really not OK. If you’re doing something cutting
edge, you’re making fundamental decisions about your architecture, and
if you let it slide for a year or two, then it’s just not the right decision any-
more. Even if you pile on all these extras, it’s not optimal. It’s not targeted
at what you’re doing. So I have some concerns about Prey coming out
this late.
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
46
Interviews
Hook: That’s the other thing that differentiates the really good people
and is sort of a pet peeve of mine. I have a problem with some of Dave
Perry’s attitudes, but he has shipped games, so he is someone to be taken
seriously. It bothers me when someone solicits magazine covers 12 months
before their game is going to ship. It’s like, ”Spend more time work-
ing on your game instead of hyping it.” The ability to ship a game, you
can’t stress that enough. You know that Albert Einstein quote ”Imagina-
tion is more important than knowledge.” I don’t believe that anymore. I
think the ability to ship a product is far more important because some-
one who’s not very creative can have little bouts of creativity, but some-
one who’s not very productive doesn’t have a bout of productivity and
ship a product. You just have to grind it out.
The problem is that it’s a slippery slope. Everybody likes to make fun of
Battle Cruiser 3000 AD–which I’ve never even seen–but it was like seven
years late because they didn’t know when to just say ”Ship the damn
thing!” No matter how creative you are, no matter how good you are, if
your product takes three, four, ﬁve years to develop, you’re not going to
make back the money you spent on development.
These days, I’m a lot more jaded. You’ll see Next Generation or boot com-
ing out with a preview of a game that’s 25% complete but it’s got the most
incredible screen shots. You look at it, and you look at the developer, and
you’re like ”What have they done? Nothing.” You can look at a laundry
list of games that people talked about and never shipped, or by the time
they came out, were absolutely irrelevant.
John Carmack: We’ve got a pretty consistent track record here. We go
50% over budget on schedules. With Quake we said ”We’re going to do it
in 12 months,” it took 18. It’s pretty much the same thing back for Doom
and Wolf. Michael Abrash and I once had a discussion kind of justifying
ourselves. We said, ”Well, if we shipped on time, we probably weren’t
ambitious enough.”
Hook: Games that were started in 1992 and took a really long time have
shipped in the past six months and they still use ﬁxed-point math. And
ﬁx-point math died with the 486. They said ”Hey, why don’t we use ﬂoat-
ing point?” Then later, it’s, ”No, we don’t have time to go back and rewrite
it.” You choose your target platform and you architect your entire game
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

John Carmack Archive
47
Interviews
around this concept, then the minute you slip you’re going to be dated
technology and you’re not going to be appropriate for the vast majority
of systems people are running.
John Carmack: That was one thing that Quake did really good on. We
still hear people that use Cyrix and AMD processors saying, ”You’re just
lazy for not doing ﬁxed-point math.” We saved time doing ﬂoating point.
And on Intel processors it was actually the faster thing to do.
CHAPTER 3. JOHN CARMACK - THE BOOT INTERVIEW (OUTTAKES)

Chapter 4
John Carmack (of id Software)
interview
This interview was conducted by Electric Play for Electric Play on Dec 06,
1997.
http://web.archive.org/web/19981201075539/http://www.elecplay.com/
feature/quake/carmack.shtml
Interview
Electric Play: Does this stuff make you kind of uncomfortable, all of this
attention.
John Carmack: Well, I usually try to avoid press whenever possible be-
cause all of my time is really spent on my work and I would much rather
be working on something new than talking about something I did in the
past. I try to only manage to do a couple of these a year and hide from
most of the rest of them.
Electric Play: You must realize that everybody is interested in where you
came from and why you got into games.
John Carmack: I know it’s a pretty good story, but once again it’s not
48

John Carmack Archive
49
Interviews
getting into it for the fame and talking about it wasn’t in my plans.
Electric Play: Having said that, how did you get started in the games in-
dustry.
John Carmack: I’ve always thought of myself as a games programmer
with the programmer emphasized. Working with computers has been
something that has fascinated me since I ﬁrst worked on a computer
with, like an Apple II in sixth grade. From that point on, I knew that I
was going to be a computer programmer, it was just a forgone conclu-
sion, and it was only a matter of the years going by until it came to be
time that I could do that as my full-time profession. I knew for a decade
before I could actually go out and do it as my job.
Electric Play: Was it games speciﬁcally that interested you?
John Carmack: Just about anything I could ﬁnd interesting. I enjoy writ-
ing compilers or interpreters or network sub-systems. There are interest-
ing aspects to all of these, but games have turned out to be a nice place
where a synthesis of these interesting things can be done and it can be a
lucrative rewarding profession. So instead of being pigeon-holed in one
area, I get to work on just all sorts of different technologies and it has
been just about the best possible thing for me.
Early on there was a little bit of concern that I might get bored with the
games and go off and work on something else, OS research or something,
but as the years have gone by I’ve found that I’ve been able to do probably
more stuff in this ﬁeld than I would have in any other ﬁeld of computer
science. I’m quite happy with it.
Electric Play: Are you a game player yourself?
John Carmack: Yeah, I’ve played quite a bit. It comes and goes depend-
ing on different phases of the development process. At the peak I guess I
would play Quake at maybe half an hour or an hour a day, but right now
it’s kind of low because we are heading in towards crunch time on Quake
2. I haven’t played in a little while.
Electric Play: When did it hit you that you’d created something that was
going to bring you a lot of attention?
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
50
Interviews
John Carmack: Well, with the early projects we were just so excited to
do anything at all. Our early side-scrolling games, we’d ﬁnd something
neat that we’d be able to do. We’d be able to emulate some of the games
that we enjoyed and liked and try them for the ﬁrst time on the PC. That
was when it was all just exciting for us to be doing it at all We were just
pleased that we were able to be getting anything out there.
As we moved into the 3D games with Wolfenstien 3D it became obvious
that we were kind of on the verge of... well, we basically invented a whole
new genre of games; the ﬁrst person action shooter. That was pretty ob-
vious from the ﬁrst project, and as we moved into Doom it did become
clear that we had carved out a niche pretty much permanently for our-
selves. We’ve been pursuing that and ﬂushing it out and seeing where it
takes us as we ride the different technologies that are going on.
Electric Play: You guys have been at the forefront of that stuff and also
the distribution model that has blown the industry away with the share-
ware versions.
John Carmack: Well, I would have to say.. I know that Apogee always
comes out and they are correct in saying that wasn’t our model, that
was Apogee’s model. We were just kind of the most famous for proba-
bly the way Doom was distributed originally, but that was Scott Miller’s
idea and our early products were distributed by Apogee. It was basically
their method. It was a really smart business model and it did really well
for boot-strapping some small companies and development teams.
Electric Play: Is developing the 3D games pretty much the same now as
it was back then?
John Carmack: It has gotten a lot rougher. If you look at the way our
games have gone, early on, our ﬁrst couple of games only took three
months of time to develop, then maybe four months. Wolfenstein took
six months. Doom took nine. Doom II took 12 and Quake took 18. Quake
II is only going to take 12 months because a lot of things are functioning
better at the company.
There is a deﬁnite fear that the next generational step that we take... if
it is a two year development process, that is starting to bring up a lot
of complicated issues. How do you forecast two years ahead and what
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
51
Interviews
technology curves that you are going to be riding? It has gotten a lot more
difﬁcult.
The market has changed quite a bit too. It’s not even clear that a game
like Tetris or something could be successful in today’s market. So there
are much larger barriers to entry.
Electric Play: Are you worried that there is a little bit of over-saturation
with ﬁrst person shooters out there?
John Carmack: It does concern me a little bit, not so much for our posi-
tion because I do believe we will lead the crowd pretty consistently, but
with all of the people working with the technology, I mean we are fairly
widely licensing our technology and there are several good companies
that are going to do good products with it, but there is a limit to how
much the market can sustain out of that.
Electric Play: What are some of the other companies and other games
that are using the Quake engine?
John Carmack: Well there are about a half-dozen games that are under
development directly with the Quake technology. There are a couple at
ION Storm, there is the one at Ritual, SIN. 3D Realms is doing one. Valve
is doing one. There are a couple of other licensees out there, and there
are options for more, and there will probably be more later on. So there
is a lot of action going on, though while it sounds like a lot it is still the
sensible thing for those companies to be doing.
Developing the technology, if they pay a whole lot of money to us for that,
they could have looked at it and said ’maybe we could hire a few guys and
re-develop it for ourselves for less and even get some additional features’.
But time is so crucial on game development. If you say ’well we are going
to do it in nine months’ which is half of what we did it in. If you’ve got a
model to work from and you are just re-engineering, it might not be out
of the question to do that. But still, nine months is just a huge amount
of time. For most companies it is easier to throw off a half million dollars
or something rather than spending nine months of time. It is usually the
smart business move.
Electric Play: What do you say to guys like Dave Perry of Shiny Entertain-
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
52
Interviews
ment who are saying that a game company developing its own technol-
ogy is absolutely crucial to good game development.
John Carmack: I think that the people who create their own technology
and produce the games will always be at the head of the pack and you
are deﬁnitely better off there. But the bottom line is that there are only
a handful of companies that are capable of doing it, even given all of the
right conditions. It gets narrowed down by the fact that the conditions
are not always there.
I think that he is absolutely correct in the sense that if you have the re-
sources, all of the resources necessary to do it, you are deﬁnitely better
off. An engine that is custom designed speciﬁcally for your game will cer-
tainly be better adapted to it, but there are so many different resources
that are required for it. There is the time, at least a year, for development
of the technology. There is the integration of all of that. There are only
a handful of programmers in the world that can compete at the top level
of this now. Companies that don’t have those programmers try to grow
them from people that they’ve got. It’s all possible but it keeps adding
these levels of risk to it. The companies that are able to produce the tech-
nologies speciﬁcally for their own games, if the technology is state of the
art they will lead the pack.
I think that is clearly his mission and I think that Shiny is taking pretty
much the right steps to play in that ballpark, so I think he is correct.
Electric Play: I’m curious to ﬁnd out what your views are on the way that
the Dallas development pool sprang. How did you end up in Dallas?
John Carmack: Well, originally we pretty much came down here around
Apogee, but there is kind of a funny story there, in that when id was ﬁrst
founded we were in Louisiana and Apogee was distributing our work.
We moved the company in a fairly misguided moment to Madison, Wis-
consin. It was a horrible mistake and we ﬂed south and just knew we were
going someplace where it was warm. The obvious place we were consid-
ering was down here by our distributor. There were a few other factors
that got tossed in so we just moved down here. It has worked out pretty
well. And then all of these other companies kind of sprang up, people
falling off or breaking away from Apogee or id into the half dozen other
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
53
Interviews
companies that are here. There are a couple of other unrelated compa-
nies in the Dallas area. It is a surprisingly active game development scene
here. No one would have guessed it in the middle of Texas a few years ago.
Electric Play: Do you think that it is growing?
John Carmack: It certainly is growing a lot right now. I’m not clear that
it can be sustained over the longer term, but for the next year or two we
will see quite a bit going on.
Electric Play: Now John Romero, who is one of the founders of ION Storm,
was a key member of id. What was that like when he decided to say ’I’m
leaving guys’ and started his own company.
John Carmack: That is not really the way things happened. Romero is an
extremely talented person and he was crucial to the early success of id.
Very much his mark is on Doom, Doom 1, a lot of it has his spirit in it.
He was a key player in all of our projects up to that point, but there were
some serious problems afterwards.
We are a very focused company where we require everyone to work an
awful lot. I mean we don’t believe in letting people direct other people
to do the real hard work and allow themselves to work in a less focused
fashion.
The bottom line came to be that Romero had reached his level of success
and he wasn’t pushing as hard as everyone else was and.. he’d... we pretty
much.. well, we ﬁred him. We parted on reasonably good terms. We are
technology licensing with him. We still talk every now and then, but he
just wasn’t working out as a part of id. His new company seems to be
what he wants it to be, where he has got a large number of people that he
can direct and he can give his ideas to for implementation. We’ll see if it
works out well with him.
Electric Play: Switching tracks a bit, what is new with Quake II? How is it
going to be different from the original Quake?
John Carmack: Well it is still an evolutionary product where it is not a
brand new technology generation, but it is the largest evolutionary step
we’ve taken.
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
54
Interviews
In our previous products we’ve always done kind of a follow-on that was
basically identical technology but with new content as an opportunity
for the designers to kind of stretch themselves with known constraints.
The ﬁrst product with a bleeding edge technology is a really hard thing
for the designers to work on, it’s very frustrating because with all of the
work that they put into it, the technology will change and the rug will get
pulled out from underneath their feet and they will have to throw away
stuff. Things that they were planning on don’t make it in.
It’s just tough in the bleeding edge products. Usually in the follow-on is
where they get known circumstances and can stretch their design skills
and do things that are better for games. With Quake especially we were
hit hard with all of those factors. We were having problems with Romero
and some of our other employees and the whole company wasn’t really
working very well through Quake’s development. It had many serious
design problems but we just had to push it out the door. We knew that
it wasn’t really hitting the potential that it should have even for a ﬁrst
generation product. So we had plenty of room to improve Quake II.
At this time we have the best crew that we’ve ever had at id. Every single
person is really essential to the company right now. We are all working
very hard. Quake II is going to be our best game in any way that you want
to look at it. It has the best design. It has ﬂexible integrated technology.
There is a sense of purpose and elegance to the entire design and it has
come together very cleanly.
There is not like.. ’gee wiz’ incredibly unbelievable features, but there is a
solid evolution. Everything that was good in Quake we’ve made better. All
of the things that were lacking in Quake are now present. We have a good
design. We have ﬂow through the levels. We have intelligent presenta-
tion of new features and monsters. We do have new rendering features, a
lot of things that people look for like colored lighting, translucency, and
other effects like that. Different ways for model interpolation. There are
a lot of nice features to make people say ’Wow this is a souped up engine’,
but it is still fundamentally the same generation.
I know what the next generation is going to look like and this isn’t it. This
will be the state of the art for the next year as other things are built on top
of it. The main thing that we are looking at with Quake II is that it is going
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
55
Interviews
to be a better game because we fell below our own par on Quake and we
don’t intend to repeat that again.
Electric Play: Is multiplayer gaming it? Is it something that you guys
consider necessary?
John Carmack: Multiplayer gaming is the most exciting part of the gam-
ing industry. If you are being rational, it’s still not enough to support the
games industry. If you are paying attention on the net you can get a self-
centered of reality thinking that there are ﬁfty-thousand people that are
stark raving lunatics about it and that’s all that matters, but you forget
that there are a million people that are just buying the game for the sin-
gle player stuff. But the multiplayer is far and away the most exciting and
that is where a lot of the interesting things are happening with the online
community.
There have been a lot of things that have been designed into Quake II
from a technology standpoint to allow some really interesting things to
happen. Like we have effectively no limit on the number of players that
can be in a large multiplayer world. I fully expect to see at some conven-
tion, like at QuakeCon ’98 we’ll see 150 people in one giantic specially
constructed map. There are some really exciting things happening.
Electric Play: Is that what excites you the most?
John Carmack: There are so many things that excite me about what I
work on here. The multiplayer aspect has a lot of challenging problems
on dealing with the communications of that many seperate clients. Deal-
ing with the bandwidth and latency issues.
The other thing that I’m really excited about is the next generation graph-
ics technology, I have a fairly clear vision of several steps that we are tak-
ing there and that is going to be a lot of fun.
Electric Play: In the graphics side, there are artists and lead artists that
oversee...
John Carmack: We don’t really have an arrangement like that. We have
three artists and they all kind of overlap. Paul Steed is strictly a modeller,
Adrian is strictly a texturer and Kevin kind of covers those and can work
on either side, but there is not a type of lead artist.
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
56
Interviews
We don’t have enough staff to require a level of management like that
which I think is kind of an inherent inefﬁciency if you do require it, be-
cause then you have someone who is busy managing instead of doing.
That is actually a signiﬁcant issue about id, where we don’t believe in get-
ting to a level where you need managers. I mean we have 11 people work-
ing on a project right now and it’s unlikely going to grow signiﬁcantly over
this. We think that is the right number of people to do a project like this
and having 50 people doesn’t help, in fact it hurts.
Electric Play: How do you make your direction decisions? Do you get
together and have democratic meetings?
John Carmack: Well, it is a helluva lot better now with less people. At
one point id had six people that were partial owners in one way or an-
other, now it is down to three and life runs so much more smoothly. I
don’t believe in commitee and democratic votes. Whenever possible a
dictatorship is the most efﬁcient form of government.
Electric Play: Are you hands on with everything, all of the programming
and the coding that goes on in Quake II.
John Carmack: Almost all of my time is spent actually coding stuff for
the game. Quake II is the ﬁrst time that I haven’t needed to be involved
in the rest of the project which has been really nice for me.
Kevin Cloud has taken over as project manager to make sure that the
levels and art and monsters and all of those things are done and coor-
dinated. Previously I always had to make an effort to make sure that it
got done, but it has worked out nicely without that. So my duties now
are strictly to make sure that the code works right and to keep anything
really obnoxious from slipping through. I mean I’m kind of a ﬁnal ﬁlter
of things because if I don’t think something is good enough that I’m not
going to program it in and it’s not going to be in there.
I’ve had to do nothing outside of coding on Quake II which has been a
real change for me. But certainly all of the code, every ﬁle is practically
created by me. I share a lot of work now with Brian Hook and John Cash
which has been really nice. We have it pretty segmented out.
John Cash has been doing a lot of game programming with making the
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
57
Interviews
monsters perform their actions and artiﬁcial intelligence. He is doing an
excellent job segmented off there.
Brian Hook has been brought on to help me with supporting the different
graphics, the different 3D accelerators, different graphics architectures. I
start everything and then I parcel some of it out to the other people and
that has worked out really efﬁciently for us.
Electric Play: And that is why Quake II is going to be so much more
cleaner?
John Carmack: Well all of the projects have been done like that. This
probably has more code written by other people just because we have a
better way to split it out. On Quake there was really only two of us that
wrote code, me and Michael Abrash. Michael was doing mostly assembly
optimizations on things. So we have more people writing a somewhat
larger bulk of code now, but we have made changes to our structure to
allow us to work a little bit more independantly.
Electric Play: You mentioned that Quake II is not the next generation
and that you know what that will look like. What is the next level?
John Carmack: Well the fundamental challenge of the next generation
of games is going to be dynamic generation of ﬂexible geometry so that
you can have levels of detail issues... where Quake’s geometry is ﬁxed and
immutable. So if you can see a huge canyon, every polygon that you can
see there is going to be drawn as a little spec and as you get closer to it, it
becomes a great big polygon.
For certain types of things that is the way to do it, like for a desk because
that geometry is inherently ﬂat, but if you want to model something nat-
ural like trees, rivers, hills, and mountains. With things like that you want
dynamic geometry where as you get further away it simpliﬁes itself down.
That can be applied to all levels of things, where everything should be
able to fall down at some point to a simpliﬁed representation so that you
can render anything. There are levels of steps that are going to be taken
to approach this. I’ve got a pretty good idea where we are going with
our next generation of technology and dynamic geometry is the most key
element. I think everybody recognizes that is the future, but the issues of
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
58
Interviews
how you are actually going to bring that into the future is really crucial.
Some of the other important things are atmospheric effects, like real fog
that illuminates in light tones and rolls around the feet, not just this haze
that you use as an excuse for a rear clipping plane the way people do it
now. There will be a lot of specular lighting which is a second pass, which
people aren’t doing now but as accellerators get faster and we can afford
to do an extra pass.
There will be a lot of stuff that you will see immediatly with the next gen-
eration. You will see the atmosphere affect the light and as you move you
will see changing specular highlights. You will have scenes that you just
can’t do with current generation technology, which is what technology is
supposed to do, to allow you to do things you haven’t done before.
Now if you want to be able to stand on top of a castle and see the whole
world spread out before you which you just can’t do with any kind of cur-
rent technology but it is going to be possible with the next generation so
that will change the types of games that we have available for us to do.
The way we work our games here is that, instead of making desgin doc-
uments and saying this is the kind of game we want to make and then
trying to do the technology... instead we try to ﬁgure out the most im-
pressive technology that will have the biggest impact on the players and
then mold a game around that. That has affected a lot of our choices
because the technologies that we’ve been developing that I consider as
the most impressive aren’t able to do grand outdoor areas. That is why
we aren’t doing ﬂying or driving games or something like that. But the
densly enclosed areas with detailed textures and complex lighting that
you can do can have a very evocative feel on the players and we can get
a lot of pulse pounding action out of it. In the next generation we won’t
leave that behind, but we will have these new areas that we can design a
game that brings more elements into it than we had before.
CHAPTER 4. JOHN CARMACK (OF ID SOFTWARE) INTERVIEW

Chapter 5
Interview with John Carmack
This interview was conducted by Benjamin E. Sones for Computer Games
Online on Jun 30, 1999.
http://web.archive.org/web/20030515172424/http://www.cdmag.com/articles/
021/004/jc_interview.html
Interview
Prologue
Other staff members have come and gone since the unofﬁcial genesis of
id Software in September of 1990. From the original four founders (John
Carmack, Adrian Carmack, John Romero, and Tom Hall) who came to-
gether to create both id and the Commander Keen series, the company
has grown only slightly in size -14 members currently ﬁll the roles of the
id staff. Their technological prowess and inﬂuence within the computer
game industry have grown immeasurably, however, and now the power-
house developer is working full steam to deliver their next ﬁrst-person
shooter. We cornered founder and lead programmer John Carmack in
the halls of id’s Mesquite, Texas ofﬁces to gather his thoughts on Quake
59

John Carmack Archive
60
Interviews
III Arena.
Questions
Benjamin E. Sones: What are you most excited about in regards to Quake
III Arena?
John Carmack: Well, one of the things is that because of the way the de-
velopment schedule has gone this time, I’ve had a lot more time to make
a lot of the technology really ”well done” and robust. It’s turned out that
the game engine is not the leading factor in this project. Right now the
leading factor is getting the bots and the single-player experience going.
So that’s really given me more room than I usually have to go in and make
sure that everything not only works, but actually is pretty much doing the
right thing and it’s giving us a more ﬂexible infrastructure to go for, which
means that other companies that wind up working with the technology,
and all the user community stuff is going to work out, and yet again be
more ﬂexible than anything that’s been done before. I know that’s not
going to have any immediate impact, but as we look towards six months
after release, or twelve months after release, that’s where those things are
really going to shine through.
Benjamin E. Sones: Will this game cater to the mod community to the
same extent as your past projects have?
John Carmack: Ever since Wolfenstein that’s been one of my primary
design goals-to go ahead and make something that’s going to be ﬂexible
and easy to add on and play with in different ways, because one of the
things is, all game designs are elements of compromise. We have to go
ahead and make certain rules that we think are going to be right for what
we’re doing but it really is something I like a whole lot, the fact that it
is fairly straightforward for people to go in and change the game to suit
themselves. I think that’s a good thing. In some ways there’s deﬁnitely a
lot more ﬂexibility than we’ve had before. Whether or not it will be easier
or more difﬁcult to take advantage of, I’m not sure yet. There is more that
people have to think about in a few ways, because we have modiﬁcations
being done on the client side as well as the server side. But it’s deﬁnitely
CHAPTER 5. INTERVIEW WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
61
Interviews
way more powerful, and it doesn’t require a commercial compiler to go
ahead and do the work with.
When we did Quake II there was kind of this dividing point where go-
ing to .DLLs lets you do much more advanced things, and it brought out
things that you never would have been able to do in Quake with QC, but it
did mean that you pretty much had to be pretty much a professional pro-
grammer with professional development tools and everything to work
with it. Now we can use a freely available compiler for [Quake III Arena]
that will be available to anyone and allow anyone to work with that. All in
all, Quake II mods deﬁnitely did come out, and it was almost certainly for
the best-we got more sophisticated mods with more development work.
There was less of ”here’s my mods that will make more gibs” that we got
with Quake, where everyone can just go in and do their ten line modiﬁ-
cation. That was cool because it did get a lot of people more interested in
programming but it just wasn’t a professional enough development en-
vironment to do some really major modiﬁcations. People did go ahead
and bump right up against the limits of what you could do with Quake
II, and those are the people who are going to be thrilled with what you
get with Quake III. You actually can go ahead and build an entirely new
user interface and complete client-side presentation. We’ve got an ex-
tremely elegant, orthogonal graphics engine that people can work with,
our shading language is really great.
Really, Quake III-our game-isn’t going to exploit most of the things we’ve
got in terms of graphics. We’ve made a pretty speciﬁc design decision to
focus on the fast action stuff. Speed is one of the most important factors
in what we’re doing right now. I do expect that other companies working
with the technology-and even with mods-there’s going to be people that
do some really, really, neat things. As we [are developing] the technology,
right now our artists are just getting into the swing of building procedural
shader stuff and everything like that, but we can’t go back and rework ev-
erything. Honestly, that’s something that I’m a little bit disappointed with
we have a bunch of technology in [the engine] that we aren’t exploiting
properly yet. We’ve got things like specular maps and detail maps, and
these things just aren’t in any of the levels. A lot of that does come back
to the speed thing-people will put one of these things in at some place,
and then they go over their polygon budget and they have to pull it back
CHAPTER 5. INTERVIEW WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
62
Interviews
out.
All the mainstays of id Software products we do have-the best graphics
stuff, the best networking, and I think it’s going to have the best game-
play. It comes down to some design decisions, and I am happy with
the ones we’ve made. We have been focusing on a general, broad ap-
peal. There are a lot of more sophisticated games that you can make that
will appeal very strongly to the people that are more serious about some
things, and I think that games like Team Fortress 2 will fall into this [cate-
gory]. The people that will be into that kind of gameplay will love it-they
will love it more than they will love Quake III, but there’s a larger base of
people who just want to sit down and have some idle entertainment. I
still immensely pleased that our secretary is addicted to Quake III Arena]
now. She’s been here since Doom, but this is the ﬁrst game that she has
started playing every day, and I think that’s a real winning thing. We have
also catered to the other side, the real hardcore tournament player that
we are making a lot of design decisions around. Like the fact that you
can conﬁgure Quake III to run as fast as Quake II if you’re willing to have
it look like crap. [Laughs]. That’s just a level of ﬂexibility that will be up
to the user to decide.
Benjamin E. Sones: More than one id employee has made the compari-
son between Quake III Arena and ﬁghting games such as Mortal Kombat
is that a valid assessment of Quake III’s gameplay?
John Carmack: Not really, because we’re not focused on one-on-one or
head-to-head. Tournament play will be like that, but most of the maps-
900f them-are designed for 4 or more players. Being in there with at least
small teams or a larger number of people in a free-for-all that is more the
ﬂavor of the game. We do scale kind of both ways, to one-on-one and
also to the much larger games, but we’ve kind of looked at our sweet spot
being in the 4 to 8 player range. That’s the type of pick-up deathmatch
games that I most enjoy playing, where you’ve got a reasonable number
of people running around. It’s a different game than the ”cat and mouse”
of head-to-head. Those are just pure judgement calls, there are other
valid game styles to be had. In general the game is not about the one-on-
one [gameplay] like ﬁghting games are.
Benjamin E. Sones: But not as much about story, either?
CHAPTER 5. INTERVIEW WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
63
Interviews
John Carmack: No, not at all. We’re still all about the experience of the
combat in that way, yes, it is very much like the ﬁghting games where
there is some back story, but who the hell cares? The game has to be
fun as you’re doing your actions, as you’re sitting there doing your ”bob
and weave,” ”duck and attack” that’s what has to be fun-not the fact that
you are progressing through a story to some end goal. That’s something
that I’m making no excuses about, no slipping around saying ”Oh, there
is a story” and all that. Yes, there is a little back-story, but that’s not the
point. The point is that the game is fun to play. There’s value to be had in
story-driven games-it’s another valid style. It’s not like we’re saying ”this
is the only way to do games;” but one thing we absolutely are coming
out and saying is that this is a valid way of doing games, and we are not
apologizing for the lack of story.
Benjamin E. Sones: Some people have said that is one of id’s strengths
is Quake III Arena an attempt to strip away the non-essentials and focus
on what you are best at?
John Carmack: Absolutely. I wanted to do this in Quake, where the last
month somebody writes up a story for it-”blah blah blah,”-and I just
wanted to say ”whatever it’s not the point.” I would rather not attempt
to do something when I know we’re going to do a slipshod job at it.
Benjamin E. Sones: Was balancing weapons towards deathmatch a ma-
jor issue in this game?
John Carmack: The major issue in designing weapons for single-player is
that in single-player you have to start off with a pea shooter, because the
weapons are the major cookies that you get as you go along. Your char-
acter gets bigger and more powerful by getting bigger and more power-
ful offensive capabilities. In single-player it’s not as rewarding to get a
weapon that has a different tactical beneﬁt; you want to be able to just
impart massive destruction. You just need to be able to go in and lay
waste to everything. That is what gives you the good feedback, [that is]
the ”treasure” in single-player. That’s not what you want in multiplayer.
We’ve got one weapon that is the ”massive devastation” weapon, and a
lot of people will hate that it’s in there when they get killed by it but a lot
of that is the fact that people will argue about anything.
There is something to be said for the argument, what a lot of the Quake
CHAPTER 5. INTERVIEW WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
64
Interviews
players said about Quake II was that they thought the weapons were too
balanced. Different people could have fair ﬁghts with multiple different
weapons, and we generally thought that was a positive step. In Quake ev-
eryone liked the rocket launcher, and people with good framerates and
good connections liked the lightning gun. That was basically it-nobody
cared about the nailgun and the single shotgun they might as well have
not even been there. We’re still of the opinion that we would rather have
more weapons that tend to be effective, but there is a little bit more spread
between them [in Quake III Arena]. In some cases you come down to dif-
ferent styles of games, where some people like a style of game that just
isn’t what we’re making.
A lot of people in Quake liked the kind of ”blow out” matches where you
get control of the level, and it’s not even a matter of fair ﬁghts, it’s just
a matter of maintaining your dominance, and you get scores of 50 to 1.
Some people really enjoy that, but I don’t think that in general that is a
fun game for most people. We have tried to build in changes that prevent
that from happening. A perfect game is where the relative rankings of
players is proportional to their skill, and Quake was not terribly balanced
like that. You would have somebody, who was deﬁnitely better, but they
would just completely wipe the ﬂoor with somebody who was only a lit-
tle bit worse than them, and we don’t feel that offers a real good sense
of proportional advancement. You still want a game that’s fair, where the
better players always wins, but you don’t want it to be completely demor-
alizing to the person who gets really close, but just doesn’t quite get into
that niche.
Benjamin E. Sones: Tell us about the single-player game.
John Carmack: I’m really happy with the elements of the single-player
game where there are two axes that you’re advancing on-you have the
opening up of new levels, and then you have your relative ranking to all
the bots in the game. That has some nice feedback characteristics to it
where if you’re going in and you’re not that great at the game-you just
don’t have massively wonderful reﬂexes-you will get in and reach your
plateau, and the game will keep putting in relatively appropriate bots for
you. Even if you’ve plateaued and reached the extent of your skills, if you
keep going at it, you will eventually get to see all the levels. Even if you
reach a level that you really are no good at, if you keep losing your rank
CHAPTER 5. INTERVIEW WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
65
Interviews
will eventually start to go down, and if you do that long enough eventu-
ally the game will put in the bots that essentially stand still and let you
shoot them. Persistence will get you through the game, if you are having
fun. There is also the other axis, where even if you don’t care about seeing
all the levels and you want to ﬁght to hone your skills, you can pick your
favorite level and just keep playing on that until you work your rank up
above all the other bots. I think that’s a really nice thing, because in all of
our games-since way back when-there has been this demoralizing aspect
that even though we make 30 levels of the game, most players never see
all those levels. Each level takes the same amount of time to create, we’ve
got designers making things and putting all this effort into making things
that most people will never see. I don’t have any hard numbers to back it
up, but I would bet that only a minority of people played through all the
levels in Quake II.
Benjamin E. Sones: Are there any incentives built into the single-player
game that give the player reason to play all the way through, or do you
feel that it is not even an issue?
John Carmack: Seeing new levels-that is a reward, to open up and see
new environments to play in, and seeing new models for the enemy bot
characters. We have ranking awards as that kind of cookie thing that we
present, and I am really happy with the reward things we’ve got like the
”impressives” and ”excellents” that you get while you’re playing the game
that was a perfect thing to add because it brings a smile to everyone’s face
every time it happens, and it’s not taking something away from other
players. It’s a really great game design aspect, because if you give the
player a cooler weapon it takes something away from the other player-
they get killed more easily, and it’s more frustrating for them. But it’s a
free cookie when you can give something away like [verbal accolades],
because the other player is already dead. We’ve tried a few things like
that, but we haven’t come across many that are worthwhile-the ”impres-
sives” for accurate railgun hits and the ”excellents” for multiple deaths
within a short amount of time we think those have stood really well. We’re
going to track all of those, and in the single-player game you will get little
merit badge-type things to track your achievement there. If you’ve been
playing the game a long time you can have a big row of awards like that.
Benjamin E. Sones: Will there be a ranking system in the multiplayer
CHAPTER 5. INTERVIEW WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
66
Interviews
game?
John Carmack: No. We considered doing that, and in my original Quake-
world experimentation I had global ranking on everything, and it was a
really interesting issue because that split the community almost down
the middle. There were people that like it and thought it was a great
idea, and the other half thought it took away from the game, and there
were valid arguments for that too. There were behaviors you would start
seeing from people where, a lot of time when you are playing on servers
you’re kind of just gooﬁng off, having a good time, trying goofy stuff or
just playing casually with you friends. When every frag was logged, peo-
ple got a lot less friendly. You’d see people who would abort out of games
they saw somebody tough enter the game, because they didn’t want to
risk having a fair ﬁght. There was a lot more whining and complain-
ing. The right way to do it would be to have it optional, where servers
would be logged or not. As soon as you’re into people setting up their own
servers with their own rule modiﬁcations, it’s just a huge can of worms.
I would rather allow more diversity to happen by just allowing people
to change the rules on their servers and run modiﬁcations and things
like that, rather than to have it be ”here is the game, in crystallized form,
which we are going to be ranking people on.” I think there are going to be
servers that have rankings for just the people who play on those servers.
You’re not going to be able to say ”I’m the best player in the world” there
is deﬁnitely value to that, but what it would take away from the commu-
nity as a whole, it’s just a non-optable thing.
CHAPTER 5. INTERVIEW WITH JOHN CARMACK

Chapter 6
Carmack Q&A on Q3A changes
This interview was conducted by Kenn Hwang for Firing Squad on Sep
28, 1999.
http://www.firingsquad.com/news/newsarticle.asp?searchid=828
Interview
Prologue
John Carmack’s recent .plan update included some exciting news for Quake
3 Arena players, consisting of gameplay changes, bug ﬁxes, and more. In
response to the sometimes technical-sounding worklog, we shot off a few
questions to JC to get the straight scoop on what’s been done.
Questions
Kenn Hwang: In your recent plan, you mentioned that com maxfps has
been limited to 85. Were there still high-framerate problems that were
67

John Carmack Archive
68
Interviews
cropping up at 100fps?
John Carmack: Yes. Some poor modem connections still had problems.
Kenn Hwang: Do you think this will be detrimental to people planning
on buying new video cards capable of putting out twice the framerate
(particularly at low detail settings)? For advanced players, more FPS makes
a huge difference (being able to see and dodge fast-moving projectiles
such as the hyperblaster, plasmagun, etc.).
John Carmack: You are free to turn off com maxfps if you want, the de-
fault is just a safe level.
Kenn Hwang: How will you ﬁx low-fps problems such as the no-fall telel-
port (from the lightning room into the RL room) in q3tourney? How hard
is it to ﬁx the source of the problem (bugs occuring due to different fram-
erates), rather than applying kludges such as arbitrary framerate limits?
John Carmack: The way to make everything completely framerate inde-
pendent is to use ﬁxed timeslices for simulation, but that comﬂicts with
trying to get very high framerates. DOOM used a ﬁxed 35 hz simulation
cycle, so it never varied at different speeds, but it could never run faster
than 35 hz.
Quake has always used a msec variable simulation time, which allows
any framerates without stuttering, but has some time dependent behav-
ior.
In theory, all itterative behavior can be calculated parametrically at arbi-
trary times, but in practice there are difﬁculties.
I just added a maximum simulation time option, which subdivides frames
larger than 66 msec into two moves, which prevents large changes in be-
havior.
This ﬁxes the no-fall exploit.
The simulation timeslice is deﬁnately a tradeoff – the smaller it is, the less
variation is allowed, but it involves more cpu work, which can make it go
even slower, feeding in upon itself.
Kenn Hwang: You also mentioned ”removing some latency from light-
CHAPTER 6. CARMACK Q&A ON Q3A CHANGES

John Carmack Archive
69
Interviews
ning endpoint.” Could you give us a little more detail on this? Is it the
slight delay between shooting and hitting sound effects, or how the shaft
appears onscreen?
John Carmack: The amount of lag when turning has been slightly (aver-
age 25 ms) reduced.
Kenn Hwang: Currently in 1.08, walking backwards is still fast enough to
produce footstep sounds. Will this be ﬁxed?
John Carmack: I had forgotten about that. I just ﬁxed it. Anything else
on the ﬁring squad’s ”annoying bugs in q3test” list?
Kenn Hwang: PS - I’m going to ask for Dennis since he’ll never ask him-
self - what are the chances of getting footsteps reduced/removed for 1 on
1? :)
John Carmack: We had them out for a while, but we put them back in
because the levels felt more ”dead” without player movement noises.
CHAPTER 6. CARMACK Q&A ON Q3A CHANGES

Chapter 7
Carmack responds to FS
Suggestions
This interview was conducted by Kenn Hwang for Firing Squad on Oct
02, 1999.
http://www.firingsquad.com/news/newsarticle.asp?searchid=832
Interview
Prologue
A few days ago, we sent off an e-mail to John Carmack outlining some
further bugs and broken features in Q3A test. Let’s just say the man is
on top of things! Here is the latest exchange we’ve had with him, and the
results they’ve produced!
70

John Carmack Archive
71
Interviews
Questions
Kenn Hwang: Hey John, Thanks a lot for being so quick to answer our
questions! We got deluged with ”bug ﬁx” mail, and here are the few that
we felt relevent to the game as it’s developing. Scoring: Currently, if 3
people are tied for ﬁrst, the 4th person down still registers as being in
”2nd place” even though they may be signiﬁcantly lower in frag-count
than the ones above.
John Carmack: Ok, changed it. I got the selectable crosshairs and crosshair
offsets Dennis requested in, and most of the things you mention.
Kenn Hwang: Many people wrote in about racing someone to a weapon
and hearing the pickup, only to ﬁnd that the client-side predict was off
by a fraction of a second, so they actually didn’t pick it up. This never
happened on any other id game, and we experience it regularly even on
LAN. Is this something that can be ﬁxed?
John Carmack: I added a ”cg predictItems 0” option if you don’t want
predicted pickups, but I like them when playing online.
Kenn Hwang: cg drawFPS doesn’t work in teamplay. Taking out cg drawtimer
is a good thing, but FPS is harmless and people love seeing their framer-
ate.
John Carmack: All status elements now stack above/below each other as
apropriate instead of overriding or overdrawing each other. Cg drawtimer
is NOT explicitly removed now. I understand how it is used in timing
items, but I don’t think it would be right to remove it from a speciﬁc mode
of play.
Kenn Hwang: Currently, switching teams in teamplay mode subtracts
one frag from the team. This even happens if players are going into spec-
tator mode. Is it possible just to make players spawn into spectator mode
and allow them to select their team?
John Carmack: Done.
Kenn Hwang: You mentioned the com maxfps can be changed from the
default of 85. Is 100 still a max limit or will people be able to choose to go
CHAPTER 7. CARMACK RESPONDS TO FS SUGGESTIONS

John Carmack Archive
72
Interviews
higher (and voluntarily live with the FPS-induced issues)?
John Carmack: You can set it to any number, or 0 to disable all limits.
Kenn Hwang: Here’s a doozy we found while benchmarking the game
with different OSs and video cards. Alpha-transparency effects such as
invisibility, smoke trails, and even the crosshair vary on different cards,
drivers, and OSs. While this isn’t really an id issue, it does seriously affect
the game because people playing in WinNT will have lighter smoke trails
and crosshairs (basically what people were doing in q3test to hack their
smoke). In many cases, the invisibility is virtually undetectable on cer-
tain conﬁgs while it stands out clearly in others. Can this be taken into
account as the powerup features get tweaked (perhaps base part of it on
a non-alpha effect)?
John Carmack: Not much we can do about that.
Kenn Hwang: Thanks a lot for your time, John. I hope you can bear an-
other argument against footsteps :) In free for all, footsteps rarely make
enough of a difference to use as a tactical advantage. However, in 1 on
1, every sound matters, and the game slows to a crawl as people walk
around rooms and corners continually. Basically it comes down the fact
that by standing still, you can tell where your opponent is and they can’t
tell where you are. 1 on 1 is such a different game, and whatever id
decides WILL become the default for world competition. We’re of the
opinion of making it as fast and frenzied as FFA/teamplay. Would you
consider turning off footsteps only for the tournament mode of game-
play? The weapons idle sounds and item pickups should be enough to
keep players on their toes, and a 1 on 1 with footsteps is guaranteed to
be much more ”dead” and quiet compared to one without. Also, if you
think about it, since sound is so important, taking out footsteps can also
keep reduce bunnyhopping/strafejumping, since they’ll be able to re-
main silent at full running speed (otherwise the convention goes ”why
should I run and make footstep sounds when I can go faster by bunny-
hopping?”) Thanks again, and sorry for the constant badgering!
John Carmack: I have been thinking hard about that. I see your points,
and they make sense, but we just added a bunch of character speciﬁc
footsteps, and for non-professional gamers, we think they add to the ex-
perience.
CHAPTER 7. CARMACK RESPONDS TO FS SUGGESTIONS

John Carmack Archive
73
Interviews
If there were a small set of professional rules that I agree with in theory
but have chosen not to pursue because they conﬂict with more common
play, then an ofﬁcial ”pro mode” might make sense. Any other sugges-
tions along those lines?
Kenn Hwang: Well, for better or for worse, the fact that id is willing to
consider a ”professional” mode to suite the smaller elite community is
an tremendous step forward! Remember, if this does get implemented, it
wil consist only of small changes and minor tweaks, and will most likely
consist of hard-set (or suggested) values for team/tournament play, such
as ammo, footsteps, minor weapons tweakage, and such. Thanks for lis-
tening to our pleas, John!
CHAPTER 7. CARMACK RESPONDS TO FS SUGGESTIONS

Chapter 8
Slashdot asks, John Carmack
Answers
This interview was conducted by Slashdot for Slashdot on Oct 15, 1999.
http://games.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=99/10/15/1012230
Interview
Prologue
A few days past, we solicited questions from you folks to ask QuakeLaird
John Carmack. We sent the questions over to him, and he answered. A
lot. It’s deﬁnitely one of the best interviews we’ve had yet - click below to
read more.
74

John Carmack Archive
75
Interviews
Questions
Slashdot: Inazuma asks: I know that you and id are doing simultaneous
development of Q3 for Windows, Mac and Linux. Which of those is your
favorite OS to use, and which to program for?
John Carmack: I use WinNT, Win98, MacOS 8.x, and linux on a regular
basis. I also spend some time with MacOS X and irix.
There are individual pros and cons to each system, but if I had to choose
only a single platform in its currently shipping state to work on for the
next year, I would choose WinNT.
I’m going to risk my neck here and actually defend microsoft a bit:
There are plenty of reasons to have issues with MS, but to just make a
blanket statement like ”everything that comes from microsoft is crap” is
just not rational. There are a lot of smart people at microsoft, and they
sometimes produce some nice things. There are some damn useful fea-
tures of MSDEV that I have not seen on any other platform - all the intel-
lisense pop up information and edit-and-continue, for instance.
I chose NT as our development environment because, after evaluating all
available platforms, I decided it was the best tool for the job. NT had the
added advantage of running the native executables of our largest target
market, but the important point is that it would have won on its own
merits even without it.
It offered quality 3D acceleration on intergraph hardware, a stable plat-
form, a good user environment, apps for basics like mail and document
editing as well as high end media creation tools, and a good development
environment.
I made that decision over three years ago, and I think it has proven to
be the correct one. NT is deﬁnitely going to be the primary develop-
ment platform for our next project, but I will be evaluating alternatives
for a possible transition after that. The contenders will be linux and Ma-
cOS X. None of the other unix workstations would be competitive for our
purposes, and I don’t think BeOS will offer anything compelling enough
(they can always prove me wrong?).
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
76
Interviews
I haven’t really been using Win2K, but from a cursory glance, it looks like
a reasonable evolution over NT 4.0. The only real downsides to NT 4.0 for
me are the bad sound latency and poor input ﬁdelity, and these should
be ﬁxed in Win2K.
The current MacOS X server is a bit of a disappointment. I really en-
joyed NEXTSTEP on a lot of levels, and if it had workstation quality 3D
acceleration, I probably would have stayed there. Unfortunately, much
of the development effort spent on it during its transformation to Ma-
cOS X seems to be steps sideways instead of forward. Macifying the user
interface, porting to PPC, deprecating ObjC for java and C++, etc. They
probably all had to be done, but it just hasn’t brought anything new to
the table. As a user environment, it still feels sluggish, and it still doesn’t
have 3D graphics.
Linux has progressed a lot in usability in the time since I made the last
platform decision. Sure, the guts have always been good, but the user
environments were very weak compared to windows or the mac. Some
people may think six xterms and a few athena apps are all the UI that any-
one should need, but I disagree. The Linux user environment still isn’t as
good as windows, but going from redhat 5.2 to redhat 6.0 was a whole
lot more impressive than going from win95 to win98, or MacOS 7 to Ma-
cOS 8. If there is another jump like that, I wouldn’t feel too bad inﬂicting
another non-windows platform on everyone else in the company.
Slashdot: DanJose52 asks: How’d you start, personally (I mean on the
inside, like emotionally and morally), and how has Id software changed
you? for better or worse?
John Carmack: I knew I wanted to work with computers from a very early
age, but there were also a lot of other stereotypical geek aspects to my
life growing up - phreaking, hacking (nobody called it ”cracking” back
then), rockets, bombs, and thermite (sometimes in not-so-smart combi-
nations), sci-ﬁ, comic books, D&D, arcades, etc.
I was sort of an amoral little jerk when I was young. I was arrogant about
being smarter than other people, but unhappy that I wasn’t able to spend
all my time doing what I wanted. I spent a year in a juvenile home for a
ﬁrst offence after an evaluation by a psychologist went very badly.
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
77
Interviews
I went to a couple semesters of classes at the University of Missouri (UMKC),
taking nothing but CS classes, but it just didn’t seem all that worthwhile.
In hindsight, I could have gotten more out of it than I did, but I hadn’t ac-
quired a really good attitude towards learning from all possible sources
yet.
I dropped-out of college to start programming full time, but trying to do
contract programming for the Apple II/IIGS post 1990 was not a good
way to make money, and I only wound up with between $1k and $2k a
month. Not having enough money is stressful, and I did some things
I didn’t want to. I wrote a numerology program for a couple hundred
bucks one time...
Softdisk publishing ﬁnally convinced me to come down to Shreveport
for an interview. I had been doing contract work for Jay Wilbur and Tom
Hall, so I knew there were some pretty cool people there, but meeting
John Romero and Lane Roath was what convinced me to take the job.
Finally meeting a couple sharp programmers that did impressive things
and had more experience than I did was great.
After I took the job at Softdisk, I was happy. I was programming, or read-
ing about programming, or talking about programming, almost every
waking hour. It turned out that a $27k salary was enough that I could buy
all the books and pizza that I wanted, and I had nice enough computers
at work that I didn’t feel the need to own more myself (4mb 386-20!).
I learned a huge amount in a short period of time, and that was proba-
bly a turning point for my personality. I could still clearly remember my
state of mind when I viewed other people as being ignorant about various
things, but after basically doubling my programming skills in the space
of six months, I realized how relative it all was. That has been reinforced
several additional times over the seven years since then.
All the time from working at Softdisk, to founding Id and making the
products we are know for has been pretty seamless for me. I have been
learning as much as I can, working hard, and doing my best.
I know that most people won’t believe it, but a 100x increase in income
really didn’t have that big of an impact on me as a person. It is certainly
nice to be in a position where people can’t exert any leverage on you, but
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
78
Interviews
it’s deﬁnitely not the primary focus of my life. I get to drive a ferrari in
to work, but my day to day life is almost exactly the same as it was eight
years ago. I get up, go in to work, hopefully do some good stuff, then go
home. I’m still happy.
Slashdot: moonboy asks: I once read, in Wired, an article that said you
have an incredible headstart on everyone else for making ”virtual worlds”
on the Internet using your engine from the Quake games. Do you have
any intention of doing this? Has anyone approached you about it? It
would seem like a fantastic use of the technology with online gaming be-
ing so popular. Entire worlds online could be created virtually and very
life-like with many different purposes.
John Carmack: Making Snow Crash into a reality feels like a sort of moral
imperative to a lot of programmers, but the efforts that have been made
so far leave a lot to be desired.
It is almost painful for me to watch some of the VRML initiatives. It just
seems so obviously the wrong way to do something. All of this debating,
committee forming, and spec writing, and in the end, there isn’t anything
to show for it. Make something really cool ﬁrst, and worry about the spec
after you are sure it’s worth it!
I do think it is ﬁnally the right time for this to start happening for real.
While a lot of people could envision the possibilities after seeing DOOM
or Quake, it is really only now that we have general purpose hardware ac-
celeration that things are actually ﬂexible enough to be used as a creative
medium without constantly being conscious of the technical limitations.
Two weeks ago, I pitched a proposal to develop some technology along
these lines to the rest of the company. I may wind up working on some
things like that in parallel with the next game project.
Slashdot: justin saunders asks: Many people consider you to be one of
the best programmers in the game/graphics scene, based on your ability
to keep pushing the limits of current PC hardware.
I was wondering what measures you use to gauge the skill of a program-
mer, and who, if anyone, you look up to and consider to be a ”great” pro-
grammer.
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
79
Interviews
John Carmack: Like most things, it is difﬁcult to come up with a single
weighted sum of the value of a programmer. I prefer to evaluate multiple
axis independently.
Programming is really just the mundane aspect of expressing a solution
to a problem. There are talents that are speciﬁcally related to actually
coding, but the real issue is being able to grasp problems and devise so-
lutions that are detailed enough to actually be coded.
Being able to clearly keep a lot of aspects of a complex system visualized
is valuable.
Having a good feel for time and storage that is ﬂexible enough to work
over a range of ten orders of magnitude is valuable.
Experience is valuable.
Knowing the literature is valuable.
Being able to integrate methods and knowledge from different ﬁelds is
valuable.
Being consistent is valuable.
Being creative is valuable.
Focus is extremely important. Being able to maintain focus for the length
of a project gets harder and harder as schedules grow longer, but it is criti-
cal to doing great work. (Side note - every time ”focus” is mentioned now,
I think of Vernor Vinge’s ”A Deepness in the Sky”, currently my favorite SF
novel)
I certainly respect the abilities of my primary competitors. Back in the
DOOM days, Ken Silverman was extremely impressive, and today Tim
Sweeny is producing much of value.
Slashdot: ajs asks: I read a sort-of-analysis that you wrote way back com-
paring DirectX 3D handling to Open GL (with Open GL being far prefer-
able to you). Do you feel that the tools that you and others will need to
create the next generation of games exist now under Linux or other Open
Source operating systems, or is that still a long way off? What would you
recommend that we developers and developer wannabes dedicate our
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
80
Interviews
time to?
John Carmack: To develop a game, you need coding tools, pixel art tools,
modeling and texturing tools, sound tools, and usually music tools.
Coding tools are basically ﬁne under linux, and there is already plenty of
force behind their improvement.
Gimp looks serviceable for pixel editing, but I don’t know of any profes-
sional game developers using it.
I assume there are some basic sound tools available, but I would be sur-
prised if they are equal to the best windows or mac tools. That is probably
the most approachable sector to work on improving.
Modeling and texturing tools are the biggest lack, but it is also the hardest
to address. They really need to be built on top of solid 3D infrastructure,
and that is still in its infancy right now. It would probably be possible
to build a simple, focused modeling and texturing program that could
get the job done, but full featured programs like MAX and maya have an
immense amount of work invested in them. Maybe SGI will get maya
ported to linux...
We are going to try to build our next level editor cross-platform, which
will probably sort out a bunch of 3D content creation issues. I will be
improving the matrox GLX driver as necessary to support the effort.
Slashdot: thebrit asks: Is it possible ID may join Ion Storm for a future
project together, or are the ’artistic’ differences between you too great?
John Carmack: Future technology licensing is certainly possible, but as
for actually working together, there is very little chance of that for a project
that we considered important.
If I decided to spend a little discretionary time whipping up, say, a color
gameboy port of Commander Keen (an idea I have sort of been toying
with), then I might ask Tom and John if they wanted to make some levels
for it.
Slashdot: Scott Francis[Mecham asks: Recently someone posted about
their experience in determining the ﬁle structure of the Doom WADﬁle.
How did you feel when people were discovering how to modify Doom,
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
81
Interviews
from building new levels, to changing the executable itself(dhacked) orig-
inally without any information from id? In your opinion, is the modding
community a valuable place for creating future game developers?
John Carmack: The hacking that went on in wolfenstein was unexpected,
but based on that, DOOM was designed from the beginning to be modi-
ﬁed by the user community.
The hacking that went on with the leaked alpha version was obviously
not approved of, but after the ofﬁcial release I did start getting some
specs and code out. I had sent some things out early on to a couple of the
people that had done tools for wolfenstein, but in the end it was pretty
much a completely different set of people that did the major work with
DOOM.
The original source I released for the bsp tool was in objective-C, which
wasn’t the most helpful thing in the world, but it didn’t take long for peo-
ple to produce different tools.
Dhacked was a bit of a surprise to me, and I always looked at it as some-
thing that maybe shouldn’t have been done. I’m not very fond of binary
editing an executable. It clearly showed that people were interested in
more control, so it probably argued for the greater freedom given with
quake.
I still remember the ﬁrst time I saw the original Star Wars DOOM mod.
Seeing how someone had put the death star into our game felt so amaz-
ingly cool. I was so proud of what had been made possible, and I was
completely sure that making games that could serve as a canvas for other
people to work on was a valid direction.
A doom/quake add-on has become almost an industry standard resume
component, which I think is a Very Good Thing. The best way to sell
yourself is to show what you have produced, rather than tell people what
you know, what you want to do, or what degrees you have.
In the modern gaming era, it is very difﬁcult for a single person to pro-
duce a complete looking demonstration game from scratch. It does hap-
pen, but a much more reasonable scenario is to do an add-on that show-
cases your particular talents, whether they are in coding, design, or me-
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
82
Interviews
dia. You want to be able to go to your prospective employer and say
”There is a community of ten thousand people actively playing a mod
that I wrote in my spare time. Give me a job and I will be able to devote
all of my energy to gaming, and produce something vastly superior.”
Slashdot: jﬂynn asks: Many people think that the extreme sucessfulness
and longevity of DOOM and Quake was partly due to the internet com-
munities that sprung up around them, to discuss playing them and write
new levels for them.
How important do you feel a viable gaming community is to the success
of a new game today?
John Carmack: I have always been a strong proponent of supporting the
gaming community, but arguments can be made that it isn’t that impor-
tant for success.
Most entertainment media is designed to be throw-away, where people
buy something, have a good time with it, and move on. Myst, the most
successful computer game of all time, has no community.
A lot of companies would prefer to look at their games like movie re-
leases. Every couple years, you go see the latest by a director you like,
then don’t think about it too much until the next one.
The game-as-a-lifestyle type of community that has sprung up around
a few games is an interesting phenomenon. The plus side is that there
is a lot of wonderfully creative things going on, and it does attract more
attention over the years than any single media blitz.
The downside is that it breeds a lot of zealotry, which can be a bit ugly.
I get some fairly hateful email from people that are too wrapped up in it
and disagree with some direction I am taking.
At this point, I think it is clear that the community has been a positive
thing. I was very pleased when, earlier this year, Kevin Cloud came around
and agreed that the community has indeed been good for us. For years, it
felt like I was just being humored by the other owners at id when I pushed
for all the code releases.
Slashdot: mpav asks: This is a break from the usual questions from this
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
83
Interviews
group, but I thought it would be interesting to know.. You have a couple
of exotic sports cars, one being a 1000 horsepower/750 ft-lbs of torque
(insane!) ferrari, and I was wondering which one you generally drive to
work?
John Carmack: I drive my twin-turbo F50 almost all of the time. It took
a while to get all the bugs sorted out, but it is almost a perfect combina-
tion right now. It is light, nimble, and responsive, and 600 hp at the rear
wheels is just about perfect for a street car of that conﬁguration.
I only drive my testarossa now when I am low on gas in the F50 or if I
need to drive someplace where I think the extra inch or two of ground
clearance is important. It is heavy and ponderous, but every time I do
drive it, I am impressed again with the power. 1000 hp at the rear wheels
is excessive. It takes a while to spin the turbos up to the full 24 psi of
boost, but when it has a full head of steam going, it moves like nothing
else on the road. It runs away from superbikes on the highway. However,
when exercising it, you have a very clear sense that you are taking your
life into your hands.
I will probably be getting rid of my TR when my next project car is com-
pleted. It is a custom carbon ﬁber bodied ferrari GTO with a one-of-a-
kind billet aluminum twin turbo V12. It is going to make a bit more power
than the TR, but only weigh about 2400 lbs. I have a suspicion that we will
wind up detuning the engine, because 1 hp / 2 lbs is probably quite a bit
past excessive and into the just-plain-stupid realm.
It was supposed to be done two years ago – mechanics are worse than
programmers.
I also have a little MGB that I am theoretically working on myself, but I
haven’t had time to touch it in six months?
Slashdot: Hobbex asks: Though it unlikely that games will ever be free
(ala beer), since so much effort goes into them from all angles (not just
code, but also art, music, design etc), but that does not necessarily pre-
clude open source game engines.
Admittedly (and I don’t mean this as a slam against you) game engines
today do suffer from many of the same problems that Open Source ac-
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
84
Interviews
tivists attack in Operative systems and other software: bugs, instability
and sometimes even bloat and vaporware.
Do you think that Open Source will play a part in the future of game de-
velopment?
John Carmack: I have spent a lot of time thinking about that.
I was trying hard to get an article together about game code licensing to
go out with the interview questions, but I just didn’t make it in time. I
had written three pages of article and four pages of other stuff that I had
ripped out because it was going off on various tangents.
First, it is interesting to examine how coding is similar or dissimilar to art,
music, design, etc. Most GPL works don’t have to face the issue, because
the work is clearly dominated by code. A few little icons aren’t enough to
make people really think about it. The argument is signiﬁcant for games,
because coding is only about a third or less of the work in most cases. The
arguments that RMS puts forth for the ethical rightness of free software
also seem to apply to all digital media. If you take them seriously, the
spirit of the GPL seems to want to say that all digital media should be
free. That isn’t a pragmatic battle to try and ﬁght.
If you just focus on the code, I think there is indeed a viable business
model for a line of titles based on open source code with proprietary
data. It will take either a very small company, or a very gutsy big com-
pany to take the ﬁrst step. The payoff won’t be until the second product.
I think open source is at its best with games (and probably most other
things) in a post-alpha model. Fixing, improving, and building upon an
existing core is obviously extremely fruitful in an open source model.
Going open-source from development day one with a game probably
doesn’t make much sense. Design by committee doesn’t work particu-
larly well, and for something with as much popular appeal as games, the
signal to noise ratio would probably be very low.
I tagged along at the beginning of a from-scratch open source gaming
project (OGRE), and it more or less went how I feared it would - lots of
discussion, no code.
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

John Carmack Archive
85
Interviews
While the mod communities may not be exactly OpenSource?, I think
they work very well. There is some value in having focused areas to work
in, rather than just having the entire thing dumped in your lap.
I am going to be releasing the majority of the code for Q3 soon, but there
will still be proprietary bits that we reserve all rights to. We make a fairly
good chunk of income from technology licensing, so it would take some
damn good arguments to convince everyone that giving it all away would
be a good idea.
Something that is often overlooked about Id is that Kevin and Adrian to-
gether own 60% of the company. They are artists, and most deﬁnitely do
not ”get” free software.
CHAPTER 8. SLASHDOT ASKS, JOHN CARMACK ANSWERS

Chapter 9
John Carmack Interview
This interview was conducted by Bob ”CalBear” Colayco for Firingsquad
on Feb 09, 2000.
http://www.firingsquad.com/features/carmack/
Interview
Prologue
John Carmack is a man who almost needs no introduction - a founder of
id software, the company that invented the ﬁrst person shooter and sin-
gle handedly revolutionized what PC action gaming means. From Com-
mander Keen to Doom to Quake, Carmack/id’s games have captivated
millions of bleary eyed gamers into spending hours on end at the com-
puter, blasting away at their on screen opponents.
Late last December, Firingsquad and Gamers.com had the unique oppor-
tunity to conduct a lengthy face to face interview with John Carmack. We
took the opportunity to ﬁnd out more about John the man as opposed to
John the programmer. We also asked John about his and id’s plans for the
future as well as his take on the gaming industry and where it might be
86

John Carmack Archive
87
Interviews
headed. Questions are in bold; John’s responses are in plain text.
Questions
9.1
The Man Behind the Phenomenon
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So how old are you?
John Carmack: 29
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Do you think that being married will detract
from your programming?
John Carmack: No, I wouldn’t be getting married if I thought that.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So what’s a typical date between you and Anna
[Kang]?
John Carmack: Lately we’ve been building some model rockets. I did an
interview one time and someone asked me about my teenage years, and
I mentioned rockets and bombs and stuff like that. And I was thinking,
you know, that was kind of fun, I liked that. Of course nowadays you can
just go on the internet and say ”I want one of these and one of these and
one of these.” They now have powerful rockets that we never had back
when I was doing it - these high powered rockets with something like
2000 Newton/seconds of thrust!
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Do you and Anna ever 1on1 deathmatch?
John Carmack: Just yesterday we were out at Apple, and Anna was play-
ing one of the Apple guys - she was kicking his ass. I was in a meeting with
some other people, so they were playing for a while, and she was just wal-
ing on him. But then when I ﬁnished that meeting, they snuck me into
that guy’s room and they sat me down and I came back to a narrow vic-
tory. I expected to hear her cursing from the other side of the building.
She still thought it was the other guy magically acquiring skills at the end
of the game!
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
88
Interviews
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: I’ve read some earlier interviews where you said
you were into bombs and stuff. You were a miscreant kid, right?
John Carmack: Yeah in a lot of ways I looked back and I was an arrogant
little jerk when I was a teenager. I matured over the years and when I look
back now, I don’t think THAT highly of myself as a teenager. I mean, I was
really smart, I was already programming computers in a lot of ways. But
I was amoral at many times.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: What would you say if you were giving advice to
people who have kids like you in their school?
John Carmack: Well I already knew exactly what I wanted to be doing. I
wanted to be programming, and I knew this even when I was around 12.
I knew that that’s what I wanted to be doing and I had these clear ideas
of what I wanted to get. You can’t just say the world owes me whatever I
want to get. But there are times when some things are necessary to help
a kid along. My parents never really understood that about me, so I never
got the computers I wanted and needed. I held that against my mother
for like a decade, but we’re all past that now
It was frustrating because I clearly knew what I wanted to be doing but
it wasn’t available to me at the time. It was always: if you want to do
computers you need to go to MIT then you go work at a corporation as an
engineer and follow ”the path.” But I dropped out of college, and started
my own company. My brother followed a more conventional path. He got
a degree and became a stock broker and that’s what my mother expected
that you’re supposed to do. And he’s doing OK for himself, but there’s
nothing like a few Ferarris to rub your parents face in.”
I can say that everything’s ﬁne with my mother at this point in my life.
We can talk about these things, look back and she recognizes that she
was kinda wrong, but what good does that do? She’s not raising another
child or anything.
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
89
Interviews
9.2
Carmack on Money
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: You have a good deal of money now - how does
that affect you?
John Carmack: I have sufﬁcient money that I don’t need to work any-
more; I really don’t have to. That’s a nice freedom, the freedom from any-
one having the ability to have any leverage over you, as long as you’ve got
the money to take care of yourself and you aren’t wrapped up in having
more and more money. There are a lot of people even though they have a
lot of money, they can still be manipulated by the carrot of having more
money.
In my position I have basically everything I want. I’ve got enough money
to take care of myself and family so nobody, not any company, can have
a signiﬁcant leverage on me.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So is there some area where you thought you
could use your money to have leverage in other situations?
John Carmack: I try not to think about it that much. I try not to be too
proactive in terms of trying to make other things happen. I like to work
directly on the technical aspects of things and while there probably are
some things I can do like leverage the money in other ways, I’m much
more interested in trying to accomplish things directly.
That’s one reason why I’m not a very good manager. I’m an engineer,
so I want to ﬁx things directly. I want to set the circumstances up such
that they become ﬁxed even though in many cases I recognize the larger
projects that need to get done. But it’s not something I’m uniquely suited
for.
There’s a speciﬁc area that I’m very good at and I happen to enjoy it a
whole lot, so I don’t feel a whole lot of desire to go out and exploit other
aspects. I do have a pile of money sitting around to do things with, but
I’m happy with how things are.
I feel bad for some companies out there. The founders, who are these
incredible engineers, are now directors of their departments doing man-
agement rather than engineering. At the same time most of the people
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
90
Interviews
they are managing are nowhere near as good as they were at doing the
actual work.”
That’s what I hope never happens to me. I want to stay in the trenches
working on the things all the time. There is some beneﬁt to sitting back,
reading and researching and getting some broader scope on it. But if
you’re divorced from the low level nuts and bolts of things, like how this
actually applies to the real world, then you’re just an academic. You get
these huge disconnects between what an academic can do and what some-
body in production can do.
In the last two projects, my time has been split. I’d have about 3 months
of pure research. I’m in that phase right now, playing around with differ-
ent stuff. And then after that it’s about 16 months of work on the project.
It would be nice to shift that more towards research, but I would never
want to devote a majority of my time to research. The whole point of re-
search in my mind is you ﬁgure out a new way to do something, but then
you want to go actually do something with it, not just have the knowledge
that it’s possible to do something.
9.3
Focus and Inspiration
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Your focus is astonishing. It seems that you’re
uniquely suited to this time and place.
John Carmack: Focus is extremely useful. As far as this speciﬁc time and
place, I do think software is an almost uniquely wonderful medium. But
if it wasn’t here, I’d be some other type of engineer or some kind of scien-
tist. I could have a ﬁne time working in any kind of hard science
Software is so wonderful in a unique way. The people who set up for a
physics experiment spend a year of preparation time, tooling around do-
ing things. And then you spend another year analyzing it. With software
you can have an epiphany and just sit down and hash it out. You can
make it happen right there. It’s the most malleable media to be working
in for any kind of intellectual pursuit. I do feel fortunate that I’m around
in a time when all this is going on.
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
91
Interviews
I can remember again when I was a lot younger, and I didn’t have the
computer I wanted. I had this frustration. I felt like I was ”missing it.”
I felt like I should be writing these games, like the early Apple II games.
I was genuinely frustrated because I felt like I was missing the golden
opportunity. Of course at the time I didn’t know that I was going to come
in on the ”later” golden opportunity.
You read the book ”Hackers” by Steven Levy?
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Yeah it was a great book!
John Carmack: I read that as a teenager. At that third section I was like
”Goddamnit, I should be here!” Then about 10 years later, I thought back
about it: ”you know, if there was a fourth section in that book, maybe I
would be in there!” That’s a nice thought.
It was just interesting to see that. I honestly thought I was missing my
shot when I was a lot younger, like it was a golden age in the early devel-
opment on PCs, and I was really frustrated that I wasn’t there.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Do you think that it’s the very act of program-
ming and the very act of making your ideas into code that’s inspiring for
you? Or were there actual games that you can name that you were play-
ing on the Apple II and PC early on that inspired you?
John Carmack: I can name off the games that I really liked at the time,
but programming in the abstract sense is what I really enjoy. I enjoy lots
of different areas of it
In the gaming industry, there are a lot of people that are speciﬁcally in it
because they love games and they want to create things.
My love for programming is a more abstract thing. I’m taking a great deal
of enjoyment writing device drivers for Linux. I could also be having a
good time writing a database manager or something because there are
always interesting problems. There are some things that are inherently
more rewarding than others. Graphics and games are probably the most
generally rewarding area of programming.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: How so?
John Carmack: Because you get really nice feedback. When you write
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
92
Interviews
a graphics algorithm, it draws a picture for you. While data can be re-
warding in its own way, in general the human species is wired to re-
spond much more strongly to visual things and things that have to be
interpreted from symbols. So there’s something fundamental there why
it’s a neat thing. But we do get to work on a whole lot of areas. I enjoy
all aspects of it, but games have always been one place where there are
challenging things and it has its own reward at the end, aside from the
problem itself.
Early on I was really into the RPGs, like the Ultimas, the Wizardrys and all
those things. Some of the very early games I wrote for the Apple II were
basically Ultima ripoffs. I also loved all the straight arcade games, all the
classic games.
9.4
Epiphanies
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: In some ways, don’t you think Dungeons and
Dragons is just a program that you put yourself into, with words and ta-
bles, etc? A structure to tell stories in, like the Quake engine?
John Carmack: It’s a similar thing about being able to create things com-
pletely from scratch, a media where you don’t have built-in limitations.
In fact, the original story of Quake was supposed to be an RPG, well not
an RPG exactly, but a fantasy game. It completely diverged from that
because of Quake’s sordid development process. Since then we’ve been
much more honest about our goals from the beginning on what we’re
doing. They’ve been very different games but I’ve been happy with the
results. It’s unlikely that we’d ever go and do a fantasy/role playing game
type thing.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: I’ve heard that you’ve cut back on your personal
dungeon mastering
John Carmack: Up through Wolfenstein, the entire company played ev-
ery weekend. It tailed off basically in Doom. We ran a couple of games
last year just for fun. It takes so much time though. To do a good job you
spend a day playing and a day preparing, but there’s no way now that I
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
93
Interviews
can sacriﬁce 20% of my hours for anything now.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: You have a special focus, an inspiration - how
you can improve an algorithm or something. How often do these epipha-
nies come to you?
John Carmack: Well, I think a lot of people put too much emphasis on
the epiphanies. Epiphanies are there, you do get them where you see
clearly into something and all that. But it really is true that most great
works aren’t a result of epiphanies, they’re the result of lots of hard la-
bor. That is a trap that a lot of people fall into where you think that the
epiphany is the important thing. Sometimes it is, but in 95% of cases it’s
just a matter of smooth, calm integration of everything you know.
It’s not the one brilliant decision, it’s the 500 smart decisions that really
make things good. It’s more a matter of being able to keep making smart
decisions. Making one brilliant decision and a whole bunch of mediocre
ones isn’t as good as making a whole bunch of generally smart decisions
throughout the whole process. And there’s so many of them that have to
be made.
Even at the end of Quake 3, I had a to-do list of a thousand things that
could potentially be improved on. So it’s a matter of going through and
knowing all these things that could be done, and prioritizing what the
”sweet spots” are. Like ”This amount of effort would get this batch of
things done and it would have this side effect.” Or ”it would take all day
to do this thing but it would probably destablize something else, so I’m
not going to do it.”
I deﬁnitely enjoy the epiphanies when they come - when I can be working
on something and just realize that there’s a much better way of doing it.
That’s very rewarding but I can’t say that those happen every day. To a
lesser degree, there’s some insight where I can actually come home and
tell Anna, ”I ﬁgured something new out today!” That happens fairly often,
and that’s good.
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
94
Interviews
9.5
On Open Source
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Most people would say you’re one of the world’s
foremost gaming engineers. Do you think that in this world that there’s
enough of a range of tasks and depth to keep you intrigued for years to
come?
John Carmack: Sure, there are a lot of different things. Right now, I’m
spending more of my time in this lull or break, working on some things
in Linux. One of the things I’ve done is written two 3D drivers for Linux
or done a good chunk of the coding on them. That’s useful for me as a
developer, because I certainly do the high level stuff, the API level pro-
gramming, but it’s also good to go ahead and take it underneath that.
Doing some implementation level stuff on the device driver down to pro-
gramming the hardware gives me more scope, looking at things through
the entire process. There are a lot of programmers who only know things
from the top and don’t realize why things are sometimes the way they are
because of the structure that’s ”invisible” to them.
One of the other things that I’m considering doing is (because I like know-
ing things very clearly from the highest to the lowest level) spending some
time implementing my own network stack for the research and the learn-
ing experience. I’ve also got some experiments I want to try, ﬁnding out
how much overhead the operating system actually imposes on the rout-
ing time and queuing things down to a serial driver level and a packet
driver level. There’s some information that I’d like to get from below the
layers that you’re normally communicating with.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Just in Linux or Windows and Mac also?
John Carmack: Well the thing is that it’s just easier to do under Linux
because you’ve got the ability to take anything you want out. While Linux
is clearly not ready for replacing Windows on people’s desktops, there is
something fundamentally cool there.
The whole way I got into this is that someone had written a Linux driver
for the Matrox cards. I had been reading about it for a while. Appar-
ently they had it working barely with Quake 3. So I ﬁnally got around to
downloading it and checking it out. I was pretty impressed by how well it
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
95
Interviews
worked. It was slow but it was pretty nearly feature complete, good qual-
ity implementation. But there was this really obvious bug with the way
textures were swapping. They were swapping most recently used instead
of least recently so you’d see it thrash on the screen.
I knew exactly what it was doing so I said ”OK, this has the source code
available.” So I ﬁgured out how to download it, get access to the CVS
repository and all that, worked my way through the code, found the bug
and ﬁxed it! That’s just fundamentally neat.
The corollary of that is that Apple had exactly that same bug in their
driver for a while. So here we had a case of the same bug appearing in
two drivers, but the Linux one I was able to just go in and ﬁx it. While
there are certainly a lot of barriers to entry on a lot of levels with that, it’s
nice to have that ability. Fundamentally if you know that if you’re work-
ing on this system that’s all open source, if anything annoys you enough,
you can spend the time to go ﬁx it yourself. You don’t have to wait for
anyone. You don’t have to ask nicely for it, or wait for a patch.
It’s not usually cost effective time wise to go do it. But if something’s really
pissing you off, you just go ﬁnd the code and ﬁx it and that’s really cool.
9.6
More on Linux
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So that’s exactly your kind of attitude, hands on.
You don’t wait for anyone to issue an update, you’d rather do it yourself.
John Carmack: Right, so that’s why if I was to be doing some network-
ing research or whatever, it would be something where you could do it
in Linux, where if you want to you can go and gut parts of the operat-
ing system and say ”OK I’m just going to grossly cut all of this out right
now because I want to be doing something experimental.” There’s a lot
of freedom there.
And I do think over the course of the next couple of years, the usability
stuff will be straightened out. There are a lot of economic trends that
make it relevant. You start looking at PCs costing under $500 and there’s
a $90 Windows license in there. If people are just using it for the basic
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
96
Interviews
stuff, I think there will probably be a fairly signiﬁcant demand for a free
operating system.
There are a lot of zealots in the Linux space that just don’t have rationality
in their viewpoints, but there is some truth behind the hype on how good
it [Linux] actually is.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So you’re very focused and you drive yourself.
But have you thought about taking on a boss to help you learn new skills?
John Carmack: I can see there is some beneﬁt to having management
on some things. We brought Graeme on at the end of Q3 to help man-
age some aspects. It didn’t wind up having any real impact on the way I
was doing things, because Graeme’s not ﬁercely organized enough to stay
on top of every little thing. It turns out that my personal organization is
greater than what most managers would wind up imposing on me.
I am aware of the limits of my personal organization skills. I have that
list of a thousand things, and every once in a while I start bubble sorting
things up to the top. I do think that it would be great if somebody were
here whose primary job was to make sure they knew and understood all
of those because everyone has their own weaknesses in organizational
skill. You don’t recognize yourself doing it but there are some things that
you don’t want to deal with that end up bubbling down. I recognize the
beneﬁt of having somebody who’s kind of a conscience for you on the
workload.
Recently I put out a call for someone to be doing some conformance test-
ing on the OpenGL aspects of things, speciﬁcally the Linux driver stuff.
I’m doing a reasonable amount of coding on that, and I’m trying to be
reasonably conscientious about it, but I know that I’m directing things
in certain ways to meet my goals. I have the ideal desire to do the per-
fect implementation, but I recognize that in my limited time I wind up
directing myself not necessarily in the best coverage.
So sometimes it is good to have someone who can sit back and be a con-
science for your effort. But it’s all still a theoretical issue to me. I believe
that there can be beneﬁt but I’ve yet to see it demonstrated.
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
97
Interviews
9.7
Carmack the Student
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Less about organization then, what about a boss
as a teacher? Is there anyone from whom you feel you could learn from?
John Carmack: I actually learn things from almost anyone. This is one of
the major differences between me as a teenager and me now. My views
as a teenager were that ”I am smarter than all these people around me,
and therefore I will completely ignore anything that anyone has to say.” I
went through a couple semesters of college classes like that. I look back
on it now and realize that I was not treating things in the right way. Yeah,
maybe I was smarter than the professor but it didn’t mean that there
weren’t things I could learn from him.
The way I go about things now is that everyone I work with in the pro-
gramming level I learn something from. I can look at the time I spent
with Brian Hook. I learned some better C coding standards and stricter
use of struct and const that I wouldn’t normally do. That’s been a posi-
tive thing that I’ve improved on because of him. And then there’s Graeme
- I’m seeing him put some things together very quickly from the Java li-
braries - things that I would have rolled from scratch and taken longer to
do.
So it doesn’t take someone that’s necessarily a ”better” developer or pro-
grammer for them to have things that you can learn from; that’s a really
important lesson that I’ve learned over the last decade. There’s knowl-
edge waiting to be gained all around you in just about everything. There’s
beneﬁt to putting yourself in an information rich environment like a uni-
versity IF you’ve got the right attitude. If you’re looking for anything to
be learned from anywhere you can get it, rather than looking for the
one ”motherlode” of useful information where you’ve got everything to-
gether. You have to glean things. You have to be able to grab things from
anywhere you can get it.
During the development of Quake when we hired Michael Abrash, I was
really psyched about that because I learned a lot of my early PC program-
ming skills - assembly language and graphics - from his articles in Dr.
Dobbs. So that was really great to bring him on. I did pick up some fur-
ther things from him but it was interesting.. it was almost uncomfortable
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
98
Interviews
for a while because he got fairly deferential on the programming side to
me about things. Michael knew an immense amount of stuff, but I’ve still
been on this very quick learning curve.
So almost all the programmers I’ve worked with, I’ve learned something
from.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: OK you mentioned gleaning things from the
world around you. How about non-technical sources - recent books and
movies.
John Carmack: My favorite book in recent years has been A Deepness in
the Sky by Vernor Vinge. As far as movies go, I’m not sure what I’d say is
really inspiring. I see most of the reasonably good movies that come out.
Toy Story 2 was wonderful - I really enjoyed that.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: The Matrix?
John Carmack: Matrix was wonderful. All the great sci-ﬁ, action movies
and everything. I’m not too big into deep meaning movies, I go to movies
for entertainment and a lot of that basically plays out in our games also.
We are kinda the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie of computer games.
9.8
Quake and Simplicity
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Why do you think people like Quake 3?
John Carmack: Speciﬁcally what we set out to do with Quake 3 was just
a completely eyes-wide-open-focus on the game just being fun while
you’re playing it. There’s no sense of hubris about the grand design or
anything about it, or trying to impose a story or a tale on top of all this.
It’s looking at a game in it’s fundamental sense of what you’re doing has
to be fun. It’s not a matter of beating the game into submission or ac-
complishing something, the actions have to be fun.
There has to be something that you wanna just go out and do. People
don’t play softball because they want to beat the game of softball; it has to
be an action that’s fun by itself. I think that we succeeded in a lot of ways
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
99
Interviews
there. We expected and did receive a lot of feedback from the incestuous
core of our fanbase.
There certainly are people who want more and more complexity and so-
phistication in things. That is a viable direction to go for games, but it
does lead towards a stagnant core. You get like what you have in the ﬂight
simulators, where you have games that require you to read this giant
manual before you can get in and have fun. There have been ﬂight simu-
lators where you just jump in, ﬂy around and shoot things, and those are
fun and interesting. Then there are these serious simulators where you
have to convince yourself that you’re being entertained.
It’s possible to do a ﬁrst person shooter like that, where it requires so
much knowledge about what’s going on, how things are supposed to work,
strategies of all of these things, that it’s just not fun to sit down and play.
And there would be probably a couple of hundred thousand people that
would like that, but I wouldn’t actually be one of them. I don’t have the
time to sit down and learn it. I never got into any of the complex mods
that would require like a whole bunch of complex stuff to learn. I still like
playing a simple, fast game, where you jump in and have a good time, and
I think there are ﬁve times as many people in the game buying world that
also feel that way. But those 200,000 people that want the extremely so-
phisticated, complex games, they’ve got my email address and they make
themselves known. We set out expecting that.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So what was the last non-id game that you spent
more than 2 hours playing?
John Carmack: Probably F-Zero X on the Nintendo 64 - racing cars.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: have you ever thought of making a driving game?
John Carmack: We talked about it right after Wolfenstein. I was working
with some voxel-landﬁeld technology and we did a really brief demo of
a little car driving thing. But we’ve never taken anything close enough
to proof of concept. But if we did do a driving game, it would almost
certainly be in the fun genre, like the F-Zero games, rather than the really
serious driving simulations. And again, there are many valid paths to
games, but I have my personal biases, and they happen to be broadly
held enough that we can do successful games and still be doing games
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
100
Interviews
that I consider entertaining for me.
9.9
The Next id Game
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So you would describe your personal biases as
not necessarily so much driving but more about rocket launchers?
John Carmack: The games are for fun. And simulation games have never
been that big for me, as far as ﬂight simulators, driving simulators and
all of that. I recognize in some aspects the element of entertaining there,
and it’s certainly not like I’m saying ”these are no fun, nobody can enjoy
these,” but it’s just they haven’t been my personal favorites.
Early on I loved the RPG games, but as my life got busier and busier
with other stuff, I didn’t have that much time to spend on those. I’ve al-
ways loved the simple straightforward arcade games. And while they’ve
changed a lot in going from Gauntlet to Quake 3, they’re still the same
kind of fundamental things - you run around, you ﬁght your enemies,
you pick up stuff, you make it to the next level in time. It’s a funda-
mentally valid, core, primal gameplay element there, and I don’t feel bad
about even making relatively similar games like Quake, Quake 2, Quake
3 on the different styles of things. Just like there have always been driv-
ing games and ﬂying games, there’s always going to be action ﬁrst person
shooters now, and I think we’ve made good steps in each of our projects.
We probably are going to be going a different way with our next game,
because not everyone at the company does feel the same way I do about
that. So we’re likely going to be doing something a bit different next time,
but we haven’t exactly settled on it yet.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Have you decided if it’s going to still be a ﬁrst-
person game?
John Carmack: It’s very likely to still be a ﬁrst person game, but it may not
be an action game. Graeme and I have been sitting around talking about
game design ideas for different things, and they cover a pretty fair range,
exploring a few different choices that we’ve got, but we’re not prepared
to talk about any of them yet. They are likely to be ﬁrst person, almost
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
101
Interviews
certainly.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: I just thought it would be interesting if id went
into RTS or something else, the same way that Blizzard went from RTS
into creating the action RPG.
John Carmack: I’m not a real good real time strategy player. Actually,
I’ve never really sat down and played much of one. Just not my type of
thing. It’s just a whole difference of - the ﬁrst person games are the most
immersive kind.
Real time strategy games are among the least immersive, you’re directing
your forces, and it’s clearly not you in the game. I think it’s very likely
that we’ll be doing something that’s still ﬁrst person. It’s a small step to
third person, but I actually think there’s probably other companies that
are better suited to do third person, companies that have more directo-
rial ambitions.
Unlike many people in the games industry, I have absolutely zero desire
to be making movies that go on the computer. And that’s the downfall of
a lot of companies. A lot of game designers wish they were directors, but
I think you should make up your mind. And I’m clearly in the game de-
signer part, rather than the director part. That’s also the draw that puts
a lot of people towards third person games. Third person is deﬁnitely
better for showing off things like character animation. Steed would def-
initely love to go to something that was much more animation focused,
but it’s probably not going to be the next step. That’s not completely out
of the question, but I would bet on staying with something ﬁrst person.
9.10
On the Gaming Industry
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So it’s interesting that you say movies on your
computer are the ”downfall of some companies,” because a lot of the 3D
card companies like 3dfx and Nvidia actually use that as their mantra -
putting Hollywood on the desktop.
John Carmack: There are interesting aspects to that - one thing is that the
amount of labor required to do the highest quality utilization of today’s
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
102
Interviews
3D engines is very quickly approaching what you need in Hollywood set
design. Like right now, Quake 3 wasn’t really even close to pushing the
limits of what we could do if we were aiming for lush visuals, because we
had to maintain this fast speed throughout the whole thing.
But if somebody took basically this year’s level of technology, this Christ-
mas’s products and said ”I want to do the most visually stunning thing
that’s going to be the closest to the movies,” it’s possible to do that right
now beyond the level that people have really seen. The technology’s
there. And that’s where it’s been going for the past year or so on there,
speciﬁcally some things like full texturing of the levels where set design-
ers have to go in and airbrush their sets in the different ways and build
all these things up with models. That level of effort can now be spent in
computer games. It didn’t used to be that way.
In the days of Doom and Quake, you didn’t have the ability to put that
much labor into it. If you’ve got a room and a hallway and another room,
it’s like: hallway, block block ceiling. And that’s it, that’s all the possibility
you have to do, so there are limits to how much work can be done there.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So you’re always going to be in favor of creating
games with smaller teams of people; so that keeps the door open for the
kid in his garage with his friends down the street...
John Carmack: It’s not like we’ve tapped out all possible game genres. A
lot of people do complain about the industry in various ways, and there
is some real truth to the fact that the publishers don’t want to publish a
new idea. Chris Hecker from Deﬁnition 6, he’s one of the guys pushing
physics in a lot of ways; he does a lot of the geniusy stuff. He’s had this
little game demo that he’s been working on that’s a novel idea. And it’s
using physics as the core principle, but it’s not like ”let’s take physics into
a ﬁrst person shooter,” it’s a completely different game. It’s actually a
good game design to tie in with the physics. But the publishers just aren’t
interested in that.
And that’s too bad, but on the other hand, there are some positive signs
from some other things, like the guys who do simple little games, and
sell them over the internet and make a lot of money, like a couple hun-
dred thousand dollars a year on downloaded stuff. I’m heartened by that,
because it is neat to see that there are some people that can make good
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
103
Interviews
money doing games that are outside the mainstream; that’s possible be-
cause of the internet.
We were successful in shareware early on. With the original Keen tril-
ogy, we were making $100, 150 thousand a year on that. With the second
trilogy, we were up to making half a million a year from shareware. And
that was before we had any commercial boxes. And it looks like it’s pos-
sible to do even better than that nowadays. So that’s kinda cool. But the
mainstream boxes on the shelves, buying your endcaps and shelf space,
there’s not a lot of desire from the publishers to do interesting new things.
I’m sure there are new genres that are ready to pop up, but there’s some
resistance to that.
9.11
id is not a publisher
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Are you interested in Halo at all?
John Carmack: I’ve watched the movies of it; it looks pretty good. The
one problem right now is that there’s no way to really judge anything from
screenshots because any halfway competent rendering engine can ren-
der any given scene. And it’s only in how things tie together that there’s
any differentiation. Certainly the Bungie people, they’ve got a lot of tal-
ent. And they’ve been doing this basically as long as we have. They were
kind of id’s Mac shadow for many years. But now that they’ve gone ahead
and had some mainstream PC success, they’re doing pretty well.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Going back to creating new genres, and the re-
sistance from the publishers, is that something you’d be interested in
promoting, to help get new genres out there, maybe supplying money
to publish these games?
John Carmack: I’m positively not interested in being a publisher. That
was a multi-year argument at id. If you think back 5 years ago, all the
game developers wanted to break in to become publishers because there
were lots of the little teams. This was before everything consolidated
down to the few major ones. We argued over that for a long time, and
we self-published the original Quake shareware stuff, and when all was
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
104
Interviews
said and done, we probably lost money on it because of colossally bad
business management in different aspects of that. But ﬁnally everyone
agreed, especially as we see the publishers consolidating, coming down,
that it is much better to be a developer than a publisher. Because being
a software developer is this clean part of the industry, you hand off your
CD and you get your checks in the mail. While, being a publisher, it just
takes you into all these messy parts of the business that you really don’t
want to be, like getting people to pay you after they’ve taken and sold
your product. I don’t want any part of that side of the business.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: What about using your inﬂuence to say to some
publisher, hey you know, maybe you should give this a chance?
John Carmack: I don’t push a lot. I can toss an offhanded comment
about something like that, but I try not to undertake things that I know
that I won’t have the time and energy to push hard for. In fact that’s very
key to a lot of my focus. I’m willing to just ignore a whole lot of things.
And that’s pretty important, because so many things come in that are po-
tential demands on my time, and it’s just easy to see how people that are
in a similar situation, wind up just getting their entire days spoken for,
and not being able to do any work because every day, there’s phone calls
and emails from people that want to do something, they want to have an
interview, or pitch a business proposal.
Sometimes I wind up feeling guilty that I’m not doing more. Especially
this coming year, there are going to be a lot of divergent hardware de-
signs, and there’s not a clear direction where everybody thinks things
should be going. I’m telling myself that I should be out there, evangeliz-
ing things, and trying to bring a consensus, because I am in a fairly good
position to do that type of stuff. Microsoft listens to me on a lot of stuff.
And certainly all the hardware companies do, and there’s a good general
level of respect and all that. But during the development of Quake 3, the
time just wasn’t there; I couldn’t go do it.
And now I’m running around, trying to go hit a bunch of things, but I
know that even now I’m not going to be able to really follow through,
because it would practically be a full time job to just try and do that, to
try and shepherd some of the things in the industry in a direction that I
want it to go. I don’t have the hubris to think that the world’s going to hell
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
105
Interviews
if I don’t help it. So I can look at that and say, I’ll do my best to help in a
little way, but I’m not going to be able to give it the full attention.
9.12
The Trinity Thing
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Switching gears a bit, I was reading some stuff
about how now that Quake 3 has been put to bed, that you’re going to
spend a little more time doing more research on engines.
John Carmack: I’ve got a couple of engine things that I’m working on, as
far as research.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So is one of those things Trinity? I think there’s
been a little confusion about ”Trinity.”
John Carmack: I was never really certain how this got as confusing as
it did to everybody. After Quake, when I was starting on new render-
ing technologies and everything, everybody was just calling it ”the next
engine” or whatever. Michael Abrash suggested we just take Intel’s tack
of naming your next project after a river near you. We have the Trinity
River in Dallas, and so it was just like ”Trinity Engine,” the next step. And
of course we wound up not rolling that into a project because Quake II
was derivative of Quake I, and I wound up stopping [Trinity] to work on
Quake II, so there was never a speciﬁc project that was on. It was just like
when we were talking about the work that I was doing, and at the start of
Quake III, I went and did like six different research engines, for different
rendering techniques and everything.
But it’s still just the research work that I’m doing. It was like two voxel
things, a spacewarping thing, a lumigraph thing, and then some of the
stuff that actually turned into the Quake III engine, and some other stuff
like that.
That’s one thing that’s been one of the real strengths of id and my tech-
nical direction in particular. You see companies that are wed to a clever
idea; there are some speciﬁc games that you can probably name where
they have their idea and that’s what everything’s wrapped around. I’m
not tied to any of the particular ideas. Like I said, at the start of Quake
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
106
Interviews
III I had like six different things to go on, and I looked at all of them and
said, ”these are more intellectually neat,” but what we’re doing for Quake
III actually turned out to be kind of a righter path in many ways. And
I’ve got a couple of things that I’m going on right now. But there’s no one
that’s like got some magic tag on it, they’re just all the different things that
I’m going to be examining.
9.13
Voxels and Curves
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: You mentioned voxels and you’re doing some
research on that, do you think 3D hardware companies should be work-
ing on voxel acceleration? And what do you think of the voxel games that
have come out, like Delta Force?
John Carmack: The Voxel stuff in software.. I’ve written a few voxel en-
gines at one point, actually the early version of Shadowcaster, Raven’s
Origin title, actually had voxel ﬂoors in it at one time. But we wound
up taking that out when we rewrote the stuff to be more polygon based.
There are some real advantages to voxel representations of things, be-
cause it gives you complete texturing and detail geometry in many ways.
But I did these two voxel engines at the beginning of Quake III and it got
to the point where I thought that I could almost make them run in soft-
ware, but it would be at a fairly low resolution and compared to what you
could do, at that speed with hardware polygons, it doesn’t pay off in that
case.
I did do an analysis of what the memory access patterns would be and
everything; you could do a voxel ray-tracer in hardware with drastically
less hardware than what we’re actually using right now for all the triangle
rasterizers and I think it could be a much more compelling visual repre-
sentation in a lot of cases. But it’s gonna be really difﬁcult to see, I almost
hesitate to tell people to pursue something like that. I know that I did
some walkaround demos and everything, but the reason the PC industry
is as good as it is right now in hardware is because we all had the exam-
ple of SGI to look up to. We had working existence proofs of ”this clearly
works, look they’ve done it” and then it’s just a matter of matching and
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
107
Interviews
then exceeding their performance.
To recommend something completely different, like saying ”You should
go have your fab make you a voxel chip, you should just go try this, spend
millions of dollars on this,” I’m really hesitant to do that because we don’t
have a complete existence proof that says this is a necessary and suf-
ﬁcient rendering primitive to do a complete engine or something with.
Now if somebody did do a voxel caster there, you could go ahead and
get depth value and intermix it with current triangle stuff and that would
be an interesting intermediate step, but I honestly don’t think it would
take that much hardware, and someone right now, in this time of chaos
when everyone’s crazily trying to diversify their product, maybe someone
will try something like that, just on a lark, because they’re just fumbling
around for something to do.
I think there are some potential good things there, but I can’t conclusively
say this is the future direction, because while it works really well for envi-
ronments, and there’s some great stuff you can do with that, it’s less clear
how well it works for characters. You wind up saying, ”well maybe you
have to build them in a deformation matrix around them, and then when
you raycast into it bend the rays as it hits the deformation lattice.” But I
haven’t written a software version of that. I’d be hesitant to tell someone
that this is clearly a good idea until I can present a simulation showing
that it works, and that it looks more impressive than anything you can
do directly. And that’s not on my schedule right now to spend the time
to do because I’ve got a couple of things that are immediately pressing in
terms of research.
But I do think there is at least some signiﬁcant potential for that being
an interesting direction. Now the thing that I actually want to play down
on everyone is higher-order surface rendering, like curves and Nurbs and
subdivision surfaces and all of this stuff, which everyone’s all crazy about
now. After working with them for two years, they’re not all they’re cracked
up to be; there are all these issues. You don’t see them from the outside,
and this is the thing about being in the trenches as a developer.
If you just read the research papers and you understand how Bezier patches
and all this stuff works, and you think, wow, this is neat, this is just the
next step up from triangle primitives. And you don’t recognize all of these
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
108
Interviews
”in practice” problems, like with invalid normal but degenerate edges.
How you can’t do an arbitrary cut of a patch without raising it to like the
square of the order of the side, you can’t stitch two junctions by ﬁxing the
other things, there’s all of these little things that actually wind up being
a fairly signiﬁcant pain in the ass in different cases that you’re just not
aware of from this bird’s-eye view of it. And there may very well be all
those issues with voxels too, which is again why I’m hesitant to just get
up on a pulpit and say this is the future, because a lot of things look great
from the outside and aren’t necessarily so great when you get down to it.
9.14
Looking at the Competition
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So since you’re going back to your research, is
this going to have an effect on when the next id game is going to come
out?
John Carmack: It depends on what we wind up choosing for the next
step. Both of the technologies that I’m working on are stuff that can
ﬁt fairly well into the existing Quake 3 framework, so there is a possi-
bility that new technologies will wind up going into the next product.
Currently we have this wonderful opportunity where we’ve got this rock
solid, stable, expandable, ﬂexible engine where we could do a game de-
sign and not touch much of the engine... and that would be really nice
from a management standpoint. However, if we do that the stuff that I’m
doing today probably wouldn’t see store shelves for like three, four years
or something, and that’s just a long time for something to go. So there’s
going to be a really strong incentive to push some of the technology into
the next product.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Do you do much research by playing other games,
looking at competitors’ products?
John Carmack: I played Unreal most of the way through, I’ll probably
play Unreal Tournament most of the way through, although I haven’t yet,
aside from some of the demo stuff. I don’t do a really thorough can-
vassing, play everything that’s out there. Usually I watch over someone’s
shoulder when they’re playing the hot new game. But I don’t spend that
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
109
Interviews
much time actually playing other games. I certainly play more Quake 3
than any other games out there.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Is there someone in the company that does do
that?
John Carmack: Christian and Graeme play most of the new games. It
used to be Brandon who played every game, when he was at id, every-
thing funneled through there. Tim does it more for some kinds of like
research purposes; Tim’s fairly conscientious about looking through the
other stuff, but Graeme and Christian probably play the other games
more for fun.
9.15
Carmack’s Research
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Can you give us an overview on what you are
researching now?
John Carmack: One of the rendering engine things that I’m working on
speciﬁcally is a better lighting model. Quake 2 added radiosity lighting to
the calculations where you would get realistic bouncing of light on there,
but a lot of people actually didn’t like that because it took away from
some of the harder shadows where it kind of murked out more things,
even if it was in a more realistic way - a lot of people liked the stronger
shadows. In Quake 3 we went back to just a direct cast light, at least par-
tially because I didn’t want to do the ﬁnite element radiosity on the curve
patches. The other thing is allowing us to manually make things look
better by giving the artist the ability to texture and cut geometry every-
where. So those are the two directions and in fact, they can be combined
or used together. They both have interesting technical challenges associ-
ated with them. Those are things which may very well show up into our
next project.
There’s some other research stuff I’m working on which isn’t game engine
related. I’m working on some vision research with webcams, like some
head tracking stuff. There might be some kind of gimmick things I can
integrate into games with that. Like when you’re bobbing and shaking
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
110
Interviews
your head, your character can do that. Or maybe like the holographic
window scenes where you move your head and it actually changes the
view for you. I don’t think the webcams have a fast enough latency to do
that without some lag, but that’s still some interesting stuff. There are
other levels you can take this to, with facial expressions, etc.
I think there are probably more applications for all this than I can think
of. All the little interesting discontinuities happened with changes in
input/output devices. Things changed when people started using the
mouse for everything. I think ”computer vision” is practical enough that
it may very well have a ”mouse-like” effect on things. After all, there were
things that you could do with the mouse that you wouldn’t do with the
keyboard. That’s still in the random guess phase of things.
There are interesting things now that we have enough CPU power to do
some pretty good stuff. And it also, unlike a lot of the graphics stuff, has
a lot of unsolved research problems. There’s active research going on but
we don’t have ”that SGI example” to know how to put things together and
just worry about making it fast.
The last direction I’m interested in is getting some more generalization
of 3D technology, moving towards being able to do things with other ren-
dering stuff like HTML inside 3D worlds, and being able to build little
cyber space things that are not speciﬁcally game related. I believe there’s
an infrastructure framework that we can build. We can build a ﬁrst per-
son shooter, but the framework is general enough that we can do other
things with it.
All the existing software is built clearly as a ﬁrst person shooter game, but
then people do other interesting things with the technology. It always
costs a bit to generalize. You can always make something more efﬁcient
by specializing, but at some point you reach a decision where the cost to
generalize is not that painful and the beneﬁts by having a more general
platform can be pretty signiﬁcant. I think we’re at that point for 3D games
right now.
We clearly weren’t two years ago. We were still caring about every last lit-
tle frame to squeeze out any bit of performance. This isn’t the case any-
more with the trends in hardware acceleration, especially with geometry
acceleration, much faster CPUs, more RAM, etc. I think we can do things
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
111
Interviews
that are 90% or more as fast as the specialized version, and still have the
possibility to do a ton of other interesting things with it.
9.16
Miscellaneous Bits
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: So you might be thinking of a persistent Quake
world where people are having conversations and such.
John Carmack: Yeah, not even necessarily Quake related. I think there
are some interesting things to be done in communication with the medium.
You see people follow each other around, meet on a server, etc. There’s
a lot of potential directions there. I wouldn’t tag it with virtual reality be-
cause VR is a term laced with death and destruction. There’s never been
a successful VR company, but I think a lot of that was really because the
time wasn’t right technically. In a lot of cases, creativity and innovation
are constrained by technical curves.
Speciﬁcally this comes up a lot with Doom. It took a lot of cleverness,
creativity, and smarts to do Doom but all that cleverness, creativity, and
smarts ﬁve years previously wouldn’t have mattered because it just wasn’t
possible at the time. There are times that are appropriate for new inno-
vations to happen.
I think that the next couple of years will be one of those times for some
of those innovations to happen, like the generalizing of 3D interfaces.
Everyone goes on and says that at some point the internet and the web
will have a 3D interface, in this vague, airy sense. But the concrete details
never come out on what actually needs to be done. It may be time for
something like that and it may not.
I’m looking at these different directions on things and I’m going to pursue
all of them, and I’m going to wind up following through on the ones that
are most promising.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Is Jan Paul (Mr. Elusive) going to continue on
with the company?
John Carmack: He is dead set on ﬁnishing up his college studies. He
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
112
Interviews
won’t commit to it yet, but we’re probably going to have him back. We’re
certainly going to be working with him on various things, but we have
ofﬁcially offered him a job if he wants it.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: Do you recommend that people go to school or
not?
John Carmack: If you go into it for the right reasons, it can be a good
place. University can be a very information rich environment. I do look
back and realize that I wasted some of the time I had there. I could have
been going in and using their graphics workstations and other facilities
that I didn’t take advantage of.
If it’s just a matter of going in to get a degree so you can get a job, then
I’m not wild about that. If you’re going there to meet smart people, ex-
pand horizons, and learn some things, then I’m all for that. Some people
learn so much better like that. Me, I’ve always been the type that reads a
manual or something like that. I just prefer to learn that way, but not ev-
eryone’s like that. I don’t think college is a bad thing, but I would not hold
to some truth that ”you must go to college, it’s the only way to succeed”
because clearly it’s not.
I do think that at least for young and fast moving industries like the inter-
net and game design, talent and a resume that shows you’ve done some
things means more than a degree. I’ve never asked someone ”do you
have a degree?” It’s more a matter of ”what have you done?” If it’s a choice
between sitting in a lecture hall and taking a test or staying at home to
write a game mod to prove you have some talent, then I think that can be
a reasonable way to go.
Bob ”CalBear” Colayco: One last quickie - what consoles do you have
access to right now?
John Carmack: The only one I have hooked up at home now is the Nin-
tendo 64, but wrapped up in cords, we have Playstation and Saturn and
others.
CHAPTER 9. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

Chapter 10
John Carmack Interview
This interview was conducted by John ”JCal” Callaham for Stomped on
Aug 04, 2000.
http://web.archive.org/web/20000815070142/http://www.stomped.com/
published/jcal9654375651.html
Interview
Prologue
John Carmack was here at QuakeCon earlier today doing an TV interview
for Gamespot TV and generally wandering the QuakeCon grounds. How-
ever, Carmack was nice enough to take some time to do an interview for
Stomped.
113

John Carmack Archive
114
Interviews
Questions
John ”JCal” Callaham: What do you think of the convention so far? Is it
gratifying to see all these people here to basically celebrate a game that
you helped to create?
John Carmack: Well, the whole history of QuakeCon has been wonder-
ful. I mean, just from the very ﬁrst get-together about lots of people with
poor planning crowding into a hotel and everything to the pretty well put
together, well run convention in the past couple of years. It’s impressive
to see them growing continuously in size and to have more and more
people attending and more vendors. Tim (Willits) came in and said ”It’s
like a mini-E3 this year.”
John ”JCal” Callaham: The ﬁrst Quake 3 engine based games are now
beginning to appear. Star Trek Voyager: Elite Force and F.A.K.K. 2 are
already out in some form and others are coming out. What do you think
about the quality of the games that are using your engine?
John Carmack: Well, Star Trek has been nice in that they (Raven Soft-
ware) actually got a reprieve on their deadline push. They were able to
go in and put in that extra set of polish that game developers always wish
they had, while F.A.K.K. was kind of in the opposite sense were they (Rit-
ual Entertainment) were really kind of like right up to the wire to ﬁx the
last things before they get it out, which I hope works out OK for them.
People seem to be really enjoying playing F.A.K.K. and it look gorgeous;
they have wonderful stuff. There is deﬁnitely the danger, though, that
they have maybe been a little bit to close to the wire and we will see how
that plays out.
John ”JCal” Callaham: You must also be gratiﬁed by the interest that Sega
has in Quake 3 Arena. What do you think of their port of your game to the
Dreamcast?
John Carmack: Well, actually Sega didn’t do it. It was done by Raster
Entertainment. It look spectacular, doesn’t it? I mean, when you look at
it across from there it looks like the PC version in many cases. In fact, for a
lot of people it will end up looking better than the PC version because we
used compressed textures on the Dreamcast where the average person
CHAPTER 10. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
115
Interviews
starting up Quake 3 get the slightly blurred textures on there unless they
got a 32 meg card and they crank everything up, while on the Dreamcast
you get most of that detail just kind of out of the box. Of course, a lot of
types of games just tend to look better on a TV set with the kind of blurred
together very cheap anti-alising.
John ”JCal” Callaham: Sega is also playing up the fact that you can play
the Quake 3 port with Dreamcast players and PC players on the Inter-
net. Do you think that’s an important feature to have to bring more of a
mainstream player over to Quake 3 in this regard?
John Carmack: Well, I actually think it will be important to keep them
fairly separated. We are probably going to have two masters where one
is Dreamcast-only and one is kind of open, because there is going to be
such a huge delta between the people who are going in playing with the
joypad versus the people going in playing with the mouse and keyboard.
I just think that would not be a whole lot of fun to be playing with your
joypad unless you got really, really good and want to go out to the open
tournament area.
John ”JCal” Callaham: I know you can’t talk about your current project,
but how are things at id right now?
John Carmack: Well we got lots of really interesting technology coming
out. We have got the strongest programming team we have ever had
in the company where we’ve got programmers that are working on ar-
eas that we have conventionally short-shrifted. Some of the things like
sound and game logic are things where I would just always do something
that’s acceptable that would get the job done. There was never like a pri-
mary focus for it. Now we’ve got expert programmers dedicated to it.
We’ve got a programmer dedicated to making great sound; a programmer
dedicated to making great game technology; a programmer dedicated to
great tools. Of course, we are going to have great graphics and great net-
working and all this type of stuff we have always been known for, but a
lot of the areas that have been kind of our secondary strength are going
to be brought to primary level and that’s going to be really cool.
CHAPTER 10. JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

Chapter 11
Knee Deep in John Carmack
This interview was conducted by Billy ”Wicked” Wilson for Voodoo Ex-
treme on Sep 18, 2000.
http://web.archive.org/web/20010624154450/http://www.voodooextreme.
com/games/interviews/carmack/
Interview
Prologue
John Carmack, Co-founder of id Software and Lead Programmer; creator
of engines. From the early days of DOOM id has been on the bleed-
ing edge of the ﬁrst-person-shooter scene, revolutionizing the 3D action
genre. Today, we have part three of our lengthy interview series with
John, featuring questions submitted by many top industry profession-
als, including Valve Software’s (Half-Life) Gabe Newell, 3D Realms’ (Duke
Nukem) Programmer Brandon ”GreenMarine” Reinhart, Epic Games (Un-
real, Unreal Tournament) Designer Cliff Bleszinski, Human Head Stu-
dios’ (RUNE) Chris Rhinehart and of course your pals – the Voodoo Ex-
treme chumps (Billy [most of the questions], Apache [editing and HTML],
116

John Carmack Archive
117
Interviews
Eidolon [he’s just a chump]). Topics include: DOOM III, id Software,
games in general, technology, programming and much more. Enjoy the
third part of our series, we hope you enjoyed reading it and can’t wait for
more DOOM III goodness.
Questions
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: During the development of Quake III Arena, you
released Q3Test. Are you planning on doing something similiar with DOOM
3? If so, when would you plan on doing it (rather, how far along in the de-
velopment process, not a speciﬁc date or time frame)?
John Carmack: There will certainly be a test. I am a ﬁrm believer in the
beneﬁts to the ﬁnal product of doing that.
Q3Test was released too far ahead of the commercial product. The game
engine was nearly ready to ship, but the bot code was still completely
unresolved, and wound up causing the real ship date to be much later
than expected. We will probably try to have a test for the next product
much closer to full beta time.
Don’t hold your breath.
CliffyB; Epic Games: The climate for a successful FPS has changed dra-
matically since Doom ﬁrst hit the market. As great as Doom was, any
game that comes out now and features 40 hours of mindless shooting
with key/door/switch puzzles will be ravaged in the press and sales will
suffer. Half Life didn’t just raise the bar for SP FPS gaming, it destroyed it,
and with the possible exception of System Shock 2 and Deus Ex no game
has come close to capturing the public’s heart...and gaming dollar.
John Carmack: You won’t get any argument from me about the signiﬁ-
cance of Half Life.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: We rarely see any major sound advances in games
these days, seems most developers focus on the visuals. Are you planning
on doing anything different with the sound engine in Doom3? I ask this
as, as we’ve seen in some recent games like System Shock 2, in creating a
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
118
Interviews
genuinely creepy game, sound can be an incredible thing.
John Carmack: Graeme’s primary task is going to be a completely new
sound engine. Coupled with the fact that this will be the ﬁrst project
where I am comfortable using threads (previously the cross-platform is-
sues have nixed it for me) for required background streaming, we should
have quite literally an order of magnitude more audio richness than in
our previous games.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: Has id ever thought of doing JUST engines/technology,
rather than developing games, or would you get bored with this?
John Carmack: It wouldn’t work.
It would be a pretty fair analogy to say that writing a game engine and
selling it to someone without having actually built a game with it would
be like writing a program and selling it to someone without trying to
compile it. Even if you know what you are doing, you are going to miss
important things.
Even now, as we test the DOOM renderer, the level designers constantly
present me with pathological uses of resources that I would never con-
sider doing, but they did the ﬁrst day. Programmers tend to avoid doing
things that are going to hurt their code. Level designers don’t know any
better.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: Support for bump mapping? If there is, can you
expand on that? Is it artist produced bumpmaps, or procedural?
John Carmack: Oh, yes.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: What’s your favorite Arcade / console game?
John Carmack: Hmmm. If I had to pick a number one for each, it would
probably be the arcade Super Mario Brothers and the original Sonic the
Hedgehog.on genesis. I took a job at a pizza parlor when I was ﬁfteen in
part because they had a SMB machine.
I loved most of the classic arcade games. The direct-acting feel of the
controls on the old games is almost lost in arcades today, with all of the
vaguely-working gun games and the ﬁghting games with their time de-
pendent blind control sequences.
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
119
Interviews
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: Any personal interest in doing a game outside
of the FPS realm - I’m thinking of the comments you made on doing a
Commander Keen game on the GameBoy.
John Carmack: I get the urge to do programming-in-the-small at least
once a year, but I don’t think I could devote myself to doing a good job
on another platform without abandoning more pressing work on the PC
platform.
The pace of Moore’s law with regards to the history of gaming makes for
some interesting thinking. Our data sets and processing are such that
every arcade game I ever played as a teenager could be included, and
run simultaneously, with the resources that we currently use for a single
level. While intellectually I know that throwing an extra dozen rendering
passes on all our surfaces now is The Right Thing for our market, part of
me would still like to take 64k and really make it count again.
My interest in rocketry over the last year has given me some vague no-
tions of a hard sci-ﬁgame of strategy or role-playing in the solar system
a couple hundred years from now, but I doubt I will pursue it.
I do think the time is right to have FPS infrastructure transcend its market
niche and become the general infrastructure that VRML and others al-
ways envisioned. That was one of my major pitches post-Q3, but it wasn’t
received with much enthusiasm - most of the people here are game guys,
not infrastructure guys.
I have also proposed two other games that were still ﬁrst person action
games, but with different enough play styles to stand apart from our pre-
vious work. In the far distant future, when DOOM ﬁnally ships, we will
certainly go through the whole debate again.
Gabe Newell; Valve Software: With Gameboy Advanced just around the
corner, still not really a 3D capable device, what would John like to see in
the way of a handheld gaming platform?
John Carmack: I can’t believe there is going to be another gaming de-
vice that still has the concept of ”tiles”. I am really quite shocked. The
Atari lynx showed how it should be done YEARS ago: a memory mapped
framebuffer, a reasonable CPU, a blitter coprocessor, and uniﬁed mem-
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
120
Interviews
ory (large form factor and short battery life were it’s problems). Several
more backwards handheld systems have unfortunately been produced
since then.
A device that was basically half or a quarter the speed and memory of
the U64, but with a similar architecture, would have made a great hand-
held. However, I wouldn’t be surprised if the hardware optimum involved
having 256k or so of embedded video memory on the LCD/graphics con-
troller. It wouldn’t be as convenient to program, but it would let it get
away with a much lower performance memory subsystem.
Gabe Newell; Valve Software: Ken Perlin has been working with Microsoft
and the hardware developers to incorporate his noise functions into their
chipsets. How useful does John think this will be?
John Carmack: At the Hardcore Game Developer’s Conference, Ken was
giving his talk and he asked the (intended to be rhetorical) question ”Who
here doesn’t think this is a good idea for hardware?” I actually raised my
hand. It’s not that I have anything against noise functions (although I will
admit a bit of a bent towards raw data over proceduralism), but that I am
keenly aware of the effect of adding extra features. Even a good or harm-
less feature will have some impact on the pace of shipping a product,
and I would rather have whatever engineering and driver writing effort
would have gone to supporting noise functions, instead go to stabilizing
and optimizing the existing features. Or work on something truly impor-
tant, like really solving the shade tree temporary problem in an accept-
able fashion, or adding more bits of precision. Heck, more bits of preci-
sion are practically a requirement for doing most of the crazy synthesist
things you do with lots of noise functions.
Gabe Newell; Valve Software: What advice would he give other develop-
ers to help preempt patent litigation?
John Carmack: I just don’t know what to do about software patents. There
probably isn’t another issue that can make me feel so helplessly frus-
trated.
Patents are supposed to help promote invention and allow beneﬁts to
accrue to inventors. By most deﬁnitions, I would be considered an ”in-
ventor” of sorts, and patents sure as hell aren’t helping me out.
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
121
Interviews
The idea that I can be presented with a problem, set out to logically solve
it with the tools at hand, and wind up with a program that could not be
legally used because someone else followed the same logical steps some
years ago and ﬁled for a patent on it is horrifying.
To laymen, all of programming is alchemy, and trying to convince them
that any given software patent is ”obvious” or ”clearly follows from the
problem” is really tough.
The only way to ﬁght it is with legal and political means, and I don’t have
the skills or tools to even formulate a plan of attack. I give money to
causes that try to ﬁght those battles.
The only scenario that I can see would be to have enough truly, blatantly
stupid patents prosecuted that someone could make a stand in congress
and show the public in an understandable way just how wrong it is.
On a personal level, I refuse to patent anything that I am involved in.
Anyone that has ever gotten an idea based on any of my work and done
something better with it - good for you.
Chris Rhinehart; Human Head Studios: From what I’ve read, Doom3 is
intended to have a strong single-player experience. What do you antici-
pate to be the biggest design hurdles to overcome while creating Doom3,
as opposed to designing a title intended primarly for multiplayer?
John Carmack: We sort of went into Q3 thinking that the multi-player
only focus was going to make the game design easier. It turned out that
the lack of any good unifying concept left the level designers and artists
without a good focal point, and there was more meandering around that
we cared for. The hardest thing is deciding what to focus on, because
DOOM meant different things to different people. We have decided to
make the single player game story experience the primary focus, but many
people would argue that DOOM was more about the multi-player.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: When do you think computers will become fast
enough so that developers can dump BSP based VSD algorithms for more
ﬂexible ones?
John Carmack: I think this has been mis-characterized for a long time
- None of the Quake games have had what I would call a ”BSP based
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
122
Interviews
VSD algorithm”. The visibility associated with quake is a cluster to clus-
ter potentially visible set (PVS) algorithm, masked by an area connectiv-
ity graph (in Q2 and Q3), followed by hierarchical frustum culling (which
does use the BSP). The software renderers then performed an edge based
scan-line rasterization algorithm, which resulted in zero-overdraw for
the world.
Early in Q1’s development, I pursued ”beam trees”, which were truly a
BSP based visibility algorithm that did exact visibility by tracking unﬁlled
screen geometry going front to back, but the log2 complexity scaling fac-
tor lost out to the constant complexity factor from the PVS.
That highlights an important point that some graphics programmers don’t
appreciate properly - it is the performance of the entire system that mat-
ters, not a single metric. It is very easy to go signiﬁcantly slower while
drawing less primitives or with less overdraw, because you spent more
time deciding which ones to not draw than it would have taken to draw
them in a more optimized manner. This applies heavily to visibility culling
and level of detail work, and is much more signiﬁcant now with geometry
processors and static meshes.
The PVS system had two signiﬁcant beneﬁts: constant time lookup, and
complete automation (no designer input required).
Through Q2 and Q3, the ”complete automation” advantage started to de-
teriorate, as designers were coerced into marking more and more things
as detail brushes to speed up the processing, placing hint brushes to con-
trol the cluster sizes, or manually placing area-portals.
The principle drawbacks of the PVS are the large pre-processing time, the
large storage space cost, and the static nature of the data.
The size and space drawbacks were helped with detail-brushes, which
basically made a more complex map seem less complex to the visibility
process, but they required the level designers to pro-actively take action.
It has been interesting to watch the designers’ standard practices. Almost
nobody just picks a policy like ”all small trim will be detail brushes”. In-
stead, they tend to completely ignore detail brushes until the map pro-
cessing time reaches their personal pain threshold. Here at Id, we usu-
ally didn’t let maps take more than a half-hour to process (on our huge
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
123
Interviews
16 CPU server.), but I heard tales from other companies and the commu-
nity of maps that were allowed to take overnight or all weekend to vis.
That is a mistake, but the optimize-for-vis-time guidelines are not widely
understood.
The static nature of a pre-computed PVS showed up most glaringly when
you had your face in front of a closed door, but the game was running
slow because it was drawing everything behind the door, then drawing
the door on top of it. I introduced areaportals in Q2 to allow designers to
explicitly allow large sections of the vis to be pruned off when an entity
is in a certain state. This is much more efﬁcient than a more generalized
scheme that actually looked at geometric information.
In the Q1 timeframe, I think the PVS was a huge win, but the advantage
deteriorated somewhat as the nature of the rendering datasets changed.
In any case, the gross culling in the new engine is completely different
from previous engines. It does require the designers to manually placed
portal brushes with some degree of intelligence, so it isn’t completely au-
tomated, but I expect that for commercial grade levels, there will be less
portal brushes than there currently are hint brushes. It doesn’t have any
signiﬁcant pre-processing time, and it is an exact point-to-area, instead
of cluster-to-cluster. There will probably also be an entity-state based
pruning facility like areaportals, but I haven’t coded it yet.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: The shader rendering pipeline [in DOOM 3] -
completely re-written from Quake III? How are you going to handle the
radically different abilities of todays cards to produce a similar visual ef-
fect on each? For example I’m thinking of the presence or non presence
of register combiners, and the different implemntations of these exten-
sions.
John Carmack: The renderer is completely new, and very different in
structure from previous engines. Interestingly, the interface remained
fairly close for a long time, such that I was able to develop most of the
DOOM renderer using the rest of Q3 almost unmodiﬁed. It ﬁnally did
diverge, but still not too radically.
The theoretically ideal feature set for a 3D accelerator would be:
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
124
Interviews
Many texture units to allow all the lighting calculations to be done in a
single pass. I can use at least eight, and possibly more if the reﬂection
vector math needs to burn texture units for its calculations. Even with the
exact same memory subsystem, this would more than double the render-
ing speed over a current dual texture chip.
Flexible dependent texture reads to allow specular power function lookups
and non-triangulation dependent specular interpolation. No shipping
card has this yet. I was initially very excited about the possibility that the
ATI Radeon would be able to do some of this, but it turns out to not quite
be ﬂexible enough. I do fault Microsoft for adopting ”bumped environ-
ment mapping” as a specialized, degenerate case of dependent texture
reads.
Dot3 texture blending. This is critical for bump mapping. Embossing
and bump env mapping don’t cut it at all. GeForce and Radeon have this
now, and everyone will follow.
Flexible geometry acceleration. I can’t use current geometry accelera-
tors to calculate bumped specular, so the CPU must still touch a lot of
data when that feature is enabled. Upcoming geometry processors will
be powerful enough to do it all by themselves. I could also use multiple
texture units to get the same effect in some cases, if the combiners are
ﬂexible enough.
Destination alpha and stencil buffer support are needed for the basic
functioning of the renderer. Every modern card has this, but no game
has required it yet.
The ideal card for DOOM hasn’t shipped yet, but there are a couple good
candidates just over the horizon. The existing cards stack up like this:
Nvidia GeForce[2]: We are using these as our primary development plat-
form. I play some tricks with the register combiners to get a bit better
quality than would be possible with a generic dual texture accelerator.
ATI Radeon: All features work properly, but I needed to disable some
things in the driver. I will be working with ATI to make sure everything
works as well as possible. The third texture unit will allow the general
lighting path to operate a bit more efﬁciently than on a GeForce. Lack-
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
125
Interviews
ing the extra math of the register combiners, the specular highlights don’t
look as good as on a GeForce.
3DFX Voodoo4/5, S3 Savage4/2000, Matrox G400/450, ATI Rage128, Nvidia
TNT[2]: Much of the visual lushness will be missing due to the lack of
bump mapping, but the game won’t have any gaping holes. Most of these
except the V5 probably won’t have enough ﬁll-rate to be very enjoyable.
3DFX Voodoo3, S3 Savage3D/MX, Matrox G200, etc: Without a stencil
buffer, much of the core capabilities of the renderer are just lost. The
game will probably run, but it won’t be anything like we intend it to be
viewed. Almost certainly not enough ﬁll rate.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: The game side is C++, why not the rest of the
code?
John Carmack: It’s still a possibility, but I am fairly happy with how the
internals of the renderer are represented in straight C code.
Gabe Newell; Valve Software: John has consistently made very clear de-
cisions about the scope of projects id has undertaken, which I would say
is one of the main reasons id has been such a consistent producer over an
extended period of time. Not having spoken with John about it directly,
I think I understand his rational for focusing id on the Doom project.
For the beneﬁt of other developers, are there a couple of heuristics John
uses to decide what does and doesn’t make sense to undertake on a given
project?
John Carmack: The basic decision making process is the same for almost
any choices: assess your capabilities, value goals objectively, cost esti-
mate as well as you can, look for synergies to exploit and parasitic losses
to avoid. Maximize the resulting values for an amount of effort you are
willing to expend.
Computer games do have some notable aspects of their own, though.
Riding the wave of Moore’s Law causes timeliness to take on a couple
new facets. Every once in a while, new things become possible or prag-
matic for the ﬁrst time, and you have an opportunity to do something
that hasn’t been seen before, which may be more important than lots of
other factors combined.
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
126
Interviews
It also cuts the other way, where something that would have been a great
return on the work involved becomes useless or even a liability when you
miss your time window. Several software rendering engines fell into that
category.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: Id traditionally provides the fastest engine out
there for the game types that it does. Bearing in mind that Doom3 is go-
ing to be far more single player focussed, is there any change in focus
from making the engine the fastest it can be, to more of a designer / con-
tent friendly environment - bearing in mind that probably 75% of a single
player content is designer built?
John Carmack: Yes. I am spending a huge amount of graphics horse-
power to allow the engine to be ﬂexible in ways that game engines have
never been before. It is a little scary to drop down from the ultra-high
frame rates we are used to with Q3, but I ﬁrmly believe that the power of
the new engine will enable a whole new level of game content.
I am hoping that the absolute top-of-the-line system available when the
game ships will be capable of running it with all features enabled and
anti-aliasing on at 60hz, but even the fastest cards of today are going to
have to run at fairly low resolutions to get decent frame rates. Many will
choose to drop a feature or two to get some speed back, but they still
won’t be able to get near 60hz.
Remember, the game won’t ship for a long time yet, and today’s cards will
seem a bit quaint by then.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: How committed is id to producing user modiﬁ-
able content? Obviously making user modiﬁable multiplayer games is a
long way different from providing user modiﬁable scripting systems, pro-
ducing speciﬁc animations and so on. What kind of tools will be used to
create animations for instance, and will any pre-parsing tools be released
to the public?
John Carmack: The decisions to integrate all tools (editor and map pro-
cessing) directly into the executable, and to make map source data re-
quired for loading in addition to derived data, make the new game far
and away the easiest to create content for. Every installation that can
play the game can edit the game.
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
127
Interviews
Also, I have banished the last of the binary ﬁle formats, so everything
(except standard data ﬁles like .wav and .tga) is now in easily explored
and understood text ﬁles.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: Given that you’ve made a public declaration that
Id has the strongest programming team it’s ever had, what’s your per-
sonal role in the software development? Up til now it would appear that
you’ve always had your hands in whatever is going on, is this going to
change in the development of Doom3?
John Carmack: Jim [ Dose - new programmer, formerly of Ritual] and
Robert [Duffy] have large blocks of code in the new game and UI scripting
that I haven’t ever looked at, and Graeme’s sound system will be another
one. Jan Paul’s bot code in Q3 is one big black box to me.
It has been a strong temptation to just say ”I am working with Smart Peo-
ple, they can handle it”, but that would not be a good plan. I need to
build up more discipline about reviewing all parts of the code, because
my global knowledge of all aspects of the project has always been an im-
portant part of making good decisions.
Billy ”Wicked” Wilson: Has video technology advanced as quickly as
you would like? Are you impressed with what nVidia, 3dfx, and others
have done, or a tad frustrated (wish they have done more/made more
advances)?
John Carmack: Even after all my experience, I ﬁnd that I still underesti-
mate the rate of progress. During Q3, I spent some time thinking about
what could be done with stencil shadow volumes as a required feature. I
thought about how the technology could be used at a reasonable cost if
you designed an outdoor game, because then you would have a simple
case with a single orthographic light - the sun.
That would have been a reasonable feature spec for a game shipping this
christmas, but turned out to be a drastic understatement of what I wound
up doing for DOOM. Eighteen months ago, I probably would have had a
difﬁcult time accepting how much hardware power the new DOOM ren-
derer is exploiting.
Brandon Reinhart; 3DRealms: Where do you derive inspiration now
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
128
Interviews
that you are the master of your industry?
John Carmack: There are some things lost as you progress through a
large learning curve. Early on, there is the bewildering sense of how
huge a ﬁeld is. Then you move into the fun part where you have enough
grounding to understand the issues, and you are constantly getting the
ﬂashes of insight as you understand the solutions that other people have
developed, and you begin to formulate your own approaches.
Eventually, you reach a point where the ﬁeld starts to dry up a bit, and
you ﬁnd that you can sometimes read an entire book and not feel that you
really learned anything new. There are certainly still an inﬁnite number
of things to learn, but the mean time between epiphanies increases.
Most of the motivation remains internal. Being able to see The Right
Thing, then program it into existence out of thin air is still the core won-
der of programming for me.
Another way to supplement things is to start learning something from a
completely different ﬁeld. I have been reading Sutton’s ”Rocket Propul-
sion Elements” like I used to read Foley and Van Dam’s ”Computer Graph-
ics: Principles and Practice” - practically every page has something new
for me to integrate into my understanding.
Gabe Newell; Valve Software: How will you exploit a broadband only de-
sign target?
John Carmack: The biggest thing that broadband will do is just save a
lot of twitchy programmer time spent optimizing for the modem straw.
This will increase ﬂexibility and let developers concentrate on making
the environment and game play more fun. Clearly, that is a good thing
all by itself.
Voice (probably with several optional vocoders) is a no-brainer once we
get more bandwidth, and even talking-head webcam video becomes a
useful possibility.
I’m not sure of the exact utility of it, but it becomes feasible to send and
receive packets from multiple sources on a real-time basis, which you
can’t afford to do with a modem. This may enable some architectures
that are more clustered instead of the binary boundary of client / server.
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
129
Interviews
Chris Rhinehart; Human Head Studios: John, you once mentioned years
ago that, in hindsight, you had wished that instead of jumping right into
Quake that you had combined the Doom render engine and the Quake/Quakeworld
network architecture, resulting Doom multiplayer that was internet friendly.
However, you also have stated that you like to start with a clean slate
when beginning a new project. Are you starting with a clean slate for
Doom3, or are there carryover components from Q3A?
John Carmack: With hindsight, I thought that Q1’s technology could
have been developed in two parts, with QC and client/server infrastruc-
ture combined with a tweaked DOOM graphics engine for one game, fol-
lowed by the full 3D engine in the next game. I think that would have
allowed us to produce two games in one year each, instead of spending
18 months on Q1. I still think trying to aim for one year development
cycles is a good thing for developers, allowing them to be a little more
daring and focused than with 2+ year cycles, but you can’t change every-
thing and still build anything in that timeframe.
All of the earlier projects, from Keen1 to Keen4 to Wolfenstein to Doom to
Quake had been a completely new codebases each time, but everything
since Q1 has involved signiﬁcant code re-use.
Since then, we have stayed in a framework that has allowed upgrades to
different parts of the codebase without rewriting everything from scratch.
Its not ”modular” in the sense that major improvements get dropped in
without disturbing the rest, but even with hacking in lots of places to in-
tegrate signiﬁcant changes, there has still been a huge amount of re-use.
GlQuake brought OpenGL rendering. QW brought new network code. Q2
brought game DLLs and the integrated and enhanced rendering DLL ar-
chitecture. Q3 brought an almost completely new rendering engine and
the QVM support. All of those changes were done without ever ”break-
ing” things in a truly fundamental way.
With the new DOOM renderer, I was able to do all the rendering develop-
ment with very little change to a copy of the Q3 codebase. It was forked
off before the rest of the team started on the Q3 mission pack, and I had
to make a few tweaks here and there, but nothing very substantial. It is a
huge help to have all the existing facilities of player movement, weapons,
third person, noclip, cvars, console commands, etc, all present while I
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
130
Interviews
just concentrated on new rendering algorithms.
In the past couple months, the codebase has changed dramatically as
Jim Dose completely gutted the old game logic, and I changed the way
the entities were communicated to the renderer.
I used to take a lot of pride in the ”clean sheet of paper” way of doing
things, because it is obvious that there are signiﬁcant dangers of compla-
cency if you stick with a single codebase. I try to actively address that by
making sure that I clearly look at what I am reusing, and make sure that it
hasn’t slowly become lacking for the current situation. Even simple little
things that could hide away in a library forever, like ﬁle access and con-
sole completion, get looked at and improved, even when they are mostly
reused.
CHAPTER 11. KNEE DEEP IN JOHN CARMACK

Chapter 12
GameSpy @ E3 - Q & A with John
Carmack
This interview was conducted by Sal ”Sluggo” Accardo for GameSpy on
May 23, 2002.
http://archive.gamespy.com/e32002/pc/carmack/
Interview
Prologue
This has obviously been a big week for DOOM III. We’ve ﬁnally learned
the ﬁrst real details on the new game and the engine, and for those of
lucky enough to attend E3, have actually seen the new engine in action.
With this in mind, we were able to ask the man behind the technology –
id Software’s John Carmack – a few questions about the new engine, the
current state of video cards, and a few other topics.
131

John Carmack Archive
132
Interviews
Questions
Sal ”Sluggo” Accardo: It’s been a few years since the release of Quake III,
and other than a few appearances at QuakeCon and other shows, and a
few .plan updates, we haven’t heard much from you. In terms of develop-
ing the new DOOM engine (and otherwise), what have you been up to? In
this day and age, how do you approach the task of building a brand new
3D engine, and where does work on the engine stand at the moment?
John Carmack: I’m not real big on the celebrity bit, so I have just been
quietly going about my work.
The process of building the new engine went much more smoothly than
anything we have done before, because I was able to do all the ground-
work while the rest of the company worked on TeamArena. By the time
they were ready to work on it, things were basically functional. I did most
of the early development work with a gutted version of Quake 3, which
let me write a brand new renderer without having to rewrite ﬁle access
code, console code, and all the other subsystems that make up a game.
After the renderer was functional and the other programmers came off of
TA and Wolf, the rest of the codebase got rewritten. Especially after our
move to C++, there is very little code remaining from the Q3 codebase at
this point.
The fundamental strategic decisions that I made at the start of the devel-
opment really haven’t changed at all. My continuing effort is going into
making it clean, solid, and fast. As the artists and designers have built
things with the engine, we have left most of our original performance
budgets behind, so performance is still a big issue (but, wow, does it look
great!).
Sal ”Sluggo” Accardo: The Quake 3 engine has been licensed a number
of times since its creation, and many developers have built their own spe-
cial additions to the engine for their games. Raven Software, in particu-
lar, has built technology like the GHOUL II system – do you take any of
these systems into consideration or talk with these developers as you de-
velop the new DOOM engine, or is the game basically being built with
one game in mind and a speciﬁc set of goals?
CHAPTER 12. GAMESPY @ E3 - Q & A WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
133
Interviews
John Carmack: I try to keep us focused on building our particular game,
rather than trying to solve all the world’s problems. There are some tough
judgement calls to be made during development about whether some-
thing is an elegant extension of our chosen technical paradigm, or if it
is unjustiﬁed work. Having the inclination and authority to just say ”no”
to feature requests has been an important aspect to being able to write
quality code. Too many programmers agree to random feature requests
without thoroughly considering the impacts. I try to err on the side of
elegance in implementation, rather than feature coverage.
Sal ”Sluggo” Accardo: One of the things that ﬁrst attracted people to the
Quake engine – and in many ways helped shape the current online gam-
ing community – was the ability to modify the game and create entirely
new games with it. Is this something that’s being taken into considera-
tion during the development of the new DOOM engine? Compared to
the previous games, how easy – or hard – do you think it will be for mod
makers to work with the new engine?
John Carmack: A big plus is that all of our tools are now built in to the
game, so every release automatically has the tools that were used to build
the game. The game also uses the same map ﬁle that the editor uses, so
the original source data can be opened up with any copy of the game.
We have not yet decided exactly where we are going to break the source
code for mod making, but it is certain that it is going to be a C++ DLL.
Artists are going to have a signiﬁcant learning curve to properly deal with
the bump maps, but again, all the tools we use to generate them are in-
cluded with the game.
Level designers have to retrain themselves to use lighting more efﬁciently.
Instead of plastering in hundreds of little lights to get your light maps the
way you want, you need to think about primary key lights in a scene, and
ﬁll in around them as necessary. Cinematic lighting skills are now directly
relevant.
Sal ”Sluggo” Accardo: Quake 3 was essentially built as a multiplayer game,
and it’s been 5 years since id Software developed and released a game
with a traditional single-player campaign (Quake II, 1997). Is there any-
thing different about developing an engine for the two different styles of
CHAPTER 12. GAMESPY @ E3 - Q & A WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
134
Interviews
games? Is there anything new or special you need to take into considera-
tion for a single-player campaign as work on the new engine continues?
John Carmack: The core renderer is fairly agnostic to single player ver-
sus multiplayer, but many other areas of the game have to make tradeoff
decisions. A latency tolerant multiplayer game needs to have all time
dependent effects predictable, which forces a style of programming that
isn’t always the most direct. A single player game can also have more
expressive and precise effects, like multiply blended skeletal animations
with pivot feet, that wouldn’t work out well over a network channel.
Sal ”Sluggo” Accardo: The world of video cards seems to change on a
daily basis. What do you think of the current crop of cards on the mar-
ket, and where do you see things heading? Are there any new cards that
interest you? Where would you like to see things go?
John Carmack: There are interesting things to be said about the upcom-
ing cards, but NDAs will force me to just discuss the available cards.
In order from best to worst for Doom:
I still think that overall, the GeForce 4 Ti is the best card you can buy. It
has high speed and excellent driver quality.
Based on the feature set, the Radeon 8500 should be a faster card for
Doom than the GF4, because it can do the seven texture accesses that
I need in a single pass, while it takes two or three passes (depending on
details) on the GF4. However, in practice, the GF4 consistently runs faster
due to a highly efﬁcient implementation. For programmers, the 8500 has
a much nicer fragment path than the GF4, with more general features
and increased precision, but the driver quality is still quite a ways from
Nvidia’s, so I would be a little hesitant to use it as a primary research plat-
form.
The GF4-MX is a very fast card for existing games, but it is less well suited
to Doom, due to the lower texture unit count and the lack of vertex shaders.
On a slow CPU with all features enabled, the GF3 will be faster than the
GF4-MX, because it ofﬂoads some work. On systems with CPU power to
burn, the GF4 may still be faster.
CHAPTER 12. GAMESPY @ E3 - Q & A WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
135
Interviews
The 128 bit DDR GF2 systems will be faster than the Radeon-7500 sys-
tems, again due to low level implementation details overshadowing the
extra texture unit.
The slowest cards will be the 64 bit and SDR ram GF and Radeon cards,
which will really not be fast enough to play the game properly unless you
run at 320x240 or so.
Sal ”Sluggo” Accardo: Every once in a while, we see news that you’re –
quite earnestly – working with a team to build a rocket capable of blasting
someone into space. From an engineering point of view, it’s easy to see
the fascination with the subject, but it’s certainly not something to be
taken lightly, nor is it an inexpensive endeavor. What was it about *this*
particular project that attracted you to it?
John Carmack: There is something to be said for grappling with a chal-
lenge that only involves the forces of nature (ignoring, for the moment,
the regulatory challenges), rather than consumer tastes.
The appalling inefﬁciency in the aerospace industry is also a bit of a driv-
ing factor. Due to an accident of history tying them to ICBMs, the evo-
lution of space vehicles has wound up tending towards a local optimum
that is in a completely different area than better global solutions, and it
doesn’t seem likely to break out of the current context. The aerospace
industry needs a fresh reboot. There is an order of magnitude improve-
ment available in low hanging fruit.
I have a reasonable time table going for all of our development work, and
things are proceeding satisfactorily.
CHAPTER 12. GAMESPY @ E3 - Q & A WITH JOHN CARMACK

Chapter 13
John Carmack on DOOM3
rendering
This interview was conducted by Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan for Beyond3d
on Jun 06, 2002.
http://web.archive.org/web/20020623092357/http://www.beyond3d.com/
interviews/carmackdoom3/
Interview
Prologue
id Software’s demonstration of the work-in-progress of DOOM3 at the
recently concluded E3 have left many breathless when it came to the
graphics aspect. While John Carmack, main programmer and the man
responsible for various game engines of past id Software classics, have
given us his thoughts on the technological aspects and hardware require-
ments in past dot plan ﬁles and random postings and email replies, many
are still curious about DOOM3’s engine and hardware compatibility.
I’d picked a few interesting questions raised by Beyond3D forum mem-
136

John Carmack Archive
137
Interviews
bers, re-phrased them a little for clarity and sent them off John’s way. A
few of John’s answers were original posted by me in a thread in the fo-
rums while some are new. I’d asked John for short, to-the-point answers
since he’d said he doesn’t have much time for interviews. Here we go:
Questions
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: It appears the models are low in poly count.
Knowing what I know, it would appear that the reason for this, speciﬁ-
cally with regards to your engine, is because of the shadow volume based
lighting. With higher poly counts, your engine’s speed would suffer. Am I
correct? And how would ATI’s TruForm look?
John Carmack: The game characters are between 2000 and 6000 poly-
gons. Some of the heads do look a little angular in tight zooms, so we
may use some custom models for cinematic scenes.
Curving up the models with more polygons has a basically linear effect
on performance, but making very jagged models with lots of little polyg-
onal points would create far more silhouette edges, which could cause a
disproportionate slowdown during rendering when they get close.
TruForm is not an option, because the calculated shadow silhouettes
would no longer be correct.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: Higher precision rendering. It appears that the
GF3/GF4Ti clamps the results (including intermediate ones) when some
part of the calculations goes over 1.0. The Radeon 8500, with up to 8.0
higher internal ranges, can keep higher numbers in the registers when
combining, which allows for better lighting dynamics. How much will
this have an impact in DOOM3’s graphics?
John Carmack: At the moment, it has no impact. The DOOM engine per-
forms some pre modulation and post scaling to support arbitrarily bright
light values without clamping at the expense of dynamically tossing low
order precision bits, but so far, the level designers aren’t taking much ad-
vantage of this. If they do (and it is a good feature!), I can allow the ATI
to do this internally without losing the precision bits, as well as saving a
CHAPTER 13. JOHN CARMACK ON DOOM3 RENDERING

John Carmack Archive
138
Interviews
tiny bit of speed.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: Multiple passes. You mentioned that in theory
the Radeon8500 should be faster with the number of textures you need
(doing it in a single pass) but that the GF4Ti is consistently faster in prac-
tice even though it has to perform 2 or 3 passes. Could this be due to
latency? While there is savings in bandwidth, there must be a cost in la-
tency, especially performing 7 textures reads in a single shader unit.
John Carmack: No, latency should not be a problem, unless they have
mis-sized some internal buffers. Dividing up a ﬁxed texture cache among
six textures might well be an issue, though. It seems like the nvidia cards
are signiﬁcantly faster on very simple rendering, and our stencil shadow
volumes take up quite a bit of time.
Several hardware vendors have poorly targeted their control logic and
memory interfaces under the assumption that high texture counts will
be used on the bulk of the pixels. While stencil shadow volumes with
zero textures are an extreme case, almost every game of note does a lot
of single texture passes for blended effects.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: As I understand it, DOOM3’s rendering pipeline
works by, ﬁrst, rendering the complete scene without ambient light nor
textures (so that this pass is very quick) and then ﬁlling the z-buffer with
correct (and ﬁnal) depth information for each pixel on screen and z-
writes are turned off.
John Carmack: Yes.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: And then, for each per pixel light : 1. Render
shadow volumes of all shadow casters into stencil buffer. This is again
a quick pass (no textures used), but potential ﬁll rate burn because of
overdraw (btw, what sort of optimizations are you doing to reduce over-
draw?). 2. Add light contribution to pixels that have stencil=0 (when
they are not in shadow). This looks something like this for diffuse point
light: Temp=NormalMap dot3 LightDirection Temp=Temp mul Attenua-
tionMap Temp=Temp mul LightColor Result=Temp mul MaterialTexture
John Carmack: That is basically correct for the diffuse map, although you
have to sort by light and clear the effected regions of the stencil buffer as
CHAPTER 13. JOHN CARMACK ON DOOM3 RENDERING

John Carmack Archive
139
Interviews
well. Adding the specular map requires a half angle cube map, another
access of the normal map, some random math, and a specular map ac-
cess.
There are some subtleties with sorting to allow some extra shadowing
features, but they aren’t critical aspects.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: Basically, your engine draws z-buffer in one
quick pass and then the z buffer does not change anymore. Total number
of render passes is (greatly) inﬂuenced by the number of per pixel lights
used. Correct?
John Carmack: Yes.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: You said there are two passes on GeForce 3/4
and one on Radeon 8500. Are these number of passes *per light*? Say we
take 30fps as basis - GeForce3 or 4 could handle about 3 or 4 per pixel
lights per frame which actually means 8-10 passes! Radeon 8500 would
take 5-6 passes which saves some T&L work. Again, correct?
John Carmack: Yes, the primitive code path is a surface+light ”interac-
tion”. We guestimate 2x lights per surface average and 2x true overdraw,
for 4x interaction overdraw (times 5,3,2,or 1 passes, depending on the
card and features enabled).
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: The Kyro (or speciﬁcally, the Kyro2). With lack
of cubemap support, and with LightDirection being a cube map texture,
would disabling per pixel normalization of LightDirection enable the Kyro2
to run DOOM3? Would you do this?
John Carmack: I doubt it, but if they impress me with a very high perfor-
mance OpenGL implementation, I might consider it.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: GeForce1/GeForce2/Radeon7500. All would
be able to run DOOM3 at lower resolutions with fewer per pixel lights per
frame. What about per pixel normalized LightDirection? No cube maps
and LightDirection can be stored in diffuse or specular color component
of vertex but I’d appreciate a clariﬁcation/conﬁrmation from you.
John Carmack: That is actually on my list of things to benchmark, but
I rather doubt it will make a difference. I don’t think there are enough
CHAPTER 13. JOHN CARMACK ON DOOM3 RENDERING

John Carmack Archive
140
Interviews
combiners on a GF1/2 to do it, and I don’t expect much of a speedup by
skipping a rather low-res cube map access on GF3/4.
John Carmack
CHAPTER 13. JOHN CARMACK ON DOOM3 RENDERING

Chapter 14
GameSpy @ QuakeCon 2003 - A
Conversation With John Carmack
This interview was conducted by Steven Kent for GameSpy on Aug 16,
2003.
http://archive.gamespy.com/quakecon2003/carmack/
Interview
Prologue
John Carmack sits at the end of an enormous boardroom table in a ho-
tel conference room. He has the room to himself, and that seems like a
good arrangement by him. The occasion is QuakeCon, and people have
traveled in from around the country, computers in tow, to celebrate the
games Carmack helped create.
On this occasion, John Carmack seems very satisﬁed, and that is some-
thing to worry about. In the book ”Masters of DOOM,” author David
Kushner mentions questions about Carmack retiring. With the DOOM
3 engine complete and news that Raven, not id, will create Quake IV, per-
141

John Carmack Archive
142
Interviews
haps Carmack is ready to retire.
Fortunately, in his current mood, no subjects were off limits:
Questions
Steven Kent: Are you going to retire after DOOM 3?
John Carmack: No. I’ve got at least one more rendering engine to write.
The development of rendering engines is driven by two major factors.
One of these is, of course, the question, ”When you ﬁnish a game, is it
time to write a new engine?” The answer is based on what is happening
in the hardware space.
Previously, it was just about what was happening on CPUs. Do we have
32-bit CPUs? Do they have ﬂoating point on the CPUs? Then we got
graphics cards and that stayed the same for a number of years. We got
some important new features in the graphics which basically engendered
the DOOM engine. We had cube-mapping, dot re-rendering, and geom-
etry acceleration. This important set of features, and it was enough to
make it worth writing a new engine.
DOOM is going to be in use for a long time, but just this year, hardware
has surpassed a really signiﬁcant point with the ﬂoating point pixel for-
mats and generalized dependent texture reads. These are things that de-
mand that a new engine is written.
It’s particularly signiﬁcant because those are the only features that are
necessary with temporary buffering to actually implement anything. You
can decompose Pixar Renderman shaders into multi-passes. It doesn’t
mean that they can run in real time, but the fact that they can be calcu-
lated on a graphics card has a wide range of implications on what you
want to do for the graphics pipeline. It’s going to impact both real-time
rendering and off-line rendering. There is going to be an interesting con-
vergence.
DOOM does a lot of things to use these features, but it still uses that
notchy functionality of previous generation graphics cards where you
CHAPTER 14. GAMESPY @ QUAKECON 2003 - A CONVERSATION
WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
143
Interviews
had this set of features and you could use combinations of them but you
could not do exactly what you want.
The very latest set of cards, with the combination of those features –
ﬂoating point and dependent texture reads and the ability to use inter-
mediaries – you can now write really generalized things and that is ap-
propriate. You might use 50 or 100 potential instructions in some really
complex gaming shader; but if the engine is architected right, you would
be able to use the exact same engine, media creation, and framework
and architect the whole thing to do TV-quality or eventually even movie-
quality rendering that might use thousands of instructions and render
ridiculous resolutions. The ability to use the same tools for that entire
spectrum is going to be a little different from what we have now.
Steven Kent: How long does it take to create an engine?
John Carmack: The DOOM rendering engine went surprisingly smoothly,
I mean more so than almost any other thing that I have done before. I
made absolutely the right calls at the early strategic level. It was good
fortune.
I look back at that and see that the very real decisions about what the core
rendering technology was going to be, how the architecture was going to
be, and what the external interface was going to be did not change in over
two years in a fundamental way. I had the core of it done two years ago.
We could render a picture and it looks like what the DOOM engine does.
It took another year to add all of the features, but fundamentally, it has
not changed in a year. There have been a few changes, a few little opti-
mizations, but mostly it’s the rest of the game coming up to par-getting
the game technology there, the game system and all of the characters,
and the things that make it a real game.
Steven Kent: I am surprised that you do not see Quake IV using this next
generation engine.
John Carmack: Wolfenstein worked out so spectacularly well. Inside id
there is a group that really, really does not want to do another sequel. Our
next game is not going to be a DOOM, Quake, or Wolfenstein sequel, it’s
going to be something new and that is a foregone conclusion.
CHAPTER 14. GAMESPY @ QUAKECON 2003 - A CONVERSATION
WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
144
Interviews
We knew that we were going to license that out and let someone do it.
The work that was done with Wolfenstein, in the end it turned out great,
of course, everybody loves it, but it was painful during the development.
At one point we had every programmer at id working, trying to stabilize
the code base to make things okay for shipping.
But still, we looked at that as a success and we are hoping to replicate
that success with Raven doing Quake IV. Raven has always been our lead
engine adopter. It was a foregone conclusion that Raven would get the
Doom engine early, the only question was what they were going to work
on.
Steven Kent: Do you see yourself ever straying away from FPS games?
John Carmack: John Carmack: Occasionally I desire to do a different
kind of game. To a large degree, id Software is a prisoner of its own suc-
cess. Because we are a single-title company, we have a strong obligation
to do something that has relatively low risk.
With game development taking multiple years and costing many millions
of dollars I think real innovation will not necessarily come from triple-A
titles. Triple-A titles have so much of an investment that it engenders a
huge risk-aversion. I think that the real innovation will come from things
that are done on a smaller budget, that might be targeted as budget ti-
tles. It’s okay to risk $500,000 on a development budget where you might
say, ”This is a clever idea, lets give it a try.” Risking $10 million dollars,
and some development budgets are going well over that already, is a lot
harder.
Even going to another style of game, we have an obligation to make sure
that our current distribution of artists, level designers, and programmers
are gainfully employed on the next project. We are built around doing
ﬁrst-person shooters with this mix of content creation.
Steven Kent: Let’s switch topics from your job to your hobby. Can you
make a rocket to take two people in orbit?
John Carmack: Orbital is a lot more challenging. The X-Prize is about
going up 100 kilometers and coming back down. You leave the atmo-
sphere. You enter space and you remain weightless for 10 minutes or
CHAPTER 14. GAMESPY @ QUAKECON 2003 - A CONVERSATION
WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
145
Interviews
so. You come back in and it’s the world’s tallest roller coaster ride. That
would require about one-eighth of the energy required to go into orbit.
The X-Prize is absolutely obtainable. It is obtainable next year. There is
little doubt in the technical ability on that and I think things are okay on
the regulatory side. There are issues that we are working there, but we
have plans and fallback plans.
Getting there is more fundamentally difﬁcult, but it is not impossible.
Rocket science has a mythology about it that isn’t correct. Because of the
way things evolved, we got our gigantic, expendable space vehicles.
There is a wonderful analogy here with gaming. Remember when I said
that we are trapped by our own success? We have something that works.
We serve a market. We have a continuing customer base and with a $10
million budget, you can’t F*** around with this.
Elevate that to the orders of magnitude in the aerospace industry. You
have a stable customer base. This satellite costs $500 million, do we want
to try a little experiment to see if we can do something a little bit better?
They are completely stuck.
It doesn’t have to be that expensive, but they are not going to make it
cheaper because they are in this way where it is stable and proﬁtable.
Doing something off the wall is going to need to come from a lower tier,
just as it will with the gaming industry.
The only difference is that gaming and computer entertainment are vi-
brant and competitive. You have hundreds and hundreds of little teams
doing this. Aerospace is not. You have two or three monoliths and a few
government contractors.
It’s weird being in a company that is part of the stable establishment, but
we are. We’re kind of the blue chips. We’re the Boeing of the ﬁrst-person
shooters. It constrains us, but we are.
Steven Kent: Thesis and anti-thesis become synthesis. Id was once the
anti-thesis of the established game order. Now you and the Nintendos of
the world have merged to create a new order that can only be challenged
by new small companies.
CHAPTER 14. GAMESPY @ QUAKECON 2003 - A CONVERSATION
WITH JOHN CARMACK

John Carmack Archive
146
Interviews
John Carmack: It’s fun being part of the scrappy little start up with rock-
ets.
I am different than a lot of people in the space community in that I am
not this life-long visionary about all that. I had a normal geek childhood
with science ﬁction and model rockets, but I didn’t think about space for
a decade. It’s mostly an engineering challenge to me.
Steven Kent: As a triple-A company, can id work on any smaller ideas?
John Carmack: I thought it would be kind of neat if we took the DOOM
renderer, and we had a team take previous games-don’t touch the game,
just revamp it graphically. Just take Quake II, and just use the DOOM en-
gine to make brand new graphic models and everything. But don’t spend
time messing with the gameplay because we know that is pretty good.
Just release it as Quake II Remix with brand new graphics technology and
sell it at a middle-level price instead of a boutique price.
I thought that was a pretty good idea.
CHAPTER 14. GAMESPY @ QUAKECON 2003 - A CONVERSATION
WITH JOHN CARMACK

Chapter 15
DooM III Preview
This interview was conducted by PC Zone Staff for Computer and Video
Games on Oct 23, 2003.
http://www.computerandvideogames.com/article.php?id=97758
Interview
Prologue
Some say he’s the greatest programmer alive. Others call him a visionary
genius who single-handedly drags games technology into the future with
his audacious talent. Since we wouldn’t know a string of C-code from a
string of lean beef snarlers, we could hardly comment on that, but we do
know one thing - John Carmack has coded some of the best games ever
made. Wolf 3D, Doom, Quake - hell, he practically invented the FPS.
These days, the Mack Daddy of rendering doesn’t emerge from his sub-
terranean lair very often, and PC ZONE was the only UK magazine to
secure an interview at QuakeCon 2003. It’s too big for one magazine, so
we’ve had to split it across a couple of issues. Part one starts right here,
so without further ado, over to the big man...
147

John Carmack Archive
148
Interviews
Questions
PC Zone Staff: How close is Doom 3 to completion?
John Carmack: We’re really close. The last level was completed recently,
but there’s a huge amount of tuning that needs to be done. We’ve got a
few levels, like the ones shown in the demo that are pretty much at the
level of polish we’re looking for throughout the game. But the other 20-
some odd levels are not there yet.
PC Zone Staff: How critical are the next few months going to be?
John Carmack: In some ways this is the most important time of devel-
opment. The tools are all there, everything’s at our disposal, everything’s
basically working. Now’s where it goes from being an interesting demon-
stration of all the technologies to being a fabulous game, and that really
does all happen at the end.I recently counted up the number of things
we have to tune between pulling a trigger and hitting something with a
projectile, and there’s 32 effects that we have going on between there.
There’s the muzzle ﬂash model, the light from there, the kick of the gun,
the kick on the view, the sound on the muzzle ﬂash, the sound on the
projectile, the light on the projectile, the particles from the projectile, the
pain animation that the monster gets hit by, the knock-back that he gets,
the blood spray that comes off of it, the decal that gets put on it, the pass-
through that goes on to the wall, the shell that comes out of the gun - you
know, it’s this huge list. You look back at the really early games where
it’s like, OK, you had an animation that happened there as a little muzzle
ﬂash and then the guy went into a pain animation, and that was it. So,
there are a lot of dimensions that we have at our disposal for tuning, and
you’re not going to get everything perfect, but you feel an obligation to
at least try and explore the solution space a little bit to try and hit on the
really good things.
PC Zone Staff: So is it at the stage now where your personal involvement
on the game is a little bit less?
John Carmack: Actually this entire past year I haven’t been the most crit-
ical person on the team, because the development of the rendering en-
gine went smoother than really any I’ve ever done before. It turns out
CHAPTER 15. DOOM III PREVIEW

John Carmack Archive
149
Interviews
that the decisions I made at the very beginning about how the imple-
mentation was going to be, what the features were going to be, what the
interface was going to be - they were all really good. Normally there’s lots
of evolution and major changes that go on, but the original architecture
for the Doom 3 renderer has stayed pretty damn constant. Two years ago
it was rendering pictures that look basically like our pictures today. One
year ago it was feature-complete. This past year has been adding tweaks
and some optimisations to things, but really at this point I’m hesitant to
make too many major changes because it’s really good right now, I don’t
want to screw it up.
PC Zone Staff: What’s your main responsibility on the game now then?
John Carmack: I’ve actually been back in recently doing some more of
the game code, which is not what I ever intended to do, but I’m almost
sort of twiddling my thumbs sometimes. It’s more difﬁcult now, because
in previous games all the code was spawned by me. I wrote the base of
everything and then other programmers would take over and extend the
things, but I still put everything in its original places so it was easy for me
to jump in and quickly diagnose any problems or add any feature. Doom
3 is the ﬁrst game that started out with multiple programmers writing
brand new code.In Quake III we wound up pulling in a big block of code
that Jan Paul [van Waveren, the Dutch programming whiz headhunted
by id from the Quake editing community] wrote for the bots, but that was
an emergency measure at the end, because of the way that whole thing
worked out. So there’s this block of stuff in Quake III that I really know
nothing about. But with Doom 3 we had many programmers writing
brand new sub-systems, and I don’t necessarily always agree with how
some of the things are implemented. So I’m not in a position where I can
just jump in and grab anything off the ’to-do’ list and go and ﬁx a prob-
lem in the game code. But I did recently ﬁnally start getting back into
carving off some sections of the game code and ﬁxing it up and mak-
ing it more the way I’d like it to be. I’ll probably be doing some more
of that. But there’s a huge loss in productivity once you go from a project
that one person basically created the bulk of to something that has lots of
people working on it. We’ve had ﬁve programmers working almost from
the beginning on Doom 3, and it might have twice as many features as
if I had done everything, but it has like ten times the problems. You pay
CHAPTER 15. DOOM III PREVIEW

John Carmack Archive
150
Interviews
more labour for more features, but you get features that you wouldn’t
have got otherwise. The classic case that I’ll hold up, as a perfect exam-
ple of something I wouldn’t have done that turned out really good, is the
ragdoll physics for deaths that Jan Paul really pushed for. That’s the type
of feature that I never would have implemented.
PC Zone Staff: Why’s that? We can’t get enough of those kooky ragdolls...
John Carmack: Physics code is among the twitchiest stuff to put into
a game engine, because it’s not as deterministic and able to be nailed
down. It is a pretty signiﬁcant performance drag, and for two years now
in Doom 3 we’ve had cases where it’s like, ’the game is stuck at seven
frames per second, what the hell?’ and it’s because a ragdoll is stuck and
not going into a quiescent state. There’s all these sets of problems that I
knew would be problems, and were. But they were able to be solved, and
now the ragdolls are a good feature.
PC Zone Staff: Do you fret a bit about losing a certain level of control over
the development process?
John Carmack: I’m at peace with the situation. It was a known strate-
gic decision. For one thing I’m not spending all my time at id anymore,
because I’m doing the Armadillo stuff with a good chunk of my time [Ar-
madillo Aerospace, John’s rocket science project]. So the company has to
get by without me, and even if I was still spending 80 hours a week at id,
you’d just eventually reach a point where one person functionally cannot
do all the features that you want to have on there.
PC Zone Staff: I was talking to Tim and Todd earlier about the involve-
ment of UK developer Splash Damage on the Doom multiplayer. How’s
that working out?
John Carmack: Well, we always knew that we were going to be, inten-
tionally, giving multiplayer short shrift in Doom 3. It’s a single-player
game, that’s what we’re building everything around, and the multiplayer
is going to be present, but not a focus. So it’s probably a good thing that
we’re getting an outside team to go ahead and make it their focus. Oth-
erwise it would have been essentially the level of capability that Quake II
had, where you had like ﬁve levels that were hashed out in a week from
somebody. So now we’re going to get some good stuff with really good
CHAPTER 15. DOOM III PREVIEW

John Carmack Archive
151
Interviews
playtesting in it.
PC Zone Staff: You’ve been doing this stuff for more than a decade now,
making dark and disturbing ﬁrst-person shooters. What keeps you going
and what keeps it interesting?
John Carmack: Well, to some degree we are trapped by our success. Be-
cause we’re a single-product company, and we have 20-some odd em-
ployees that we pay very well, we don’t have the freedom to go off on
some complete lark and try some random thing. The products that we
spend time on have to have a high probability of success, and they also
have to use the same mix of artists, level designers and programmers that
we have. It’s not in our cards to go and say, ’well, we really only need one
designer for this project, we’ll ﬁre four level designers’. We just wouldn’t
do that.
PC Zone Staff: Are you ever tempted to try something completely differ-
ent?
John Carmack: Well, I’m doing Armadillo Aerospace, so yes, you could
say the temptation is there on some level [laughs]. Game-wise, I’ll occa-
sionally have some random thoughts about doing something different,
but the ﬁrst-person shooters have been good from a technical-challenge
level, with the combination of networking and sound with the graphics
and the structuring and architecting of the things. It’s been rewarding
on that level. And that’s my primary motivation really - the engineering
challenge. Making interesting things work as new capabilities arrive, as
the hardware provides it to us.
PC Zone Staff: Are you anticipating any media controversy to follow the
release of Doom 3, as you’ve suffered with many of your previous games?
John Carmack: I would have thought that stuff had been played out. The
media every once in a while is like, ’Hmm, what are we going to do now...
Let’s pick on violent videogames.’ I wouldn’t be surprised though. Ex-
ternal events again are going to be the driver. If there’s any other... ah,
Columbine sort of thing, I’m sure it will come up again. I don’t think
we’re going to get too much of it, but I could be wrong. It’s not my area.
PC Zone Staff: We noticed one undiscussed item on the multiplayer weapons
CHAPTER 15. DOOM III PREVIEW

John Carmack Archive
152
Interviews
menu - the Soulcube. Can you tell us about this item and any other
power-ups we don’t know about?
John Carmack: The Soulcube is a hell artifact from the later part of the
game. There are some other power-ups that you haven’t seen yet, but the
multiplayer is not going to have all the power-ups that people expect on
there - it’s not hugely focused on that. There will be a few other things
with some interesting effects, but that’s not a focus in the multiplayer.
CHAPTER 15. DOOM III PREVIEW

Chapter 16
Doom 3, basketball and the
future of everything
This interview was conducted by PC Zone Staff for Computer and Video
Games on Oct 31, 2003.
http://www.computerandvideogames.com/article.php?id=98036
Interview
Prologue
Last month, we kept it simple. We shot the breeze with John about rag-
dolls and hell artifacts, how happy he is with the game and how things
have changed since the olden days. But really, we were just warming
up. This month, we give the world’s most-famous code-jockey the reins,
hanging on for grim death as he vents his views on innovation, graphics
technology and manned space ﬂight...
153

John Carmack Archive
154
Interviews
Questions
PC Zone Staff: So, John, id’s games have signalled generational leaps in
gaming technology more than once. Do you see Doom 3 as an equally
big leap as Doom or Quake?
John Carmack: Yes. We had a few evolutionary steps where we had Quake
II and III - obvious evolutions of Quake. Even though Quake III was a
completely different rendering engine, it was still in the same paradigm,
which was light-mapped worlds and single point-shaded characters.Before
each new game, I take stock of where I think the hardware’s going, what
we’ve got now and what’s coming out in the time until we release the
game. That’s what drives the decision of when it’s time to write a new
engine. It’s not like I’ve got some brilliant new way of structuring things,
it is driven by the external forces. And people who ignore that suffer mis-
erably, like the people who were doing voxel engines right as 3D hard-
ware engines were coming on. So as we went through Q2 and Q3, I was
like OK, we’re starting to get hardware acceleration here, but can we rely
on it, does it fundamentally change the way we do the rendering? And
it didn’t. With Q3 we were able to say ’hardware accelerated only’, but
the things we could do with that hardware were still basically the things
we were doing in previous generations. We could just do it more con-
cisely, faster, higher colour, all those various things. When it was time
to look at the Doom 3 stuff, I investigated ﬁve different directions for
rendering post-Quake III. Some of them would have given much higher
quality renderings of static environments. It’s not an exaggeration that
we can do photo-realistic renderings of static environments and move
through them. But, when you then paste dynamic objects on to those
static scenes, they’re clearly in this separate plane. You’ve got your mov-
ing thingy and your environment. And I thought it was more important
as a game technology, which is about interactive things, that we followed
this other opportunity. Instead of pursuing ultimate detail on the envi-
ronments, we could unify all the lighting and surfaces, which is the big
thing for Doom 3. So that was the core decision to be made, and I look
back at that and, more than any other game I’ve done, I think those initial
decisions and the initial technology layout were exactly right. Looking at
things today, there’s a clear generational step.
CHAPTER 16. DOOM 3, BASKETBALL AND THE FUTURE OF
EVERYTHING

John Carmack Archive
155
Interviews
PC Zone Staff: What’s the next step then?
John Carmack: The next step is actually ready to be written now. Again,
driven by external hardware things, we had a couple of important inﬂec-
tion points happen in hardware with the latest generation - the ﬂoating-
point pixel formats and the generalised dependent texture reads and ﬂex-
ible fragment programming. Those three things combine with ﬂoating
point buffers to allow us to synthesise any equation by decomposing it
into multiple passes.
PC Zone Staff: Come again?
John Carmack: Previously, without the ﬂoating-point you would always
start losing lower order bits of precision because you’ve done so many
calculations on some of these things. Even in Doom 3 it’s a signiﬁcant
problem - it starts showing up as some artifacts that can be pointed out
in the game. Even if you had inﬁnitely fast hardware of previous genera-
tions, you couldn’t do a hundred-pass computation because you’ve only
got eight bits of precision and it’ll turn to mud after a certain number of
combinations. But with the ﬂoating-point calculations you can then ar-
bitrarily decompose this and do, if necessary, hundreds of thousands of
calculations. And this is hugely interesting.
PC Zone Staff: It is?
John Carmack: Yes. There was an important paper that came out at SIG-
GRAPH a few years ago by someone at SGI [Silicon Graphics]. He pre-
sented one real-time renderer and he presented something that showed
the decomposition of Renderman shaders into multi-pass stuff that re-
quired ﬂoating-point and pixel stuff. It was amusing because I remember
people completely discounting that paper, which I think is going to be
looked back at as one of the most seminal things in interactive graphics.
People were saying the Renderman shader was ridiculous - it took 500
passes to do this simple shader. People just hit this number - 500 passes,
and clicked it out of their brain as not relevant. But a pixel in Doom 3
may have 80 textures combined on to it. Depending on whether things
are done completely in calculations or not, it may have up to seven tex-
tures per light on each surface. You may have a surface with three lights
shining on it, that’s 21 textures, and you might have three levels of things
drawn behind that, and then you might have 50 shadow planes going be-
CHAPTER 16. DOOM 3, BASKETBALL AND THE FUTURE OF
EVERYTHING

John Carmack Archive
156
Interviews
tween them, so we can pile up over 100 operations per pixel right now. So
suddenly 500 for every surface layer is maybe a generation or two away,
but it’s not that far off. Exponential paces are difﬁcult to come to grips
with.
PC Zone Staff: OK... So, do you think Doom 3’s gameplay would be as
interesting if it wasn’t for the new technology?
John Carmack: We decided Doom 3’s gameplay is not going to be some
wild innovation - it’s a ﬁrst-person shooter. There are a lot of arguments
that can be made about game design, and I prefer simplicity and ele-
gance. There are big arguments that happen inside id over ’do we wanna
have an additional control for something like this?’, and I’m always the
one saying we want the minimum number of everything, because I want
it to be simple and fun to play. I think the GUI interaction in the game is
really powerful as an interactive paradigm. It doesn’t require additional
controls; you’re interacting with something people are familiar with. Al-
lowing you to interact with complex displays is powerful, much more
than adding three more keys to do something.In terms of the basic game-
play, the ﬁrst-person shooter is a genre that will probably be around for-
ever now, like ﬂight sims and driving games. There are plenty of branches
you can take within that, like pure realism, tournament play, comic ac-
tion. And I think the push for people to innovate in gameplay - I’m not
sure that I particularly agree with it. You don’t go around constantly com-
ing up with new basketball games. What we have the ability to do is im-
prove the playground you’re playing on in these fundamental ways, and
it’s a good thing. We’ve got some neat things where you can control some
big machines and do some cool stuff, but it is still a ’running a person
around, shooting at things in the world’ game, and I didn’t want to make
it anything other than that. We have vehicle code in there that I know
Splash Damage is playing with and making buggies and stuff ﬂy around,
but I’m most mistrustful of adding that sort of thing.
PC Zone Staff: Now you’ve got the per-poly hit detection in the game, will
all player models have to comply to a strict surface area in multiplayer
matches?
John Carmack: It’s going to be a factor, because yes, that matters. When
we ﬁrst put it in the game, we took the same damage levels from Quake
CHAPTER 16. DOOM 3, BASKETBALL AND THE FUTURE OF
EVERYTHING

John Carmack Archive
157
Interviews
III, and we started playing against it - you just couldn’t kill people! They
occupy like one-third the surface area of their bounding box, and it just
takes a long time to hit people. The damage levels have been upped a
lot - it probably makes aiming for splashes more important. But yes, it
probably will have some effect on the models. People who are playing
competitively will probably play with the lock-down original models. But
because the multiplayer is peer-to-peer, where you join together at the
start, it will have a different general dynamic from the Quake servers. You
won’t see people randomly joining in the middle of a game.
PC Zone Staff: From Doom to rockets, what’s the latest on your experi-
mental rocketry project, Armadillo Aerospace?
John Carmack: We’re probably six months behind because of the pro-
pellant situation. Here I am, trying to buy $150,000 worth of rocket-grade
peroxide, and here is a big chemical company that’s losing money, but are
more scared of something happening and being sued. But our sub-scale
vehicle is ready to ﬂy and our big vehicle is very close to ﬂight form as
well. We bought a Russian space suit off Ebay and we’re going to modify
that.
PC Zone Staff: What’s the goal then? Orbit?
John Carmack: We’re aiming for the X PRIZE. It’s a $10million prize to
launch three people to 100km. You go up, you get 10 minutes of weight-
lessness in space, and you go through re-entry - it’s basically the world’s
tallest roller-coaster, and you have to repeat it twice in two weeks.
PC Zone Staff: Are you going up?
John Carmack: It would be fun, but it’s not something I’m really driven
to do. And my wife is vigorously opposed to the concept.
CHAPTER 16. DOOM 3, BASKETBALL AND THE FUTURE OF
EVERYTHING

Chapter 17
Interview with id Software’s John
Carmack on Doom3
This interview was conducted by Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan for Beyond3d
on Aug 10, 2004.
http://web.archive.org/web/20040813015408/http://www.beyond3d.com/
interviews/carmack04/
Interview
Prologue
Probably the most eagerly-anticipated game for a number of years is upon
us. Four years in development, Doom3 is the latest game by Mesquite-
based id Software, a game that id says is the best they have ever done.
While the reception to its gameplay is mixed (as is always the case for
such a subjective topic of discussion), the majority is in agreement that
it is the best looking game ever released on the PC platform.
This reporter, ﬁnally getting his hands on a copy of the game after a tor-
turous wait, has been corresponding with id’s Technical Director, John
158

John Carmack Archive
159
Interviews
Carmack, the man responsible for the engine powering Doom3, on a va-
riety of topics concerning the game. Deciding that the information gen-
erated from these correspondences could prove useful to the public, a
request was made to turn these correspondences into an unofﬁcial in-
terview and John gave the go-ahead to this ”interviewer” (although he
voiced his concern to this interviewer that this ”interview” may incite
lots of other people to send him more emails!).
Some of the following information have been provided by this interviewer
in Beyond3D’s various forums, scattered as they may be due to the nature
of Beyond3D’s forums where there are individual forums for discussing
technologies and games. The hope is this ”interview” would be a single
source of information that touches on a few matters raised by this inter-
viewer to John. Let’s not waste anymore time.
Questions
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: It appears that benchmarking demos (using
the ”timedemo” command) results in higher performance stats than ac-
tual gameplay. Can you explain to me why is this so, regarding the ”timedemo”
command? Is it because ”timedemo” do no calculate AI and physics?
What else? Also, if I run in a straight line in normal gameplay and have
that entire run logged, total frames is higher than a recorded demo of that
same run. Why is this?
John Carmack: Timedemo doesn’t do any game logic.
Demos are always recorded at exactly 30Hz.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: Okay, timedemo only tests graphics render-
ing and ignores AI and physics. Even with a high-end CPU system, I
have found that timedemo is still very CPU-dependent. In demos with
many monsters and/or large/complex monsters, I will have to assume
this CPU-dependency in timedemos is a result of CPU skinning (since AI
and physics are ignored in timedemo). Correct?
John Carmack: CPU skinning, shadow generation, and tangent space
reconstruction are the parts of Doom that take up signiﬁcant time in
CHAPTER 17. INTERVIEW WITH ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK ON
DOOM3

John Carmack Archive
160
Interviews
timedemos, but there is a lot of driver overhead as well.
”r skipRenderContext 1” will unbind the gl context, so all driver calls be-
come null functions. You can have some timings activated, then enable
this, then disable it so things draw again, and compare to see how much
time is spent in the driver, assuming the scene is not hardware limited.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: What’s the situation with regards to depth bounds
test implementation in the game? Doesn’t appear to have any effect on a
NV35 or NV40 using the cvar.
John Carmack: Nvidia claims some improvement, but it might require
unreleased drivers. It’s not a big deal one way or another.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: There are several rendering paths. How do we
get to set speciﬁc path to use?
John Carmack: ”r renderer [ arb | nv10 | nv20 | r200 | arb2 ]”
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: (A thread in our forums shows an ATI employee
improving performance on ATI hardware by changing a Doom3 shader.
There have been widespread discussions on this, not only in that par-
ticular Beyond3D thread but on other public forums as well. Please visit
this forum post to understand the reasoning behind the following 2 ques-
tions. This interviewer pointed John Carmack to that particular forum
thread, as did the individual which started the thread.)
Now, without taking anything away from that guy for experimentations,
something must be up because:
1) I can’t believe you didn’t think of this :) ; and 2) You couldn’t do that
because it (probably) affects some other stuff (speciﬁc lookup tables, for
instance)
Any comments on what might be actually happening?
John Carmack: The ARB2 path uses a lookup that exactly matches the
bias / square calculations used by the NV10 / NV20 / R200 paths so the
surfaces look the same in the different rendering modes.
Anthony ’Reverend’ Tan: Does that mean you’re using different lookups
for different materials? What exponent exactly are you trying to approxi-
CHAPTER 17. INTERVIEW WITH ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK ON
DOOM3

John Carmack Archive
161
Interviews
mate?
John Carmack: The specular function in Doom isn’t a power function,
it is a series of clamped biases and squares that looks something like
a power function, which is all that could be done on earlier hardware
without fragment programs. Because all the artwork and levels had been
done with that particular function, we thought it best to mimic it exactly
when we got fragment program capable hardware. If I had known how
much longer Doom was going to take to ship from that time, I might have
considered differently.
It should be noted that a power function is a strictly empirical approx-
imation of a surface’s specular response, so other specular approxima-
tions shouldn’t be looked at as just approximating a power function. For
instance, especially for broad highlights, it is nice to have a ﬁnite cutoff
angle, rather than the power limit approach.
The lookup table is constant in Doom, so there isn’t any real strong argu-
ment against replacing it with code. The lookup table was faster than do-
ing the exact sequence of math ops that the table encodes, but I can cer-
tainly believe that a single power function is faster than the table lookup.
CHAPTER 17. INTERVIEW WITH ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK ON
DOOM3

Chapter 18
”Meet the Graphics Guy” - PC
Gamer interviews John Carmack
on the future of iD.
This interview was conducted by PC Gamer for PC Gamer on Jan 01, 2006.
http://www.rage3d.com/board/showthread.php?t=33841622
Interview
Prologue
Industry leaders dictate their own terms: so it is with John Carmack. Leg-
end states that the id founder and programming genius is a workaholic,
coding well into the evening. It is 1am in Texas, his home-town. The
world is sleeping, yet this is the time chosen by John to talk.
Carmack’s career has never been less than astonishing. His code has con-
sistently wrought new opportunities. One of his ﬁrst projects was to build
a side-scrolling routine for the early IBM PCs. As a joke, and to prove
his routines potential, Carmack and his friend Tom Hall reproduced the
162

John Carmack Archive
163
Interviews
entire ﬁrst level of Super Mario Brothers 3 over the course of one long
evening. That scrolling technology formed the basis of the ﬁrst Com-
mander Keen game; the title that would eventually lead to Wolfenstein
3D, the Doom and Quake series.
Carmack is undergoing a similar creative resurgence. His own curiosity
has led him to the under-powered, under-appreciated world of mobile
phone gaming. He’s been working on a conversion of Doom for handsets;
a task he picked up to sate his own curiosity. That work has implications
for the wider world of gaming - implications that John is more than happy
to discuss.
John speaks with a rare focus and control. Each answer feels not thought
out, but parsed. He cuts directly through to the issues that id, and the PC
face, without attempting to obfuscate or misdirect. He is a fascinating
subject: concerned not just with technology, but with game design and
the business reasoning behind the games industry.
Questions
PC Gamer: The world associates John Carmack with the technology, rather
than game design. Is that fair?
John Carmack: I think a lot of people have always associated id with
technology, but not game design, but that’s a surface view that doesn’t
capture a lot of the important things. Game design isn’t necessarily a case
of piling things on. A lot of game design is about deciding what you don’t
need. There is an elegance and beauty in simplicity which has made a
lot of id games very successful. That actually is an element of design, it’s
not throwing everything and the kitchen sink in, it’s putting in the right
things so that there’s an elegance to it.
As an engineer I strive to do that type of stuff in the design side of things.
In the mobile platform, because you don’t have the resources, it encour-
ages that type of clear headed thinking.
PC Gamer: How much say do you have in what goes into an id game?
CHAPTER 18. ”MEET THE GRAPHICS GUY” - PC GAMER INTERVIEWS
JOHN CARMACK ON THE FUTURE OF ID.

John Carmack Archive
164
Interviews
John Carmack: I don’t. Not anymore. Post Quake 3 I’ve stepped a little
bit back from the design side on the PC space because I’m really not rep-
resentative of what most of our market is now. I did realise that my very
simpliﬁed game design ethic is not really what the market is demanding.
Internally, Quake 3 was viewed as my game. It was a game I wanted to
play. It was the id game that I probably spent the most time playing and
enjoyed the most, but it was actually one of our less successful titles. The
focused minimalism is appealing for me, but probably isn’t the best di-
rection for a top-ﬂight commercial game company.
I’m no longer in there vetoing things getting added to the game design.
That’s probably one of the reasons why Doom might have taken longer
to ship, but it was a richer game for it.
PC Gamer: Id have always created ﬁrst person games, since your very
early shareware stuff. What’s so great about that genre?
John Carmack: Once you make the decision to come out of 2D and into
3D you’ve got the fundamental choice between ﬁrst person and third
person. I think what it breaks down to is that ﬁrst person is more im-
mersive, you can have more visceral effects, while third person is more
cinematic. I would even say that maybe, third person may be a more
popular genre, because you’ve got a lot more cinematic heritage to fall
back on, and it’s more of a storytelling, rather than playing experience.
Third person games that have your character at the bottom of the screen,
though, are not nearly as strong for gameplay reasons. They don’t have
the shock, they don’t let us do as much to the player. Certainly, many
companies are successful with their third person games, but I don’t feel
that we, as a company, or as the individuals that make up the company,
have the cinematic underpinnings amongst us to do what would be an
epic third person game.
PC Gamer: Why mobile phone games?
John Carmack: It started out as something I thought was interesting, and
might be fun to do, and I found a business rationalisation for it. I bought
a mobile phone recently, and saw that it could run Java. Java’s an open
platform, it’s very easy for me to go onto the web, grab development kits,
and put together a few little toy applications. I started kicking around a
CHAPTER 18. ”MEET THE GRAPHICS GUY” - PC GAMER INTERVIEWS
JOHN CARMACK ON THE FUTURE OF ID.

John Carmack Archive
165
Interviews
few ideas, well, if this is reasonably straight forward, and it’s obviously a
small platform, maybe it would be reasonable to actually do a product
for it.
I spent a little while thinking of what would ﬁt on the platform. That
was one of the things I saw was wrong with most of the games that were
already there: they were taking something that might work on another
platform and just cramming it on the mobile device without any real re-
gard for what actually plays well from a users perspective. I went through
a bunch of different concepts, but the one I settled on was using a 3D en-
gine, because that’s the thing I like to do. I knew you can’t do a straight
conversion, but you could leverage a little bit of 3D, still get some of the
interesting immersion that you have in a 3D world, but still playable with
just a thumb. I settled on this RPG-ish interface. At the time, something
we thought of doing, was ”we have the Doom movie coming up out,” and
we were always kind of sad that we didn’t have a PC or console title set up
in time for the release, just because the development cycles were too out
of skew to let that happen. But I realised that I could toss something to-
gether on the mobile phone in just a few months.
PC Gamer: Was making the mobile phone game fun?
John Carmack: Yeah, it was a lot of fun. In the PC space, we’d just got off
the Doom development last year, which took four years of effort. For this
I did a proof of concept in a couple of weekends of work, then I passed it
on to Fountainhead Entertainment, which is my wife’s company, and the
total development time was just about four months. Looking back over
things, that’s about the same time it took for one of our very early share-
ware games. It was like stepping back in time ten or twelve years. Since
I’ve gone through the development process I’ve really become a pretty
big booster of the mobile platform for the possibility of doing slightly
more creative things in the game design ﬁeld.
The PC and console space is so risk averse because you’re talking of mil-
lions upon millions of dollars in game budgets, and everything depends
on a make or break decisions. When we look at something like this where
it’s done for tens of thousands of dollars, rather than tens of millions of
dollars, you can afford to maybe pick up a different style, or a clever idea
and give it a try.
CHAPTER 18. ”MEET THE GRAPHICS GUY” - PC GAMER INTERVIEWS
JOHN CARMACK ON THE FUTURE OF ID.

John Carmack Archive
166
Interviews
The other major beneﬁt you get which we’re lacking in the PC space is the
rapid pace of evolution. You can build a project, get it out the door, learn
your lessons from it, and go build something much better. The follow
on project we’ve got going, a sort of fantasy RPG styled game in a similar
engine; it’s a much improved game. We were able to learn all the lessons
from the playtesters, we were able to do apply them. I’m pretty excited
about the possibilities.
PC Gamer: Where’s id at the moment?
John Carmack: We had the Quake 4 getting out the door for the PC was a
big thing, and all the 360 work is in submission with Microsoft right now.
We should have Quake 4 ready for the Xbox 360 launch.
PC Gamer: Are you working on a new rendering engine?
John Carmack: Yeah. For the last year I’ve been working on new render-
ing technologies. It comes in ﬁts and starts. Our internal project is not
publicly announced on there. We’re doing simultaneous development
on Xbox 360, PC, and we intend to release on PS3 simultaneously as well,
but it’s not a mature enough platform right now for us to be doing much
work on.
PC Gamer: Game engines have their own certain look to them. Quake 3
era games all have a similar lighting and texture model, so do Doom 3 era
games, from the high-poly bump maps. Can you predict what the engine
is going to look like from the start?
John Carmack: Usually when I set out making the technical decisions
I don’t know how it’s going to turn out. A lot of it is working out what
works, and what ideas come to you. It is worthwhile mentioning, as you
said, that there’s a characteristic look to the new engine, and it’s going to
be centred around Unique Texturing.
This is an argument I get into with people year after year. Every gen-
eration, someone comes up and says something like ”procedural and
synthetic textures and geometry are going to be the hot new thing”. I’ve
heard it for the last three console generations - it’s not been true and it’s
never going to be true this generation too. It’s because management of
massive data-sets is always the better thing to do. That’s what a lot of the
CHAPTER 18. ”MEET THE GRAPHICS GUY” - PC GAMER INTERVIEWS
JOHN CARMACK ON THE FUTURE OF ID.

John Carmack Archive
167
Interviews
technologies we are working on centre around - both the management
for the real time use of it, and the management of the efﬁcient content
creation side of it. I think that’s going to give a dramatically better look
than what we’re seeing in this generation.
PC Gamer: Can you describe how it will look, in a layperson term.
John Carmack: When you start seeing screenshots of games designed
like this, it’ll be obvious that they’re of a new generation. I’m not sure
how much it comes through, but Quake Wars: Enemy Territory, the game
Splash Damage are working on, that uses an intermediate half-way tech-
nique, the Megatexture stuff I did originally. They’ve really gone and
run with that. Some of their screenshots are really starting to show the
promise of unique texturing on everything. We’ve got an interesting com-
bination of techniques on that - they did a procedural ofﬂine synthetic
synthesis to generate the basis of the terrain, and I built some technol-
ogy to let artists dynamically stamp things into all the channels in game.
We’re starting to see some really, really spectacular results out of this, as
everyone climbs up the skill curve of using these new tools. The tech-
nology we’re working on here at id takes that a step further with a terrain
texturing system is applied throughout for everything.
PC Gamer: I have a quote here from Gabe Newell talking about the next
generation of processors and consoles. He says ”the problems of getting
things running on multicore processors are not solved. We have doctoral
theses but no real world applications.” Do you agree with him?
John Carmack: The difference between theoretical performance and real
world performance on the CPU level is growing fast. On say, a regular
Xbox, you can get very large fractions of theoretical performance with not
a whole lot of effort. The Playstation 2 was always a mess with the mul-
tiple processors on there, but the new generations, with Cell or the Xbox
360 make it much, much worse. They can quote these incredibly high
numbers of giga-ﬂop or tera-ﬂops or whatever, but in reality, when you
do a straighforward development process on them, they’re signiﬁcantly
slower than a modern high end PC. It’s only by doing signiﬁcant architec-
tural work that you even have a chance of ﬁnding speed-ups to what the
PC can do, let alone it’s theoretical performance. It’s only through triv-
ial, toy or contrived applications that you can deliver the performance
CHAPTER 18. ”MEET THE GRAPHICS GUY” - PC GAMER INTERVIEWS
JOHN CARMACK ON THE FUTURE OF ID.

John Carmack Archive
168
Interviews
numbers they claim.
The graphics systems are much better than though. Graphics has an in-
herent natural parallelism. The capabilities of the Xbox 360 and PS3 are
really good on the graphics side, although, not any head or shoulders
above any PC stuff that you can buy at a higher price point.
PC Gamer: When you create a technology, do you build features specif-
ically for a game, or is a case you just testing to see what the silicon can
do?
John Carmack: It’s somewhere in between. You don’t build technology
for technology’s sake. The people who would just build 3D engines with-
out a game attached, those have never been the really successful prod-
ucts. In any case of engineering, you really need to tailor your design to
what you’re trying to accomplish. There are always the types of situa-
tions when you can say, ”we know we want our game to have this type of
outdoor stuff, or this type of indoor stuff,” and you start trying to write
technology for it, but you ﬁnd out something might be harder than you
expected, or you might get a novel idea, and that might feed back into
the game design. We commonly switch gears during our development
process when a really good opportunity comes up. We’re not going to be
pig-headed about something, and say ”this is what our design spec says,
so this is what we’re going to do”. We’ll pick targets of opportunity when
we get them, but the technology does very much try to build around what
we want to accomplish with our games.
PC Gamer: Was there one of these ”targets of opportunity” in the devel-
opment of Doom 3?
John Carmack: When we left Quake 3 I had several different directions of
technology that I considered potentially useful for next generation game
engines. One of those was uniquely texturing the surfaces, and one of
them was this bump-mapped and uniﬁed lighting thing that wound up
in Doom. The decision I made at the time was that something that made
less quality screenshots but a more dynamic environment would make a
better game, which is why I took that direction, but it’s interesting, now
that the technology of the hardware has progressed, I can combine both
of what I wanted to do with the unique texturing and the fully dynamic
environments.
CHAPTER 18. ”MEET THE GRAPHICS GUY” - PC GAMER INTERVIEWS
JOHN CARMACK ON THE FUTURE OF ID.

John Carmack Archive
169
Interviews
PC Gamer: Do you ever miss shareware?
John Carmack: I think that the mobile business is giving me some of the
vibe I had missed from the old days. I am really getting some enjoyment
from working on that. Now, Fountainhead is doing most of the work on
the titles, but it’s been a situation for me where I can go in, do some core
pieces of technology, provide some core design guidance out of that. I’ll
spend one day a week managing that project. It’s kind of fun - the way
that I built both major pieces of technology for this, I would go on a va-
cation with my wife, baby, and laptop and sit there and write technology
while they went off and did something. When I got back to id, we could
take that and work on it. That’s been fun. There’s a lot of potential with it.
Shareware blew off and took id to a very inﬂuential position. The mobile
game market it similar - it’s an interesting game design space, an inter-
esting technology space, and it may very well be an interesting market
space.
PC Gamer: Is the Xbox 360 id’s primary development platform?
John Carmack: [pause] It probably will be. As it is right now we would get
the game up on the 360. When I would do major hack and slash architec-
tural changes it was back on the PC, but it’s looking like the Xbox 360 will
be our target. All of our tools are on the PC, and we’re maintaining the
game running on the PC, but probably all of our gameplay development
and testing will be done on the Xbox 360. It’s a really sweet development
system.
PC Gamer: At an event recently, your colleague Tim Willits said that id
were seriously hurt by piracy. Has that inﬂuenced your decision to move
to Xbox?
John Carmack: The PC market in general is getting really, really torched.
Todd mentioned a statistic: last year was half the gross revenue of three
years ago. A really grim number. People in the PC space are looking at
games that, one way or another, require subscription or internet con-
nection.
PC Gamer: Does moving to the Xbox change any of your open source
support? You’ve been practically deiﬁed in that community for the way
you allow them to work on your game engines.
CHAPTER 18. ”MEET THE GRAPHICS GUY” - PC GAMER INTERVIEWS
JOHN CARMACK ON THE FUTURE OF ID.

John Carmack Archive
170
Interviews
John Carmack: It makes it less of a priority to structure things in a way
that they can be easily modiﬁed. But I think, already in the PC space,
there’s been a downswing in the modding scene. As projects got more
and more complex the modiﬁcations that have gone on in the user com-
munity have got sparser and sparser because the teams have had to con-
glomerate into these super-groups to put something together. I think,
looking back, Quake was the golden age of user-modiﬁcations. It was still
crude enough that you didn’t need an art director to produce a signiﬁcant
mod. That’s saddening, but just the way the platforms have evolved.
Our PC version will probably continue, for ever after, to have signiﬁcant
modiﬁcation capability. We’ll release large chunks of source code for
people to hack up any way they want. I intend to continue my practice
of releasing complete engine source code sometime after the next major
game is released. One year after our next game is out, I may very well be
releasing the Doom 3 source code.
CHAPTER 18. ”MEET THE GRAPHICS GUY” - PC GAMER INTERVIEWS
JOHN CARMACK ON THE FUTURE OF ID.

Chapter 19
MegaTexture Q&A
This interview was conducted by Cain Dornan for Gamer Within on May
01, 2006.
http://www.gamerwithin.com/?view=article&amp;article=1319&amp;cat=
2
Interview
Prologue
One of the most respected and well-known game developers in the world,
John Carmack hardly needs any introduction. Having mastered the skill
of game programming, Carmack co-founded developer id Software, and
has also worked on such classic series as Doom, Quake and Wolfenstein
3D.
In this Question & Answer with Carmack, he discusses the new MegaTex-
ture technology, which will be used in the upcoming Enemy Territory:
Quake Wars for PC. Deﬁnitely a worthy read for any programming, de-
signing or general development enthusiast, as well as any gamer slightly
interested in the development process behind games.
171

John Carmack Archive
172
Interviews
Questions
Cain Dornan: What is MegaTexturing technology?
John Carmack: MegaTexture technology is something that addresses re-
source limitations in one particular aspect of graphics. The core idea of
it is that when you start looking at outdoor rendering and how you want
to do terrain and things in general, people almost always wind up with
some kind of cross-fade blended approach where you tile your textures
over and blend between them and add little bits of detail here and there.
A really important thing to realize about just generally tiling textures, that
we’re so used to accepting it in games, is that when you have one repeated
pattern over a bunch of geometry, the texture tiling and repeating is really
just a very, very specialized form of data compression where it’s allowing
you to take a smaller amount of data and have it replicated over multiple
surfaces, or multiple parts of the same surface in a game since you gen-
erally don’t have enough memory to be able to have the exact texture that
you’d like everywhere.
The key point of that is what you really want to do is to be able to have
as much texture as you want to use where you have something unique
everywhere. Now normally, you just can’t get away with doing that, be-
cause if you allocate a 32,000 by 32,000 texture, the graphics curve can’t
render directly from that. There’s not enough memory in the system to
do that, and even when you have normal sized textures, games are always
up against the limits of the graphics card memory, and system memory,
and eventually you’ve got hard drive or DVD memory on there, but you
wind up with a lot of different swapping schemes, where you’ll have a lit-
tle low-res version of a texture, and then high res versions that you bring
in at different times, and a lot of effort goes into trying to manage this
one way or the other.
So when Splash Damage was starting on, really early with Enemy Ter-
ritory: QUAKE Wars, they were looking at some of these different ways
to render the outdoor scenes with different blends and things like that.
And one of my early suggestions to them was that they consider looking
at an approach where you just use one monumentally large texture, and
that turned out to be 32,000 by 32,000. And I - rather then doing it by
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
173
Interviews
the conventional way that you would approach something like this (i.e.
- chopping up the geometry into different pieces and mapping different
textures on to there and incrementally swapping them for low res versus
high res versions), just let them treat one uniform geometry mesh and
have this effectively unbounded texture side on there, and use a more
complicated fragment program to go ahead and pick out exactly what
should be on there, just as if the graphics hardware and the system really
did support such a huge texture.
In the end what this winds up getting us is the ability to create a great
outdoor terrain texture that has far more complex interactions than any-
thing that you would get with any kind of conventional rendering, where
you’ve built it up out of pieces of lots of smaller textures on there, where
they do some sophisticated things with growing grass up between bump
maps. And then you can go back and do hand touch ups in a lot of dif-
ferent places to accent around features that are coming out of the sur-
face. And this type of thing is, I’m very sure, going to become critically
importance as we go forward into kind of next generation technologies
on there. We’ve seen this over and over as we’ve gone through graphi-
cal technology improvements over the years, where there will be certain
key elements that you start looking at in games that look really dated be-
cause they don’t have the capabilities that people are seeing in sort of
the cutting edge things there. And this type of unique texturing over the
coming generation of games, I think, is going to be one of those, where
when people start looking back at a game that’s predominantly tiled and
doesn’t have that unique artist touched sense about all of the scenes, it’s
going to look very previous generation.
Cain Dornan: What’s the beneﬁt on the top most level just for gamers, of
the MegaTexture. And the second part of that is what’s the beneﬁt as the
developer?
John Carmack: Well for the user the bottom line is just that it looks bet-
ter. You wind up with something that has the diversity that you don’t get
with more conventional terrain generation systems out there. As the de-
veloper, looks are still important for games. If you look at a game and
you make it look better, it’s a better game, so long as you don’t impact the
gameplay negatively. So it’s nothing profound and fundamental, it’s just
one tiny little aspect of graphics rendering that’s just better now.
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
174
Interviews
Cain Dornan: Aside from the visual aspect of the terrain looking better,
do you think there will be any other foreseeable differences to us gamers
that are playing MegaTexture games?
John Carmack: It’s just the variety and the diversity of it. Like I said at
the very beginning, this is only a very small aspect of graphics, let alone
of games in the larger sense. It’s a speciﬁc little piece of technology that
addresses texture resource limitations, and this entire technology would
not need to exist if you had four gigabyte graphics cards, and lots more
RAM. In fact, so much of programming and graphics programming in
particular is just trying to pretend that we’ve got hardware that’s ﬁve or
10 years more advanced than what we’ve got right now by making various
algorithmic trade offs.
Cain Dornan: How is the MegaTexture a major step forward for game
graphics?
John Carmack: My core comment here is that any repeating use of a tex-
ture is just very specialized data compression. Any time you have one
set of texture data, and it’s present in more than one place on the screen,
it’s really an approximation to what an ideal inﬁnite resource video game
would provide. Because in the real world, there aren’t any repeats-even
things that look like they repeat, like bricks or dry wall, are uniquely dif-
ferent. The subtle differences that you get are the things that distinguish
a rendering, especially a game rendering, from something that’s very re-
alistic.
The MegaTexture allows us to have terrain in QUAKE Wars that does not
require any repeated textures for resource limitation reasons. There may
still be some areas where a texture is repeated just because they didn’t
feel like doing anything better, but there was no resource limitation that
encouraged them or required them to do that. They are perfectly capable
of having an artist go in and add 10 million little tiny touches to the level
if they chose to do so. It’s taken it from being a resource constraint to
something that becomes a design trade off.
Cain Dornan: Does MegaTexturing technology bring any speciﬁc limita-
tions with it?
John Carmack: No. There’s no limit to dynamically changing it. That’s
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
175
Interviews
one of the neat things about it - to the graphics engine, it looks like you’re
just texturing on top of arbitrary geometry. You can move it around and
all of that. With the technology in Enemy Territory: QUAKE Wars, there
are some issues with deforming the texture coordinates too much. You’ll
get areas that are blurred more than you would expect with a conven-
tional texturing, and that’s something that’s ﬁxed in my newer rev of tech-
nology.
There are some minor things you have to worry a little bit about. If you
stretched up too steep a cliff slide, there would be some blurring involved
there, even if you adjusted the texture coordinate somewhat. And you
can crutch around that a little bit. That’s also a problem that’s been ﬁxed
by a newer rev of technology that we’ve got right now.
Cain Dornan: So would you consider the fact that the MegaTexture paints
all of the terrain with one enormous texture an advantage to level of de-
tail or a limitation?
John Carmack: Level of detail wise, the terrain does not render with any
sophisticated geometry morphing situation. That’s one of those things
that for years I think most of the research that’s gone into has been wasted.
Geometry level of detail on terrain.. there have been thousands of papers
written about it, and I honestly don’t think it’s all that important. The way
the hardware works, you’re so much better off setting down a static mesh
that’s all in vertex and index buffers, and just letting the hardware plow
through it, rather than going through and having the CPU attempt to do
some really clever cross blended interpolation of vertices.
In and inﬁnite sized world, you would have to include some degree of
level of detail. The Quake Wars levels are not inﬁnite size. They’re bounded.
And it generally turns out to be the best idea to just have the geometry at
a reasonable level of detail and very efﬁciently rendered.
But the MegaTexture would work just ﬁne if you wanted to use that on
something where you were dynamically level detailing the terrain. That is
one of the nice aspects of it, where to the application it just looks like you
can texture with an inﬁnite size texture. You don’t have to worry about
breaking it up on particular boundaries of anything special like that.
Cain Dornan: How do you see the mega texture developing in the next
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
176
Interviews
few years?
John Carmack: The particular version that’s in the Splash Damage code
is essentially already abandoned, where the newer version of the stuff
that I’ve got is a super setup that allows us to use it for arbitrary textures
and has a few other nice beneﬁts. It was one of those things where, if I
had thought about it at the beginning, then I probably would have done
it back then.
But from a technology development standpoint, content wise, the tech-
nologies that Splash Damage developed for creating these terrains ,and
some of the stuff that I was working on to modify MegaTextures artisti-
cally, those are the corner stones of what we’re using going forward for
content creation.
Cain Dornan: Do you think that since it’s a solution that’s working with
Enemy Territory: QUAKE Wars, it’s eventually going to be used in other
software.
John Carmack: Correct. What’s exciting is that I did this stuff a long
time ago, when I ﬁrst did the initial MegaTexture stuff for Splash Dam-
age, which is specialized for terrains. The MegaTexture works for things
that are topologically a deformed plain, like an outdoor surface, and it
has certain particular limitations on how much you can deform the tex-
ture mapping there. For the better part of a year after that initial creation,
I have been sort of struggling to ﬁnd a way to have a similar technology
that creates this unique mapping of everything, and use it in a more gen-
eral sense so that we could have it on architectural models, and arbitrary
characters, and things like that.
Finally, I found a solution that lets us do everything that we want in a
more general sense, which is what we’re using in our current title that’s
under development. That was one of those really happy programmer
moments, where I knew that this sense of unique texturing was a really
positive step forward for what we could do artistically with the game. I
just hadn’t hit on the right thing for a long time, and then, ﬁnally, when I
did settle down and come up with a technology that works for all of that,
it was a good moment.
Cain Dornan: Do you think it is inevitable that this would be a wheel that
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
177
Interviews
the other guys are going to have to reinvent, too?
John Carmack: Yes. Although most graphics rendering stuff is not that
incredibly mysterious and difﬁcult. It used to be that people were always
looking for the black magic in the code, some place, but it’s not that big of
a deal. And especially now there are hundreds and hundreds of graphics
programmers out there who, as soon as they see this type of stuff and
read and article about it, they can go out and start implementing some
of the same things. I expect that pretty much will happen.
I would say that the greater differentiation will be in the two ((inaudible))
that go into allowing people to take effective use of this because the core
technology to do this is tiny. There’s one ﬁle of source code that manages
the individual blocks, and then the fragment program stuff for this is like
a page. It’s not that big of a deal. It’s an architectural and mind set change
that you have to make to decide to actually build a project that’s going to
leverage this type of technology.
Cain Dornan: Why do you think other developers haven’t done anything
like this before?
John Carmack: One aspect of it is certainly the fear of unboundaried de-
velopment time. That’s something that you can look at and say, ”Oh my
gosh, we make this many megabytes of textures. If we uniquely texture
the entire world, it’s going to be 50 times that. How are we going to get
that done?” Generally that’s a bad way to look at things, because while
you now have the ability to uniquely texture everything, nothing is forc-
ing you to. You can still set up and use the technology just like any old
system where you repeat pictures; it’s just that now you have the ability
to do it everywhere you want to, anywhere your fancies strike you or your
artist wants to go in and touch everything up to make an area look better.
But, the worry about development time certainly is an issue and has been
an issue for many years now. Speciﬁcally a signiﬁcant concern about the
fact that it’s not such a good idea to develop a technology that is only go-
ing to make a game ﬁnish later and later. Anything that you’re going to
include that allows more capabilities will take longer to optimize. There
are very, very few things that you can do that just automatically take the
same effort, but produce something drastically better.
Cain Dornan: Did you create the MegaTexture technology with PC hard-
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
178
Interviews
ware in mind? Or were you also planning for next gen consoles when you
started coming up with it?
John Carmack: It was done on the PC. But we know that next-gen con-
soles are essentially PC graphics renderers.
Cain Dornan: Would the consoles having less memory than a PC pose
a problem for the MegaTexture? Or is something that you guys have al-
ready started to work around?
John Carmack: If anything, it works out better for the next-generation
consoles, because on the PC you could often get away with not doing
texture management if you were targeting fairly high end, while on the
consoles, you’ve always had to do it. And especially my newer paged vir-
tual texturing which applies to everything instead of just terrain, allows
you to have a uniform management of all texture resources there, as well
as allowing inﬁnitely sized texture dimensions. So this is actually working
out very nicely on the Xbox 360.
Cain Dornan: Do you think the MegaTexture is a technology that will
push hardware forward, in terms of gamers having to buy new upgrades
for PCs, or not?
John Carmack: Interestingly, this isn’t as performance demanding as a
lot of things we’ve done before. While the exact implementation that I’ve
done for ETQW wouldn’t have been possible until the modern genera-
tion of cards, the fundamental idea of unique texturing is something that
could have been done at any point all the way back to the 3DFX cards.
And when I was originally starting the DOOM development ﬁve to six
years ago, unique texturing was something that I looked at as a viable di-
rection to go to make a next-generation step, but I instead chose to go
with the bump mapping and the dynamic lighting and shadowing be-
cause I thought, for game play reasons, that they were going to work out
better. It’s a technology that I’m surprised that no one else wound up
pursuing, because I picked my direction way back in the DOOM 3 days
and I kind of saw this other viable path that people could be pursuing.
I was kind of surprised that ﬁve, six, years later, nobody else had really
taken that task, because it always looked good to me.
Cain Dornan: Do you think that the MegaTexture technology will be ac-
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
179
Interviews
cessible to mod teams? I’m making the connection there in terms of
thinking of some of the smaller teams out there.
John Carmack: It doesn’t help them. In general, all the technology progress
has been essentially reducing the ability of a mod team to do something
signiﬁcant and competitive. We’ve certainly seen this over the last 10
years, where, in the early days of somebody messing with DOOM or QUAKE,
you could take essentially a pure concept idea, put it in, and see how the
game play evolved there. But doing a mod now, if you’re making new
models, new animation, you essentially need to be a game studio do-
ing something for free to do something that’s going to be the signiﬁcant
equivalent. And almost nobody even considers doing a total conversion
anymore. Anything like this that allows more media effort to be spent,
probably does not help the mods.
Cain Dornan: Has the MegaTexture been a really rewarding breakthrough
for you in the scope of some of your other accomplishments?
John Carmack: It’s hard to put everything in comparison against all the
different things I’ve done. Certainly in this generation of technologies
that I’m working on I’ve done dozens and dozens of little experiments
with lots of different graphics technologies. I do think that the unique
texturing technologies are the most important of all of the things that
I’ve done and are going to have the most signiﬁcant impact.
There’s a ton of little graphics technologies that you can experiment with,
different rendering technologies, and ways of drawing things with silhou-
ette lighting or deformation maps - just all sorts of things that are inter-
esting when you look at them in a particular light, and may have some
great use in a game. But any texturing technology is something that ap-
plies to everything, and I’ve always wanted to do technologies that have
a more general application, rather than things that I always considered
artifact effects that you put on a particular object. I’m probably more ac-
cepting of eye candy like that on particular objects now than I used to be,
because people do ﬁnd things like that catchy, and it will make an impact
on people when they see something special. But I’ve generally preferred
to set up technologies that effect everything uniformly across the entire
game world and this is one of those.
Cain Dornan: Public perception of you is sometimes centered around
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
180
Interviews
your love of technology in making games, and maybe more so for right or
wrong, than the ﬁnished product. What do you think of that assessment?
John Carmack: Well, the gameplay really is intertwined with the presen-
tation. I’ve never pursued a technology that I thought would negatively
impact gameplay. It’s always in the context of ”how will this technology
improve the game?” And it is true that I’m not the ﬁnal arbiter of what’s
necessarily going to make our games fun, gameplay-wise. I don’t neces-
sarily consider myself representative of our target market. And the game
play decisions are generally now made by Tim.
But I do still care about making sure that the technology that I help pro-
vide, which is sort of the canvas that everything is painted on, is some-
thing that will only have positive improvements to the whole game play
experience. So I am focused more and more narrowly now, than I used to
be, on the graphics technology and my little aspect of this. It’s true that
I used to write essentially all of the code for everything. But as the de-
mands of the technology have improved we have to have more and more
people and it gets more and more specialized. So I’ve sort of retrenched
into the area where I have the most to offer and I put in the time that I
can to it.
Cain Dornan: Is there anything else that you’d like to add?
John Carmack: It’s still very exciting the capabilities that are continu-
ously being added to our arsenal here. I am having a really good time
working on the Xbox 360 right now, graphic technology-wise. As for the
MegaTexture stuff, it is kind of funny that it’s not super demanding of
the hardware. As I mentioned, I was kind of surprised that something
like this hadn’t been pushed before we got around to it. There are lots
more exciting possibilities for the graphics research and we’re still toying
around with some fairly fundamental architectural design issues on the
Xbox 360.
And, the PC space is going to be moving even faster than the consoles.
The graphics technology is still exciting and they’re still going to be sig-
niﬁcant things that we can show to people that will make them look at
this and say ”wow, this is a lot better than the previous generation.” I do
think unique texturing is the key for the coming generation.
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

John Carmack Archive
181
Interviews
There are lots and lots of graphics technologies that we can look at. And
maybe you add ﬁve or six up and they wind up being something that
really gives it a next generation wow. But just by itself, even with no newer
presentation technologies, allowing unique texturing on lots and lots of
surfaces, I think, is the key enabler for this generation.
CHAPTER 19. MEGATEXTURE Q&A

Chapter 20
CES 2007: John Carmack And
Todd Hollenshead Speak
This interview was conducted by Billy Berghammer for Game Informer
on Jan 09, 2007.
http://www.gameinformer.com/News/Story/200701/N07.0109.1737.15034.
htm
Interview
Prologue
Game Informer met with id Software’s John Carmack and Todd Hollen-
shead to talk about, well, a lot of things. In our hour-long talk, we talked
about the state of PC gaming, QuakeCon and the pros and cons of devel-
oping for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. We’ve split the interview into
two digestible chunks. Part one appears here today, and we’ll run the
conclusion tomorrow. Enjoy.
182

John Carmack Archive
183
Interviews
Questions
20.1
Part One
Billy Berghammer: First off, I just want to say congratulations on the
awards. [John Carmack was just presented with a Technology Emmy
award at CES for his work in 3D game engines, and id Software earned
an Emmy for the company’s rendering work.]
John Carmack: It still seems kind of a bizarre thing. I mean, whenever
you hear Emmys and Oscars and stuff, you think high fashion and Holly-
wood, and that is so not what I’m about at all. And being honored with
that - it’s certainly one of the big-time honors that you’re not going to
turn down or are not going to step away from - but I never would have
expected to receive something like this.
Billy Berghammer: After Enemy Territories: Quake Wars ships with the
highly modiﬁed Doom 3 engine and the MegaTexture support, is it time
for you guys to move on from that engine?
John Carmack: Yes, the in-house development project that we’ve been
working on is all new technology. It still has some roots in the Doom 3
technology, but almost everything is new in there. We’re still not talking
about exactly what the project is, but it’s a new IP, it’s diverting a little
bit from the standard id formula and it’s not just a ﬁrst-person shooter.
Technically, it’s built around an advancement over the MegaTexture tech-
nology from Quake Wars. Where that was applied just to the terrain, the
version of the new technology applies it into everything, so we can have
that level of rich detail on all the surfaces on the entire world. That’s the
push that we’re making with graphics technology. The gameplay is some-
what different from anything that we’ve of done before. The company
is pursuing Wolfenstein, Doom and Quake franchises with other part-
ner developers and all, but we’re trying to develop a brand-new franchise
with this new one. Hopefully, we’ll be talking about that sometime this
year, and we’ll be able to go ahead and come out of our own little cone of
silence about it.
Billy Berghammer: Do you think that’ll be at E3 or maybe the next Quake-
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
184
Interviews
Con
John Carmack: I would certainly expect by the next QuakeCon, but...when
is E3 this year?
Billy Berghammer: July
John Carmack: [pauses] I don’t know. That’s a toss-up. It kind of depends
on what the business relationships and stuff are at that point.
Billy Berghammer: Are you planning on adopting DX10 for Quake Wars?
John Carmack: Not for Quake Wars, for sure. It has come up as a ques-
tion for our internal development projects, and we weren’t even expect-
ing to ask that question. There’s no massive pull for me for DX10. It would
be more a question of if we don’t think we’re going to get done until Vista
is broadly adopted, it might just save us development and support things
to say it’s a DX10 game - but there’s no huge thing where we’re dying to
use any particular DX10 feature. It would just more be a question about
practically, is the market there where we can write off everything else?
Quake Wars is deﬁnitely not DX10.
Billy Berghammer: Since you’re moving ahead with the new technology
within the Doom 3 engine, you’re not worried about adopting that for
DX10?
John Carmack: No, because the DX9 stuff - actually, DX9 is really quite a
good API [application programming interface] level. Even with the D3D
[Direct3D] side of things, where I know I have a long history of people
thinking I’m antagonistic against it. Microsoft has done a very, very good
job of sensibly evolving it at each step - they’re not worried about break-
ing backwards compatibility - and it’s a pretty clean API. I especially like
the work I’m doing on the 360, and it’s probably the best graphics API as
far as a sensibly designed thing that I’ve worked with.
Billy Berghammer: A lot of gamers are in the boat right now - and I’m in
the boat as well - where they’re saving money to buy a new rig. I was at
QuakeCon two years ago with my computer, and I was just slow. So I’ve
been saving cash to buy a new rig to handle the next-gen of PC games.
Quake Wars, Spore and Crysis are all coming out on the horizon, and
there’s a big push for PC games this year. Do you think gamers should
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
185
Interviews
take the plunge now for DX10, or do you think they should wait and stick
with DX9.
John Carmack: I don’t think that there’s any huge need for people to
jump right now. All the high-end video cards right now - video cards
across the board - are great nowadays. This is not like it was years ago,
where they’d say, ”This one’s poison, stay away from this. You really need
to go for this.” Both ATI and Nvidia are going a great job on the high end.
Internally, we’re still using more Nvidia cards, but it’s not necessarily be-
cause we’ve done a careful analysis and we decided that they’re supe-
rior in some way. They have better OpenGL support, but they’re all good
cards right now. Personally, I wouldn’t jump at something like DX10 right
now. I would let things settle out a little bit and wait until there’s a really
strong need for it. I doubt there’s going to be any radical, obvious sweet
spot where it’s like, ”Now is the time to go get things.” It’s fairly mature,
the pace that things are going on, and I don’t expect there’s going to be
any huge sea changes in the way things are moving.
Billy Berghammer: Is there anything in particular that you’d suggest if
someone was going to be going out and buying a new computer right
now that they should make sure they get in their new rig?
John Carmack: You know, not really. I think that while there are still
points of differentiation between the different qualities of things both
in graphics and processor and all that, it’s hard to go wrong nowadays.
The prices are so low relative to where things used to be and the per-
formance is great. People can still screw up and buy a computer with
no expandability or get stuck with some integrated graphics card on the
motherboard or things like that, but it’s been a long time since we’ve
cared enough about the exact performance stuff to go and make exhaus-
tive benchmarks on all the different things that we’ve done. I mean, the
latest Intel processors are really fast, and we do ﬁnd them pretty much
top of the line. Jan Paul has done a lot of benchmarking for various com-
pression and decompression things, and it is kind of neat going around
benchmarking on the 360 and the different Intel processors and compar-
ing everything, and Intel’s done a really great job with the latest genera-
tion of things. It’s funny from my position, but I’m not all that deeply into
the latest and greatest nitty-gritty details between the different things on
there. Maybe with the length of perspective that I’ve had, it’s not all that
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
186
Interviews
incredibly important - especially when we’re looking at a four-year game-
development title again. If I go and say, ”Right now, this is absolutely the
best thing, two years from now it’s not going to matter.” If I ever see any-
thing where I think someone could make a really tragic mistake, like there
was something out there that probably wouldn’t be a good thing to buy
into, I would warn people off.
Billy Berghammer: What’s your take on Microsoft’s attempt to make Vista
a more viable gaming platform?
John Carmack: Microsoft has done a spectacular job on the 360 sup-
port. The PC, though, is fundamentally pretty different - with a variety
of platforms and everything - and I don’t think Microsoft’s gaming ini-
tiatives...they’re able to really show their stuff on the 360 and make great
value there. So obviously, we like the PC as a game-development plat-
form and it’s still probably our favorite platform, but there are certain
things I ﬁnd more fun to do on the 360. We still very much like the PC,
and most of that is due to Microsoft’s general support of making it rea-
sonable to do that there. I’ve never been a big believer in cross-platform
games, because there are too many compromises you need to make to
design the game to be the same game play on both of them and have
co-op play across them and all that. So, that’s not a major direction for
me. Some of the tools that they wind up producing aren’t things that
we adopt, but they are things that are important to some studios. So, I
wouldn’t say Microsoft’s latest gaming initiatives on Vista have had a sig-
niﬁcant impact on id Software - and they might not even be the best use
of Microsoft’s various resources - but they have so many resources they
kind of scatter them around, and it’s not a horrible thing to do.
Billy Berghammer: What do you think about them trying to bring the
Xbox Live platform to the PC space?
John Carmack: Well, that’s been one of Microsoft’s big successes. They
really did wind up hitting on a good set of things with Xbox Live. They
probably surprised Sony with how a lot of the things are working out
there, and we’ll probably wind up utilizing some of their technology on
the PC space. People are expecting such richer and richer experiences
with all of that now, where it’s becoming burdensome to continue to re-
develop all of that sort of stuff, and the platform is possibly standardiz-
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
187
Interviews
ing. It seems people are generally pretty happy with what they get with
Live, and I don’t think it would be too big of a shame to make that sort of
a standard interface across the board for the PC as well.
Billy Berghammer: Can you see them charging, like they do for Xbox
Live, or do you think those are waters you don’t want to dip your toes
into?
John Carmack: I really haven’t even given it that much consideration. I
think that they are providing a decent service for that. We’re very happy
with our live downloads and stuff like that, and there’s value there, but I
would expect that Microsoft would end up subsidizing that for their plat-
form, but I don’t really know.
Todd Hollenshead: Didn’t AOL try that with a closed-content network
that they charged a premium price for, and then ended up making it all
free? That would be my kneejerk reaction. I think for games like Quake 3
or the multiplayer aspects of ﬁrst-person games and those sorts of things,
it’s going to be a hard sell to players who have had it free for over a decade
now and now they’re going to be charged for it. If it’s a persistent type of
game or a more persistent type of game...you know some of the things
that we’re talking about like Enemy Territory: Quake Wars, where it still
is an instanced game. You don’t have levels or anything like that, but
when you play you can actually - through experience points - get bet-
ter abilities. But when you log off, your experience effectively goes away
and you start again the next time you play at zero. Some of the sorts of
things we have planned for the game is a persistence type of stat track-
ing, so that you can be on ladders and have skill points and these sorts
of things that you really haven’t seen that much on the PC outside the
MMO-type games but that you see with all of the achievements and lad-
ders and things on the XLA side.
Billy Berghammer: We’ve heard mixed results from developers on devel-
oping for, or bringing their games over to, Vista. Some have loved it, and
others have been lukewarm about it. What are your thoughts on Vista?
John Carmack: We only have a couple of people running Vista at our
company. It’s again, one of those things that there is no strong pull for us
to go there. If anything, it’s going to be reluctantly like, ”Well, a lot of the
market is there, so we’ll move to Vista.” Other people that are running it
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
188
Interviews
are going, ”It’s coming around, you’ve gotta run this. This is the greatest
thing on here.”
Todd Hollenshead: And it has posed some backwards-compatibility prob-
lems for us with Doom 3, Quake 4, Quake 3...
John Carmack: Quake 3 is a problem on it?
Todd Hollenshead: Well, it’s not that it’s a problem, but more of that we
haven’t done much testing with it.
John Carmack: I’m pretty sure (Quake) 1 through 3 work just ﬁne.
Todd Hollenshead: But yeah, there has been some level of concentra-
tions, at least on my part. It’s like a whole new QA process. Publishers
aren’t really used to having to fund that on a title like Doom 3, which a
still a very signiﬁcant selling title. But it’s one where Activision thought
their support aspect of it was effectively dwindling down to zero. What
we ended up doing right was basically doing it ourselves, because Activi-
sion didn’t want to do it. We had to go through a whole QA process with
Doom 3, so we had to pull people off of the various things that they’re
working on.
John Carmack: It’s a tough thing for Microsoft, where, essentially, Win-
dows XP was a just ﬁne operating system. Before that, there were horrible
problems with Windows. But once they got there, it did everything an op-
erating system is supposed to do. Nothing is going to help a new game
by going to a new operating system. There were some clear wins going
from Windows 95 to Windows XP for games, but there really aren’t any
for Vista. They’re artiﬁcially doing that by tying DX10 so close it, which
is really nothing about the OS. It’s a hardware-interface spec. It’s an arti-
ﬁcial thing that they’re doing there. They’re really grasping at straws for
reasons to upgrade the operating system. I suspect I could run XP for a
great many more years without having a problem with it.
Billy Berghammer: At QuakeCon two years ago, you were very adamant
during your keynote about not being too thrilled about developing for
multi-core systems. Not just speciﬁcally with PCs, but also the PlaySta-
tion 3 and Xbox 360. Now that you’ve been working with both of them
since then, have your thoughts changed at all?
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
189
Interviews
John Carmack: Microsoft has made some pretty nice tools that show you
what you can make on the Xbox 360. I get a nice multi-frame graph, and
I can label everything across six threads and three cores. They are nice
tools for doing all of that, but the fundamental problem is that it’s still
hard to do. If you want to utilize all of that unused performance, it’s go-
ing to become more of a risk to you and bring pain and suffering to the
programming side. It already tends to be a long pole in the tent for get-
ting a game out of the door. It’s no help to developers to be adding all
of this extra stuff where we can spend more effort on this. We’re going
to be incentivized, obviously, to take advantage of the system, because
everybody’s going to be doing that. It’s not like anyone’s going to say
that it’s impossible to do. People tend to look at it from the up side. It
gives you this many more ﬂops and it gives you this much more power
to do that. But you have to recognize that there is another edge to that
sword, and you will suffer in some ways for dealing with this. I don’t have
any expectation that anytime soon, a massive breakthrough will occur
that will make parallel programming much easier. It’s been an active
research project for many years. Better tools will help and somewhat
better programming methodologies will help. One of the big problems
with modern game development with C/C++ languages is that your ju-
nior programmer who’s supposed to be over there working on how the
pistol works can’t have one tiny little erase condition that interacts with
the background thread doing something. I do sweat about the fragility
of what we do with the large-scale software stuff with multiple program-
mers developing on things, and adding multi-core development makes
it much scarier and much worse in that regard.
So we’re dealing with it, but it’s an aspect of the landscape that obviously
would have been better if we would have been able to get more gigahertz
in a processor core. But life didn’t turn out like that, and we have to just
take the best advantage with it.
Billy Berghammer: You talked a lot about the Xbox 360. What are your
thoughts on the PlayStation 3 now that you’ve had more time on it?
John Carmack: We’ve got our PlayStation 3 dev kits, and we’ve got our
code compiling on it. I do intend to do a simultaneous release on it.
But the honest truth is that Microsoft dev tools are so much better than
Sony’s. We expect to keep in mind the issues of bringing this up on the
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
190
Interviews
PlayStation 3. But we’re not going to do much until we’re at the point
where we need to bring it up to spec on the PlayStation 3. We’ll proba-
bly do that two or three times during the major development schedule.
It’s not something we’re going to try and keep in-step with us. None of
my opinions have really changed on that. I think the decision to use an
asymmetric CPU by Sony was a wrong one. There are aspects that could
make it a winning decision, but they’re not helpful to the developers. If
they make the developers say that Sony is going to own the main market-
place, let’s make them develop toward this and build it this way, it would
somewhat downplay the beneﬁts of the Xbox 360 and play to the PlaySta-
tion 3’s strengths. I suspect they’re not going to overwhelmingly crush
the marketplace this time, which wasn’t clear a year ago. A lot of peo-
ple were thinking it’s going to be a rerun of the last generation, and it’s
now looking like it might not be. I’ve been pulling for Microsoft, because
I think they’ve done a better job for development support, and I think
they have made somewhat smarter decisions on the platform. It’s not
like the PlayStation 3 is a piece of junk or anything. I was not a fan of the
PlayStation 2 and the way its architecture was set up. With the PlaySta-
tion 3, it’s not even that it’s ugly - they just took a design decision that
wasn’t the best from a development standpoint.
Billy Berghammer: When you were talking about adding more resources
into the parallel development, do you feel that goes against Microsoft’s
XNA platform? Microsoft’s spiel was that you used to spend 80% on prob-
lems and 20% on creativity.
John Carmack: Yeah, that’s all bullshit. If anything, when you give pro-
cessing power in a way that is not convenient on here, it can make you
spend more effort. It can make you do greater things like with physics or
accelerate audio or something, but it’s not like that you have this hard-
ware that takes whatever work you were doing and makes it into less
work. And this had analogs through all kinds of parallel processing on
there. It’s very rare that you have a piece of hardware that can make what
you were doing easier. Usually, you have to spend more effort, but you
get something vastly more powerful in the end. Even 3D graphics was
kind of like that - especially a lot of the early cards. They were a decelera-
tor, people used to joke. If you ran a game that had a really good software
rasterizer, like Quake, and you chose to run that through most of the early
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
191
Interviews
3D cards, it actually got slower. But then you could say: ”Oh, you can run
at a higher resolution and you can get ﬁltering.” But it was still not mak-
ing what you were doing go faster. So you had to go put in all of this other
work to try and bring the speed back and also get these other advantages.
The same type of thing was true with sound accelerators, and we still deal
with EAX and stuff, but it’s not a high-return platform. And people are
dealing with that with the standalone physics accelerator. I don’t think a
physics accelerator alone will ever be a big thing. If anything, it will be
technology rolled into something else.
So with all of the extra power, we’re going to be able to do some cool
things with it, but by no means will it make our lives easier. Now it will be
more like, ”Hey audio guy, you no longer have to live in 10%. This core is
all you. Have a blast.” That type of thing will make life easier, but it’s not
the most efﬁcient use of resources.
20.2
Part Two
Billy Berghammer: We’re talking about the high end. Going to the other
side, you’ve gone back and programmed for simpler systems, like cell
phones. On the console side, the Wii is the most underpowered, as they
say. What do you think about developing for the Wii?
John Carmack: You know, we’ve never had a good relationship with Nin-
tendo, from really early products we did a long time ago. And for the most
part, we just said, ”Fine.” We’re busy with other stuff, and we just haven’t
been that tight with Nintendo. On the up side, I really do respect what
they’re doing, where for years, I’ve been saying - you probably heard me
at QuakeCon - I will go on about how IO devices are where the really big
differences are going to be made in gaming. You can get ten times the
graphics power, and you can make a prettier picture, but when some-
body makes a new IO device that really changes the way that people in-
teract with the game, that’s going to have a larger beneﬁt there. So I’m
really pleased with what they’re doing with the Wii and with the DS - and
they’re doing innovative things. But our current generation of game tech-
nology is not targeted at the Wii. Maybe that was a mistake on our part
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
192
Interviews
originally, but we have been looking strictly at the 360, PS3 and PC as
what we want to simultaneously develop on. We probably aren’t going to
be able to hit the Wii with the same technology platform.
Billy Berghammer: What are your thoughts on episodic gaming?
John Carmack: You know, it’s one of those things that sounds like a good
idea initially, but I’m not sure that - it’ll probably have some degree of
success - but I don’t think it’s necessarily a method that’s going to cover
the majority of the gaming market right now. I think it does tend to feel a
little bit - it’s all in market psychology and all of that, and I won’t claim to
be any kind of an expert on that there. It would be nice if games could be
developed more piecemeal like that, but it still is so heavily front-loaded
to build your basic core on there. It would be great if you could go ahead
and release episodes regularly after that, but I think the customers feel to
some degree that if they buy a game and they can get episodic additions
to it, that there’s this sense of, ”Why didn’t they just put that on there
when I bought the main game itself?” I think there are some barriers to
overcome. It would be nice when Internet distribution does become the
main way that people get their games and you can just continue carrying
out additional upgrades as long as you’ve got enough people willing to
buy them. I think that would be good for game-development studios.
But, so far, nothing’s come along that really satisﬁes the same thing as
the blockbuster commercial release. Of course, it’s a tough market, with
winners and losers, but even if you’re in the winner’s slot, that’s still where
the big successes are. But I do think it’s possible for a lot of the less-
conventional marketing strategies to get to a lot of game studios. There’s
probably a lot of good business there, but it’s not the same thing as if
you’ve got the possibility of doing a triple A title, there’s nothing that’s
currently drawing you away from that.
Todd Hollenshead: If you’re doing a triple A title, I think there are sub-
stantive reasons as to why you would choose to go that direction. I mean,
the ﬁrst thing, as John said, is that the costs are front-loaded in terms
of time and the expenses, and basically the game has to be done, espe-
cially from a programming standpoint, by the time you release the ﬁrst
episode. You can add some features as you go along, but the fundamen-
tal aspects of what you’re going to be able to do from a signiﬁcant level
are going to have to be done. You incur all the time and expense to create
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
193
Interviews
that, and typically the media creation is not something that’s gating you
for release anyway. So, there’s a bit of out-of-sync between how you in-
cur time and cost and how you would actually recoup that through sales.
Plus, there’s the way that the market is set up and the way consumer ex-
pectations are set, certainly, publishers’ market games are for games with
a large launch with maybe some potential upside. You saw a game like
Battleﬁeld: 1942 that had a big launch, but then when it caught on it
still had a crescendo of support. Typically, the game-sales curve is that
you have your biggest month in your launch month, and it decays from
there as retailers devote less and less shelf space to it, publishers devote
less and less marketing dollars to promoting it and those sorts of things.
So, talking about a long-term cycle of continuing to have to support that
from a retail channel of support and a marketing dollar channel of sup-
port - it’s very difﬁcult for the market to understand how exactly that’s
going to work.
Billy Berghammer: Obviously, the retail chain’s going to hate it.
Todd Hollenshead: They’re not going to like it, because you have effec-
tively one product that gets split into, let’s say, four boxes at lower price
points, and that’s the exact opposite direction that retail wants to be in. If
you’re talking about Internet distribution, there are issues there, but the
main one is that even when you look at Half Life 2 and the episodic con-
tent, the biggest litmus test is taking a triple A title, where you have retail
distribution and Internet distribution, and the choice that Valve made
was to have both, which I think tells you that even with a company that’s
extremely motivated - because they have their own proprietary distribu-
tion system - to go exclusively with that distribution system understands
that from a market reality standpoint that if you want the big dollars,
you’re going to have to be in retail stores, too, at this point in time.
John Carmack: That is one of the interesting things about the cell-phone
market, where instead of the fall off on sales curves like with PC titles, the
cell-phone ones actually tend to grow with time as word-of-mouth gets
around. And it’s an interesting different sales dynamic, and I do always
hope for something that - it’s sort of a shame, where with a cell phone,
most of the content comes over the air, which has this weird dynamic
with the fact that memories are getting huge on the cell phones and you
have a little straw to suck the content through, and that has its own set
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
194
Interviews
of issues. It has the potential there, where if people are always buying
the games on there, where it should be this egalitarian system where you
should be able to get any sort of content through there, but because of
the way that it is tightly controlled by the providers on there - who are
not exactly nimble, quick companies - and they have that aspect of that,
dealing with the actual cell-phone companies does stink. It’s interesting
to play around with different distribution strategies and technologies on
something like that where you’re not talking about sinking thirty million
dollars on development into something that you want to roll the dice on.
Billy Berghammer: Speaking of Valve, what’s your take on Steam?
Todd Hollenshead: I think as far as an Internet-distribution methodol-
ogy, that it’s probably the most effective right now. They’re not the only
game in town anymore, there are competitors, and the issue for a devel-
oper like id is that if we use Steam then we have to bolt someone else’s
distribution system onto our technology as opposed to if you’re a Source
engine licensee or something, that all kind of comes pre-packaged. So,
that would be an issue for us, but I think it’s a pretty big advantage for
Valve to be able to have a second line of publishing for their own titles.
John Carmack: Of course, it doesn’t help developers that much, because
they take as big of a cut as a conventional publisher would.
Todd Hollenshead: I’ve spoken to them about Steam and I’ve looked at
it for our back catalog, and the royalty Valve was getting - and we have a
publisher that still has distribution rights we’d have to share - and by the
time we go through all of the royalties, you end up making less money
distributing it over the Internet, which is the opposite of the way you
think it should be. The story that Gabe [Newell] told at GDC, when he
sort of introduced Steam as, ”Here is your distribution platform of the
future,” and all that - I don’t think Gabe intentionally misled anyone, but
I was there, and I saw that there were serious ﬂaws in the economic anal-
ysis that he laid out for developers. The problem for most developers is
not one of not getting paid enough once the game is out, it’s that they
don’t have the seed funding necessary to internally fund development
of their titles. That’s why they work for publishers on milestone sched-
ules and advances against future royalties, and Steam offers no solution
for that. It also doesn’t offer any solution for the marketing spend ques-
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
195
Interviews
tion, where if developers don’t even have enough money to fund them-
selves internally to develop their product, then they’re not going to be
able to pay for a multimillion dollar marketing campaign, which is a huge
amount of risk that as an industry standpoint is ofﬂoaded from devel-
opers to publishers. A lot of the marketing spending goes in advance.
They have their metrics about what game anticipation is and game rank-
ings and a number of measures that they can use to gauge their market-
ing spends. Building the inventory and spending the marketing dollars,
those are before you get a dollar of revenue, generally, and developers
just can’t afford that, and Valve doesn’t have a seed-capital solution for
that. So the issue is that if developers are beholden to publishers, which
gives publishers more leverage in the business relationship, the problem
with using Steam is that it would only make sense for a developer like
id or Epic or Valve, who are completely internally self-funded. We don’t
have that issue of not having leverage with publishers because we have
to borrow their money to make our games or they have to pay us to make
games for them. To me, that’s a bit of the catch-22. I think when you
look at the access to a market, in terms of, ”Hey, we have this game and
we want to make it available to everyone who has Steam,” which is the-
oretically everyone who has bought Half Life a few years after it was out
or Half Life 2 or a lot of these other titles, I think that they’ve created an
asset that has signiﬁcant value.
John Carmack: It’s getting to be one of those things where in the long
term it’s obvious that you’re going to be able to say, ”I want to play this
computer game,” you just click here on your computer and you get it.
There’s no question that that is a powerful model that people are going to
want to pursue, it’s just a question of how it works out in the next decade.
Todd Hollenshead: Yeah, and you do see almost all of the publishers now
are either working on their own internal solution or partnering with a re-
tailer. There’s this whole crazy deal where publishers feel like it’s a bad
idea to be in theoretical competition with their customers. Even though
they have their own little Internet stores, they haven’t gone at being di-
rect to the customer. For a developer like us, that’s never made any sense
at all. If the market is more efﬁcient to be more direct with your cus-
tomer, then it seems to me that that’s what you should strive for. They
have been paranoid about telling a retailer, ”We want to sell you X hun-
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
196
Interviews
dred thousands of copies, and meanwhile we’re going to be doing our
best to make sure that no one buys one because we’re selling them all
through this sales-distribution avenue that you have no access to.” What
I think we’re seeing is that EA is working with Valve and they’re working
on their own solution, and Activision is working on their own solution,
and all the publishers we’re talking to now, whether they’ve announced it
or not, at least have some kind of plan - whether it’s in partnership with
retail through some online distribution or whether they’re going to build
something or license something - I think they all recognize that this is
on the horizon. I think one of the worst business decisions that you can
make is to ﬁght an inevitable technology.
Billy Berghammer: This year’s QuakeCon is coming up...
Todd Hollenshead: I don’t know if I’m supposed to say this or not, but
the Anatole [the Hilton Anatole Hotel in Dallas], that’s where QuakeCon
is going to be for the next two years. We’ve entered a two-year deal with
them. Last year’s QuakeCon, I think it ended up working out a whole
lot better than I thought it was going to be, given the last-minute nature
of the way things came together. The problem really was - and I think
people always think there’s some kind of big conspiracy or something or
incompetence - but we got the rug jerked under our feet from the Gay-
lord Texan, where we’d had it the previous two years. They told us they
had a date saved for us and then, lo and behold, surprise, it came through
some alleged scheduling snafu the dates weren’t going to work because
they had someone coming in on a date that we absolutely had to have
the space. I think we made the best out of an unpleasant situation, and
it ended up being a lot of fun at the Anatole this year, and the guys there
really appreciated the business. I don’t think the Gaylord Texan ever ap-
preciated the QuakeCon crowd, and I really don’t like to apologize for
our guys. We love the people who come out there, and they have their
own thing. If you get 5,000 people together and expect that there are go-
ing to be no problems whatsoever, then you’re not in touch with reality.
The Gaylord wanted the Red Boa ladies or whatever. I just use that as an
example because it seems whenever I’m at that hotel they’re there. You
know, it’s like women in their 50s and 60s and 70s and they go out for
a week to get away from, I don’t know, their husbands, and they go out
and party or go get as crazy as you can at that age. That’s the crowd that
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
197
Interviews
they wanted, which is different in lots of ways than the Quake crowd. I
mean we advertise it as a party for the fans, and when you have college
and that sort of demographic at an event, then you’re going to have a cer-
tain amount of zest for life that maybe at 70 years old you’re not going to
appreciate.
John Carmack: But realistically, we don’t have that many problems at
QuakeCon. If it was a football convention or something, there would
probably be a lot more incidents.
Billy Berghammer: I was there two years ago, and the later it got it got
loud and I saw some crazy stuff, but I’ve seen worse at other places.
Todd Hollenshead: It kind of comes down to, and this is sort of a silly ex-
ample, the hotel freaked out because somebody smoked pot in the hotel.
And I’m like, ”If you’re freaking about somebody smoking pot in your ho-
tel, then you haven’t been in the hotel business very long or you freak out
way too easy.” What do you say? ”I didn’t tell them it was OK, but it’s their
room.” It’s like, ”Yeah, well what else is new, and what do you want us to
do about that?” It’s not something that we endorse, but at the same time
we realize that it’s there. Our deal was that we police the convention cen-
ter, and we did that. We told them that they needed to police the hotel,
and they’re coming to us with issues like that. That’s on their side, and
they needed to take care of those sorts of issues. This year’s QuakeCon
is August 2-5. The Anatole worked out great. Where we had the BYOC
[bring your own computer] and the vendor area is now all BYOC, and the
room beside that, where we had the stage presentations, is now all going
to become the vendor area. We’re changing the way it works, too. As op-
posed to having everybody who is a vendor being effectively a sponsor of
the event, we’re basically going to the E3 or GDC methodology of booth
space. You’ll get a space, like if it’s ten by ten, it’s $2,500 and it goes from
there.
John Carmack: So we won’t have someone from Intel bitching about hav-
ing an AMD poster, and vice versa.
Todd Hollenshead: We do want to have certain aspects of the event spon-
sored, for example a tournament sponsor. You don’t have to be an ex-
hibitor to be a sponsor or vice versa. You can be one or the other or
whatever it is that you want to do. We are making it more like - at least for
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
198
Interviews
the exhibitors, vendors and sponsors - a traditional trade show. Part of
it is with changes to E3, we see an opportunity to raise the proﬁle of the
event and also, as John said, we’ve had issues in the past where if Nvidia
has a partnership with AMD and we have Intel as a sponsor then Intel
gets upset with AMD logos in the Nvidia booth. There’s gamesmanship
that goes on amongst the sponsors, that if they didn’t get the exclusive,
then they’re looking for a way to wedge in and get some display there.
Then we get bitching from the other side, which is totally understand-
able. But it really does end up being like separating ﬁghting siblings over
things, and we’d rather not be babysitters about that stuff anymore.
Billy Berghammer: Are there any other plans for the event that you can
share yet?
Todd Hollenshead: I think most of the stuff we’ve talked about in the
press releases is sort of where we’re going. QuakeCon is one of those
things that when it gets to speciﬁcs, when we get more momentum on
the event we actually plan that stuff. We’ll have the tournaments again,
and expect the BYOC to be massively expanded. There’s an opportunity
for the event to be the biggest that it’s ever been, and that would certainly
be our hope. It may be even bigger, in terms of attendance, than we had
at Gaylord. That’s going to be a challenge for us because, technically,
it’s a little less total square footage space. We really do like the Anatole,
and they were totally cool to everybody who came. Like on the croquet
court. I think there’s a rule on it that says you can only wear white on
it, but someone went to Wal-Mart and bought some of those giant-ass
bouncy balls and then put numbers on them and they were playing hu-
man pool where you’d kick the ball and then put chairs on the side of
the croquet court. The hotel was like, ”OK, you can’t have the chairs out
there,” because it’s basically like a golﬁng green and they don’t want the
chairs tearing up the grass. Then they just had people out there spread
their legs and if the ball went through, it formed a pocket. Stuff like that,
they’re just totally cool. There was a report of damage, which the hotel
didn’t freak out about, like an overhead lamp ﬁxture got broken or some-
thing, and they came and said, ”Well, we had this lamp that was broken
because two people were out last night having a light-saber battle and
they hit one.”
Billy Berghammer: Two more quick questions. Is there any game or tech
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
199
Interviews
that you’ve seen in the past year that’s made you say, ”Wow”?
John Carmack: I think Gears of War looks great. I really do. I think they
did an excellent job with that. They did a lot of things really well. That’s
the best-looking thing that I’ve seen in a while.
Todd Hollenshead: The Crysis stuff looks pretty good, too. I don’t know
if you’ve seen that.
John Carmack: Yeah, that’s not a shipping product yet.
Billy Berghammer: Doom, starring the Rock. Any regrets?
John Carmack: It’s obviously not an Oscar-worthy movie, but I had fun
watching it. I saw it twice, and I thought it was pretty good. All I wanted
it to be was not wretched. I didn’t want it to be Super Mario Brothers or
Double Dragon - the really, really bad movies. And it came out and did
pretty well, and I thought it was pretty good. So, no regrets.
Todd Hollenshead: It was a tough thing, too, you know. The movie had
been in some level of production across different license holders for years
and years. Still, it was the ﬁrst time we’d ever done anything like that, and
a lot of the stuff was me working with people on stuff that I had absolutely
no experience working on. I think you learn a lot in the process working
on something like that. I think Hollywood is a bit voodooish and they
keep very much, ”Pay no attention to the man behind the curtain,” about
how things work, and I guess that’s just sort of part of the mystique of it.
Part of that is, ”We’re spending all this money to make it,” and the studio
takes the responsibility for, and takes control of as much responsibility,
as they can get. I think we maybe let them have a little bit too much.
There are some things that I would do a little differently, but I think the
main thing is to get the people that really understand the game who are
really interested in making the type of movie that is true to the game.
John Carmack: My only regret is that they didn’t play up the satanic Hell
aspect, that it just became a genetic mutation. I did want it to be more
about evil, but I can understand why they cast it the way they did, and I
think they did a decent job with it.
Billy Berghammer: Would you guys like to revisit Hollywood? Try it
again?
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

John Carmack Archive
200
Interviews
Todd Hollenshead: One of the things we’re working on now, although
the rights are currently all back with us, with Wolfenstein in develop-
ment there’s interest in a Wolfenstein movie. And Sony had the rights
for a while and those recently expired and came back to us.
John Carmack: And I would hope that at least the same thing doesn’t
happen on there, where it doesn’t get turned into a traditional war movie.
You have to have that aspect of the macabre and the supernatural to
make it into something other than Brothers in Arms or whatever.
Todd Hollenshead: It’s kind of an interesting process. You don’t want
to stiﬂe someone’s creativity so they have to make a movie that’s exactly
the same thing as a video game, which I don’t think results in very good
movies. At the same time, you want to put parameters in place so that
you can’t do something that’s completely not in line, which makes sense.
If they wanted to make a World War II movie, why did they pay id a license
for Wolfenstein unless it’s just a way to monetize off the name. We try to
put some criteria in to constrain them in some ways but allow them to be
creative in others. If things work out right, in a lot of ways these things
end up being totally dependant on the script and if you get a good script
that works with the movie, if an actor reads it the director reads it and
likes it, then you can get a good cast of talent together.
Billy Berghammer: Thanks for your time.
CHAPTER 20. CES 2007: JOHN CARMACK AND TODD HOLLENSHEAD
SPEAK

Chapter 21
QuakeCon 2007: John Carmack
Talks Rage, id Tech 5 And More
This interview was conducted by Billy Berghammer for Game Informer
on Aug 03, 2007.
http://www.gameinformer.com/News/Story/200708/N07.0803.1731.12214.
htm
Interview
Prologue
QuakeCon’s big event is Friday night - John Carmack’s keynote speech.
We had the opportunity to catch up with things since our CES interview
and get the important details about id Tech 5. Will it work with DX10?
Wii? What is Rage? What’s going on with Doom 4? What the heck is
Quake Zero? Carmack spills the beans on the next Quake Arena project
and a whole lot more in this extensive QuakeCon interview!
201

John Carmack Archive
202
Interviews
Questions
Billy Berghammer: When we interviewed you at CES this year, and Quake-
Con two years ago you weren’t too thrilled with developing for multicore
systems. Obviously now, that’s the case across all platforms. Were you
kind of at the point with id Tech 5 where, you said, ”We give in?”
John Carmack: You have to take advantage of what’s on the table. Al-
though it’s interesting that almost all of the PS3 launch titles hardly used
any Cells at all. We hired one of the best PS3 guys around who did the
Edge Acceleration technology for Sony - he’s on our team now so we’ve
got some of the best PS3 experience here. In fact when we were doing all
of the tech demos, we’d bring in the developers and they’d walk over and
say, ”it’s running on the PS3!” (laughs) They’d sit there and stare at it for a
while.
There’s no doubt that with all of the platforms that we have running here
PS3 is the most challenging to develop on. That’s what I’ve been saying
from the beginning. It’s not that it was a boneheaded decision because
they’re a lot closer the fact that they can run like this [points to the 4 dif-
ferent gaming stations running Rage] - they’re a lot closer than they’ve
ever been before. It’s a hell of a lot better than PS2 versus Xbox. But given
the choice, we’d rather develop on the Xbox 360. The PS3 still does have
in theory more power that could be extracted but it’s not smart. We don’t
feel it’s smart to head down that rat hole. In fact, the biggest thing we
worry about right now is memory. Microsoft extracts 32 megs for their
system stuff and Sony takes 96. That’s a big deal because the PS3 is al-
ready partitioned memory where the 360 is 512 megs of uniﬁed and on
the PS3 is 256 of video, 256 of memory minus 96 for their system...stuff.
Stuff is not the ﬁrst thing that came to my mind there. (laughs)
The PS3 is not the favorite platform but it’s going to run the game just
as good. To some degree there’s going to be some lowest common de-
nominator effect because we’re going to be testing these every day on all
of the platforms, and it’s going to be ”Dammit it’s out of memory on the
PS3 again, go crunch some things down” That’s probably going to be the
sore spot for all of this but because we’re continuous builds on all of these
we’re going to be ﬁghting these battles as we go rather than build these
CHAPTER 21. QUAKECON 2007: JOHN CARMACK TALKS RAGE, ID
TECH 5 AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
203
Interviews
things out and go, ”Oh my God we’re so far away from running on there.”
Which is the situation where Enemy Territory is suffering with at a degree
right now, and a lot of other people have that.
Billy Berghammer: Will this engine support any DX10 features?
John Carmack: No, not currently. We’re not expecting to. We’re not sure if
we’re going to be a Vista title or not. There will be some support beneﬁts
by being Vista only. It depends when we get the game done what the
adoption has been. But it’s a OpenGL title on the PC and Mac right now,
obviously D3D on the 360, and the PS3 it’s kind of an in between where
it’s Open GLES but we do a lot of direct command buffer writing there. If
necessary we can move the PC version over to DX10, but there’s not much
strong pull for us to do that. All of the toolset is in OpenGL, I wouldn’t
want to convert everything over.
Billy Berghammer: You didn’t seem to hot on DX10 or Vista at CES.
John Carmack: Microsoft has done a great job with all this stuff. I mean, I
honestly think that DX9 with how it’s implemented on the 360 is a clearer
and more open API than OpenGL is. It doesn’t hide the state.
That’s sort of the Microsoft way. They start off with a piece of crap, and
then over a number of versions taking a lot of people with them over the
painful route they eventually get to something that’s better than what
they are competing against. It’s a valid strategic direction. I think they’ve
come out at the end with a good platform and a good product. Some of
the DX10 stuff I don’t think there’s going to be huge draws for the fea-
tures there, but a lot of what they’ve done with the structuring of the API
I think are still positive things to do there. I think they have a good team
with solid engineering there.
Billy Berghammer: You’ve got all the platforms except one. Could some-
one theoretically use a light version of id Tech 5 to develop a Wii title?
John Carmack: We could port the Megatexture stuff over, we could port
most of the engine over there, but you wouldn’t be able to use the same
set of original content. There’s a bigger gap there. We don’t have any
major intention to port this entire technology platform to the Wii. What
I am kind of hoping for is if Orcs and Elves is big on the DS I want to do
CHAPTER 21. QUAKECON 2007: JOHN CARMACK TALKS RAGE, ID
TECH 5 AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
204
Interviews
Orcs and Elves for the Wii. You know wave the wand in the air.(laughs)
My whole reverse engineering for the platform. I still have high hopes for
that. Start on mobile, go to the DS, go to the Wii. Then maybe wind up
on the 360, PC.
I’m thrilled that Nintendo has had great success with the Wii because
while Nintendo has never been my favorite company - relationships be-
tween id and Nintendo - we’re not a good match in general. We match
better with Microsoft with how they position the 360. But one of my ten-
ants that’s near and dear to my heart is the signiﬁcant improvements that
are going to be done are with IO devices and the Wii I think is a really
good demonstration of that. They’ve taken something that’s much less
powerful but it has an innovative IO device. But the fact that they did
something different it added a lot of value.
Billy Berghammer: Do you play [Wii] a lot?
John Carmack: Not a lot. I’ve got a Wii. My almost three-year-old boy, I
got that out so we could wave things around there. I play a little bit but I
don’t play a huge amount of video games in general. No time.
Billy Berghammer: So why did you choose a Mac show to ﬁrst debut id
Tech 5 for the ﬁrst time, and then show it all off at QuakeCon. I know you
showed it to a few people at E3, but not the masses.
John Carmack: The Mac thing was just this weird happenstance. Macs
have been sort of inﬁltrating our ofﬁce. They’ve been sprouting up a
lot and people are getting Macbooks and they’re generally pretty well
regarded. Robert Duffy who’s the programming lead has four Mac’s or
something. He was like, ”I’m going to port Rage over to the Mac.” Okay,
that’s a good thing. We learn something every time we move over to a
new platform. It was always a good idea there. As it was going over we
had a meeting with Apple and they said, ”What about doing some of this
for Steve’s keynote.” I’ve had ups and downs with the whole relationship
with Apple and Steve, but we thought it was probably a decent thing to do
because it was going to be the ﬁrst crunch point for the team. It’s a good
team building exercise. The time where you get everyone there working
at 2am trying to get things done. In the large scheme Mac Worldwide De-
velopers Conference isn’t the hugely important thing to do. It was a good
point to see what we could do, because we knew at that time we were
CHAPTER 21. QUAKECON 2007: JOHN CARMACK TALKS RAGE, ID
TECH 5 AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
205
Interviews
already aiming to be showing at E3. So then we were like, ”Can we limit
features a bit and show something a month before E3?” We ﬁgured it was
a reasonable thing to do and in hindsight it was a worthwhile technology
path to take.
The E3 stuff was all developer only. We still hadn’t announced Rage. I
think we were actually waiting to see if we were trademark cleared at E3.
Trademarking game names is a far bigger deal than most people give it
credit. It’s amazingly frustrating. You can have a page of names and then
have them come back and say none of those are okay.
The old story was that Quake II which has nothing to do with Quake I
was going to be a completely different name, but we got fed up with get-
ting the names rejected so we said, ”Dammit, it’s Quake II. We own that
trademark.”
Billy Berghammer: What can you say about Rage? When everyone saw
the shakey-cam footage people were wondering if you were making a rac-
ing game....
John Carmack: It’s about 50/50 racing and ﬁrst person action. It’s in-
teresting. If we go back post Doom 3, we started making a completely
different game. It’s internal name was The Darkness, which it’s obvious
that someone else has taken since then (laughs) but it was going to be
another spooky dark survival horror thing set on an island. We spent a
lot of time going on that. But we reached this point where, ”Do we re-
ally need to do another dark, spooky game?” id always gets slammed for
the game is always too dark. Maybe we should do another game that’s a
little brighter. We can branch out a bit more. Maybe it would be more
fun to run over people with pick up trucks and ATVs. We rebooted our
entire development project. We were reasonably far into production on
The Darkness title and we just said we wanted to go in a completely dif-
ferent direction. We wound up with this post-apocalyptic Road Warrior
type thing.
I think there’s going to be some neat stuff in it. We’ve got the whole out-
door wasteland - big areas, going between lots of different areas. We’re
doing some of the sandbox play there. I like racing games. Mario Kart is
the last game I played reasonably. That type of thing is fun.
CHAPTER 21. QUAKECON 2007: JOHN CARMACK TALKS RAGE, ID
TECH 5 AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
206
Interviews
Then you’ve got the run and gun internal shooter stuff, id’s always done
well, and we’re going to do a good job on that. Then you have the sort
of RPG-ish elements, pimping out your ride, getting money to buy ac-
cessories and building it up. It is a different style of game which is risky
especially when you’re talking a $20 million budget, and the safe this for
us to do would be to run right into Doom 4. But we made the conscious
decision that we want to broaden id a little bit. We’ve got Wolfenstein,
Doom, and Quake. We’re trying to bring Orcs and Elves up from the low
end, and we’re going to try to bring Rage in from the high end to broaden
our whole portfolio here. There’s no doubt it’s a gamble. It’s a big deal.
There’s an element of stress there that we don’t have all of the advantages
that we previously had going into a title, there. But we think it’s going to
be pretty cool.
There will be a Doom 4, we don’t have it scheduled or a team assigned to
it, but there will be a Doom 4. There’s going to be a Quake Arena sequel.
There’s a Wolfenstein thing in production. We’re following along with all
those. This game doesn’t have to be Doom. It’s going to be something
different.
Billy Berghammer: Now that you’re creating something totally different,
do you want to make another Quake or Doom game in house, or are you
interested in letting your friends - Raven, Splash Damage - work on those
games and then you move forward with the engine situation, and creat-
ing new IP.
John Carmack: The big changes at id is that we are going to be starting
to staff up for a second team.internally. This was mostly driven by pub-
lishers where the publishers would come to us and say, ”We want to do a
Quake Arena sequel, or Doom 4. We’ll be happy to work with other teams
like the normal id relationship.” It’s important to realize with a pure tech-
nology license with Prey, we kind of tossed the stuff over and ”Good luck,
we wish you the best, don’t bug us too much.” With Enemy Territory we
have half our company working on that project right now, even though
technically it’s Splash Damage. There’s always a lot of id involvement on
an id titled game.
So with the publishers, if we do it in house, they said they’ll give us a
bunch more money. This came from several publishers on there. Really
CHAPTER 21. QUAKECON 2007: JOHN CARMACK TALKS RAGE, ID
TECH 5 AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
207
Interviews
signiﬁcant amounts of delta’s there. So we are beginning to staff up inter-
nally. We’ve got a plan to do this.
We have a kernel team and we’ve seeded it with people from our main
team and moved them over, and the plan is right now to do a bridge
project that we’re calling Quake Zero. This is experimental and this is
one of my pet ideas. We’re taking the Quake Arena code base data sets
and repackaging it for incremental web downloads and make it a free
game and we’re going to try a sponsored advertising supported free ver-
sion of the game. I want to try this. Where the website is the hub for
everything, most of the menus are gutted out of the game. The game
is something that launches instantly. You set up everything on the web
page, all of your community stuff there. You get sponsors and advertisers
on there to see if we can support this. We have a unique opportunity for
this because we own all the stuff on there - it’s still a good game. We can
do this with the kernel of the ﬁrst six developers on here.
The goal is here to make - after Quake Zero - then we’ll probably take all of
the lessons we learn from that interaction and make an id Tech 5 Quake
Arena sequel with all the bells and whistles. All of the modern stuff on
there. That kind of boot strapping process will be the best path. I expect
we’ll wind up with 40 something employees. We’re still tiny as far as the
big studios go. I want to keep us under ﬁfty.
Billy Berghammer: I haven’t seen you this excited since you talked about
your portable mobile project. What’s it like to say again, ”we’re totally
doing something different - here it is!”
John Carmack: It’s an exciting time right now at the company. It really
is. We’ve got a great team here. It was a great week last week. We’ve been
going through the features, and we made the video and asked one of the
artist, ”How’s it going?” and he goes, ”it’s going awesome!” And we have
that feeling across a lot of the company where we see how the product is
going to turn out and we think it’s going to be something that’s going to
go out there and make a dent and have some impact for us.
There’s a lot of trials and tribulations across the development process.
There’s going to be highs and lows across all of it. I think we’re accom-
plishing what we set out to do. That’s really the things that drive me.
Here’s the problem, here’s the goal, here’s the tools at our disposal, lets
CHAPTER 21. QUAKECON 2007: JOHN CARMACK TALKS RAGE, ID
TECH 5 AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
208
Interviews
craft something that’s going to get us there, then evaluate how we’re do-
ing as were making our way there. I think right now we’re doing a pretty
good job. There’s a lot more left to do and a lot more challenges. I think
we’ll continue to sit up at the top of the important and relevant compa-
nies that are doing the technology for gaming and then the games them-
selves.
CHAPTER 21. QUAKECON 2007: JOHN CARMACK TALKS RAGE, ID
TECH 5 AND MORE

Chapter 22
John Carmack on the Nintendo
DS
This interview was conducted by Craig Harris for IGN on Nov 08, 2007.
http://ds.ign.com/articles/833/833894p1.html
Interview
Prologue
Next week Electronic Arts will ship Orcs & Elves for the Nintendo DS, a
dual-screen conversion of the cellphone design brought to life by game
engine guru John Carmack, best known for his work at id Software such
as Wolfenstein 3D, Doom, Quake...and the list goes on. The man also
had his hand on the Nintendo DS version, building the tech to get Orcs &
Elves moving on the portable system.
In preparation of the game’s release on November 13th, we had the op-
portunity to talk with Carmack about his work on the Nintendo DS.
Carmack has also been blogging about his experience on the Orcs & Elves
209

John Carmack Archive
210
Interviews
developer diary. Be sure to check it out.
Questions
Craig Harris: So I heard that you created the engine for Orcs and Elves
for the DS in four days. Truth, or an exaggeration? If it is true, how the
heck is that possible?
John Carmack: It is true that I wrote the 3D code in four days, but I had
a good setup for it. The Fountainhead team had gone through the initial
learning curve of working with the DS dev tools, so the game was basi-
cally running when I got it. They had also done some test models and a
ﬁrst cut at a non-tile based level model, so I had data to work on the new
functionality with.
Once or twice a year I go on ”working retreats”, where I lock myself in a
hotel room for two weeks with no internet connection for completely fo-
cused work. I tackled the DS work ﬁrst this time. I had read the reference
guides, I understood what the hardware did, and I had a pretty good idea
how I was going to structure everything. Fortunately, I didn’t hit any blind
alleys, and the implementation went pretty much as I expected it to. After
four days, all of the low level functionality for displaying the general pur-
pose 3D levels and moving around models and sprites was implemented,
and the Fountainhead team took it back over to ﬁnish all the detail work
of the game.
Craig Harris: Since this is your ﬁrst Nintendo DS project, what was it like
poking at the hardware?
John Carmack: It was probably the most fun platform that I have person-
ally worked on. The early consoles that I worked on (SNES, Genesis-32X,
and Jaguar) had fun hardware and full documentation, but a lousy devel-
opment tool chain. A lot of later consoles had much better development
tools, but they started playing secretive with the exact hardware specs, at
least around console introduction time.
While there are a few nooks on the DS that aren’t documented, they weren’t
things I cared about, so to me it was almost perfect. It is a shame that
CHAPTER 22. JOHN CARMACK ON THE NINTENDO DS

John Carmack Archive
211
Interviews
homebrew development can’t be ofﬁcially sanctioned and supported, be-
cause it would be a wonderful platform for a modern generation of pro-
grammers to be able to get a real feel for low level design work, to be
contrasted with the high level web and application work that so many
entry level people start with.
Orcs & Elves makes the move from phone to DS this month.
Craig Harris: Tell us some of the features of your engine, and how that’s
applied to Orcs and Elves. Can this engine be used for anything but a
step-by-step, gridded ﬁrst-person dungeon hacker?
John Carmack: On projects of this scope, it isn’t really accurate to speak
of the ”game engine” since there isn’t all that much code involved. The
basic strategy is to just allow the relatively slow CPU to chain together
static blocks of data that are ready for the relatively fast GPU to consume,
implementing dynamic effects by prepending some state updates before
the static data is consumed. I wanted 60hz updates everywhere (I was
irritated that Prison occasionally slows down to 30hz).
To the game code, the world is still just a tile map, but for rendering, each
map was exported as a general-purpose 3D model, and the artists could
then go through it and spend the polygons any way they liked, with-
out the limits of line-of-constant-z software rasterization that we lived
with on the mobile phones. You can’t render all that many polygons on
a DS frame, and you have to keep a healthy reserve to avoid ugly fail-
ure in dynamic situations, but the geometric freedom and vertex light-
ing/colorizing lets it look a heck of a lot better than any cell phone.
High level culling is still done by a front to back walk of a BSP based on
the original tile geometry, with a one dimensional occlusion buffer being
ﬁlled in as segments are processed. This is the thing that is most marginal
right now, since if the ”prettied up” 3D model diverges too far from the
original tile geometry, you can get culling errors. I would do this differ-
ently, given a bit more time. An explicitly modeled 2D portal/occluder
shell would be faster, more ﬂexible, and slightly smaller in memory, but
would require another new element in our production chain. Our next
DS title will certainly use code from Orcs&Elves, but there will be signiﬁ-
cant changes.
CHAPTER 22. JOHN CARMACK ON THE NINTENDO DS

John Carmack Archive
212
Interviews
Craig Harris: Orcs and Elves seems to approach a game idea that’s been
left behind: the Eye of the Beholder/Lands of Lore-style dungeon hack.
Do you think this style of gameplay is still relevant? Are you concerned
that maybe this style might not work in this day and age?
John Carmack: I think World of Warcraft shows that people today still
like a good fantasy hack and slash game. I always thought that a lot of
computer fantasy games leapt into complex party based play somewhat
prematurely. There is a certain type of fun in shufﬂing things around to
min/max your party’s combat effectiveness, but that type of gaming is
pretty much orthogonal to the basic sense of adventure at the core of an
RPG.
It is true that the gameplay for Orcs&Elves was designed around the lim-
itations of mobile phones, and that if we were starting completely from
scratch for the DS we would probably do things a bit differently, but the
bottom line is that when we sit a random DS player down with the game,
they have a lot of fun.
Craig Harris: You mentioned at Quakecon that you’re interested in a
Quake Arena for the Nintendo DS, but didn’t want to approach it control-
wise like Metroid Prime Hunters with the mouselook on the touchscreen.
Care to elaborate on this? Why wouldn’t you want to utilize the touch
screen for the freedom of movement?
John Carmack: I haven’t ruled any control scheme out at this point, but
when I ask people what they think of Metroid Prime Hunters, the re-
sponse is strikingly uniform: The control seems wonderfully cool at ﬁrst,
but nobody wants to play it for extended periods of time, because the er-
gonomics are bad. It is essentially like trying to use the right analog stick
on a 360 with your left thumb.
I think that there is a somewhat unexplored spot in the gameplay solu-
tion space around a game that plays more like classic Doom deathmatch,
with dpad+shoulder strafe control. At 60fps rendering speed, aiming
control can be quite accurate, and timing based skills somewhat take the
place of the extra dimensions of look up/look down decisions. I know
for a fact that we can make something fun with that control scheme, the
only question is if we can do something else that is even more fun. The
DS doesn’t care at all whether it is rendering a 2.5D play environment or
CHAPTER 22. JOHN CARMACK ON THE NINTENDO DS

John Carmack Archive
213
Interviews
a full 3D, 6DOF environment, but if the gameplay gets less fun when you
insist on forcing the player to use additional degrees of freedom, it could
still be a bad decision.
Craig Harris: Since you’re very tech heavy and familiar with the hard-
ware, tell us: have we reached the cap of what’s possible on the Nintendo
DS? Or do you think there’s something coming down the pike that’ll really
wow us?
John Carmack: It is likely that every signiﬁcant trick of the hardware has
been demonstrated, but software is all about combining basic steps to
do unique things, so new things will be seen as surely as new books will
be written. In any case, all of the implementation decisions will change
as the prices for cartridge memory continue to fall. If we had a 128 meg
cart instead of a 16 meg cart, all sorts of priorities would have been differ-
ent. The combination of larger amounts of non-volatile memory on carts
with internet access also opens up possibilities for continuously updated
games.
Craig Harris: Do you feel a sense of responsibility for driving the indus-
try forward? Is that something you keep in mind when developing new
engines?
John Carmack: Oh, the industry is barreling along just ﬁne all by itself.
Sometimes I get to nudge the steering wheel a little. One of the things
that is stressing me out right now is that signiﬁcant decisions are being
made about the next generation of consoles and compute accelerators
based on large arrays of processing elements, and there is a lot of hand
waving going on about how great new things will be done with it, but very
little to back it up. I have my own ”hand waving” direction that I have
been talking about, but until I have the time to actually implement some
proof of concept work, I can’t speak with any kind of an authoritative
voice.
Craig Harris: What’s the next big step for games - where you see it mov-
ing over the next ﬁve to ten years, both in terms of technology and plat-
forms?
John Carmack: I do think that mobile platforms will play an increasingly
important role. There are vastly more mobile phones in the world than
CHAPTER 22. JOHN CARMACK ON THE NINTENDO DS

John Carmack Archive
214
Interviews
there are game consoles, the hardware capabilities are now quite strong,
and connectivity is intrinsic. There is still a large issue with poor user
input characteristics and widely scattered implementation quality, but I
am hopeful that will be improving over the next few years.
Ten years is a long time to look ahead for hardware trends. Some things
will not have changed drastically – the HDTV resolutions will probably
be the same, and game consoles and controllers will still be recogniz-
able. Processing will likely be done with hundreds of parallel processing
units with a ﬂexible division of work. Content delivery will mostly be
over the internet, likely in a dynamic streaming style rather than a one-
big-download style. Networking could even displace local computation
for high end rendering, with cheaper devices essentially streaming me-
dia created at locations of higher compute density. I don’t think it is in-
evitable in this timeframe, but signiﬁcant advances in IO would make
the largest difference – direct retinal image scanning, high resolution full
body input, etc.
Craig Harris: To the average gaming consumer, what do you think of as
the most important aspect to deliver in a game? What are people really
looking for, and how are you working to incorporate that into the work
you do?
John Carmack: Today, I don’t think it is reasonable to speak of the ”av-
erage gaming consumer”, any more so than the ”average phone user” or
”average book reader”, and I wouldn’t try to guess what such a large slice
of the public really wants anyway. We try to pick directions that a good
number of people will enjoy, then just do a quality job implementing it.
Some people will love it, and some people will hate it. The people that
hate it usually scream louder.
CHAPTER 22. JOHN CARMACK ON THE NINTENDO DS

Chapter 23
The id Mobile Interview
This interview was conducted by GameSpy Staff for GameSpy on Nov 15,
2007.
http://ds.gamespy.com/articles/835/835571p1.html
Interview
Prologue
id Software and Fountainhead Entertainment announced today that the
two developers have joined forces to create a new division of id Soft-
ware, id Mobile. GameSpy recently had the opportunity to discuss the
formation of the new division with id Software technical director and co-
founder John Carmack, id CEO Todd Hollenshead, and id Mobile presi-
dent Katherine Anna Kang.
Read on to learn more about the wand-waving future of Orcs & Elves, the
upcoming Wolfenstein handheld games and about working with Steve
Jobs on bringing games to the iPhone.
215

John Carmack Archive
216
Interviews
Questions
GameSpy Staff: Tell us about how you got involved in mobile develop-
ment and the formation of id Mobile.
John Carmack: Well, the whole move into mobile a few years ago was
sort of a random ﬂuke. The state of the mobile phone caught my eye,
and I was basically looking at the games and thinking, ”I could do a lot
better than this really quickly.”
Initially when we made contact with Jamdat at the time to do Doom RPG
it was a pretty speculative venture on our part. We had no idea if this
would turn out to be something useful, but Jamdat was behind it enough
to go ahead and cover all of our development costs on it.
So we went ahead and made Doom RPG and it turned out to be this great
big hit. It really exceeded my expectations for what we would get out of
the game. We followed it up with Orcs & Elves, which won a bunch of
awards and is doing well. Soon we have Orcs & Elves 2 on the mobile
phone and Orcs & Elves for the Nintendo DS, which is the ﬁrst step of my
theoretical plan of upward mobility for new IP’s on there.
Overall, it’s turned into something that we’re now sure that we’re commit-
ted to this. It wasn’t going to be the little one-time thing, experimentally,
as we started out. We think that this is going to be a signiﬁcant aspect of
our business going forward.
Even if we look at it as the worst case, right now it’s a successful business;
we’re doing well on it. We’re building a lot of favorable impressions from
people who are playing the games on mobile. It’s sure to be growing,
at least modestly, over the coming years. There’s a decent chance that
some time in the next ﬁve years or so that mobile gaming could be a real
breakout success. There are certainly lots of possibilities when you look
at the numbers. There are at least twenty times as many mobile phones
as there are personal computers, and maybe a hundred times as there are
consoles, so there’s certainly a large potential market.
We’re just now getting to the point where the common phones that peo-
ple have, the phones that there are hundreds of millions of out there, are
CHAPTER 23. THE ID MOBILE INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
217
Interviews
things that are capable of playing the kinds of games that we like to make
and that we have skills at. Obviously there have already been big suc-
cesses in the puzzle games: the Tetrises and Bejeweled and Pokers and
things like that. And that’s great that they’re doing well, but it’s unlikely
that we’ll start playing in that market because that’s just not the type of
thing that we do.
The types of games that we do end up working on, the kind of technology-
heavy, media-rich games are becoming more credible on those platforms,
and I think we’re going to be well positioned to make some signiﬁcant
marks there.
Once we reached the conclusion that mobile was going to be a signiﬁcant
part of our companywide strategy in the coming years, it made sense to
pull the development team internally. This brings us several advantages.
One of the things that we’ve had difﬁculty with over the last couple years
is getting good, qualiﬁed, talented game developers that actually want
to work on mobile projects. In America at least, mobile development is
seen as the ghetto of game development. When people say they want to
go into the game industry, they’re always envisioning working on some
cutting-edge high-end Xbox 360 or PC game or something. If they’re told,
we’re going to work on a mobile project, you can usually just see their
faces fall. Immediately their position is not something that is highly re-
spected here, even if their sales numbers can be quite large and they can
do something that a lot of people will play.
We are expecting that as an id Software division, it will be a little more
enticing for people that are interested in development. And it also gives
us a better position for dealing with publishers, carriers, hardware ven-
dors, chipset vendors, the whole ecosystem of the mobile space, where
we expect to establish ourselves as a signiﬁcant player.
GameSpy Staff: Do you ﬁnd that people that express interest in working
for id Mobile won’t just be using this as a stepping stone for future po-
sitions within id? What do you plan to do to make mobile development
attractive to talented industry professionals?
John Carmack: It’s deﬁnitely something that we’re going to have to pay
attention to. If we poach good developers out of the mobile section Anna
CHAPTER 23. THE ID MOBILE INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
218
Interviews
will hit me.
Katherine Anna Kang: I will hit you!
John Carmack: We hope to be able to ﬁnd people that really love the idea
of working on the mobile platform. There is a fundamental coolness to
the games living on your cell phone, rather than on a dedicated gaming
box. While we can’t say that we’ve run into a whole lot of them yet, I’m
still holding out hope that there are people that are incredibly talented
and actually speciﬁcally interested in the mobile space.
Katherine: The thing about the id Mobile division and the relationship
with id Software is that it does not preclude the possibility of people
working on the id Mobile division and then going on to other projects.
For example, one of our programmers has just moved to an id Software
project. But the thing is, id Mobile will stay focused on the handhelds
and mobile. As id Software and id Mobile grows, that all becomes a part
of how the companies allocate their labor force. There’s deﬁnitely not a
speciﬁc plan where we bring people in to id Mobile so that they can step
up to id Software, but that’s deﬁnitely not outside the realm of possibility.
Todd Hollenshead: Just to be clear from an operational standpoint, id
Mobile is operating effectively as a separate company. Now, there are a
lot of shared resources, the name is the same, and a lot of the drudgery
of the business aspect will be handed off to corporate headquarters, if
we can loosely call it that. The idea is that everybody is working at the
same company. While that’s partially true, effectively there will be a wall
operationally to separate the operations of the mobile business from the
rest of what id does.
John Carmack: I will say there are some positive encouraging signs for
this going on. For instance, my lead programmer on Rage would love to
work on an iPhone title. That’s probably the ﬁrst inkling that I’ve seen of
somebody on one of the high-end projects that would actually really like
the idea of going and working on a mobile title.
The mobile things are getting cool, and Apple is helping that some with
the iPhone. In general, as the technology gets better and the capabilities
get better, it’s more exciting to work on. A lot of people still have this
vision where mobile phones are just good for playing Snake or Tetris.
CHAPTER 23. THE ID MOBILE INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
219
Interviews
GameSpy Staff: That’s a question we wanted to ask you, John. Do you
see any point in the near future where you’re targeting speciﬁc platforms
like iPhones or Blackberries as some of those platforms become more
dominant?
John Carmack: It would be great from our point of view if it did reach
any kind of level of dominance. But it’s like the decisions we face all the
time in our development. Just between Qualcomm’s BREW and the Java
platforms. The BREW platform is tons better for making games. It’s a
native code platform, it has strong central control of the API, it’s just more
sensible in just about every way, and you can make much, much better
games on it. But it’s only about a third of the domestic market, and a tiny
fraction of the European market. If we were to make any kind of a jump
ﬁrst, it would be to get rid of Java ﬁrst and go to BREW.
When we talk about something like the iPhone, they’ve only sold about
one and a half million units. It’s a great success for Apple, but it’s a tiny
drop in the bucket in the mobile market. Interestingly, I’ve been going
back and forth with Steve Jobs about iPhone development on different
things. It’s a tough situation there, because when you look at the iPhone,
where it has 128 MB of ram and gigs of storage, if you were to make a
game that was really targeted to the iPhone and made maximum use of
its media potential, there’s no way you could sell enough units to pay for
the development cost of something like that.
So that puts you in a weird situation that no other game platform has had
before, where the hardware has more resources than you can afford to
fully exploit, just by development dynamics. Historically, on the consoles
and PC, we’ve always been trying to push to what’s just barely possible
on the platform. At the rate that some of the cell phones are advancing
in power, you’re going to be mostly stuck by the artiﬁcial limit on over-
the-air transfer size. So you’re stuck with this incredibly powerful system
that you can only download 1 MB or two of content for. But the iPhone
will probably bypass that with iTunes based sales, if that all works out.
GameSpy Staff: John, you’ve spoken on multiple occasions on how you’ve
enjoyed developing for the mobile platform, simply because you have a
more immediate effect on the smaller projects this way. How much in-
volvement will you have on id Mobile and the games going forward?
CHAPTER 23. THE ID MOBILE INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
220
Interviews
John Carmack: The best example of that is certainly the three mobile ti-
tles we’ve gone through, Doom RPG, Orcs & Elves, and Orcs & Elves 2.
The games have gotten signiﬁcantly better each time. I wrote the core
stuff for Doom RPG, and updated it a little bit when we moved to the
BREW port. I really didn’t do that much work on Orcs & Elves and Orcs
& Elves 2, aside from a few overview meetings on it. But then it was just
recently with the Orcs & Elves DS port where I got to go back in and de-
vote some real quality programming time to laying out the 3D engine and
everything on the DS, and that was a lot of fun.
I suspect that now it’ll be a similar thing where some groundwork’s been
laid and there will be another DS project where I only provide technical
direction and don’t get to actually do too much coding on it, but we’ll see.
The hope is that in the next year, we’ll have four titles from id Mobile,
probably two mobile and two DS titles. Probably half of them developed
internally and half of them with partner companies.
GameSpy Staff: Is Wolfenstein the next IP coming to id Mobile?
John Carmack: Wolfenstein development is ongoing for mobile phones
right now. One of the changes that we’re doing for that is we’ve dropped
the lowest end cell phone platform that we’ve been building for. We felt
that was necessary to continue. If we want Wolfenstein to be as much
better of a game than Orcs & Elves 2 was than Orcs & Elves, and Orcs &
Elves was than Doom RPG, we felt there really wasn’t that much more
we could do within the low-end Java constraints that we’d been working
on. We’ve chopped out the lowest-end version and slightly upscaled the
highest-end version, so it gives us a little more elbow room to do some
more creative things and expand the game on there.
None of these future projects have we signed actual deals on yet. We are
in a nice position where we don’t get locked into any long-term contracts
with any publishers. EA is publishing Orcs & Elves 2 for mobile and Orcs
& Elves for the DS. We’re certainly talking to them about who’s going to
be publishing the next set of titles, and they’re probably the frontrunner.
But all of those are still up in the air right now. We do hope to be able to
do a simultaneous DS and mobile release of a Wolfenstein-themed game.
GameSpy Staff: What’s the strategy for getting id Mobile games on the
handheld platforms, like DS and possibly PSP? Are all your major IP’s go-
CHAPTER 23. THE ID MOBILE INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
221
Interviews
ing to be hitting handheld systems?
Katherine: In regards to how we develop the game, we don’t like forcing
the game to a platform. We prefer to create a game that is ideal for a
platform. So if a particular game doesn’t ﬁt for the PSP, we’re not going to
push it. If a game works great for a cell phone, but due to the mechanics
or just everything involved, we won’t try to push it on the DS. But if it
seems like there’s a really good relationship between a game type that
would go well across the cell phone and with additional enhancements
and perhaps more media be able to expand it further that it can go on the
DS, then we’ll do that. If it looks like the game has such a rich universe
that we can go all out and create an awesome triple-A title type, then
we’ll bring it up further, if the popularity of the game merits that. Our
core strategy is not to get every single platform out there, but to make
every single game unique to its platform.
John Carmack: Here’s a couple speciﬁc examples. Orcs & Elves going
from the highest end cell phone, that basic gameplay style was just barely
good enough for the DS. We would not try to port a cellphone game up to
the PSP, that would have to be a complete design rethink. Similarly, we’re
thinking of doing a Quake Arena-themed game for the DS, and there’s no
way I would try and put that on a cell phone now, because the user input
ﬁdelity and speed just isn’t good enough to do that type of a game.
When possible, we want to be able to go ahead and have things across
different platforms, but we’re never going to push it when it doesn’t make
sense. We do hope that if Orcs & Elves is successful on the DS, we’d like
to go ahead and build a brand new Orcs & Elves game scaling up higher
to the Wii. There’s a great waving a magic wand approach on there, but
that would be a game that has nothing but the theme in common with
the cell phone game, while the DS game was clearly a super pumped up
on steroids enhancement of the cell phone game. A higher end version
would have no direct commonality to it.
GameSpy Staff: What sorts of resources are you directing towards mo-
bile development and are id Mobile games developed simultaneously for
mobile and handhelds?
John Carmack: Right now, the mobile team is only about ﬁve people. I
get to poke in and do a little bit of work here and there, and there are
CHAPTER 23. THE ID MOBILE INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
222
Interviews
some other resources that get claimed in different places. We expect to
be expanding that slowly. There’s no plan to have a mad rush to hire a
whole set of other people, but we do expect it to grow to two complete
internal teams, and then working with more partner companies, as id
Software has historically done. We build something internally, and then
we can work with our partners like Splash Damage or Raven. Some of
those companies do similar things to what we do on the high-end, and
we want to do the same thing with mobile, where we build a couple solid
relationships with outside teams so we can take advantage of everything
on mobile at the same time. We do want to see all of our IP’s, Wolfen-
stein, Doom, Quake, Enemy Territory, Rage, all of these will eventually
be represented on the mobile and handheld space. We also do want to
continue to use this as an opportunity to bring in brand new IP’s, like we
have with Orcs & Elves.
GameSpy Staff: Are there plans to license out your mobile platform tech-
nologies to other developers who want to get into the mobile space?
John Carmack: It’s certainly a possibility, but we’re not making it part of
our core strategy. If people want to talk to us about it, we’d be happy to
do that. It’s always weird talking about engines or technology on such a
small project relative to the large-scale stuff that we do, but it’s something
that we are open to. As the market matures over the coming years, it’s
going to follow the same track that the PC space did.
As the development environments get more and more complex, and more
effort goes into it, there probably will be a much larger push for licensing.
But as it is now, in terms of technical complexity, we’re really a lot closer
to the original Wolfenstein 3D era on the PC. I wouldn’t be surprised as
it trends up one more generational notch, we see broader interest in li-
censing like we did in the original Doom era.
CHAPTER 23. THE ID MOBILE INTERVIEW

Chapter 24
Carmack on id Mobile, Crap
Games, and Why iPod Sucks
This interview was conducted by James Brightman for GameDaily on Nov
15, 2007.
http://www.gamedaily.com/games/orcs-and-elves/mobile/game-features/
carmack-on-id-mobile-crap-games-and-why-ipod-sucks/5241/71158/
Interview
Prologue
GameDaily BIZ spoke to John Carmack at length about the new mobile
studio, how id plans to attack the mobile space, Apple’s ”horrible de-
cisions,” overcoming the challenge of developing in Brew and Java for
many handsets and more.
223

John Carmack Archive
224
Interviews
Questions
James Brightman: What was the impetus for launching a mobile studio?
What’s the great appeal of mobile gaming to id?
John Carmack: It’s been an interesting journey to get here in that we
didn’t start off with some grand strategic planning where we decided this
was going to be really important. It all started when I got a cell phone and
thought the games on it were really bad and we could do a lot better. That
led to Doom RPG, which was a big success. Then we followed up with
Orcs & Elves and now Orcs & Elves II coming out... By testing the waters
like this we’ve found out it’s a viable business right now, we’re doing good
business, the products are successful and proﬁtable, we’ve got a plan laid
out for a bunch of new things we want to be doing, but I think there’s
really some signiﬁcant potential.
The worst, most pessimistic case is that we could carry on as we’re doing
right now, doing successful games and having fun with all of this, but I
think over the course of the next ﬁve years or so there’s the possibility that
the mobile gaming market could wind up becoming signiﬁcantly larger
than some of the traditional markets. There are 10 to 20 times as many
mobile phones as there are personal computers and 100 times as many as
there are console platforms. As these things evolve into devices more like
the media powerhouses we’re used to developing for, there’s a possibility
we could have a breakout success there. I think if we go into this thing
thinking we’ll do our best, we’ll be successful, then we may be positioned
for something that could be a really signiﬁcant tipping point some time
in the next ﬁve years or so. Mobile gaming really could take off.
James Brightman: Everyone keeps talking about the huge potential of
mobile gaming but the percentage of wireless subscribers actually paying
to download games remains quite low. How do you see that changing and
how does id plan to help push the sector forward?
John Carmack: There are a lot of reasons why mobile gaming is the way
it is right now, and my initial assessment is probably shared by a lot of
people. Most of the games are just crap; there are a lot of really bad things
and shareware type games that people would give away for free on the
PC. There aren’t nearly as many cases where you take a professional team
CHAPTER 24. CARMACK ON ID MOBILE, CRAP GAMES, AND WHY
IPOD SUCKS

John Carmack Archive
225
Interviews
of developers and try to do something really good. [That said,] you are
also signiﬁcantly hamstrung by the platform itself... the download limits,
restrictions in the APIs, huge variability across the hardware platforms
and the carriers. It’s an ugly market from a developer’s standpoint.
Consoles are clean and wonderful. You produce one title and it goes
through one publisher and you sell millions of units if you’ve got a good
title. In the mobile market, it’s ugly like a retail business. Domestically,
you’ve got a handful of carriers and that’s reasonably clean, but then
when you go into Europe or Asia, where half or more of your market
is, you’re dealing with dozens and dozens of different [carriers] and it’s
a model that’s not really comfortable for a lot of software developers.
The tiny customization that you have to do means that the sort of hard-
core technical programming winds up being not as relevant because you
could do something that’s spectacularly clever on one platform and have
it be something that doesn’t even work on a whole of other ones.
You have to approach it in a very different way, but I do think it’s clear
that the games are getting a lot better. In the last couple years I’d like to
think that we had something to do with that with Doom RPG and Orcs
& Elves being critically acclaimed titles that sold really well. I know for
a fact that we were instrumental in having Sprint raise their over-the-air
download limit and to allow us to do a high-end Java version to make
it look somewhat competitive with the Brew version. Initiatives and lit-
tle things like this will allow games to improve a lot more over the com-
ing years to the point where they won’t necessarily be an embarrassment
to look at. You’ll be able to have games on the cell phone that look like
games on other portable platforms like the DS and PSP. There’s no doubt
that right now there are cell phone handsets that have all the hardware
power necessary to be signiﬁcantly better than the DS, but you don’t see
that in the games themselves for all of these non-technical reasons.
James Brightman: Considering it’s been reported that your interest in
Linux has wavered, would games be coded in Java or something else?
John Carmack: Right now we develop four primary versions of a title on
mobile: a low-end Java version, which is limited to like 350k download
size; a high-end Java version, which adds some extra features and takes
it up to around 2 megs; a low-end Brew; and a high-end Brew. There’s
CHAPTER 24. CARMACK ON ID MOBILE, CRAP GAMES, AND WHY
IPOD SUCKS

John Carmack Archive
226
Interviews
a vast difference in what we can do in the games between Qualcomm’s
Brew and the Java platforms. You’re much closer to the hardware and
you can actually write typed assembly code if you need to, so the best
looking games right now are deﬁnitely Brew games. If people can afford
to develop strictly for that they’ll make much better games.
Unfortunately it’s only about a third of the domestic market and a tiny
fraction of the European and Asian markets. So the industry is deﬁnitely
not united and [mobile] is not a great developer’s platform because of
this huge amount of diversity. If we were left to our own and the only idea
was to make the best possible mobile game, we would develop for some
high-end Brew platform and we could make a spectacular, stellar but it
would only be seen by a relatively small fraction of the mobile playing
market. It’s one of those tradeoffs. We’re obviously not going for every-
body or else we would be developing 64k card games - these relatively
modest games that can run on anything - which a lot of people think is
the key to success in the mobile market. But we’re happier developing
more sophisticated games that are better games but can only hit a some-
what smaller fraction of the market. If we establish ourselves here I think
we’ll be well positioned as the hardware market sort of catches up with
where we’re going.
James Brightman: id’s announcement that Rage was coming to Macs
was a huge deal. Since you seem to have a long personal interest in Macs,
might future games from Fountainhead/id come to the iPhone or iPod?
John Carmack: We’ve certainly been looking at it but Steve Jobs and I
have not been seeing really eye to eye on a lot of important issues. We
were in a fairly heated argument at the last WWDC [Worldwide Develop-
ers Conf.] and we’ve had a few follow-ups. I have an iPhone right now and
it’s a platform I would enjoy developing for but Apple is not taking pro-
gressive steps in regards to [gaming]. Their strategy seems to be working
just ﬁne from a business standpoint, so I’m not going to second guess
them and tell them they’re being fools or idiots for not focusing on this.
The honest truth right now is that Apple’s not exactly hugely supportive
of this. When they ﬁnally allowed games to be put on the iPod... in many
ways it’s one of the worst environments to develop games for. You have
to work on an emulator... just all these horrible decisions. I expressed my
CHAPTER 24. CARMACK ON ID MOBILE, CRAP GAMES, AND WHY
IPOD SUCKS

John Carmack Archive
227
Interviews
fears directly to Steve Jobs that some of these mistakes might be carried
over to the iPhone, so they’re at least aware of all of them, but they’re not
giving any spectacular signs that it’s going to be a big deal for them in the
next year.
James Brightman: There was an interesting mobile news announcement
recently from Google, which launched the Android OS with multiple phone
makers and even carrier networks. What type of impact, if any, does that
announcement have on id’s mobile business?
John Carmack: It might, but I’ve not looked at all the details of what
they’re doing. The most important thing for us is native code execu-
tion. Java was sold in many ways as a security architecture, and there’s
some truth to that at least on early cell phones... but for modern cell
phones with virtual memory and memory management units, traditional
OS methods really are appropriate. And that was my big argument with
Steve Jobs about the security measures on there. If you’ve got a real OS
and a real MMU on there, you can have secure native mode applications
just like you do with any traditional Unix system. I certainly hope that
becomes the direction things go in. Java still does have the beneﬁt of be-
ing able to run across different CPU architectures but Qualcomm seems
to be content with saying ARM is it. If we can get away with that and say
ARM owns the mobile space, as a software target it would be much, much
more desirable from a developer’s standpoint.
James Brightman: In terms of your mobile games strategy and your port-
folio, are you looking to create new IP, just continue with IP that’s been
working like Orcs & Elves and Doom, or both?
John Carmack: Orcs & Elves was actually the ﬁrst new id Software IP
since Quake. While we were working on Rage, our big high-end title, we
were able to sneak Orcs & Elves after Rage was started and ship it well be-
fore Rage was going to ship. The fact that we could get that out and have
it be successful I’m really pleased with. So we intend to pursue both;
we have additional new IPs we’re going to be speciﬁcally aiming at the
mobile market, but we’re probably going to be hopping back and forth
between traditional id IPs and new IPs. The project under development
right now is the Wolfenstein-themed project. We are probably going to
try to do that simultaneously on mobile and DS, which would be a ﬁrst
CHAPTER 24. CARMACK ON ID MOBILE, CRAP GAMES, AND WHY
IPOD SUCKS

John Carmack Archive
228
Interviews
for us. We’re still sort of feeling out all these different strategies about
where IPs start and where they go, whether it’s simultaneous or subse-
quent development.
James Brightman: What’s the plan for marketing and publishing id’s mo-
bile titles?
John Carmack: Currently we’re working with EA, but one of the nice ben-
eﬁts of being id Software is that we can get away with signing only one-
at-a-time publishing deals. We don’t have any long-term deals tying us
in. We’re reasonably happy with the support from the Jamdat guys that
are now a part of EA, but if another publisher wants to make us a really
good offer we’re certainly willing to listen.
Todd Hollenshead: For example, Orcs & Elves II is being published by
EA but beyond that when we’ve talked about the future of what id Mo-
bile is going to be bringing to the market, those titles are all completely
unsigned.
James Brightman: You touched on this a bit before, but in terms of the
power of the mobile handsets and how they could easily eclipse the DS,
obviously not every handset is created equally. And as PC developers you
are quite familiar with trying to create something that’ll work across nu-
merous speciﬁcations, so when you’re optimizing these games for mobile
how do you make it playable across handsets?
John Carmack: In that respect it is actually worse than the PC. The PC
feels bad compared to the consoles - whether you’re on a DS or 360, it’s
great because you have one target, but on the PC you might be scaling
over a factor of four. On mobile we’re scaling over a factor of at least 10,
and that’s pretty grim. So we make signiﬁcant gameplay decisions that
strategically at the very beginning have to affect all of that.
Katherine Anna Kang: So far I think the strategy that’s worked for us is
that we have four versions (high-end and low-end for Java and Brew), so
we know that the lowest version of the game should never look or play
worse than the lowest that we’ve developed and given to the publishers.
So we have a very, very bottom and a very, very top, and after delivering
those to the publishers they will take those versions and port it over to
the hundreds of handsets that need to be taken care of.
CHAPTER 24. CARMACK ON ID MOBILE, CRAP GAMES, AND WHY
IPOD SUCKS

John Carmack Archive
229
Interviews
James Brightman: I would assume that signiﬁcantly raises the cost of
development, right?
John Carmack: Oh yeah, it deﬁnitely does. It’s hard to say what the
breakpoint would be, but we do feel that it’s fairly necessary for what
we’re trying to accomplish. We could do some proﬁtable games if we
were high-end Brew only, and they would be much ﬂashier and more
impressive, but we’d be serving a much smaller chunk of the market and
we wouldn’t be able to accrue the consumer goodwill and broad based
IP market growth that we’re trying to do. The thing about the cell phone
market is that it’s possible to go out there and sell millions of units. These
are good numbers just to have people say, ”This is a great game.” Whether
they played it on mobile or some high-end platform, if they think, ”Orcs
& Elves, that was a great game...” then we’ve built some long-term value
that the company’s going to be able to take advantage of for year’s to
come. And while we might still be able to make money doing a high-end
only Brew game, and in some ways it would be a much more fun thing
to develop, we would lose out on that broader sense of a couple million
people having favorable impressions of the game and company and so
on.
James Brightman: And ﬁnally, the ﬁrst games to come out under this
new mobile studio are expected when?
John Carmack: The Wolfenstein title is under development right now,
and we expect that to follow the previous [pattern] of taking six months
to develop...
Katherine: The idea is that if we do the code release of the cell phone
and DS version of Wolfenstein, we’ll deﬁnitely have it out for next year’s
holiday. If we don’t do the code release, the cell phone version won’t be
out before the DS.
John Carmack: My ideal would be if we winded up developing two titles
internally and then we probably work with maybe two other outside stu-
dio teams to develop two more products, like the Quake Arena project
we’re talking about for the DS and possibly deal with somebody else on
another mobile title. Ideally, I would hope to see four mobile titles com-
ing from id Mobile next year.
CHAPTER 24. CARMACK ON ID MOBILE, CRAP GAMES, AND WHY
IPOD SUCKS

Chapter 25
1UP Interviews John Carmack on
id Mobile
This interview was conducted by Scott Sharkey for 1UP on Nov 16, 2007.
http://www.1up.com/do/newsStory?cId=3164439
Interview
Prologue
Yesterday, id Software and Fountainhead announced they’re opening their
own mobile gaming division. That all seems to come a little late, since
they’ve already been making some of the best damn mobile games for
the last couple years. Give Doom RPG or Orcs & Elves a shot if you’re still
clinging to the belief these things universally suck.
We had a chatter about it with id CEO Todd Hollenshead, Fountainhead
CEO Katherine Anna Kang, and nerd-everyone-wants-to-grow-up-to-be-
just-like, John Carmack. Between making games and blowing up rockets,
(it’s okay, he has another one) we don’t know where he ﬁnds the time, but
we’re glad he could spare some to geek out about the prospects of devel-
230

John Carmack Archive
231
Interviews
opment on mobile and Nintendo DS.
Some of the more interesting points that came up included the mention
of Duke Nukem games in the works for mobile and Nintendo DS, and
an incarnation of Quake Arena for DS exclusively. We even talked a bit
about a D20 pen and paper module coming out based on Orcs & Elves,
which was in turn based on the tabletop RPG campaigns he used to DM
a million years ago.
Questions
Scott Sharkey: So, new venture I guess, sort of.
John Carmack: Yeah, it’s deﬁnitely a ”sort of”, because we’ve been doing
the mobile stuff now for two years just in partnership between Fountain-
head and Id. But we decided we’re happy enough with how things have
been going, the business has been good, and we think that the potential
is really strong looking the next several years ahead, that we decided it’s
better to just go ahead and build an actual Id software division around
this.
Where we think that it’s going to help us – I track more people interested
in working on the mobile stuff, it’s going to let us use our clout more with
the carriers, the handset manufacturers, the chipset manufacturers, and
all that. But at least in the immediate future, it’s still going to be carry-
ing on as we have been. We’ve got new titles under development with
Wolfenstein, some other projects that we’re going to be working on, new
IPs and all that. But we do expect to be slowly ramping this up, with pretty
substantial commitment over the next several years.
Scott Sharkey: A lot of DS development possibly?
John Carmack: Well, we’re deﬁnitely very excited to see how Orcs and
Elves DS does. It’s coming out next week, and that’s also the ﬁrst step&
there’s two aspects to this, it’s our ﬁrst DS title at all, but also it’s the ﬁrst
test of this upward mobility theory about testing out a project on the mo-
bile platform, and then see how it does moving it up to more conven-
tional platforms on there.
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

John Carmack Archive
232
Interviews
The DS development was a lot of fun, in a lot of ways it was kind of the
most fun poking at the hardware sorts of stuff that I’ve done in a long
time. So we’re currently looking at potentially two more DS titles in the
next year a Wolfenstein title and a Quake Arena title. Wolfenstein 1 being
done in concert with a mobile title, the Quake Arena title would be DS
speciﬁc.
Scott Sharkey: So you are going to be doing exclusive stuff for DS some-
times?
John Carmack: Yeah, I mean it all depends on what the title is on there.
You can’t do a good shooter on mobile. If you picked one mobile phone,
you might be able to do a good job on it, if you picked a high end BREW
or Symbian phone and targeted it speciﬁcally for that, that keypad lay-
out, you could maybe do something decent, but it’s not something you
can do a broad-based, good game on. So for that type of thing, and Quake
Arena is all about the competition, super-fast reactions and all that, that’s
something that just isn’t going to play well on mobile. We’re never going
to try and cram a square peg into a round hole with this. That’s kind
of our whole theory behind the mobile stuff, is, we’re going to do things
that work well on mobile, rather than try to do the things that we’re his-
torically known for and push it onto mobile.
Todd Hollenshead: In fact, we have signiﬁcant amount of experience as
to how the square peg/round hole stuff doesn’t work. We actually made
some money off of that, but it was always exercises in how much we could
tolerate our games being tortured from a playability standpoint. Because
somebody would always come up with some new operating system on a
PDA, or some new capability on a speciﬁc handset of a cell phone, and
somebody would say because whatever game from Id has been open-
sourced, I can make a technical case about how this would work. It al-
ways ended up being some kind of technical novelty, that sort of looked
neat but wasn’t anything that people actually wanted to play. What we
did with Doom RPG, which was the completely opposite approach: what
works on a handset, and let’s combine this with something in the Doom
universe. And that actually was not only a commercial, but a critical suc-
cess.
Scott Sharkey: Yeah, I was really happy with that, it really played to the
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

John Carmack Archive
233
Interviews
strengths of what you had available.
Todd: So that’s the model, and we hope to replicate that and improve
upon that as we go forward to more advanced handsets, into the DS mar-
ket, etc.
John Carmack: We want to use as much synergy as we can. With Wolfen-
stein, this may be a great case where we can have a mobile title out, we
can have a DS title out, and both of those should come out in advance
of the big cross-platform, high-end Wolfenstein title that’s under devel-
opment right now. And that may come out being almost perfect timing,
where we can go out and move maybe a couple million units on mobile
and DS, in preparation for the big high-dollar one going out on the PC,
360, PS3 SKUs on there 6 months later or something.
Scott Sharkey: With Orcs and Elves, I think there was some difﬁculty with
the development in porting it down for lower end phones. Is that going
to be a problem? Are you going to be developing from the DS down, or
from lower end phones up?
John Carmack: Well right now we have made the decision that the next
mobile title is dropping the lowest end Java support. I felt that was nec-
essary, where we made good strides from Doom RPG to Orcs and Elves,
and Orcs and Elves 2, the game got better each time. It wasn’t just that
a matter of changing the graphics and making new levels – there were
signiﬁcant improvements in each step that we took there. I was pretty
much convinced that we were at about the limits of what we could use-
fully do on the lowest end platform. There’s still lots of room for us to
expand on the high end BREW or Java platforms, but if we’re continuing
to require that we ship on a 350k Java, it would have kept us from being
able to make that kind of step again.
So for Wolfenstein, we cut off the lowest end, which throws away a decent
chunk of the market, but we do think things are still moving from a plat-
form migration standpoint. And we think we’ll be able to make enough,
better of a game that it’ll make up for giving some of the low-end away
there.
Scott Sharkey: So it should offer a lot more freedom now, then?
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

John Carmack Archive
234
Interviews
John Carmack: Yep. We always look longingly at the possibility of, if we
could develop just for high-end BREW, we could make games that would
be, really, every bit as good or better than a DS game. Really it’s worse on
mobile, than any other platform, where the consoles are sort of the best
– you’ve got a one point target. PC space you might have a factor of four
performance that you’re scaling for there. But on the mobile we’ve got
well over a factor of ten from the lowest end and the highest end, where
you’ve got something that might be at 16 mhz processor on the low end,
and a 300 mhz processor on the high end, or even higher. There are 1Ghz
processors going into cell phones right now.
Scott Sharkey: How do you feel about mobile development? I under-
stand there’s a lot more opportunities for hands-on individual work, com-
pared to the huge teams and budgets.
John Carmack: So our current teams that have done all these titles have
usually been ﬁve or six people, and we expect that to still be staying fairly
constant through the next year. Now I do think that it’s inevitable that
if the market grows, and you have bigger and bigger successes on there,
that it will inevitably follow the path that PC and console games have had,
where ten years from now we’ll be talking about the twenty million dollar
developed mobile game, probably much less than ten years actually. But
I think for the next several years it will grow reasonably slowly.
There’s also this interesting phenomenon, where because the gaming isn’t
what’s driving the technical decisions on the cell phones, we’re sort of
reaching a case where modern high-end cell phones have more resources
than we can actually afford as game developers to take full advantage of.
Which is a bizarre situation that we’ve never seen on PC or consoles for a
high end game, where you’re always trying to eke every last little bit out
of the platform. But when we look at a high end phone like an iPhone or
something, that might have 128 megs of ram and gigs of storage, if you
built a game and said I’m going to do the best possible thing on this plat-
form, you could go ahead and spend 5 or 10 million dollars developing
some really lush media platform on there, and you would never be able
to sell enough units to go ahead and justify that from a risk standpoint.
So mobile development is going to remain different in interesting ways
than the rest of the console or PC development there.
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

John Carmack Archive
235
Interviews
Scott Sharkey: So it’s a matter of ﬁnding a sweet spot between innovation
and expense?
John Carmack: Yeah, if you shot just for the low end, then you can say
I’m just going to try to max out the low end platform on here. Although
you’ve still got the issue of, it has to then be customized 150 different
times for all the different handsets. That was one of the things that was
interesting doing the DS work recently, where for Orcs and Elves DS I per-
sonally had a blast working on that because it was this tight, low level
hardware thing where you could go in and poke at registers, and if it
worked great on this one it would work on every single DS ever made like
that. And it was a very different feel from the cell phone development,
where you have to do a good sort of strategic job on there, but the tiny
little tactical decisions, about programming implementation, you can’t
get much leverage out of that, because it’s going to be different on 150 or
300 different cell phone SKUs that you wind up developing on.
I know when I very ﬁrst started playing with cell phone development on
my personal cell phone, I spent a little bit of time doing Java disassembly,
and tweaking things to generate the exact op codes that I wanted, but it
was really pointless in terms of a larger, broad scale commercial release,
because any tweaks I did on that would only be hitting some minor frac-
tion of what the total market was.
Scott Sharkey: With the lower budgets and few people breathing down
your neck, is there going to be more opportunity to do things that we
haven’t seen before?
John Carmack: Orcs and Elves was the ﬁrst new IP that Id software has
created since Quake about ten years or so. We’re working internally on
RAGE, our big new high end IP, and the fact was we were able to sneak
in and do something we haven’t done in a long time, and be successful
with it on the mobile platform. I think that’s a really good sign, that it’s
out there, and that it was successful critically and commercially. We’re
all waiting, eagerly anticipating how Orcs and Elves DS will do, because
if that comes out really good also and show how we were able to pioneer
a new IP on the low end mobile platform and then step up to a more
conventional platform, then we’ll probably try moving that again. And
that would be a great existence proof for the industry, and I know a lot
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

John Carmack Archive
236
Interviews
of people at EA are looking very carefully at this, because it could be a
signiﬁcant new change in the way people think about trying out some of
the new IPs on there.
Katherine Kang: I think one of the ways that developers can come up
with new ideas is, with the mobile market, with the DS market, but par-
ticularly the mobile market you can throw a lot of ideas in there with a
very low budget and see if people take to it. If they do, then you may al-
ready have a fan base that enjoy that game, that may see it as a beneﬁt to
go to the more higher end games.
One of the things with Orcs and Elves that will be very interesting is in
the cell phone market, nobody really knew anything about it except that
it must have orcs and elves. You know it was very special, it was a really
good game for the cell phone, and people really liked it, and Orcs and
Elves 2 that’s coming out in a week, next week, is an even better game
than Orcs and Elves. People who played the original Orcs and Elves seem
to want more of the Orcs and Elves, the idea being that the DS is still a
very good budget to work with, but not extravagant. We give them more,
and if people like this approach, then I think a lot of more innovative
new type of games will come out of the studios, because they won’t have
to risk tens of millions of dollars in just trying something they would have
liked to try but couldn’t afford to.
John Carmack: I think one thing that’s kind of worth recognizing is that
if somebody played a mobile game, and if they think ”Orcs and Elves,
that was a great game”, and it’s in the context of, ”this was a great mobile
game”, that people still have that same positive feeling about it, you’re
building pretty much the same brand loyalty that you would if you were
developing a great game on the 360 that cost 40 times as much to de-
velop.
Scott Sharkey: Do you think that will help in terms of, people will buy
Orcs and Elves DS and with the sequel out already on mobile, that people
will seek that out?
Kathering Kang: That’s the idea. The idea is that if the people who played
Doom RPG, played Orcs and Elves, that they would go buy Orcs and Elves
2. But with Orcs and Elves 2 out there, the people who perhaps pick up
Orcs and Elves DS and enjoy it and go ”wow, this is a fun little game, I
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

John Carmack Archive
237
Interviews
wish there was more to it”, then they can go on the cell phone and be
introduced to the same universe, with some of the characters that they
became accustomed to, and continue enjoying it. And after playing Orcs
and Elves 2 on the cell phone, that they’ll be like, ”oh boy, can’t wait un-
til Orcs and Elves 2 is out on DS” or another platform. But rather than
having to wait 3, 4, 5 years, next year they’ll be ready to pick it up.
John Carmack: There is a danger there though in that the DS is nicer in
a lot of ways. It’s very fast and smooth, better graphics, more levels, all
this, where especially if somebody had a low end phone, they would be
sorely disappointed if they went from playing Orcs and Elves on the DS,
to playing Orcs and Elves 2 on a low end Java phone.
Kathering Kang: It could potentially go a positive way, though, where the
gameplay experience is still fun. So they could play it on the cell phone,
and say, I can’t wait to see the DS version, to see what more there is that
we weren’t able to see on the cell phone.
John Carmack: But that would be an interesting situation if we were in,
where we have a huge hit on the DS, and then people wind up seeking
out the mobile version for the next step in that. Then there would have
to be some expectation management in effect there.
Scott Sharkey: It’s deﬁnitely an interesting experiment. Do you think you
might do any development speciﬁcally for the DS and then expand that
downward?
John Carmack: Well we are deﬁnitely right now looking at the Quake
Arena title on the DS, which will be a DS exclusive game, again because
we don’t feel that we could do a good job on a Quake Arena style game
across any kind of broad mobile platform. So we’re sticking to, we’ll do
what’s appropriate for the different platforms.
You’re never going to see us say, well we’re now doing, say, RAGE, and
we’re going to go ahead and do RAGE on all the high end titles, we’re go-
ing to do a mobile version, we’re going to do a DS version, because specif-
ically I don’t think we can do a good version of a racing game like RAGE
on the cell phone and do a particularly good job at it. It’s not outside of
the realm of possibility, you could push it and possibly make something
happen, but I don’t think it’s the right thing to do. The same thing with
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

John Carmack Archive
238
Interviews
what we were talking about with Quake Arena, and similarly I think that
there are things we could do on a mobile title that won’t translate well to
other games.
We have a lot of ideas that we’ve talked about, about things that could ac-
tually take more advantage of the speciﬁcs of the mobile platform, with
the always connected nature of it, things that are interacting with live in-
ternet connections, or SMS messaging, or any of those things that would
clearly be mobile only. Where we want to get the synergies that we can,
out of the fact that we have these IPs present on multiple platforms, but
it’s not going to absolutely drive everything that we do.
Scott Sharkey: One last question about Orcs and Elves, the story was that
was a [D and D] campaign that you ran?
John Carmack: Not speciﬁcally. Orcs and Elves is Anna’s creation, mostly
from scratch, but she was inspired by some of the things that I did pre-
viously. Certainly the actual gameplay style that we developed for Doom
RPG was things that I dredged up out of my early gaming experiences,
and the computer games that I remember playing as a teenager, the Wiz-
ardry and Bard’s Tale and games like that. So we’ve been tagged as a retro
game in that, because people can think about Eye of the Beholder and
classic games like that. It’s not intentionally being set up like that, it’s
more a matter of, what was going to work well on the cell phone for play
style, and dredging out all the different possibilities, that just came out
on the top of my list, that that would work out well.
Scott Sharkey: Do you have any remnants of any of those old games? I’m
sure the scenario is different, but It’d be fun to see a character sheet or
something.
John Carmack: Yeah, I actually have a bookshelf full of my old campaign
notes still in my ofﬁce upstairs.
Katherine: We actually have a D20 coming out based on Orcs and Elves,
that I believe should be released either next week or the following week,
for the people who are still playing Dungeons and Dragons.
John Carmack: It’s actually kind of neat, one of the guys at EA was in-
volved in writing some of the D20 based adventures, and he put a lit-
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

John Carmack Archive
239
Interviews
tle module together based on something happening at the periphery of
the Orcs and Elves game, and I reviewed all that a couple days ago, and
passed along a couple of tiny notes. But I thought it was pretty neat, what
they did with it.
CHAPTER 25. 1UP INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK ON ID MOBILE

Chapter 26
Gamasutra interviews John
Carmack and Katherine Anna
Kang
This interview was conducted by Gamasutra for Gamasutra on Nov 23,
2007.
http://www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/news_index.php?story=16352
Interview
Prologue
Veteran Texas-based developer Id Software recently announced Id Mo-
bile, a new division of the famed Doom and Quake creator that will de-
velop games for cell phones, as well as for both the Nintendo DS and PSP.
Id Mobile will be headed up by Fountainhead founder Katherine Anna
Kang, who was formerly director of business development at id, and has
already worked with spouse Carmack on projects including Doom RPG
and Orcs & Elves, the latter of which (pictured) recently shipped on Nin-
240

John Carmack Archive
241
Interviews
tendo DS.
Gamasutra sat down with Id Mobile’s Kang and Id’s legendary Carmack
to talk about the endeavor, a planned Wolfenstein mobile/DS title, pos-
sibilities for a Wii version of Orcs & Elves, why Carmack has warmed to
Nintendo platforms, and more.
Questions
Gamasutra: Why form a separate division instead of continuing to create
games from Fountainhead, the way you had with Doom RPG and Orcs
and Elves?
John Carmack: Working with Anna allowed us to try things out and ex-
periment, but once we decided it was successful, there are certain things
that are easier to deal with at Id. For one, no three-way contracts!
One of the funny things about mobile development work is that the game
is often ﬁnished before contracts, which is just ridiculous! So this cer-
tainly simpliﬁes things. Another aspect is we have a bit more dev cash
at Id, and we’re hoping it will be easier to attract interested developers.
That’s been a little of an issue at Fountainhead – ﬁnding talent that’s in-
terested in working on these smaller platforms.
Katherine Anna Kang: With two separate goals and separate companies,
rather than investing in your future and your people, you’re kind of on
your own. Overall, it was a good combination for the titles we want to
develop, but also the quality we want to focus on, and the type of titles
we want to focus on.
Gamasutra: So how much will you focus on mobile games versus portable
systems? Do you think you’ll continue to sort of test concepts on the mo-
bile phone and then expand on them for DS or PSP as appropriate?
John Carmack: We’re really looking forward to seeing how Orcs & Elves
does on the DS. It’s looking like now like our ﬁrst project is going to be a
mobile/DS Wolfenstein-type title. After that, we’ll do an original title on
the mobile, and what happens after that will determine how we go from
CHAPTER 26. GAMASUTRA INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK AND
KATHERINE ANNA KANG

John Carmack Archive
242
Interviews
there.
Katherine Anna Kang: I think the general idea is that we deﬁnitely want
to make games for the known Id IP –Doom and Wolfenstein – but what we
will probably be doing is something between the two: One year a known
IP, the next year a new IP, and back and forth. We have a lot of great ideas
that haven’t been explored yet, and we’re really excited and interested.
We’re also excited to be bringing the classics onto the cell phone or DS.
Gamasutra: A lot of people are very interested in seeing Doom RPG come
to a portable system, and when we last talked, Anna, you said to that
you were concerned about the DS’s audience skewing a bit younger, and
the risk of an M-rated title on that platform. If you guys are going to be
developing for PSP now, do you think we might see more of the intense
sort of hardcore Id games that everyone loves hit portable systems?
John Carmack: Well, we have a few things that we’re looking at as sales
of DS stuff goes on this year. There are a couple new mature-rated titles
coming out for DS we’re going to be watching the sales numbers on, and
EA will be looking at all this as well. Certainly, there are good games we
would like to do that would be M-rated, but I’m hedging my bets on that
right now where I think it’s still kind of risky, but I would love to be proven
wrong!
It is an interesting question, about whether we design games to be able
to cross between DS and PSP. It’s a little bit tough because there’s a broad
hardware gulf between the two just in terms of power, processing, mem-
ory – pretty much across the board. We did one experiment with Orcs
and Elves – scaling up a high-end cell phone game to the DS, but from
the DS to the PSP is probably straining a little bit. Whether we wound up
designing something that could span between DS and PSP... that would
be an interesting challenge, to do something that’s really good on both
platforms.
Katherine Anna Kang: My goal is to convince him that Doom on DS
must happen!
John Carmack: If Orcs & Elves is successful on the DS, we would like
to consider scaling that up to a higher-end sku on the Wii – waving the
magic wand around and all that would make a neat entry point onto that
CHAPTER 26. GAMASUTRA INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK AND
KATHERINE ANNA KANG

John Carmack Archive
243
Interviews
platform.
We ignored Nintendo for a long time for a number of fairly good reasons
— we hated dealing with them 10 years ago, as they always lagged behind
the front runners in terms of raw technology... now we’re branching out
onto lower-end platforms, so now its an interesting platform for us to be
looking at. Six months from now, when our current projects are done, we
have all sorts of options we’re focusing on. It really will depend on how
things go sales-wise on Orcs & Elves for DS.
It’s a great situation we’re in – even if we stuck with two mobile titles a
year, it’s already proﬁtable and rewarding. The way I look at it is, even if
nothing improves, even if we stay as is, it’s still a nice business for us to
be in. And the exciting part is that there is a real chance over the next ﬁve
years that mobile gaming on cell phones could really take off. It could
be ﬁve times larger in four years if certain things happen, but even if it
doesn’t, we’re still okay.
Gamasutra: What’s it like to be sort of a ”game industry power couple”?
Do you sometimes feel extra pressure when you do things together? Is it
sometimes challenging personally to be a husband-and-wife team?
Katherine Anna Kang: I think from my perspective, it’s really fun to work
with John. I think I kind of take for granted that a lot of people would love
to be in my position, and brainstorm game ideas with John! We do have
an interesting kind of relationship – I’m purely a designer, I come up with
a lot of different ideas, and John is pure tech - so sometimes, we end up
kind of speaking different languages, and kind of cross paths, instead of
meeting. It is a little bit different in the sense he’s talking tech and I’m
talking design and we don’t quite get what each other is talking about -
but we always end up together.
It’s really fun working with John – I think that sometimes I wish I could
clone him so I could have him just working on my products, but he must
be shared! And I think it’s also really nice, because were both workaholics.
We work a lot, pretty much seven days a week, always working in one way
or another. To be able to spend that extra time, and have that much fun
talking about games - it’s really, really fun. I think that for John’s part,
when he’s working with me... he’s less likely to be able to put his foot
down!
CHAPTER 26. GAMASUTRA INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK AND
KATHERINE ANNA KANG

John Carmack Archive
244
Interviews
John Carmack: There are some funny stories about that. The situation is
different now from our very ﬁrst game. A signiﬁcant aspect of my values
in the design skills I have is in minimization. Keeping a project from go-
ing off the rails is half the battle, keeping things from getting screwed up.
There are a lot of things I would dismiss out-of-hand, and say, ’oh, no,
we don’t need that’ - but in Doom RPG, the ﬁrst project we really worked
together on, Anna had a few features that she really wanted to get in, and
twisted my arm a little bit.
They turned out to be things that people really liked! I remember scofﬁng
at the whole idea of the ﬁre extinguisher, as going around and putting out
ﬁres. I was like, ’why would you want to do that?’
Katherine Anna Kang: I thought it was really hilarious, the idea of having
it as a weapon, because you had these ﬁre demons ﬂying at you...
John Carmack: But going around and... putting out ﬁres? What’s the
point? But then, when we watched people play it, we saw so many people
just putting out every single ﬁre in the level.
Katherine Anna Kang: But the biggest argument was the doggie. I liked
the idea of having a dog in the game, and really liked the idea of convert-
ing it into a friend. And John was really anti-doggie...
John Carmack: Anna was like, ’Can we have a doggy?’ I was like, ’...No.’
And it went on like that... but then I ﬁnally came up with an idea that was
a good way to do it.
Katherine Anna Kang: What I had to do convince John it would work is,
I had my designer, and I said, ’look, this is the idea, let’s just show it to
him’. Once he saw it, he kind of went ’...Okay. I think this will work.’
John Carmack: And since we’ve seen a couple of those things turn out
well, I’m much more willing to trust Anna’s judgment, even if my ﬁrst re-
action is ’no, we don’t need it’. Not because her ideas are bad, but because
there is just so much value in drawing the line.
Katherine Anna Kang: One interesting thing about Orcs & Elves 2 is that
it has a mouse familiar. I think initially he wanted to scoff at the idea of
the familiar. I could tell he was just about to pan it, but then he kind of
held his tongue and said, ’we’ll see.’ And it turned out really well, and
CHAPTER 26. GAMASUTRA INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK AND
KATHERINE ANNA KANG

John Carmack Archive
245
Interviews
everybody loves the little mouse. And in the end, even John really liked
it. I think that after what, four games now, he has learned to not cut me
off, and listen to me, and see how it goes!
John Carmack: It works out really well.
Gamasutra: So obviously you can’t say speciﬁcs, but what can we look
forward to in the pipeline from the Mobile division?
John Carmack: Wolfenstein is deﬁnitely under production right now.
We’re expecting more titles for both mobile and DS, and these early mo-
bile SKUs we have been doing, we want to improve. We feel we’re up
against the limits with the current set of platforms; we think we’ve tapped
out what we can do, so we’re tossing out the low end and still innovating
some more.
We’ll probably do some simultaneous mobile and DS [releases] - and
there are a lot of things, depending on what publisher interest is and how
Orcs & Elves does on the DS, we could wind up with any of three or four
different directions, and we may not know for four or ﬁve months.
CHAPTER 26. GAMASUTRA INTERVIEWS JOHN CARMACK AND
KATHERINE ANNA KANG

Chapter 27
John Carmack on id Tech 6, Ray
Tracing, Consoles, Physics and
more
This interview was conducted by Ryan Shrout for PC Perspective on Mar
12, 2008.
http://www.pcper.com/article.php?aid=532
Interview
Prologue
In recent months a lot of discussion has been circulating about the roles
of ray tracing, accelerated physics and multiple-GPU conﬁgurations in
the future of PC and console gaming. Here at PC Perspective we have
heard from Intel on the subject many times and just recently sat down
with NVIDIA’s Chief Scientist David Kirk to discuss the ray tracing and
rasterization debate.
Many of our readers, as well as comments across the web, asked for feed-
246

John Carmack Archive
247
Interviews
back from the developers. It makes sense - these are the people that
are going to be spending their money and time developing games to sell
on next-generation architecture so surely their opinions would be more
grounded in reality than a hardware company trying to push their tech-
nological advantages. With that in mind, we spent some time talking
with John Carmack, the legendary programmer at id Software famous
for Wolfenstein, Doom, Quake and the various engines that power them.
What started out as a simple Q&A about Intel’s ray tracing plans turned
into a discussion on the future of gaming hardware, both PC and console,
possible software approaches to future rendering technology, multiple-
GPU and multi-core CPU systems and even a possible insight into id Tech
6, the engine that will replace the id Tech 5 / Rage title.
The information that John discussed with us is very in-depth and you’ll
probably want to block off some time to fully digest the data. You might
also want to refresh your knowledge of octrees and voxels. Also note that
in some areas the language of this text might seem less reﬁned than you
might expect simply because we are using a transcription of a recorded
conversation.
Questions
27.1
Ray tracing for more than rendering
Ryan Shrout: Let’s just jump right into the issue at hand. What is your
take on current ray tracing arguments ﬂoating around such as those fea-
tured in a couple of different articles here at PC Perspective? Have you
been doing any work on ray tracing yourself?
John Carmack: I have my own personal hobby horse in this race and
have some fairly ﬁrm opinions on the way things are going right now.
I think that ray tracing in the classical sense, of analytically intersect-
ing rays with conventionally deﬁned geometry, whether they be triangle
meshes or higher order primitives, I’m not really bullish on that taking
over for primary rendering tasks which is essentially what Intel is push-
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
248
Interviews
ing. (Ed: information about Intel’s research is here.) There are large ad-
vantages to rasterization from a performance standpoint and many of
the things that they argue as far as using efﬁcient culling technologies to
be able to avoid referencing a lot of geometry, those are really bogus ar-
guments because you could do similar things with occlusion queries and
conditional renders with rasterization. Head to head rasterization is just
a vastly more efﬁcient use of whatever transistors you have available.
But, I do think that there is a very strong possibility as we move towards
next generation technologies for a ray tracing architecture that uses a
speciﬁc data structure; rather than just taking triangles like everybody
uses and tracing rays against them and being really, really expensive.
There is a speciﬁc format I have done some research on that I am starting
to ramp back up on for some proof of concept work for next generation
technologies. It involves ray tracing into a sparse voxel octree which is
essentially a geometric evolution of the mega-texture technologies that
we’re doing today for uniquely texturing entire worlds. It’s clear that what
we want to do in the following generation is have unique geometry down
to the equivalent of the texel across everything. There are different ap-
proaches that you could wind up and try to get that done that would
involve tessellation and different levels of triangle meshes and you can
could conceivably make something like that work but rasterization ar-
chitecture does really start falling apart when your typical triangle size is
less than one pixel. At that point you really have lost much of the bene-
ﬁts of rasterization. Not necessarily all of them, because linearly walking
through a list of primitives can still be much faster than randomly access-
ing them for tracing, but the wins are diminishing there.
In our current game title we are looking at shipping on two DVDs, and
we are generating hundreds of gigs of data in our development before
we work on compressing it down. It’s interesting that if you look at rep-
resenting this data in this particular sparse voxel octree format it winds
up even being a more efﬁcient way to store the 2D data as well as the 3D
geometry data, because you don’t have packing and bordering issues. So
we have incredibly high numbers; billions of triangles of data that you
store in a very efﬁcient manner. Now what is different about this versus a
conventional ray tracing architecture is that it is a specialized data struc-
ture that you can ray trace into quite efﬁciently and that data structure
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
249
Interviews
brings you some signiﬁcant beneﬁts that you wouldn’t get from a trian-
gular structure. It would be 50 or 100 times more data if you stored it out
in a triangular mesh, which you couldn’t actually do in practice.
I’ve been pitching this idea to both NVIDIA and Intel and just everybody
about directions as we look toward next generation technologies. But this
is one of those aspects where changing the paradigm of rendering from
rasterization based approach to a ray casting approach or any other ap-
proach is not out of the question but I do think that the direction that
Intel is going about it as a conventional ray tracer is unlikely to win out.
While you could start doing some real time things that look interesting its
always going to be a matter of a quarter the efﬁciency or a 10th of the ef-
ﬁciency or something like that. Intel of course hopes that they can win by
having 4x the raw processing power on their Larrabee versus a conven-
tional GPU, and as we look towards future generations that’s one aspect
of how the battle may shape up. Intel has always had process advantage
over the GPU vendors and if they are able to have an architecture that has
3-4x the clock rate of the traditional GPU architectures they may be able
to soak the signiﬁcant software architecture deﬁcit by clubbing it with
processing power.
From the developers stand point there are pros and cons to that. We
could certainly do interesting things with either direction. But literally
just last week I was doing a little bit of research work on these things.
The direction that everybody is looking at for next generation, both con-
sole and eventual graphics card stuff, is a ”sea of processors” model, typ-
iﬁed by Larrabee or enhanced CUDA and things like that, and everybody
is sort of waving their hands and talking about ”oh we’ll do wonderful
things with all this” but there is very little in the way of real proof-of-
concept work going on. There’s no one showing the demo of like, here
this is what games are going to look like on the next generation when
we have 10x more processing power - nothing compelling has actually
been demonstrated and everyone is busy making these multi-billion dol-
lar decisions about what things are going to be like 5 years from now in
the gaming world. I have a direction in mind with this but until every-
body can actually make movies of what this is going to be like at subscale
speeds, it’s distressing to me that there is so much effort going on without
anybody showing exactly what the prize is that all of this is going to give
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
250
Interviews
us.
Ryan Shrout: So, because Intel’s current demonstrations are using tech-
nology from two previous generations rather than showing off one or two
generations AHEAD of today, there is little exciting to be drawn from it?
John Carmack: I wouldn’t say there’s anything that Intel has shown, even
if they network a whole room full of PCs and say ”we’ll be able to stick all
of this on a graphics card for you in the coming generation,” I don’t think
they’ve shown the win. I don’t think they’ve shown something people
will say ”my god that’s 10x cooler” or ”that makes me want to buy a new
console”.
It is tough in a research environment to do that because so much of the
content battle now is media rather than algorithms. They’ve certainly
been hacking on the Quake code bases to at least give them something
that is not an ivory tower toy, but they’re working with something that is
previous generation technology and trying to make it look like something
that is going to a next-gen technology. You really can’t stretch media over
two generational gaps like that, so they’re stuck. Which is why I’m hop-
ing to be able to do my part and provide some proof of concept demo
technology this year. We’re working on our RAGE project and the id Tech
5 code base but I’ve been talking to all the relevant people about what we
think might be going on and what our goals are for an id Tech 6 gener-
ation. Which may very well involve, I’m certainly hoping it involves, ray
tracing in the ”sparse voxel octree” because at least I think I can show a
real win. I think I can show something that you don’t see in current games
today, or even in the current in-development worlds of unique surface
detail. By following that out into the extra dimension of having complete
geometric detail at that same density I think can provide something that
justiﬁes the technological sea change.
Ryan Shrout: How dramatic would a hardware change have to be to take
advantage of the structures you are discussing here?
John Carmack: It’s interesting in that the algorithms would be some-
thing that, it’s almost unfortunate in the aspect that these algorithms
would take great advantage of simpler bit-level operations in many cases
and they would wind up being implemented on this 32-bit ﬂoating point
operation-based hardware. Hardware designed speciﬁcally for sparse
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
251
Interviews
voxel ray casting would be much smaller and simpler and faster than a
general purpose solution but nobody in their right mind would want to
make a bet like that and want to build speciﬁc hardware for technology
that no one has developed content for. The idea would be that you have
to have a general purpose solution that can approach all sorts of things
and is at least capable of doing the algorithms necessary for this type of
ray tracing operation at a decent speed. I think it’s pretty clear that that’s
going to be there in the next generation. In fact, years and years ago I did
an implementation of this with complete software based stuff and it was
interesting; it was not competitive with what you could do with hard-
ware, but it’s likely that I’ll be able to put something together this year
probably using CUDA. If I can make something that renders a small win-
dow at a modest frame rate and we can run around some geometrically
intricate sparse voxel octree world and make a 320x240 window at 10 fps
and realize that on next-generation hardware that’s optimized more for
doing this we can go ahead and get 1080p 60 Hz on there.
That would be the justiﬁcation that would make everybody sleep a whole
lot of better that there is going to be some win coming out this.
Ryan Shrout: Is AMD’s tessellation engine that they put in the R600 chips
anywhere close to what you are looking for?
John Carmack: No, tessellation has been one of those things up there
with procedural content generation where it’s been ﬁve generations that
we’ve been having people tell us it’s going to be the next big thing and it
never does turn out to be the case. I can go into long expositions about
why that type of data ampliﬁcation is not nearly as good as general data
compression that gives you the data that you really want. But I don’t think
that’s the world beater; I mean certainly you can do interesting things
with displacement maps on top of conventional geometry with the tes-
sellation engine, but you have lots of seaming problems and the editing
architecture for it isn’t nearly as obvious. What we want is something that
you can carve up the world as continuously as you want without any re-
spect to underlying geometry.
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
252
Interviews
27.2
Hybrid rendering, graphics APIs and mo-
bile ray tracing
Ryan Shrout: Based on your new data structure method using ray trac-
ing, could you couple this with current rasterization methods for hybrid
rendering?
John Carmack: I saw the quote from Intel about making no sense for a
hybrid approach, and I disagree with that. I think that if you had basically
a routine that ray traces this area of the screen in the sparse voxel octree
it’s going to spit out fragments, it’s going to wind up having a depth value
on there that you could intermix with anything else. Even if you had a ray
trace against a conventional architecture you would still want to have a
fragment program there that would look almost exactly like current frag-
ment programs that we’ve got right now. I couldn’t imagine wanting to do
something that didn’t have a back end like that. I mean you might even
have vertex processors - the stuff that Intel is doing right now, ray tracing
into the geometry, it’s very likely that you would in the end want to be
able to run the triangles in there that you are ray tracing against through
vertex and fragment processors and you’re just getting the barycentric
coordinate of your ray trace stab. You have to know what you hit but then
you have to know what you want to do there. You would want in addition
some ability to send dependent rays out from there as extra elements.
It’s reasonably likely that if my little data structure direction pans out
you’ll probably still want to do characters as skinned and boned with tra-
ditional animation methods. While you could go ahead and work out a
voxel method of characters using refraction skeletons around characters
and you could do animation, you probably wouldn’t want to because we
can make characters that look pretty damn good with the existing stuff
and if everything continues to get 10x faster without us doing anything
you’ll probably want to do characters conventionally. But if you can do
the world and most of the static objects at this incredible level of detail
that you would get with the sparse voxel octree approach that seems like
a completely reasonable way to mix and match.
Now there are aspects that mix and matching would work poorly. It would
be nice to be able to solve the shadowing problem really directly by ray
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
253
Interviews
tracing. You could do that in a completely ray traced world, you just send
the shadow rays out and jitter them and do all the nice things that let you
solve the aliasing problem nicely. But if you rasterized characters tradi-
tionally with hardware skinning, the voxel ray tracer wouldn’t ﬁnd any
intersections with the characters, and they wouldn’t cast any shadows.
So there are down sides to that but what I want to get out of ray tracing
here is not a lot of what would be considered the traditional beneﬁts of
ray tracing: perfect shadows - shadowing would be damn nice to be solve
but we can live without that - things like refraction and multiple mirror
bounces. Those just aren’t that important and we have every evidence in
the world about that because in the real world where people make pro-
duction renderings, even if they have almost inﬁnite resources for movie
budgets, very little of it is ray traced. There are spectacular off line ray
tracers but even when you have production companies that have rooms
and rooms of servers they choose not to use ray tracing very often be-
cause in the vast majority of cases it doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter for
what they are trying to do and it’s not worth the extra cost. And that’s
going to stay fairly similar throughout the next-generation gaming hard-
ware models.
What I really want to get out of the ray tracing is this inﬁnite geometry
which is more driven by the data structure that you have to use ray trac-
ing to access, rather than the fact that you’re bouncing these multiple
rays around. I could do something next generation with this and I hope
that it pans out that way - we may not have dependent rays at all it and
may just use ray tracing to solve the geometry problem. Then you can
also solve the aliasing problem by stocastically jittering all the sample
centers which is something that I’ve been pushing to have integrated into
current rasterization approaches. Its obvious how you do it in a ray trac-
ing approach; you jitter all the samples and you have some dependent,
reﬁnement approach going on there.
I think that we can have huge beneﬁts completely ignoring the traditional
ray tracing demos of ”look at these shiny reﬂective curved surfaces that
make three bounces around and you can look up at yourself”. That’s neat
but that’s an artifact shader, something that you look at one 10th of 1%
of the time in a game. And you can do a pretty damn good job of hacking
that up just with a bunch environment map effects. It won’t be right, but
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
254
Interviews
it will look cool, and that’s all that really matters when you’re looking at
something like that. We are not doing light transport simulation here, we
are doing something that is supposed to look good.
Ryan Shrout: So current generation consoles and PC graphics cards aren’t
going to be capable of running this new type of sparse voxel octree based
technology? And do you think vendors adding in support for it for next-
generation hardware would be sacriﬁcing any speed or beneﬁts to raster-
ization?
John Carmack: Right not at all. You could certainly do it (sparse voxel
octree) but it’s not going to be competitive. The number of pixels that you
could generate with that would be less than a 10th of what you could do
with a rasterization approach. But the hope would be that in the coming
generation we might have the technology for it.
No matter who does what, the next generation is going to be really good
as rasterization, that is a foregone conclusion. Intel is spending lots of
effort to make sure Larrabee is a competitive rasterizer. And it’s going to
be ball park competitive, we’ll see how things work out, but a factor of
2 plus or minus is most likely. But everything is going to be a good ras-
terizer. We should have enough general purpose computational ability
to also be able to do some of these other novel architectures and while
everybody thinks it’s going to be great I have to reiterate that nobody has
actually shown exactly how it’s going to be great. I have my ideas and I’m
sure other people have their ideas but it’s completely possible that the
next generation of high end graphics is just going to be rasterizing like
we do today with a little more ﬂexibility and 10x the speed.
Ryan Shrout: Do you think DirectX or OpenGL will have to be modiﬁed
for this?
John Carmack: They are almost irrelevant in a general purpose compu-
tation environment. They are clearly rasterization based APIs with their
heritage but there is a lot of heard room left in the programming we can
do with this. Almost any problem that you ask for can be decomposed
into these data parallel sorts of approaches and it’s not like we’re capping
out what we can do with rasterization based graphics. But when you get
these general purpose computing things going, they will look like differ-
ent environments for how you would program things. It could look like
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
255
Interviews
CUDA or with Larrabee you could just program them as a bunch of dif-
ferent computers with SIMD units.
Ryan Shrout: Intel has discussed the beneﬁt of ray tracing’s ability to
scale with the hardware when they showed off the Q4: Ray Traced engine
on a UMPC recently. What are your thoughts on that possible advantage?
John Carmack: Speaking as someone that is a mobile developer and a
high end console developer, that’s a ridiculous argument.
Ryan Shrout: Rasterization can scale just as easily?
John Carmack: Yeah. The idea of moving ray tracing onto the mobile
platforms makes no sense at all.
Ryan Shrout: What are your thoughts on Intel’s purchase of Havok and
Project Offset? One theory is that Intel is going to be making a game en-
gine either for demos or to sell. Do you think this is their hope in address-
ing the ability to ”show a win” as you mentioned before?
John Carmack: That’s what they have to do, that’s always been my ar-
gument to Intel and to a lesser degree the other companies. The best
way to evangelize your technology is to show somebody something. To
show an existence proof for it, to kind of eat your own dog food, in terms
of working with everything. Instead of just telling everyone you should
be able to do great things with this, the right thing to do is for them to
produce something that is spectacular and then say ”ok everybody that
wants this here’s the code”. That’s the best way to lead anybody; it’s by
example. They’ll learn the pros and cons of everything directly there and
I very much endorse that direction for them.
27.3
Multi-GPU graphics and Conclusions
Ryan Shrout: What are your thoughts on the current climate of multi-
GPU systems? Do you see that as a real beneﬁt and do you think devel-
opers are able to take advantage of those kind of hardware conﬁgurations
easily enough?
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
256
Interviews
John Carmack: From a developer stand point the uncomfortable truth
is that the console capabilities really dominate the development deci-
sions today. If you look at current titles and how they’ve done on the
console, you know, high end action GPU based things, the consoles are
so the dominate factor that it’s difﬁcult to set things up so that you can
do much to leverage the really extreme high end desktop settings. Tra-
ditionally you get more resolution, where a console game might be de-
signed for 720p and the high end PC you go ahead and run at 1080p or
even higher resolution, that’s an obvious thing. You crank up the reso-
lution. You turn off compression when you have 1GB of video memory
available. And also normally you can go from a 30 Hz console game to a
60 Hz PC game. So there are a number of things you can crank up there
on the PC, but it’s difﬁcult to try and justify any radically different algo-
rithm, something you would really do with 4x the power you’d have with
a high end PC system.
Ryan Shrout: Do you think NVIDIA and AMD are relying too heavily on
the multi-GPU technology instead of pushing forward with true next-
generation GPUs? Will multi-GPU systems continue to be an option at
all?
John Carmack: I’ve always been a big proponent of these high end bou-
tique systems - way back from the early days of 3dfx I always thought it
was a real feather in their cap early on that they could pay more money
and have a bigger system and have it double up and just go faster. I think
it’s a really good option and certainly companies like NVIDIA and AMD
are throwing all the resources they possible can at making the newer,
next-generation cards. But to be able to have this ability to just pay more
money and get more performance out of a current generation is really
useful thing to have. Whether it makes sense for gaming to have these
thousand dollar graphics cards is quite debatable but it’s really good for
developers; to be able to target something high end that’s going to come
out three years from now by being able to pay more money today for 2x
more power. Certainly the whole high end simulation business has ben-
eﬁted a lot from commoditization of scalable graphics.
Although on the down side it was clear that years back when everything
was going in a fairly simple algorithmic approach as far as graphics en-
gines where you just rendered to your frame buffer, it was easy for them
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
257
Interviews
to go ahead and chunk that frame buffer up into an arbitrary number of
pieces. But now there is much more tight coupling between the graphics
render and the GPUs where there are all sorts of feedbacks, rendering to
sub buffers, going back and forth, getting dependent conditional query
results, and it makes it a lot harder to just chunk the problem up like
that. But that’s the whole tale of multi-processing since the very begin-
ning; we’re ﬁghting that with multiple CPUs. It’s the primary issue with
advancing performance in computing.
That is my big take away message for a lot of people about the upcom-
ing generation of general purpose computation on GPUs; a lot of peo-
ple don’t seem to really appreciate how the vertex fragment rasterization
approach to computer graphics has been unquestionably the most suc-
cessful multi-processing solution ever. If you look back over 40 years of
research and what people have done on trying to use multiple processors
to solve problems, the fact that we can do so much so easily with the ver-
tex fragment model, it’s a real testament to its value. A lot of people just
think ”oh of course I want more ﬂexibility I’d love to have multiple CPUs
doing all these different things” and there’s a lot of people that don’t really
appreciate what the suffering is going to be like as we move through that;
and that’s certainly going on right now as software tries to move things
over, and it’s not ”oh just thread your application”. Anyone that says that
is basically an idiot, not appreciating the problems. There are depths of
subtly to all of this where it’s been an ivory tower research project since
the very beginning and it’s by no means solved.
Ryan Shrout: NVIDIA and AMD driver teams have to hack up games to
get them to work optimally on multi-GPU systems and that’s more dif-
ﬁcult for them today than in the past. Do you think developers depen-
dence on the console market, which is solely single-GPU today, is a cause
of those headaches?
John Carmack: It’s probably making it even harder for the PC card guys
because as developers get more sophisticated with the low level access
we get on the consoles, the rendering engines are become harder to kind
of, behind our backs, automatically split across multiple GPUs. We are
doing more sophisticated things on the single GPU - there is a lot more
data transfer going back and forth, updated states that have to be repli-
cated across multiple GPUs, dependent sections of the screen doing dif-
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
258
Interviews
ferent things. It’s still possible buts it’s kind of a hairy job and I deﬁnitely
don’t envy those driver writers or their task at all.
Ryan Shrout: Any thoughts on the 3-4 GPU systems from AMD and NVIDIA?
Overkill?
John Carmack: For many applications, for the class of apps that just treat
something like a dumb frame buffer, they really will go ahead and be 4x
faster especially if you’re just trying to be 4x the resolution on there, that’s
easy. There is no doubt that if you take a game that’s playing at the frame
rate you want at a certain resolution, a 4 GPU solution will usually be able
to go ahead and render 4x the pixels, or very close to linear scaling.
But as far as what it’s unlikely to do is take a game that’s running 20 FPS at
a given nominal resolution and then make that game run 60 FPS. You’re
likely bound up for things that aren’t raw GPU throughput, usually CPU
throughput in the game.
Ryan Shrout: You’ve had choice words for what AGEIA was trying to do
with the hardware physics add-in cards. Now that they are off the scene,
having been purchased by NVIDIA, what are your thoughts on that past
situation?
John Carmack: That was one of those things where it was a stupid plan
from the start and I really hope NVIDIA didn’t pay too much because I
found the whole thing disingenuous. Many people from the very be-
ginning said their entire business strategy was to be acquired because
it should have been obvious to everybody that the market for an add-in
physics card was just not there. And the market proved not to be there.
The whole thing about setting up a company and essentially lying to con-
sumers, that this is a good idea, in order to cash out and be bought out
by a big company, I saw the whole thing as pretty distasteful. It’s obvi-
ous, and we knew when AGEIA was starting, that a few generations down
the road we would have these general purpose compute resources on the
GPU. And what we have right now are things like CUDA that you can im-
plement physics on; you can’t mix and match it very well right now, with
such a heavy weight systems change, but that’s going to be getting better
in future revisions. And eventually you will be using a common set of re-
sources that can run general data parallel stuff versus very high efﬁciency
rasterization work. As for the PhysX hardware, while they would have a
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
259
Interviews
little bit of talk about how their architecture was somehow much better
suited for physics processing, and it might have been somewhat better
suited, for it they never told anyone how or why.
Ryan Shrout: Do you think moving physics to a GPU is a beneﬁt?
John Carmack: Right now, to ofﬂoad tasks like that you have to be able
to go ahead and stick them in a pretty deep pipeline so it doesn’t ﬁt the
way people do physics modeling in their games very well right now. But
as people choose to either change their architecture to allow a frame of
latency in the reports of collision detection in physics or we get much
ﬁner grain parallelization where you don’t have this really long latency
and you can kind of force an immediate mode call to GPU operations,
then we start using that just the way we do SSE instructions or something
in our current code base. Then, yeah, we deﬁnitely will wind up using
compute resources for things like that or collision detection physics.
Ryan Shrout: NVIDIA has Novodex, Intel has Havok – will that cause frag-
mentation in the market? Do you think Microsoft would combine them
into a physics API like they did DirectX?
John Carmack: It will be interesting to see how that plays out because
while I was well known for having certain issues with Microsoft on the
graphics API side of things I really think Microsoft did the industry a good
favor by eventually getting to the DX9 class of stuff, having a very intel-
ligent standard that everyone was forced to abide by. And it was a good
thing. But of course I have worries as we look towards this general com-
pute topic, because if MS took 9 tries to get it right...well. They proba-
bly have some accumulated wisdom about that whole process now, but
there is always a chance for MS to sort of overstep their actual experience
and lay down a standard that’s no good. T heirstandards almost always
evolve into something good... it would be wonderful if they got it right on
the ﬁrst step of DX compute, or whatever its going be. I wouldn’t hold my
breath on that because really all of this it is still research. With graphics
we were really, for a larger part, following the SGI model for a long time
and that gave the industry a real leg up. Right now this comes back to the
earlier point: everybody’s still waving their hands about what wonder-
ful stuff we’re going to do here but we really don’t have the examples let
alone the applications. So it’s sort of a dangerous time to go in and start
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
260
Interviews
making speciﬁc standards when there’s not actually all that much of an
experience base.
As far as the physics APIs, I do expect that for any API to wind up getting
broad game developer support, whether it’s going to Novodex or Havok,
they are going to have to have backends that at least function using any
acceleration technology available. It’ll just be a matter of Intel obviously
not trying to make a CUDA implementation very fast but someone will
wind up having a CUDA implementation for it that is at least plug com-
patible. Maybe NVIDIA will end up having wrappers for their APIs to do
that. But that is just kind of the reality with today’s development; unless
you are a Microsoft tech developer or something that’s tied to the Xbox
360 platform, developers aren’t going to make a choice where ”well we’re
going to use Intel’s stuff and not run on the current console generation”
or something. That’s just not going to happen.
CHAPTER 27. JOHN CARMACK ON ID TECH 6, RAY TRACING,
CONSOLES, PHYSICS AND MORE

Chapter 28
Carmack frees Quake
This interview was conducted by Norman Chan for PC Gamer US on Jun
24, 2008.
http://www.gamesradar.com/pc/quake-live/g-2008022010732152090
Interview
Norman Chan: What inspired you to resurrect Quake III Arena as Quake
Live?
John Carmack: At the very highest level, Quake Live - what we originally
called Quake Zero - was one of my experiments about what we could do
usefully on the PC platform. The consoles are very good machines for
a lot of things, but there are some things the PC platform uniquely does
better, such as anything having to do with a web browser and the superior
mouse & keyboard interface. [Those things are] pretty darn good reasons
to be playing on the PC, and were also trying out an innovative business
strategy that could pave the way for the future.
Its completely free - there arent any micro-transactions. Quake Live is
completely ad-supported on the web browser pages and [through] in-
game advertising. Of course, this is speculative - were going to have to
261

John Carmack Archive
262
Interviews
see how this works out. Early on, we were tossing around two different
orders of magnitudes - anywhere from 50,000 to 5 million people playing.
We have no idea where it is going to be in there. The fact that 70,000
people have signed up in a week means that were going to be looking
at hundreds of thousands of players, if not millions. We hope that that
can be a sustained critical mass of a community that can play this type
of game, and be self-supporting.
Quake III Arena was always my personal favorite id Software game. Its
such a pure activity kind of game - more of a sport than a movie. And Im
excited to have this opportunity to bring back the pure type of gaming as
opposed to the everything and the kitchen sink modern design. We have
no pretensions about it being the best multiplayer game in all types of
things, but for any player looking to test their [deathmatch] skill, I think
Quake III Arena is the best there ever was.
Norman Chan: Why this new direction?
John Carmack: I would say that there is this sense of trying to ﬁgure out
what to do with PC gaming. Historically, id Software has been a PC gam-
ing company, with consoles a secondary business that happened later.
And even though the PC doesnt get the focus that it used to, in many
ways our hearts are still there, and wed like to do things where the PC is
the appropriate platform. [Wed like to] do something that really speaks
to the future of where the PC can be superior to consoles.
Obviously, we have examples like World of Warcraft that show how the
PC can be viable and vibrant in its own way. But in terms of ﬁrst-person
shooters, if you look at something like Crysis and say thats the height
of what the PC market can manage, I dont think thats necessarily that
exciting of a direction for the PC to be going in the future. With Quake
Live, we hope that theres an opportunity for people whove never played
shooters to give this a try, and with that, the potential of actually growing
the PC gaming market. I still have a lot of a faith in simple gameplay
formulas - it might not be the game that everyone plays for three hours a
day to be the best at, but its something that ofﬁces, dorms, and schools
across America can have fun with.
Norman Chan: How much of the original game has been ported?
CHAPTER 28. CARMACK FREES QUAKE

John Carmack Archive
263
Interviews
John Carmack: Every single level of the original game has been touched
to bring them up to modern quality standards. All the little things, like
level alignment and lighting in different areas. We also integrated in-
game billboards throughout the levels. So, all the levels are modernized
a little bit, but theres no pretense about this being a modern technology
game. One of the key beneﬁts of this, with the old game being a standard
graphics benchmark, is that this is going to run on almost any machine
youd want to play it on, and at a very high framerate.
Playing directly inside a browser window is moderately new in that it in-
tegrates friends lists and messaging. The core of the game remains the
same.
Norman Chan: How will matchmaking work?
John Carmack: Increasing the approachability of the game is one of the
absolute top-level priorities here. If someone bought Quake III right now
and found a game online, they would have a miserable experience be-
cause people playing the game right now are too skilled and experienced.
Were doing a few things to address that. Skill-based matchmaking is ex-
tremely important, so when you jump in, youre going to be someplace
appropriate. But were also adding things like bot-guided training levels
ofﬂine. When you initially set up your account, you get to give the system
an indication of what your skill level is. After a few matches, the game will
see how youre performing and adjust your choices.
Norman Chan: Whats going to convince the existing Quake III commu-
nity to make the move to Quake Live?
John Carmack: Thats not necessarily our primary objective. We know
that theres going to be some pushback. At least initially, were not going
to have all the mods that they expect to have supported. But I do expect
that a lot of people will transition because its going to be a more polished
experience and its going to be a much larger stage to play on. If youre
a hotshot player, youre going to want to know where you rank globally
in the new community. But our top priority is to get a broader range of
people - more than those who played the old game - trying this out.
If we have a breakout success, there are all sorts of places it could lead.
But while this is novel and a new direction, I dont think this is that risky
CHAPTER 28. CARMACK FREES QUAKE

John Carmack Archive
264
Interviews
of a bet for us. I have pretty high conﬁdence on it right now.
CHAPTER 28. CARMACK FREES QUAKE

Chapter 29
Quake Live: Frantic and Free
This interview was conducted by Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo for GameSpy on Jul
11, 2008.
http://pc.gamespy.com/web-games/quake-zero/888676p1.html
Interview
Prologue
GameSpy’s ties to the Quake franchise go back pretty far, starting with
the release of the QSpy server browser over 10 years ago. PlanetQuake
served as home to countless mods as the franchise grew, and here in the
ofﬁce, games were played nightly for years. In Quake III’s heyday, it was a
regular occurrence for someone to yell ”INSTAGIB” into the intercom at
5 p.m., and a local server would ﬁll up instantly.
So it’s not without some excitement and interest that we’re watching one
of id Software’s latest projects: Quake Live. Originally dubbed ”Quake
Zero” when announced at QuakeCon last year, the concept is to make
Quake III playable in a web browser, where it’ll run on almost any PC in
a matter of seconds and be completely free to play, through the use of
265

John Carmack Archive
266
Interviews
advertising. With E3 just a few days away, we chatted with id Software’s
John Carmack and Marty Stratton, who ﬁlled us in on the state of the
project and what we can expect from it.
Questions
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: It’s been a while since we last talked about Quake
Live; can you give us a quick overview of the game and where it’s at now?
John Carmack: What we’ve done is taken the Quake III Arena game that
we released nine years ago, but still has tens of thousands of people play-
ing online on a regular basis, we’ve taken the core of the game, stripped
out all the antiquated user interface stuff, and wrapped it in a web browser
interface, so that all the things you used to do with conﬁguration, and es-
pecially ﬁnding a game to play and dealing with updates, are all handled
by a modern web interface.
The game itself, once you get inside it, is not drastically changed from
the original, although it’s been brought up to a modern level of quality
without changing the core rendering engine in any particular way. But
what you do is, you go to the website, it’s just a couple of clicks, it au-
tomatically happens, it brings the game down, you don’t have to go off
and install anything, update any drivers, this kind of stuff, you click on
it, just like you would a Java or Flash game, but it is actually a full na-
tive game that was state-of-the-art AAA when it was released with a full
development team going at it rather than a more amateur small-time de-
velopment system on there.
Once you’re into the system on there, it has all the things that you would
expect from a social community thing: friends list, forums, matchmak-
ing, teams, different things that you can set up there, an incredible amount
of stats that are tracked on things. It’s got leaderboards, and you can go
back and scout how certain people have done in previous games; you
can look at your ratios versus other people; and dig down as deep as you
want in all of these kinds of baseball-like statistics on everything.
What we’ve done is take a game that was fundamentally good at its core,
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

John Carmack Archive
267
Interviews
cleaned it up a little bit, and wrapped it in an absolutely modern 2008
state-of-the-art kind of web experience that guides the player through it.
We’ve taken, in the nine years that it’s been sort of playtested with peo-
ple, we’ve incorporated a lot of the small changes that the hardcore pro
players like – minor things like weapon tuning and air control and anti-
lag, different things like that – but most of the effort has gone into making
this an experience that anybody who’s never even played the game can
just follow a few clicks, someone could give them a URL, go there, poke
around, and be handheld through the early parts of the game and get in
and start playing with people of similar skill level.
If we gave you a boxed copy of Quake III Arena today, you could install
it and if you tried to go online and play, you’d have to ﬁnd whole sets of
patches to download, mods to get, servers to go to, ﬁnd a group of people
who haven’t been playing for nine years straight and are a hundred times
better than you – that’s not a real viable experience. Everything we’re
setting up on the Quake Live project allows anyone, from anywhere, to
get into the game quickly and easily with no hassle on their part and start
taking, what we think were good about the original game and removing
all the things that weren’t great or were obstructions to enjoying it, and
wrapping it up in what’s good about the modern web experience.
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: Will Quake Live play out fullscreen, or just conﬁned
to a window in your browser?
John Carmack: It launches in the browser – it’s a native plug-in – but it
goes fullscreen. Because this is such an old title, and was used as a graph-
ics benchmark for so long, on any reasonable system it runs at 120Hz.
So when you go fullscreen, it looks at your desktop settings, and does
drop down to 640x480 like the old game used to do. If you’re running
at a 2 megapixel display, it’s running at 2 megapixels and it still runs re-
ally great, which is kind of an interesting thing relative to all the modern
games including the things that we do that are leaning so heavily on the
graphics card. This one does very much cruise on any computer you’ve
bought in years.
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: In terms of content, will this be a full conversion of
everything in Quake III, or just some of the maps?
John Carmack: It’s everything that was in Quake III Arena, and also the
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

John Carmack Archive
268
Interviews
content from Team Arena, which a lot of people hadn’t seen because it
was an add-on expansion.
Every map has been touched, where it’s not just maps copied over, but we
took current level designers, and had them go through every single map.
Everything has been touched up – the lighting’s been improved, texture
alignments, all these little things. When Quake III Arena came out, it was
the ﬁrst major hardware acceleration-required game, and it kind of got by
on a lot of ”wow, this is fast, colorful, anti-aliased graphics acceleration”
stuff, and when we went back to look at it with a critical eye, we see a lot
of things like ”oh, these textures don’t match along the walls, this area is
too dark.” All that type of stuff has been cleaned up as they integrated the
sponsorship billboards, scoreboards and things like that inside the game.
Fundamentally, no changes have been made to the graphics engine, other
than minor stuff about focus capture and full-screen modiﬁcation and
things like that. But the media has been touched in every case, the mod-
els have been tweaked, there are some new model skins, but the core
content is basically in the style of the original Quake III Arena, just pol-
ished up a lot.
Marty Stratton: There are a couple of new maps, too. We have a young
level designer that created a duel map that’s really popular with our beta
testers; a lot of pros really like it. We’ve created a couple of maps that are
similar to existing Quake III arenas, but are different enough that they’re
pretty new experiences. So we’ll go out the door with over 30 arenas and
the full line of Quake III Arena characters.
We’ve added bright skins to a number of the characters, as well as what
we call team skins. They’re more green and white. Bright, but not full-
bright. We’ve also done what some of the more advanced players wanted
– pro-looking bright skins that are more of a solid bright color. And then
when you see the opening of the game, you’ll meet a new version of Crash
who shows you around. She’s our Quake Live version of Crash; she was
reskinned to look like what the ﬁnal website will look like (not what you’ll
see in the beta). The ﬁnal website has a very ESPN-ish sports vibe to it.
John Carmack: The project did get more ambitious over the last year. We
announced it at QuakeCon last year, which was shortly after we had the
original idea, at that point, we were sort of thinking, we’re going to take
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

John Carmack Archive
269
Interviews
Quake III Arena, strip out some stuff and wrap a website around it, and
we’ll do it in six months. Of course, here we are, almost a year later, and
it’s just rolling into beta.
Some of that was underestimation on our part, where we did underesti-
mate the task of doing a modern website with a database backend and
some of the server management issues, but some of this was also that we
went out and made the game better than we originally planned to. More
effort did get put on all the different media, more effort went into the
testing – it’s been running in beta, for how long now?
Marty Stratton: It’s been about four to ﬁve months now. Now we’re at
the point where we’re adding about 1500 players per week, and once we
get moved over – we’re hosting that back end here at id, and our IT man-
ager is starting to get grumbly about the amount of bandwidth we’re tak-
ing, so we’re in the process of making a ﬁnal decision on our data cen-
ter – we’ll actually start adding 10,000 people per week or more, going
through more of an open beta through July, through August, growing it
up to 150,000-200,000 people, making sure that when we remove the gate
from the site, that we have a solid experience that can support a huge
number of people hammering the site.
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: On the mapping side, is there any chance we’ll see
a remake of [Quake II map] ”The Edge” in Quake Live?
Marty Stratton: It’s like you’re downstairs with us! (laughs) We’re talking
about it; I don’t think we’ll have it for launch, but we’ve already started to
experiment with some stuff.
John Carmack: One of the great things about this is because the con-
tent is streamed through the web interface, it’s all set up so that we’ll be
adding stuff continuously. As long as the market can support the prod-
uct, we’ll have people on it creating new things and managing the expe-
rience there.
And that’s the big open question. This is a very speculative experiment,
and at the beginning, we really had no clue how many people might be
interested in this. Reasonable arguments could be made for anything
from 50,000 to 5,000,000 potential users. There was certainly a fear early
on that we might spend, even if we were thinking six months at the time,
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

John Carmack Archive
270
Interviews
we’d go out and open it up and there’d be crickets chirping – you’d have
50,000 people that sign up and you get only a few hundred people on at
any given time. At least that fear has been allayed by the fact that we’ve
had over 100,000 people sign up for our beta with no promotion and re-
ally no way to get in and take a look at it right now.
So we’re leaning more towards the high end, so now we do have some fear
about, well, if we do have some hiccups with several thousand people,
what happens when we have ﬁve million people? You don’t want to have
the experience where people say ”hey, go take a look at this” and people
go and say ”oh, it crashed.”
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: Will Quake Live also include bots for people who
want to get in and practice on their own?
Marty Stratton: Yes, there are bots. Our interface for joining a game is
divided between two tabs. One shows you online games, presented as
thumbnails where you can ﬁlter out games – they’ll always be presented
with the best quality in mind, games happening at your skill level, with
the lowest ping, and if you have friends in those games, they’ll bubble up
to the top, and you can narrow your search by all the different factors –
friends, or just free-for-all, those types of things.
And then you can go and practice against all of the bots in any of the are-
nas. John Dean, who’s kind of our resident AI programmer, spent some
time and added some functionality to the bots, where they actually dy-
namically scale their skill based on your skill. That’s actually how we do
the initial warmup match: We have a bot that scales their skill to you, and
then we set your initial skill ranking based on that. But then you can go in
and play against those same bots and choose the setting that says ”keep
it close” and the bot will adjust based on how well you do. Believe me,
he’s tuned them up a little bit where they can just hammer you.
John Carmack: The bots are one of the few areas inside the game where
some programming resources have been expended. We hired John Dean
for Enemy Territory development work, and he has done some really use-
ful work on this project.
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: As far as community aspects like a friends list, are
you looking to build a closed system, or are you looking to tie into any
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

John Carmack Archive
271
Interviews
existing systems like AIM or Steam, etc.
Marty Stratton: It’s a closed system, but it’s built on a Jabber network
from a chat perspective, so if you have a Jabber client, we have the ability
to allow you to chat between your Quake Live account and your Jabber
client.
There’s a friends list built into the website, and if you choose to play
within the web browser window, there are three resolutions you can use
based on your screen size, and your chat window stays persistent to the
right side of your game window, so you can see the presence of your
friends logging in. You’ll get messages in-game when they log into the
site; if they join your game, you’ll see that. If they’re on the website and
send you a chat message, you’ll get that chat message in-game and vice
versa. So it’s a very interwoven experience, and it’s one of the areas that,
as we progress the project, and if it’s successful and we keep a team on it
over six to eight months, will really be adding to that social aspect.
You go to QuakeCon and you’ve been part of the community a long time
– you know that the social aspect of Quake III is as much as any other
game. The way we’ve developed this website and the things we can do by
centralizing all of this information and this experience really allows us to
take new approaches but also existing approaches to that social experi-
ence and apply them into this game experience.
John Carmack: It is worth saying we don’t have any intentions about be-
coming some kind of online gaming portal. The Quake Live system, it’s
Quake Live. We don’t have any plans or pretentions about it being some-
thing more encompassing than that.
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: You mentioned stats, which have become more
common in modern games. In that same vein, are there plans to add
other features like achievements, which have proven popular in things
like Call of Duty 4 or Team Fortress 2?
Marty Stratton: Achievements will be a big part if that’s what drives you
to play. We actually already have a list of 150 achievements: We’ll prob-
ably pare that down to 30 or 40 for launch. For us, it’s as easy as web
development to create a new achievement, and adding that stuff to the
back end is simple.
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

John Carmack Archive
272
Interviews
The idea is that we’ll add achievements continually, and we can even
have sponsored achievements. That really gets into how integrated the
advertising partners are into the entire experience – not only can they
have billboards in the game and ads on the website, but they can have
sponsored skins, where, for the length of a campaign, you’re playing with
their skin. They can run contests, leaderboards, tournaments – that stuff
is all integrated into this system; if you’re playing in a tournament that’s
sponsored by X, they’ll probably own all the advertising in the arenas that
you’re playing in. So it’s really an interwoven way of approaching this
stuff, far more extensive than just throwing an ad up on a wall. It really is
a totally integrated way of doing things and unlockables totally will work.
We actually plan to unlock quite a bit of content over the course of the
project.
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: So, on that topic, can you go into a little more detail
on how the advertising will work?
John Carmack: Inside the game, every level has been geometrically mod-
iﬁed to have tastefully-done billboards and stuff in there. If you had a
switch to turn off all the advertising, everything would look worse, be-
cause it’s built around expecting to have those things in there. There’s
ads on the scoreboards when you die, there’s all the traditional website
advertisements and all the things Marty talked about in terms of spon-
sorship.
What’s great about this is that it would be silly to try and integrate this
into something like Doom or Rage, where in most cases, it would be
damaging to the gameplay experience, but it totally ﬁts within Quake
III Arena, because it was always this sports-arena sort of thing, where
you’re playing a sport rather than progressing through a movie. It’s not
tastefully-done product placement – it’s the billboards you would expect
to see in an arena and we really haven’t seen any negative feedback from
the users. It’s not something that’s annoying and pushed in your face, like
”click here and watch this ad for 30 seconds so you can play our game” –
there’s none of that going on.
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: Is there any ballpark release date set for Quake Live
yet?
Marty Stratton: We’re taking a baby-steps approach, releasing over a pe-
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

John Carmack Archive
273
Interviews
riod of time so we’re not ﬂipping a switch and getting hammered and
the site goes down and nobody has a good experience. So the plan right
now is we’re sitting around 4000-4500 beta testers, we invite about 1500 a
week, and as soon as we’re moved to our managed hosting solution, we’ll
start to grow it by 10,000 players per week. As the infrastructure sup-
ports it, we’ll make sure that we can grow the way we want to, but take a
measured approach to it, upwards of 150,000-200,000 people before we
remove the gate. That is planned to happen through July and into late
August before we would kind of remove the front gate and open the site
broadly.
John Carmack: The nice thing is that, unlike a packaged goods model,
we don’t have to have our two-week media blitz timed to when things hit
the store shelves. We expect this to grow more by positive word of mouth,
people passing it on, but we want it to be an easy enough thing so that
you can just tell someone in a chatroom or email, just visit quakelive.com
and follow the instructions and you really don’t need to give them much
more than that. We think it’ll have signiﬁcant growth through the ﬁrst
six months of development – we should know by the end of six months
whether this whole thing is panning out or not.
Sal ’Sluggo’ Accardo: Before we run out of time, can you describe the
evolution of the project? Was someone just fooling around running Quake
III in a browser, or was it a case where id was looking to dabble in the on-
line space and Quake III was just the best ﬁt?
John Carmack: There are a lot of things that led to it, but it was mostly
me thinking about trying to do something on the PC that played to the
PC’s strengths, rather than treating it as an expensive console with driver
problems. If you take a PC game like Call of Duty or something, it’s not
catering to the PC’s strengths, it’s using it as a different type of console.
Historically, at id Software, all the way up through Doom 3, we were a PC
development house. We thought of consoles as an afterthought for us,
and there really has been a sea change there, where our big titles, what
we’re doing with Rage and id Tech 5, are cross-platform, with consoles
honestly being the more important brethren there. But there are still
things the PC does better than the consoles: browsing the web, display-
ing a lot of information, the keyboard-mouse interface for ﬁrst-person
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

John Carmack Archive
274
Interviews
shooter gameplay, the ubiquity of computers being everywhere and be-
ing able to access the same data sets from lots of different places.
It’s never been a secret that Quake III Arena was my favorite game inter-
nally at id Software. It was a pure-play game, not necessarily as media-
heavy and awesome in some ways as some of the other stuff we were
doing, but I really liked that type of experience. And it doesn’t look like
that type of a pure-play experience can stand as a $50-60 AAA title now
no matter what you do with it. I was recently looking at Unreal Tourna-
ment III, which is a damn ﬁne game in many ways, but not a blockbuster
saleswise. So the idea of being able to take the core of what’s good on that,
and try out a new business model on the PC has been pretty appealing.
And it also has secondary beneﬁts. Even if it turns out to not be a busi-
ness success, we’ve taken a new team of people and put them through
the entire concept-design-develop-deploy-test-manage cycle in a rela-
tively short time, and if we need to grow another team around them, or
take them over as more senior people into a follow-up Doom project, we
could certainly do that.
Obviously, I hope that this works out well as a business model, that we
can be successful, that we can leave the team on Quake Live and they
can continue to nurture and support it for years to come, but even if it
doesn’t, we think it’s a good play, a worthy gamble that we’re making.
And if we’re successful, I bet there’s going to be a lot of companies that
go out wanting to take some old title and wrap a web interface around it,
and most of them are going to ﬁnd it’s harder than it sounds, and most
games aren’t nearly as well-suited for it as Quake III Arena is.
CHAPTER 29. QUAKE LIVE: FRANTIC AND FREE

Chapter 30
id Software’s John Carmack and
Marty Stratton Talk Quake Live,
PC Gaming, and More
This interview was conducted by Nick Breckon for Shacknews on Jul 13,
2008.
http://www.shacknews.com/featuredarticle.x?id=917
Interview
Prologue
Following the release of Doom 3, legendary developer id Software shuf-
ﬂed to the background of the gaming industry for a time. Now the com-
pany is readying for a resurgence, on several fronts at once.
id is readying two traditional big-budget titles in Doom 4 and Rage, the
latter marking the company’s ﬁrst original IP in some time. Founded late
last year, id Mobile will be releasing its ﬁrst project later this year with
Wolfenstein RPG, the follow-up to the Doom RPG. Finally, the company
275

John Carmack Archive
276
Interviews
is forging new ground in the web-based gaming sector with Quake Live,
a free version of Quake III Arena without all the fuss–or the cost.
Recently I had a chance to talk with id Software co-founder John Car-
mack, as well as executive producer Marty Stratton. While the theme of
the talk was Quake Live, we also covered topics ranging from the state of
PC gaming to the potential of iPhone development.
Questions
Nick Breckon: I had a chance to check out the Quake Live beta last night,
and more than the technology or the price point, the thing that impressed
me the most was how easy it was to get started and jump into a game. I
assume that was a primary goal in development?
John Carmack: Yes, and I’m so happy we’re ﬁnally talking to somebody
that’s actually been on the beta and gone and looked at it so I don’t have
to explain everything from ﬁrst principle.
But yeah, the idea is that we know that we had a good core gameplay ex-
perience there, but, for instance, if somebody was given a copy of Quake
Arena right now and they wanted to go play the game and navigate on-
line, they would have a wretched experience. Because we have people
that have been playing the game for nine years online, and somebody
who just gets the game for the ﬁrst time and says, ”Oh I’m gonna jump
on here,” there’s no way they would have a decent experience.
But so much of what we’re trying to do here is to make that possible. To
have somebody who is not necessarily a ﬁrst person shooter player, and
would not go and spend 50 or 60 bucks on a brand new AAA title, or might
not even own a console or something, but can just, from practically any
computer in the country–if not the world–sit down, go to Quake Live,
get the things on there, jump in, be led through a new style of play, and
have everything catered around what they’re capable of doing and what’s
going to be enjoyable for them.
So that’s the hope. We’re hoping that we get something that you could
basically tell anybody, ”Hey, go check this out, you might enjoy it.” And
CHAPTER 30. ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK AND MARTY
STRATTON TALK QUAKE LIVE, PC GAMING, AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
277
Interviews
if they’re willing to spend 20 minutes to go through and play through the
basic match, and get a look at it, that they might say, ”Hey, I do kind of
like this style of game.”
Nick Breckon: Do you see the future of PC game development becoming
focused on that challenge of streamlining the user experience?
John Carmack: Yeah, I think that the PC deﬁnitely can’t.. we can’t go on
making PC games like we used to. The combination of the dominance
of the consoles, as far as market forces there, and piracy.. the traditional
AAA, media-heavy boxed game that sells for a bunch of money, and goes
out on the PC for a single player experience–it’s just not happening. Even
if we look at something that had such a push like Crysis, it didn’t really do
all that well.
While at id Software we’re still certainly doing those types of AAA titles
on [the PC platform], we have to look at it from a cross-platform prod-
uct perspective on there, rather than being PC-focused like we used to
be. I mean, all the way up to our last major title, which was Doom 3, we
were a PC company. We made PC games, and we gave some thought to
how they might be deployed on consoles, but that wasn’t what we were
fundamentally doing. And that has changed with this generation.
But still, there are some things that the PC does fundamentally better
than the console. I mean, the internet interaction, as far as displaying
and navigating large amounts of information on a website–while you have
web browsers on consoles, they suck, you know, they’re just not good. It’s
not like what you’ve got on the PC.
And from a ﬁrst person shooter perspective, the keyboard/mouse inter-
face is still just a lot better than a console interface. It’s a much more
direct position vs. integrating over time.. it’s just plain better, and that’s
one of the things we want to cater to.
So there are strengths that the PC has, and we think Quake Live is very
much playing to them. While given inﬁnite resources, yeah, it’d be great
to go ahead and do another technology showcase on the PC, because
you’ve got a couple times the power in a modern high-end system than
you do in a current generation console.
CHAPTER 30. ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK AND MARTY
STRATTON TALK QUAKE LIVE, PC GAMING, AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
278
Interviews
But it’s just not feasible for us as a company to continue taking that route.
So we are branching out into some different areas and diversifying a little
bit, where we’ve got our id Tech 5, cross-platform, high-end stuff that we
are pushing, and we’ve also got Quake Live and our mobile products.
Nick Breckon: Speaking of mobile products, the second generation iPhone
launched today. What’s going on at id Mobile?
John Carmack: I’m really kind of sad about.. how things played out out-
side of our real control on that. I’m really bullish on the iPhone market.
I think that what they’re doing with iTunes, cutting the carriers out of
there.. it’s a great hardware platform.
It’s a market I really want to be in, we just didn’t have the resources to go
do something for the initial launch.
Robert Duffy and I actually hacked together a kind of a port of some of
the Orcs & Elves stuff using the 3D engine, but we just didn’t have the
manpower to do something that would be what we would consider our
best foot forward. We still have a lot of effort going on in the Java and
BREW stuff. Wolfenstein RPG is gonna be coming out later this year, and
that’s really great in a lot of ways.
Nick Breckon: Does a 3G cellphone connection offer any advantage as
far as online gaming?
John Carmack: Bandwidth is good with 3G, but latency is still worse than
an old dialup connection. Of course with WiFi, it is as good as any other
computer.
Nick Breckon: So would you say that id committed to developing an
iPhone game?
John Carmack: I deﬁnitely want to, and we have some experiments run-
ning, but the main team is probably going on to a Doom RPG sequal for
Java/BREW next. We have been trying to ﬁnd someone to lead a dedi-
cated iPhone project that we have been discussing.
Nick Breckon: Getting back to Quake Live–is the plan still for the game
to be totally ad-supported?
John Carmack: We think that there may eventually be some kind of–I
CHAPTER 30. ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK AND MARTY
STRATTON TALK QUAKE LIVE, PC GAMING, AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
279
Interviews
think that there will likely be some kind of premium subscription at some
point, but we really don’t know what it is. We don’t know what we want to
offer.
It would not be eliminating the ads, because the ads are actually–if you
turned the ads off in the game, it would look worse. The game is so
wrapped around this kind of ESPN-ish look and feel that if all of those
turned into blank billboards, it would be a detraction from that experi-
ence rather than any kind of enhancement.
But there may be something just in terms of people wanting to separate
themselves into tiers, or maybe adding some other stuff, but we really
don’t know, and we’re deﬁnitely not rolling out with any kind of subscription-
based stuff on there.
But it’s not just in-game advertising that’s supporting it, there are going
to be a lot of speciﬁc sponsorship things as well. Sponsored levels, spon-
sored skins, sponsored tournaments, leaderboards and so on. We just
don’t know how this is going to play out business-wise. It’s a big experi-
ment for us. There aren’t any real [comparable examples] for us to point
to that are really close to what we’re doing here.
We can certainly look at lots of successful things that go on on the web,
with free content and various things that have done well. There are lots
of casual games that are doing moderately well. But this is a new data
point, and I’m sure a lot of people will be watching very closely to see
how we do.
Nick Breckon: As far as capitalizing on the strengths of the PC, will you
be planning any kind of community generated content or mod support?
John Carmack: Not initially. That’s been one of the toughest questions
that people have asked us from day one, is how we’re going to be inte-
grating all of that. It is a tough call I expect.
Marty Stratton: Yeah, it is. I mean, in making a system easier–and again,
as John has said, this is kind of a test case for us, so we’re solving these
issues to some extent as we go–in making the system easier, it’s required
us to take control of a lot more things that we normally do. Taking con-
trol of servers, taking control of content, delivering that content–as you
CHAPTER 30. ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK AND MARTY
STRATTON TALK QUAKE LIVE, PC GAMING, AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
280
Interviews
probably went through the registration process, you downloaded maybe
180 megs of information basically without even knowing it, because it
happened while you were playing your warm-up match. Those types of
things require us to take control and somewhat close the system a little
bit.
On some of the mod stuff, we’ve actually talked to the mod teams, par-
ticularly the competitive mod type stuff, who have maintained a com-
munity of people continuing to play the game nine years later. And we’ve
incorporated a number of things that casual players won’t know about. In
fact, they’re things that will actually make the experience a little bit bet-
ter for players, but also things that experienced players will really appre-
ciate: weapon tweaks, physics tweaks, networking tweaks, anti-lag stuff.
Things that have been done in the mod community previously. We talked
to those groups, and in some cases contracted those people to roll that
stuff in on our site.
As far as content goes, it really is something that I want to bring in as
we go forward, and as the product gets successful. My personal feeling
is that it will come in more like user-generated content comes into, say,
current social website communities. An idea would be like: we make
our SDK available, we run a level design contest, a certain period of time
passes, we take those levels, weed out the ones that basically aren’t up to
some level of quality, and then we put those up on the game, and they go
out to everybody. So that again, we don’t get that fractured community,
where this person is running this mod, this person is running this map,
and when you connect to the server it doesn’t know that you have it–
which is kind of the current state of the original Quake III.
But basically we push all this content to everybody, make it available to
everybody, and then on the website we can enable people to either au-
tomatically, or by their own input, vote on this content, or put it up a
ladder of quality or preference. And then either reward or award the peo-
ple who created that content, or [reward them] just because it’s up on the
site and it’s the most played map out of all of this user generated content,
just like a Youtube video has a certain cache when your stuff rises to the
top. I think that is probably the future of the way we’re going to be able
to deliver new content.
CHAPTER 30. ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK AND MARTY
STRATTON TALK QUAKE LIVE, PC GAMING, AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
281
Interviews
And of course I say all that–that won’t be what we do initially. What we’re
initially focusing on for our ﬁrst release is getting this core experience,
this technology all in place to create a great user experience. But I think
down the road, as we do roll in that type of content, we’re thinking of new
ways to integrate it.
John Carmack: But it’s worth remembering that Quake Arena is not go-
ing away. It’s still there, and I can very much see millions of people mak-
ing Quake Live as their entry into that, and then the mod community
will probably have a huge boost from all of this. The people that want to
do something different that’s not [supported] in Quake Live, well they’ve
still got Quake Arena. It’s open sourced and they can do anything want in
there, and build whatever new mods they want, and I would expect this
to have a positive effect on that entire community on a lot of different
levels.
Marty Stratton: And because the fundamental engine and really the game
hasn’t changed, we can actually take Quake III content, a Quake III map–
not so much a full mod–but a Quake III map, and it basically comes into
the game in a matter of minutes. It’s very easy, so, you know, it could be
something where it just reinvigorates the Quake III mod scene, and we
can continue to take a look at that and bring stuff to market that makes
sense.
Nick Breckon: It sounds like adding content to the game is relatively easy.
How much of a challenge has the project been so far?
John Carmack: That’s kind of an interesting thing where we announced
this at QuakeCon last year, and we started putting our team together, and
honestly, we underestimated some of the effort. The idea was, ”Oh, we’ll
take this whole game that we’ve got, we’ll wrap a weapon around it, and
put it out and see what happens.”
But when we started getting getting down to decisions and saying, we re-
ally want to do an absolutely top notch–the game’s not state of the art,
but the web interface around it really is. And we did not have the ex-
perience in website development, database management, and all of that
web world type stuff. And honestly, we underestimated the challenge in-
volved in that. So it has been a signiﬁcant effort taking the game to this
point, and I’m sure we’re going to run into signiﬁcant problems as we roll
CHAPTER 30. ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK AND MARTY
STRATTON TALK QUAKE LIVE, PC GAMING, AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
282
Interviews
it out and scale it up.
There are challenges there that–it’s not that we didn’t think there would
be any problems, but it’s just that we’re honestly ignorant of a lot of the
challenges. And as far as how successful it is, we can just cross our ﬁngers
and hope. We’re going to put something really good out there, but in
the world of business and everything, sometimes you can have a great
product that doesn’t succeed. But we can do our side of it, and see what
the market thinks of it. But I have some high hopes.
Marty Stratton: And you know, even to John’s point, we did underestimate–
it’s become a much larger project. I think we still make the decisions that
are going to make it the absolute best product of its kind–it’s kind of a
one-of-a-kind product, anyway. But a lot of stuff that we’re developing
right now and rolling out over the next couple of weeks you didn’t see yet
today when you joined the beta.
I mean the website even still is totally not–when we launch the new web-
site here in about a week, it’s completely different looking. It’s really
pretty dramatic. So we’ve taken these challenges, but we’re still devel-
oping it fairly efﬁciently. We have a team of about eight guys internally
and four contractors externally working on it, so still a relatively small
team that’s been able to put this together.
John Carmack: I would expect that if we are successful, there will be a
lot of other people that say, ”Hey, we’ve got games from nine years ago,
let’s do the same thing,” and a lot of them will probably be surprised at
how non-trivial it actually is. It’s just one of those napkin ideas that you
can lay out really quick, sounds really plausible, doesn’t sound like too
terribly much work, but they always are.
Nick Breckon: How involved are you in the development of Rage and
Doom 4 right now, John?
John Carmack: Essentially all of my programming time is on Rage right
now, and I will be talking a lot about Rage development at QuakeCon. I
duck out for a few days at a time in ”retreat mode” to work on mobile
projects a couple times a year. Kevin Cloud is running the Doom project,
and I won’t be involved on a day to day basis with it, although Kevin does
run the core decisions by me.
CHAPTER 30. ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK AND MARTY
STRATTON TALK QUAKE LIVE, PC GAMING, AND MORE

John Carmack Archive
283
Interviews
Nick Breckon: Have there been any major developments with id Tech 5
since last year’s reveal at QuakeCon?
John Carmack: None of the core decisions have changed, it is now just a
lot closer to being a game.
Nick Breckon: Will you be speaking at this year’s QuakeCon? And will
there be any major announces from id?
John Carmack: We don’t have any shocking news, but I will be giving my
usual open discussion about all of our software development efforts and
experiences on the different platforms.
CHAPTER 30. ID SOFTWARE’S JOHN CARMACK AND MARTY
STRATTON TALK QUAKE LIVE, PC GAMING, AND MORE

Chapter 31
E3 ’08: Carmack IDs Quake Live
This interview was conducted by Tom Magrino for GameSpot on Jul 13,
2008.
http://www.gamespot.com/news/6193726.html
Interview
Prologue
It isn’t at all unusual to hear the word’s ”pioneer” and ”id Software” ut-
tered within the space of a breath. After all, the Mesquite, Texas-based
outﬁt dramatically revolutionized the gaming industry in 1993 with the
ground-breaking ﬁrst-person shooter Doom. Since then, the developer
has maintained its position as a technological innovator, thanks in no
small part to programming wunderkind John Carmack.
At last year’s QuakeCon, the notable studio ﬁrst teased its next ambitious
effort in the gaming industry, announcing a free-to-play, ad-supported
version of Quake III Arena. However, forgoing the traditional brick-and-
mortar distribution channel, and outright leapfrogging the ﬂedgling digi-
tal download market, id revealed the game would be streamed as a native
284

John Carmack Archive
285
Interviews
application through an everyday Web browser.
Nearly a year on and a partnership with in-game advertising kingpins
IGA Worldwide later, id is preparing to open the ﬂood gates on Quake-
Live.com, the platform that will host the free-to-play, browser-based Quake
III Arena. With id expecting to ﬂip the switch on QuakeLive.com as soon
as next month, GameSpot sat down with id Software founder and techni-
cal director John Carmack as well as executive producer Marty Stratton.
The gaming execs discussed what Quake Live brings to the table, how the
ad-supported gaming ﬁt in with id’s mobile and top-tier development
strategy, what PCs still have over consoles, and how the PC is the ”ju-
nior partner” in id’s cross-platform strategy for Rage and its latest-and-
greatest game engine, Tech 5.
Questions
Tom Magrino: Quake Live was initially announced as Quake Zero at last
year’s QuakeCon, and you all said it would be an experiment in advertising-
supported gaming. When did it become Quake Live, and what has been
going on with the game since then?
John Carmack: So the process was, I had this rough idea to try this shortly
before QuakeCon last year, and we announced it there, but we didn’t
wind up tying up all the domain names that we should have when we
were calling it Quake Zero. So some speculators or squatters wound up
sitting on the domain, and we decided that since it was still the early days,
to go ahead and just change the title of the game, rather than pay them
off.
And it’s been Quake Live since very shortly after that. Now, it’s deﬁnitely
already been signiﬁcantly longer than we thought it would take to launch.
The initial thought was that this might be a six-month development, where
we take the old title and we wrap a Web interface around it and kind of
push it out there and see what it does. And it turned into, one, a more
ambitious project, and two, as we should have expected going in, we re-
ally didn’t know how to make Web sites and manage databases and all
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

John Carmack Archive
286
Interviews
that stuff with the people that we already had in house.
And there’s been a big learning experience on it, and here we are, almost
a year later, and it is rolling into beta now, and we’re pretty happy with
how it looks on everything. But the big question about how this will do
as a business model should be answered within six months. We’ll know
whether things are playing out fairly early.
My ﬁrst earliest fears have already been resolved where, when this idea
was ﬁrst ﬂoated out, we really didn’t know if when we launched, if we
would get 50,000, 500,000, or 5 million people playing it. I mean, I could
see credible arguments that people could make for any of those num-
bers and anything in between. And I was really quite heartened when
we opened the beta registration process and we have had over 100,000
people sign up, with really no signiﬁcant promotion or anything around
it.
I think that bodes very well for the possibility of getting in the multiple
millions of regular users. And so much of the effort that’s gone into this
has been about turning it from something that was very much a hardcore
game, into something that is approachable by everybody. We’ve taken all
the suggestions that the people that have been playing the game for the
last nine years–the diehard, competitive crowd–the things that they like
about it, and the rule changes that they’ve liked, and so on. Those are all
moved into the game.
So in many ways it’s better for the hardcore people, but most of the focus
has been on making sure that, if somebody–since it’s free, you want the
scenario to be, ”Hey, go check this out. You might like it.” We want people
to be able to go to the Web site, and things just automatically happen.
They jump in, they’re trained a little bit, they’re taught what goes on in
the game. They’re given an opportunity to play at something that won’t
be overwhelming, and then based on how their training match went, the
initial games that they select to play in will be with people at a similar
level of skill.
Because right now, if you gave somebody a boxed copy of Quake Arena,
there’s still a few thousand people playing it, like, probably at this mo-
ment still, online. So there’s a community of tens of thousands of people
that are still active Quake III players. But if somebody was given a copy
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

John Carmack Archive
287
Interviews
of Quake III, and they tried to go online, they’d have a miserable experi-
ence. Because everybody’s playing some modiﬁed version of something,
the communities are all tightly knit and everybody is extremely highly
skilled, if they’re still playing the game, and it would be a lousy entry
point.
So we’ve made that our highest priority. We want it to be something that
people that have never played this type of game before can follow their
Web browser over here and things just happen and lead them into the
game and that’s a nice, easy way.
Tom Magrino: So is this just a port of Quake III Arena? Or have you added
in additional features?
John Carmack: The core game has had very little changes to the en-
gine. The idea was to wrap this really state-of-the-art–player interaction,
score-boarding, leaderboards, chat forums–all this stuff, around a sta-
ble, consistent game. So there are some advantages to that, in that every
computer that anybody is at all going to sit down on, and is connected to
the Internet, can play Quake Arena well. You know, most of them run it
at 120-something frames per second on there. There are no driver issues,
because everybody used this game as a benchmark for ﬁve years before
it was superseded by other things on there.
The data has actually been touched on every single level, though. While
the core rendering engine has only modest tweaks on it, nothing partic-
ularly to improve what you really call rendering things. But every map
has been touched where there’s a level of polish that modern games have
that, when we look back nine years ago, standards were a lot more lax.
I mean, Quake Arena was the ﬁrst mainstream, hardware-accelerated
game, and it was much more about, ”Wow, look at this. Isn’t it cool?” And
people weren’t looking at all the details, like making sure the textures line
up or the lighting is appropriate.
And we have had the designers make a path through every single level
in the original Quake Arena, the Team Arena content, and there’s a little
bit of custom new stuff that goes on in here also. So everything is cleaned
up, brought up to a modern level of polish, the billboards and advertising
scoreboards are very nicely integrated. It’s not a matter of just ﬁnding a
bare spot of wall and throwing up two triangles that you can stream an
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

John Carmack Archive
288
Interviews
ad on to. They’re actually built into the levels in a very stylish way, where
you’ve got the boards with spotlights, lighting them up as things change.
And all that’s been done really nicely.
But, you know, 90 percent of the work on the project has been stuff that
goes around the game–the Web site experience, the game rankings, all
the stat-tracking and database management, and all of this stuff that re-
ally is better than probably any game, anywhere has done. We went out,
we surveyed the landscape of what was available, what we could inte-
grate, what we could take, and what we could improve.
And we make no claims or try to hide the fact that the core of the game is
essentially nine year old technology. But everything around it is modern,
2008, state-of-the-art stuff.
Tom Magrino: What changes or what new technology has made it possi-
ble to get the Quake engine running in a Web browser?
John Carmack: Fundamentally, nothing. We are running the game as
a native application. This isn’t a Flash or Java game. I mean, it’s always
been interesting for years to watch people port various versions of Quake
to Java and run in the sandbox. But this is the core game put inside, and
you could do this back when Quake Arena was originally released. And,
in fact, that was one of my–it didn’t wind up turning out like this–but I
had actually pitched the idea of doing all of our user interface in a Web
browser back when we did the original game.
So there’s nothing fundamental that makes it possible now, that wasn’t
possible before. It was just a choice to go do this now, rather than fo-
cusing on the conventional game models that we had previously had
through Doom III. The PC market has dropped an important force rel-
ative to the console for our mainstream titles. So what we’re doing, we
take Tech 5 and Rage, and PC’s still there, but it’s a junior partner in the
cross platform strategy.
And Quake Live was our attempt to look at what the PC still does really
honestly better than the consoles, where you’ve got the rich Internet ex-
perience, the good Web browsing, the ability to show lots of statistics, the
ability to have ubiquitous PC anywhere–you could sit down and log into
your account from anywhere–and, importantly, mouse/keyboard inter-
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

John Carmack Archive
289
Interviews
face, which for a game like Quake III, makes the game a whole lot more
enjoyable than a joypad ever could.
I wouldn’t say that things like new game advertising and web interface are
the future of PC gaming. That’s a huge over reach for something that’s so
speculative right now. But thinking about those types of questions, and
then building PC games around what differentiates the platform from
consoles–that has guided a lot of our decisions about what we do here.
Tom Magrino: Are there any plans to turn QuakeLive.com into a full-
ﬂedged platform in the vein of something like Garage Games’ InstantAc-
tion, where you’ve got several different titles on it? Where do you see the
future of this browser-based gaming going for you guys?
John Carmack: Well, the future on this is that we hope it’s a successful
product and we keep team members on it indeﬁnitely. We don’t have a
follow up plan. There was a little bit of talk about taking Enemy Territory:
Quake Wars, and doing something similar with it. But there are no cur-
rent plans for that, and if we did do that, it would just be a completely
parallel experience. We think that that the Quake Live game is going to
be its own Web site, and it’s not going to be part of a platform where you
have selective different options.
Certainly, the success of some of the casual gaming markets has been a
good ﬁnd for us. That there’s success to be had there, but just the level
of product that we’re putting out–something that was, at one time, the
stand-out commercial title–and it is a different level of development from
what people are expecting from Web games.
Tom Magrino: So you mentioned that this is a free product and will be
ad supported. How is that going to be integrated into the game?
John Carmack: Yeah, it won’t be strictly ad support, in that we have in-
game advertising, billboards and such inside the game. There are ads
on the scoreboards and when you die, and certainly all the normal Web
site advertising. But there’s also a lot of opportunities for sponsorship of
things. Sponsored contests, whether it’s sponsored media level tourna-
ments, leaderboards, all sorts of things like that.
And while we have a good guarantee already on the in-game advertising,
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

John Carmack Archive
290
Interviews
it’s going to be a toss up to see–well, we’re very interested in seeing how
it plays out. There’s still every chance in the world that this just fails.
We don’t have the existing proofs to point to and say, look, clearly this
a successful model because there are ﬁve other companies doing it. We
may well wind up being the pioneer with all the errors in our plan here.
But there’s enough good signs that I’m at least guardedly hopeful that this
is going to turn out to be an interesting business for us.
Tom Magrino: Do you think that this kind of ad-supported model will,
in the near-future, take off to the point where games are essentially free,
and you’re making money by serving ads to a mass-market audience?
John Carmack: It doesn’t really work that way for most games and, you
know, that’s why we would never consider doing something like a Doom
Live, or something, where the core of the game is just not as compelling
with commercials and ads stuffed in. That’s why I’ve never been a big
supporter of in-game advertising in any of our other titles. You know,
we’ve looked at it, we’ve been approached by people about it for our titles
for quite some time. Actually, all the way back to Quake I, if you can
believe it.
But we’ve never chosen to do it because, for lots of games, it’s just not
a good ﬁt. Like, Quake Arena was always about this kind of ESPN-like
arena, where there’s commercialized combat, and it just ﬁts pretty nat-
urally with that game. You know, as with almost anything, there are lots
of viable and valid paths to take, and I think that it’d be nice if it turns
out that this type of thing can be a small niche in the market. I would be
shocked if it turned out to be a dominant platform for PC gaming going
forward. It’s not out of the question, but it’s not what I would expect.
Tom Magrino: What about the mobile market?
John Carmack: Well, I’m a big believer in the mobile market. We’ve sold
over two million units our mobile games, Doom RPG and Orcs and Elves,
and we have Wolfenstein RPG coming out later this year, the latest and
greatest 3D engine, all that kind of good stuff.
So yeah, those in fact are the three prongs of this strategy right now.
We still have our top-of-the-line, triple A, cross-platform titles with what
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

John Carmack Archive
291
Interviews
we’re doing with Rage and Tech 5, and we’re following up with another
Doom game after that. But then we’ve got Quake Live, as our PC-focused
title, and then we have the mobile projects, with what we’re doing on mo-
bile.
Tom Magrino: Would it be possible to do something like Quake Live for
mobile phones?
John Carmack: You know, I have this type of discussion a lot with my
wife, and the problem is that there’s not enough tight control. You can’t
do a great action game on mobile right now in any kind of a broad base.
I have really high hopes for the iPhone as a market. I think that what
they’re doing with the iTunes delivery, cutting the carriers out, native pro-
gramming, graphic accelerator–they have lots of great possibilities there.
Although, fundamentally, unless you have Wi-Fi access, even the 3G net-
work really ﬁghts for latency, so a Quake Live game would not be a par-
ticularly good product. All of the success of our mobile games is largely
due to the fact that we didn’t ﬁght the platform. We built a completely
new style of gameplay to cater to that. Rather than just saying, ”Well, we
know how to do ﬁrst-person shooters, let’s push one on the phones.” In-
stead we’ve got the kind of RPG 3D stuff that we’ve been doing on there.
So no, I wouldn’t expect a Quake Live on the phone anytime soon.
Tom Magrino: Alright. So do you guys have an expected launch date for
QuakeLive on PCs?
Marty Stratton: We’re rolling through a closed beta right now, and as
John mentioned, scalability is something that we’re cautious of. We don’t
have a lot of experience with the data-hosting side, and we’re trying to
get good solutions in place. So we’re basically going to take a measured
launch approach, where we move through our closed beta, where we’re
adding–right now we’re adding about anywhere between 1,000 and 1,500
players a week to our closed beta. Over the next two, three weeks, four
weeks, once we get into our data center, that’ll allow us to then scale by
tens of thousands every week. And I would expect us to grow that up to
150,000 to 200,000 through July and into August, and kind of see how the
scalings happen.
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

John Carmack Archive
292
Interviews
The last thing we want to do is just ﬂip a switch, open the site, and be
down within 30 minutes. I think even Apple is experiencing that [with
the launch of its new iPhone]. I’ve heard you [couldn’t] register your new
iPhone because their servers are down. We’ve got a lot less experience
than Apple does, so we’re really trying to take an approach that’ll allow
large groups of people to get into the game, over a period of time. And
then once we’re conﬁdent we can handle all the loads, then we’ll basically
just take the gate off the site and open that up to everybody.
And that process will happen really through July, into August, probably
later into August, and hopefully by then we’ll be really near completely
launched, if not completely launched. But, of course, that’s one of the
great things about this model. It’s not like the boxed-good model, where
you have to have your two-week media blitz leading up to the roll out on
here. The product’s going to sit there, and it can grow users at whatever
rate it turns out to happen.
Once we’re sure that the product really is solid, and we’ve got a happy
user base, then we probably will be investigating in advertising and extra
pushes and things like that, that we can do at it. But there’s no real pres-
sure for that to happen sooner rather than later. We’d rather let it grow
at a cautious rate and try and do a great job, rather than make some big
blitz and fall on our face because, you know, we weren’t really qualiﬁed
to deal with all those problems immediately.
And even from just a feature perspective, our focus is on I’d say maybe
ﬁve core features that we’re delivering over that time period that I just
went through. Almost all of those are about the Web experience and the
usability of the Web site and getting into the game. Longer term, we al-
ready have a list of I think it’s eight to 10 features right now, that we want
to add, and because the interface is on the Web, because the delivery
mechanism is basically transparent, we can update content without peo-
ple even really knowing. We can publicize things that basically are just as
easy as updating a Web site.
So it really gives us a level of ﬂexibility and speed that we’ve never had be-
fore with a retail product. I mean, we’re not going through a publisher, so
if we want to run a contest, we run a contest, and it’s immediately up on
the Web site. And the players see it, and if we need to push new content to
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

John Carmack Archive
293
Interviews
do that, we push new content to do it. It’s really a whole different way of
doing things for us, even from a development and delivery perspective.
CHAPTER 31. E3 ’08: CARMACK IDS QUAKE LIVE

Chapter 32
E3 2008: The John Carmack
Interview
This interview was conducted by Will Smith for Maximum PC on Jul 15,
2008.
http://www.maximumpc.com/article/features/e3_2008_the_john_carmack_
interview_rage_id_tech_6_doom_4_details_and_more
Interview
Prologue
We had an opportunity to speak with id co-founder John Carmack after
the big EA press conference yesterday (where id surprisingly announced
a partnership with EA to publish Rage). We grilled the legendary game
developer (and part-time rocket scientist) about id’s post-apocalyptic shooter,
the state of gaming graphics, and what his plans are after id Tech 5. Rage
looks be a drastic departure from the traditional id FPS, not only in game-
play style (open worlds with vehicles vs. claustrophobic indoor environ-
ments) but also in the way Carmack has designed the code-base. id has
294

John Carmack Archive
295
Interviews
already announced that Doom 4 is in development (no publisher has yet
been annonced), and Carmack conﬁrmed that it’ll run at 30Hz and run
with several times the graphics power as Rage, a 60Hz game.
Questions
Will Smith: Can you lead off by telling us a little bit about Rage and id
Tech 5?
John Carmack: id Tech 5 is the next major technology generation after
the Doom 3 [engine]. Doom 3 was targeted at high-end PCs and the orig-
inal Xbox. Its been one of our big learning experiences working with our
partner companies about just how miserable the porting process is. Do-
ing a game, then delivering for the PC, the Xbox 360, the PS3, the Mac
or whatever. Its just something horrible that we suffered through with
Enemy Territory, or rather one of our partners did.
The target that we had, we knew when we were starting this generation
of technology that the consoles were taking over the preeminence for the
types of games wed been makingthe AAA media-rich blockbusters were
on the consoles. We needed a solution that would be portable across 360,
PS3, PC, and OS X, but we didnt want to abandon our PC roots. And we
have enough Apple boosters internally that the Mac remains a platform
that we have some fondness for.
On a technical level, we had to make design decisions that would let us
target all of these platforms, very importantly, from a single source-base,
and developed [that] internally. We didnt want to have to go out to any
other companies to produce these games. We wanted to say OK, heres
the build and run the same build on the PC, the 360, and the PS3. We still
have to go through one extra step to build it on the Mac. But it really does
work that way on the other [console] platforms. Right now, you check the
stuff in, the next day you get the build reports, which says, here it is [ready
to go] on these three platforms. So thats one of the core technical aspects.
Will Smith: So one team is developing for four platforms at the same
time (PC, 360, PS3, and OS X)? Thats really cool!
CHAPTER 32. E3 2008: THE JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
296
Interviews
John Carmack: This is the ﬁrst time weve done this at id, and we think
weve done it better than many other companies. This is one source tree
and one environment, you build it and it works well on all these. Differ-
ent platforms have had different amounts of elbow grease on them. Cer-
tain things are easier on the 360 than the PS3, but you put the extra effort
in where its required. You dont want to minimum common denominator
it, and just do whats easy on the different platforms. The intersection of
that is not so great.
Tim Willits: One of the great things about the new id Tech 5 engine is
that as a developer, you use the same set of assets on all of the platforms.
You can immediately see what your game looks like on all the different
platforms. For us, thats a great way of looking at development of games.
John Carmack: Our history as a PC developer lead us to a lot of develop-
ment technologies that console developers generally didnt do. Through
the Doom 3 generation we had all of this live update stuff, where a mod-
eler could save out a model or save out an image. You could just hit one
key in game, and it refreshes everything in the game around you. While
we went through the Doom 3 porting process to the Xbox, our design-
ers were appalled at how painful the process was. Ew, this takes hours
to just make tiny changes there. Weve brought all of the goodness of PC
development there to console developers.
During the development process [now], you can do the exact same thing:
save this thing out, hit a key, and it magically pops up in the world around
you. With a stamping on the Megatexture stuff, youve got even cooler
demos, where you can be doing grafﬁti on the texture on the PC, and a
guy walks around the corner on the PS3, and its magically there.
Tim Willits: So Rage, the other part of your question. Rage is a new fran-
chise built on a ﬁrst-person shooter foundation. But yet, it expands on
that with more exploration, more action, and more adventure with some
driving and vehicle combat.
John Carmack: Its explicitly not the corridor shooter that people have
come to expect from id. It was a very conscious decision that this wont
just be the next revision of the same game that ids made before.
Will Smith: It seems like youve taken inspiration for Rage from Mad Max
CHAPTER 32. E3 2008: THE JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
297
Interviews
and everything else thats post apocalyptic and awesome. What would
you say that youre juiced about and pulling on to make Rage?
Tim Willits: For us, its all about fun and making the game experience
as enjoyable as possible. During development, whenever we hit a cross-
roads between realism and fun, we take the fun path. We would love for
game players, after they ﬁnish Rage to say, that game was fun. I had a
great time.
John Carmack: And that actually, there are some technical points that we
tie in there. I was very proud of the Doom 3 generation, where I uniﬁed
all these things: static and dynamic lighting, static and dynamic geom-
etry. It was technically elegant and wonderful, and was this thing that
I was quite proud of as a setup. Were making completely different de-
cisions on Rage. Im not trying at all to be perfectly uniform or elegant
in whatever way. Were doing a lot more of the traditional gaming hacks
in the technology, because were a 60Hz game. Were totally blazing fast
because Rage is a 60Hz game. We want to be responsive for the driving
side of things, and that carries over into a silky-smooth sense of play even
with all the other ﬁrst-person sides of things.
That also plays into our grand strategic plan with all this generation of
technology. Were ramping up to do another Doom game, built on id Tech
5. But its going to be a 30Hz game. Even though were not changing the
engine, we get to throw three times as much horsepower at it, so its going
to look like a totally new game engine on there, even though its going to
be built on the four years of effort that we spent developing this genera-
tion of technology.
Will Smith: So, you said Rage is a 60Hz game. Is it an OpenGL or DirectX
game?
John Carmack: Its still OpenGL, although we obviously use a D3D-ish
API [on the Xbox 360], and CG on the PS3. Its interesting how little of
the technology cares what API youre using and what generation of the
technology youre on. Youve got a small handful of ﬁles that care about
what API theyre on, and millions of lines of code that are agnostic to the
platform that theyre on.
Will Smith: Are you using DirectX 9 equivalent? For Doom 4 as well?
CHAPTER 32. E3 2008: THE JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
298
Interviews
John Carmack: Yes to both. Its one of those things I get asked a lot. Whats
big and exciting for DirectX 10 or DirectX 11? Theres not a whole lot of
really not a whole lot. The big touted geometry shaders were in many
ways, a mistaken belief that people desperately wanted to create stencil
shadow volume.
Theres a tough thing with that. You get a bunch of people who make
APIs, and they think its my job to make APIs. I make new APIs every
year. Theres a reality of approaching a functionality curve, and the DX9
level gives us a whole lot of stuff where its not like before, even at the
DX7 functionality level. Graphics programmers have tried every possi-
ble conﬁguration, and theyve tried every state and know what happens
when. But, as soon as you get programmability in there (as happened
with DX9) youre writing code now. The code is limited, but were so far
from exhausting the possibilities.
Sure, when DX10 hardware is ubiquitous and thats our baseline platform,
well ﬁnd something useful to do with all that extra hardware. Its not like
were saying no, we wont use this.
Will Smith: Do you think weve reached a point of diminishing returns
with regard to graphics?
John Carmack: Therere interesting things to talk about in that direction,
[for example] with Quake Live. Were taking this ancient graphics tech-
nology, its nine years old, but were wrapping it in this other way to in-
novate, with the website interface for all of that. Its clear that there are
certain types of games that were past the curve for the beneﬁt. For the
highly competitive games, competitors would crank the detail all the way
down, sometimes going too far. Its cool that were running those games
now at 60Hz on 2 million-pixel monitors.
Theres still value to be gained at the high end with graphics. Weve got
some wonderful looking stuff with Rage where we can do things with the
environments that people have never seen before. Rage and id tech 5 will
make a lot of games start to look plain. Weve seen that phenomenon with
previous games, where people dont know exactly what theyre missing
until theyre shown it, but it makes some of the other things look shabby
in comparison.
CHAPTER 32. E3 2008: THE JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

John Carmack Archive
299
Interviews
I still think theres one more generation to be had where we virtualize ge-
ometry with id Tech 6 and do some things that are truly revolutionary.
Will Smith: How long will we see games based on id Tech 5?
John Carmack: Through this console generation at least, I am begin-
ning some of the preliminary research work on what were going to follow
this up with on the following console generation. Lots of questions are
unanswered about that, depending on how all the players choose their
technologywhether it ends up being a Larrabee based, CUDA hybrid, or
Fusion-based, therere lots of unanswered questions. I know we can de-
liver a next-gen kick, if we can virtualize the geometry like we virtualized
the textures; we can do things that no ones ever seen in games before. Its
worth doing a new generation for.
Will Smith: So this isnt your last engine?
John Carmack: No. Its interesting though, that a couple of years ago,
Id thought that maybe we were approaching something that would be
a regular tool, that the performance is a driving factor. You could write
something really general, but the performance is hard, even for a 30Hz
game.
In some ways, our big advances are in tools. Our innovations are be-
yond the ofﬂine renderers. Were doing stuff that even the ofﬂine render-
ers dont.
CHAPTER 32. E3 2008: THE JOHN CARMACK INTERVIEW

Chapter 33
Quelling The Rage
This interview was conducted by Chris Remo for Gamasutra on Aug 01,
2008.
http://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/3751/quelling_the_rage_carmack_
and_.php
Interview
Prologue
Id co-founder John Carmack - co-creator of franchises such as Doom and
Quake and coding pioneer - is not known for self-censorship. It’s thus
interesting to hear him speak as positively as he does about his com-
pany’s recently-announced relationship with Electronic Arts, which will
be publishing its ﬁrst-person, post-apocalyptic driver/shooter Rage for
Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and PC.
Here, Carmack, joined by id lead designer Tim Willits and David DeMar-
tini, general manager at EAP, discuss the relationship, the game’s move to
a primary console focus, the broader philosophy that lead to the devel-
opment of the title, and the future of the company itself.
300

John Carmack Archive
301
Interviews
Questions
Chris Remo: I guess the most obvious question is: how did the EA/id
thing come about in the ﬁrst place?
John Carmack: Well, everybody knew that, or, most people know, at
least, that id doesn’t sign long-term contracts. Every title that we’ve had
really has been negotiated separately. We have a long history with Activi-
sion - we’ve had a lot of success over the years - but we’ve had a couple
disappointments, recently, with our partner titles... and Rage is a brand
new IP, it’s a fresh start for us in a lot of ways, so we did go out and broadly
shop, looking really critically at all of our publishing options.
And, of course, in the end it came down to like four publishers - you could
probably pick which four - and out of that, there’s kind of a tier where
you’ve got Activision and EA at the top, and then a couple others below
that. And everybody made strong offers; all of them came to the table
with a lot of money, good terms, and all of this.
In the end, the decision came down more to secondary factors: about
how we thought that the company viewed us in relation to their other
projects, what the top executives would think about our products com-
peting with other products they might have internally, how they viewed
our game and what they thought we’d do for them.
And we had, surprisingly - if you had asked me ﬁve years ago if we would
be considering EA, I would’ve said, probably, no. Because I carried around,
really, some outdated prejudices about EA, the big evil empire of gaming,
that kind of bought and crushed and squashed a lot of small, creative
stuff.
Chris Remo: They admitted as such recently; John Riccitiello did.
John Carmack: But when it turned out that we went in and we checked
on some of these things, we talked with the developers in the EA Partners
program, and we talked to Valve, and some of the other guys who we
know, and at this point they say universally positive things about how
working with EA has been.
I think there really has been a major intentional corporate change there.
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
302
Interviews
It came down from on high; it’s like, ”We’re going to change the way
things are done here.” And the people that are there right now are happy
working with EA, and I’ve looked over everything - it was a tough call,
certainly; everything was strong out there, but we made the call to go
with EA, and we’re happy with how things are looking right now, and cer-
tainly going to be another question that comes up when we start shop-
ping Doom IV.
David DeMartini: We’re in day one of the marriage, and they’re really
happy, so...! (laughter from all)
The wedding day’s been great, and all that other kind of stuff; and, you
know, from this point forward you have to earn the business. Because, as
John says, they sign one deal at a time. Which we’re perfectly happy with,
because in this business you’re only as good as your last deal. They’re
only as good as their last game, and we’re only as good as our last deal,
and we’re only as good as what we said we would do and then what we
actually did.
And then now comes the time where we need to provide the appropriate
service to the business, and do what we need to do to be the good partner
that we said we would be. And we’re very conﬁdent that with the right,
humble attitude, that we will earn the business time and time again with
partners like id.
Tim Willits: You know, one of the things, just to add to what John said
about the top tier at EA, is, when we’re coming down to the ﬁnal deci-
sion, you know, Riccitiello and Frank Gibeau ﬂew out to id and they gave
them the game demo, and David was there, and all the EA people asked
really intelligent game player questions. They were asking things about
other games, and what we thought of this and that, and we were, as game
players and game developers, very impressed that these guys at the very
top, that run this huge company, are actually hardcore gamers. Moreso
than I think people would realize, and it really impressed us.
Chris Remo: It’s interesting because - I mean, I’ve talked with you about
this before - I’ve been following EA Partners for a while, and though I
didn’t know anything about this deal, it actually didn’t surprise me too
much, because you’ve got Crytek, you’ve got Valve, and they’re some of
the only developers that are sort of similar in spirit to id. And I’m won-
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
303
Interviews
dering if that inﬂuenced this at all.
John Carmack: I mean, the fact that they’re happy with the relationship
there meant a lot; and [Valve’s] Gabe [Newell]’s gonna speak his honest
opinion on everything like that.
And we got positive responses on that. And it is interesting, when we look
at some of the premiere ﬁrst-person action titles on there... We all looked
at it, and we don’t think that we’re being - none of us are doing kind-of
head-to-head bashing titles that are going to be competing against them;
Rage is a different ﬂavor than what any of these other things are going for,
so it should be an amicable set of partner companies that are working on
this, here.
Chris Remo: Any chance of id products being on Steam in the future?
Tim Willits: Well, we have our catalog...
Chris Remo: You have your catalog on there, but in terms of newer games
- Activision put some of that stuff up there, but EA often goes for the EA
Link thing; but also, Valve is working with EA Partners, so it’s kind of a big
weird soup.
John Carmack: Right now, we are looking at it - for Rage - as the con-
soles are the most important ”legs” that this project is on. It’s deﬁnitely
shipping on PC as well, and we would be willing to entertain different
distribution notions on that, but we would probably leave that up to EA’s
decision on thereabout.
They’re the publisher, and they’re going to pick out the best way to get
this out to the most number of people; and when EA decides that they
think that it’s going to be better to cut some deal for electronic distribu-
tion, and possibly avoid retailers, or whatever, we’ll probably take their
advice on that.
Chris Remo: Any comment on that? Probably not?
David DeMartini: No.
Chris Remo: OK! (laughs)
David DeMartini: No, I mean, before I would’ve said, ”Just leave it at the
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
304
Interviews
no,” but what I think we’d say is: game players are getting their games
from a variety of sources - from retail, electronic distribution - and EA is
committed to being on every viable platform and means of distribution,
so that we could get their great game out into as many hands as possible.
So I don’t think there’s any preconceived ”yes” or ”no” on any platform,
or any method of distribution. Obviously we’re developing our own, and
we’re trying to make that experience as great as possible for game players;
we do Direct2Drive, we do other partners, and I don’t think that there’s
any viable entity that we just immediately say ”no” to.
Chris Remo: There have been reports of some developers being dissatis-
ﬁed or uneasy about the Activision/Vivendi merger, and I’m wondering
if you guys had any misgivings about that in any way.
John Carmack: Not speciﬁcally; I mean, we have our set of internal is-
sues with Activision, which we’re not just going to all air, but we don’t
have any burned bridges with Activision either. They’re still publishing
Wolfenstein for us, there... It’s certainly a big shake-up in the industry.
And there’s probably going to be the various consolidation things that
happen, and I’m sure it’s going to spawn lots of other new studios, as
other people decide they don’t want to be part of this big thing; jump off
and do their thing, or their studio gets axed and they go form something
else... So it’s hard to say exactly what the impact on the industry is.
I’m sure it’s actually putting EA on notice to some degree; they’ve lost
their ”number one” by a certain however-you-choose-to-count-it metric,
and that probably is beneﬁcial for them, by getting a ﬁre lit and going on
that...
Chris Remo: Well also, gamers have a new whipping boy at this point.
John Carmack: Yeah.
David DeMartini: Well, I think the other thing, too, is - you know, not that
I would go out of my way to defend Activision, but - I would hope that,
moreso than Activision losing this business, EA won this business, and I
like to think that that’s the approach that we take to all of these things.
We’re not trying to beat Activision; we’re trying to be the best publisher
we can possibly be, so that we’re attractive to companies like id.
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
305
Interviews
And, you know, with a property like Rage, that is so premiere, and so
highly anticipated - and anything they’ve ever done internally has been
great, ﬂat-out great, and customers love it - I think it’s more an issue of
we were highly attracted to id, we were highly attracted to a new IP from
id, and we really reached out and tried to win the business by the services
that we were offering, and the commitment that we were making to id.
Hopefully, that’s the way I would characterize it, moreso than ”Activision
did a bad job and they left.” I don’t think that’s fair to Activision, much like
if a partner left us and went with Activision, they wouldn’t say, ”Oh, EA
screwed it all up, and that’s why we left.” So, I think it just demonstrates
our commitment to the developers, and we’re very happy that we won
this business.
Chris Remo: Fair enough. It’s been a while since you guys introduced a
100% new franchise. Obviously, you guys made your name on Doom and
things that you built from the ground up - is there a lot of pressure there?
What does it feel like, internally?
John Carmack: Certainly we have our marquee titles, with Wolfenstein,
Doom, and Quake; and Doom really is the big gun out of that, the one
that everybody remembers. ”That’s the game I played in college!” We
certainly expect to carry on with that, but there is a sense that in the com-
munity at large, if we were doing a Quake 5, Doom 4, Wolfenstein 4, just
running all of that...
Even if people love it, and you can make - as EA has shown, you can run
the sports titles every year, and people will love it, and as Activision is
showing, you can sell Call of Duty every year, and people will love it.
We did feel some pressure to try and strike out, and do something dif-
ferent. And there are certain things that we’ve always been dinged on, in
the community, about our games. Some of which were to some degree
intentional, but people talk about, ”It’s too dark! It’s too cramped! It’s all
indoors!” You know, the prototypical corridor shooter, and we did want
to branch out from that.
I mean, there are still great things you can do inside any given niche like
that, but we wanted to really strongly address some of those things. It’s a
bright, outdoor, post-apocalyptic desert world. It’s a lot of the things that,
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
306
Interviews
while still a technological showpiece, in many ways, it’s not limited in the
way that Doom 3 was, and it’s going to hopefully be a broader appeal to
the game, with not so much the, ”Be scared out of your wits while you’re
running around tense,” all bunched up, playing the game. It should be
a more fun experience in a lot of ways; and we wanted to consciously
address some of these things.
There are certain things that we know we can do great. We can build
up the excitement, and the tension, and the competitiveness, and get
people’s pulse pounding; we can do all of these things, we’ve always been
able to do them well, and we’ve got better tools now, so we can do them
even better. But, there’s a lot more to gaming than just that aspect, there,
and we do want to build our skills.
There are things that - some of the hardest that we do, we have never
done a driving game, so for some of the driving aspects of it, we decided
to focus on that early, and make sure that we’ve got this cool stuff, run-
ning around, driving in the wasteland, shooting at things, and racing.
But that’s only an aspect of the game. We keep all the things we’ve always
been good at, we add some new things, we learn how to be good at it, and
then we build the whole mix together.
Tim Willits: Yes. I mean, John said it much better than I would say it, but
yes, internally we wanted to do something different, something exciting,
but we wanted to keep it grounded in that ﬁrst-person shooter. And so
it’s important for people to know that it is a ﬁrst-person action game,
with some exploration, you have some vehicle combat, but it’s not a race
game, and we’re really excited about it. It really allows us to innovate the
genre that we created, and expand it while making it better.
John Carmack: Now it is actually worth noting, as a little aside, that it’s
not actually the ﬁrst new IP in a long time, because our mobile titles -
which was our entry into the relationship with EA, with Orcs and Elves.
And the mobile titles have been really successful; we’ve sold over two mil-
lion units on the mobile titles.
And we have a Wolfenstein RPG with a whole new engine coming out,
and that was sort of our foot in the door with EA, where people we were
working with at Jamdat moved to EA, and those became the guys that we
knew that are at EA, which boosted us up to start talking with EA Partners
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
307
Interviews
people.
David DeMartini: And that’s what really attracted us to id. I mean, when
you hear the guys talk, you know, talking about constantly getting better.
Not resting on their laurels, if you will, or continuing to deliver more of
the same, but taking their creative efforts and their technology efforts to
the next level.
So idTech 5 takes the technology to the next level, the fellas are working
on a design which takes it to the next level, and not only does what id has
done great, but starts to evolve their skill set with driving, and some of
the other elements that are in the game. So you get all the great stuff that
you always got from id, but you get an additional set of fun factors that
you’ll be able to play with Rage, that take that game to the next level.
So, whether it’s baseball, or sports, or in business, what you’re always
looking for is partners who are trying to get better, constantly improve,
and take their whatever-they-do to the next level. We hope that EAP does
that same kind of thing by taking our services to the next level, and con-
stantly get... We don’t always get it right every time on every element, but
when you screw up, have the integrity to say, ”Hey, screwed that up; I’m
gonna ﬁx this.”
Same kind of thing with id, and where id wants to go with - you know,
like John was saying, they started this project four years ago, and they
spent a year working on this project and then said, ”This doesn’t feel like
this is going to be the next level of what we want to do with this title. So
we’re going to scrap that, and we’re going to start all over again.” So many
other organizations would’ve tried to ﬁgure out how to salvage what they
started, so they didn’t toss that year; these guys learned from that year
and built off of that to make it even better, and I think Rage is going to
beneﬁt from all that time that was spent.
Chris Remo: I’ve been playing id games since Wolfenstein 3D, and when
I was at QuakeCon last year, it was really almost astonishing to me how
many disparate genre elements you’re bringing into Rage. Which is an
unusual thing for a developer that has made its name on really establish-
ing one genre, and I’m wondering how much you had to, or if you had to,
modify your internal design processes to deal with that.
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
308
Interviews
John Carmack: Yeah, it is a tough call, because I’ve always argued against
”kitchen sink” gaming design, and that’s a real problem with modern
games, where the idea is that you throw hundreds of people at it and
make sure that you have everything in there.
There are some extremely successful games that are built along that model,
of ”have everything, give people nothing that they could criticize us for”
- but we’re not a team size big enough to do that. I wouldn’t really want
to do that type of thing, but we knew that we wanted to do certain things
different; the idea of setting it out in the brighter outdoor area, that was
one of the preeminent things.
I mean, the ﬁrst game, that we rebooted, was called Darkness. And I was
thinking, ”This is just going to be another thing that people hate us for -
the exact same things.” So we’re going to go ahead and do the ”running
over mutants in a pickup truck” sorta thing, in the outside.
But we feel we retired most of the risk for the driving side of things; the
last big question is the more adventureish, RPGish side of things - which,
of course, is the hardest thing to retire, because you wind up meeting the
entire game, there, and ﬁnding out how fun it is to go take these tasks,
around that. And that’s the remaining thing, that none of us internally
have built games like that, except for cellphone games, to a minor degree.
But we went through the driving aspect, and we hadn’t done this, but
we’ve got stuff that’s fun now; it’s fun to sit down, drive around, and either
race or shoot at other cars, and mow down things. So, we can build the
skills; we’ve got extremely talented people on all sorts of levels, and we
can learn what’s necessary to do any of these different tasks.
We went into this knowing that we had the humility to say, ”We’re great
at what we do, and we’re all smart, and we’re all talented; we can learn
these other things, but we don’t know it yet.” And we have to go in with
this ”freedom to fail” sort of approach. We’re going to go take some cuts
at it, we don’t expect it to be right ﬁrst, and we’ll work on it as long as it
takes.
Chris Remo: The focus on Rage is the consoles. I think that’s understand-
able, these days, from a market perspective, but I’m wondering, from a
development perspective, again, if that is something of a shift in the way
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
309
Interviews
that you have to think about the project.
John Carmack: Well, it’s a lot of fun, actually, going and working on the
different console platforms. I mean, I enjoy doing that type of stuff. The
mobile phones are fun, the 360 and PS3 stuff is. It’s fun to look at the
different challenges. You’ve got the set of all these technical things here,
and ﬁguring out the right set of techniques and organizations for all of
that, I love that type of stuff.
I do miss, in some ways, the, ”Let’s just stay at the bleeding edge on the
PC; work real closely with all the hardware vendors so that you’re using
the latest stuff the minute it comes out,” but there are days when I’m like,
”Wow, it would be nice to develop just for the 360,” you know? If you
just want to make games, it would be great to just do that, and not have
to worry about driver updates, and all the different hardware SKUs on
there.
So we’re still trying to do things that - the Quake Live project is all about,
”Let’s do something that the PC is uniquely good at,” because the con-
sole is still a crappy web browser, and it’s still not as good as a keyboard-
mouse interface; it’s just not. So there are things that the PC is better at,
and we want to take advantage of that.
And there’s exciting stuff that we can do on the mobile, but for the big,
blockbuster, media-rich, triple-A titles? You have to be cross-platform
across the platforms. If you’re going to devote the tens of millions of dol-
lars that it takes to make one of these games, you just really need to be
there, just from a business reality sort of standpoint.
Chris Remo: How big is the team on this game? Approximately.
John Carmack: Well, id now is up to 60 people and growing, because
we’re actively growing now, as we plan to move up a second team to do
a Doom project. And, historically, we’re still a tiny team; we’ve grown
very slowly over the years; we’ve had very little attrition, and we usually
bring on one or two people a year, but now we’re hiring good people as
fast as we can ﬁnd them. We’re only taking people that are great on here.
It’s tough, you can’t just snap your ﬁngers and say, ”I want 30 hot-shot
developers to drop what they’re doing and jump on to our project.”
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
310
Interviews
But, internally, we have the Rage team now, which is... How many people
are on Rage exclusively? It’s easier to go the other way, and say we have
the Quake Live team, which has six or eight people.
Tim Willits: Eight. About eight people, yeah.
John Carmack: Eight people on there, with some contractors working
on it. And we have the id Mobile team, which only has like six people
or something, on that. So that means we’ve got 45-some-odd people on
Rage, and then a few other people that are cross-support on different
things.
And we expect to be growing - I don’t expect that you’ll see id at 100 peo-
ple in the next several years... I don’t think we’ll get to 100 people in that
time. We’re looking, for the Doom project, we want to ﬁll out, have 30 or
40 people that are Doom guys, and then we want to be able to migrate re-
sources between the other teams as they start the normal pipelines that
most developers are in, that id’s really been sort-of a laggard in coming to,
where you want to be able to have the previous team going, and starting
the work on another one.
Because we have been very efﬁcient like that, where we have the entire
team come off of Doom 3 - now a lot of people go to try and help the
partners, help with Quake Wars: Enemy Territory, porting on that, but
still, you’re kind of left with a chunk of people more or less twiddling their
thumbs, because it’s not the right time to power them onto the project,
and that’s hurt us in terms of the utilization, and we want to be able to do
a better job with that in the future.
Chris Remo: I almost dread to ask this, because it doesn’t seem like the
type of question that you would usually be into, but do you have any
comments on what management structure you use, in terms of Scrum
or agile, or anything like that?
Tim Willits: Well, for us, we have no real model. Sometimes we have
Scrums, with the artists, we try to be agile as much as we possibly can, but
it’s really about talking to people, putting the best people on the projects,
and staying on top of it.
John Carmack: But I will say, speciﬁcally, that that has never been a
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

John Carmack Archive
311
Interviews
strength of id Software for people to emulate! And we have a much better
team, in a lot of ways, than we used to. We used to have a, just a deserved
reputation, for having a bunch of prima donnas - talented prima donnas,
but, you know...
Tim Willits: Don’t point at me! (laughter)
John Carmack: But we have, especially with this project - to some degree
through Doom 3, but deﬁnitely throughout this project - we have a lot
more mature developers, and a lot of it is just that as people get older,
and they are more mature about the way they look at it. This is your
career; this is what you do. And they’re going to be disciplined about it.
But the growth of a dozen, or two dozen people up there, to 60-something
people, there are growing pains there. But those are, again, tasks that we
look at and say, ”These are challenges; we don’t have the right answers;
we need to learn what the right answers are,” and go into that as a learn-
ing experience. And we’re getting better at a lot of things there, and we’re
pretty thankful that things have been as placid as they have been.
CHAPTER 33. QUELLING THE RAGE

