JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 57(3):359–377, 2006
This article describes the latest development of a generic
approach to detecting and visualizing emerging trends
and transient patterns in scientiﬁc literature. The work
makes substantial theoretical and methodological contri-
butions to progressive knowledge domain visualization.
A specialty is conceptualized and visualized as a time-
variant duality between two fundamental concepts in
information science: research fronts and intellectual
bases. A research front is deﬁned as an emergent and
transient grouping of concepts and underlying research
issues. The intellectual base of a research front is its
citation and co-citation footprint in scientiﬁc literature—
an evolving network of scientiﬁc publications cited by
research-front
concepts.
Kleinberg’s
(2002)
burst-
detection algorithm is adapted to identify emergent
research-front concepts. Freeman’s (1979) betweenness
centrality metric is used to highlight potential pivotal
points of paradigm shift over time. Two complementary
visualization views are designed and implemented:
cluster views and time-zone views. The contributions of
the approach are that (a) the nature of an intellectual base
is algorithmically and temporally identiﬁed by emergent
research-front terms, (b) the value of a co-citation cluster
is explicitly interpreted in terms of research-front con-
cepts, and (c) visually prominent and algorithmically de-
tected pivotal points substantially reduce the complexity
of a visualized network. The modeling and visualization
process is implemented in CiteSpace II, a Java applica-
tion, and applied to the analysis of two research ﬁelds:
mass extinction (1981–2004) and terrorism (1990–2003).
Prominent trends and pivotal points in visualized net-
works were veriﬁed in collaboration with domain experts,
who are the authors of pivotal-point articles. Practical im-
plications of the work are discussed. A number of chal-
lenges and opportunities for future studies are identiﬁed.
Introduction
Scientiﬁc literature is characterized by two distinct cita-
tion half-lives of articles: classic articles with persistently
high citations and transient ones with their citations peaked
within a short period of time (Price, 1965). Transient ones
are much more common than classics (van Raan, 2000). The
average length of time that a research article continues to be
cited in the scientiﬁc literature is closely connected to the
growth speed of the underlying research area (Abt, 1998).
Understanding the dynamics of how transient articles trans-
form the intellectual landscape of a scientiﬁc ﬁeld has sig-
niﬁcant practical implications for scientists in a wide variety
of disciplines.
Emergent trends and abrupt changes in the scientiﬁc liter-
ature can be associated with internal as well as external
causes. Typical internal causes include new discoveries and
scientiﬁc breakthroughs such as the discovery of an impact
crater in mass-extinction research or the discovery of a
supermassive black hole in astronomy. External ones may
provoke scientists to study a subject matter from new per-
spectives. For example, the September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks have raised a variety of new issues to be addressed
by researchers in national security, health care, posttrau-
matic stress disorder (PTSD) research, and many other
areas. Detecting and understanding emerging trends and
abrupt changes caused by such events in scientiﬁc disci-
plines can signiﬁcantly improve the ability of scientists to
deal with the changes in a timely manner. It is worth noting
that large-scale changes in complex systems characterized
by self-organized criticality may take place without apparent
triggering events (Bak & Chen, 1991). There is limited evi-
dence to suggest that the growth of scientiﬁc literature may
be connected to self-organized criticality (van Raan, 2000).
In this article, we concentrate on changes associated with
signiﬁcant events.
The concept of a research front was originally introduced
by Price (1965) to characterize the transient nature of a
research ﬁeld. Price observed what he called the immediacy
factor: There seems to be a tendency for scientists to cite the
most recently published articles. In a given ﬁeld, a research
front refers to the body of articles that scientists actively cite.
According to Price, a research front may consist of 40 to 50
recent articles. A research front has been studied in at least
CiteSpace II: Detecting and Visualizing Emerging Trends
and Transient Patterns in Scientiﬁc Literature
Chaomei Chen
College of Information Science and Technology, Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104-2875. E-mail: chaomei.chen@cis.drexel.edu
Received July 26, 2004; revised August 11, 2004; accepted February 7,
2005
© 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. • Published online 14 December 2005 in
Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/asi.20317

360
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
three forms: (a) a cluster of co-cited articles (Chen & Morris,
2003; Small & Grifﬁth, 1974), (b) a cluster of co-cited articles
and all articles that cite the cluster (Garﬁeld, 1994; Garﬁeld &
Torpie, 1964), and (c) a cluster of articles that cite a common
group of articles (Morris, Yen, Wu, & Asnake, 2003).
The concept of an intellectual base is useful to further
clarify the nature of a research front (Persson, 1994). If we
deﬁne a research front as the state of the art of a specialty
(i.e., a line of research), what is cited by the research front
forms its intellectual base. A specialty can be conceptualized
as a time-variant mapping 
from its research front 
to its intellectual base (t).
The goal of our research is to develop a generic approach
that can be used to detect and visualize emerging trends and
abrupt changes in
over time. In particular,
is a
group of words and phrases (i.e., terms) associated with
emergingtrendsandsuddenchangesattimet.Thesetermsare
called research-front terms. (t) consists of groups of articles
cited by articles in which research-front terms were found.
The following notions summarize these relations, for exam-
ple, Stitle denotes a set of title terms; IsHotTopic (term, t) de-
notes a Boolean function, and article0 →article denotes that
article0 cites article. In particular, we illustrate the use of the
new approach with two examples; one shows the impact of in-
ternal events, and the other shows the impact of external
events.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. First, we
summarize related work in detecting and visualizing emerg-
ing trends and abrupt changes in transient networks as well
as quantitative studies of research fronts. Then we describe a
new approach to detecting trends and changes in scientiﬁc
literature, especially those due to triggering events. The goal
is to enable domain analysts and scientists to identify and
understand structural and temporal patterns clearly. We illus-
trate the new approach with two real-world examples: mass-
extinction research (1981–2003) and terrorism research
(1990–2003). The resultant research front maps are veriﬁed
with domain experts. The results also are evaluated by
examining the content of some of the relevant articles.
Detecting and Tracking the Evolution of a Specialty
Researchers have studied quantitative methods that can
be used to identify and track the essence of a research front
as it evolves over time. The transient nature of a research
front poses challenges for scientists, research policy makers,
∧ article0  article6
(t)  5article | term °(t) ∧ term  article0
´ Sidentifier ∧ IsHotTopic (term, t)6
°(t)  5term | termStitle ´ Sabstract ´ Sdescriptor
£(t) : °(t)  (t)
°(t)
£(t)
£(t) : °(t)  (t)
°(t)
£(t)
and many others to keep up with the rapid advances of the
state of the art in science. Understanding the dynamics of
a research front is essential for scientists, analysts, and
decision makers to be able to identify emerging trends and
sudden changes in the body of scientiﬁc knowledge.
Research Fronts and Intellectual Bases
A research front represents the state-of-the-art thinking of
a research ﬁeld. Price (1965) noticed the interesting ten-
dency that the most frequently cited articles tend to be the
most recent ones in the citation network of scientiﬁc articles.
The immediacy effect gives a good explanation of the well-
known phenomenon of articles being considered obsoles-
cent a few years after their publication. Price described an
earlier conjecture made by Burton and Kebler (1960) that
the periodical literature may be composed of two distinct
types of literature with very different half-lives—the classic
and the transient parts. The transient part essentially corre-
sponds to what is called a research front. According to Price,
“the research front builds on recent work, and the network
becomes very tight” (p. 515). He estimated about 30 to
40 articles published before a citing article would constitute
the research front relative to the citing article. Price arranged
200 articles on the N-rays subject chronologically and used
a matrix of citations (column articles cite row articles) to
depict the research front of the subject, showing that the
boundary of the research front was about 50 articles pub-
lished prior to the citing article. Clearly, it would be useful if
the movement of such relatively small networks of articles
can be tracked in the overwhelmingly large body of the
literature.
Typical questions regarding a research front may include:
How did it get started? What is the state of the art? What are
the critical paths in its evolution? To address such questions,
we need to detect and analyze emerging trends and abrupt
changes associated with a research front over time. We also
need to identify the focus of a research front at a particular
time in the context of its intellectual base, to reveal signiﬁ-
cant intellectual turning points as a research front evolves,
and to discover the interconnections between different
research fronts.
Researchers studied the evolution of a ﬁeld of study from
a variety of perspectives. Small and Grifﬁth (1974) repre-
sented currently activated scientiﬁc specialties as clusters of
co-cited articles. The nature of a co-citation cluster was de-
termined by word proﬁles. Suppose an article Di in a cluster
has been cited by K citing articles Di1, Di2,..., Dik. The four
most frequently found words in the titles of Dij’s are selected
to form the word proﬁle of the article Di. By aggregating all
the word proﬁles within a cluster and selecting the top-N
most frequent words, one can easily extend the method to
generate an N-word cluster proﬁle. The distinct advantage of
using such word proﬁles is its simplicity; however, the ﬁrst-
order word proﬁles were limited to the titles of the K citing
articles, thus they may not reveal the dynamics of underlying
themes.

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
361
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Braam, Moed, and Raan (1991) deﬁned a specialty as
“focused attention by a number of scientiﬁc researchers to a
set of related research problems and concepts” (p. 252).
They studied the continuity and stability of a specialty in
terms of the similarity between co-citation clusters across
consecutive years. The similarity between two co-citation
clusters is determined by comparing aggregated word pro-
ﬁles of the clusters. They identiﬁed a series of similar co-
citation clusters over years as different phases of the same
specialty, although they did not present graph-theoretical or
other visual representations to illustrate the transformation
from one phase to another.
In a study of research fronts and intellectual bases based
on articles published in the Journal of the American Society
for Information Science between 1986 and 1990, Persson
(1994) made a distinction between a research front and an
intellectual base: “In bibliometric terms, the citing articles
form a research front, and the cited articles constitute an
intellectual base” (p. 31). The intellectual base was repre-
sented by co-citation clusters. By gradually lowering the
co-citation threshold, he demonstrated what he called a step-
wise enlargement of the intellectual base—the intellectual
base grew larger as more articles with lower co-citations
were added to the co-citation clusters. Persson found that an
intellectual base was remarkably stable over a long period of
time. He noted that the correspondence between research-
front clusters and intellectual-base clusters is not self-
evident since there is no restriction in terms of what cited
articles were active when the research front was formed. In
this article, we conceptualize a specialty as a time-variant
mapping between its research front and its intellectual base.
Morris et al. (2003) described a timeline visualization of
a research front, deﬁned as groups of articles that consis-
tently cited a ﬁxed, time-invariant group of base articles. The
research-front articles were clustered based on bibliographic
coupling (Kessler, 1963).
The Special Topics series (http://www.esi-topics.com) is
a Web-based service directed by Henry Small at the Institute
for Scientiﬁc Information. The series reports scientiﬁc
research areas that have experienced distinct advances in
terms of citation proﬁles. The Special Topics series has
drawn upon decades of work by Small (1977, 1999b, 2003;
Small & Grifﬁth, 1974). Clusters of co-cited articles are ex-
tracted from each year’s citation data. Clusters from adjacent
years are compared to identify new members as a sign of an
emerging trend. The extent to which co-citation clusters in
adjacent years overlap with one another provides a means
for detecting the shift of research focus. Table 1 summarizes
related work regarding research fronts and intellectual bases.
In this article, we chose not to restrict the citations to a
ﬁxed, time-invariant intellectual base; instead, we expect
that a specialty’s intellectual base will change over time
along with the movement of its research front. In part, this is
because we deﬁne a research front differently to emphasize
emerging trends and abrupt changes as the deﬁning features
of a research front. A research front is the domain of a time-
variant mapping, and its intellectual base is the co-domain of
the mapping. Our new deﬁnition means that now the intel-
lectual base of a research front is simply the citation trails of
the research front in the literature.
Our goal is to determine to what extent the movement of
a research front is coupled with the stability of its intellectual
base. It also is of particular interest to identify what impact
external events may have on the dynamics of the interrela-
tionship between a research front and an intellectual base.
For example, how does the discovery of compelling
evidence shift the course of a research front?
Detecting Emerging Trends
There is a growing interest in detecting emerging trends
and tracking topics. Some researchers visualize various
temporal patterns to aid trend detection (Erten, Harding,
Kobourov, Wampler, & Yee, 2003), although it is still
common to identify a trend based on statistical proﬁles
(Popescul, Flake, Lawrence, Ungar, & Giles, 2000; Roy,
Gevry, & Pottenger, 2002).
Research in Topic Detection and Tracking has primarily
focused on ﬁve types of tasks: (a) story segmentation,
(b) topic detection, (c) topic tracking, (d) ﬁrst-story detec-
tion, and (e) story-link detection. Roy et al. (2002) surveyed
existing methods for trend detection. Kontostathis, Galitsky,
Pottenger, Roy, and Phelps (2003) gave a comprehensive
survey of trend detection in text data mining.
Allan, Papka, and Lavrenko (1998) described a single
pass algorithm for identifying new stories. Given a newly
received story and a collection of existing stories, if the col-
lection has no similar stories then the story is identiﬁed as a
new story. Their algorithm worked well to distinguish stories
on the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995 from the earlier ones
on the World Trade Center attacks, but it did not single out
the O.J. Simpson trial stories from other court cases.
Swan and Allan (1999) constructed a 2 distribution-
based statistical model to determine the signiﬁcance of
received information. They tested their approach with CNN
broadcast news and Reuters newswires, which is a subset of
the Topic Detection and Tracking pilot study’s corpus.
Text analysis may help to identify the most popular words
used in articles over a particular period of time. The move-
ment of an underlying thematic ﬂow can be captured by
the changes of such words. ThemeRiver (Havre, Hetzler,
Whitney, & Nowell, 2002) is a visualization system that uses
the metaphor of a river to depict thematic ﬂows over time in
a collection of articles. The thematic changes are shown
along a time line of corresponding external events. A the-
matic river consists of frequency streams of terms; the
changing width of a stream over time indicates the changes
of term occurrences. The occurrence of an external event
may be followed by sudden changes of thematic strengths.
Erten et al. (2003) described a temporal graph visualiza-
tion of the categorization of articles in ACM conference
proceedings using their system TGRIP to ﬁnd the “hottest”
topics in computing and identify steadily declining areas as
well as rapidly growing ones. Their category graph consisted

362
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Price
Small & Grifﬁth
Braam et al.
Garﬁeld
Persson
Morris et al.
CiteSpace II (this
article) 
1965
1974
1991
1994
1994
2003
Transient clusters of actively
cited recent (30–50) articles
from the perspective of a given
citing article
Co-citation clusters
Focused attention to a set of
related problems and concepts
Co-citation clusters plus citing
articles
Articles citing the same literature
Groups of articles consistently
citing a ﬁxed, time-invariant
group of base articles
Emerging thematic trends and
surges of new topics
Not deﬁned
Not deﬁned
Citation image of a
research front
Fixed, time-invariant
groups of articles
Co-citation network
Recentness of
citations
Co-citation 
Co-citation
Co-citation
Co-citation
Bibliographic
coupling
Hybrid networks
of co-cited
articles and
terms citing
these articles.
N/A
Cited articles labeled by
word proﬁles derived
from citing articles
Word proﬁles
Articles labeled by title
words
Cluster labeled by
manually examined title
words
Terms from titles,
abstracts, and
descriptors of abrupt
frequency increase
TABLE 1.
Deﬁnitions of research fronts and intellectual bases.
Author
Year
Research front
Intellectual base
Cluster
Labeling
of multiple time slices. Changes between adjacent time
slices were shown as edges weighted in proportion to the
corresponding percent change. Trends in each year were
identiﬁed by the top ﬁve title words that have the highest per-
centage of use. Words such as design, system, and simulation
were persistently found on the list over time whereas ADA,
database, and parallel were listed only for a few years be-
fore they disappeared. Their study did not use citation data.
A clustering technique was reported for identifying tem-
poral trends in the CiteSeer document database (Popescul
et al., 2000). First, inﬂuential articles were identiﬁed based
on citations to seed clusters. Then, articles co-cited with the
seeding article of a cluster were assigned to the cluster. The
similarity between two clusters was determined by articles
they have in common. Clusters were characterized by most
frequently used title words in member articles.
Identifying and Visualizing Specialties
In traditional co-citation analysis, much of the focus is on
individual clusters of co-cited articles, and few studies have
particularlyexaminedtheinterrelationshipsbetweenspecialty
clusters except for the work of Grifﬁth, Small, Stonehill, and
Dey (1974) and Small (1999a) on disciplinary connections.
Grifﬁth et al. (1974) found that between-cluster co-citation
links tend to be weaker than within-cluster co-citation links.
In a social network, the inﬂuence of an actor may depend
on how he or she is connected to other members in the net-
work. Granovetter (1973) emphasized the strength of weak
ties. Burt (1992) introduced the concept of structural holes.
Within-cluster links are often stronger than between-cluster
links. The focus of traditional citation-network analysis is on
strong links (i.e., within cluster links). To understand how
specialties and different thematic trends interact with each
other, it is essential to study the nature of long-range, be-
tween-cluster links and understand why articles in different
specialties were connected.
The centrality of a node is a graph-theoretical property
that quantiﬁes the importance of the node’s position in a net-
work. A commonly used centrality metric is the betweenness
centrality (Freeman, 1979). It measures the percentage of the
number of shortest paths in a network to which a given node
belongs. Nodes with high-betweenness centrality tend to
be found in paths connecting different clusters. This feature
has been used in community-ﬁnding algorithms to identify
and separate clusters (Girvan & Newman, 2002).
Centrality metrics provide a computational method for
ﬁnding pivotal points between different specialties or tip-
ping points in an evolving network. An advantage of such
a graph-theoretical method is that it is applicable to a wide
variety of subject domains because the method is indepen-
dent of any domain knowledge. Working with a small
number of pivotal points, instead of the entire network, has
several desirable practical implications. First, if these piv-
otal points characterize the structural and dynamical nature
of a domain, the user’s cognitive load would be considerably
reduced. Second, subsequent processing such as automatic
text summarization and natural language processing
algorithms can be effectively limited to the small number
of more focused pivotal points. Third, a pivotal-point-
based
approach extends word-proﬁle-based approaches
because pivotal points are identiﬁed based on their global
graph-theoretical properties whereas word proﬁles are based
on ﬁrst-order frequencies.

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
363
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Citation networks and co-citation networks have been
long studied in information science and other disciplines.
Garﬁeld’s historiography, for instance, is a directed graph of
articles depicting citation links. HistCite is the most recent
example along this line of research (Garﬁeld, Pudovkin, &
Istomin, 2003). In contrast, co-citation networks are undi-
rected graphs (Small, 1986; Small & Grifﬁth, 1974). An
earlier example of visualizing co-citation networks is the
SCI-Map system developed at the Institute for Scientiﬁc
Information. Rather than using the more commonly used
multidimensional scaling, SCI-Map uses a two-dimensional
layout algorithm based on a geometric triangulation process.
The triangulation starts with an arbitrarily chosen article and
maps it to the origin of the coordinate system. Next, it places
the article that has the strongest co-citation link with the ﬁrst
article. The position of the third article is triangulated using
distances from the ﬁrst two positions. The method gives the
priorities to the strongest links. As a result, the network
grows from the center onward. According to Small (1999b),
a drawback of the process is its dependence on the order in
which objects are assigned. SCI-map scales the radius of an
article to the cube root of its citation frequency to represent
the number of citations as the volume of a sphere.
Link reduction, or network scaling, is a practical chal-
lenge in visualizing complex networks such as co-citation
networks. Real-world co-citation networks often have a
large number of links. Reducing the number of links shown
at a time may improve the clarity of a visualized network.
Spatial conﬁgurations of multidimensional scaling do not
show links explicitly. In contrast, minimal spanning trees
and Pathﬁnder network scaling (Schvaneveldt, 1990) select
a subset of the original links and form a simpliﬁed network
representation. Pathﬁnder networks were initially adapted
for author co-citation analysis and subsequently extended
to general co-citation analysis (Chen, 1999; Chen & Paul,
2001). Pathﬁnder network scaling relies on a triangle in-
equality test to determine whether a particular link should be
preserved or eliminated. The selection criterion is that a
single-link path’s weight should not exceed that of alterna-
tive paths of multiple links. A Pathﬁnder network is superior
than a multidimensional scaling in terms of preserving the
chronological growth patterns in co-citation networks (Chen
& Morris, 2003). Progressive Pathﬁnder network scaling is
the most recent development for visualizing the evolution of
a knowledge domain over time (Chen, 2004).
Several studies explored techniques for visualizing
changes of bibliographic networks, including a study of the
evolution of the AIDS research (Small & Greenlee, 1980).
VxInsight, developed at the Sandia National Laboratories,
depicts a body of the scientiﬁc literature as a three-
dimensional landscape (Boyack, Wylie, & Davidson, 2002).
It allows users to spot trends over time by using a time-slider.
Temporal patterns of the evolution of a three-dimensional
co-citation landscape were animated (Chen & Kuljis, 2003).
CiteSpace is a Java application for analyzing and visual-
izing co-citation networks (Chen, 2004). Its primary goal is
to facilitate the analysis of emerging trends in a knowledge
domain. It allows the user to take a time series of snapshots
of a domain and subsequently merge these snapshots. The
initial version of CiteSpace was used to reveal turning points
in superstring revolutions in physics; however, several is-
sues remained unresolved when we implemented the ﬁrst
version of CiteSpace. To distinguish the substantial changes
since our earlier report (Chen, 2004), we refer to the initial
version as CiteSpace I and the new version as CiteSpace II.
Table 2 lists the major improvements in CiteSpace II. The
most distinctive new feature is the combination of computa-
tional metrics and visual attributes of pivotal points. The
motivation is to substantially reduce the user’s cognitive
burden as he or she searches for pivotal points in a knowl-
edge structure.
New features of CiteSpace II are related to three central
concepts: burst detection, betweenness centrality, and het-
erogeneous networks.Aspecialty is conceptualized as a map-
ping function between a research front and its intellectual
base. This mapping function provides the basis of our con-
ceptual framework to accommodate the three concepts.
These concepts have instrumental roles in addressing three
practical issues: (a) identifying the nature of a research front,
(b) labeling a specialty, and (c) detecting emerging trends
and abrupt changes in a timely manner.
CiteSpace II
We next analyze the three practical issues and describe
how they are addressed in CiteSpace II. The procedure of
applying the new approach to the study of what impact trig-
gering events may have on a research ﬁeld is outlined. The
conceptual model of CiteSpace II is shown in Figure 1.
Labeling Co-Citation Clusters
Labeling clusters is concerned with the clarity and inter-
pretability of co-citation clusters. The standard approach
relies on word proﬁles derived from articles citing a cluster
of co-cited articles. A pragmatic assumption is that word
TABLE 2.
CiteSpace I vs. CiteSpace II.
CiteSpace I
CiteSpace II
Time slicing
√
√
Co-citation networks/intellectual bases
√
√
Time-slice-based thresholds
√
√
Pathﬁnder pruning
√
√
Progressive network patching
√
√
Time-coded network visualization
√
√
n-gram term extraction
–
√
Burst detection
–
√
Sharply increased topical terms/research fronts
–
√
Betweenness centrality
–
√
Citation tree-ring visualization
–
√
Heterogeneous networks
–
√
PubMed MeSH heading networks
–
√
Time-zone views
–
√
Multithread Pathﬁnder
–
√

364
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
FIG. 1.
The conceptual model of CiteSpace II. Time-sliced snapshots are devised to highlight changes of prominent specialties over time.
proﬁles characterize the nature of a co-citation cluster be-
cause the words are from articles that shape the cluster in the
ﬁrst place. Word-proﬁle approaches have drawbacks. First,
word proﬁles may not converge to a focused message.
Analysts and users will make a substantial amount of sense-
making efforts to synthesize a diverse range of word proﬁles.
Second, cluster labels based on aggregating word proﬁles
tend to be too broad to be useful. In practice, many users
would be interested in not only the most commonly used
terms but also terms that can lead to profound changes. Terms
associated with an emerging trend could be overshadowed by
a broader and more persistent theme. For instance, a surge of
interest in health care with reference to the threats of biolog-
ical and chemical weapons may be easily outnumbered by
the more dominating terms such as biological weapons.
An ideal labeling method should distinguish emerging
trends and rapid changes at the foreground from more per-
sistent themes at the background. Small (1999a) dealt with a
similar situation when he needed to explain the nature of
cross-disciplinary co-citation links. He suggested that a use-
ful explanation should distinguish how the articles at the two
ends of such a link differ and what they have in common.
Kleinberg’s (2002) burst-detection algorithm can be
adapted for detecting sharp increases of interest in a specialty.
Although Kleinberg’s original algorithm was developed to
detect the bursts of single words, the algorithm is generic
enough to be applied to a time series of multiword terms or ci-
tations of articles. In CiteSpace II, a current research front is
identiﬁed based on such burst terms extracted from titles, ab-
stracts, descriptors, and identiﬁers of bibliographic records.
These terms are subsequently used as labels of clusters in het-
erogeneous networks of terms and articles.
Improving the Timeliness of Visualized
Co-Citation Networks
Using citing terms to characterize a research front may im-
prove our understanding of its intellectual base. Co-citation
analysis traditionally focuses on homogeneous networks of
co-cited articles. Newly published articles tend to be under-
represented in such networks because they may not have
enough citations. In addition, word proﬁles are not normally
regarded as part of a co-citation network. Burst-detection
algorithms can identify emergent terms regardless of how
many times their host articles are cited. Therefore, a new
research front can be featured in the “big picture” even before
it attracts enough citations.
In addition to the standard force-directed view, CiteSpace
II supports a time-zone view to highlight temporal patterns
between a research front and its intellectual base.Atime-zone
view consists of an array of vertical strips as time zones. The
time zones are arranged chronologically from left to right so
that a research front points back to its intellectual base. The
layout algorithm is a modiﬁed spring embedder algorithm
such that the horizontal movement of an item is restricted to
its own time zone, but its vertical movement is completely de-
termined by its connections to items in other time zones. The
goal is to make a specialty easily recognizable. The design of
a time-zone view resembles the overall layout of time-line vi-
sualization (Morris et al., 2003). In terms of the major differ-
ences, time-zone views in CiteSpace II simultaneously show
cited articles and citing terms to highlight the mapping be-
tween a research front and its intellectual base.
Computationally Identifying Pivotal Points
We assume that transitions between transient research
fronts are traceable in terms of citations and co-citations. As-
sume 
a are 
b are prominent research fronts at time t and
t  ∆t, with corresponding landmark articles a and b in their
intellectual bases a 
(
a) and b 
(
b). Two clus-
ters of co-cited articles would emerge; a would be the center
of one and b would be the center of the other. Articles on
paths exclusively connecting the two clusters {p(i)} charac-
terize the transition from 
a to 
b. We refer to such {p(i)}
as pivotal points, turning points, or tipping points.
In CiteSpace I (Chen, 2004), users only have one way
to identify pivotal points by visually scanning a visualized
°
°
°
£
°
£
°
°

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
365
DOI: 10.1002/asi
network for nodes that bridge different clusters.An advantage
of this approach is that no additional computing is required;
however, a drawback is that users have no way to ensure that
all the important pivotal points are found except by doing a
brute-force visual search of all nodes in the network.
CiteSpace II makes it easier for users to identify pivotal
points. In addition to inspecting salient visual attributes, the
user easily can see nodes with high betweenness centrality
(Freeman,1979).Pivotalpointsarecomputationallyidentiﬁed
and rendered so that they become preattentative, or pop out, in
the visualized network. Pivotal points are highlighted in the
display with a purple ring so that they stand out in a visualized
network. Graph-theoretically identiﬁable pivotal points allow
us to reduce networkwide operations to the subset of pivotal
nodes only to improve the interpretability of the network.
Procedure
The procedure of using CiteSpace II is described in the
following steps, followed by illustrative examples to demon-
strate the new features.
1. Identify a knowledge domain using the broadest possible
term. This is to ensure that subsequent analysis covers all
major components of a knowledge domain (e.g., mass
extinction).
2. Data collection: Currently, the primary source of data is
the Web of Science. CiteSpace II also allows users to
download bibliographic records directly from PubMed, a
primary repository of medical literature. The topical
terms identiﬁed in the ﬁrst step are used to retrieve bibli-
ographic records from the Web of Science, including
titles, abstracts, and cited references. Each bibliographic
record represents a citing article whereas a cited refer-
ence included in each record is called a cited article.
3. Extract research front terms: CiteSpace II ﬁrst collects
n-grams, or terms, from titles, abstracts, descriptors, and
identiﬁers of citing articles in a dataset. The present study
used single words or phrases of up to four words. For
example, terrorism and posttraumatic stress disorder are
valid terms. Research-front terms are determined by the
sharp growth rate of their frequencies.
4. Time slicing: In CiteSpace II, users specify the range of the
entire time interval and the length of a single time slice.
5. Threshold selection: CiteSpace II allows users to specify
three sets of threshold levels for citation counts, co-
citation counts, and co-citation coefﬁcients. The speciﬁed
thresholds are applied to three time slices, namely the
earliest slice, the middle one, and the last one. Linear
interpolated thresholds are assigned to the rest of slices. In
this study, bipartite networks of research-front terms and
intellectual base articles were constructed. Such networks
contain three types of links: (a) co-occurring research
front terms, (b) co-cited intellectual base articles, and (c) a
research-front term citing an intellectual base article.
6. Pruning and merging: Pathﬁnder network scaling is the de-
fault option in CiteSpace II for network pruning (Chen,
2004; Schvaneveldt, 1990). Users choose whether to apply
the scaling operation to individual networks. Pathﬁnder
network scaling is an asymptotically expensive algorithm.
CiteSpace II implements a concurrent version of the algo-
rithm to process multiple networks simultaneously, which
substantially reduces the overall waiting time. Networks
Gi  (Vi, Ei) and Gj  (Vj, Ej) from different time slices
may have overlapping vertices and edges, i.e., Vi ∩Vj ∅
and Ei ∩Ej ∅. CiteSpace II merges individual networks
by taking a set union of all the vertices and selecting links
that do not violate a triangle inequality condition in
overlapping areas between networks. Users can choose
whether to prune the merged network as a whole.
7. Layout: CiteSpace II supports a standard graph view and
a time-zone view.
8. Visual inspection: CiteSpace II enables users to interact
with the visualization of a knowledge domain in several
ways. The user may control the display of visual attrib-
utes and labels as well as a variety of parameters used by
the underlying layout algorithms. Figure 2 illustrates the
visual attributes of an article node.
FIG. 2.
Citation tree rings represent the citation history of an article. The color of a citation ring denotes the time of corresponding citations. The thickness
of a ring is proportional to the number of citations in a given time slice. The small number next to the center of a node is the citations throughout the entire
time interval.

366
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
9. Verify pivotal points. The signiﬁcance of a marked piv-
otal point can be veriﬁed by asking domain experts (e.g.,
authors of pivotal-point articles) and/or examining the
literature (e.g., passages containing citations of a pivotal-
point article). A particularly interesting direction of re-
search is the development of tools that can automatically
summarize the value of a pivotal point. Digital libraries,
automated text summarization, machine learning, and
several other ﬁelds are among the most promising
sources of input.
Case Studies
We demonstrate the new features of CiteSpace with case
studies of two research ﬁelds: mass-extinction research
(1981–2003) and terrorism research (1990–2003). Both
ﬁelds have experienced profound changes as a result of trig-
gering events.
Mass-extinction research (1981–2003).
Five major mass
extinctions have taken place on Earth in the past. The
most widely known mass extinction is the K-T extinctions
65 million years ago, which led to the extinction of di-
nosaurs. Causes of mass extinctions have been debated by
catastrophists and gradualists. Catastrophists stress the
role of catastrophic events in triggering mass extinctions
whereas gradualists believe that mass extinctions in gen-
eral are a prolonged process and that no single event can
determine the course of mass extinctions. The most fa-
mous catastrophic theory is known as the impact theory,
proposed in the early 1980s to explain the K-T extinctions
(Alvarez, Alvarez, Asaro, & Michel, 1980). According to
the theory, a gigantic asteroid hit the earth and led to the
extinctions of many species. The impact crater was identi-
ﬁed in 1990. The goal of this case study was to see to
what extent emerging trends and sudden changes can be
detected with reference to specialties associated with the
impact theory.
There are several key questions to be answered by the case
study. What is the latest research front in mass-extinction
research? How did the impact-theory research front evolve
over the last 20 years? What are the “hottest” research-front
terms? Which articles are associated with these terms?
The input data for CiteSpace II were retrieved from cita-
tion index databases via the Web of Science based on a topic
search for articles published between 1981 and 2003 on
mass extinction. The scope of the search included four topic
ﬁelds in each bibliographic record: title, abstract, descrip-
tors, and identiﬁers. The search was limited to articles in
English only. The resultant dataset contains a total of 771
records. A total of 333 research-front terms were detected
from the four topic ﬁelds of these records. The 23-year time
span between 1981 and 2003 was divided into twelve 2-year
time slices. Three sets of threshold levels, namely citation
threshold (c), co-citation threshold (cc), and co-citation
coefﬁcient threshold (ccv), were set as follows: (2, 1, 10),
(3, 1, 0), and (3, 2, 10).
Terrorism research (1990–2003).
The 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing and the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks
are among the most traumatic terrorism events. Unlike the
mass-extinction case, each event may alter the course of
research. How did the research community respond to such
events and ramiﬁcations? What are the emerging research
fronts in this ﬁeld of research? How are they related to
earlier research fronts?
The terrorism research (1990–2003) dataset consists of
1,776 records resulted from a topic search on terrorism in
the Web of Science. A total of 1,108 research-front terms
were found. The entire time interval of 1990 to 2003 was di-
vided into seven 2-year slices. The seven corresponding net-
works were subsequently merged into a panoramic network
to depict the changes of dominating research issues over the
entire 14-year time span. CiteSpace II conﬁgurations are
summarized in the next section.
Results
This section is organized in two parts: mass extinction
(1981–2004) and terrorism (1990–2003). The following
notations are used: D—a set of articles, T—a set of terms,
G(T1, T2,...,TN)—a multipartite network of node types
{T(k)}, for example, G(D) and G(T, D), {Gi}—a network
merged from snapshot networks {Gi},  is the merge
operation, and PF(G)—a Pathﬁnder network of G.
Mass Extinction (1981–2004)
We describe four visualizations of the mass-extinction
dataset produced by four conﬁgurations in CiteSpace II: (a) a
merged network of co-cited articles {Gt(D)}, (b) a merged
network of Pathﬁnder-pruned individual co-citation net-
works {PF(Gt(D))}, (c) a Pathﬁnder-pruned hybrid
network PF(G(T, D)), and (d) the Pathﬁnder-pruned hybrid
network PF(G(T, D)) shown in time-zone view.
Table 3 shows the ﬁrst conﬁguration for a 515-article
co-citation network {Gt(D)}. Note that no articles were
selected from the ﬁrst two slices. It took less than 10 seconds
to complete the process in CiteSpace II.
The most prominent article in the visualization is
Alvarez-1980. It was this article that ﬁrst introduced the im-
pact theory (see Figure 3). The central area was surrounded
by ﬁve densely connected clusters. In CiteSpace II, the user
can select a cluster of items and ﬁnd matching records in
PubMed. Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) assigned to
matched articles were ranked by their occurrences so that
they serve as labels of the selected cluster. The number at the
corner of each rectangle in Figure 3 is the number of articles
in the selected region. For example, MeSH term Geologic
Sediments was assigned to 8 of the 100 selected articles.
Since PubMed primarily covers the medical literature, de-
pending on the subject domain, articles in a visualized net-
work may or may not have matching records in PubMed.
This {Gt(D)} network is the result of merging several
time-slice networks. Co-citation networks do not explicitly

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
367
DOI: 10.1002/asi
TABLE 3.
The construction conﬁguration for a 515-article co-citation network. 
2-year slices 
c
cc
ccv
No. Articles
No. Nodes
No. Links
1981–1982
2
1
0.15
64
0
0
1983–1984
2
1
0.19
27
0
0
1985–1986
2
1
0.23
163
7
14
1987–1988
2
2
0.28
205
8
16
1989–1990
2
2
0.32
331
7
10
1991–1992
2
2
0.36
1,687
123
353
1993–1994
3
3
0.40
2,004
31
59
1995–1996
3
3
0.38
2,908
47
30
1997–1998
3
3
0.36
4,503
142
522
1999–2000
3
3
0.34
5,994
156
436
2001–2002
3
3
0.32
7,431
300
1,181
2003–2004
4
4
0.30
7,092
101
243
Total
32,409
922(515)
2,864
feature research fronts; rather, they represent the footprint of
a research front. As a result, such networks do not readily
lend themselves to answer questions such as: “Why did a
particular cluster of co-cited articles emerge? Which re-
search front is being involved?”
The second conﬁguration generated a 541-article network
{PF(Gt(D))}, merging individual Pathﬁnder networks of
co-cited articles. In addition, lower threshold levels were as-
signed to the earlier time slices. It took 24.6 seconds to com-
plete the process. The results are summarized in Table 4.
The lower threshold levels increased the number of
selected articles in the 1981–1982 and 1983–1984 slices,
although these newly selected articles were cited only once
in the dataset. These articles were not selected by the ﬁrst
conﬁguration. These articles appeared to be widely co-cited.
In 1981–1982, 1,555 co-citation links were found among
62 articles. Similarly, 2,964 co-citation links were found
among 156 articles in 1985–1986.As shown in Figure 4, these
articles are essentially one or two co-citation links away from
Alvarez-1980 (Alvarez et al., 1980).The cluster located to the
right of the visualization was apparently formed recently
because the prevalent red rings in this cluster indicate that
they were cited in 2003–2004. Highly cited articles in this
cluster include Bowring-1998, Renne-1995, Hallam-1997,
and Wignall-1992. Raup-1982 is the second most highly
cited article in the older cluster centered atAlvarez-1980.
The third conﬁguration speciﬁes a hybrid network of
research-front terms and intellectual-base articles. The most
recent cluster is positioned as the upper cluster in Figure 5.
This cluster includes research-front terms such as Late
Frasnian, Atomospheric CO2, and carbon cycle. The cen-
tral area is associated with research front terms such as
Cretaceous-Tertiary Boundary and Late Cretaceous, which
are the key concepts of the impact theory.
In addition to the three visualizations, a time-zone view is
shown in Figure 6, which emphasizes the temporal relation-
ships. The time-zone view reveals three remarkable clusters
stretched over time. Each cluster corresponds to a specialty in
mass-extinction research. The lowest major cluster in the
map, full of green lines if shown in color, is the K-Textinction
FIG. 3.
A 515-node network of co-cited articles on mass extinction (1981–2004) based on twelve 2-year slices. Five clusters and the central area are marked
by MeSH terms assigned to articles in individual clusters. MeSH terms were retrieved from PubMed on demand. The number at the corner of each rectangle
is the number of articles found in the cluster. The youngest cluster is a 100-article cluster in the lower left of the visualization.

368
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
TABLE 4.
The second conﬁguration, including Pathﬁnder pruning and lower threshold levels.
2-year slices 
c cc ccv
No. Articles
No. Nodes (unique) 
No. Links
1981–1982
1 1 0.35
64
62
1,555
1983–1984
1 1 0.35
27
26
325
1985–1986
1 1 0.35
163
156
2,964
1987–1988
2 2 0.35
205
8
16
1989–1990
2 2 0.35
331
7
10
1991–1992
2 2 0.35
1,687
123
353
1993–1994
3 3 0.35
2,004
31
60
1995–1996
3 3 0.35
2,907
47
30
1997–1998
3 3 0.35
4,497
142
523
1999–2000
4 4 0.35
5,990
59
68
2001–2002
4 4 0.35
7,427
145
364
2003–2004
5 5 0.35
7,091
53
93
Total
32,393
859(541)
6,361
FIG. 4.
The network of 541 co-cited articles based on 12 Pathﬁnder-pruned snapshot networks. The ﬁrst three slices now present in the visualization. The
most prominent cluster (i.e., the cluster to the right) also is the most recent one.
FIG. 5.
A 569-node hybrid network of cited articles and citing terms (Time taken  28 s).

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
369
DOI: 10.1002/asi
FIG. 6.
A time-zone view of mass-extinction research, showing three prominent lines of research: the K-T extinction thread (the second-lowest cluster), the
Late Frasnian extinction thread (the middle cluster), and the Permian extinction thread (the upper cluster).
debate thread. Starting with Alvarez-1980, this thread main-
tained a strong presence for the next 10 years until it started to
diminish in 1991–1992 and disappeared from the map after
1995–1996. Many articles in this cluster were still cited in
2003–2004, as indicated by the color of their outmost rings of
citations. The most recent research-front terms include North
America, fossil record, and Late Cretaceous.
The middle cluster, consisting of yellow links, started be-
fore the 1980s and ended in 1997. The thread contains arti-
cles Johnson-1985 and Copper-1986. The size of this thread
is smaller than the K-T extinction thread. Because the thread
has a research-front term Late Frasnian, we call it the Late-
Frasnian thread. On a geological scale, the Frasnian Age is
part of the Late Devonian Period between 386 and 375 mil-
lion years ago. Late Devonian mass extinction is one of the
ﬁve major mass extinctions at the boundary between the
Frasnian and Famennian ages. Explanations for this mass
extinction include an episode of global cooling, and associ-
ated lowering of sea level, and Meteorite impacts.
The cluster near the top of the map is predominated by
orange links, representing an evolving thread. It started with
Wignall-1992 (Wignall, 1992), reinforced by Bowring-
1998, and recently added Becker-2001 (Becker, Poreda,
Hunt, Bunch, & Rampino, 2001). Permian-Triassic-
boundary and South China are two research-front terms de-
tected in 2001. Becker-2001 is entitled “Impact Event at the
Permian-Triassic Boundary.” Asimple search on the Web for
“Becker, Permian, and Triassic” conﬁrmed that Becker-2001
presented evidence for a major impact associated with the
Permian mass extinction. Becker et al. (2004) published a
more recent article in Science entitled “Bedout: A Possible
End-Permian 
Impact 
Crater 
Offshore 
Northwestern
Australia.” Bedout is the name of a crater. Its signiﬁcance
to the Permian mass-extinction research is expected to be
comparable to that of the Chicxulub crater to the K-T impact
theory. The discovery of the Chicxulub crater dramatically
boosted the credibility of the K-T impact theory. Encouraged
by the successful puzzle-solving experience, many scientists
appear to have adapted the same approach to solve a differ-
ent puzzle—by applying the impact theory to an earlier mass
extinction. Finding the impact crater is the next logical step.
Identifying a Permian-Triassic boundary impact crater has
attracted the attention of many researchers. It was in this
context that the current research front has emerged.
The time-zone visualization along with three questions
(see Figure 7) were sent to Dr. Paul Wignall at Leeds Univer-
sity in the United Kingdom to verify the aforementioned
observation because he authored two pivotal-point articles in
the Permian extinction thread (Wignall & Hallam, 1992;
Wignall & Hallam, 1993). He conﬁrmed that the K-T extinc-
tion debate was slowing down since the mid 1990s because
much of the debate was resolved as a result of the discovery
of the Chicxulub impact crater: “Many people still work on
this extinction event but many others have now moved to
look at the end-Permian mass extinction, which is why there
is continued interest in my work.” The research front term
Late Frasnian was ﬁrst found in 1997 in this thread. In
answering the question of why the thread in the middle
appears to come to an end, Wignall explained that the thread
was related to Copper’s work on the Late Devonian mass
extinction. It has not been an active line of research primar-
ily due to the lack of supporting data.
In summary, the time-zone view conveys a picture of the
decade-long trends consistent with the observation of a do-
main expert. The K-T extinction thread ended about the time
the Permian extinction thread started to take off. Was it be-
cause scientists were encouraged by the outcome of the K-T
extinction debate? The recent series of work by Becker et al.

370
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
FIG. 7.
The time-zone visualization along with three questions sent to Dr. Wignall for comment. He is the author of two pivotal-point articles identiﬁed in
the visualization.
(2004) indeed bears a considerable amount of resemblance
to the K-T debate in the 1980s, notably the impact theory
and the search for the impact crater. It would be very reveal-
ing to track how this thread will evolve in the near future.
Compared with earlier visualizations, the new methods in
CiteSpace II have improved the clarity and interpretability
of visualizations. In our 2002 case study of mass-extinction
research (Chen, Cribbin, Macredie, & Morar, 2002), the goal
was to reconstruct the history of a scientiﬁc ﬁeld by visual-
izing the evolution of its co-citation network not only
chronologically but also retrospectively. The most cited arti-
cle can be identiﬁed by the tallest citation bar, and the main-
stream specialty can be identiﬁed by the color groupings
based on Principal Component Analysis. Walter Alvarez’s
(1997) book was used as the primary source to interpret the
three-dimensional models—a two-dimensional co-citation
network as the base map and a one-dimensional citation pro-
ﬁle. Although three-dimensional models vividly reproduced
the growth of the citation landscape, identifying emerging
trends in such models turned out to be a challenging task.
The new visualizations in CiteSpace II enable us to identify
not only groundbreaking articles such as Alvarez et al.
(1980) but also critical points in the course of transition from
one specialty to another. Identifying pivotal points purely
based on the topological properties of a network has practi-
cal values. For example, one can quickly identify a small
number of domain experts and seek their advice on speciﬁc
issues. In the following example, several domain experts are
identiﬁed in this way as part of an in-depth validation of the
method.
Terrorism Research (1990–2003)
Merging seven snapshot networks led to a 335-node
hybrid network of terms and articles. Threshold levels are
summarized in Table 5. It took 8 seconds to build the merged
TABLE 5.
The CiteSpace conﬁguration used for visualizing the terrorism research dataset (1990–2003).
Threshold levels are set for citations (c), co-citations (cc), and co-citation coefﬁcients (ccv). The number of
articles in each slice is the total number of articles that were cited within the slice. The number of nodes is the
number of articles and terms that pass the thresholds. The number of links is the number of links within a slice.
2-year slices
c  cc  ccv
No. Articles
No. Nodes (unique)
No. Links
1990–1991
2  1  0.10
1,455
15
27
1992–1993
2  1  0.11
1,372
32
137
1994–1995
2  1  0.12
1,527
12
19
1996–1997
2  1  0.14
2,735
109
1,504
1998–1999
3  2  0.15
3,037
31
75
2000–2001
3  2  0.18
5,518
47
211
2002–2003
3  2  0.22
18,366
182
649
Total
34,010
428(335)
2,622

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
371
DOI: 10.1002/asi
network in CiteSpace II on an IBM ThinkPad with a
1.6 GHz Pentium processor and 1 GB RAM.
CiteSpace II implements a multithread version of
Pathﬁnder to reduce the overall waiting time. When Cite-
Space II was conﬁgured to extract a Pathﬁnder network from
each slice in this example, the process took 20 seconds to
complete. Given the rich information it represents, this is
expected to be a reasonable trade-off.
The terrorism research map has three prominent clusters
(see Figure 8): (a) Cluster A (CA) is body injuries in terrorist
bombing (upper left, green), containing research-front terms
bodyinjuriesandterroristbombing;(b)ClusterB(CB)ishealth
care in response to the threat of biological and chemical
weapons (upper right, yellow-orange), containing terms health
care and chemical weapons, and (c) Cluster C (CC) is psy-
chological and psychiatric impacts of the September 11, 2001,
FIG. 8.
Three prominent clusters emerge in the 335-node hybrid network of cited article (intellectual bases) and citing terms (research fronts): CA: body
injuries in terrorist bombing (upper left, green), CB: health care systems in response to the threat of mass destructive biological and chemical weapons (upper
right, yellow-orange), and CC: psychological-psychiatric impacts of September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks (lower central, orange).

372
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
attacks
(lower
middle,
orange),
containing
the
terms
September11,UnitedStates,andposttraumaticstressdisorder.
CA represents the specialty on body injuries in terrorist
bombing, especially from surgeons’perspectives. It includes
intellectual-base articles such as Cooper-1983 (Cooper,
Maynard, Cross, & Hill, 1983), Frykberg-1988 (Frykberg,
Tepas, & Alexander, 1989), and Katz-1989 (Katz, Ofek,
Adler, Abramowitz, & Krausz, 1989). CB represents the
health-care specialty, containing two substructures. Its left
half is in bright yellow, and its right half is in orange. The left
half includes the term emergency medical, and the right one is
dominated by the term health care. Both parts are concerned
with the vulnerability of the health care and emergency sys-
tems in response to the potentially massive damages caused
by biological and chemical weapons. CA and CB are con-
nected via a single pivotal point Mallonee-1996 (Mallonee
et al., 1996) (centrality  55%). The pivotal article reported
a comprehensive study of the casualties caused by the 1995
Oklahoma City bombing. It is connected to CA because it
dealt with body injuries and casualties in a terrorist bombing.
On the other hand, it also is connected to CB because of
the large number of injuries and casualties caused by the
Oklahoma City bombing, which is a central concern of CB.
CC represents the specialty that is concerned with
psychological and psychiatric disorders as a result of the
September 11, 2001, attacks. The PTSD thread includes
a 2001 PTSD survey Schuster-2001 (Schuster et al., 2001), a
2002 PTSD survey Galea-2002 (Galea et al., 2002), and a
1999 PTSD study of the Oklahoma City bombing North-
1999 (North et al., 1999). Galea-2002 and North-1999 also
are identiﬁed as pivotal points. Galea-2002 is the single
bridge between CA and CC whereas North-1999 is the single
bridge between CB and CC. CB and CC are connected by a
pivotal link between Holloway-1997 (Holloway, Norwood,
Fullerton, Engel, & Ursano, 1997) and North-1999.
Holloway-1997 resides in CB, which is about the health
care preparedness in response to possible mass destruc-
tive terrorism attacks; the psychological perspective of
Holloway-1997, among other issues, echoes the PTSD
aspect of terrorism research. The only other link between CB
and CC is via a single term: United States.
The signiﬁcance of North-1999 in the entire “big picture”
became clearer as we examined the context of its citations.
At a glimpse, one can easily and intuitively ﬁnd articles that
are worth a closer look. In CiteSpace II, users can examine
the details at several levels. At the top level, the labels of the
most prominent items are displayed by default. CiteSpace II
provides a number of interactive controls for users to adjust
the amount of information shown at this level based on var-
ious threshold values. At the second level, the user can bring
up one-line reference details by a single click on a node in
the network. The user can access further details by a double
click on a node.
Figure 9 shows a local view of the overview visualization
in Figure 8. This view shows a number of pivotal points be-
tween the three clusters (i.e., CA, CB, and CC) and the titles of
pivotal-point articles. Two of them are associated with the
1995 Oklahoma City bombing: Mallonee-1996 on body
injuries and North-1999 on PTSD among the survivors. Post-
September 11, 2001, studies of PTSD heavily drew upon the
experiences and ﬁndings from the Oklahoma City bombing.
On the other hand, the research focus shifted from the sur-
vivors of the direct blast in the Oklahoma City bombing, as
studied by North-1999, to wider populations. PTSD studies
FIG. 9.
Three prominent research fronts in the ﬁeld of terrorism research.

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
373
DOI: 10.1002/asi
of the September 11 attacks (e.g., Galea-2002; Schlenger-
2001), focused on people who were indirectly exposed to the
September 11 attacks in New York primarily from the mass
media. CiteSpace II was able to draw our attention to the
signiﬁcant connection between North-1999 and Galea-
2002 at a specialty level. The precise nature of the connection
was discovered in a subsequent survey targeted to domain
experts, namely the authors of the pivotal-point articles. The
survey results are described in the following section.
We also generated a time-zone view of the terrorism re-
search. Due to the limited space, we summarize the major
ﬁndings only. Three major threads emerged. The Oklahoma
City bombing thread came to an end in 1997. The most
recent terms—health care and after September 11—were
found in the research front of bioterrorism. The two terms
were ﬁrst detected in 2003. The PTSD thread was stretched
across the entire time interval, suggesting that PTSD
research has a long history despite the fact that it became
prominent in the terrorism research only recently. PTSD
research studies a broad range of stressors (e.g., triggers of
stress such as natural disasters as well as terrorism). The
events of September 11 added a new perspective and
expanded the traditional scope of PTSD.
Table 6 lists research-front terms that emerged between
1990 and 2003. Terms associated with the September 11,
2001, attacks include chemical-weapons and anthrax-
vaccine in 2001, New-York and posttraumatic stress disorder
in 2002, and health-care and after-September in 2003.
Terms associated with the Oklahoma City bombing, includ-
ing blast-injuries and federal-building, surged in 1996. Note
that PTSD was spelled out as posttraumatic in 1996, but
as post-traumatic in 2002 after the September 11, 2001,
attacks. Mental-health is a closely related concept to PTSD;
frequencies of both terms jumped up substantially in 1996
after the Oklahoma City bombing.
Evaluations
The nature of identiﬁed pivotal points was evaluated in
two ways: (a) a questionnaire to authors of pivotal-point
articles as domain experts and (b) content analysis of pas-
sages in which pivotal-point articles were cited and co-cited.
Due to the limited space, we only present the questionnaire
in this article.
A questionnaire containing four questions was e-mailed
to authors of pivotal-point articles. The goal of the evalua-
tion was to verify that these pivotal points indeed represent a
crucial point in an intellectual transition, a shift of focus, or
a change of perspective in the knowledge domain in ques-
tion. In the questionnaire, we asked each domain expert
about the signiﬁcance of their pivotal-point articles and the
nature of connections to neighboring pivotal-point articles.
The questionnaire was e-mailed to eight domain experts
along with hyperlinks to high-resolution images. Three
experts were not reachable because their e-mail addresses
were no longer valid. The remaining ﬁve experts replied and
answered all questions. Due to the limited space, we discuss
one expert’s answers in detail and summarize other experts’
answers. Further details are available from the author upon
request.
Galea-2002 and North-1999 are the two pivotal-point
articles in the PTSD cluster. Dr. Sandro Galea, the ﬁrst
Terms
Frequency
2003
health-care
47
after-September
32
care-workers
9
attacks
8
security
7
2002
New-York
111
post-traumatic-stress-disorder
70
North-Korea
30
homeland-security
24
international-community
14
bin-laden
13
health-protection
13
2001
11-september
75
chemical-weapons
23
America’s-response
20
anthrax-vaccine
11
2000
law-enforcement
14
task-force
14
new-terrorism
7
Terms
Frequency
1999
biological-weapon(s)
16
emergency-medical
11
emergency-management
6
1998
organophosphate-poisoning
9
1997
terrorist-bombings
15
blast-overpressure
14
warfare-agents
10
Tokyo-subway
9
mass-disaster
8
biological-terrorism
7
gastrointestinal-tract
6
lung-injury
6
traumatic-events
6
Buenos-Aires
3
1996
blast-injuries (injury)
29
mental-health
19
posttraumatic-stress
17
federal-building
6
Terms
Frequency
1995
peace-process
10
couple-violence
7
emergency-room
7
common-couple
6
sarin-vapor
6
major-trauma
5
1994
national-security
8
1993
united-states
21
international-news
6
criminal-justice
5
nuclear-weapons
4
1992
Northern-Ireland
8
gulf-war
6
political-violence
6
United-Kingdom
6
blast-loading
5
blast-lung
2
Iowa-state
2
TABLE 6.
Research-front terms surged between 1990 and 2003.

374
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
author of Galea-2002, provided the following answers
regarding Galea-2002.
1. What is the signiﬁcance of the issue(s) addressed by your
article?
I think our article was the ﬁrst to use a validated instrument
to document psychological disorders that were linked to the
September 11 terrorist attacks showing the psychological
consequences of terrorism. There was intense interest in the
September 11 attacks and our article provided some empiric
rationale for the speculation about potential consequences of
the attacks.
2. What was the major impact or implication of your article
on subsequent research?
There have been a number of articles that have been pub-
lished after the September 11 attacks, all discussing in some
respect the psychological consequences of those attacks/
potential implications of terrorism. I think our article (a) es-
tablished the importance of terrorist events for population
mental health (b) clearly laid out the fact that persons in the
general population (not just victims) can have psychological
disorders after a mass disaster.
3. Your article has been frequently cited together with the
following pivotal points (see details in the table). Could
you explain the possible nature of such connections?
•
North, C.S., et al. (1999) Psychiatric disorders
among survivors of the Oklahoma City bombing.
JAMA, 282(8), 755–762.
•
Mallonee, S., et al. (1996) Physical injuries and fa-
talities resulting from the Oklahoma City bombing.
JAMA, 276(5), 382–387.
I think the “real link” is the ﬁrst of these two articles. The
September 11 attacks were perceived as the “next” big attack
after the Oklahoma City bombing and as such early after the
attacks there were a lot of references to Oklahoma City. The
North paper was the “standard” paper after the Oklahoma
City bombing and as such people inevitably made compar-
isons between the two (very different) papers. 
4. In your opinion, does your article represent a shift of
focus, or a change of perspective?
I think our article identiﬁed “everyone in the city” as poten-
tially at risk for PTSD after terrorism, this is not an uncontro-
versial observation and broadens what people previously
thought of as “exposures” to a disaster. In that regard yes, it
represents a change in perspective. Subsequent articles have
embraced that perspective, although others have contested it.
Other experts also offered their comments, including
Dr. Eric Frykberg on pivotal-point article Frykberg-1988 in
CA and Dr. Todd Sandler on pivotal-point article Sandler
1983 (Sandler, Tschirhart, & Cauley, 1983). Dr. Carol
North provided valuable insights and interpretations in a
30-minute telephone interview.
Frykberg explained the signiﬁcance of Frykberg-1988
in CA: “as a collective review of hundreds of bombing inci-
dents in the literature, it represents the ﬁrst time to my knowl-
edge that the patterns and severity of injury of casualties of
terrorist bombings were analyzed to derive general principles
of management, showing that once patterns were identiﬁed,
preparation and planning is possible to improve outcome.”
Frykberg-1988 introduced a new outcome measure of med-
ical management, namely critical mortality, and concluded
that triage is a critical factor in casualty outcome since
accurate and rapid identiﬁcation of that small minority
needing immediate care is essential to saving lives in
immediate jeopardy.
North-1999 is one of the two pivotal points in the PTSD
cluster. North explained in a telephone interview that al-
though the PTSD cluster appeared swiftly after the September
11 attacks, PTSD research has a long history. Earlier PTSD
studies were associated with the Vietnam War, the Gulf War,
and natural disasters such as earthquakes and hurricanes.
Terrorism is a relatively new type of stressor in PTSD re-
search. The sudden popularity of PTSD in terrorism research
is largely due to a number of PTSD studies after the
September 11, 2001, attacks. These studies, along with the
earlier PTSD studies of the Oklahoma City bombing, have es-
tablished PTSD as a prominent aspect of terrorism research.
North also noted the bioterrorism research front in CB as
an active area of research. Since bioterrorism is regarded as
a special type of terrorism, lessons learned from terrorism
research in general could be applicable to bioterrorism. As
shown in a time-zone view, the research-front term health-
care in CB belongs to a current and active research front.
North also suggested one way to distinguish the prominent
PTSD studies in the cluster in terms of the populations they
studied. For example, North-1999 studied the directly
injured victims at the scene of the Oklahoma City bombing.
Galea-2002 sampled from the entire population in Manhat-
tan, a much broader population than the immediate victims
at the World Trade Center scene. Schuster-2001 studied the
prevalence of terrorism-triggered PTSD in an even broader
population—the entire population across the United States.
Schlenger-2002 studied populations increasingly further
away from New York.
Discussions and Future Work
CiteSpace II is a system that could be potentially used by
a wide range of users, notably scientists, science policy re-
searchers, and research students, to detect and visualize
emerging trends and radical changes in scientiﬁc disciplines
over time. It can be used to explore the dynamics of a spe-
cialty in terms of a time-variant mapping from a research
front to its intellectual base. The innovative combination of
computational and visualization techniques has substantially
sharpened the focus of progressive knowledge domain
visualization techniques initially proposed and implemented
in CiteSpace I. The results of the two case studies are en-
couraging, especially in light of the validations of domain
experts.
The fully integrated representation of research fronts and
intellectual bases in the same network visualization has three
practical advantages. First, using surged topical terms rather

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
375
DOI: 10.1002/asi
than the most frequently occurring title words is particularly
suitable for detecting emerging trends and abrupt changes.
In visualized networks, research-front terms are explicitly
linked to intellectual-base articles. This design presents a
compact representation of the duality between a research
front and its intellectual base. Second, research-front terms
naturally lend themselves to be used as labels of specialties.
Third, it overcomes a common drawback of word-proﬁle-
based labeling approaches. Aggregated word proﬁles may
not converge to an intrinsic focus. Terms selected based on
sudden increased popularity measures are particularly
suitable to characterize a current research front.
The divide-and-conquer strategy has captured the
dynamics of evolving specialties efﬁciently. The ability to
identify pivotal points algorithmically largely reduces users’
cognitive load. In this study, we validated the pivotal points
in terrorism research with domain experts. More compre-
hensive evaluative studies are recommended to investigate
the effect of alternative centrality metrics.
The Pathﬁnder algorithm extracts the most salient patterns
from a network, but it does not scale well. CiteSpace II
implements a concurrent version of the algorithm. The con-
current Pathﬁnder algorithm has substantially optimized the
network scaling module, although it still took 6,000 seconds
to process 14 networks and merge them into a 1,704-node net-
work. We also are investigating parallel solutions using clus-
ter computing techniques. Currently, an optimal conﬁguration
on a single PC is to limit the visualization to a dozen snapshot
networks of 200 to 300 nodes per network so that the process
can be completed within tens of seconds.
A long-term challenge is to develop a seamless environ-
ment in which users can explore the literature of a scientiﬁc
discipline at various levels of granularity. Pivotal points may
serve as users’ signposts and help them to track an evolving
specialty. Another challenging issue to be addressed is an
integration of citation index and co-citation index with text-
processing techniques at the full-text level. Such integra-
tions enable users to not only identify important patterns and
relations based on citation indexing but actually access the
ﬁrsthand information in original articles. In a sense, this line
of research may fulﬁll what Vannevar Bush had envisaged
in 1945.
In this article, we have described CiteSpace II as a system
devised to facilitate the study of evolving specialties in the
form of a time-variant duality between a research front and
its intellectual base. There are several possible directions
to extend the research. For example, the linkage between
scientiﬁc literature and technological inventions, namely be-
tween articles and patents, has been a central topic in areas
such as research policy, science and technology indicators,
and knowledge diffusion (Carpenter, Cooper, & Narin,
1980; Tijssen & Vanraan, 1994); however, much work
remains; users need tools that can turn a vast amount of data
into crystal-clear and instructive messages.
An increasingly important link is between government
funding agencies and scientists’outputs. Identifying trends in
research-grant solicitations and awarded grants is vital for
scientists. The ability to identify the connections between a
funding trend and an existing intellectual base can substan-
tially improve the competitiveness of universities and
research laboratories. In addition to the horizontal-expansion
opportunities, a number of application domains are particu-
larly in need of trend detection and topic-tracking tools,
including bioinformatics and national security-related areas
such as intelligence analysis.
A far-reaching research agenda is to develop deep
knowledge discovery and data-mining techniques and syner-
gize with knowledge domain visualization challenges. The
work of Swanson (1986, 1989) on discovering logically re-
lated noninteractive literature and hypothesis formation
(Smalheiser & Swanson, 1998) is particularly relevant.
Due to the limited access to the full-text version of arti-
cles in various sources, we were not able to locate as many
instances of citation context as we had hoped. This experi-
ence raised a practical question concerning the extent to
which analysts need to access the literature. In an ideal
scenario, one would have access to the full text of all the
citing and cited articles from a comprehensive digital
library. In reality, the closest sources include the ACM
Digital Library and the IEEE Explorer. In an even more re-
alistic setting, one would get started with full-text access to
just a few core journals in a ﬁeld. Open-access repositories
such as arXive and CiteSeer would be good testbeds. In
future work, we plan to extend and tailor our tools to ana-
lyze trends in these sources.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the new features introduced to CiteSpace
II for detecting and visualizing emerging trends and abrupt
changes in a ﬁeld of research have produced promising and
encouraging results. The major ﬁndings are that
•
the surge of interest is an informative indicator for a new
research front;
•
using heterogeneous networks of terms and articles provides a
comprehensive representation of the dynamics of a specialty;
•
research-front terms are informative cluster labels;
•
citation tree-ring visualizations are visually appealing and
semantically interpretable;
•
betweenness centrality metrics identify semantically valid
pivotal points.
Challenges and opportunities also are identiﬁed in this article
for future work. In summary, the major challenges are to
•
empirically evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of using
burst terms as cluster summaries as opposed to using word
proﬁles;
•
empirically compare the pivotal points identiﬁed by be-
tweenness centrality versus points identiﬁed by alternative
centrality metrics;
•
develop seamlessness environments by adapting and
incorporating automated text summarization and natural
language-processing techniques in addition to statistical
approaches so that visual exploration and everyday scientiﬁc
activities can be integrated closely;

376
JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
DOI: 10.1002/asi
•
integrate the visualizations of research fronts and intellectual
bases with full-text digital libraries;
•
implement and compare trend detection and topic-tracking
techniques;
•
expand the work to heterogeneous data types such as patents
and grant awards.
The provision of a tool-like CiteSpace II enables analysts
to perform quantitative and qualitative studies of scientiﬁc-
subject domains more easily. In terms of intellectual contribu-
tions, the study shows the potential of a practical tool for
improving our understanding of a research ﬁeld. The study
also demonstrates how the experience and ﬁndings of the
study have led to an understanding of more challenges and
moreopportunitiesahead.Bydrawingthestrengthsfrommul-
tiple disciplines, the research becomes a melting pot to turn
otherwiseisolatedtechniquesintoanintegrativeenvironment.
We have demonstrated the potential of an integrative ap-
proach to the visualization and analysis of the evolution of a
ﬁeld of research. In particular, we have focused on various
practical issues concerning detecting emerging trends and
abrupt changes in transient research fronts. The encouraging
results indicate that this is a promising line of research with
potentially wide-ranging beneﬁts to users from different
disciplines.
Acknowledgments
The author is grateful for generous help from Dr. Paul
Wignall at Leeds University, England, on the mass-extinction
study and Dr. Carol North, Professor of Psychiatry,
Washington University School of Medicine; Dr. Sandro
Galea, the Center for Urban Epidemiologic Studies, New
York Academy of Medicine; Dr. Eric Frykberg, Professor of
Surgery, University of Florida; and Dr. Todd Sandler, School
of International Relations, University of Southern California,
on the terrorism-research study. The author acknowledges a
2002 Citation Research Grant from the American Society for
Information Science and Technology and the Institute for
Scientiﬁc Information. CiteSpace is available at http://cluster.
cis.drexel.edu/~cchen/citespace.
References
Abt, H.A. (1998). Why some papers have long citation lifetimes. Nature,
395, 756–757.
Allan, J., Papka, R., & Lavrenko, V. (1998). Online new event detection and
tracking. Proceedings of ACM SIGIR (pp. 37–45).
Alvarez, L.W., Alvarez, W., Asaro, F., & Michel, H.V. (1980). Extraterres-
trial cause for the cretaceous-tertiary extinction. Science, 208(4448),
1095–1098.
Alvarez, W. (1997). T. Rex and the crater of doom. New York: Vintage
Books.
Bak, P., & Chen, K. (1991). Self-organized criticality. Scientiﬁc American,
264(1), 46–53.
Becker, L., Poreda, R.J., Basu, A.R., Pope, K.O., Harrison, T.M., Nichol-
son, C., & Iasky, R. (2004). Bedout: A possible end-Permian impact
crater offshore of northwestern Australia. Science, 304(5676),
1469–1476.
Becker, L., Poreda, R.J., Hunt, A.G., Bunch, T.E., & Rampino, M. (2001).
Impact event at the Permian-Triassic boundary: Evidence from extrater-
restrial noble gases in fullerenes. Science, 291(5508), 1530–1533.
Boyack, K.W., Wylie, B.N., & Davidson, G.S. (2002). Domain visualiza-
tion using VXinsight for science and technology management. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 53(9),
764–774.
Braam, R.R., Moed, H.F., & Raan, A.F.J.v. (1991). Mapping of science by
combined co-citation and word analysis: II. Dynamical aspects. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science, 42(4), 252–266.
Burt, R.S. (1992). Structural holes: The social structure of competition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burton, R.E., & Kebler, R.W. (1960). The “half-life” of some scientiﬁc and
technical literatures. American Documentation, 11, 18–22.
Bush, V. (1945). As we may think. Atlantic Monthly, 176(1), 101–108.
Carpenter, M.P., Cooper, M., & Narin, F. (1980). Linkage between basic
research literature and patents. Research Management, 23(2), 30–35.
Chen, C. (1999). Visualising semantic spaces and author co-citation
networks in digital libraries. Information Processing and Management,
35(2), 401–420.
Chen, C. (2004). Searching for intellectual turning points: Progressive
knowledge domain visualization. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, USA, 101 (Suppl.), 5303–5310.
Chen, C., Cribbin, T., Macredie, R., & Morar, S. (2002). Visualizing and
tracking the growth of competing paradigms: Two case studies. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 53(8),
678–689.
Chen, C., & Kuljis, J. (2003). The rising landscape: A visual exploration of
superstring revolutions in physics. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 54(5), 435–446.
Chen, C., & Morris, S. (2003). Visualizing evolving networks: Minimum
spanning trees versus pathﬁnder networks. Proceedings of IEEE Sympo-
sium on Information Visualization (pp. 67–74), Seattle, WA: IEEE
Computer Society Press.
Chen, C., & Paul, R.J. (2001). Visualizing a knowledge domain’s intellec-
tual structure. Computer, 34(3), 65–71.
Cooper, G.J., Maynard, R.L., Cross, N.L., & Hill, J.F. (1983). Casualties
from terrorist bombings. Journal of Trauma, 23(11), 955–967.
Erten, C., Harding, P.J., Kobourov, S.G., Wampler, K., & Yee, G. (2003).
Exploring the computing literature using temporal graph visualization
(Tech. Rep. TR0304), University of Arizona.
Freeman, L.C. (1979). Centrality in social networks: Conceptual clariﬁca-
tion. Social Networks, 1, 215–239.
Frykberg, E.R., Tepas, J.J., & Alexander, R.H. (1989). The 1983 Beirut Air-
port terrorist bombing: Injury patterns and implications for disaster man-
agement. American Surgeon, 55(3), 134–141.
Galea, S., Ahern, J., Resnick, H., Kilpatrick, D., Bucuvalas, M., Gold, J., &
Vlahov, D. (2002). Psychological sequelae of the September 11 terrorist
attacks in New York City. New England Journal of Medicine, 346(13),
982–987.
Garﬁeld, E. (1994). Scientography: Mapping the tracks of science. Current
Contents: Social & Behavioural Sciences, 7(45), 5–10.
Garﬁeld, E., Sher, I.H., & Torpie, R.J. (1964). The use of citation data in writ-
ing the history of science. Philadelphia: Institute for Scientiﬁc Information.
Garﬁeld, E., Pudovkin, A.I., & Istomin, V.S. (2003). Why do we need algo-
rithmic historiography? Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 54(5), 400–412.
Girvan, M., & Newman, M.E.J. (2002). Community structure in social and
biological networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA, 99, 8271–8276.
Granovetter, M. (1973). Strength of weak ties. American Journal of
Sociology, 8, 1360–1380.
Grifﬁth, B.C., Small, H., Stonehill, J.A., & Dey, S. (1974). The structure of
scientiﬁc literatures: II. Towards a macro- and microstructure for science.
Science Studies, 4, 339–365.
Havre, S., Hetzler, E., Whitney, P., & Nowell, L. (2002). Themeriver:
Visualizing thematic changes in large document collections. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1), 9–20.

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY—February 1, 2006
377
DOI: 10.1002/asi
Holloway, H.C., Norwood, A.E., Fullerton, C.S., Engel, C.C.J., & Ursano,
R.J. (1997). The threat of biological weapons: Prophylaxis and mitiga-
tion of psychological and social consequences. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 278(5), 425–427.
Katz, E., Ofek, B., Adler, J., Abramowitz, H.B., & Krausz, M.M. (1989).
Primary blast injury after a bomb explosion in a civilian bus. Annals of
Surgery, 209(4), 484–488.
Kessler, M.M. (1963). Bibliographic coupling between scientiﬁc papers.
American Documentation, 14, 10–25.
Kleinberg, J. (2002). Bursty and hierarchical structure in streams. Proceed-
ings of the 8th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (pp. 91–101), Edmonton, Alberta, Canada: ACM Press.
Kontostathis, A., Galitsky, L., Pottenger, W.M., Roy, S., & Phelps, D.J.
(2003). A survey of emerging trend detection in textual data mining. In
M. Berry (Ed.), A comprehensive survey of text mining (pp. 185–224).
Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Mallonee, S., Shariat, S., Stennies, G., Waxweiler, R., Hogan, D., & Jordan,
F. (1996). Physical injuries and fatalities resulting from the Oklahoma
City bombing. Journal of the American Medical Association, 276(5),
382–387.
Morris, S.A., Yen, G., Wu, Z., & Asnake, B. (2003). Timeline visualization
of research fronts. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 55(5), 413–422.
North, C.S., Nixon, S.J., Shariat, S., Mallonee, S., McMillen, J.C.,
Spitznagel, E.L., & Smith, E.M. (1999). Psychiatric disorders among
survivors of the Oklahoma City bombing. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 282(8), 755–762.
Persson, O. (1994). The intellectual base and research fronts of JASIS
1986–1990. Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
45(1), 31–38.
Popescul, A., Flake, G.W., Lawrence, S., Ungar, L.H., & Giles, C.L. (2000).
Clustering and identifying temporal trends in document databases.
Proceedings of IEEE Advances in Digital Libraries (ADL 2000)
(pp. 173–182), Washington, DC.
Price, D.D. (1965). Networks of scientiﬁc papers. Science, 149, 510–515.
Roy, S., Gevry, D., & Pottenger, W.M. (2002). Methodologies for trend
detection in textual data mining. Proceedings of the Textmine ‘02
Workshop at the 2nd SIAM Conference on Data Mining.
Retrieved July 1, 2004, from http://www.cse.lehigh.edu/~billp/pubs/
ETDMethodologies.pdf
Sandler, T., Tschirhart, J.T., & Cauley, J. (1983). A theoretical analysis of
transnational terrorism.American Political Science Review, 77(4), 36–54.
Schlenger, W.E., Caddell, J.M., Ebert, L., Jordan, B.K., Rourke, K.M.,
Wilson, D., Thalji, L., Dennis, J.M., Fairbank, J.A., & Kulka, R.A.
(2002). Psychological reactions to terrorist attacks. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 288(5), 581–588.
Schuster, M.A., Stein, B.D., Jaycox, L.H., Collins, R.L., Marshall, G.N.,
Elliott, M.N., Zhou, A.J., Kanouse, D.E., Morrison, J.L., & Berry, S.H.
(2001). A national survey of stress reactions after the September 11,
2001, terrorist attacks. New England Journal of Medicine, 345(20),
1507–1512.
Schvaneveldt, R.W. (Ed.). (1990). Pathﬁnder associative networks: Studies
in knowledge organization. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Smalheiser, N.R., & Swanson, D.R. (1998). Using Arrowsmith: A com-
puter-assisted approach to formulating and assessing scientiﬁc hypothe-
ses. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 57(3), 149–153.
Small, H. (1986). The synthesis of specialty narratives from co-citation
clusters. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 37(3),
97–110.
Small, H. (1999a). A passage through science: Crossing disciplinary
boundaries. Library Trends, 48(1), 72–108.
Small, H. (1999b). Visualizing science by citation mapping. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 50(9), 799–813.
Small, H. (2003). Paradigms, citations, and maps of science: A personal
history. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 54(5), 394–399.
Small, H., & Greenlee, E. (1980). Citation context analysis and the structure
of paradigms. Journal of Documentation, 36(September), 183–196.
Small, H.G. (1977). A co-citation model of a scientiﬁc specialty: A longitu-
dinal study of collagen research. Social Studies of Science, 7, 139–166.
Small, H.G., & Grifﬁth, B.C. (1974). The structure of scientiﬁc literatures:
I. Identifying and graphing specialties. Science Studies, 4, 17–40.
Swan, R., & Allan, J. (1999). Extracting signiﬁcant time varying features
from text. Proceedings of 8th Conference on Information Knowledge
Management (CIKM ’99) (pp. 38–45), Kansas City, MO: ACM Press.
Swanson, D.R. (1986). Undiscovered public knowledge. Library Quarterly,
56(2), 103–118.
Swanson, D.R. (1989). Online search for logically related noninteractive
medical literatures—A systematic trial-and-error strategy. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 40(5), 356–358.
Tijssen, R.J.W., & Vanraan, A.F.J. (1994). Mapping changes in science and
technology—Bibliometric co-occurrence analysis of the r-and-d litera-
ture. Evaluation Review, 18(1), 98–115.
van Raan, A. (2000). On growth, ageing, and fractal differentiation of
science. Scientometrics, 47(2), 347–362.
Wignall, P.B., & Hallam, A. (1992). Anoxia as a cause of the Permian/Trias-
sic extinction: Facies evidence from northern Italy and the western United
States. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 93, 21–46.
Wignall, P.B., & Hallam, A. (1993). Griesbachian (earliest Triassic)
palaeoenvironmental changes in the salt range, Pakistan and Southeast
China and their bearing on the Permo-Triassic mass extinction. Palaeo-
geography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 102, 215–237.

