1378
Journal of Dental Education ■ Volume 65, No. 12
Pain and the Neuromatrix in the Brain
Ronald Melzack, Ph.D.
Abstract: The neuromatrix theory of pain proposes that pain is a multidimensional experience produced by characteristic
“neurosignature” patterns of nerve impulses generated by a widely distributed neural network—the “body-self neuromatrix”—in
the brain. These neurosignature patterns may be triggered by sensory inputs, but they may also be generated independently of
them. Acute pains evoked by brief noxious inputs have been meticulously investigated by neuroscientists, and their sensory
transmission mechanisms are generally well understood. In contrast, chronic pain syndromes, which are often characterized by
severe pain associated with little or no discernible injury or pathology, remain a mystery. Furthermore, chronic psychological or
physical stress is often associated with chronic pain, but the relationship is poorly understood. The neuromatrix theory of pain
provides a new conceptual framework to examine these problems. It proposes that the output patterns of the body-self
neuromatrix activate perceptual, homeostatic, and behavioral programs after injury, pathology, or chronic stress. Pain, then, is
produced by the output of a widely distributed neural network in the brain rather than directly by sensory input evoked by injury,
inflammation, or other pathology. The neuromatrix, which is genetically determined and modified by sensory experience, is the
primary mechanism that generates the neural pattern that produces pain. Its output pattern is determined by multiple influences,
of which the somatic sensory input is only a part, that converge on the neuromatrix.
Dr. Melzack is Professor Emeritus, Department of Psychology, McGill University. Direct correspondence and requests for
reprints to him at Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Dr. Penfield Avenue, Montreal, Quebec, Canada  H3A
1B1; 514-398-6084 phone; 514-398-4896 fax; rmelzack@ego.psych.mcgill.ca.
Key words: pain, body-self neuromatrix, stress
P
ain has many valuable functions. It often sig-
nals injury or disease and produces a wide
range of actions to stop it and treat its causes.
Toothache, for example, is usually a signal of caries,
and forces us to seek dental help. Memories of ear-
lier pain and suffering also warn us to avoid poten-
tially dangerous situations. Yet another effect of pain,
especially after serious injury or disease, is to make
us rest, thereby promoting the body’s healing pro-
cesses. All of these actions induced by pain—to seek
help, avoid, or rest—have obvious value for survival.
Yet despite these valuable features of pain, there
are negative aspects that challenge our attempts to
understand the puzzle of pain. What is the value of
persistent phantom limb pain to amputees whose
stump has healed completely? The pain, not the physi-
cal disability, prevents them from leading normal
lives. Similarly, most backaches, headaches, muscle
pains, nerve pains, pelvic pains, and facial pains serve
no discernible purpose, are difficult to treat, and are
a disaster for the people who suffer them.1,2
Pain may be the warning signal that saves the
lives of some people, but it destroys the lives of count-
less others. Chronic pains, clearly, are not a warning
to prevent physical injury or disease. They are the
disease—the result of neural mechanisms gone awry.
The neuromatrix concept suggests brain mechanisms
that may underlie some kinds of chronic pain and
points to new forms of treatment.
Phantom Limbs and the
Concept of a Neuromatrix
The gate control theory of pain,3 proposed in
1965, highlighted the role of spinal and brain mecha-
nisms in acute and chronic pain, and triggered an
explosive advance in pain research and therapy. Yet,
as historians of science have pointed out, good theo-
ries are instrumental in producing facts that eventu-
ally require a new theory to incorporate them. And
this is what has happened. It is possible to make ad-
justments to the gate theory so that, for example, it
includes long-lasting activity of the sort Wall4 has
described. But there is a set of observations on pain
in paraplegics that just does not fit the theory. This
does not negate the gate theory, of course. Periph-
eral and spinal processes are obviously an important
part of pain, and we need to know more about the
mechanisms of peripheral inflammation, spinal
modulation, midbrain descending control, and so
forth. But the data on painful phantoms below the
level of total spinal section5 indicate that we need to
go beyond the foramen magnum and into the brain.6,7
Now let me make it clear that I mean more than
just the sensory thalamus and cortex. These are im-
portant, of course, but they mark just the beginning
of the neural activities that underlie perception. The

December 2001
■Journal of Dental Education
1379
cortex, White and Sweet8 have made amply clear, is
not the pain center, and neither is the thalamus.9 The
areas of the brain involved in pain experience and
behavior are very extensive. They must include the
limbic system as well as somatosensory projections.
Furthermore, because our body perceptions include
visual and vestibular mechanisms as well as cogni-
tive processes, widespread areas of the brain must
be involved in pain. Yet the plain fact is that we do
not have an adequate theory of how the brain works.
My analysis of phantom limb phenomena6,7 has
led to four conclusions that point to a new concep-
tual nervous system. First, because the phantom limb
(or other body part) feels so real, it is reasonable to
conclude that the body we normally feel is subserved
by the same neural processes in the brain; these brain
processes are normally activated and modulated by
inputs from the body, but they can act in the absence
of any inputs. Second, all the qualities we normally
feel from the body, including pain, are also felt in
the absence of inputs from the body; from this we
may conclude that the origins of the patterns that
underlie the qualities of experience lie in neural net-
works in the brain; stimuli may trigger the patterns
but do not produce them. Third, the body is perceived
as a unity and is identified as the “self,” distinct from
other people and the surrounding world. The experi-
ence of a unity of such diverse feelings, including
the self as the point of orientation in the surrounding
environment, is produced by central neural processes
and cannot derive from the peripheral nervous sys-
tem or spinal cord. Fourth, the brain processes that
underlie the body-self are, to an important extent that
can no longer be ignored, “built-in” by genetic speci-
fication, although this built-in substrate must, of
course, be modified by experience. These conclu-
sions provide the basis of the new conceptual model.
Outline of the Theory
The anatomical substrate of the body-self, I
propose, is a large, widespread network of neurons
that consists of loops between the thalamus and cor-
tex as well as between the cortex and limbic system.
I have labeled the entire network, whose spatial dis-
tribution and synaptic links are initially determined
genetically and are later sculpted by sensory inputs,
as a neuromatrix. The loops diverge to permit paral-
lel processing in different components of the
neuromatrix and converge repeatedly to permit in-
teractions between the output products of process-
ing. The repeated cyclical processing and synthesis
of nerve impulses through the neuromatrix imparts
a characteristic pattern: the neurosignature. The
neurosignature of the neuromatrix is imparted on all
nerve impulse patterns that flow through it; the
neurosignature is produced by the patterns of synap-
tic connections in the entire neuromatrix. All inputs
from the body undergo cyclical processing and syn-
thesis so that characteristic patterns are impressed
on them in the neuromatrix. Portions of the
neuromatrix are specialized to process information
related to major sensory events (such as injury, tem-
perature change, and stimulation of erogenous tis-
sue) and may be labeled as neuromodules that im-
press subsignatures on the larger neurosignature.
The neurosignature, which is a continuous out-
flow from the body-self neuromatrix, is projected to
areas in the brain—the sentient neural hub—in which
the stream of nerve impulses (the neurosignature
modulated by ongoing inputs) is converted into a
continually changing stream of awareness. Further-
more, the neurosignature patterns may also activate
neural networks to produce movement. That is, the
patterns bifurcate, so that a pattern proceeds to the
sentient neural hub (where the pattern is converted
into the experience of movement), and a similar pat-
tern proceeds through neural networks that eventu-
ally activate spinal cord neurons to produce muscle
patterns for complex actions.
The four components of the new conceptual
nervous system, then, are 1) the body-self
neuromatrix; 2) cyclical processing and synthesis in
which the neurosignature is produced; 3) the sen-
tient neural hub, which converts (transduces) the flow
of neurosignatures into the flow of awareness; and
4) activation of an action neuromatrix to provide the
pattern of movements to bring about the desired goal.
The Body-Self Neuromatrix
The body is felt as a unity, with different
qualities at different times and, I believe, the brain
mechanism that underlies the experience also com-
prises a unified system that acts as a whole and pro-
duces a neurosignature pattern of a whole body. The
conceptualization of this unified brain mechanism
lies at the heart of the new theory, and I believe the
word “neuromatrix” best characterizes it. “Matrix”
has several definitions in Webster’s dictionary,10 and
 19307837, 2001, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.0022-0337.2001.65.12.tb03497.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/10/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1380
Journal of Dental Education ■ Volume 65, No. 12
some of them imply precisely the properties of the
neuromatrix as I conceive of it. First, a matrix is de-
fined as “something within which something else
originates, takes form, or develops.” This is exactly
what I wish to imply: the neuromatrix (not the stimu-
lus, peripheral nerves, or “brain center”) is the ori-
gin of the neurosignature; the neurosignature origi-
nates and takes form in the neuromatrix. Although
the neurosignature may be triggered or modulated
by input, the input is only a “trigger” and does not
produce the neurosignature itself. Matrix is also de-
fined as a “mold” or “die” that leaves an imprint on
something else. In this sense, the neuromatrix “casts”
its distinctive signature on all inputs (nerve impulse
patterns) that flow through it. Finally, matrix is de-
fined as “an array of circuit elements . . . for per-
forming a specific function as interconnected.” The
array of neurons in a neuromatrix, I propose, is ge-
netically programmed to perform the specific func-
tion of producing the signature pattern. The final,
integrated neurosignature pattern for the body-self
ultimately produces awareness and action.
For these reasons, the term neuromatrix seems
to be appropriate. The neuromatrix, distributed
throughout many areas of the brain, comprises a
widespread network of neurons that generates pat-
terns, processes information that flows through it,
and ultimately produces the pattern that is felt as a
whole body possessing a sense of self. The stream of
neurosignature output with constantly varying pat-
terns riding on the main signature pattern produces
the feelings of the body-self with constantly chang-
ing perceptual and emotional qualities.
Pain and Stress
We are so accustomed to considering pain as a
purely sensory phenomenon that we have ignored the
obvious fact that injury does not merely produce pain;
it also disrupts the brain’s homeostatic regulation
systems, thereby producing “stress” and initiating
complex programs to reinstate homeostasis. By rec-
ognizing the role of the stress system in pain pro-
cesses, we discover that the scope of the puzzle of
pain is vastly expanded and new pieces of the puzzle
provide valuable clues in our quest to understand
chronic pain.11,12
Hans Selye, who founded the field of stress
research, dealt with stress in the biological sense of
physical injury, infection, and pathology and also
recognized the importance of psychological
stresses.13 In recent years, the latter sense of the word
has come to dominate the field. However, it is im-
portant for the purpose of understanding pain to keep
in mind that stress is a biological system that is acti-
vated by physical injury, infection, or any threat to
biological homeostasis as well as by psychological
threat and insult of the body-self. Both are correct
and important.
The disruption of homeostasis by injury acti-
vates programs of neural, hormonal, and behavioral
activity aimed at a return to homeostasis. The par-
ticular programs that are activated are selected from
a genetically determined repertoire of programs and
are influenced by the extent and severity of the in-
jury.
When injury occurs, sensory information rap-
idly alerts the brain and begins the complex sequence
of events to reinstate homeostasis. Cortisol is an es-
sential hormone for survival after injury because it
is responsible for producing and maintaining high
levels of glucose for rapid response after injury,
threat, or other emergency.14,15 However, cortisol is
potentially a highly destructive substance because,
to ensure a high level of glucose, it breaks down the
protein in muscle and inhibits the ongoing replace-
ment of calcium in bone. Sustained cortisol release,
therefore, can produce myopathy, weakness, fatigue,
and decalcification of bone. It can also accelerate
neural degeneration of the hippocampus during ag-
ing. Furthermore, it suppresses the immune system.
A major clue to the relationships among in-
jury, stress, and pain is that many autoimmune dis-
eases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and scleroderma,
are also pain syndromes. Furthermore, more women
than men suffer from autoimmune diseases as well
as chronic pain syndromes. Among the 5 percent of
adults who suffer from an autoimmune disease, two
out of three are women. Pain diseases also show a
sex difference, as Berkley16 has argued, with the
majority prevalent in women and a smaller number
prevalent in men. Of particular importance is the
change in sex ratios concurrently with changes in
sex hormone output as a function of age. Estrogen
increases the release of peripheral cytokines, such
as gamma-interferon, which in turn produce in-
creased cortisol. This may explain why more females
than males suffer from most kinds of chronic pain as
well as painful autoimmune diseases such as mul-
tiple sclerosis and lupus.
 19307837, 2001, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.0022-0337.2001.65.12.tb03497.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/10/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

December 2001
■Journal of Dental Education
1381
I propose that some forms of chronic pain may
occur as a result of the cumulative destructive effect
of cortisol on muscle, bone, and neural tissue. Fur-
thermore, loss of fibers in the hippocampus due to
aging reduces a natural brake on cortisol release,
which is normally exerted by the hippocampus.15 As
a result, cortisol is released in larger amounts, pro-
ducing a greater loss of hippocampal fibers and a
cascading deleterious effect. This is found in aging
primates and presumably also occurs in humans. It
could explain the increase of chronic pain problems
among older people.
The cortisol output by itself may not be suffi-
cient to cause any of these problems, but rather pro-
vides the conditions so that other contributing fac-
tors may, in combination, produce them. Sex-related
hormones, genetic predispositions, and psychologi-
cal stresses derived from social competition and the
hassles of everyday life may act together to influ-
ence cortisol release, its amount and pattern, and the
effects of the target organs.
These speculations are supported by strong
evidence. Chrousos and Gold14 have documented the
effects of disregulation of the cortisol system: effects
on muscle and bone, to which they attribute
fibromyalgia, rheumatoid arthritis, and chronic fa-
tigue syndrome. They propose that they are caused
by hypocortisolism, which could be caused by deple-
tion of cortisol as a result of prolonged stress. In-
deed, Sapolsky15 attributes myopathy, bone decalci-
fication, fatigue, and accelerated neural degeneration
during aging to prolonged exposure to stress.
Clearly, consideration of the relationship be-
tween stress-system effects and chronic pain leads
directly to examination of the effects of suppression
of the immune system and the development of au-
toimmune effects. The fact that several autoimmune
diseases are also classified as chronic pain syn-
dromes—such as Crohn’s disease, multiple sclero-
sis, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, and lupus—
suggests that the study of these syndromes in relation
to stress effects and chronic pain could be fruitful.11,12
Immune suppression, which involves prolonging the
presence of dead tissue, invading bacteria, and vi-
ruses, could produce a greater output of cytokines,
with a consequent increase in cortisol and its destruc-
tive effects. Furthermore, prolonged immune sup-
pression may diminish gradually and give way to a
rebound, excessive immune response. The immune
system’s attack on its own body’s tissues may pro-
duce autoimmune diseases that are also chronic pain
syndromes. Thorough investigation may provide
valuable clues for understanding at least some of the
terrible chronic pain syndromes that now perplex us
and are beyond our control.
The Multiple Determinants
of Pain
The neuromatrix theory of pain proposes that
the neurosignature for pain experience is determined
by the synaptic architecture of the neuromatrix, which
is produced by genetic and sensory influences. The
neurosignature pattern is also modulated by sensory
inputs and by cognitive events, such as psychologi-
cal stress. It may also occur because stressors, physi-
cal as well as psychological, act on stress-regulation
systems, which may produce lesions of muscle, bone,
and nerve tissue, thereby contributing to the
neurosignature patterns that give rise to chronic pain.
In short, the neuromatrix, as a result of homeostasis-
regulation patterns that have failed, produces the de-
structive conditions that may give rise to many of
the chronic pains that so far have been resistant to
treatments developed primarily to manage pains that
are triggered by sensory inputs. The stress regula-
tion system, with its complex, delicately balanced
interactions, is an integral part of the multiple con-
tributions that give rise to chronic pain.
The neuromatrix theory guides us away from
the Cartesian concept of pain as a sensation produced
by injury, inflammation, or other tissue pathology
and toward the concept of pain as a multidimensional
experience produced by multiple influences. These
influences range from the existing synaptic archi-
tecture of the neuromatrix—which is determined by
genetic and sensory factors—to influences from
within the body and from other areas in the brain.
Genetic influences on synaptic architecture may de-
termine, or predispose toward, the development of
chronic pain syndromes. Figure 1 summarizes the
factors that contribute to the output pattern from the
neuromatrix that produce the sensory, affective, and
cognitive dimensions of pain experience and behav-
ior.
We have traveled a long way from the psycho-
physical concept that seeks a simple one-to-one re-
lationship between injury and pain. We now have a
theoretical framework in which a genetically deter-
mined template for the body-self is modulated by
 19307837, 2001, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.0022-0337.2001.65.12.tb03497.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/10/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1382
Journal of Dental Education ■ Volume 65, No. 12
the powerful stress system and the cognitive func-
tions of the brain, in addition to the traditional sen-
sory inputs. The neuromatrix theory of pain—which
places genetic contributions and the neural-hormonal
mechanisms of stress on a level of equal importance
with the neural mechanisms of sensory transmis-
sion—has important implications for research and
therapy. The expansion of the field of pain to include
endocrinology and immunology may lead to insights
and new research strategies that will reveal the un-
derlying mechanisms of chronic pain and give rise
to new therapies to relieve the tragedy of unrelent-
ing suffering.
REFERENCES
1. Melzack R, Wall PD. The challenge of pain, 2nd ed. Lon-
don: Penguin Books, 1996.
2. Wall PD, Melzack R, eds. Textbook of pain, 4th ed.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingston, 1999.
3. Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: a new theory.
Science 1965;150:971-9.
4. Wall PD. Introduction.In: Wall PD, Melzack R, eds. Text-
book of pain, 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone,
1989:1-18.
5. Melzack R, Loeser JD. Phantom body pain in paraple-
gics: evidence for a central “pattern generating mecha-
nism” for pain. Pain 1978;4:195-210.
6. Melzack R. Phantom limbs, the self and the brain (The
D.O. Hebb Memorial Lecture). Canad Psychol 1989;30:1-
14.
7. Melzack R. The gate control theory 25 years later: new
perspectives on phantom limb pain. In: Bond MR,
Charlton JE, Woolf CJ. Pain research and therapy: Pro-
ceedings of the VIth World Congress on Pain. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 1991:9-26.
8. White JC, Sweet WH. Pain and the neurosurgeon. Spring-
field, IL: Thomas, 1969.
9. Speigel EA, Wycis HT. Present status of
stereoencephalotomies for pain relief. Conf Neurol
1966;27:7-17.
10. Webster’s Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary. Springfield,
MA: G and C Merriam Co., 1967.
11 Melzack R. Pain and stress: clues toward understanding
chronic pain. In: Sabourin M, Craik F, Robert M, eds.
Advances in psychological science, Vol 2: Biological and
cognitive aspects. Hove, United Kingdom: Psychology
Press, 1998:63-85.
12. Melzack R. Pain and stress: a new perspective. In: Gatchel
RJ, Turk DC, eds. Psychosocial factors in pain. New York:
Guilford Press, 1999:89-106.
13. Selye H. The stress of life. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1956.
14. Chrousos GP, Gold PW. The concepts of stress and stress
system disorders. JAMA 1992; 267:1244-52.
15. Sapolsky RM. Neuroendocrinology of the stress response.
In: Becker JB, Breedlove SM, Vrews D, eds. Behavioral
endocrinology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
16. Berkley KJ. Sex differences in pain. Behav Brain Sci
1997;20:1-10.
Figure 1. Factors that contribute to the patterns of activity generated by the body-self neuromatrix, which comprises
sensory, affective, and cognitive neuromodules. The output patterns from the neuromatrix produce the multiple
dimensions of pain experience as well as concurrent homeostatic and behavioral responses.
 19307837, 2001, 12, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.0022-0337.2001.65.12.tb03497.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [10/10/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

