KANT’S PHILOSOPHY OF MATHEMATICS
Volume I: The Critical Philosophy and Its Roots
The late s saw the emergence of new philosophical interest in
Kant’s philosophy of mathematics, and since then this interest has
developed into a major and dynamic ﬁeld of study. In this state-of-
the-art survey of contemporary scholarship on Kant’s mathematical
thinking, Carl Posy and Ofra Rechter gather leading authors who
approach it from multiple perspectives, engaging with topics includ-
ing geometry, arithmetic, logic, and metaphysics. Their essays oﬀer
ﬁne-grained analysis of Kant’s philosophy of mathematics in the
context of his Critical philosophy, and also show sensitivity to its
historical background. The volume will be important for readers
seeking a comprehensive picture of the current scholarship about
the development of Kant’s philosophy of mathematics, its place in
his overall philosophy, and the Kantian themes that inﬂuenced
mathematics and its philosophy after Kant.
is Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem. He is editor of Kant’s Philosophy of Math-
ematics: Modern Essays () and has written extensively on the
philosophy of mathematics as well as on Kant.
is a member of the philosophy department at Tel
Aviv University. Her work focuses on Kant within the philosophy of
mathematics and its history, and she has published a number of
papers on Kant’s philosophy of arithmetic.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Published online by Cambridge University Press

KANT’S PHILOSOPHY OF
MATHEMATICS
Volume I: The Critical Philosophy and Its Roots

CARL POSY
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
OFRA RECHTER
Tel Aviv University
Published online by Cambridge University Press

University Printing House, Cambridge , United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, th Floor, New York, , USA
Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, , Australia
–, rd Floor, Plot , Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – , India
Anson Road, #–/, Singapore 
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/
: ./
© Cambridge University Press 
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, Elcograf S.p.A.
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
----Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

