KARLBÜHLER 
SEMIOTIC FOUNDATIONS 
OF LANGUAGE THEORY 

TOPICS IN CONTEMPORAR Y SEMIOTICS 
Series Editors: 
Thomas A. Sebeok and Jean Umiker-Sebeok 
Indiana University 
SPEAKING OF APES 
Edited by Thomas A. Sebeok and Jean Umiker·Sebeok 
KARL BÜHLER: Semiotic Foundations of Language Theory 
Rober! E. Innis 

KARLBÜHLER 
SEMIOTIC FOUNDATIONS 
OF LANGUAGE THEORY 
ROBERT E. INNIS 
University of Lowell 
Lowell, Massachusetts 
SPRINGER SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA, LLC 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Innis, Robert E. 
Kar! Bühler, semiotic foundations of language theory. 
(Topics in contemporary semiotics) 
Bibliography: p. 
Includes index. 
1. Bühler, Kar!, 1899-1963. 2 Language and languages-Addresses, essays, 
lectures. 3. Linguistics - Addresses, essays, lectures. 4. Semiotics - Addresses, 
essays, lectures. l. Title. I l. Series. 
P85.B8156 
401'.41 
81-19958 
ISBN 978-1-4757-0925-4 
ISBN 978-1-4757-0923-0 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4757-0923-0 
© 1982 Springer Science+Business Media New Y ork 
Originally published by Plenum Press New York in 1982 
 
All rights reserved 
AACR2 
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means, e1ectronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, 
recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher 

PREFACE 
In 1933, Kar! Bühler, then professor of psychology at the University of Vienna 
and director of the Psychological Institute, published in Kant-Studien a seminal 
methodological work under the title "The Axiomatization of the Language Sci-
ences." Bühler was primarily concerned with establishing an ultimate set of 
categories and principles which, taken together, would give us a semiotically 
derived model of language. This model did not spring complete from Bühler's 
head; it involved a patient attempt to synthesize elements from the whole phil-
osophical and linguistic tradition into a coherent account of the semiotic foun-
dations and specificity of language. In particular, there is an extensive reliance 
on the discoveries of phonology, the implications of which Bühler was one of 
the first to exploit; on the work of Stumpf, Husserl, and Meinong, specifically 
their discussions or acts and structures; on the work of Plato, in whose Cratylus 
Bühler saw anticipated his organon model or language; and on the work of many 
others, ranging from Aristotle to Cassirer, whose names appear throughout the 
monograph and throughout Bühler's masterwork Sprachtheorie . 
The .. Axiomatization" essay was taken up in slightly altered form as the 
first part of Sprachtheorie under the title "Principles of Linguistic Research," 
and its main themes were expanded and developed in the body of that large 
work. Through this monograph, and the book to wh ich it led, Bühler has wielded 
a profound but relatively unnoticed influence on later thinkers. He had a strong 
impact on the epistemological work of such men as Kar! Popper, Michael Polanyi, 
and Ernst Cassirer, and two central figures of the Prague Linguistic Circle, 
Roman lakobson and lan Mukafovsky, were heavily indebted to hirn. Moreover, 
Bühler's critical confrontation with de Sallssure and Husserl is still challenging 
and illuminating. Bühler's insights into language, and into ollrselves as language 
animals, remain of permanent interest and importance for semiotic and language 
theory. They intersect with many topics and areas of concern in contemporary 
semiotic research and in the philosophy of langllage, anticipating, grounding, 
and criticizing this work. A marvelous combination of synthesis and original 
thought, Bühler's work on the foundations or language theory has managed to 
v 

vi 
PREFACE 
develop a matrix of pivotal notions and categories of continuing relevance for 
our own attempts to understand the scope, foundations, and implications of 
language theory. 
The present book consists of a long critical essay focusing in a highly 
selective and dialectical way on the scope, methodological power, and heuristic 
fertility of Bühler's language theory, principally as found in Sprachtheorie. and 
of a translation of the "Axiomatization" essay. I have incIuded Elisabeth 
Ströker's 'Introduction' to the Gerrnan student edition, published by Vittorio 
Klostermann, but not her 'Commentary.' My thanks once again to Professor 
H.A.T. Reiche, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, for help with 
ambiguities in the German, and to my wife Marianne for forbearance and help 
with the proofs. I am especially indebted to Professor Thomas Sebeok for his 
encouragement and interest in this book. 
ROBERT E. INNIS 
Lowell, Massachusetts 

CONTENTS 
Preface 
v 
PART l: 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
by Robert E. lnnis 
1. Bühler's Axiomatic Project 
3 
2. Phonology, Diacrisis, and Abstraction 
I I 
3. The Two-Field Theory of Language 
19 
4. From Perception to Metaphor 
43 
5. Clarifying Language by Contrast 
55 
6. ConcIusion: Some Open Questions 
67 
References 
71 
PART ll: 
THE AXIOMATlZATlON OF THE LANGUAGE 
SCIENCES 
75 
by Karl Biihler 
Introduction 
77 
by Elisabeth Ströker 
A. The Key Principle: The Sign Character of Language 
91 
B. Speech Action and Language Structure 
109 
VII 

viii 
CONTENTS 
C. The Structural Model of Language 
131 
D. The Schema of Language Functions 
147 
Name Index 
165 
Subject Index 
167 

PART I 
KEY THEMES IN BUHLER'S LANGUAGE 
THEORY 
ROBERT E. INNIS 

BÜHLER'S AXIOMATIC PROJECT 
In the third volume of his Philosophy 0/ Symbolic F orms (1957), Ernst Cassirer 
wrote, "The significance which the problem of language has acquired in con-
temporary psychology and most particularly for its methodology may be most 
clearly followed in the writings of Karl Bühler" (Vol. 3:208 n3). Readers of the 
following monograph will soon see how Bühler combined reflection on meth-
odological principles with phenomenological description, thus providing the 
monograph with a certain heuristic fertility and contentiousness from both a 
methodological and substantive point of view. The programmatic and abstract 
character of the essay is explained basically by the fact that it was oriented from 
the beginning toward inclusion in Sprachtheorie, Bühler's most important work, 
which was devoted to establishing the contours of the representational-as op-
posed to the expressive or appellative (conative)-function of language, its ca-
pacity to represent and to communicate objects and states of affairs. Once again, 
Ernst Cassirer (1957), when detailing the gradual predominance of the repre-
sentational function in linguistic development, noted: 
I use the term "representative function" (Darstellungs funktion) in the same 
sense as Karl Bühler, whose works were not known to me when I treated 
the problem from the standpoint of the philosophy of language in the first 
volume of the present work . . . . This is all the more reason to mention 
here the fundamental agreement between the findings of a general analysis 
from the standpoint of the philosophy and history of language and of Bühler's 
investigations, which are essentially oriented toward psychology and biology 
(1957, Vol. 3:208 n3). 
Written when Bühler was at the height of his powers, "The Axiomatization 
of the Language Sciences" and Sprachtheorie represent the culmination of a 
long process of research and reflection. As Bühler put it, "ever since I have 
been able to pursue scientific work, my interests have circled around the phe-
nomenon of language" (Sprachtheorie xxviii, hereafter: ST). With respect to 
content and to fonn both Bühler's programmatic essay and the larger work to 
which it led have attained something 01' the status 01' classic statements, yet they 
3 

4 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
are relatively little known in the English-speaking world. Their influence has 
been widespread, however, entering into the work of such widely diverse groups 
as the Prague Linguistic Circle, especially the work of Mukafovsky and of 
lakobson (see Mukafovsky, 1977; lakobson, 1960); the work of Roman Ingar-
den, whose The Literary Work of Art (1973) is peppered with references to 
Bühler; and the work of Karl Popper, one of the most influential epistemologists 
ofthe twentieth century, who wrote in his autobiography, Unended Quest (1976), 
"Most important to my future development was his (Bühler's) theory of the 
three levels or functions of language" (1976) (74). 
Popper continued: 
This theory became important to me for many reasons. It confirmed my 
view of the emptiness of the theory that art is self-expression. It led me later 
to the conclusion that the theory that art was "communication" (that is, 
release) was equally empty, since these two functions were trivially present 
in all languages, even in animal languages. It led me to a strengthening of 
my "objectivist" approach. And it led me-a few years later-to add to 
Bühler's three functions what I have called the argumentative function. The 
argumentative function became particularly important for me because I re-
garded it as the basis of all critical thought. (79) 
Indeed, continuing in the properly epistemological field, the superb chapter 
"Articulation" in Michael Polanyi's Personal Knowledge (1958; see also Innis, 
1973) is to a great extent an exploitation and deepening of Bühler's key insights, 
consisting principally in an exploration in more detail of the Deutungszentrale-
interpretative center-which Bühler argued grounds human intercourse with the 
world and which Polanyi thematized as the tacit dimension. 
For the most part, the trajectories of twentieth century linguistics and lan-
guage theory have not followed Bühler's work, except in the German-language 
countries (see Leroy, 1967). The French tradition has followed de Saussure 
predominantly, while the English-language work has been subject to different 
stimuli of divers origin, ranging from the anthropological investigations of a 
Boas and a Sapir to the linguistic objectivism and behaviorism of a Bloomfield 
to the now wide-ranging work of Chomsky and his followers. Nevertheless, 
Bühler's work has a synthetic power and clarity of expression that make its study 
a most rewarding enterprise. As a matter of fact, when one recognizes that 
Bühler undertook a radical critique and evaluation of de Saussure and of Husserl, 
it is rather amazing that he is rarely cited in the literature on both men. While 
defending the essential sociality of language structures with de Saussure-as 
against the work of Husserl in his Logic'al lnvestigations (1970)-he also de-

BÜHLER'S AXI0MATlC PROJECT 
5 
fended Husserl's position on the essential sui generis character and indispens-
ability of acts of meaning, as opposed to de Saussure's model of an associative 
circuit that gives rise to meaning. 
Bühler divided his monograph into four sections. Each section thematizes 
a domain of material from the vast realm of data encompassing the phenomena 
of language. Bühler's procedure was 'axiomatic' in the sense that he was con-
cemed about determining the central presuppositions of a language theory that 
are needed to construct an analytic framework adequate to its object: language 
in its representational function. 
The first axiom, which sets the stage for all the rest, deals with the sign 
character of language. It is a keystone of Bühler's language theory that a purely 
physical approach to sign theory and to language theory is impossible, since the 
essential nature of a sign is its capacity to "stand for" something else. What 
makes possible this 'standing for' is the ability of the sign user to take up a 
particular 'set' vis-a-vis the physical reality of the sign, regarded as a material 
entity, and by means of this set to endow the material entity with sense. This 
set is the result of a particular abstractive act that regards as semiotically relevant 
only apart of the material reality of the sign. The main support of Bühler's 
position here is the fundamental distinction between phonetics and phonology, 
which manifests the radical difference between a materially oriented and a for-
mally oriented science. Indeed, the insights of phonology and the principles on 
which it is based point to the primacy of abstractive procedures not just in the 
apprehension of signs but in perceptual procedures quite generally . In fact, 
Bühler argued in the course of the first section of the monograph that "the theory 
of perception in psychology cannot be brought to anything without considering 
the sign-functions of the sense-data found in it" (102). In Die Krise der Psy-
chologie (1978), hereafter referred to as KP, Bühler's first semiotically oriented 
work, Bühler had already contended, with reference to the three sign-functions 
represented by signals, indexes, and symbols, "I think that by means of the 
three sense functions (Sinnfunktionen) of signals. indexes, and symbols, the 
whole domain of perceptions can be theoretically mastered" (KP 75). 
Moreover, the concept of representation, which is the focus of Bühler's 
essay and of Sprach theorie (1965) as a whole (its subtitle is Die Darstellungs-
funktion der Sprache, "The Representational Function of Language"), makes 
no sense apart from specific abstractive procedures, the ability to make a material 
mark mediate a content to the partners in the exchange of signs. Bühler' s ap-
proach to the sign character of language was shared by Cassirer and Gomperz 
and pointed the way to a doctrine of synthesis or of mediational acts of conferring 

6 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
sense, although Bühler's anti-Cartesianism constantly insists on the primacy of 
the social matrix in the genesis of sense and by no means allows the essential 
determinant of sense or meaning to be confided to a private mental acL Bühler 
insisted on the primacy of social and hence publicIy observable data for laying 
the foundations of language theory, combating in this way Husserl's tendency 
to explain all differences in meaning by differences in acts of meaning, them-
selves accessible to some form of introspective procedures, and paralleling the 
later work of Wittgenstein, I 
Throughout all Bühler's work, the central and ever-recurring thesis is the 
irreducible social matrix of meaning in both the human and the non human 
spheres, Bühler wanted to argue, in a way analogous to the work of Mead, that 
the origin of meaning and of the conditions of sense is to be found not in the 
individual but in society or sociallife as lived (Gemeinschaft) (KP 38) and that, 
as a matter of fact, there is an intrinsic reference to meaning (as embodied in 
objective structures)-a constitutive semantic factor-in all animal or human 
social life, Social life is characterized first and foremost by a mutual steering 
or guiding of its members (gegenseitige Steuerung) (KP 39), involving the set 
(Einstellung) of one individual or group of individuals toward another. This set 
issues into a covariance of movements, a mutual coordination of activities that 
can be extemally observed and, in fact, read off from individuals' behaviors, 
Traffic on the busy street and its coordination, the way we navigate on a sidewalk 
or in a subway-these are cIear examples of extemally verifiable covariance, 
This mutual coordination of living systems, both individual and group, involves 
the giving and the receiving of signs (a theme developed in cIosely related fashion 
in the work of von Uexküll and Cassirer), In this respect, Bühler insisted on an 
irreducibIe duality of sign giver and sign receiver as the key to social life (cf. 
KP §5), 
An early theme in "The Axiomatization of the Language Sciences" is that 
social life takes place chiefly at the beginning in common perceptual situations 
and that the direction of guidance or steering (der Richtpunkt der Steuerung) is 
also to be found in the common perceptual field, lt is only when the crucial 
1 The relation between Husserl and Wittgenstein is the theme of Cunningham (1978)' where the 
interpretative framework is explicitly Wittgensteinian. Gerd Brand's The Essential Wittgenstein, 
however, is an explicitly Husserlian appropriation of Wittgenstein, In the translator's introduction 
to the Brand book I have tried to speil out just where the points of intersection lie. One of the most 
vigorous and historically sophisticated attempts to think through the primacy uf the social is to be 
found in the writings of Ferruccio Rossi-Landi, listed in the references. In his (1979), written in 
conjunction with Massimo Pesaresi. Rossi-Landi notes the need for a detailed study of Bühler's 
work. 

BÜHLEWS AXIOMATIC PROJECT 
7 
determinant of behavior or of change of behavior no longer lies in the perceptual 
field that a diacriticon is needed to signal the shift. This signal can be of almost 
any sort so long as it is perceptible. The contact of a higher order, however, 
wh ich characterizes discursively formed institutions and societies, involves not 
mere signaling--deictic expressions-but an appeal to the representations and 
concepts in possession of the hearer (KP 41). For Bühler, the anthropologically 
decisive step in the genesis of sense comes not with articulate speech but rather 
with the step from immediately intelligible natural gestures to symbolic gestures. 
Sociallife, however, even before the advent of speech, is replete with meaning 
that functions as social bond, and thus Bühler pointed out that "semantics in the 
animal domain lets us acknowledge analoga to human signals" (KP 37), though 
he insisted that the third function of a sign, the representational use constituted 
by words and sentences, is lacking, strictly speaking, in the animal realm and 
is proper to humans alone, a position about which there is, of course, considerable 
controversy (cf. Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok, 1980). 
The second axiom deals with the relations between speech action as a form 
of human action in general and language structure, this distinction paralleling 
that of de Saussure between parole and langue. The subjective pole of language, 
constituted by the language user, was thematized by Bühler along the Iines of 
a peculiar combination of von Humboldt's notion of energeia; Husserl's act 
theory, primarily as developed in the Logicallnvestigations; and Bühler's own 
concern, once again, about emphasizing the social nature of language: that it is 
a public action among other types and kinds of action, such as grasping, fighting, 
hunting, and so forth. In fact, the emphasis on the subjective pole was also 
meant to support the essential Bühlerian thesis, already established in the first 
axiom: that the experience of meaning, as schematized by de Saussure in the 
Course in General Linguistics (1966), does not equate with the experience of 
complexes and circuits as an associative chain reaction. Because language struc-
tures are ideal-this assertion applies to both written and spoken language-their 
apprehension presupposes abstractive procedures once again. Inattention to their 
abstract character gets us involved in what Bühler called a "material derailment." 
The ideality of language structures does not contravene their essential in-
tersubjectivity. Although Bühler had recourse to the Platonic model of ideas and 
forms to illustrate what kind of things language structures are, their eternity and 
immutability, as we shall see, are transformed into intersubjectivity and con-
ventionality. In order to be proper instruments for social communication, me-
diators in social exchange, language structures have to have a transsubjective 
quality, functioning in their role as uni versals or species in which the individual 
consciousnesses of the sign users are participating. The peculiarity of these 

8 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
universals or species, however, is that they are produced (erzeugt) by the lin-
guistic community, which utilizes them as instruments to wh ich the individual 
consciousnesses themselves are subject. Bühler's theory of structure will prevent 
language theory-such as was ultimately developed by the Husserlian tradition-
from falling into a monadic individualism or a subject universalism. Thus, the 
primacy of the objective in Bühler's language theory is identical with the primacy 
of the social. 
The third axiom, which establishes the structural model of language, de-
Iineates the essentially stratified nature of language. Language is represented as 
a sequence of levels: phonemic, lexical, and syntactic. By now, this structural 
model is relatively unexceptional to uso Bühler's central thesis here concems the 
universal "representational power" of what he called a two-class system, and 
it is the essential two-class character of language that explains its representational 
superiority to all other systems of signs and symbols used by all other creatures 
or devised by men. For Bühler, there were two radically different classes of 
language structures: words and sentences, which are "correlative moments" in 
human language. Language is primarily and necessarily composed of symbols-
as bearers of representational content-situated within a field. These words-as 
lexical units of meaning-are themselves composed of units, or rather bundles 
of units, which in themselves have no meaning. This is the well-known doctrine 
of double articulation, the source of language's infinite creativity in spite of its 
finite means of expression. Throughout Sprachtheorie Bühler .took great pains 
to establish language as a sui generis sign system. Bühler denied that there is 
an exact analogy between the relation of word and sentence in language and 
similar paralleis in other symbol systems. In this way, Bühler's work on language 
theory intersects with problems common to general semiotic theory, overspilling 
thereby the concentration on language as such. His work constitutes achallenge 
to all those who are trying to build a general semiotic theory on the model of 
language and questions the unity of semiotics as a science. 
The final axiom establishes the organon model of language and situates the 
representational function of language vis-a-vis the appellative and expressive 
functions. For Bühler, the starting point of language analysis was the concrete 
speech event (Sprechereignis), and the three autonomous functions were "ab-
stract moments" read off and out of the same linguistic form. There has, of 
course, been extensive work done in delineating the essential contours of the 
expressive and appellative functions since Bühler, and his three functions have 
been potentiated into six by Roman lakobson in his now famous essay "Lin-
guistics and Poetics" (1960). Moreover, in the course of discussing his organon 
model of language-Ianguage as an intersubjective instrument by wh ich asender 

BUHLER'S AXIOMATIC PROJECT 
9 
communicates to a receiver information conceming objects and states of affairs-
Bühler showed that biology, too, reIies on semiotic categories in that it cannot 
do without the notions of effector signs and receptor signs. In this respect, 
Bühler's work anticipated later attempts to understand both the biological roots 
of semiosis and the semiotic roots of biology. 
Still, in this monograph and in Sprachtheorie. Bühler resolutely stuck to 
the representational function and its implications for language theory. Connected 
with language' s representational function is the not ion that each language the-
matizes reality in a way specific to itself, that each language has its own worid 
view (Weltansicht). Bühler took over this notion from von Humboldt and de-
veloped it in a new context and according to his own means, based on a hundred 
years of research in the period between von Humboldt's death and the time he 
himself was writing. By reason of the doctrine of syntactic schemata and his 
notion of a field, Bühler was able to demystify some of the more radical ideas 
connected with Iinguistic relativity, at the same time giving the idea itself a firm 
theoretical basis. 
Having sketched the central ideas of the "Axiomatization" essay, I turn 
now to a set of key topics and themes in Bühler's working out of his semiotically 
grounded language theory. The focus of the following discussion will be on 
Bühler's methodological and heuristic fertility and on selected points of inter-
section between his work and later research. While we will certainly not exhaust 
the range of Bühler's language theory nor reconstitute its massive detail, we will 
nevertheless penetrate into its very core. 

2 
PHONOLOGY, DIACRISIS, AND ABSTRACTION 
Bühler was one of the first to understand the immense theoretical importance 
of phonology and of the abstractive procedures underlying the grasp of phonemes 
not just for language theory but also for the theory of knowledge as a whole. 
In Sprach theorie Bühler wrote, "The phenomenon of abstraction holds a key 
position in sematology [Bühler's term for semiotics], to which we will have to 
return time and again" (ST 45). Indeed, "it is a general sematological principle 
that all things or events in the world which we use as signs are used according 
to the principle of abstractive relevance" (ST 224). The key axiom of the sign 
character of language, based on this principle, not only pointed, as Kar! Popper 
(1963: 293 ff) saw quite clearly, to the impossibility of a purely physical approach 
to the phenomena of signs and meanings, but also, by extension, furnished a 
paradigm for constructing a model of human cognitional process, involving the 
primacy of an 'intentional set' in semiosis. In his earliest book-Iength semiotically 
oriented work, Die Krise der Psychologie, Bühler insisted on the central idea 
of "the clearly recognizable and never mistaken duality of phonic image and 
word meaning ... ; this analogy and the complex relation between sign and 
meaning which is derived from it is ever to be found in the most complex 
variations in all sense-filled experiences" (KP 14). Specifically, "to the whole 
which is language there belong sensibly perceptible signs and their meanings" 
(KP 45), and this whole has the paradoxie al quality about it which Bühler 
characterized as the "apparently paradoxical double face of an abstracting from 
and a turning to the sense of signs" (KP 45), a direct result of the principle of 
abstractive relevance. There are thus operative principles of selective preference 
in sign theory, consisting in a focus on "the sense functions of signs" (KP 47). 
Now, " 'Sense in itself,' abstracting from a language community for which 
it is valid, would be a no less realizable concept than, say. 'money in itself,' 
in abstraction from an economic context in which it functions in exchange" (KP 
126). As a matter of fact, "this sense is no essential characteristic of the sense-
bearing structures, but a moment resulting from an operation of giving validity 
1 I 

12 
KEY THEMES IN SÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
wh ich is similarto the giving ofvalue to paper currency" (KP 131). This moment 
results not from an individual operation but from a social performance. What 
Bühler called the essential "subject-relatedness" of the concept of sense refers 
to the social subject, and here he was in accord with the transformed Durkheimian 
position of de Saussure, with its central notion of social positing. Bühler's thesis 
was that 
... it is impossible to constitute the concept of sense without appeal to 
goals and to subject-relatedness. The things and events in the world carry 
only so much sense for the experiencing subject as he is able, either rightly 
or wrongly, to extract from them or to pour into them, but in either case 
we are dealing with an operation of positing. (KP 132) 
Thus, we can see the radical distinction between physical and social facts, one 
of the chief theoretical fruits of the principle of abstractive relevance, bearing 
witness to the "abstract finality factor in the concept of sense" (KP 133), for 
"in the case of the sign, it is always only a matter of abstract moments by reason 
of which and with which the concrete thing [das Konkretum] functions 'as' a 
sign" (ST 40). 
For the purpose of representation, these moments are, as we all now know, 
phonemes, the minimal diacritical units used to articulate differences in meaning 
in a linguistic utterance, although they themselves have no intrinsic meaning. 
Bühler's central thesis was that 
phonemes are sound-marks in the word's tonal reality and in every word 
they can be counted. But the word-image is also Gestalt-like, it has atonal 
face or aspect, that also changes like a human face in the changing course 
of the expressive or appellative function. (ST 258) 
... Indeed, what has to occupy quite generally the language theorist is the 
remarkable constancy of the phonematic signaling of word images in the 
course of their changing sound face. (ST 259) 
The attentive reader of Bühler's work will soon notice a marked oscillation back 
and forth between properly semiotic and Gestalt considerations, something that 
had already been a theme in Die Krise der Psychologie. This theme is taken up 
in § 18 of Sprachtheorie, where Bühler wanted to establish two radically different 
aspects of the word: its Klanggesicht ("tonal face") and its phonematische 
Signalement ("phonemic signaling character"): 
'Face' and 'signaling character' are figurative names for two. not for one 
and the same, method of guaranteeing their diacritical function. for the 'face' 
in our sense belongs to the domain of Gestalten and the 'signaling character' 

PHONOLOGY. DlACRISIS. AND ABSTRACTION 
essentially belongs either completely or extensively to the domain of 'sum-
mative connections' [Undverbindungen]. (ST 276) 
13 
Alphabetical writing bears witness to the signaling characteristic of words: 
through alphabetical writing, one tries to reproduce visually the phonemic dia-
critica that one has relied on acoustically. This, of course, is done with varying 
degrees of success, but the success itself is due to the phonological principles 
underlying human linguistic intercourse. In fact, first and foremost, a word is 
primarily a compound of diacritically relevant moments, these diacritically rel-
evant moments being objective and intersubjective structures-social struc-
tures-which, in making possible the distinction of each one from the others, 
make language the instrument of intersubjective exchange of signs and meanings. 
"In matters of diacrisis phonemes are the trees and the tonal form of the word 
is the forest" (ST 278). Indeed, 
phonemes belong to the class of marks, properties, criteria, notes: they are 
sound properties on the tonal picture of the word and constitute the correlate 
to the properties of things which we have known from time immemorial in 
logic and have characterized as marks or, in Latin, as "notae." (ST 278) 
Nevertheless, "phonology today accomplishes only the first step of its task 
of a systematically constructed theory of diacrisis and has to be instructed by 
Gestalt theory in order to take a second" (ST 283). For Bühler, the phonologie al 
recognition of a word-as a bearer of representational sense-was a kind of 
typical ideal case: the function of phonemes is to differentiate a word intemally. 
When phonemes come together into a Klangganze ("tonal whole"), there occurs 
the Aufspringen or emergence of its meaning that Bühler characterized by taking 
over the imagery of the great Hindu grammarians: it is like the opening of a 
flower, an Aufplatzen, Sphota. In the normal course of speech, however, we do 
not experience a continuous series of such events; rather, the concrete procedures 
of interpretation rely on phonematically different autosemantic and synsemantic 
sense syllables and on subtle contributions from the contextual conditions, whose 
function is to limit and restriet what one would expect on any particular occasion 
of linguistic exchange. As a matter of fact, we know that a gradual extinction 
of the specific characteristics of the material word, which are phonologically 
important, can be compensated for by, among other things, Gestalt qualities 
such as melody, the high-Iow relief of the word, the rhythmic structure of 
long-short and strong-weak, and the degrees of saturation and brightness of the 
vowels. In short, in such cases, the "word images are then predominantly 
recognized by their acoustical face and by no means only by their signaling 
character" (ST 284-285). Thus, acoustically speaking, a word image can 

14 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
undergo severe phonematic distortion and can still be recognized on the basis 
of Gestalt characteristics. 
Moreover, "the claims of diacrisis are similarly diminished in cases where 
the tonal image of a word is empractically structured" (ST 285), that is, embed-
ded in a deictic field or field of praxis. In these cases, where the situation is 
clear to both parties, often "any complex character or single characteristic is 
sufficient to identify what is diacritically important. Do not underestimate the 
theoretical scope of these matters!" (ST 285). Perception here is often induced 
by the most minimal of characteristics outside the strictly phonemic sphere, the 
function of diacrisis being taken over by so me element from the tonal face of 
the sound structure. Bühler noted that "the phenomenon of the sounding word 
is a continuum and is capable of being given continuous nuances in unforeseeably 
many dimensions" (ST 286), for the word has both physiognomic and path-
ognomic valences, which vary radically in their material character from person 
to person. 2 B ut through all these changing valences, there must persist constant 
characters: "The social calling of sound structures in intersubjective exchange 
categorically demands adefinite degree of uniformity" (ST 286). There is no 
objective representation without this uniformity, for, since "the perceiving hearer 
extracts from the sound continuum certain fruitful moments for the purpose of 
the indispensable diacrisis" (ST 287), a certain constancy has to be maintained. 
"There is, therefore, in linguistic intercourse, a constancy of diacritical signaling 
in the changing tonal faces of words" (ST 288). 
Bühler was more interested in determining the preconditions and conse-
quences of the radical distinction between phonetics and phonology than in doing 
phonological research himself: 
It is more important to recognize the new-trod path of phonological analysis 
as a procedure that promises to become paradigmatic [vorbildlich 1 for the 
extensive circle of tasks involved in analyzing intersubjective events and 
that leads to a new concept 0/ elements. (ST 275). 
It leads to a concept of elements that are both socially objective (functioning as 
a semiotic bond between individual consciousnesses) and dependent on certain 
subjective operations and powers of the sign users. A linguistic sign is, just like 
2 Bühler's discussion of the issues 01' physiognomie and pathognomic valences was his way of 
handling the notion of suprasegmental phonemes. The general sense of the two categories is explored 
in great detail in Ausdruckstheorie. where their pertinence to the expressive dimension is primarily 
focused on. Still. it is clear from the discussions in Sprachtheorie that what we now call supra-
segmental features also have a representational valenee. In Ausdrllckstheorie. moreover. Bühler 
also showed himself to be weil aware of the delicacy of hermeneutical procedures in the matter 
of mime and pantomime. 

PHONOLOGY. DIACRISIS. AND ABSTRACTION 
15 
other signs, the crystallization of a set of shifting structural relationships, and 
Bühler did not hesitate to assimilate them to Platonic-like forms. Language 
structures are ideal, and it is their ideality that allows them to be social. However, 
the Platonic characters of externat and immutable, as applied to intelligible 
structures, are, we noted, transformed in the linguistico-semiotic domain into 
intersubjective: 
Language structures are, platonically, ideal objects; they are, logically, 
classes of classes, like numbers or objects of a higher level of formalization 
as in scientific thinking. However, if we choose the Platonic mode of rep-
resenting these structures, we have to modify or leave aside the assumption 
of etemity and immutability of these 'ideas'; if we choose the logistical form 
of expression, we must not press the comparison with numbers in order to 
avoid conflicts with obvious facts. (ST 60) 
The language structure is a true species as considered in the Scholastic and 
Husserlian projects. Now, in both operations, species are derived by processes 
of abstraction. In the Scholastic approach, the problem was the extraction and 
communication of universals-forms, species, intelligibilities-in which partic-
ulars 'shared' or 'participated.' The approach was resolutely ontological, even 
if the act of abstraction was a specific kind of act, an act of intellect and not an 
act of sense proper. 3 Bühler suggested changing the whole orientation toward 
the problem by avoiding an ontological approach and by concentrating on the 
apprehension of signs and on the preconditions for the intersubjective use of 
signs (Zeichenverkehr) as bearers of content and sense. Since the organon model 
of language-that language is an instrument used by asender to communicate 
to an addressee about objects and states of affairs-involves intersubjective 
sharing, the ideal structures are social objects that have been produced by com-
municating subjects, though produced by a group and not by any one individual 
consciousness. 
If linguists and language theorists today feel inspired once again to essay 
forth from their own domain into the age-old dispute of the masters con-
cerning the problem of abstraction, they can give good reasons for doing 
so. For the one who knows how to turn the old interest around, to turn the 
gaze of the abstraction theorist away from the things that are being named 
to the naming activity of the words themselves, to the tonal structure, he 
J Bemard Lonergan has given a paradigmatic and quasi-definitive account of the medieval problematic 
in Verbum: Word and Idea in Aquinas (1967). He has attempted a modem reconstitution in Insight: 
A Studv of Human Understanding (1957). Lonergan has been especially concemed about fusing 
the insights of Aquinas's epistemology with the results of a sophisticated ret1ection on contemporary 
scientific methods. 

16 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
gains a new chance for dealing with this issue. And he does so for the simple 
reason that these structures are not only ready at hand but also produced by 
the persons who know them. lndeed, they are produced precisely for this 
end by every speaker of a language, so that his conversational partner can 
recognize correctly each sound structure for wh at it is and can distinguish 
it from others. Therein lies the great chance for those who want to tackle 
anew the problem of abstraction as linguists, relying on the findings of 
phonology. (ST 288) 
In reliance in particular on the groundbreaking work of Husserl's Logical 
lnvestigations (1970), Bühler pinpointed the need to focus on sense-conferring 
acts (sinn verleihende Akte) (ST 63) 4; "Everything that is connected with the 
phenomenon of abstraction has been purified and decisively advanced by Hus-
serl's phenomenology. Also everything connected with the freedom of the con-
stitution of meaning" (ST 67). Still, no coherent semiotic analysis of language 
can restrict itself to act analysis-the root of Husserl's phenomenological pro-
cedures-nor, in fact, in the last analysis, can it be grounded purely and simply 
in such acts. As Bühler put it, "it is impossible to master the totality of the 
theory of meaning, as the Logical Investigations try to do, from the point of 
view of acts" (ST 69). Such a position 
... is so false that one must hold to the opposite: the theory of structure 
traditionally derived from the genuine organon model of language and from 
the objective treatment of language and the attendant social moment 0/ 
language are logically prior to or at least logically equiprimordial with a 
subject-related act theory. (ST 69) 
To ignore this primary fact would be to fall into a monadic individualism or a 
subject universalism. Thus, the primacy of the objective in Bühler's language 
theory is identical with the primacy of the social. 
Although Bühler's personal psychological propensity was toward a specif-
ically objective language theory, with its emphasis on works and structures 
(Werke and Gebilde), that is, on language as a prodllct, he nevertheless thought 
that "nowhere else in the wide territory of human action are the relations so 
favorable for a regressive movement from the product to the act, from the ergon 
to the energeia" ("The Axiomatization of the Language Sciences," 124), an 
echo, of course, of von Humboldt's conception of language as spiritual creativity. 
As a matter of fact, Bühler also thought that it was possible, if one were so 
inclined, to discover structural invariants on the subject side of language, al-
, English-Ianguage readers can find interesting and authoritative discussions of Husserl's positions 
on abstraction in the two books of Robert Sokolowski. The Formation of Hlisser!'s Concept of 
Constitution (1970) and Husserlian Meditations: Ho,," Words Present Things (1974). 

PHONOLOGY. DlACRISIS, AND ABSTRACTION 
17 
though he did not explore such invariants in detail. Indeed, while in "The 
Axiomatization of the Language Science" B ühler had a rather diffuse correlation 
of action (Handlung) to structure (Gebilde) or to work (Werk), in Sprachtheorie 
he offered a fourfold schema, a four-field schema, which specifies the relations 
between the objective and the subjective more c1early and fully (see Figure I), 
I 
11 
1. 
ACTION 
WORK 
2. 
ACT 
STRUCTURE 
Figure I 
The items under I refer to subject-related phenomena. Those under II refer to 
subject-independent phenomena, wh ich are therefore intersubjectively fixed. 
Reading horizontally, the items in 1 refer to a lower level of formalization, while 
those in 2 belong to a higher level and involve a greater removal from the data 
of the senses on the part of the language researcher. It is clear that each square 
in the schema would be open to independent theoretical and phenomenological 
investigation. As action language would be subject to the types of investigations 
pursued by the speech-act theorists and would, in addition to the normal range 
of topics considered by them, encompass the various roles that language is able 
to play. As dependent on acrs. in the Husserlian sense, language refers us back 
to the constituting acts of consciousness as condition of sense, for without these 
acts-as acts of meaning, of intending, of abstracting-the 'dead' material of 
the language sound or mark cannot be endowed with sense or besouled. As work. 
language displays its character as product, as ergon. while as strucrure (or 
structure of structures), it makes us aware of its abstract scaffolding and of the 
fact that it is the result of successive levels of integration, which are themselves 
revealed by abstraction. 
The ultimate philosophical roots of the dependence of language on aers is 
not explored in detail by Bühler, since he thought that the projects of Husserl 
and of Cassirer thematized this basic subjective and synthetic dimension quitc 
adequately for his purpose, which is to construct a fundamentally objective and 
axiomatic language theory independent of final philosophical options. That there 
are philosophical consequences of rccognizing the role of abstractive procedures 

18 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
in linguistic intercourse has already become c1ear, and we will take these con-
sequences up again later. 
For the purposes of our analysis, however, it is sufficient to note that Bühler 
established clearly and forcefully-and lang before many others, in fact, with 
the great exception of Sapir-that articulation (in the human sense, as an Ur-Akt 
of human being-in-the-world) involves a differentiated dividing up of the flow 
of sounds produced by the body as a whole, thus echoing Homer's characteri-
zation of humans as those animals who divide their voice. This process of 
segmentation and articulation has two principles of formation: (l) a physical 
principle, which governs the division of the sound flow into syllabIes, and (2) 
a grammatical principle, which involves the introduction of sense into the seg-
mentational activities. Bühler's point was that the two principles operate along-
side one another, not one after the other, and that each has its own proper 
tendency (Eigentendenz). We are not concerned here with the material descrip-
tions of articulation, since Bühler's procedure was to integrate and synthesize 
materials received from others. A conceptual point, nevertheless, is most 
important: 
For on cIoser psychological analysis, in the perception in which we appre-
hend them phonemes stand already cIoser to conceptual moments than to 
sensible qualities. (ST 289) 
Simple tones and noises, whether produced by tuning forks or vocal cords, 
have no exchange value in human linguistic intercourse. They are material 
things just like the paper of banknotes, but are not language signs. (ST 272) 
To become true language signs-bearers of representational content-they must 
"presuppose psychophysical systems similar to those of the human." That is, 
we must have systems capable of performing various acts of abstraction. It is, 
it seems to me, Bühler's great merit to have put this procedure right at the heart 
of linguistic theory. His insights into the perceptual foundations of language 
theory and its epistemological implications establish his heuristic fertility and 
anticipatory status for later developments. We will note certain points of inter-
section in the course of our future discussion, for these issues permeate Bühler's 
language theory as a whole. 

3 
THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
At the heart of Bühler's language theory lies the distinction between the Zeigfe/d. 
or index field, and the Symbolfeld. or symbol field. This distinction points to 
the autonomous and separate functions of "intuitive pointing and presenting" 
and the abstract, conceptual grasping of the world. The two fields are "the two 
sources out of which in every case the precise interpretation of linguistic utter-
ances is nourished" (ST 149), namely, the situation (which as intuitive is de-
termined through deixis in all forms, thus generating the Zeigfeld) and the context 
(the syntactic matrix in which symbols are to be situated). In the case of language, 
Bühler thought, the radical distinction between these two fields cannot be over-
come, nor can one be derived from the other. 
THE NATURE OF THE INDEX FIELD 
Bühler recognized pointing as the first and most fundamental, public, and 
observable act in the segmentation of the perceptual field and of the constitution 
of the speech situation, the gesture that, as a vector, directs our attention away 
from itself and toward a perceptible object in the world. Pointing is an event 
within the total human comportment with the world, and when pointing takes 
on voice, so to speak, we have the transformation of pointing into language, a 
properly intuitive language that is bound to the intuitively grasped world. Thus, 
a language event comes to perform the previously only gesturally embodied act 
of segmentation and direction of attention. According to Bühler, the properly 
logical function of the deictic use of language signs is to individualize the 
nominatum, to pick it out from the weiter of items that enter into the flow of 
experience. Index words, in his conception, are meant not to conceptualize or 
grasp in abstract fashion the objects on which they bear but to perform or effect 
an intuitive and perceptual segmentation and identification. It is this indexical 
process that generates and constitutes the index field. 
19 

20 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
Bühler's chief concern was to give a structural phenomenology of deixis, 
and in the course of his discussion he managed to reveal so me important constants 
concerning the Ur-Akt of human signification and its differentiation into a number 
of modes, 
Bühler, like many others who have treated these matters, started with the 
simple finger or arm gesture of pointing, This act-which also contains the key 
to the definite article-effects the primary opening up of the index field by 
indicating an object that stands in a common perceptual space, within which two 
exchangers of linguistic signs are situated. The linguistic embodiment of the 
pointing gesture is one of the most important events in the process of humani-
zation and the development of an instrument for social communicative intercourse 
(cf. Snell, 1952; Tran-Duc-Thao, 1973; Cassirer, 1957). Nevertheless, Bühler 
rejected all attempts to derive the origin of language as such from this primary 
form of deixis as ill-founded and as contrary to the structural principles by means 
of which human language actually operates. 
Now, while linguistic deixis in its first form points away from the sender 
in the direction of the object that it is meant to be individualizing, there is a 
second form of pointing toward oneself as sender that is embodied linguistically 
in the word here, which indicates the position of the sender, and in the word 
I, wh ich functions as an individual signal (ST 95-96). While it is clear that a 
pointing finger points away from itself to the object on which it bears and that 
often the verbal deixis of the definite article is also accompanied by a gesture, 
how do such words as here and I, which, Bühler contended, have in themselves 
no primary conceptual content, perform their deictical functions? Bühler traced 
the roles these words play in discourse back to their psychological foundations 
in the common perceptual space. Here is a word that functions not in an abstract 
context of linguistic actions-in, say, the context of fiction, where the narrator 
says "here"-but in a shared external perceptual situation. If someone in a 
crowded room asks, "Where are you?" and another person answers, "here, .. 
what is indicated is the spatial point of origin of the utterance, for the word 
occurs in the shared perceptual space, which becomes differentiated by the 
possible specification of multiple here's, all taking their point of origin from a 
different "place. " 
Now, while the spatial source is indicated by the spatial coordinates of the 
perceptual field in wh ich one is operating, the individual or personal source is 
indicated by the use of the word I, which is internally differentiated according 
to wh at Bühler called the Klangcharakter or Illdil'idualcharakter of the word. 
Hic-deixis (from the Latin word for 'here') consequently indicates where one is 
speaking from and who is speaking: "Just as the here-word is related to the 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGl'AGE 
21 
quality of origin, so the I-word is related to the individual voice quality of the 
speech sound" (ST 94). If such is the case, then such a word as I, wh ich has 
troubled a distinguished line of logicians, is not originally a Nennwort or a 
naming word but an index ward, and in this capacity it demands perceptual 
fulfillment (a not ion also employed, though in a slightly different framework, 
by Husserl) in order to play its role in human discourse. We can clearly see here 
Bühler's specific contribution to the thomy problem of shifters, those terms that 
change their meaning from user to user. Bühler tried to deal with them, at least 
in a first step, by placing them back in the concrete material field of language 
events and by refusing to puzzle his head over their abstract logical function, 
which really rises on the base of their concrete use in the exchange of signs in 
social life. 
A third form of pointing is toward the addressee of a message. Bühler called 
this istic-deixis (from the Latin iste) and argued that this form of deixis is the 
key to the word you. While in this case one can point one' s finger at the one 
whom one is addressing, the most common form of indicating the addressee is 
through tuming to the person and fixing hirn with one' s eyes. This constitutes 
a properly optical form of pointing and seems to correspond to one of the 
psychological foundations of human linguistic intercourse. The word you, ac-
cordingly, also gets its meaning only through an intuitive, perceptual complement 
within the social field of discourse. 
Bühler went on to distinguish a fourth form of deixis, which, following 
Brugmann-Delbruck's outline of the comparative grammar of the Indo-Germanic 
languages, he calledjener-deixis (from German that), whose function is properly 
to point out something that lies beyond a limit. This is a process involving 
distancing and the segmentation of the perceptual field into spatial zones of 
proximity and distance. The use of the word that as opposed to this cuts the 
perceptual field in two, though Bühler admitted that in this case there does not 
seem to be a specific gesture to accompany the linguistic utterance. Rather , one 
has to utilize the total perceptual context in order to gather the sense of the word 
in its deictical use, and thus Bühler hesitated to accept the so-called jener-deixis 
as an autonomous mode, though it certainly seems that it would be possible to 
generate gestural movements that would indicate c\oseness and remoteness quite 
unequivocally (cf. Eco, 1976:115-121). 
At any rate, Bühler' s intention, independently of the fine details of historical 
etymology and linguistics, was to uncover the psychological roots or foundations 
of index words. In fact, he went so far as to construct a model that was to 
function quite generally and that would give the key to the linguistic data and 
fumish us a schema of the essential coordinates of the index field. 

22 
KEY THEMES IN SÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
+ 
This model is meant to represent the point of origin of a system of indexical 
coordinates and to supply the interpretative key to the index field, In this sense, 
each person who moves about and speaks can be represented by the same model. 
Now, it is possible, Bühler argued, to identify the roles that the words here, 
now, and I play in the index field by noting how they differentiate this coordinate 
system, functioning as markers, The word here functions as a place marker, the 
word now as a moment marker, and the word I as a sender marker. These words 
have different meanings--different intuitive meanings, subject to spatial and 
temporal conditions--depending on who utters them and where and when they 
are uttered, They are not, in primary functions, symbols, in the sense of being 
bearers of conceptual content, as they became when they were substantivized 
as "the here," "the now," and-that most famous of all philosophical prob-
lems-"the I. " Rather, they are signs functioning as signals, as reception signals, 
and thus their meaning shifts from case to case, 
What becomes progressively clear in this analysis is the necessary embed-
ment of index words in an intuitive and perceptual field, Whatever may have 
been the historical situations in wh ich the index words-and also the demon-
stratives-arose, the permanent psychological truth remains that "there is no 
linguistic index sign that could dispense with a gesture or with some sensible 
cue equivalent to a gesture or finally with some orientational convention taking 
the place of a gesture" (ST 93), Indeed, "one has to raise the deictical moment 
to the rank of a defining property of the genus, Then, we will get rid of a whole 
series of skewed classifications, and the natural system of index words will 
become visible in its entirety" (ST 117), The key, then, to understanding words 
such as here, there, I, you, this, and that is to hold fast to the "sematological 
difference" between pointing and naming, The deictical moment does not char-
acterize something or someone as a such-and-such, That function, properly 
speaking, is reserved for signs functioning as symbols within the symbol field,5 
5 Nevertheless, Zeigzeichen are signs and have a semantic contem or sense that has to be understood. 
Different linguistic systems have different ways of segmenting the index field, which is the fjeld 
par excel/ence of linguistic action, See Emile Benveniste's essay "Subjectivity in Language," in 
his Problems in General Linguistics (1971), 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
23 
It is clear from the foregoing what the tenor of Bühler's procedures is and 
how heuristically fertile it could become_ It makes possible a comparative, 
historical, and phenomenological inventory of linguistic signs in the phase of 
intuitive expression and paralle1s in quite remarkable fashion the third chapter 
of Ernst Cassirer's first volume of his Philosophy of Symbolic Forms (1957), 
a parallel that Bühler himself noted. The interested reader can refer to the 
empirical materials found there to supplement what I have been able in this 
context to supply of Bühler's own analyses. 
The forms of deixis treated up to now belong to the mode that Bühler called 
demonstratio ad oculos. This characterization derives, of course, from the fact 
that they occur be fore the eyes of each member of the common and shared 
perceptual situation. Bühler also distinguished two other modes of deixis, whose 
importance becomes clearer as the argument of Sprachtheorie proceeds. 
Anaphora denotes the capacity of our index words to refer backward and 
forward in the flow of discourse to what is no longer, or not yet, present to 
intuitive apperception. In fact, it is anaphora that "appears to be called in the 
highest degree to connect pointing with authentic representing" (ST 123). For 
such a thing to occur we have to recognize an important psychological fact: 
. 'Treated psychologically, every anaphorical use of index words presupposes 
that sender and receiver have be fore themselves the flow of discourse as a whole 
and that it is possible to refer backward and forward to its parts" (ST 121). 
Thus, we have the two operations of Vorverweisung and of Rückvenveisung. 
This phenomenon of anaphora illustrates how the context of speech in process 
of becoming is itself raised to being an index field. This is, Bühler noted, for 
linguistic representation an extraordinarily characteristic phenomenon (ST 124), 
though he said that it would not be correct to think of the contextual index field 
as a third field over against the material (sachliches) index field and the symbol 
field. We will discuss the radical significance of anaphora in the structure of 
language more explicitly later on. 
A third mode of pointing takes place in the field constituted by memory 
(or remembrance) and constructive imagination (or fantasy). In both cases, we 
are led by something that is absent, and "the central psychological quest ion is, 
therefore, how such a leading and being led by what is absent is possible" (ST 
125). It is clear that we can transpose (versetzen) ourselves from our own per-
ceptual space to aspace of fantasy wherein we can enact in imagination a 
transposition of ourselves and of the object world. This psychological and per-
formative function is intimately connected with how our index terms can be used 
without clear referential objects in the perceptual field. But the ability to objectify 
imaginally and in fantasy the coordinates of a totally different perceptual system 

24 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
is the psychological foundation of the use of index terms in this context. • 'Wher-
ever we are linguistically demonstrating by recourse to fantasy, there is operating 
an uncommonly find and for us adults still scarcely noticed play of transposi-
tions" (ST 138), 
It is clear that we are dealing here with a dialectical relation between 
linguistic functions and imaginative powers, It would be an interesting question 
to consider whether Demonstratio am Phantasma is rendered possible by the 
power of fantasy or whether the power of fantasy is itself rendered possible by 
the power of indexical reference, Or whether, in fact, it makes no difference to 
speak of one without the other. Bühler's approach was, stricto sensu. nongenetic, 
and there is no way of telling from his text wh at order or priority is to be 
maintained, But no matter what the genetic priority is, it is certainly clear that 
this form of deixis is one of the main constituents of the human generation of 
the index field, Whether it is a properly psychological power or apower that 
grows symbiotically with language is irrelevant to our recognizing its constitutive 
power in linguistic being-in-the-world. 
In Sprach theorie there is a final section in Bühler's discussion of the index 
field dealing with the replacement of index terms by place names, which function 
in this context indexically, but since there is nothing methodologically new, 1 
will omit an account of it here. But the final ups hot of that discussion is of 
importance to this presentation, and that is the fact that whether or not there are 
specifically separate and pure index words does not matter, so long as thefunction 
of pointing, as opposed to characterizing and naming, is fulfilled. Whether index 
terms as such are still alive makes no difference so long as the pointing or the 
indexical activity itself is alive. Thus, Bühler could write, regarding the later 
development of language, "I recommend to the later linguistic community the 
motto: The index words in aur linguistic intercaurse are dead, but deixis itself 
is alive" (ST 145), 
THE CONTOURS OF THE SYMBOL FIELD 
The second field in which language signs are embedded is the symbol field, 
which is paradigmatically constituted by words used in their nominative or 
naming function and called by Bühler Begrijfszeichen Oiterally, 'concept signs '). 
This field is radically different from the index field since it becomes the matrix 
of those items bearing conceptllal content. According to Bühler, the function of 
symbols within human language is sui generis. and he insisted on the radical 
break between the two fields and the two functions, even if there are certain 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
25 
linguistic entities, such as the demonstrative pronouns, that seem to straddle the 
fence, a complication that need not be discussed here. While index words demand 
embedment in a situation in order to be used meaningfully, symbols need a 
context wherein they can make sense. What, then, is this nation of a con-
text? 
Bühler's first step in explaining the concept of a context is to develop the 
nation of an Umfeld, an environment or surrounding field, within which words 
used in their properly symbolic capacity can be put into order. 
Bühler first distinguished an empractical use of words and consequently an 
empractical Umfeld. Here we have namings and referrings with the help of 
isolated language signs. The signs function purely diacritically, as when we 
accompany a nod of the head with "yes" or hand money to a bus driver with 
the expression "transfer," to indicate that we want a transfer ticket. In cases 
such as these a goal-directed form of behavior is connected with a linguistic 
utterance that is used only as a diacriticon. The relevant surrounding field in 
which it-the linguistic symbol-stands is in this case a field of praxis. 
Bühler distinguished a second essentially different dass of cases of iso-
lated-that is, syntactically context-free-names. This dass of cases compre-
hends those in which a name is physically connected with a thing, such as the 
names of wares, titles on books, inscriptions on monuments, place names on 
road signs, and so forth. What all these items have in common-all items 
involving the use of names-is a real bond (dingliche Anheftung). Consequently, 
Bühler proposed to call such cases the "symphysical" use of names. More 
generally , though, such physically connected names function as marks (Marken). 
Wh at is decisive from the point of view of language theory is that "the words 
attached as the brand marks have and need no context around them" (ST 161). 
In such a use, "the nominal form stands equally, just as much in the case of 
living discourse as in the case of a connecting of an optically legible linguistic 
form to an arrow-like sign, in the framework of ademonstratio ad oculos" (ST 
161). 
The third surrounding field distinguished by Bühler, the synsemantical field 
(ar Umfeld), leads directly to the nation of a proper linguistic context. Bühler 
illustrated this nation by reference to color perception, one of his favorite anal-
ogies, which is, indeed, semiotically fertile. In contradistinction to color contrast, 
wh ich is a function of the physical proximity of the stimulated cells of the visual 
receptor system, the field values within a picture as a whole present a radically 
different case. The same physically identical splotch of paint can have radically 
different image values depending on its role within the painting. As a result, 
, 'the structural law of image values of a painting is samething totally different 

26 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
from color contrast; these image values are found in a synsemantical sUITounding 
field and possess in it definite field values" (ST 165). The specks of color (even 
more generally , in fact, for Bühler the sense data) have to have sign values, a 
theme that Bühler also developed in Die Krise der Psychologie. 6 
Bühler argued that the context of field values in a representational painting 
is the analogon to the context of language signs; in both cases, there is a syn-
semantical environment, an environing semantic field from which the various 
signs get their relative meaning and value. Indeed, in the case of the signs of 
language, it is crucial to note, once again, that they do not stand alone but are 
embedded in a matrix of gestures, mimicry, and so forth. That is, they are found 
within a total framework of all the coproduced signs of social intercourse. We 
will return to this analogy in another section. 
In a later section of Sprachtheorie (§ 11) Bühler proceeded to discuss the 
notion of a context of field moments in more detail. A key point is that "it is 
no accident that we can best see the linguistic index field in the case of language 
action and the symbol field in the case of a language work that has been se para ted 
from the actual flow of speech" (ST 168). Now, the separation of the language 
work from the originary indexical auxiliaries is a central theme in Bühler's theory 
of the sentence, for in this process of separation we see the function of the 
synsemantically environing factors conserved. The fact is that nouns-and all 
symbol functions that together make up sentences-project their values as weIl 
as a kind of Sphärengeruch ('atmosphere') by means of which we are able to 
find, for example, the crystallization point of an otherwise dismembered and 
deforrned text by a sort of process of "filling in the blanks" (see ST 170ff.).7 
This process is helped along by our factual knowledge of the subject matter 
to wh ich the word classes themselves refer. There is a kind of being guided by 
the material (stoffliche Steuerung) that enables us to grasp the sense of the 
language work, and the foreknowledge of the hearer or the receiver of any 
'One of the purposes of Die Krise der Psychologie was to rethink the foundations of psychology 
using language and signs as the guiding idea. The results in this book are fragmentary. but 
nevertheless exciting. At the same time, later work on perception has gone much further than 
envisaged, especially the later work of Merleau-Ponty, the dynamics of whose thought drove hirn 
in the direction of a semiotic model of perception and toward thinking of perception along the 
analogy of a language or sign system constituted by a system 01' differences, a theme central to 
contemporary structuralism. See Innis (1980). 
7 Bühler spoke of a Konstntktionsdrang that operates independently of morphological and ordering 
auxiliaries. The interpretative contribution 01' the linguistic agent, an informal component not 
explicitly furnished by the linguistic signs themselves, consisting in the linguistic subject's being 
alongside the things one is talking about and being guided by the object itself. is a central recurring 
theme in Bühler's work. Michael Polanyi exploited this idea in his chapter on articulation in 
Personal Knowledge (1958). Also st:e Innis (1973). 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
27 
linguistic communication is something that it is not possible to eliminate. It is 
such a guiding that enables us, for example, to understand the differences between 
the apparently identically formed German words Backstein (bake stone or brick), 
Backofen (bake oven), and Backpulve (bake powder).8 
Word classes generate their own fjelds. Bühler noted that words of a specific 
word class open up one or more empty spaces (Leerstellen) that have to be filled 
in by words of specific classes. This, of course, is the familiar notion that only 
certain types of words can exist in the neighborhood of others. "It is the important 
fact of connotatio, which was already known to the scholastics, that we have 
in mind. Alongside the material auxiliaries it is the second important and general 
contextual means" (ST 173), although sequential placement and musical and 
phonematic modulations also determine the linguistic context. For example, 
Bühler wrotes; "lust as there are the large forms of the so-called sentence 
melodies, of sentence rhythm, and the temporal forms of the sentence, so there 
are already found the same forms in the small format of the word" (ST 177-78). 
Indeed, "every word has a tonal face that is not without remainder determined 
by the expression, but partially also specifies the symbol value and the syntactic 
valence of the word" (ST 177). 
In his discussion of the symbol field, Bühler emphasized one of the cardinal 
notions of his language theory, which also joins it with de Saussure ' sand 
Cassirer's work: "The linguistic representational instrument belongs to the realm 
of indirect representations; it is a mediating or medial (mediales) instrument, in 
which definite mediators as ordering factors playa role" (ST 151). This notion 
of mediation distinguishes language in its essential structure from all those forms 
of representation that present some sort of iconic imaging of their contents, 
however we want to think of the concept of iconism. The coordination of language 
signs with their contents and with the referents on which they bear is mediated, 
not direct, and one of the operational principles of language is its relational 
fidelity (Relationstreue) as opposed to its iconic fidelity (Erscheinungstreue). 
There is in language a distinct lack of mirroring moments, a repudiation of 
8 Note how Back- belongs to different linguistic fields as we attach it to the different roots. but the 
detennination of the field is not a fonnal feature of the construction that is linguistically manifest; 
rather. it derives from our knowledge of the subject matter. lndeed. such composites as these 
illustrate the need for a plurality of meaning pu/ses. Moreover. our knowledge of how to construe 
the composites. of wh ich element in the composite is detennining and which determined. cannot 
be derived from a purely fonnal. logical grammar. We have to appeal to the concrete, material 
knowledge (Sachwissen) of the subject matter in possession of the language user. This appeal 
illustrates the source of Bühler's objection to Husserl's project of a formal doctrine of meaning. 
Bühler's very real admiration 01' Husserl did not prevent hirn from seeing so me of phenomenology's 
real, intrinsic limits. 

28 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
intuitive similarity between representational instrument and conte nt. But there 
does have to be so me sort of fidelity, "for without fidelity there is simply no 
'representation' worthy of the name" (ST 191). Bühler's position here is identical 
with de Saussure's axiom of the arbitrariness of the sign, while going beyond 
it to raise questions about the referent, which are fundamentally excluded in de 
Saussure 's project (cf. Benveniste, 1966:43~8). 
Bühler argued the now well-accepted thesis that language did not grow out 
of a complexification and differentiation of onomatopoeia, nor does sound paint-
ing (Lautmalerei) play any crucial role in its present functioning. The reliance 
on mediation is raised to a structural law of discourse, and all fidelity or cor-
respondence to "reality" is itself mediated, not direct. The painting potential 
found in language-as vocal and articulatory possibilities-is areal but totally 
subordinated factor. As Bühler put it, "Ianguage would not be what it is if there 
were a coherent, operationally effective painting field [Maifeld] in it" (ST 196). 
The fields opened up in the symbolic use of language signs are fields defined 
by synsemantic and contextual relations, not relations of real connection or 
mirroring between sign system and correlates. The capacity of generating and 
of being found in a field, which characterizes the word notion as such, is a 
diacriticon that is immanent in the structure of language itself. We have to admit 
that "in language there is valid first and foremost a completely different structural 
law than the onomatopoetic" (ST 202). 
This becomes clear when we realize that onomatopoeia, as it appears in the 
various languages, is subject to two essential barriers immanent in each language: 
a phonemic barrier and a syntax barrier. It has by now become a truism that 
each language has its own phonemic system and that what are putatively the 
"same" sounds---onomatopoetically-have different realizations in the different 
languages. There are also syntactic restrictions on the freedom of word formation, 
in that what is verbally painted in one language would have to be nominally 
painted in another. Once the claims of sentence formation have been satisfied, 
choice of words and formation of words remain as minor domains of freedom 
wherein painting tendencies can work themselves out or be effected (ST 203). 
The language-theoretical ups hot of the discussion of onamatopoeia is, therefore, 
that the process involves "reproductions which are to a high degree symbolic" 
(ST 207). 
The symbolic reproduction is in its own way true to the form of the phe-
nomenon that is being painted, but it does not reproduce it eidetically or icon-
ically. lt entails rather a process of abstraction, a persistent theme, we have seen, 
in Bühler's work. For if even onomatopoeia is itsel1' selective, how much more 
so is the realm 01' properly mediating symbolic formations'? Hems that are pro-

THE TWO-FlELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
29 
duced as specifically linguistic conceptual signs (Begrijfszeichen) involve ab-
straction both on the expression side and on the content side. Wh at is conceptually 
significant on the expression side is not the totality of the expression in its 
physical reality but only its diacritical core, and what is significant on the content 
or object side is not the totality of all the aspects of the phenomenon but only 
those that characterize it as this kind of object rather than another. Thus, we see 
once again the bite of the principle of abstractive relevance. Indeed, by relying 
on this principle, Bühler thought that every form of flatus-vocis-nominalism 
could be rejected, something that is discussed at length in the "Axiomatization" 
essay. 
What, more exactly, makes up the structure and the inner constitution of 
a linguistic conceptual sign? Bühler noted that the earliest giving of names to 
objects in our environment was based on certain sensorily outstanding specific 
characteristics. Sense specificity became the ruling criterion in contrast to the 
drive toward abstraction, as found in the development of scientific language and 
its systematic tendencies. The 'original' creators of language classified and cat-
egorized by means of criteria and diacritica that arose from, or were rooted in, 
immediate practical use, overpowering, or defense. Bühler came to this conclu-
sion not just on the basis of historical etymology but also by empirical research 
with children. He found out that their relation to, and acquisition of, language 
is reflection-free as weil as free from the magical attitude so often ascribed to 
primitives' ways of living the word-thing relation. 
By taking the rise and use of concrete nouns and names as one pole of a 
scale and the development of scientific language as the other pole, Bühler thought 
we could discem an intermediate stage that is of great importance for language 
theory. When we use such a word as horse we do not think, as is obvious, of 
any particular, concrete horse, and in this sense our word is separated from 
particularity by a specific act of intending or meaning (Meinen), a notion that 
is reminiscent of Husserl's theory of meaning. Rather, we intend apart or a 
moment of the world that is represented in one's knowledge. At the same time, 
words carry with them a 'sphere' that segregates the intended content from other 
contents: "And such an ordering into spheres become noticeable in experience 
where no concrete material images can be adduced. They [images] are lacking 
in the experience of the speaking thinker precisely because he does not need 
them" (ST 221). The word horse, to retain Bühler's example, belongs to the 
sphere 'animals' or 'domestic animals.' Thus, Bühler thought, in addition to 
having their own proper (lexical) meaning, words belong to various meaning 
spheres or meaning regions. 
This notion has important implications. As Bühler put it: 

30 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
The appearing of an ordering sphere in our knowing points universally 
toward the fact that in many cases of the actual use of a word it is enough 
if, instead of the content, the scope [Umfang] of a concept, that is, the 
domain of application of the ordering sign, be in some way marked out. 
(ST 221) 
It is this consideration that lies behind Bühler's conception of a synchytic concept, 
that is, a concept that has no sharp boundaries and that bears remarkable simi-
larities to the ideas developed so fruitfully by Wittgenstein as "family resem-
blances." For our words remain in currency even when the objects to which 
they apply have become maximally differentiated and multiply formed by the 
advance of culture. The example Bühler appealed to here is the word book, and 
we ean, of course, think of many others. 
As the argument of Sprachtheorie proceeds, Bühler eontinues to engage in 
dialeetieal eonfrontations with major theses of Scholastie philosophy and with, 
paradigmatieally, the work of Mill and Husserl, whose differences on eertain 
issues are of extreme methodological importanee. 
The Seholastie model, whieh often involved philosophizing in the Pla-
tonie-Aristotelian fashion using language as a guiding elue, was eonstituted by 
the thesis that our words-in their nominal funetion--enable us to grasp abstracta 
and generalia. Thus, the physieally emittedflatus vocis horse does not bear on 
the total physieal and eoncrete reality of the object horse but only on the species 
horse. Bühler represented this whole proeess-in its semiotic expansion-by 
means of a small diagram. 
For, he pointed out, it is not the flatus vocis itself but only its relevant moments 
that are apprehended as signifieant, and it is not the total horse but only the 
shaded part-symbolizing its relevant moments-that is intended by the word. 
Here we see the real bite of the principle of abstractive relevanee for problems 
in the theory of knowledge and the theory of meaning, for the differences in 
pronuneiation and so forth of the words, physieally eonsidered, may have path-
ognomie or physiognomie significanee, but they are irrelevant to the nominal 
function of the word itself. Such reflections as these lend themselves to an elegant 
and laconic refutation, Bühler thought, of all flatus vocis types of nominalisms, 
a position with which I eoneur, and it also involves a rejeetion of all attempts 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGlJAGE 
31 
to build a semiotics on a purely physical basis, something that Kar! Popper also 
has argued, relying on the work of Bühler. 9 
Bühler devoted two rather rambling sections to contrasting the work of Mill 
and Husserl on proper and class names (ST 225-236). He used the occasion to 
discuss a crucial methodological issue in the analysis of conceptual signs, an 
issue that has permeated the ear!y parts of this study and that permeates the 
.. Axiomatization" essay: the primacy of the social or the primacy of the indi-
vidual consciousness and its acts in the genesis and determination of meaning. 
Bühler characterized Husser!'s theory of meaning as an act theory, whereas 
Mill's theory rests on the organon model, that is, that language is an instrument 
used by one person to communicate knowledge about objects and states of affairs 
to another. This organon model was, of course, the foundation of Bühler's own 
thought. 
Mill's central point is that a proper name is analogous to the famous red 
mark on a house in the 1001 Nights. It functions as a socially observable dia-
criticon. Bühler objected that normally a proper name is not really like a red 
mark attached to identical things; rather, it is attached to a person or a thing that 
has been distinguished (and is distinguishable) objectively beforehand and to 
which the naming sign (Nennzeichen) is then attached afterward in the course 
of linguistic exchange. This is reminiscent of the situation of the symphysical 
surrounding field, wh ich we have already discussed. Class names, however, 
contain a Wasbestimmung of the object (a what determination), in short, a 
connotation, in the sense that when the class name is used an empty place (eine 
Leerstelle) is noted along with it. The adjective ITite
r 
for instance, also connotes 
a bearer or a carrier, schematized by Bühler as 
~ . According to Mill, there 
are two nominal forms that have, in the sense defined, no connotation: abstrac-
tions such as whiteness or redness (die Weisse and die Röte) and proper names. 
As a consequence, Mill held that a proper name such as Sacrares has no con-
notation, a position that, on the surface, may arouse some suspicion. Bühler 
responded by noting that "what is valid for all concepts does not have to be 
valid for all names, if certain names are not full-fledged conceptual signs" (ST 
9 Bühler was not trying to solve the problem of concept formation by fiat or by avoiding any appeal 
to genetic processes. He was offering a model. What the "relevant features" of any conceptual 
sphere are is a matter for discussion. but Bühler's point is that hol>' we seleet and reeognize relevant 
features is a proeedure akin to or isomorphie with our grasp 01' the unity of a word amidst its 
phonemic markers. Wh ich features are determinative is either an empirical matter. to be settled by 
examining concepts as "pieces of natural history" (in Wittgenstein's sense), or something one 
would argue to, a matter of conceptllal decisiollS. in Polanyi's rather than a Camapian conven-
tionalist sense. 

32 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
228). Bühler's key point here is that we identify and deal with things in the 
world that we want to distinguish or set off from others and to recognize when 
we encounter them again, and it is to these things that we give proper names. 
Turning to Husserl, the problem is how, starting from the realm of per-
ception, individual and general objects are constituted: for example, Socrates 
and man, in the sense of Homo sapiens. On the same perceptual base, or material 
of sense data (i.e., linguistic expressions), Husserl thought that different acts of 
meaning can intend either an individual, A, or a species, B (ST 229), a thesis 
that is developed with great subtlety and at great length in Husserl's Logical 
lnvestigations (1970). Now Bühler noted that both Husserl and Mill had attached 
themselves to problems deriving from the Scholastics, but that they had availed 
themselves of two different thought models. Husserl-, in his own way, wanted 
to reconstitute the Scholastic act theory (intellectus in the sense of actus intel-
lectus), while Mill was concerned with the conditions of intersubjective linguistic 
intercourse. In this sense, Mill's approach was objective. while Husserl's was 
subjective. What direction is an axiomatically grounded language theory to take? 
"Linguistic research has a great interest in being permitted, in the sense 
of a Millian analysis, axiomatically to place the fact of the intersubjective ex-
change of signs at the starting point of its analyses" (ST 231). If this is the case, 
then the essential meaning diacriticon of the Husserlian position, which places 
it in the different acts of a subjectively intending consciousness, cannot alone 
suffice to mark the distinction between "man as species" and "man as indi-
vidual," a distinction that in linguistic intercourse must be effected through 
properly linguistic means or through the Umfeld of the actual word. Bühler 
thought that while Husserl had made a great, indeed a crucial, contribution to 
the problem of abstraction and universals by starting from the experiential (or 
act) side and thus unmasking the Humean theory as a merely apparent solution, 
his basically monological and subjective model for grounding a language theory 
could not do the job, at least if we restrict ourselves to the Logic·allnvestigations. 
The Husserlian language consciousness is a reduced product of human speech, 
a derivate from the intersubjective (not intrasubjective) exchange of linguistic 
signs. The grounds of language theory are primarily to be found, then, in a Mill 
type of analysis joined to behavioral and perceptual (i.e., public) considerations. 
Nevertheless, Bühler did think that in Husserl's later work, principally the 
Cartesian Meditations (1960) and Formal and Transcendental Logic (1969), 
Husserl hirnself overcame his essentially monological orientation, with its in-
sistence on the primacy of subjective analyses, and approached an objectively 
oriented language theory. In support of this contention, Bühler adduced a preg-
nant text from the later book, which it would be weil to cite here. 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
These Objective affairs all have more than the fleeting factual existence of 
what comes and goes as a formation actually present in the thematic field. 
They have also the being-sense of abiding validity; nay, even that of Ob-
jective validity in the special sense, reaching beyond the subjectivity now 
actually cognizing and its acts. They remain identical affairs when repeated. 
are recognized again in the manner suitable to abiding existents; in docu-
mented form they have Objective factual existence, just like the other ob-
jectivities of the cultural world: Thus they can be found in an Objective 
duration by everyone, can be regeneratively understood in the same sense 
by everyone, are intersubjectively identifiable, are factually existent even 
when no one is thinking them. (Husserl, 1969:34) 
33 
The attentive reader will notice here remarkable affinities with Bühler's own 
position. 
In Bühler's conception of the role of a linguistic symbol as a bearer of a 
conceptual content, it is important to recognize, as he developed the subject later 
in the section on linguistic conceptual signs, that a concept-as borne by a 
material expression--can function either according to content (nach Gehalt) or 
according to context (nach Umfang). Bühler reintroduced and specified the notion 
of a sphere schema (Sphären-schema), already found in Die Krise der Psy-
chologie. The notion of a schema is taken up and further developed in the last 
section of part three (§ 16) of Sprachtheorie, which connects it with certain 
central ideas in Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. The notion of a schema illu-
minates, in a context important to the philosophical approach to human knowl-
edge, the central concept of a symbol field of language and shows the intimate 
connection between perception (Wahrnehmung) and the linguistically constituted 
grasp or comprehension of objects in the perceptual field. What in more detail 
is this notion of a schema and what is its place in a language theory? 
It is a central contention of Bühler's language theory and of his work as 
a whole that "the linguistic fixing and apprehension of perceived states of affairs 
is prepared and rooted in the processes that we are accustomed to call perceptions 
and to separate in an inappropriately sharp manner from a 'following' linguistic 
apprehension" (ST 252). lndeed, "the orientational instrument of human lan-
guage that has been produced in linguistic intercourse potentiates the perform-
ances of the natural signals and symptoms that we tacitly receive in perception 
and to which we are indebted" (ST 252).10 Now, according to Bühler, the 
discovery of constancy moments in the flow of inner and outer experience fulfills 
the Kantian idea of mediating, ordering schemata. 
10 Potentiation: linguistie intereourse. as a seleetive apprehension of sense and fonn. paralleis the 
seleetivity and interpretative perfonnanees of pereeption. being. in a very real sense. isomorphie 
with pereeptual aehievements of fusion. integration. and abstraction. 

34 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
In work published in 1907-1908, Bühler had already discovered the ro1e 
of specifically syntactic schemata. Here we have a properly linguistic transfor-
mation of the Kantian central notion. Through a set of experiments dealing with 
the rapid comprehension of and reaction to epigrammatic sentences (the details 
of which we can leave aside), Bühler found out that content and the linguistico-
representational schema go their separate ways and hence can be (and often are) 
experienced separately. In fact, the empty syntactic schema, either wh oie or in 
part, precedes the ans wer or reaction to an epigram and in some way guides it. 
Bühler summarized the results of his early work in the following words. 
When we want to express a difficult thought, we first choose the sentence 
form for it, we first become conscious of the plane of operation, and it is 
then this plane that first masters the words. When we completely understand 
a sentence's structure, we gain knowledge of the relations that exist between 
the individual parts of the whole form. The same thing happens when we 
ourselves are speaking, for example, when we begin a parcnthesis with 'as' 
and at the concIusion of the subordinate cIause suddenly break off; then we 
see that we have expected something; that is not only a factual or a material 
but also a gtammatical expansion. We expect a main clause, In all these 
cases, we become conscious separately of something that-by-and-by and 
without being noticed in particular--<:onstantly or almost constantly mediates 
between thoughts and words; a knowledge of the sentence's form and the 
relation of the sentence' sparts to each other, something that as the direct 
expression of the grammatical rules, wh ich are active in us, has to have 
validity. (l908:84ff.) 
Bühler stated in Sprachtheorie that he would put it otherwise now than he 
had then. He would formulate his model insight in the following way: 
Thought that is expressed in speech, and along with it every other operation 
with representational symbols in the service of knowing, is in need of a 
symbol field in exactly the same way as the painter needs his painting 
surface, the cartographer his coordinate system of latitudinal and longitudinal 
lines, and the composer his still-otherwise-constructed surface, or, put in 
general terms, just as every two-class system of representational signs. (ST 
254) 
Some paralleis between linguistic signs and other representational signs will be 
taken up later, when we discuss the specificity 01' language. 
Finally, Bühler ended his treatment 01' linguistic fields with the following 
points conceming the freeing of the representational function from pointing and 
painting, a theme taken up at length in Section C of the .. Axiomatization" essay, 
devoted to the structural model of language. 
Human language as a representational instrument, such as we know it today, 
has behind it some evolutionary steps. all of which can be understood as 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
freeing it more and more from pointing and removing it further and further 
from painting. (ST 255) 
35 
This is the source of its universality and of its relational fidelity, though just 
how language represents in spite of its being freed from the index field and its 
repudiation is one of the great mysteries of human knowing, a theme explored 
in great and magnificent detail in Ernst Cassirer's Philosophy ofSymbolic Forms 
(1957). 
Bühler concluded his treatment with the following comment: 
Perhaps we overestimate the freeing from the index field; perhaps we un-
derestimate the fact of the essential openness and the need, proper to every 
linguistic representation of astate of affairs, to be completed by our knowl-
edge of this state of affairs. Or, what is the same thing: perhaps there is an 
expansion of alllinguistically constituted knowledge from a source that does 
not run in the channels of the linguistic symbol system and nevertheless 
produces a genuine knowledge. (ST 255) 
It seems to me that this is the domain thematized by Michael Polanyi in his 
Personal Knowledge (1958) as the tacit dimension, a set of informal powers 
that, while relying on articulation, nevertheless moderates, supplements, and 
controls it. Thus, Bühler could say that "language in its structures constantly 
appeals to the material/factual knowledge of its receivers" (ST 65). 
SOME IMPLICATIONS OF THE TWO-FlELD THEORY 
Bühler' s radical distinction between the two fields paralleis the Kantian 
distinction between intuition and concept. Deictic terms are in themselves rad-
ically incomplete without the exchangers of signs being joined together in a 
common field of discourse, which is itself constituted by a field of actions 
(Handlungen)." 
By means of deictic terms, the participants in the concrete 
dialogue are materially joined to one another and to the world they are jointly 
referring to. As bearers of content, however, deictic terms in different languages 
segment the personal, spatial, and temporal fields in different ways, and thus, 
there is only partial isomorphism between different deictic systems. While in 
English we have one word here, in Italian, for instance, we have the two words 
qui and qua, wh ich specify whether their referents are located at a precise spot 
11 Once again. readers can refer to Benveniste's essay in Problems in General Linguistics (1971). 
Although Benveniste never, to my knowledge. referred to Bühler in the course 01' this book. many 
of his analyses are fully compatible with Bühler's work. 

36 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
or in a more diffuse space. However, it is only as used in discourse that these 
terms gain their meaning. Classical Greek, for example, had a distinct verbal 
form for the dual, while in English no such form exists, the specification of 
person often requiring other auxiliaries in order to make clear who of those 
participating in the discourse are included within the field of reference. 
Properly symbolic terms, in Bühler's sense, segment the world not into 
individuals but into classes, and while a concept arises on the base of a set of 
particulars, it is clear that its intension is not identical with its range of reference 
or extension. Bühler took it as given that concepts are true species, true uni-
versals, and he did not study in any extensive manner in Sprachtheorie the 
genetic progression in concept formation, such, for example, as we have it 
paradigmatically illustrated in the work of Vygotsky, Luria, Piaget, and others. 
Taking his stand on adult mature language and on the preconditions for semiotic 
exchange of content, Bühler asserted that the phonematic constancy of signaling 
is itself paralleied by the conceptual constancy of the symbolic sign. But-and 
here is the semiotic twist in Bühler's work-just as the production of phonemes 
is a conventional productivity, so the production of concepts is itself a matter 
of convention and subject to the various currents and tensions to which con-
sciousness itself is subject. In fact, Bühler eschewed all ultimate epistemological 
issues conceming the ontological status of concepts, though it is clear that his 
insistence on abstractive powers, as shown most clearly in the centrality of 
phonology in his work, leads to a kind of generative constructivism in that the 
conceptual focus of the word-as weIl as of the sentence-involves the same 
kind of selectivity of distinctive features as we find in the perception and ap-
prehension of phonemes. 
Bühler, I said, gives no genetic account of this process, taking it as given. 
The world of a language' s lexicon and of its syntactic unities, and syntactic 
rules, becomes the result of prior processes of differentiation and segmentation. 
We can read off phenomenologically what the world of any language is by 
considering the language a mirror of those distinctions and foci found important 
by the community that has used the languages. Von Humboldt had already 
developed this idea, and it was taken up again contemporaneously with and after 
Bühler by such scholars as Trier and Weissgerber, the two chief advocates of 
the linguistic field theory, for whom the interactions between language as ener-
geia and language as ergon became the essential clues to a linguistically oriented 
historical phenomenology. Von Humboldt, for instance, wrote that '"the true 
significance of research on language consists in studying the share of language 
in the making of ideas. This includes everything, since the sum of those ideas 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
37 
constitutes man" (von Humboldt, 1971). Von Humboldt went on to draw an 
even more daring consequence, which is also echoed in Bühler's work: 
Owing to the interdependence of thinking and speech it is obvious that 
languages are not only the proper means of presenting truth already known, 
but also help reveal truths yet unknown. Their variety is not a variety of 
sounds and signs, but a variety of Weltanschauungen. Here is both the 
foundation and the ultimate goal of all research on language. The sum of 
that wh ich is knowable. as the field cultivated by the human spirit. is situated 
between alt languages and independently of them. Man cannot approach 
that purely objective territory except in a manner proper to his cognition 
and experiencing, and hence in a subjective manner . ... But the subjec-
tivity of all mankind is once again something objective in itself. The original 
agreement between the world and man, on which the possibility of any 
cognition of truth is based, is acquired by following the footsteps of the 
phenomenon, step by step, gradually. (von Humboldt, 1971) 
lost Trier, for his part, has a remarkable passage on the nature of a con-
ceptual field that illustrates clearly certain central ideas we have seen in our 
previous discussion of Bühler's theory. Trier wrote: 
Simple observation of one's own speaking and hearing makes us realize 
clearly that a given word spoken in a sentence obtains its meaning not only 
from its connections with that sentence, and that that sentence is not the 
only reality which imparts life to a dead single word. A much greater role 
is played by another reality, the system of the whole objective conceptual 
field which is conveyed to and present for speaker and hearer alike .... 
A word is comprehended only in connection with that whole. The field of 
a verbal sign is to be comprehended, and it will be comprehended, only in 
connection with the whole. The field of a verbal sign must be present if a 
single verbal sign is to be comprehended, and it will be comprehended, only 
depending on the degree of the presence of the field. It "means " only within 
that whole and thanks to that whole. Outside the whole field meaning cannot 
appear at all. The general theory of meaning will have to take this into 
account much more than it has so far. ... It is not a single sign which says 
something, but a system of the totality of signs which may say something 
in view of single signs. In this way a word is combined with the remaining 
words of the same conceptual field into a whole govemed by its own laws, 
and receives the scope of its meaning from that very whole. The proper 
meaning of a word becomes known only when we delimit it from the 
meanings of neighboring and opposing words. It has a meaning only as part 
of a whole, since meaning occurs only within a field. (Trier, 1931:3-6) 
Or again, Trier wrote: 
We cast a net of words on what we have a vague and obscure feeling about, 

38 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
in order to order it and to contain it in fixed concepts. The formation of 
concepts by means of words is a structuring process of explaining from the 
position of the whole. In doing so, language does not reJlect real being, but 
creates intellectual symbols. Seing itself, that is, the being given to us, is 
not independent of the kind and composition of linguistic symbolic struc-
tures. (Trier, 1931 :2) 
Such a position can be deepened philosophically by adverting to the role 
of synthesis in the originary segmentation of the world. Bühler referred frequently 
and approvingly to the work of Cassirer, whose work indeed is a necessary 
complement to Bühler's language theory. Cassirer's main goal was to reject the 
so-called copy theory of knowledge and to reinstate in full force the role of 
mediation in the relation of human consciousness to experience. Cognition 
does not reproduce a pattern already given in an object, but implies an 
original act which created that pattern. Hence cognition is never simply a 
copy, but always expresses the original creative force. The intellectual im-
ages of the world, which we get in cognition, in art, or in language, are, 
to use Leibniz's words, "living mirrors of the world." They are not simple 
receptions and passive recordings, but acts of the mind, and each of these 
original acts draws a specific and new image for us and outlines the horizon 
of the objective world. (Cassirer, 1933: 19)." 
Nevertheless, these intellectual images are not merely arbitrary, for they are 
constructed in the concrete processes of mastering and understanding the concrete 
world of our experience. They create the forms through which the data of 
experience are apprehended, and, as expressed. these forms inform us about the 
significant differences in perception that have been impressed on the various 
linguistic communities. Still, Gestalt theory has shown that there certainly are 
significant units prior to expression. Bühler's thesis that language potentiates the 
operations of perception bears this out and shows his connection with certain 
essential theses of Gestalt theory. 
Wolfgang Köhler made the point this way in his Gestalt Psychology: 
Gestalt psychology holds [thatl sensory units have acquired names, have 
become richly symbolic. and are now known to have certain practical uses, 
12Consider the closing passage in Vygotsky's Thought and Language (1962: 153): " ... a generalized 
reflection of reality is the basic characteristic of words. This aspect of the word brings us to the 
threshold of a wider and deeper subject: the general problem 01' consciousness. Thought and 
language, which reflect reality in a way different from that 01' perception. are the key to the nature 
01' human consciousness. Words playa central part not only in the development of thought but 
in the historical growth of consciousness as a whole. A word is a microcosm of human con-
sciousness." Vygotsky's work (also 1978) can be seen as a necessary and important supplement 
to Bühler's, principally by reason of its genetic approach and its insistence on the sociohistorical 
variability of linguistic mediations. See Volosinov's Marxism and the Philosophy of Lallgllage 
(1973) for another semiotically oriented sociohistorical study. See also Schaff (1973). 

THE TWO·FIELD THEORY OF LANGUAGE 
while nevertheless they have existed as units before any of these further 
facts were added. Gestalt psychology claims that it is precisely the original 
segregation of circumscribed wholes which makes it possible for the sensory 
world to appear so utterly imbued with meaning to the adult; for, in its 
gradual entrance into the sensory field, meaning follows the lines drawn by 
natural organization; it usually enters into segregated wholes. (Köhler, 
1959:82) 
39 
As we move from natural objects to social objects, however, such as color and 
kinship systems, and thence to theoretical systems, we find the formative power 
of the expression system coming to the fore, and the segregated units come to 
be differentiated from one another not because of "the elementary dynamics of 
the nervous system" (Köhler, 1959: 118) but because of the filters or lenses that 
we are using as an instrument to bring experience under contro!. 
Indeed, it would be a great mistake to misunderstand this not ion of an 
instrument. When we use an instrument, such as a probe, as Michael Polanyi 
has shown definitively, we come to dweil in it and to use it in the same way we 
dweil in and use our own bodies. Just as we live directly in our bodies and, per 
extensionem, in our instruments and experience them subjectively so we likewise 
have a direct experience of the syntactic schemata that mediate between us and 
the flow of our experience. Using Polanyi's terminology, we can say that we 
have a subsidiary awareness of the syntactic schemata and of the semantic fields 
while we have a focal awareness of the object or objects on which they bear. 
These schemata guide our integration of the particulars of objects, governing 
their fusion into a coherent focus in the same way as we fuse the relevant features 
of a phoneme-and of sets of phonemes-into a coherent focus. While we are 
using any particular system of syntactic schemata we have no reflexive con-
sciousness of it, nor do we experience the word as external to the thought, 
existing as it were as a label in relation to the thought. As Vygotsky put it, 
"Thought is not merely expressed in words; it comes into existence through 
them" (Vygotsky, 1962:125). 
The relation between thought and word is a living process; thought is born 
through words. A word devoid of thought is a dead thing, and a thought 
unembodied in words remains a shadow. The connection between them, 
however, is not a preformed and constant one. [t emerges in the course of 
development, and itself evolves. (Yygotsky, 1962: 153)" 
13 Polanyi 's cognitional model is of the greatest theoretical relevance here. His not ion of consciousness 
paralleis. without mystification. that ofthe phenomenologists. His analogy ofthe body as indwelling 
in its instruments and as expanding out into its subsidiaries illuminates the inseparable fusion 
between consciousness and its supports. whether of the body proper or of the body"s extensions. 

40 
KEY THEMES IN SÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
The projection of an intelligible network over experience is not a no mi-
nalistic procedure, therefore, and the linguistic relativism that Bühler opted for, 
with certain qualifications, is not a mere conventionalism. Indeed, I pointed out 
earIier that Bühler' s concept of a synchytic concept paralleis Wittgenstein' s 
critique of all pretensions of a formalized and precise theory of meaning. While 
for specific purposes we can make more precise the criteria of application of 
any term, denotation itself remains a skill or an art, dependent on the language 
user. As Michael Polanyi put it, in a chapter that was also heavily indebted to 
Bühler's masterwork, 
To classify things in tenns of features for which we have names, as we do 
in talking about things, requires the same kind of connoisseurship as the 
naturalist must have for identifying specimens of plants or animals. Thus 
the art of speaking precisely, by applying a rieh vocabulary exactly, resem-
bles the delicate discrimination practised by the expert taxonom ist. (Polanyi, 
1958:81; cf. Innis, 1974) 
FinaHy, Bühler's critique of deixis as the primary and predominant function 
of language and his emphasis on the conceptual, interpretive function of the 
symbol field, when coupled with his continuing insistence on the social matrix 
of language and the primacy of action, reminds us of the later Wittgenstein of 
the Philosophical Investigations (1958). The discussions of Umfelder, for ex-
ample, are concerned with specific kinds of language games, and it seems to me 
that Bühler's principles here could easily be integrated with Wittgenstein's own 
procedures. Bühler's insistence on the scope of a concept as delimiting its sphere 
of application gears into Wittgenstein' s discussions of meaning spaces as fluid 
and dynamic rather than rigidly fixed domains, thus verifying the web metaphor 
that runs throughout Wittgenstein's later work and guides its concrete analyses. 
It is inappropriate in the present context to go into more detail concerning 
paralleis and applications of Bühler's two-field theory. 14 The dialectic of situation 
and context in language use illustrates, however, one of the chief points of 
Bühler's language theory; its rejection of linguistic 'autonomism. ' Language was 
for Bühler a form of behavior, an action, which exists within a differentiated 
field of praxis, and the giving of meaning to any Iinguistic sign is not a matter 
" Both the fertility and the relevance of Bühler's work to literary theory has been discussed. with 
a mass of parallel citations and references. by Karlheinz Stierle, whose material unfortunately at 
present exists principally in German. He has shown the importance of the not ion of deixis am 
Phantasma and of the cognate notion of transposition to our reception uf texts, and he has indicated 
the points of intersection between the chief Bühlerian categories uf situation, context, and actiun 
and the problems of a sophisticated und highly differentiated theury uf the reader's encounter with 
texts. 

THE TWO-FIELD THEORY OF LA:-IGUAGE 
41 
of a private, autonomous, and solitary consciousness. lt has an intrinsically social 
reference in as much as the deictic field and the symbol field are socially shared, 
codetermining factors in the constitution of the meaning of any utterance. That 
such a position does not contravene the mediating, synthesizing activity of the 
linguistic subject is c1ear from what has been seen, and it becomes even c1earer 
if we consider one of the paradigmatic forms 01' giving sense to our experience 
through language, which has come to the center in twentieth-century language 
theory and to which Bühler dedicated a pregnant section of Sprachtheorie. I am 
referring to metaphor, to whose analysis the next chapter is devoted. 

4 
FROM PERCEPTION TO MET APHOR 
A MODEL FOR MET APHOR 
In a fertile section of Sprachtheorie. Bühler constructed a heuristic model for 
understanding metaphor, specifying its connection with perceptual issues and 
with the continuing problem of abstraction. Bühler had noted that the formation 
of composites (Komposita) such as Hölzlekönig and Hölzlekönigin to denote two 
large trees in the Black Forest illustrates in their particularity the general pro-
cedure by which Iinguistic metaphors are formed (ST 342). Bühler's point is 
that "every linguistic composite is metaphorical in so me degree, and the met-
aphorical is no special linguistic manifestation" (ST 343), a statement echoing 
that of QuintiIian's that "paene omne dictum metaphora est." 
The key to Bühler's approach to metaphor is the contention that in every 
metaphorical utterance there are present at least two spheres of meaning, and 
it is this notion of a sphere that, once again, bears the burden of the analysis. 
Bühler correlated the compounding or fusion of spheres in the metaphorical 
process with what happens also in the experiential realm, which is also char-
acterized by a Sphären-Zweiheit (a duality of spheres), thus showing the con-
tinuities between the articulate and the perceptual realms. Both realms have a 
semiotic structure that can be specified in detail, and by performing an exact 
phenomenology of the processes involved-particularly by examining the not ion 
of aSphärenmischung or mixing or fusion of spheres-we can avoid a kind of 
cocktail procedure, as Bühler called it. 
Now, according to Bühler, "there exists outside of language in the most 
various representational techniques more remote and c\oser paralleis to the lin-
guistic procedure of fusion accomplished by metaphor" (ST 345). He specified 
two in particular. First, there is the production of a type image or type picture, 
such as was developed by Dalton, by the superimposition of photographic images 
on the same plate, the result giving us something that otherwise would be 
accessible principally to representational art or to a processing in our psycho-
physical system. Second, there is binocular vision. in which the two separate 
43 

44 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
retinal images are fused together into one visual image that has a plasticity and 
depth superior to the image projected by one eye alone. The crucial difference 
between these two procedures is that in binocular vision everything that is truly 
disparate, that cannot be fused into a unified image,falls away (ausfällt), while 
in the procedure developed by Dalton we have softened or blurred contours 
(venvischte Konturen). In this respect, metaphorical expression paralleis rather 
closely the accomplishments of binocular vision. 
Furthermore, out of the expressive need (Ausdrucksnot) that leads, when 
the normal forms of expression are lacking, to a drastic characterization (Aus-
drucksdrastik)-the essence of metaphor according to Hermann Paul, a position 
seconded by Bühler-such as, "the soup has a cold" or "the butterfly is knitting 
stockings," Bühler drew the conclusion that the mixing of spheres here (based 
on the forming of a bubble resembling a blister on the surface of the soup or the 
rhythmic and methodical crossing and uncrossing of the legs) is one of the 
psychophysically simplest abstraction techniques (helped in this case by the 
normal laws of association), which has grasped samething peculiar about an 
object or astate of affairs. Such drastic namings are common in childhood, 
for who of us has not marvelled at the inventive and striking utterances of 
children?15 
In his Ausdruckstheorie (hereafter referred to as AT), Bühler had already 
drawn attention to certain facts surrounding the so-called sinnliche Metapher 
('sensible metaphors ') (AT 139ff.). A "bitter" suffering, a "sweet" happiness, 
a "sour" denial or refusal are, as he put it, "not free invention of poets, but 
visible expression phenomena on human faces" (ST 346).16 The qualification 
in this case is that "the synthesis of the linguistic conception is here not pro-
ductive, but only reproduces what is already seen tagether in every seeing and 
understanding of the adult human expression" (ST 346). This linguistic expres-
sion, nevertheless, derives from a spontaneous process of perception and not 
from so me methodical process of camparison. In this sense, a metaphorical 
expression is like an emergent novelty that cannot be foreseen or mechanically 
produced. Rather, the bringing together of the various pictures of situations is 
partially due to remembrance, within which das spielerische Moment C'the mo-
"This topic has been taken up by H. Gardner and I. Winner in an essay in Sheldon Sacks (ed.). 
On Metaphor (1979). 
I·We cannot go into the problem ofthe conventionality ofphysiognomic and pathognomic metaphors 
and the degree to which they depend on linguistic preconceptions. In a future essay I hope to 
make available a critical evaluation of Bühler's axiomatization of expression theory and to show 
its bearing on later research into this nonverbal domain of semiotics. 

FROM PERCEPTION TO MET APHOR 
45 
me nt of play') has to be underlined: "What gives the impulse is a eontemplative 
treatment of the pereeived objeet and, in the proeess of eontemplation, the 
grasping of a fruitful moment" (ST 346). These fruitful moments are part of the 
fundamentally physiognomie pereeption of the world proper to ehildren, illus-
trated in sueh expressions as that ehairs "stand" or eats "grasp." A great number 
of dead metaphors found in our eolloquial speeeh derive from sueh physiognomie 
eharaeterizations (see Chureh, 1961 :5-7). 
Moreover, Bühler wanted to ins ist on two further points. First, many ehil-
dren's metaphors make sense only when they are also aeeompanied by a dem-
onstration wherein the verbal aeeompaniment and the motorie event fuse together. 
Indeed, Bühler noted that ehildren's stories and tales are very spare in linguistie 
eomparisons, while the Homerie writings are literally awash in them. Why is 
that? Here we eome to Bühler's seeond point. Bühler thought that the extended 
metaphorieal eonstruetions of the Homerie writings must have been a souree of 
primary funetional pleasure (Funktionslust), in whieh the hearers reveled in being 
drawn here and there in fantasy (im Phantasma). This proeess eonneets the 
pleasure funetion of fusing spheres with the aeeomplishments of abstraetion. The 
pleasurable, playful eharaeter of metaphor remains a permanent part of it, to be 
sure, but as in the ease of the eonstruetion of metaphors in seienee, it probably 
eannot describe the whole structure. Nevertheless, if we hold with Gadamer and 
Polanyi to the fundamentally play character of knowing, it may be possible to 
show the essential part the play function holds in all knowing, both "primitive" 
and "sophisticated" (see Polanyi, 1958; Gadamer, 1975; lnnis, 1977). 
Bühler tried to give this theory of metaphor, derived originally from the 
observation of ehildren, a more preeise grounding by means of a technical 
analogy, although he admitted that its exact verifieation was at that time beyond 
his reach. This technieal analogy is based on the superimposition of two filters 
across the lens of a projector. Bühler represented it as shown in Figure 2: 
Figure 2 
"This technical model based on the skiopticon has not come to us out of the 
blue but is meant to elucidate that the interpretive eonstruetion of meaning 
structures eontains a projeetive charaeter or projeetive eomponent" (ST 348). 

46 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
This analogy would be even stronger if one could demonstrate a truly projective 
character in perceptual activities as weil as in psychopathic phenomena (see 
Frisby, 1980; Gregory, 1970; Pirenne, 1970; Polanyi, 1966; Cassirer, 1957). At 
the time he was writing, Bühler thought that a goodly amount of preliminary 
work was necessary be fore it would be possible to demonstrate rigorously the 
applicability of the model to the higher linguistic domain of autonomous speech: 
"The question is whether a double lattice or a double filter makes possible, in 
the technical domain, accomplishments that can be treated as analogues to the 
uncommonly fine abstraction achievements of the metaphorical overlapping of 
spheres" (ST 348). 
Bühler asked how it is possible to explain that one can understand such an 
expression as der Hölzlekönig even if one has not seen it and can also even form 
an image of it in one's fantasy: "The concept sphere forest and the concept 
sphere king are joined together; the same total object [Gesamtobjekt] is supposed 
to satisfy both spheres simultaneously, I ascribe therefore to a tree something 
kingly" (ST 348-349). What prevents us from understanding the expression in 
the opposite fashion, wh ich to be sure is purely linguistically possible, is the 
context-in the sense both of Umfeld and of synsemantical field-in which it 
is uttered, a fact that shows once again the necessary interaction between the 
linguistic-symbolic spheres and the spheres of experience. The drastic fusion 
of the spheres has a semantic effect-a meaning and a representational effect-
that can be attained to some extent only through a heaping up of adjectives, The 
production of a Gesamtobjekt-involving both linguistic and imaginal opera-
tions-generates a more-than-summative novelty, 
In fact, this novel object-the Gesamtobjekt-is characterized both by 
Übersummativität and by Untersummativität, the two characteristics of Gestalten 
delineated by von Ehrenfels. There is always a semantic plus and minus involved. 
The root of both plus and minus is the selektive Wirkung Cselective effect') 
involved in the coincidence of the spheres, a procedure that lets fall away all 
those properties from both spheres that do not fit the novel object. Bühler's 
wonderful example of a Salonlöwe C'parlor-room lion') shows this quite c\early, 
since all those properties that do not fit are left aside, .. How such an overlapping 
of spheres occurs in the psychophysical system is one of the central questions 
of concern to the psychology of language" (ST 349). Nevertheless, a truly 
pregnant metaphor is, in spite of its frequency, a special linguistic manifestation, 
while the law of overlapping is a general one in the experiential realm, Bühler 
also thought that the plus found in such composita as Backofen ('bake oven') 
and Backstein Cbaked stone or brick') comes from our knowledge of the material 

FROM PERCEPTION TO MET APHOR 
47 
or from our material knowledge of the object domain, but that any emphasis on 
the plus has to be complemented by equal emphasis on the fact of Untersummativität. 
Overlapping, falling away, selection, the difference effect are expressions 
for one and the same simple phenomenon, which it is necessary to place 
beside the criterion of Übersummativität, which alone has been emphasized 
in Gestalt theory since the time of von Ehrenfels, in order to describe 
completely the role of attributive structures in language. (ST 350). 
Bühler was weil aware of the interaction between the necessary constancy 
of meaning as ground for sociallinguistic intercourse, a demand of logic not to 
be denied, and the advantages that sociallife enjoys through the specific plasticity 
of the meaning spheres proper to nominals. 
Übersummativität and Untersummativität of attributive structures increase 
the productivity of language to an astonishing degree and make possible a 
laconic form of naming. Admittedly, the system also has at its disposal a 
correction for the indefiniteness and ambiguities of these structures. (ST 
350) 
One of these is the presence of a ready hearer and our presupposition that speakers 
play around with compositions to test how they will fit together into a structure 
(ein Gejüge). 
To conc1ude our account of Bühler's position on metaphor as a paradigmatic 
form of concept formation: the meaning structure that results from the formation 
of linguistic compounds and metaphors shows very c1early that "there is an 
adding and a subtracting in one and the same structure" (ST 355). The adding-
Hinzujügung-bears witness to Übersummativität. Abstreichen, or subtracting, 
bears witness to the separation of radical incompatibles from the structure and 
thus to Untersummativität. In this way, we see the perceptual foundation of 
Bühler's model of the double filter (ST 355). Moreover, Bühler thought it no 
accident that we can illustrate the phenomenon offalling away in the metaphorical 
realm by appeals to what happens in binocular vision, that is, in the realm of 
sense perception. The reason is that "perception is already itsel1' subject to the 
law 01' supplementation-falling away, because it is already a meaning structure 
[Sinngejüge 1 and demonstrates to us in an anticipatory manner what linguistic 
structuring repeats on a higher level" (ST 356). The conclusion is that "the 
metaphorical, with its selective emphasis, emerges without problem everywhere 
the conditions already aptly specified by H. Paul are given" (ST 356): Alis-
drucksnot and Ausdrucksdrastik ('expressive need' and 'drastic form of 
expression'). 

48 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
HEURISTIC FERTILITY OF BÜHLER'S MODEL OF METAPHOR 
How does Bühler's model fare in light of recent extensive discussions on 
the problem of metaphor, which has become one of the most intricate and 
involved issues in contemporary work? 
First of aB, in using the model of binocular vision, Bühler anticipated certain 
work of Michael Polanyi (1976), who also wanted to chart the development from 
perception to metaphor, using the same visual model. Polanyi had also been 
impressed by the philosophical implications of Gestalt theory and by the emer-
gence of novel forms within the experiential field. These forms, which Polanyi 
assimilated quite generaBy to the categories of wholes and meanings (see Polanyi, 
1958:ch. 4; Innis, 1976:394-400), have a specific phenomenal character in that 
they give rise to a mode of appearing that strikes consciousness as something 
new and hence moves or attracts it. Thus, in binocular vision, Polanyi had noted 
that there takes place a fusion or integration of two retinal images that are, 
strictly speaking, incompatible, giving rise to a new semantic object characterized 
by depth, plasticity, and so forth, which emerges from the two images and is 
distinct from each one. This integration, called a "tacit integration" by Polanyi, 
was traced in aB skiBful forms of consciousness by Polanyi and, as such, it was 
found to be operative from the motoric to the highest realms of symbolic op-
erations (see Polanyi, 1958, 1976; Innis, 1973, 1974, 1977, 1980). 
Metaphor, as understood by Polanyi, while rooted in the general structure 
of perception, as it was for Bühler, belongs, however, properly speaking, to the 
symbolic or articulate order. The problem, as Polanyi put it, is why metaphors 
are able to move us so strongly and so deeply, giving us a particular kind of 
pleasure. Bühler, we know, traced this power to the delight our fantasy takes 
in producing novel denominations and classifications of objects, giving rise to, 
and itself arising out of, that peculiar functional pleasure associated with, for 
example, the extended Homeric metaphors. Polanyi, however, more concerned 
with the aesthetic role of metaphor proper, thinks that the essence of metaphor 
involves a particular way we embody ourselves in a semantic vehicle that has, 
independent of its emergent tenor, a significance and an importance of its own: 
"We may thus see that when a symbol [that is, a metaphorical expression] 
embodying a significant matter has a significance of its own and this is akin to 
the matter that it embodies, the result is a metaphor" (Polanyi, 1976:78). Uti-
lizing the terminology of I. A. Richards, which distinguishes tenor and vehicle 
in a metaphoric expression, and combining it with his distinction between focal 
and subsidiary awareness (corresponding to the awareness we have of a whole 

FROM PERCEPTION TO MET APHOR 
49 
[focal] and to the awareness we have of its parts [subsidiary]), Polanyi argued 
that in metaphor both factors interact in a specific way and are related to the self 
in a specific way. Concretely, the subsidiary particulars, functioning as clues, 
and "consisting of all those inchoate experiences in our own lives that are related 
to the two parts of a metaphor" are "integrated into the meaning of a tenor and 
a vehicle as they are related to each other in a focal object (a metaphor). The 
result is that a metaphor, like a symbol, carries us away, embodies us in itself, 
and moves us deeply as we surrender ourselves to it" (79). This bears witness 
to "man's basic imaginative capacity for integrating two or more disparate 
matters into a single novel meaning" (79). The application of Polanyi' s epis-
temological model and its descriptive apparatus, therefore, could both extend 
the heuristic clues of Bühler and specify the source of that particular Funktionslust 
so close to Bühler's heart. 
Second, at the he art of Bühler's analysis of metaphor lies the notion of a 
sphere, a sphere of meaning. This notion of a sphere is connected with the 
cognate notion of an expressive schema, wh ich is equally important in Bühler's 
language theory, as we have seen. The function of a sphere or schema is not just 
to sort out a class of objects but to delimit a range of application. A syntactic 
schema, for example, opens onto a particular sphere within the language, al-
lowing only certain items to be included or to fall within the sphere. Now, more 
generally , a schema, which falls somewhere between a percept and a concept 
in the original Kantian formulation, can take on an extended meaning when we 
are dealing with the problem of metaphor. A word's range of meaning can be 
denoted as a sphere and the word itself as a schema opening onto it. To determine 
the extension of the term we have to specify properties, to be sure, so that the 
range of application can be established. This involves processes of abstraction. 
Looked at in this way, metaphorical express ions involve using the same material 
and expressive schema to denote different spheres or realms. This conclusion 
is reminiscent of the theory of metaphor developed by Nelson Goodman, even 
to the point of sharing a common terminology, no doubt, because of a shared 
Kantian heritage . 
Goodman's central thesis is that a schema is not necessarily a single term. 
It may be a whole set or system of terms or labels. The function of these labels 
is primarily to sort, and sorting takes place over a range: 
The aggregate of the ranges of extension of the labels in a schema may be 
called a rea/m . ... Since the realm depends upan the schema within which 
a label is functioning, and since a label may belong to any number of such 
schemata, even a label with a unique range seldom operates in a unique 
realm. (Goodman, 1968:72) 

50 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
The essence of metaphor is that 
it typically involves a change not merely of range but also of realm. A label 
along with others constituting a schema is in effect detached from the home 
realm of that schema and applied for the sorting and organizing of an alien 
realm. Partly by carrying with it a re-orientation of a whole network of 
labels does a metaphor give eIues for its own development and elaboration. 
(72) 
Goodman continued: 
The shifts in range that occur in metaphor, then. usually amount to no mere 
distribution of family goods but to an expedition abroad. A whole set of 
alternative labels, a whole apparatus of organization. takes over new terri-
tory. What occurs is a transfer of a schema, amigration of concepts, an 
alienation of categories. Indeed, a metaphor might be regarded as a caIculated 
category-mistake~r rather as a happy and revitalizing, even if bigamous, 
second marriage. (73) 
Note that Goodman was concemed with a transfer from realm to realm (see 
II, 7, "Transfer" in Languages of Art). Certainly, the expression about our 
'parlor-room lion' is a case of transfer, involving so me picking out of certain 
common features (see Goodman, 1968:78). Seeing such similarity may be truly 
creative or merely reproductive. Max B1ack noted that "it would be more il-
1uminating in so me of these cases to say that the metaphor creates the similarity 
than to say that it formulates some similarity antecedently existing" (Black, 
1962:37). Indeed, the transfer is also no mere substitution. It is the elash of the 
realms-Beardsley's metaphorical twist-that makes the good metaphor satisfy 
while it startles (Goodman, 1968:79). "Metaphor is most potent when the trans-
ferred schema effects a new and notable organization rather than a mere relabeling 
of an old one" (Goodman, 1968:79-80). Certainly we can see here how Bühler's 
ideas could be extended within the context of a sophisticated theory of symbols 
arising within a rather different context. It would also be fruitful to study how, 
say, Goodman' s attempt to develop the not ion of nonlinguistic metaphors (his 
chapter in Languages of Art from which I have been citing is "The Sound of 
Pictures") ties in with Bühler's conception. I will return brietly to this issue 
below. 
Third, I mentioned that transfer from realm to realm is not merely a sub-
stitution. Rather it is a true selective fusion, giving rise to a new total object 
(Gesamtobjekt). In this, Bühler foresaw at least the basis of the interaction theory 
of metaphor so dear to Black, Beardsley, and, in his own way, Wheelwright. 
The novel meaning arises out of the elash of spheres for these later thinkers. 
Now, Bühler did not think that all metaphors are equally pregnant or that they 

FROM PERCEPTION TO MET APHOR 
51 
all have, at least originally, a creative, aesthetic value. While it is true, as 
Goodman (1968) said, that "metaphor permeates all discourse, ordinary and 
special, and we should have a hard time finding a purely literal paragraph 
anywhere" (80), not all metaphorical utterances exhibit their force and fertility 
in such a way as to be constantly impressive and memorable. But the "urgent 
need of economy" (Goodman, 1968:80) that is one of the sources of metaphor-
shades of Paul-leads to metaphor's being not a speciallinguistic manifestation 
(Sondererscheinung) but a pervasive aspect of human intercourse with the worId, 
a persistent theme of recent work (see Ricoeur, 1977; Sacks, 1979). 
Still, by insisting upon the plus of meaning that accrues to metaphorical 
expressions, Bühler raised the persistent theme of where that plus comes from. 
We cannot merely assign it to the intention of the speaker, for then we would 
be falling back into a mentalism and epistemologism that relies basically on 
private subjective acts of meaning to constitute public semiotic objects. The plus 
has to arise objectively through the interaction and creative fusion of the objective 
semiotic units, even if, at the same time, their fusion or combination is the 
creative result of a synthesizing and integrating consciousness. Finnegan' s Wake 
as a linguistic object-as, in fact, the apotheosis of metaphoric expression-is 
the product both of the elective affinities of its semantic units and of Joyce's 
exceedingly keen linguistic consciousness, itself a product and a result of these 
affinities. The Wake was not produced by rule, and as a matter of fact, no 
metaphor iso 
Max Black has written: 
In my opinion. the chief weakness of the .. interaction .. theory. wh ich I still 
regard as better than its alternatives. is lack of clarification of what it means 
to say that in a metaphor one thing is thought of (or viewed) as another 
thing .... To think of God as love and to take the further step of identifying 
the two is emphatically to do something more than to compare them as 
merely being alike in certain respects. But what that "something more" is 
remains tantalizingly elusive: we lack an adequate account of metaphorical 
thought. (in Sacks. 1979: 192) 
Could it be that Bühler put his finger on the source of that "something more," 
without, however, reducing it to a rule or to an appeal to a mystical source? 
What are some of the intrinsic limits of Bühler's model of metaphor? 
First of all, the chief limit of Bühler' s work on metaphor lies in his neglect 
of the discourse dimension of metaphor. As Ricoeur put it, for Bühler "the 
problem of metaphor is attached to that of the delimitation of objects" 
(1977: 106). It is fundamentally a theory of denomination, and Bühler rightly 
saw that "the problem of abstraction is indeed the central problem of metaphorical 

52 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
denomination" (106). At the same time, however, while metaphorical abstraction 
leads to "linguistic metaphor," it does not necessarily lead to aesthetic metaphor 
in the sense in wh ich Jakobson defined the aesthetic as self-focusing expression 
(see his "Linguistics and Poetics," 1960), a not ion formulated first for the 
linguistic realm but quickly and effectively transferred to other systems of expres-
sion. Most aesthetic metaphors belong to a system of expressions and cannot be 
reduced to a fundamentally, albeit creatively utilized, laconic naming. It is not 
just the interaction of many spheres in an expression but the multiple interaction 
of many spheres throughout a text that is, at least, aesthetically and metaphor-
ically important. Here it is necessary to go beyond Bühler to the realm of extended 
metaphors and to such notions as Wheelwright's epiphor and diaphor and to the 
complexities of text grammars. 
Second, it is unclear whether Bühler's model can handle the soft focus of 
Wheelwright (1968) or the integration of incompatibles of Polanyi in a way they 
deserve. Bühler admitted that the paraphrase of a metaphor leaves something 
else behind, but he also maintained that a metaphor, as the result of an abstraction, 
is not verwischte. or blurred. It seems to have both a surplus meaning, unspec-
ifiable in terms of its primary components, and a precise meaning. The soft 
focus of Wheelwright is meant to counteract this putatively deleterious drive 
toward precision. The conceptual focus is not a strictly delimited sphere with 
precise boundaries, but often a whole system or space of ramifications and 
connections, such as the metonymic chain charted by Eco in his essay on "The 
Semantics of Metaphor" (in Eco, 1979). Moreover, Polanyi's integration of 
incompatibles is meant to draw attention to the impossibility of forming an exact 
conception of the meaning space emerging from a metaphorical utterance because 
there is not an exact but a fundamentally unspecifiable commingling of spheres 
of meaning, which, to be sure, can be charted and detailed, but whose total 
effect is a true surplus and, indeed, semantically irreducible. In short, it is an 
emergence, a point we have made previously in other contexts. 
Third, to group a number of issues together, can the model be extended to 
nonlinguistic domains? In as much as the visual model serves as the elue to 
metaphor in the linguistic realm, were there (or could there be) also visual 
metaphors-expressive forms-for Bühler? It would seem that Wheelwright's 
notion of a diaphor (l962),a species of metaphor that employs juxtaposition of 
contraries or of particulars, leads not to a Gesamtobjekt as the result of an 
abstractive act but to an experience of dissonance or of connection that emerges 
not as a unity of sense, however complex, but as something else. Surrealist 
paintings, or the paintings of Bosch, constitute rather a complex field 01' both 
contradictory and compatible signs, their metaphoric character perhaps arising 

FROM PERCEP'rION TO MET APHOR 
53 
out of complicated metonymie chains of associations and connections. Bühler, 
however, did not raise these issues, and I think they are best discussed in a 
different context. 
From what has been said, [ think it is possible to see the permanent value 
of much of Bühler's treatment of metaphor, to recognize its limitations and 
inadequacies, and to establish its supplementation by and paralleis to other 
contemporary work with which it has a certain affinity. 
Let us now pass on to another topic of importance in establishing the 
semiotic contours of language theory and one that lay close to Bühler's heart: 
the specificity of language as compared with that of other representational sys-
tems. This problem also occupied hirn at great length throughout Sprach theorie 
and supplements materials discussed in the "Axiomatization" essay. 

CLARIFYING LANGUAGE BY CONTRAST 
COMPARISON WITH NONLINGUISTIC 
REPRESENT A TIONAL SYSTEMS 
5 
There are two principal places in Sprachtheorie where Bühler undertook a com-
parison between language and other representational sign systems. The first is 
in § 12, "Symbol Fields in Nonlinguistic Representational Instruments," and the 
second in §26, "Anaphora." Bühler's goal was not a systematic phenomenology 
of sign artifacts and their comparative grammar but a clarification of the spec-
ificity of language. The various nonlinguistic representational systems are used 
as analyzers (Analysatoren) of language, are confronted with language with the 
intent of primarily clarifying language, even if the true analogies between lan-
guage and the other systems are plain as pikestaff (ST 180). In spite of the very 
real analogies, however, Bühler thought that there was something sui generis 
about language that would be revealed by such a comparative undertaking, whose 
primary goal was the construction of a model of language. 
Bühler began his analysis in § 12 by reflecting on the role of a represen-
tational field in the two examples of music paper and of a map. In the first case, 
he noted, we have a blank piece of paper that is covered with rows of five 
parallel lines, on which note signs and pause signs--drawn from the musical 
lexicon-are to be placed. In the second case, we have seemingly more content, 
since the outlines of the continents appear, but we soon notice that what is 
essential in the first place are the lines representing latitude and longitude. "What 
is placed on the note paper and what is placed on the map are very different, 
but the tertium comparationis can essentially be made clear to every school 
child" (ST 180). Moreover. just as the musician has a smalI, closed inventory 
of symbols that make up his lexicon, so the cartographer likewise has, in the 
box at the foot of his map, an explanation of the signs that make up his (closed) 
lexicon: cities of certain classes of population, roads of varying importance, 
churches. and so forth. the signs for wh ich are placed on the map's surface. 
These various symbols get their field values only when placed at certain places 
55 

56 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
either on the note paper or on the map. The grammar of the field values is 
obviously different in the case of music than in the case of cartography, but the 
various pieces of infonnation derivable from the field-succession of notes, 
pitch, hannony, distances of places from one another, directions, and so forth-
illustrate clearly what one means by a note field and a map field. 
Bühler thought that the symbol field in language is rather more complicated 
and, as a result, rather more difficult to understand. lust as an empty piece of 
paper before us is not yet a field, so the raw succession of sounds in the flow 
of human speech is not a field. It becomes a field through the addition of 
something analogous to the cartographical longitude and latitude markings or to 
the five parallel lines of the music paper: the phonological, syntactic, and se-
mantic rules. These make a field out of the material succession. Moreover, the 
field of the painter, the Malfläche. into which the painter sets his colors is 
constituted, in principle, in exactly the same way. Something precisely corre-
sponding to the line systems of the musician and the cartographer have to be 
added by the painter for the surface to become a representational field. This 
representational value is an image value (Bildwert), and only when this image 
value is there is there a question of representation. Moreover, 
For the rest one has to beware of being led to hasty conclusions through the 
paralleis constructed by Lessing. It is indeed true that the manifold of data 
in a painting unfolds in space and the manifold of data of a linguistic context 
unfolds in time. But language, as we know it, is no tone film in the (non-
customary) sense of the word. which we will define in the following par-
agraphs (ST 182)." 
In any case, wh ether dealing with a map, with music, or with a painting, there 
is always need for afield in order for something to appear as a work. The same 
is true of language. 
Take the example of the actor on a stage or the kind of graphic representing 
so common in contemporary fonns of science. The lines constituting a graph are 
themselves not images as such but symbolic representations and therefore are 
differentiated from one another. The purely abstract and conventional nature of 
graphic representation makes it a kind of limit case. The case of the actor is 
17 Galvano della Volpe's Critiq/le of Taste (1978) is one of the most consistent. and contentious, 
modern attempts to carry on Lessing's comparative undertaking by means 01' an application 01' 
modern linguistic and semiotic theory, principally derived from de Saussure and Hjelmslev. 

CLARIFYING LANGUAGE BY CONTRAST 
57 
rather different. The whole physical complex of the stage is exploited by the 
ac tor as his representational field, along with the cooperation of all the me ans 
of illusion and the conventions that bind hirn and the audience together. 18 
Now, the field values, as opposed to the mere representational value of a 
language sign functioning as a symbol, arise specifically out of the symbol field 
(ST 183), just as the values of all the other kinds of signs arise out of their own 
fields. For example, the various notes and cartographical signs, with their ex-
planation, have a field-foreign (jeldfremd) representational value as lexical units, 
which is enlarged by their being placed within a field in a certain way. It is the 
field that gives them specificity, admittedly in ways proper to the different fjelds 
themselves: while the note as sign itself specifies, for example, its duration, it 
does not specify alone its pitch. That is the accomplishment of the field. The 
stylized representation of a church specifies the loeation of the church thanks 
to the fjeld, but specifies a ehureh thanks to its own proper imaginal form. The 
principle is the same with language, as we will soon see. 
On the basis of the distinction between the contribution of the sign and the 
contribution of the field, Bühler thought that one could find a proper definition 
for the adjective symbolie. The key notion is that "what is symbolic can at any 
given time be determined only in relation to the fjeld" (ST 184). For example, 
the cross as found on the map and as it appears on the canvas of a painting is 
not the same thing, just as the same material line has one meaning in a map and 
quite another, say, in a print. The traditional representation of the goddess of 
justice has many attributes, such as strength, determination, and beauty, not 
connected with those that represent "justice." All that is representationally 
necessary is the blindfold over the eyes and the scales in the hand. Here, once 
again, is an insight of great semiotic value, though there is no pretence of 
completeness in determining what a symbol iso 
While most logicians think that symbolization rests on an arbitrary ordering 
(Zuordnung), Bühler insisted that the key is that all symbols need a field and 
that every field needs symbols in order to generate usable representations. Sym-
bols have to be feldfähig ('"capable of being inserted into a field"), and we 
" Bühler devoted two early chapters 01' his Ausdruckstheorie to reconstituting the work of Engel and 
Piderit on pantomime and mime. There he was able to show that there exist a true lexicon and 
grammar of pantomimic and mimical gestures and movements. and that the actors and the spectators 
are both engaged in either producing or discriminating true. fruitful gestural moments. which have 
an expressive coherence and inner logic. Thus Bühler could rccount the famous line of Garrick, 
when he characterized an actor's portrayal of Falstaff as perfect cxcept that the "left foot was too 
sober. " 

58 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
cannot place symbols proper to one field in another field (an important point, 
by the way, in the definition of a "word"). Here is an important character of 
the different grammars of representational fields, the exact specification of which 
is one of the tasks of a general semiotics. 
Bühler also devoted several pages to the cIarification of the logical rela-
tionships between an image and a symbol. certain aspects of which parallel and 
do not compare unfavorably in principle with so me of Peirce's analyses, though 
the discussion is not detailed and is concemed with issues of a general language 
theory rather than with phenomenological issues. Such a clarification is one of 
the most pressing tasks of logic. What did Bühler have to say here? 
Take the two series of examples: photographs and paintings as images or 
icons and, as cases of symbolic representations. the music sheet of the musician 
and the fever curve of the nurse or physician. Bühler thought that there are 
constant oscillations between the two poles, ranging from the highest degree of 
imaginal or iconic power to the purest abstract symbolism. Language, Bühler 
thought, is closest to the second pole: 
To put it briefly: it turns out that neither the one nor the other limit case 
would be able to be realized and utilized, but that all known representational 
media use in varying degree the iconic moment paired with the moment of 
"arbitrary" (empty) coordination. (ST 188) 
Photography, Bühler noted, is no exception, and it is better to use another 
example to i1lustrate the complex issue of representational fidelity. 
There is no question, in any case, of absolute fidelity. In sculpture, for 
example, this is impossible for material-technical reasons. Indeed, if we put 
ac tors on the stage who were the absolute doubles (cf. Eco, 1976:180-182) of 
those they were portraying, the purpose of the undertaking would be distorted-
the sense, namely, defined by the semiotic axiom of aliqllid stat pro aliqllo--
and we would be distracted by the material appearances of the sign itself, as 
embedded in the series of conventions that make up its total context, including 
the psychologie al conventions of the spectator. A certain material fidelity, fi-
delity of appearance, is necessary in imaginal representations (as opposed to 
presentations in the abstract mode), but on a sliding scale. There iso however, 
another kind of fidelity, which Bühler called "relational fidelity" (Relations-
treue), and it is this kind of fidelity that characterizes language. 
In order to answer the question, "What is relational fidelity?" Bühler asked 
a preliminary and, in his opinion, necessary question: Are there true iconic or 
image moments in the fever curve or in the music script'? Here, Bühler, un-
knowingly, touched once again on Peircean problems and themes. The temptation 
is to ans wer immediately in the negative, though Bühler thought this response 

CLARIFYING LANGUAGE BY CONTRAST 
59 
somewhat premature, for reasons that are not very clear. In both cases, there is 
a certain degree of "relational fidelity" in the rendering, in that the sign notes 
stand higher or lower in the discrete scale on the paper, corresponding to the 
higher or lower place of the symbolized tones in the scale of the discrete keys. 
Likewise, we read the fever chart from low to high and from left to right, defining 
the level of the fever and its duration, respectively. Bühler contended, quite 
rightly, that these are conventions, although physicists and technicians today 
quite naively think that they represent iconically what they stand for. 
Bühler thought a justification of this manner of speaking easy enough: what 
they mean by iconic representation (Abbildung) means here nothing other than 
"rendering through field values" (ST 190). Beside this rather general concept 
is to be put a more narrow one: the perceptual equality of the image with its 
object. This is to be denied. We know, in fact, from other discussions that the 
problem of iconic signs is an extremely complicated one, involving issues of 
properties, likenesses, conventions, and so forth. An extensive exposition of the 
problem is to be found in Eco (1976), and I will not go into it here. 
Still, what about the fidelity of linguistic representations? While it is rel-
atively easy, Bühler thought, to show traces of a phenomenal fidelity with respect 
to a perceptible object (e.g., onomatopoeia), extensive duplication of this sort 
is excluded by the structural law of language. The place ordering of words in 
a sentence, something seemingly common to allianguages, is not meant to mirror 
or iconically render the intuitive order of the linguistically apprehended things. 
Although there is a seeming exception in such ereignismalend (' 'event-painting") 
expressions as "Veni, vidi, vici," Bühler pointed out that a "specific pregiven 
framework" is necessary for such express ions to do their job. The conclusion 
is that "human language does not paint, either as the painter or as the film 
paints. lt does not even 'paint' the way the musician's note paper paints" (ST 
191 ). 
Bühler immediately qualified this conclusion by adding that there has to be 
some sort of fidelity in rendering, for "without fidelity there is, in general, no 
'representation,' which is worthy of the name" (ST 191). Here, I must admit, 
Bühler seems to have taken away with one hand what he gave with the other. 
The root of this evasiveness is philosophical. Throughout Sprachtheorie, Bühler 
wanted to avoid what he called "epistemologism": giving a philosophical ans wer 
to a "simple" question about the representational fidelity of expressions used 
in the everyday exchange of signs. Take the statement "The Cologne cathedral 
has two towers that were constructed in modern times" (ST 191). Here an 
extralinguistic state of affairs is presented (präsentiert) with practically sufficient 
univocity and clarity. From such astatement, or an analogous one, such as 

60 
KEY THEMES IN SÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
"There is an apple on the table with a peaeh on its left and a pear on its right," 
one derives the "same" information as one would from, say, a painting or a 
photograph. It makes no sense, Bühler argued, to diseuss representational fidelity 
outside the framework of manifold possibilities of presentation: "I maintain that 
there are no direet ieonie field renderings lying between the sensibly manifest 
field moments and what is to be represented, but I do maintain that there are 
indireet, mediating co-ordinations" (ST 192). 
Bühler illustrated this mediating ordering by using the alphabet as an or-
dering deviee, the importanee of whieh in the history of eulture has been diseussed 
by Lynn White and Sterling Dow, for example (cf. White, 1968). 
We learn and reproduce-not in every case, but often and repeatedly-series 
of language signs (words) and grasp and control the objective world therewith 
in the most varied fashion. The alphabet chain functions in our practical 
example [Bühler referred here to an example in his text. where lctters of the 
alphabet are used to order the corners of a polygon] as a mediatar; and its 
function as a mediator is that of an orderer. of an instrument of ordering 
or coordinating. We must therefore count on finding similar "mediators" 
and "orderers" in language; they are called mediators because they are 
shoved between. and they are called orderers becausc their achievement is 
comparable to the achievement of material ordering devices. such as letter 
sorters. catalogs. and so forth. Only one must not too hastily equate linguistic 
mediators in every respect with the material ones (ST 193).19 
Another cIear and slightly different model ean be derived from the number 
system, in both its written and its spoken form. The main point, whieh does not 
have to be belabored, is that in our system the eonvention of moving from right 
to left to determine the values of any plaee makes possible a speeifieation by 
ordering and thus makes possible the constructing of any number whatsoever, 
onee one has mastered the structural key (tens) or has the structural insight. 
Likewise, our spoken number system is also formed aceording to a syntax, with 
its own syntactic formants-teen. ty, etc.~orresponding to Humboldt's inner 
language form. The core of linguistic syntax in the last analysis, then, is to be 
understood, partly according to the model of the use of the alphabet to denote 
the corners of a polygon, partly aceording to the schema of the (optical) number 
syntax, and partly aeeording to the schema of the way we construet the names 
19 Here Bühler approached very closely the linguistic field theories discussed earlier. It is clear that 
Bühler had no truck with naive realism. Note that one 01' the chief differences between a linguistic 
and a material mediator is the particular jilsion of the sorter with the sorted in the first case and 
the permanent radical distinction between the two in the second. See also Sapir ( 1921) and ( 1970). 

CLARIFYING LANGUAGE BY CONTRAST 
61 
(acoustically) of numbers. What is crucial is the medial character ofthese ordering 
structures, not their "direct" iconic presentation of their objects. 
ANOTHER EXAMPLE: UNDERSTANDlNG ANAPHORA 
In the section on anaphora in Sprach theorie , §26, there is a comparative 
discussion of the anaphoric mechanisms of film and epic, a topic that has, in 
Bühler's operation, great semiotic importance. Anaphora, we know, is the mech-
anism of language whereby it is linked together in such a way that parts of it 
refer back to what preceded and other parts project forward, thereby forming a 
text or, more generally , a Sinngejüge ('meaning structure'). Anaphora is also 
a species of pointing, or of indicating (Zeigen). In discourse, wh ich is composed 
of many parts, Bühler thought that the ultimate conception of anaphora is seen 
when one recognizes that the context itself is raised to the status oj the index 
field (ST 386). In the course of his discussion, Bühler distinguished two kinds 
of pointing: sachliches Zeigen ('material pointing') and s}·ntaktisches Zeigen 
('syntactical pointing'). While demonstratio ad oculos and deixis am Phantasma 
are species of sachliches Zeigen, syntaktisches Zeigen rests on a different psy-
chological basis and relies on different means: 
Anaphora is reflexive pointing and as such must be distinguished just as 
c1early and precisely from material pointing as, for example. we distinguish 
suicide from murder. (ST 389) 
Bühler had no ted in a previous sec ti on the phenomenon of sentences without 
an index field, sentences, that is, that have attained the status of language works: 
If one has recognized, in the case of the sentence without an index field. 
that and how a linguistic representation iso within definite limits and pro-
gressively. extracted from the intuitive supports of the speech situation and 
becomes free from signs that function like pointers on a road. then the case 
of a sentcnce structure [Satzgefüge! offers us something new to look at. (ST 
390) 
The old index signs do not disappear; they take on an interna! function of 
pointing, pointing now not to things directly but to context places and context 
pieces, parts of discourse, or to the manner in which something is apprehended. 
Thus, a11 the deictic words are used to direct attention retlexively to discourse 
and to enable us to hold parts of it present to our consciousness and, consequently. 
to focus on it. 
This is an extraordinary achievement of language and, while not strictly 
proper to it alone, most characteristic of it and most highly developed in the 

62 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
linguistic domain. Bühler thought that there are paralleis to the anaphoric achieve-
me nt outside of language but that they are really only beginnings (Ansätze) and 
cannot compare with what language can do: 
One who his whole life long has dealt with nothing other than language 
sometimes loses the ability to wonder about what language can do; it has 
become too obvious for hirn. Then the time is ripe for a comparative look 
at extralinguistic materials. (ST 390) 
This Bühler did by a fertile, even if brief, comparison of the word tlow of human 
discourse and the image tlow in (silent) film (ST 39lff.). On the one hand, the 
silent film seems to have no chance to use anaphoric techniques, while, on the 
other hand, there is adefinite similarity between narration in the epic and the 
technique of the film. What, more specificaIly, did Bühler have to say about 
these matters? 
First of all, "film is closer to epic than to dramatic discourse with respect 
to imaginative deixis" (ST 392). On the stage, the mountain is brought to 
Muhammad, so to speak, while in the epic narration and the film, Muhammad 
is transported to the mountain. It is clear that the film has more affinity to the 
epic in this case. The reasons are not far to seek. The division of the film into 
scenes, the changing of standpoints, the changing of perspectives, and so forth 
are all transpositions (yerset::ungen) that also have their counterparts in the epic. 
In both cases, the discontinuous and discrete steps into which the narration or 
presentation is segmented are perceived as fruitful moments of the whole event 
being portrayed. Nevertheless, there are two aspects in wh ich the accomplish-
ments of language are incomparably richer than the silent film, in Bühler's 
opinion. The first concems the "short, closed unities of single sentences" and 
wh at they can offer in terms of conte nt (ST 394). The second is the structural, 
unifying means embodied in anaphora. ~o 
Second, there is an affinity between the film and the epic in the way that 
each jumps from the whole to its details, corresponding, in a certain way, to the 
close-up, the medium shot, and the long shot in the film. The original catego-
rization of the three chief shots, originating-for Bühler, at any rate-with the 
'0 Later theoreticians of the film will no doubt demur here. To argue the issues would take us too 
far afield. Jurij Lotman in his Semiotics of the Cinema (1976) gave. however. a modest and 
restrained exploration of the relevance of the semiotic model to understanding the film as a sign 
artifact. It seems to me quite acceptable to seek out the semiotic meaning of such categories as 
shots. cinematic phrases. sentences. and so forth. looking for an analogical relationship rather than 
astriet isomorphism. See also Metz. Film Langllage (1974). 

CLARIFYING LANGUAGE BY CONTRAST 
63 
film theorist Bela Balazs, makes up a kind of primitive grammar of spatial 
distance and is relatively exhaustive in principle. The analogous procedure in 
language is not easy to state in a few words, but simply put, it involves setting 
up a large and extensive context and then developing it in detail. The Odyssey. 
for example, establishes the framework and the course of everything at the 
beginning in the council of the gods on Olympus, and then, because we all know 
what is going to happen in general, it gives itself over to a glorious narration 
of the development of individual details and descriptions. 
Third, Bühler mentioned the way that film holds the ac tors constant but 
changes their milieu, something that mirrors in the realm of images what occurs 
through repetition of nouns in the linguistic domain. In a sentence sequence such 
as "lohn ate. lohn got sick. lohn got weil. lohn got sick. lohn died," we have 
a chainlike structure without connecting words. We can tell-without appeal to 
accompanying temporal indices-that we have a temporal sequence affecting the 
same person because of the repetition of the proper name; the temporal sequence 
is not thematically mentioned, nor need it be. Thus, a complex series of events, 
affecting one and the same person or object, can be segmented into units in both 
film and epic narration in relatively simple and analogous ways. 
Fourth, in the film, there are often events of memory or of imagination that 
are interpolated into the narration. The job of the stage actor is to realize them 
in such a way that we can, on the basis of the actor's present actions, perceive 
the content of his memory or his fantasy. This is done, of course, primarily 
through linguistic means. The silent film cannot avail itself of language but has 
to find a way to representlpresent the content imaginally. The procedure is to 
present an image within an image (Bild im Bilde), and without words this is an 
extremely difficult undertaking indeed. It is better accomplished in the stage 
drama, where the citing of the absent in the present avails itself of the techniques 
delineated by Engel and reconstructed by Bühler in his Ausdruckstheorie . 
More extensively, these interpolations are completely common in language, 
which possesses the systematically developed means to demark them, while they 
are special appearances in the film. Bühler thought, in fact, that in this respect 
film is doser to the structure and processes of dreams, involving for the most 
part jumps, discontinuities, and a complete ecstatic rising out of the pull of the 
present, in fact, a continuous change of present: 
Put more generally . a springing out of the basis situation to which the 
dreamer for the most part does not return again. Here is found again an 
important difference between the connecting technique of linguistic epic and 
that of the film. (ST 396) 
Bühler continued: 

64 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLEWS LANGUAGE THEORY 
The film with its equally complete transpositions is, in this respect, prac-
tically on the same level with the principle of dreams in our representational 
life, which shows itself to be something reduced in comparison with waking 
consciousness. And the ruling power of waking consciousness in complex 
thought and representation comes artfully to appearance in the involved 
structures of principal and subordinate sentences, in the alternation between 
narrating, direct. and indirect discourse, and so forth. (ST 396) 
Indeed, Bühler thought that the explicit "once upon a time" that epic utters is 
not available as a general index to film or to the dream of deep sleep. While this 
is true of dreams, however, it seems to me that it belongs to the general pre-
structure or foreknowledge of films as culturally encoded artifacts. Further , since 
the narration of dreams is also a cultural fact, certain qualifications in this regard 
are also necessary. 
Two final points: 
The theme "Film and Epic" is of conclusive importance to language theory. 
We emphasize for our purpose once again: both transpose the seer or hearer 
effectively. To continue: language is by far superior to film by reason of 
its index signs in general, by reason of its imaginative deixis and its ana-
phorical use of these index signs in particular. (ST 397) 
Again, the use of anaphorical indexes points to the necessary participation of 
the hearer in the flow of discourse. The discourse does not have to repeat the 
past materially nor fully and vainly anticipate and present the future; thanks to 
the extensive use of Iinguistic indices, it can rely on the Mitdenken and Mit-
konstruieren Cco-thinking and co-construing') of the hearer, his power to help 
constitute discourse as a whole. Discourse in this way begins to approach painting 
in that it is constituted more by what one leaves out than by what one puts in. 
Thus, we have a Iinguistic analogue, Bühler noted, of the Greek dictum of the 
mean (ST 397).21 
Earlier on, in the first part of his book, Bühler had written: 
The comparing eye can look where it will. but there does not exist. for 
example, either in music, or in the poetic image, or in any of the manifold 
symbol systems that have been invented in modern science and beyond for 
this or what representational end, an exact analogon to the two comple-
mentary structures of language-to. in short. word and sentence. (ST 75) 
" I found il arewarding enlerprise 10 read Balazs's The Theory oj' Film (1970) after studying this 
section of Sprachtheorie. There are many semiotically oriented comments. as weil as fruitful 
interseetions between his analysis of the film and Bühler's. and it becomes clear how Bühler 
appropriated Balazs's work and integrated it into his own project. 

CLARIFYING LANGUAGE BY CONTRAST 
65 
Bühler was not saying that there is no analogon, only that there is no exact one 
(cf. Pettit, 1975). In all the cases mentioned, there is a common structure of a 
field and elements ordered in a field-a sign field and sign elements-but here 
the Gestalt overtones have equal rank with strictly semiotic or sematological 
categories. We encounter here both the limits of Bühler's 'sematology' and his 
challenge to a unified semiotic theory built on the model of language. We know 
from later work that the elaboration of secondary modeling systems has led to 
developing the linguistic analogy for other sign systems and that, further, Hjelms-
lev tried to show that the logical structure of language fits not just language as 
we know it but also other forms of a universal combinatory (see also della 
Volpe). I will not pursue these topics here but will, in another place, try to 
determine the validity of the specifically semiotic approach to art and the ex-
tensive paralleIs between language and linguistic categories and aesthetic cate-
gories. A useful discussion of these issues would take us too far afield in the 
present context. (See Eco (1976),276-289, and lnnis (1977).) 

6 
CONCLUSION: SOME OPEN QUESTIONS 
ln the course of the preceding discussions and in the notes l have made frequent 
references to how Bühler's work bears on and intersects with other research 
projects, within the framework of both contemporary semiotic theory and other 
disciplines. Semiotic theory has advanced greatly since the time of Bühler, but 
a great deal of his work continues to be, it is clear, of crucial and vital importance 
and has entered into the tradition of later thought both as scaffolding and as 
foundation. 
Bühler's attempt at an axiomatization paralleis in certain respects Hjelms-
lev's project in Prolegomena to a Theory 0/ Language. Hjelmslev's innermost 
intention was to establish language as one of the many forms of an abstract 
algebra, sharing in this respect with chess, the figurative arts, mathematics, and 
so on the character of being subject to combinatorial rules. Language. and the 
other sign systems, became for Hjelmslev instantiations of a complex play of 
elements, and these elements became a universe unto themselves. For Bühler, 
language was not a form of abstract algebra, for he always had recourse to 
Sachwissen and to extralinguistic factors in determining the systematic place of 
any language sign in the linguistic field. At the same time, Bühler's semiotic 
model of perception, involving as it does a play of elements (phonemes and 
criterial notes), does have certain paralleis with Hjelmslev's procedures. Hjelms-
lev was aware of Bühler's .. Axiomatization" essay but made no attempt to 
confront it in his own work, and a systematic comparison of the two projects 
in their totality would demand a study in itself. which l hope to undertake in the 
future. 
Readers will also have noticed a marked absence of any systematic reference 
to one of the most discussed linguistic theories on the contemporary scene. 
namely. that of Noam Chomsky and his students. Bühler's approach is funda-
mentally taxonomic and, as such, would seem to fall under the critical strictures 
leveled at such an approach from the point of view of generative. transformational 
grammar, which has constantly defined itself in opposition to structuralism. 
specifically of the American variety. with wh ich Bühler did indeed have a certain 
67 

68 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
affinity, At the same time, Bühler's insistence on the specificity of the human 
capacity for representational language and his constant recourse to the mental, 
rational powers of the linguistic subject-his linguistic competence, in Chom-
sky's sense-<:ertainly do not contravene the central Chomskyan theses, With 
Chomsky's notion of transfonnation and of recursivity, however, Bühler would 
seem to have little to do, transfonnations being replaced in his language theory 
by the notion of successive and simultaneous levels of integrations, so that all 
linguistic structures are present at one time in the consciousness of the speaker 
as weil as the hearer of any linguistic utterance, By emphasizing the intimate 
continuities between perception, intellection, and language, however, Bühler 
intersected with major components of Chomsky's work, But only a detailed 
comparison of Chomsky's work on cases, grammatical categories, ellipsis, and 
so forth will show whether his framework constitutes a true and heuristically 
fertile advance over Bühler's and the continuation of Bühler's work by his 
students and their students in the Gennan-Ianguage countries, An indication of 
such a continuation is found in F, Kainz's introductory essay to the reprint 
edition of Bühler's Sprachtheorie, but there is need of an English-Ianguage study 
of this topic with full attention to the Bühlerian heritage in Germany and Austria, 
Kainz also noted that the great majority of Bühler's results could be taken 
up by structuralism, as it has been developed principally on the Continent. 
Indeed, Bühler's extensive reliance on the phonological and differential model 
joins hirn with those great currents of thought deriving from de Saussure, At the 
same time, Bühler's very real affinities with phenomenology, with its insistence 
on consciousness, on intentionality as the source of sense, have become extremely 
clear in the course of the preceding discussion, In Bühler, in fact, we have a 
model that is capable of mediating between the primacy of signs in structuralism 
and the primacy of consciousness in phenomenology, being able to exploit the 
strongest points in each. Thus, the continuation of Bühler's work in the theory 
of linguistic fields would join with structuralism 's insistence on objectivity of 
sign systems, and both could be seen within the framework of the historical 
embodiment of consciousness, not just in linguistic systems but in sign systems 
of all sorts. Bühler's work is fully compatible with such ideas. 
Readers of the following monograph will find abundant hints of Bühler's 
own conception of where his axiomatic project and his larger language theory 
intersect with, complement, or contradict other positions. They will find the 
stimulation both to think with Bühler beyond Bühler and to think against other 
positions with reliance on Bühler. Bühler's monograph has much more than 
merely historical interest, and in its own way it is even more heuristically fertile 

CONCLUSION 
69 
than de Saussure's more famous Course in General Linguistics (1966), which 
is subjected to a clear and precise critique. Of it one could say what Wittgenstein 
wrote conceming his Philosophicallnvestigations (1958): "I should not like my 
writing to spare other people the trouble of thinking. But, if possible, to stimulate 
someone to thoughts of his own" (Foreword to Philosophical lnvestigations). 
While it may not be possible in the last analysis to build a general linguistic or 
semiotic theory out of Bühler, it is likewise clear from what we have seen that 
it is certainly not possible to build one without hirn. 

REFERENCES 
Balazs, Bela. Theory of the Film. Translated by Edith Bone. New York: Dover. 1970. (Original 
edition, 1952.) 
Benveniste, Emile. Problems in General Linguistics. Translated by Mary Elizabeth Meek. Coral 
Gables, Florida: University of Miami Press, 1977. 
Black, Max. Models and Metaphors. Ithaca, New York: Comell University Press, 1962. 
Brand, Gerd. The Essential Wittgenstein. Translated with an introduction by Robert E. Innis. New 
York: Basic Books, 1979. Published in Great Britain as The Central Texts of Ludwig Wittgen-
stein. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1979. 
Bühler, Kar!. "Tatsachen und Probleme zu einer Psychologie der Denkvorgänge. " Archiv jiir 
Psychologie 12( 1908):84ff. 
Bühler, Kar!. Ausdruckstheorie. Introduction by Albert Wellek. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag, 
1968. (Original edition, 1933.) 
Bühler, Kar!. Sprachtheorie. With an introduction by Friedrich Kainz. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer 
Verlag, 1965. (Original edition, 1934.) 
Bühler, Kar!. Die Krise der Psychologie. With an introduction by Herbert Rohracher. Frankfurt: 
Ullstein, 1978. (Original edition, 1927.) 
Cassirer. Ernst. The Philosophy of Svmbolic Forms. 3 volumes. Translated by Ralph Manheim. New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1957. 
Cassirer, Ernst. "Le langage et la construction du monde des objets." Psvchologie du langage. 
edited by H. Delacroix. Paris: Alcan. 1933. 
Church, Joseph. Language and the Discoverv of Realitv. New York: Vintage Books, 1961. 
Cunningham, Suzanne. Language and the Phenomenological Reductions of Husserl. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1978. 
Eco, Umberto. A Theorv of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1976. 
Eco, Umberto. The Role of the Reader. Bloomington: Indiana Cniversity Press. 1979. 
Frisby. John. Seeing. New York: Oxford University Press, 1980. 
Gadamer. Hans-Georg. Tmth and Method. New York: Seabury. 1975. 
Gardner, Howard and Irene Winner. "The Deve10pment (lf Metaphoric Competence: Implications 
for Humanistic Disciplines." In Sacks (1979). 
Goodman. Nelson. Languages ofArt. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill (reprinted by Hackett Publishing 
Co.). 1968. 
Gregory, R. L. The Intelligent Eye. New York: McGraw-Hill. 1970. 
Hjelmslev, Louis. Prolegomena to a Theor\' of Language. Translated by Francis 1. Whitfield. 
Madison: University 01' Wisconsin Press. 1969. 
Husserl. Edmund. Formal and Transcendental Logic. Translated by Dorion Caims. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1969. 
Husserl, Edmund. Logical Investigations. Translated by lohn Findlay. London: Routledge und Kegan 
Paul. 1970. 
71 

72 
KEY THEMES IN BÜHLER'S LANGUAGE THEORY 
Ingarden. Roman. The Literarv Work of Art. Translated. with an introduetion. by George G. Gra-
bowiez. Evanston. Ill.: Northwestem University Press. 1973. 
Innis. Robert E. "Polanyi's Model of Mental Acts." The New Scholasticism 4711(973): 147-178. 
Innis. Robert E. "Meaning. Thought. and Language in Polanyi's Epistemology." Philosophv Todav 
18/1 (1974):47-67. 
Innis. Robert E. "In Memoriam Michael Polanyi." Zeitschrift für allgemeine Wissenschaftstheorie 
8/1 (976):22-29. 
Innis. Robert E. "Art. Symbol. and Conseiousness." International Philosophical Quarterlv 171 
4( 1977):455-476. 
Innis. Robert E. "Notes on the Semiotic Model of Perception." Philosophical Inquirv 21 
2-3( 1980):496-507. 
Innis. Robert E. Review artiele onA Theory ofSemiotics by Umberto Eeo.lnternational Philosophical 
Quarterfy 20/2:221-232, 1980. 
lakobson, Roman. "Linguistics and Poetics." In T. S. Sebeok (Ed.). Stvle in Language. Cambridge: 
M.I.T. Press. 1960. 
Köhler, Wolfgang. Gestalt Psvchofogy. New York: New American Library, 1959. 
Leroy, Maurice. Main Trends in Modern Linguistics. Translated by Glanville Price. Berkeley: 
University of Califomia Press, 1967. 
Lonergan, Bemard 1. F. Insight. A Stlldy of Hliman Understanding. New York: Philosophieal 
Library, 1957. 
Lonergan. Bemard 1. F. Verbum: Word and Idea in Aquinas. Edited by David B. Burrell. Notre 
Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press. 1967. 
Lotman. lurij. Semiotics of the Cinema. Translated with a foreword by Mark E. Suino. Ann Arbor: 
Michigan Slavic Contributions. 1976. 
Lotman.lurij. The Structllre ofthe Artistic Text. Translated by Ronald Vroon. Ann Arbor: Michigan 
Slavic Contributions. 1977. 
MukafovskY. lan. The Word and Verbal Art. Translated by Peter Steiner and lohn Burbank. New 
Haven. Conn.: Yale University Press. 1977. 
Ortony. Andrew (Ed.). Metaphor and Thollght. New York: Cambridge University Press. 1979. 
Peirce. C. S. Collected Papers. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 1931-1958. 
Pettit. Philip. The Concept of Struclllralism. Berkeley: University 01' California Press. 1975. 
Pirenne. Maurice. Optics. Painting. and Phorographv. Cambridge. England: Cambridge University 
Press. 1970. 
Polanyi. Michael. Personal Knowledge. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 1958. (paperback 
reprint. University of Chicago Press.) 
Polanyi. Michael. The Tacit Dimension. Garden City. N.Y.: Doubleday Anchor. 1966. 
Polanyi. Michael. Knowing and Being. Edited and introdueed by Marjorie Grene. Chicago: University 
of Chieago Press. 1969. 
Polanyi. Michael. Meaning. with Harry Proseh. Chieago: University of Chieago Press. 1976. 
Popper. Karl. Conjectures and Reflltations. New York: Harper & Row. 1963. 
Popper. Karl. Unended Quest. Lasalle. Ill.: Open Court. 1976. 
Rieoeur. Paul. The Rufe ofMetaphor. Translated by Robert Czemy. Toronto: University ofToronto 
Press. 1977. 
Rossi-Landi. Ferrueeio. Ideologies of Linguistic Relatil'itr. The Hague: Mouton. 1973. 
Rossi-Landi. Ferruecio. IIlingliaggio come lavoro e come mercato. 2d cd. Milan: Bompiani. 1973. 
Rossi-Landi, Ferruccio. "Aspetti biologie i e sociali dei linguaggio nclla loro interrelazione." with 
Massimo Pesaresi. Scien:e Umane 3 (Deeember 1979):37-90. 1979. 
Rossi-Landi. Ferrueeio. Significaro. Communica:ione. e Parlare COl11l11l1ne. 2d ed. Veniee: Marsilio 
Editori. 1980. 
Sacks. Sheldon (Ed.). On Metaphor. Chieago: University of Chicago Press. 1979. 
Sapir. Edward. Language. New York: Harcourt. Braee. In!. 

REFERE:-ICES 
73 
Sapir. Edward. "Language." In Culture, Language, and Personalitr. Edited by David G. Man-
delbaum. Berkeley: University 01' Califomia Press. 1970. Pp. 1-..... 
Saussure. Ferdinand deo Course in General Linguistics. Translated by Wade Baskin. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 1966. 
Schaff. Adam. Language and Cognition. Translated by Olgierd Wojtasiewicz and edited by R. S. 
Cohen. New York: McGraw-Hill. 1973. 
Sebeok, Thomas. and Umiker-Sebeok. Donna lean (Eds.). Speaking ofApes. New York: Plenum 
Press. 1980. 
Snell. Bruno. Der Aufbau der Sprache. Hamburg: Claasen Verlag. 1952. 
Sokolowski. Robert. The Formation of Husser/' s Concept of Constitution. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 1970. 
Sokolowski. Robert. Husserlian Meditations. Evanston. Ill.: Northwestem University Press. 197 ... 
Stierle. Karlheinz, "Der Gebrauch der Negation in fiktionalen Texten." In Positionen der Nega-
tivität. Edited by Harald Weinrich. Munich: Wilhelm Fink. 1975. 
Stierle. Karlheinz. "Über den Zusammenhang von Handlungstheorie und Handlungspoetik ... Poetica 
8/3-4. pp. 321-326. 1976. 
Stierle. Karlheinz. "Sprechsituation. Kontext und Sprachhandlung ... In Handlungstheorien inter-
disziplinär I. Edited by Hans Lenk, Munich: Wilhelm Fink. 1980. 
Trän-Duc-Thao. Recherches sur /' origine du langage et de la conscience. Paris: Editions Sociales. 
1973. 
Trier. lost. Der deutsche Wortschatz im Sinnbe:irk des Verstandes: Die Geschichte eines sprachlichen 
Feldes. Heidelberg: Carl Winter. 1931. 
Vachek. 10seph. A Prague School Reader in Linguistics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
1964. 
Volosinov. V, N. Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. Translated by Ladislav Matejka and 
L R, Titunik. New York: Seminar Press. 1973. 
Volpe. Galvano della. Critique ofTaste, Translated by Michael Caesar. London: New Left Books. 
1978. 
von Humboldt. Wilhelm, Linguistic Variabilitv and the Intel/ectual Development ofiHankind. Trans-
Iated by George C. Buck and Frithjof A. Raven. Philadelphia: L'niversity 01' Pennsylvania Press. 
1971. 
Vygotsky. Lev S. Thought and Language. Translated by Gertrud Vakar and Eugenia Hanfmann. 
Cambridge. Mass.: M,LT. Press. 1962. 
Vygotsky. Lev S. Mind in Sociery. Edited by Michael Cole. Vera lohn-Steiner. Sylvia Scribner. 
and Ellen Souberman. Cambridge. Mass.: Harvard University Press. 1978. 
Wheelwright. Philip. Metaphor and Realit\'. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 1962. 
Wheelwright. Philip. The Burning Fountain. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 1968. 
White. Lynn. Dvnamo and the Virgin Reconsidered. Cambridge. Mass.: M.!.T. Press. 1968. 
Wittgenstein. Ludwig. Philosophh·allnvestigations. Translated by Elisabeth Anscombe. New York: 
Macmillan. 1958. 

PART II 
THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE 
SCIENCES 
KARL BUHLER 

INTRODUCTION 
ELISABETH STRÖKER 
Contemporary philosophy is marked by especially diverse formulations of its 
questions. Completely different tendencies and traditions are active, which are 
distinguished as much by the content of the problems as by the methods of 
working on them. Thus the contemporary situation offers, along with a fullness 
of themes, a large number of modes of inquiry, a fact that makes it difficult to 
characterize our philosophical 'epoch' in a neat form. Not only different, but 
divergent directions of inquiry define its image. 
Nevertheless, if we try to look through the complex foreground of philo-
sophical work and to find the common elements that bind together today the 
partners of the many-voiced philosophical dialogue, one of the common elements 
is found to be reflection on language. Language constitutes one of the great 
guiding themes of contemporary philosophy-if not the only theme that, in the 
contemporary context, offers the possibility of winning an inner connection for 
widely scattered philosophical discussions. 
In this situation, the present essay of Kar! Bühler may lay claim to renewed 
interest. To be sure, at first sight, it may appear to be concemed not with 
philosophy of language but with linguistics; the author himself assigns it to 
"language theory." 1 This makes it, at first sight, not easy for one who thinks 
in terms of a clear separation of territories to determine its systematic place in 
the total field of discussion about language. But at the same time, such a person 
has to recognize that precisely in the domain of language the competences of 
the different directions of research do not allow us to set up sharp boundaries. 
It is not incidental that the philosophies of language and linguistics stand in a 
peculiar relation of tension, which, in its contemporary form or in its specific 
historical development, has no analogy in the relation of philosophy to the other 
sciences. 
I More closely treated on pp. 861'1'. 
77 

78 
ELISABETH STRÖKER 
One has to keep in mind that the reasons lie in language itself. It gets its 
specific problematic character not only from the fact that it is the object of single 
disciplines that, in their methodological heterogeneity, can scarcely be brought 
together-rather, the problematic thing, first of all, is its objectification as such. 
Far from being simply one object of research among others, language is far more 
already a necessary condition of possible research; and as object of any thought 
whatsoever, language has to appear to be more questionable the more clearly 
a reflection 'on' language finds it already at work 'in' all thought. In view of 
what it essentially accomplishes in thought, language belongs to no science and 
to no philosophical discipline exclusively. 
Nevertheless, if a precisely circumscribed territory for the problem ground 
of language cannot be laid out, for the handling of wh ich a unified tool would 
be available, then various methodical aspects can be distinguished-modes of 
research that are respectively differentiated according to how and as what lan-
guage is understood in them. 
At the same time, it is not a mere matter of numerical multiplicity of 
procedures, something demanded for all areas of research, but also a matter of 
a special, many-Ieveled character belonging to a reflective inquiry. The claim 
and performance proper to an undertaking in the philosophy of language ulti-
mately finds its measure in the degree of radicality of reflection with which it 
applies itself to language. 
It may appear strange that philosophy of language in this sense began only 
relatively late. When Wilhelm von Humboldt founded it at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century, he could al ready refer to a quite lengthy historical tradition 
of special research on language. Other than the natural sciences, wh ich won their 
independence only through gradual separation from Greek philosophy, the lan-
guage sciences did not have their point of origin in an ancient philosophy of 
language. 2 Rather, such a philosophy developed only out of the occupation of 
various single sciences with language. And out of this there grew the common 
questions about the origin, essence, and meaning of language, questions that 
force one to philosophical reflection. 
Here we have to recall several reasons that can make this peculiar devel-
opment of the language problematic intelligible. At the same time, we should 
try to illuminate the historical background of the problems dealt with in Bühler's 
work, to such an extent that the meaning of its way of formulating the question 
'By the term langllage sciences. we understand here. appropriately, all sciences that are thematieally 
oceupied with language (philosophy, grammar. his tory of language. ete.). The term lingllistics got 
its closely eircumscribed meaning with the comparalive lingllislics 01' the nineteenth century. 

INTRODCCTION 
79 
c\early stands out, that its place in the contemporary discussion of language is 
more exactly determined, and that, further, it becomes c\ear in what precisely 
defined sense Bühler characterizes his project as "language theoretical" 
(sprachtheoretisch). 
Limiting ourselves to this consideration relieves us in the following dis-
cussion of any obligation to go into historical detail, which in any case cannot 
be the task of an introduction. Besides, Bühler himself delineated the necessary 
main outlines of the problematic in its decisive points. In several of his works 
on language theory, it becomes c\ear how far and in what way he is indebted 
to the efforts of the tradition concerning the problem of language. 
Bühler appeals repeatedly to Plato's Cratylus, where he finds already pre-
formed the fundamental principle of his own language theory. In so doing, he 
refers back to the oldest transmitted philosophical dialogue that deals, in a unified 
form, with a linguistic theme. 
Plato takes up in it an old debate: Where do names (ovof.la) get their 
correctness (Op80TT)<;) from? It has not remained without effect on later devel-
opments that the oldest reflection on language, which is as old as philosophy 
as a whole, was concerned with the 'names' of things, that language was first 
considered from the point of view of 'names'-while, as a whole, it remained 
largely unthematized in itself. Greek and even Roman antiquity did not have a 
concept of language; the Greeks had no word for it. Thus, Plato 's guiding 
question, whether names are 'correct' thanks to their belonging to the things 
themselves or through the agreement and practice of those who use them for 
talking about things, could bring the problem of language's objective reference 
only to the alternative of whether the name is an image (E"LKW) of the object, 
grounded in areal correspondence, or whether it is an arbitrary sign (UT)f.lELOV), 
created by the name giver solely as an 'instrument' (op-yavov) for the purpose 
of communication. 
Plato offered with this alternative the first formulation of an opposition-
appearing still more frequently later-between, on the one hand, an image, or 
resemblance, theory of language and, on the other hand, a conventional sign 
theory. Yet, before a concept of language in general had been formed, certain 
notions already were taking shape, which were asserted as ever-returning met-
aphors in the later discussion of language, permeating them as forceful modeIs-
as in the discussions of language as an image of reality or as a taol. a medium 
'between' man and the objective realm, or in speaking of the 'vicarious' or also 
'representing' function of linguistic signs. 
In restricting the course of discussion to the relation of names to things, 
Plato kept aseries of questions still in the dark. These questions already sketched 

80 
ELISABETH STRÖKER 
out in kernel a later fundamental problem area of all treatments of language. 
The task especially was to justify the relation between oV0l-La and X-o-yo<;: between 
the 'word' that not only names but, within the realm of Logos, has a 'meaning'-
and the word as 'speech,' which does not name but communicates, which reaches 
beyond names, and in which the speaker has the possibility of uttering truth as 
weil as falsity about things. Plato's skeptical fundamental relation to the spoken 
Logos, however-which, coming from the tongues of men and passing away 
like them, was not able to guarantee access to the unchangeable being of the 
ideas--could not make these quest ions come to consciousness with that kind of 
sharpness that was necessary for a c1ear grasp of the problem. 
There occurred a differentiation of the problem with Aristotle. His special 
attention was devoted directly to the Logos, to man's speech about being. He 
found his bearings for the constitution of formal logic through its help; through 
its exploration he obtained the categories and principles of his metaphysics. Still, 
even the reflection on the Logos that began with Aristotle was not yet a genuine 
reflection on language. It thematized the Logos not as a linguistic structure but 
only insofar as being was encountered in it. He was concerned not with analyzing 
the Logos but with interpreting being that was given in the Logos. Being was, 
also, not interpreted in respect to how it 'appears' in the Logos but on the basis 
of the assumption that it is 'represented vicariously' [vertreten 1 in it. 
The unthematized presupposition of Aristotle that language is related to the 
world and that the world is also there without language, his naive trust in the 
power of signs (CJ1JI-LßoX-a) to 'present' (I-LLI-LELa1Jm) the world just as it is, did 
not yet let arise even here that critical distance to language that was necessary 
for language to be able to become a theme as language and for the question 
about the 'essence' of language to be asked. 3 It was only when from the time 
of late Hellenism the polyglot character of mankind became apparent that lan-
guage itself could become an object of inquiry. Only from that time was that 
issue exposed as a problem that ciassical antiquity had left obscured in the total 
problem complex of metaphysics: the performative capacity of language, the 
lawfulness of its formal structure, the relation of linguistic meaning and the 
objective realm, the relation of the sounds of language to their meanings, and, 
finally, the origin and beginning of language. 
Nevertheless, various individual researches into language began directly 
with Aristotle. Objectified in the present essay as a language "work," language 
is presented in such a fashion that it can appear to the investigator untrained in 
1 That means concretely. for example. with Aristotle that we use names in place of things. since we 
cannot bring them as such into our conversations. De Sophisth'is Elenchis. 165a ff. 

INTRODUCTlON 
81 
the philosophy of language as an object that lets itself be investigated as other 
pregiven objects. Aristotle's capacity for precise observation, for exact analysis 
and minute description, was beneficial for aseries of phenomena that belang to 
the domain of rhetoric, stylistics, poetics, philology, and hermeneutics, as weil 
as others that became fundamental to later grammar. Formal analyses of the 
;\o-yo<; cX1To<!>avTLKo<;, of the assertion, led to differentiations that, to be sure, 
were understood here as logical but later, in the Alexandrian period, were taken 
over into syntax as grammatical categories . .\ 
These sketchy comments on the historical beginning of retlection on lan-
guage should make us realize that individual scientific investigations on language 
had already begun early, while language, in the whole extent of its manifold 
relations and its essentially problematic character, remained hidden. 
It was centuries be fore philosophy took up questions of this sort. Never-
theless, language was not neglected in the patristic and medieval periods. In 
these periods, many of its problematic elements became even more clearly of 
importance than in the time of the Greeks. The question about the 'origin' of 
language, originally understood in the context of the theology of creation, shifted 
gradually to the problem of the role of the human spirit in the production of 
language. Questions of the relation of language and thought and hence of the 
connection between language and concept formation penetrated increasingly into 
medieval discussion, until apremature end was prepared for it through the late 
Scholastic conventionalism of William of Occam, by his dissolution of the 
essential connection that was affirmed between ward sound and conceptual con-
tent in favor of a pure theory of signs. 
Modem philosophy of language, which begins with Humboldt, is defined 
by quite different directions of interest. Humboldt's retlections on language rest 
on a remarkable mass of data that had been assembled and systematized by the 
various language sciences. He had at his disposal-in great part, through his 
own valuable, detailed work-all the empirical linguistic research of the se v-
enteenth and eighteenth centuries, which led, in the fields of philology and 
history of language, etymology and lexicography, and the phonology and syntax 
of the various languages, to the epoch-making discovery of the relationships 
between languages. Camp lex investigations into vocabulary, laws of ward for-
mation, and the formal structures of the different languages consequently laid 
the foundation for the comparative linguistics or 'lndogermanic studies' of the 
nineteenth century, which in that period understood itself to be linguistics proper. 
, More closely treated in H. SteinthaI. Geschichte der SprachlVisscnschaji bei den Griechen lind 
Römern mit besonderen Rücksicht auf die Logik (1890). 2nd ed .. facsimile reprint. 

82 
ELISABETH STRÖKER 
For the philosopher, there arises here a quest ion about a common element 
that bridges all the differences, a unity of function and achievements underlying 
all languages. Humboldt's ans wer stands within the horizon of the philosophy 
of German idealism. Its new concept of rea!ity, as a world of objects created 
through the productive power of the subject, proved itself for Humboldt also to 
be fruitful for understanding the linguistically constituted relation of the subject 
to the world. Accordingly, he saw in language not an EP'YOV, a work of the 
speaker, but he understood it essentially as EVEP'YEltX, as an activity ofthe human 
spirit, which in and with language brings forth its own 'world view' (Weltancht). 
Far from being merely an exchangeable cover for thought, language is rather its 
'formative organ' (bildendes Organ); thought is of necessity oriented toward it 
in order to attain to cIarity. 5 
It is here that reflection on language first attains its philosophical dimension. 
By finding the principle of his reflection in man's linguistic ability and !inguistic 
activity, Humboldt brought the merely objective form of thinking, which had 
been lost in a pregiven language fund (Sprach' befunde'), back to an awareness 
of itself. The insight into the inner unity of language and thinking-the knowledge 
that the language sound is not extemal to the thought, but that it is its meaning-
determining and meaning-articulating form-Ieaves the speaking subject no 
langer out of consideration but puts hirn at the very beginning. The philosophy 
of language may henceforth no langer avoid submitting to critical examination 
even those customary metaphors of language such as 'toai,' 'medium,' and 
'means,' to see whether they da justice to the essential character of language. 
However much language can and must be taken as all these, just as !ittle has one 
nevertheless been able to overlook since Humboldt that it is not a mere instru-
mental means of grasping the world, but that it mediates man and world in such 
a fashion that only in the process of language da both become, with and through 
one another, what they are and can be. 
Historical circumstances contributed to philosophy's not allotting constant 
attention to Humboldt's key contribution. If the importance of inquiry into the 
concrete, historical subject, as it had to be seen-as speaking-was lacking in 
the epoch of idealism, the question of the subject was temporarily totally lost 
after the decIine of idealism in the middle of the nineteenth century and the 
powerful rise of the positive sciences. Not by chance in the philosophy of the 
twentieth century have thinkers of the Neo-Kantian school preserved Humboldt's 
5 W. von Humboldt, Linguistie Variabilitv and Intel/eetual De\'elopmenr. trans. George C. Buck 
and Frithjof A. Raven (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 1971. pp. 33fT). 

INTRODUCTlON 
83 
heritage in its purest form and in an independent manner given it further 
elaboration .6 
On the other hand, Humboldt's work had immediate effects on nineteenth-
century linguistics. It owed its decisive impulses to it; the comparative treatment 
of language demanded now nothing less than the study of all the possibilities 
in which the human spirit puts its linguistic capacity in the service of another 
world conception and, by the very fact, at the same time takes over, as a thinking 
spirit-in its own language-the forms of its own world conception. Language, 
understood as 'spiritual possession of the nation,' as expression of the 'national 
character' and the 'spirit of the people,' offered a stimulus to a mass of historical 
as weil as systematic investigations of the various languages and brought about 
the long-necessary revivification of philology. 
Its results retained their value even later when the so-called Volksgeist of 
romanticism was found to be dispensable and the decision was taken to pursue 
a 'positive' science of language. The school of the so-called new grammarians, 
with their goal of an exact inquiry into laws, oriented itself along the lines of 
the model of the exact sciences and thereby sketched the first rough outlines of 
a methodical foundation of linguistics, which, after a few hopeful beginnings 
in phonology, was gradually brought more clearly to acceptance. The whole 
range of detailed research at the end of the nineteenth century cannot even be 
mentioned here. 7 
How difficult it was then to contain the flow of facts and discoveries-to 
organize the bewildering multiplicity of researches according to a few funda-
mental principles-is shown by the work of the important Swiss student of the 
Indo-Germanic languages at the beginning of our century. 
With him, there occurred the decisive shift from research into the devel-
opment and transformation of language to research into the conditions of its 
functioning. To do this, a basic inventory of all actuallanguage systems became 
necessary. Saussure demanded, accordingly, a clear separation of diachronic 
(concemed with development) and synchronie (systemic) research procedures. 
Above all, he tried to differentiate methodically the complex object of research 
that language iso His distinctions between the speech act (langage), expression, 
discourse as a result of the speech act (parole), and language as a system of rufes 
of a speech community (langue) have become more-or-Iess self-evident in mod-
'Cf. K. Vossler. Grundzüge einer idealistischen Sprachphilosophie (190'+); E. Cassirer. Philosoph\' 
of Symbolic Forms (1924). Vol. I; R. Hönigswald. Philosophie lind Sprache (1937). 
, Details in H. Arens, Sprachwissenschaft. Der Gang ihrer Elltwicklllllg \'Oll der Antike bis zur 
Gegenwart (1968), 2nd ed. 

84 
ELlSABETH STROKER 
em linguistics. lt will become clear in the following essay how much Bühler 
owes to Saussure for his own researches into language theory. K 
At any rate, even after Saussure, linguistics presented quite a disunified 
picture. It has got no simpler up the present day. Even today, the linguist does 
not easily find his way because of the various schools with their different tasks, 
methods, and technical terminologies. 9 
Besides, twentieth-century philosophy instituted its reflection on language 
completely outside of linguistics. It starting point (B. RusselI, A. N. Whitehead, 
G. Frege) was found in modem logic, which henceforth, with its newly under-
stood task of a structural investigation of assertions, laid claim to apart of 
research on language. 
Their original program of a 'critique of language' was directed not against 
language itself but against an uncontrolled use of language. In the customarily 
applied forms of language, the states of affairs to be expressed appeared struc-
turally distorted. A logical syntax and a logical semantics should therefore create 
a language that would exclude from the very beginning the danger of such 
distortions. They were supposed to offer criteria according to which the sense 
of statements should be tested. 
The fundamental carrying out of this program was not only unsatisfactory 
far everyday language, wh ich is itself already the last, unsurpassable linguistic 
condition for the logistical critique of language. What was above all unsatisfac-
tory was that there was implicit here aseries of metaphysical presuppositions 
conceming the relation of language and world that remained opaque first and 
fore most to logic itself. During a gradual retraction of inappropriate critical 
claims, logic most recently has withdrawn to the neutral position of 'analytic' 
philosophy and accomplishes here important work in the structural clarification 
not only of scientific language systems but also of natural languages. This 
'language analysis' appears nevertheless to mean more currently for its practical 
applicability to electronic information processing than for philosophy, even if 
there are still unanswered questions here of a sort belonging to philosophy of 
language. 
Meanwhile language has today appeared questionable in still another area 
of philosophical reflection. In this area, the question of the 'sense' of a linguistic 
8 F. de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics. trans. Wade Baskin (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1966). 
9 Good overviews are given by H. Glinz, "Ziele und Arbeitsweisen der modemen Sprachwissen-
schaft," Archiv für die Studien der Neueren Sprachen Bd. 115 ( 1964): 161-181: and P. Hartmann. 
"Die Sprache als Linguistisches Problem." in Die Deutsche Sprache im 20. Jahrhundert 
(1966):29-63. CL also his "Modellbildungen in der Sprachwissenschaft." in Studium Generale 
18(1965);364-379. 

INTRODUCTION 
85 
utterance is posed. However, its claim to sense is not disputed; it is understood 
as a demand to reflect on the conditions and possibilities of the understanding 
of sense. Hermeneutics at the present time again espouses the problem areas that 
Aristotle had assigned to it in the framework of his treatment of language, 
namely, that of the understanding of language and the interpretation of traditional 
texts. Since not only the object of hermeneutics is linguistic in nature but since 
also understanding itself is linguistically mediated and the transformation of 
written signs into meaningful linguistic contents, therefore, directly implies lin-
guistic presuppositions on the side of the interpreter, aseries of weighty questions 
appear in wh ich what is at issue is the possibility of meaning-disclosing work 
with texts within one's own linguistic matrix [Sprachlichkeit].lo 
Hermeneutics brings long-neglected aspects of the language problem to new 
attention. Not only does it make thematic the already antecedent linguistically 
mediated character of all access to language; it seizes here a question that was 
not first of all excluded by modem logic but also had been suppressed in the 
older linguistics since the time of Humboldt. In directing itself preferentially to 
questions about the form of language, this older linguistics brought about the 
widespread disappearance of the conte nt side of linguistic structures in research. 
If, however, hermeneutics calls to mind once again the content character of 
language and makes it a problem, it thereby assumes the important task of 
expanding the scope of all investigations of language that are oriented toward 
pure problems of form. 
We have, accordingly, at least in large outline, followed certain lines of 
development of linguistics and philosophy of language in the expectation of 
being able to offer, with their aid, a kind of coordinate system in wh ich the work 
of Bühler can now be adequately located. 
This work (of Bühler) counts itself among the seien ces of language and 
intends the plural in the traditional sense of all the single disciplines that occupy 
themselves with language under any methodical point of view whatsoever. But 
it is not for that reason a work that belongs to linguistic science. As an attempt 
at an axiomatics of these sciences, it is, in a sense to be made clearer immediately , 
concemed with determining axioms, principles, that constitute the foundation 
of all specific directions of research. The fact that on it philology must rest. as 
weil as the psychology and sociology of language, phonetics and phonology, 
and logic. as weil as grammar and-before all these-language itself in our 
everyday use of it, makes it clear that the elaboration of such a foundation cannot 
'0 On this. cf. H. G. Gadamer, Truth llnd Melhod. Outlines of (f Philosophical HermeneUlies (New 
York: Seabury Press. 1975). 

86 
ELISABETH STRÖKER 
be accomplished through any of these sciences, but that it can be discovered 
only by means of a regressive inquiry (Rückfragen) into universal fundamental 
conditions. These have been the concem of philosophy from time immemorial. 
Principles on wh ich all research into language must rest will have as their content 
insights that concern purely and simply the essential nature of language, if, 
indeed, the various linguistic characteristics, functions, and performance, as 
explored by linguistics, are to become comprehensible as distinctions and in this 
sense able to be grounded. That makes us think that a grounding of the sciences 
of language is to be achieved by philosophy and is its responsibility. 
If Bühler nevertheless greeted with hesitation the orienting of his axiomatics 
toward philosophy, that is because he was aware of the limits set to his own 
project. A reflection on the foundations ofthe sciences constantly leaves problems 
of a philosophical kind untreated, problems that first show up through it but 
cannot be handled within its own sphere of possibilities. It corresponds to his 
modest self-estimation as a theorist of science that Bühler characterized his 
monograph as belonging not to the philosophy of language but to language 
theory. By this is meant a reflection on the results and methods of the empirical 
language sciences. 
The limits of such a reflection are as clear as its philosophical significance. 
It is capable, through a strict methodological self-delimitation, of reflecting on 
language only in precisely those aspects in which it is represented by the separate 
sciences, namely, as an 'object' and in no other way. On the other hand, it will 
take an interest in language as an object in a way that traditional philosophy of 
language neglected. Traditional philosophy of language never ventured into the 
breadth of experience that the language sciences attained in the course of their 
development. If this is not the primary task of philosophy, still it is not allowed 
to remain in a harmless one-sided relation to the work of the separate sciences. 
Philosophy of nature can just as little talk about its object in a binding way 
without drawing on the theories of scientific research as at the present time the 
philosophy of language can establish the essence of language without being 
informed by a theory of the empirical language sciences. 
It is in this sense that Bühler understands language theory. The 'axiomatics' 
developed here was projected with an eye toward his book Sprach theorie and 
was later taken over into it as its first chapter. 11 It may appear as penetrating as 
it is daring to begin it with a laying ofaxiomatic foundations. Bühler's attempt 
11 K. Bühler, Sprachrheorie (1934), second edition in 1965 with an introductory essay by Friedrich 
Kainz. In this book one finds the axiomatization essay. with unimportant modifications and 
adaptation. as part I under the title "The Principles 01' Linguistic Research." 

INTRODUCTION 
87 
is the first and, up to now, the only of its kind that undertakes to penetrate the 
conceptual world and work method of empirical language researchers with the 
intention of developing a few theses through which their apparently disparate 
work is finally brought into unity. 
Such an attempt may be subject to misunderstandings and doubts. Should 
an axiom system be offered here with the goal of deducing scientific concIusions 
about language from it, not only would the intentions of scientific research on 
language run directly counter to it, but it would also a limine be doomed to fai!. 
The axioms that are presented here should, however, absolutely not be understood 
as if the statements of empirical linguistic research were derivable from them 
in such a way that they could thereby attain the methodical structure of an 
axiomatic-deductive system, such as exists prototypically, for example, in math-
ematics and logic. 
By axioms is understood in the present circumstances rather fundamental 
principles (Grundsätze), which, although not explicit, are already presupposed 
in all concrete individual research on language: principles through which the 
simple phenomena of language themselves are already determined. 
From the point of view of their content, they do not, accordingly, offer us 
anything new or something never heard be fore . On the contrary, just Iike most 
of the unspoken presuppositions of our thought and speech, they appear self-
evident and cannot contribute to the extension of our knowledge of language for 
the very reason that the sciences responsible for such an extension had long 
before taken up and consolidated their positions, even before they had assured 
themselves of an axiomatic foundation. 
What is new in Bühler's work, however, is the idea of revealing this 
foundation (of laying this foundation open to view), of making explicit those 
implicit presuppositions, in order to fix and to order the multiplicity of possible 
angles of research according to their methodicalloci, to make cIear the unity of 
the insights gained by the empirical sciences of language, and thereby, finally, 
to make comprehensible part of what pertains to the concept of language 
itself. 
An axiomatics conceived in this fashion is bound, by its nature, to proceed 
in a definite fashion. It is prohibited from 'positing' its axioms-it must 'look 
for' them. Its principles do not stand at the beginning of linguistic research as 
guiding principles for its progress but must be revealed regressive!.\' out of the 
fund of knowledge already available as its hitherto hidden principles. Only in 
this fashion can it function as a guide, not for the work of the positive sciences 
of language, but for our comprehension of what this work means and what it 
does for the cIarification of Iinguistic phenomena. 

88 
ELISABETH STRÖKER 
Such a qualification makes clear that Bühler did not want to set up the 
axioms formulated here with the intention of furnishing once and for all a stable, 
complete, and closed system. If the search for the axioms follows the paths of 
concrete individual research, if accordingly-faithful to the direction of Socra-
tes--one must pay attention to those versed in the subject. the successful 'work-
ers' in the field, it cannot be insignificant for the process of the axiomatic 
investigation where the starting point of its own labors lies. No matter if the 
language theorist first, through his inquiry, helps to expose the starting point; 
further penetration into the foundations is always already codefined (determined) 
through those conceptions that, right at the beginning, delimit the field of vision 
of the researcher. 
Bühler will establish four axiomatic principles. Doubts about whether such 
an axiomatics is complete find his explicit approval, because they could stimulate 
the search for further fundamental principles. Emphasizing explicitly the essay 
character of this investigation, Bühler is concerned simply with a beginning in 
research into the principles of language theory. 
Its characteristic point of departure is the concrete speech event. 
Bühler offers, in principle, sufficient warrant for the investigation that starts 
with hirn no longer exhausting itself in the fruitless dispute whether the language 
sciences are to be counted among the natural or the human sciences. Bühler 
shows right off that this alternative is a "much too narrow scholastic question. " 
Above all, Bühler validates, in the concrete speech event, a new aspect 
that, after its first and only temporary appearance with Plato, immediately fell 
into oblivion: in the speech event, language is not only a means for the pre-
sentation of astate of affairs but also constantly brings the speaker into relation 
with the hearer. The rediscovery of the speech partner is the special merit of 
Bühler for linguistics. Wh at is important here is that the speech partners need 
no Ionger play their roles off to the side in psychology and only be 'considered' 
an adjunct. Bühler allots them their own positions in the speech event, and these 
positions decisively define language itself in its meaning structure [Sinngejiige]. 12 
To be sure, one might like to ask whether Bühler is capable of rightly using 
his far-reaching discovery, when from the beginning-and apparently in a tra-
ditional fashion-he once again defines language as a system oj signs; he wants 
to conceive of language theory only as a subdiscipline of a general theory of 
signs Csematology'/semiotics). He knows, however, how to avoid the older one-
" This recognition on Bühler's part is already found in his first work dealing with the theory of 
language: . 'Kritische Musterung der neueren Theorien des Satzes." Indogermanisches Jahrbuch 
VI.Bd. (1920): 1-20. Compare further: "Die Krise der Psychologie." Konl-Studien 31 ( 1926):455-526. 

INTRODUCTION 
89 
sidednesses of the conception. By starting from the concrete speech situation, 
he distinguishes various dimensions of meaning belonging to the Iinguistic signs 
and establishes for them their own meaning function. Each of these opens up 
its own domain of phenomena to be investigated by the empirical language 
sciences. As much as this thoroughgoing sematologically oriented method of 
Bühler leaves room for criticism,13 it can be just as Iittle denied that with the 
distinctions proposed here, he freed many older problems from being thought 
about in constricted ways, retrieved many questions out of blind alleys that they 
had long ago gone into, and brought them to a proper solution. 
Only the book Sprach theorie furnishes more exact information on the fer-
tility of Bühler's differentiation of aspects. It makes possible-not least through 
the amazing breadth and multiplicity of the materials assimilated from different 
sciences and his own observations-the development of criteria [Maßstäbe] to 
determine how far the fullness of Iinguistic Iife and the richness of human 
possibilities of development in language have been uncovered through his axi-
omatics. Sprachtheorie accordingly must be called on for a comprehensive and 
conclusive response to the following monograph. 
It is the intention of the author that "The Axiomatization of the Language 
Sciences" not only-as he puts it-be taken as a representation of states of 
affairs or even as a personal expression, but that above all it be taken as an 
appeal to the reader to engage in a critical confrontation with his theses. 
13 G. Patzig, "Die Sprache. philosophisch befragt." in Die Delilsche Sprache im 20 Jahrhllndert. 
(1966):9-28. 

A. THE KEY PRINCIPLE: THE SIGN CHARACTER 
OF LANGUAGE 
That every language is a system of signs, that the sounds of language are posited 
by the speaker as signs and received by the hearer as signs, that the phenomenon 
of language arises as the mediator between individuals in the exchange of signs-
in this or some similar way we can begin to speak about language. In any case, 
the first thing needed logically in order to define it is a general term such as sign 
(aTJJ.La, signum, seign). Wh at are signs? 
I. In the domain of the Indo-Germanic languages and, within this group, 
especially in Greek, Latin, and German, as the languages in which Western 
thought grew, the roots of the two chief groups of words denoting signs point 
to the realm of what is visible. The two originally grasped moments are, then, 
'brightness, visible' or 'to make bright and visible,' and, on the other hand, 'to 
place be fore the eyes'; the 'lighting up' directs attention to itself. that which has 
been 'put before the eyes' enters in this fashion into the field of perception. lt 
is, to put it briefly, the [notions otl making present and disclosing things or [thel 
pointing to things that, as a rule, characterize the multistemmed lMehrstämmigeJ 
kinship of the Indo-European words for signs. ' 
Basically, the same explanation of the sign function is arrived at if we go 
farther and, with the help of the comparative psychologist. investigate the means 
0/ guidance in the sociallife of animals and men. We can reduce to an extremely 
simple formula the multiform complex of facts that belong to it, a formula that 
I recommended in the Crisis 0/ Psychology and justified in detail. It is apparent 
that the biological point of origin of the production of signs is universally to be 
I This is one of the results of a (still unpublishedJ study by Bruno Sonneck. "Sprachliche Unter-
suchungen zur Zeichentheorie ... which is supported by J. Gonda . .lEIK'IY\II. Semantische Stlldie 
over den indogemannschen Wortel deik-( 1929). as weil as the pertinent article in the etymologie al 
dictionaries of Walde-Pokomy. Walde. Kluge. and Pau!. However. in its results it does not depart 
essentially from the general positions reached by Gonda. It would appear to me to be essential to 
bring language theory into connection with etymological issues. As far as it is today possible. Mr. 
Sonneck may have accomplished this task in the circumscribed area. 
91 

92 
KARL BÜHLER 
found in the higher social life of animals only where a cooperation adapted to 
specific situations demands from individuals the widening of the common per-
ceptual horizon. If one of the individuals participating in the cooperative life is 
in possession of more information relevant to the perception or remembering of 
important aspects of the situation, this constitutes the cognitional surplus that 
becomes the content of the communication. 
If we imagine what must be described here using human words, which are 
only partially adequate, and if we imagine it in a primitive way for the simplest 
cases, especially of animal life, and in a sufficiently sophisticated way for the 
complicated cases of refined human sociallife, then the formula touches without 
remainder on everything that comparative psychology has found out about the 
sign-constituted means of communication possessed by animals. It also touches 
on, above all, the most conclusive cases for the question of origin, where we 
can observe newly appearing signs. For example, those who drive trucks on our 
bustling streets some years aga invented their well-known traffic signals and 
introduced them precisely for the situations that our formula describes, and only 
for them. The directing of the trucks in the busy traffic is successful without the 
aid of signs as long as and insofar as the indispensable attention that one person 
must pay to another can be directly determined from a personal perception of 
wh at is going on. If someone decides to stop suddenly or to veer off from the 
direetion he is driving in, in each case, and only then, he has to give a sign. 
Why? Because the behavior of the traffic partners has to be determined be fore 
the event. What still lies in the bosom ofthe future-impereeptible to the partners, 
but known to the one acting-must be incorporated into something that ean be 
commonly pereeived. The sign offers a supplementary stimulus to the given 
perceptual data, whieh no longer suffice alone. 
Or take an example from the animal realm: if an individual in a herd of 
animals, by reason of his position or heightened attentiveness, is the only one 
who deteets an ominous smell or catches sight of a danger and reaets, in addition 
to fleeing, with a 'cry of fright' [Schreckrufl, the behavior of his fellow members 
of the herd, which' we ean thereby observe, is the same as if they all themselves 
had had the same original impression of danger. It is 'as if' their own pereeptual 
horizon had been widened. The supplementary stimulus of the ery of fright, 
which breaks into their field of perception, fulfills the function of a eommuni-
eation that is of signifieance to life itself. This is not the plaee to address other 
analyses of the 'as if' formula. 
Only one point remains to be noted: the etymologies of the words for signs, 
which refer baek to the indieating of 'things' or the steering of a fellow observer 

THE AXIOMATlZATlON OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
93 
in the direetion of 'things,' presuppose altogether something speeifieally human. 
The authentie finger gesture of man is frequently already eharaeterized as beyond 
the animal realm; it appears eonspieuously in the etymologies of the Indo-Eu-
ropean words for signs, and only a single ease is still disputed, namely, in the 
Greek word J-Ll1VUELV. However, it remains true that the faetor of thing eonstaney 
in the field of applieation of signs, whieh is contained implicitly in the afore-
mentioned etymologies, has not been able to be proved up to the present day 
for any of the animal means of eommunieation. 2 So much for introduction. 
A satisfaetory phenomenological explanation and exaet definition of the 
sign concept demand both more and something other than pointing to etymo-
logical and genetic facts. I will put off a discussion of the notable diffieulties 
that confront such an attempt to the place in the total language theory where 
signs will be distinguished from other spiritual or mental structures. In Section 
D of our essay, we will at least succeed in one thing: getting clear on the 
multiplicity of linguistic functions of signs. In the present eontext, it is sufficient 
to grasp a genus proximum of the sign eoncept, which the Scholastics found, 
and, with its help, to put in its proper light a single, but fundamental, property 
of language, a property that defines the whole activity of research and the results 
of the empirie al scienees of language. What I have in mind is valid for all those 
things-whether they be persons or things or events-that we are accustomed 
to call representatives [Stellvertretendes]. Wherever there is a representation 
[Stellvertretung], a standing in for something or someone, there is, just as in 
every relation, two foundations, a thing [ein etwas] and then something that 
must distinguish our way of considering it. In order to eharacterize in a general 
way the relation in the case of representation, the Scholasties put it that aliquid 
stat pro aliquo, a formula that they found through a consideration of language. 3 
Now, if hic et nunc a eonerete thing is funetioning as a representative, the 
quest ion can constantly be raised by what reason or what properties it sustains 
and enters into the relation and brings it to fulfillment. A twofold determination 
of this concretum must be possible. The first of these abstracts from the function 
of the representative as representative in order to determine what it is or would 
'Compare on this K. Bühler, Die geistige Entwicklung des Kindes. I. ed. (1918). pp. 116ff.; 5 ed. 
(1929)' pp. 224ff.; and the discussions conceming what distinguishes the signals of ants and bees 
from symbolic signs which are found in Die Krise. pp. 51ff. 
, William of Occam preferred to write supponere for this: "'Occam uses supponere pro a/iquo. as 
this. according to the evidence of Thurot, was customary from the year 1200. in the intransitive 
sense as equivalent to stare pro aliquo" (M. BaumgaI1ner. Ueben\'egs Grundriss der Geschichte 
der Philosophie. 11 '0. p. 602). 

94 
KARL BÜHLER 
be for itself.'" The second way of considering it, however, looks for and finds 
in the eoncretum precisely those properties to which the relation of representation 
is bound. In the case of the being of the sign, it is always only abstract moments 
by reason of which and with which the eoncretum functions 'as' a sign. I have 
characterized this fundamental state of affairs of linguistic theory as the prineiple 
of abstraetive relevanee and explained it with the help of the distinction between 
phonetics and phonology. 5 
Before I illustrate and concretize what I have just said, let us touch on two 
more determinations that are, in our present context, in need of no closer spec-
ification. The "stare pro" belongs-whatever else it may be-in all the known 
examples drawn from life to the class of nonreversible relations. The ambassador 
is a representative of astate, but not vice versa; the advocate stands be fore the 
court for his client, but not vice versa. That is also the case for signs, and we 
can add that here, for specific reasons, the representative member of the structure 
(id quod stat pro aliquo) belongs constantly to the perceptual realm, while the 
same cannot be asserted of the other member. There is no need to waste words 
on this last point if we look on signs in general and from the start as intersubjective 
mediators (mediating structures in societies), because it is derived from its def-
inition. The matter could be grasped in an even more general way: but we will 
place no value on that here because the assertion needs no proof, at any rate for 
the case of language. The distinction between a sense-perceptible element in 
linguistic phenomena (the sound) and the other element, which it stands for, is 
completely familiar here to all those competent in these matters. 6 
2. Now to the explanations. Two decades ago, Heinrich Gomperz had 
already taken up the fruitful aliquid stat pro aliquo of the Scholastics and de-
veloped it in his own way. What no one today could explain in a more flexible 
and at the same time conceptually sharper fashion than he did (with the help of 
an intentionally colorful flock of examples) is the twofold way, everywhere 
realizable, of conceiving and determining the first member in the relational 
structure of representation. For example, if I consider the aetor (so reasons 
Gomperz), the actor standing there be fore me on the stage, he is now Wallenstein 
and yet not Wallenstein himself in persona. Rather he is Mr. Bassermann, who 
• We do not write "in itself" but rather "for itself." that iso abstracting from the function of 
representing [Vertretung I· 
'K. Bühler, "Phonetik und Phonologie." Travaux du Cercle Linguistiqlle de Prague4 (1931): 22-53. 
'The so-ca lied extemally unheard 'inner' speech does not contravene the rule. For also here, for 
the single person himself. there are given in perceptual fashion 'sounds' or a substitute for sounds 
in some form or other (acoustical. motoric, optical). therefore something that can be perceived: 
otherwise, there would not be a true speech event. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
95 
is playing hirn. Now to be sure, that is a play and a spectacle. There are many 
ways of considering it and talking about it. But we are going to concentrate with 
Gomperz on the remarkable duality that appears in the words "he is something 
and yet he is not that." It makes good sense to use the following formula for 
it: the perceptible accidents of the actor Bassermann are ascribed as inhering in 
a foreign substance, the Wallenstein of the writer. The spectator takes the costume 
and gestures, the words and deeds of Bassermann the individual as something 
that enables hirn to experience the Wallenstein created by the writer. Or, to 
define the issue from the other side, Bassermann puts at the disposal of the 
Wallenstein of the writer the previously mentioned elements so that the figure 
created by the writer can come to appearance. The scholastic conceptual pair 
'substance and accidents' is in the formulation of Gomperz separated from its 
ontological meaning and applied to give a convenient first description. 
If we add a second and a third explanatory example taken from the collection 
of Gomperz, gradually the same abstractly grasped structure of representation 
will necessarily emerge even more clearly from these different items. If a canvas 
covered with spots of color awakens in the viewer the charming appearance of 
alandscape, this state of affairs is, according to Gomperz, also describable with 
the aid of the same formula: the canvas lends its accidents, so to speak, to the, 
in the present case, imaginally presented thing [Etwas]. And, once again, al-
though it is in many points not the same but still essentially [dem Kern der Sache 
nach] comparable, the meaningful sound with its accidents stands symbolically 
for what it means. The precise wording of this conception with Gomperz runs 
as folIows: "When an object possesses such a structure that its accidents inhere 
not in the substance that normally belongs to it but rather in the substance of 
another object, there exists between that first and this se co nd object the relation 
of meaning, of standing in the place ofor representing" [Bedeutens. Vertretens 
oder Repräsentierens]. 7 
Talking about accidents, which are borrowed for the purpose of representing 
another substance, is, it seems to me, a fitting and impressive description. It is 
also verified completely coherently for the case of pure symbolic representation, 
such as is found in language. All that is missing is the easily fulfilled demand 
that one count among the accidents rather more than the so-ca lied primary or 
elementary or founding sense data. We will have something more exact to say 
about this when we treat the question of phonemes. At that time, there will be 
7 H. Gomperz. Semasiologie (n.d.l. p. 278. Compare also the essay "Über einige philosophische 
Voraussetzungen der naturalistischen Kunst," Beilage :ur Allgemeinen Zeitung. Nos. 160 and 161 
of 14 and 15 July 1905. 

96 
KARL SÜHLER 
no reason to alter, through either deletion or addition, a single thing we have 
determined in this first sketch. The psychological verification of the aliquid stat 
pro aliquo in the case of a painting can be carried through today in more detail 
and with a much better empirical knowledge than Gomperz had at his disposal 
in the year 1905. B 
An incidental criticism, which can lead to the development of what Gomperz 
began, can be brought against one point. The question is whether we ought to 
regard it as terminologically apt, and thereby leave as is, to define the three 
expressions meaning, standing for. and representing as synonyms. Synonyms 
are, it seems to me, an evil in scientific language. We cannot avoid them 
everywhere, but we can do so here. In respect to the equation "Vertreten = 
Repräsentieren, " we will put it to the jurists and have to consider, with the aid 
of the best legal theorists, whether what is specific to juridical representation 
has been touched on. If not, then it is necessary to organize matters in such a 
way that the adjective juridical is added to standing-in-place-of [Stellvertretung] 
as a genuine differentia specijica, and that standing-in-place-of [Stellvertretung] 
steps forth as the generic concept. Once this is settled, then we are forced to 
condude that precisely what was common to the three joint cases of theatrical, 
imaginal, and symbolic 'representation' [Repräsentation] is not to be found in 
juridical representation. The advocate before the tribunal does not behave as the 
representative of his dient in the way Bassermann is related to Wallenstein, nor 
as the colored canvas is related to the landscape, nor as a linguistic symbol is 
related to what is symbolized, but the relation is essentially different. To put it 
crudely: the advocate as an actual Bassermann would be a ludicrous fool before 
the tribunal; the advocate as an actual image or symbol would be an unusable 
strawman or a dressed doll, and therefore not exactly the ideal of a successful 
advocate. And from all of this, there is only one way out for logic: to consider 
the concept of standing-in-place-of [Stellvertretung 1 as the highest genus and to 
look around for the species of this genus. We have to distinguish many things 
from the dass to which the theatrical, imaginal, and symbolic representation 
belongs: besides juridical representation. also the representative function of 
money. for which the relations once again, I believe (at least in certain points), 
are specifically different. 
But enough of criticism. At the beginning, we are discussing not the species 
of representation but only the aliqllid stat pro aliqllo. which we have recognized 
as a useful genus proximllm of the sign concept. Gomperz is generally right in 
'Compare on this the section "Gemäldeoptik" in K. Bühler. Die Erscheinungsweisen der Farhen 
(Jena. 1922). 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
97 
his' 'he is something and yet he is not it really": his substance-accidents formula, 
however, fits, it seems to me, to a useful extent, only the cases of representation 
in the narrower sense of the word. 
There are many other noteworthy items in Gomperz's investigations of the 
two determinations which in the very nature of the case must result if, on the 
one hand, we treat the representative element as what it is in itself [für sich 1 
and, on the other hand, we treat it only under the aspect of its representative 
function. We will discover that Iinguistics, too, has its share of theoretical 
mistakes and gratuitous discussions, which Gomperz uncovered there as such. 
However, I first want to say something about the positive progress, aimed 
at since Gomperz, that language theory achieved thanks to 'phonology,' and 
about the principle 0/ abstractive relevance. It is a principle valid for every sign 
and beyond. With its aid, however, the differentia specijica of the sign concept 
cannot be discovered because it also extends to other things. 
3. A fictive agreement [Verabredung], found in my essay "Phonetics and 
Phonology" and adapted to a situation discussed by phonology, may serve as 
a point of departure: if we assume that two men want to make themselves 
understood and come to agreement by means of flag signals, we do not have to 
advert to the form and size of the signals, only to their color. It will be agreed 
Uust as in the case of a determinate system of sounds) that we need three meaning-
relevant levels of color saturation. First: the completely unsaturated nuances of 
the black-and-white series have uniformly the meaning A. Whether in the con-
crete case black, gray, or white is used is irrelevant. Second: the flags of a 
medium level of saturation have uniformly the meaning B. Whether in a concrete 
case sky blue, or pink, or tobacco brown is used makes no difference and is 
irrelevant to the meaning. Thirdly: the flags of the highest domains of saturation 
have uniformly the meaning C. Wh ether in a concrete case a saturated red, blue, 
green, or gold is used makes no meaning-relevant difference. I assume that we 
admit without discussion that an unhesitating functioning of such a mode of 
coming to agreement is possible. Naturally, each participant has to know the 
system, remember it, and, in concrete cases, be able to rightly order the precise 
nuances of the saturation levels that are used; then he can take part without error 
in the business of giving and receiving signals. 
There is still a rather small but theoretically important modification that 
may be brought to bear on the imagined signal procedure. This makes easier an 
exact comparison with the relations that obtain for the single sounds in the 
association of the stream of sound in speech. In every concrete case of signaling, 
we can imagine lawfully milieu-defined the selection of nuances within the free 
dimension belonging to the level of saturation. Assume that an agreement is 

98 
KARL SÜHLER 
made between a secret bride and her secret bridegroom, for whom what is 
important is that the exchange of signals proceed as unobtrusively and in as 
milieu-adapted a way as possible. The woman signals, for example, simply by 
means of the color of her dress. Then she may-if there are available three 
dresses of unsaturated color, black, gray, and white-in any given case try on 
before the mirror whatever one agrees best today with her complexion, or she 
can let the weather and other concrete circumstances dictate whether she will 
put on the gray, white, or black one. Exactly the same relations here obtain in 
principle everywhere in the sound flow of speech with regard to the influences 
of the environment. They are there and follow one another in an irrelevant 
dimension of variations. In "Phonetics and Phonology," this contention is con-
firmed by means of well-accepted facts. There exists, for example, in the West 
Caucasian group of languages one (Adyghe) that at first sight exhibits a multi-
plicity of vowel lengths similar to German; among other nuances there also 
appear those between u-ü-i. But we see that in that language two words are never 
distinguished through the vowel differences u-i, as they are with us in words 
Tusche and Tische; the nuances u-ü-i have no diacritical value in that language. 
Just as little do o-ö-e or a-ä have diacritical value. To be sure, they all appear, 
indeed regularly appear, as milieu-conditioned, but they cannot become dia-
critically relevant. In order to grasp in exact concepts this central fact of phon-
ology, I thought up the fiction of the signal flags. It makes clear the validity of 
the principle of abstractive relevance for the domain of the so-called single 
sounds of language. 
Consequently, if we are on the right track, then there are two ways of 
considering the human speech sound, because one can make first its material 
properties purely in themselves the object of a scientific determination and second 
that component of the properties that is decisive for their task of functioning as 
signs. The fundamental knowledge that we need concerning the relationship 
between these two ways can be derived from the comparative model of the 
exchange of signals by means of flags. This model is intentionally chosen as 
being so simple that the principle of abstractive relevance can be clearly derived 
from it. Black, gray, and white are different colors; no one will haggle about 
that. But they can (just as in the imagined case of agreement) mean the same 
thing, be identical in meaning, because, for their task of serving as signs, the 
only thing that is determinative is that abstract moment consisting in the lowest 
level of saturation that is common to them. 
This fact can be made clear to every child. And once this fact is established, 
then it is only the philosophers and the psychologists who can wonder about it 
and engage in further meaningful questioning. The philosopher will say retlec-

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
99 
tively: in the case of meaningful signs, things are such that the sensible thing 
[Sinnending], the perceptible something, hic et nunc, must enter into the semantic 
function without the total fullness of its concrete properties. Rather , only this 
or that abstract moment can become relevant for its task of functioning as a sign. 
Put in a simple form: that is the principle of abstractive relevance. That this 
fundamental principle of abstractive relevance is valid in language right up to 
the realm of the single isolated sounds is the thesis, and the discovery, of 
phonology. So much for citations from "Phonetics and Phonology." I am now 
of the opinion that the principle is valid for all concreta that are applied as signs, 
but in the interest of brevity, I will not at this point attempt to justify it sema-
tologically, that is, by reference to our model [modelleinsichtig]. 
With reference to language signs, be fore my contact with phonology, I had 
arrived in my own work on the problems of language theory [Sprachtheorie] at 
the point where conclusions from many areas were converging to formulate the 
key proposition of the sign nature of language. But the whole block of sound 
theory [Lautlehre] did not appear to be in agreement with the position that the 
object of the empirical sciences of languages belongs without remainder in the 
same fashion to sematology as the object of physics belongs to mathematics. 
The "ubi materia ibi geometria" of Kepler governs and defines without re-
mainder the procedure and results of physics; on the contrary, the sound theory 
of the linguists appeared to exhibit another character than that shown by the 
usual grammar. Philosophical (scientific-theoretic) amazement about it was 
shown to be fruitful and was removed when the mono graph of N. Trubetzkoy, 
. 'On the General Theory of Phonological Sound Systems," came into my hands. 9 
There, all of a sudden, was a well-grounded contribution to the study of sounds 
within the horizon of a new well-rounded scientific discipline for studying lan-
guage, which did not have the character of a phonetics and, what is more, was 
just what I was looking for. lt is possible, therefore, and necessary, to divide 
up the scientific treatment of the sounds of language in exactly the fashion that 
is demanded by the insights of logic. On the one hand, they can be considered 
wh at they are 'in themselves' Uur sich] and, on the other hand, under the aspect 
of their task of functioning as signs; phonetics does one thing and phonology 
does another. The concept of 'sound elements.' under which one is accustomed 
to subsurne the vowels and the consonants, is defined in a usable fashion only 
through the conception of a phonology, so that is is apparent that there is in 
every language only a Iimited multiplicity , a transparent system (vocalic, con-
sonantal, and many others) of discrete sound signs. Their semantic function is, 
'Travaux du Cercle du Prague I (l929). pp. 39-67. 

100 
KARL SÜHLER 
according to the terminological recommendation that I made to the phonologists, 
that of serving as diacritica of the complex phenomena that one calls words. 
Then phonemes are the natural 'marks' (tokens) by means of which in the sound 
flow of speech the semantically decisive units of this sound flow are recognized 
and distinguished from one another. 
A reflection back on the history of the empirical sciences of language shows, 
then, as is the case with all great things, that the 'new' knowledge is new only 
in its exact formulation but otherwise is very old [uralt]. It is implicitly contained 
in the discovery of the alphabet and it govemed axiomatically, although they 
did not know it, the procedures of all linguists who attempted to present the fund 
of sounds of a language as a system of discrete units. In any case, we see, to 
emphasize this once again, that even considered from the point ofview of sounds, 
the proposition that language is through and through a system of signs is justified. 
Even in the existence of the word as asound unit, the system of tonal marks is 
once again visible as an underlevel; their existence prepares the logician for a 
counterpart of the tonal characteristics, for characteristics found in the object, 
for the criterial properties of traditionallogic. If I say "counterpart" [Pendant], 
the hasty reader must guard hirnself against misunderstanding that I am saying 
that the tonal characteristics of the word are element-for-element correlated with 
the distinguishing characteristics of the object. I am so far from saying such a 
thing that we must, on the contrary, start from the other pure case, where simply 
no such coordination in detail is to be found. 
4. Perhaps it will be profitable and offer a new impulse to sematology, 
when in the course of its new forward progress it has achieved a certain rounding 
off, if a competent person writes the history of the discovery of the sign nature 
of language. He would find, regarding this task, important contributions in the 
case of Gomperz and Cassirer, to mention only two modem systematic attempts. 
We will have to refer here and there, as we proceed, to the specifically idealistic 
and functionally monistic [funktionsmonistische) tone [Färbung) of Cassirer's 
sematology; on the whole, the problem of the great project of his philosophy of 
symbolic forms lies outside the boundaries of our essay. It is enough to say that 
the axiom is central also for Cassirer and receives an epistemologicaljustification. 
The person who aims at something else and keeps carefully in mind the stim-
ulating interaction that must ex ist between language theory [Sprachtheorie land 
individuallinguistic researches will in the interest ofboth, in the present situation, 
also look into a pair of noteworthy propositions in F. de Saussure's Course in 
General Linguistics. I am citing them as a convenient springboard to an una-
voidable criticism of the widespread devaluation-widespread, even today--of 
the axiom by the linguists and the psychologists. My critical comments, which 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
101 
are intended in a purely programmatic way, are meant to promote the theoretically 
purifying influence that the acceptance of the central idea of phonology will 
putatively exercise on the concept of linguistics. They should clarify the current 
slogan of linguistic psychologism, the target of so much criticism, and assign 
to it a fixed meaning. In his Course in General Linguistics F. de Saussure writes: 
Language is a system of signs that express ideas and is therefore com-
parable to a system of writing, the alphabet of deaf-mutes, symbolic rites, 
polite formulas, military signs, etc. But it is the most important of all these 
systems. 
A science that studies the life of signs within society is conceivable; 
it would be a part of social psychology and consequently of general psy-
chology; I shall call it semiology (from Greek o"rlfl.€LOV, 'sign'). Semiology 
would show what constitutes signs, what laws govern them. Since the science 
does not yet exist, no one can say what it would be; but it has a right to 
exist, a place staked out in advance. Linguistics is only apart of the general 
science of semiology; the laws discovered by semiology will be applicable 
to linguistics, and the laUer will circumscribe a well-defined area within the 
mass of anthropological facts. 
To determine the exact place of semiology is the task of the psychol-
ogist. The task of the linguist is to find out what makes language a special 
system within the mass of semiological data. (p. 16. Course in General 
Linguistics, trans. Wade Baskin. New York: McGraw-Hill. 1966.) 
A word, first of all, about terminology: we recommend sematology, because 
the Greek work O'TIfl-U makes possible a rich group of good-sounding derivates 
in modem form (for example, sematological, which one can use in contrast to 
semantic and as against semeological). The word semasiolog}' has been used 
only by Gomperz as synonymous with sematology, but otherwise, as even the 
editors of the "Course" note, with another nuance of meaning. Bally and Se-
chehaye (the editors) define: Semasiology = the discipline that studies changes 
of meaning. That was in fact the idea behind the old study of meaning, from 
Reisig on, as far as I can tell. It is and remains, according to our criticism, a 
logically unobjectionable and determinate undertaking to think of all the phe-
nomena of language as divided by a cut into sound and meaning. But as a result 
semasiology must then also be in the position to exhibit and define the realm 
that it is investigating as it is in itself, and to follow its historical transformation. 
It has to be in exactly the same position as the phonetician is in his own area 
if it wants to endure. The old-style semasiology can be nothing more than a 
materially oriented treatment. Only, it is not the sound materials, but-to have 
recourse to a social-psychological way of speaking-the world of representations 
(the world of ideas), the world of feeling, and so forth, of a human linguistic 

102 
KARL BÜHLER 
community that it takes as its subject. This world is understood insofar as it 
becomes manifest in language. In exactly the same fashion as the object of 
phonetics is deterrnined through the fact that its assigned task is to investigate 
the sounds of language, so on the other hand the same situation obtains for the 
old-style semasiology. The world of ideas, and so forth, of a group of men is 
revealed by all their deeds, works, and institutions; the semasiologist seeks to 
determine what is revealed in language. He does not need to limit his object 
more, and what is specific to language, its sign character, he must strike from 
his framework in exactly the same way as the phonetician does. 
Let us begin with a bow to de Saussure. We will acknowledge his demand 
for the construction of a general theory of signs as important to linguistics and 
will realize its importance, but we will correct the opinion that it does not yet 
exist. In placing his hope for its construction in psychology de Saussure speaks 
as a child of his times, as a Frenchman at the end of the nineteenth century 
influenced by the predominance of social psychology at that time; one thinks of 
the influence of Durkheim and his school. It is correct that all three sciences 
that have been brought together here (sociology, psychology, and linguistics) 
would have a vital interest in the insights resulting from sematology's having 
developed to a wide range of application; it is scarcely possible to say which of 
them is of more interest than the others. Psychology finds signs everywhere in 
its own field of investigation, and far beyond the processes of human intercourse 
by means of language sounds; for example, the theory of perception in psychology 
cannot be brought to anything without considering the sign functions of the sense 
data found in it. Sematology may be inclined toward such a concern; nevertheless, 
it can never be derived from the three aforementioned sciences. For if it wants 
to be to the point, it has to be produced in correspondence to the subject matter, 
and the insights of sematology that offer support to the other sciences must be 
derived constructively by reliance on a model, just as the propositions of math-
ematics are. That goes for all the propositions, such as that of abstractive rel-
evance, and there is a lot to be said about it. Every attempt to 'prove' it inductively 
with the means of the special sciences would be just as contradictory as the 
physicist's wanting to prove inductively with his own means any mathematical 
proposition. 
And now to the application of this developed conception to the analysis of 
the concrete speech event. The linguists and psychologists of the second half of 
the nineteenth century knew, if one heard them speak about it, only that kind 
of analytical treatment and description of the concrete speech event that is still 
found today in all those texts-linguistic as weil as psychological-that deal 
with language. We assume-as de Saussure, for example. works it out in his 

THE AXIOMATlZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
103 
chapter on the "speech circuit"-that two people, A and B, are conversing. 
What is going on there? The ans wer is that there is a chain of processes that 
begins in the experience and thereby in the brain of A, then finds its continuation, 
through purely physiological events, in the nerve-muscle apparatus of the speech 
organs; "then the sound waves travel from the mouth of A to the ear of B: a 
purely physical process" (p. 12). Now, the process once again marches on in 
the psychophysical system of B in reverse order (like a mirror image). Thereupon, 
B can bring hirnself to answer. The concrete speech event appeared in this way 
to be separated purely into its components, which then was handed over for close 
determination to the auxiliary sciences of linguistics (psychology, physiology, 
and physics). 
One who has a little feel for thinking in visual terms, spicing thereby with 
some irony even a serious matter, sees the linguist standing before hirn with 
empty hands if the material is divided according to this recipe. Would not this 
man have to feel practically like that well-known tanner whose hides swam away 
from hirn? Indeed, it is understood that he will get back what has been handed 
over to other departments for pretreatment [Vorbearbeitung], but what remains 
for hirn to do with it? To fish out what is important for hirn and to paste it 
together? Actually, the professional linguist ne ver derived his specific theme 
from the texts of anatomy, physiology, and psychology, but it was considered 
and induced in a way proper to it [in seinem Aspekt], or it was also derived from 
a sematological reflection. Was it a false path, then, if from the time of Steinthai 
on, one became 'exact' and listened to one's neighbor sciences? It is quite simple 
to avoid a new historical swing of the pendulum back to the other extreme 
situation-it does not have to be the reservations of the Hegelians to Steinthal-
if one acknowledges and keeps apart two ways 0/ considering the matter that 
are prescribed by the object itself:( 1) the analysis of the raw material (Stoffan-
alyse) and (2) specifically linguistic research predefined by the fundamental 
principle of the sign character of language. But it would be completely mistaken 
to apply the division into compartments, which appears very clear, also to the 
matter at hand. Separation into aspects can never be accomplished in the concrete 
with a dismembering instrument such as the butcher's knife. Seen from afar, it 
looked Iike a butcher analysis, if time and again one emphasized-as for example 
even de Saussure did in his weak moments-that the specific object of linguistics 
(la langue) is localizable at that place in the process chain where the represen-
tation of sound appears to be associated with the representation of the thing. La 
langue is a piece cut out of 'discourse' [Rede], he says in his weak moments. 
5. Certain opponents of the 'naturalistic' linguistics and psychology of the 
nineteenth century contend that the historical moral is that no one should be 

104 
KARL BÜHLER 
amazed at an experience that repeatedly appears and is constituted in human 
history , as areal wandering lew in the most different dress. If spirit is extruded 
anywhere or if it has axiomatically had the door blocked to it, then it is no more 
to be found, not with the dissecting knife, as the physicians of the nineteenth 
century truly assured us, nor with aprecision scale or a spectroscope. Indeed, 
in order to complete what they say, we add: also the violent means of a salto 
mortale, of a leap back and forth into and out of the two worlds of physics and 
of experience, does not accomplish nor fulfill what is needed. The Cartesian 
division has to be taken up for our purposes in a way different from that of 
Descartes. His 'extended' world may continue to endure, but the 'mental' sci-
ences (human sciences) do not find their method and sufficiency in his second 
world; they do not find their method and its sufficiency in a domain that can be 
established by the scio me seire, by self-observation. 
In order to prepare a better contrast, let us let, peacefully for once, the 
determined nominalists, both the old and the new ones, have their say in the 
matter of the concrete speech event. What does the speaker speak and send, and 
the hearer he ar and receive? Flatus voeis, say the old nominalists; sound waves, 
say the modem; and no philosopher in the world is in a position to shake their 
position. There are eertainly no species, whether sensible or intelligible, that 
eould endure and fly along with the air current; these wandering species are, 
indeed, nothing other than the philosophically most sublime extract from the 
inventory of fictions belonging to magical thought; and magical thought is a 
disguised, matter-bound thought [Stoffdenkenj. What is 'Spirit' then? I contend 
that for all who have not discovered God's plan in creating the world, the chance 
of finding the way into language research is so apparent that these unenlightened 
ones may avoid a conclusive answer to the question of the essence of spirit and, 
in spite of this, be in a position to protect their enterprise from the dangers of 
the estrangement from spirit that we have described. It is sufficient if we eonsider 
the full content of the protocol sentenees of successful linguistic research and 
do not let ourselves be diverted-by any dictate of a historically famous but 
impertinently false analysis of what the data of observation can contain-from 
taking seriously everything to be found in good protocol sentences. Here is the 
way things stand, in outline, with the method of observation as used by the 
language researcher: there are life situations that contain the moments enumerated 
by Plato; namely, sounds are used as an organum for one person to communicate 
with another about things. The language researcher who has reached this point 
and looks over this situation at one time gras ps and determines the sound phe-
nomenon as it has to be determined 'taken in itself,' that is, as a happening in 
the world of the physicist with everything that belongs to it. Another time, 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
105 
however, or immediately with the other eye (to use a visual metaphor), he sees 
(it can also be the ear he attends with), perceives, and determines this sound 
phenomenon sub specie of its representative function, whether it be one or many. 
He understands it as a phenomenon mediating between the partners of the social 
situation, as a means of exchange in their exchange of signs. 
Regarding the theory of observables and observations, it is important to 
answer preliminary questions. First, whether relations belong in general to the 
data of perception, and if so, whether, second, the order in wh ich the stare pro 
obtains belongs to those data whose relations can be perceptually determined. 
The genial but unhappily erroneous idea of Hume and Mach denied that 'in 
general' and treated the manifold-simultaneously or successfully given-as 
something to which the principle. which Leibniz placed at the beginning of his 
monadology, is to be applied: "car le compose n'est autre chose qu'un amas ou 
aggregatum des simples" ('the complex is the result of addition [ein Additives], 
a summation of simples'). And only sense data are valid as simples. They are 
believed to be given and defined, in principle, with no reference to relations. 
Psychophysical research should be in a position to accomplish this task neatly. 
Now, the knowledge of the inadequacy of this assumption (more concretely the 
inadequacy of the Machian analysis of instants) belongs today to the common 
property and to the most fruitful possessions of psychology. Data having no 
reference to relations are simply not to be found. Even chickens and fish show 
through their behavior in aptly set-up experiements that, in principle, even their 
perceptual data accomplish and contain what one had wanted to deny to the 
human. 10 Conceming the second point, the Hering shadow experiment--explic-
itly discussed in my pictorial optics-shows very simply and clearly that and 
how a sense datum can undergo a change of determination through no more than 
a mere change of the order in which its stare pro quo proceeds. Summarily, it 
is true that all color data, which the (representing) painter prepares technically 
on his palette and then puts onto the picture surface, possesses an 'image value' 
[Bildwertl for the one who considers it. a value that (not just according to the 
simpler rules goveming relations of proximity, such as contrast and so forth) is 
determined by the image or picture context as such. It is therefore no exception, 
but rather the rule, that the data of perception are codetermined by that which 
10 Also, the analysis of observations in the structure of J. S. Mill"s theory of induction and the theory 
of Stumpf were free from the error we are discussing. According to Mil!, as weIl as according to 
Stumpf, relations can be 'observed'; in MiIl's theory of observation, the extremely empiricist 
notion that even mathematics is bascd on experiences is explicitly bound up with the thesis we 
are discussing. 

106 
KARL BÜHLER 
they are perceived to be standing for. Norrnally. they contain relations of the 
kind with which we are concemed. 
To make a long &tory short: if the linguist thinks he is indebted for his 
scientific knowledge of language to specific observations and protocol sentences 
in wh ich theses appear conceming the sound phenomenon 'as' a representative, 
no epistemologist or logician may think, on the contrary, that this researcher is 
fundamentally mi staken about what can belong to the truly primary observational 
data and thereby to 'pure experience.' For no one's eye, or ear, has delivered 
up the data of 'pure experience.' What one called here and there the immediately 
given-that is, what was immediately evident as a fact and as such was perceived 
by the empirical researcher---does not exclude, but inc1udes, relations. This has 
to be said to a11 element hunters and to all pointillists among the analyzers of 
perception. 
I repeat that in our context my intention has not been to say anything 
regarding the final epistemological validation or even only regarding the concept 
of the 'immediately given.' Even the Kantian question, how much is to be 
ascribed to the 'senses' and how much to the 'understanding,' is not under 
discussion. But it is worth the trouble defending just this; the existence of 
something immediately given does not exc1ude apreeise shift in the mode of 
apprehending; a shift, namely, of the same sort as when I stand as an observer 
before a picture and perceive at one time 'only' a canvas bearing spots of color 
and at another time perceive, on the contrary, a painting. In the relational 
complex, the data are grasped and 'interpreted' first one way and then another; 
but in each case there is a different relational whole. The phonetician defines 
the sound phenomena completely as a natural researcher, who values the axiom 
ubi materia ibi geometria; the phonologist and grammarian, however, define 
them as one who is inspired by the linguist's axiom ofthe sign nature of language. 
If the concrete speech situation is rich enough in Jundamenta for relations and 
transparent enough for the observer, then the relations with which the speech 
researcher is concemed can be more-or-less exactly codetermined, partly by one 
observation, and partly in aseries of them, just as is the case in every other 
inductive investigation. 
The real concems and doubts of linguistic observers who have given c10se 
thought to the reliability and extent of their protocol sentences are found else-
where. We know that, as everywhere, only rather few characteristics of a concrete 
object can be grasped exactly enough all at once. We know that it is only through 
comparison that the invariants and covariants, with wh ich linguistics is con-
cemed, can be found. And the language researcher sees himself, wherever he 
works at the boundaries of his investigation, confronted with an individual theory 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
107 
enmeshed in a complex systematic context [Systemgetragenheitl that places the 
highest demands on his breadth of vision. In his observations what he in vivo 
has to take into cor.sideration all at once is not comparable with what is accessible 
to the physicist under laboratory conditions and is to be paralleled most of all 
with biologie al observations and, of course, with forms of observations proper 
to other human sciences. Fortunately for hirn, a great part of what he establishes 
can be verified in language texts that have been fixed in writing, and that sub mit 
to repeated comparison. Then things become otherwise. In spite of this, the 
fullness of systematic relations-which, for example, de Saussure described in 
the best parts of his work (Chapters 4-6)-remains permanently the authentie, 
immanent difficulty of language research. That it is not an insurmountable dif-
ficulty is shown best by its success. 
6. In a looser form, let us now add another pair of glosses on the axiom 
of the sign nature of language. Fundamental principles should, as one knows, 
not only define the right way but also guard against wrong paths and blind alleys. 
What does the axiom of language research guard against? Against symbol-blind 
matter-boundness (StoJfentgleisung 1 on the one hand and against magical theories 
on the other. Take the case of an enlightened European who comes to an Indian 
tribe and discovers about an idol that is worshiped there that there is nothing to 
investigate other than that it is made completely of wood. A friend schooled in 
the methods of the human sciences may engage hirn in conversation about this 
by drawing (with chalk signs on a board) and asking what this and that 'are.' 
If the stubbom answer runs that it is chalk and nothing but chalk, even though 
the whole figure looks basically like this, I call this. 
in basic agreement with Gomperz, a consistent matter-bound thinking. Compared 
with this, one is accustomed to characterize as manifestations of a magical mode 
of thought what the Indians and similar thinkers, at least in so far as we understand 
them, say about their idols and what they are accustomed to do with them. 
Indeed, it does not stand so terribly far in every respect from the thought of the 
radical apostle of enlightenment as one would presume at first sight; for also. 
every form of 'magical' thought, however it may function in individual cases, 
understands itself just as he does with the help of the axiom of the sign nature 
of the object functioning as a sign [ZeichenhaJteml and answers with causal 
considerations (in the widest sense of the word) at places where the word belongs 
by right to sematology or to 3. structural theory related to sematology. That is, 

108 
KARL BUHLER 
I think, the most exact delineation of the magical spiritual attitude, so far as we 
understand it. It is an interesting and extremely important question of just what. 
from the domain of facts most pregnantly entitled inner language form, is re-
vealed in the moments of such a magical spiritual attitude in the case of this or 
that given language (also the one that we speak). To be sure, that is something 
quite different from taking such a spiritual attitude right up into language theory 
itself. Besides, it seems to me that the weight of these characteristics in this or 
that human language-with regard to the nonmagical, which indeed is and can 
be just as !ittle lacking where language was also the means of exchange in daily 
life outside of the magic circle-has been strongly overestimated. I will present 
in another place the arguments that I think I have found for this assertion. 
To everything of a signlike character that exists in the world there belong 
in the nature of the case beings who take it to be and deal with it as a sign. 
Where the concreta, which fulfill the functions of signs, are produced or estab-
!ished [hergerichtet] by acting beings, where these concreta stand to those beings 
in the relation of a work to the creator or (merely to change the focus) in the 
relation of a deed to the doer-in those cases, one can call these beings sign-
givers. In the animal kingdom, there are signal givers and signal receivers in all 
those situations that we have delineated by means of the formula on page 91 f. 
That from that point human language was already seen to belong to the category 
of instruments--or to put it in Platonic terms, that it is an organon-means no 
more than to consider it in relation to those who deal with them and are their 
producers [Täter). Language research, therefore. runs up against, in the axiom 
of the sign nature of language, the thought model of homo faber, or a maker and 
user of tools. We will keep this model in mind and step by step add to it new 
determinations derived from each new axiom. 

B. SPEECH ACTION AND LANGUAGE STRUCTURE 
Empirical science is able to distinguish in each of its complex objects many, 
one can calmly say unlimitedly many, different 'sides'; the same applies to 
language. Since, besides, speech and humanness [Menschseinl, language and 
culture, language and society, and the history of humanity, language and logic, 
and still other topics stand in a recognized inner correlation, there is no lack of 
interests, questions, and stimuli flowing to linguistics from its neighbor sciences. 
And what discipline would not in some way abut the domain of language, starting 
with mathematics-which today, in the interest of its own axiomatization, is 
vitally interested in general sematological problems-and even with aesthetics, 
geography, and psychiatry? So there are names enough for part, intermediary, 
and auxiliary disciplines for linguistic research; there is a psychology of language, 
a pathology of language, a sociology of language, an aesthetics of language, 
and so forth. To the theorist of science, these hyphenated sciences are of no 
immediate interest, no matter how great their practical importance and how rich 
in conclusions their results in single cases may be for linguistics. What we are 
considering in the interest of an axiomatization of linguistic research are now 
neither parts nor modes of the speech event but the genuine fundamental aspects 
of the object. A first defining note was given to it by subsuming it under the 
class of innerwordly sign things. We are of the opinion that linguistics under-
stands and determines the object 'language' in two correlative or self-enlarging 
ways (categories, coordinate systems, or however else one may express oneself 
at first because of an aversion to an all-too-hasty fixing of things). In any case, 
these two ways so understand language as an object that, on the one hand, one 
is talking about human action and, on the other hand, about products. Von 
Humboldt says energeia and ergon, and de Saussure tried to raise the current 
distinction in French between la parole and la langue [English: speech and 
language] to the terminological diacritikon of a linguistics of parole and a lin-
guistics of langue. In German, the compound words Sprechhandlung and Sprach-
gebilde may be used. No one can assert that we have given an exhaustive list 
of the scientific ways of defining language; I assume, for instance, that the 
109 

110 
KARL BÜHLER 
sociologist's view of language sees once again some aspect of it or sees it, at 
least, as something that would not be specifically cIear in the first two ways of 
defining it that we have already named. If we regard language not as the pos-
session of the community or the product of the community, but as the builder 
of the community and the bearer of the community or as coin of the realm in 
the exchange of signs, that must, unless I am completely mistaken, be once 
again to bring directly to appearance those aspects of it that are given by the 
other modes of determining as only indirect (consequent) properties. But this 
topic must remain to the side. It is sufficient to show, in the case of speech 
action and language structures, what they are and how they (presumably cor-
relatively) belong together. 
1. Let us begin with de Saussure's instructive grappling with the categories 
ofthe language researcher in the Course in General Linguistics. At the beginning, 
we find a list of difficulties that the language researcher stumbles against, the 
second of which consists in the following: "the linguistic phenomenon always 
has two related sides, each deriving its values from the other" (p. 8). Then four 
forms in which this duality appears are enumerated: take up the syllable and you 
will find out that it must be defined at the same time as an acoustic and a motoric 
unity. Coming analytically, on a deeper level, to sound, you must acknowledge 
that "by itself, it has no existence," but "a sound, a complex acoustical-vocal 
unit, combines in turn with an idea to form a complex physiological-psychological 
unit" (p. 8). Consider speech as a whole and you find an individual and a social 
side to it. And finally, language is at every time "an existing institution," an 
"established system" as such and yet also a product ofthe past, "an evolution" 
(p. 8). Again and again, so said de Saussure, the language researcher finds 
himself faced with the same dilemma: either to fall prey to a one-sidedness or, 
in the effort to complete the feat of a two-sided consideration, to have to grab 
for the glue pot. For in the second case, "the object of linguistics appears to us 
as a confused mass of heterogeneous and unrelated things. Either procedure 
opens the door to several sciences" (p. 9). Now, all that, grasped in stirring 
words, is the feeling not of the tanner spoken about earlier, or of one who 
receives the special reports ofhis 'auxiliary disciplines, , but of one who genuinely 
sees himself forced to comprehend all these items by himself. We naturally ask 
immediately: Where is the idea of sematology? It was for de Saussure, at the 
time that he was delivering the lectures that appeared posthumously as a book, 
not yet a leaven or the salt of the earth of the linguist that penetrated everything. 
Rather, in many places, it still stood as an idea that had emerged separately, and 
its content stood as 'something not yet existing' beside that state of affairs to 
be brought under contro!. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
111 
And yet philosophical perplexity is of much more value than an ever-so-
ingenious occupation with everything at once. Oe Saussure saw . 'only one 
solution to all the foregoing difficulties: from the very outset we must put both 
feet on the ground of language and use language as the norm of all the other 
manifestations of speech. Actually, among so many dualities, language alone 
seems to lend itself to independent definition and to provide a fu1crum that 
satisfies the mind" (p. 9). We will see that it is also possible to define la parole 
and that the spirit can just as weil find a support there. But one important piece 
of knowledge seems to me, in the sentences cited, to be quite correctly put or 
at least surmised. I mean the knowledge of the objectively grounded logical 
priority of the linguistics of langue. It will consequently be necessary for us to 
apply ourselves first to the language structure and to stick to it, because 
only in this way will it be possible to have any success in another part of 
linguistics. 
In order to explain this, we note first the historical fact that the thematization 
of grammar is older than (to put it briefly) the psychology of language; the 
grammar of the Greeks is, unless I am mistaken, just about as old as Euclidean 
geometry or its predecessors. Why? Because both displaya certain inner affinity 
as theories of structure, as sciences of ideal formations and because such sciences 
are poorer in axiomatic presuppositions than the corresponding material sciences. 
Pure mathematics is logically prior to physics, because physics, in its axioms, 
requires everything that mathematics contains, and still more. And in principle 
it is the same with the relations of the theory of linguistic structures to the theory 
of speech action. The data of descriptive grammar-the task of surveying the 
structure of a given language, such as Latin, done in the fashion of traditional 
grammar-is logically prior to the tasks of the psychology of language. One can. 
in apreeise sense, accomplish the tasks of the first before those of the second, 
but not vice versa. 
Euclidean geometry, to draw once again the illustrative parallel, was to be 
and had to be constructed be fore Kepler and others up to Newton could bring 
their physics to fruition. In exactly the same way, a still-to-be-produced theory 
of speech action will need the findings conceming linguistic structures as pre-
suppositions, not vice versa. We must keep clearly in mind what we mean by 
and how we me an this business of logical priority, lest we succumb to a lurking 
objection: Ooes not interpretation stand at the very beginning of all linguistic 
determinations, and what would an interpretation be without the subtle (right 
down to the fingertips) psychology of the great philologist? Naturally, it would 
be nothing; but such a consideration proceeds right into the most beautiful circle: 
the cat must bite its tai!. because the refined psychological nose of the philologists 

112 
KARL BÜHLER 
contains for its part, in addition to other things, a reliable sense of structure (to 
put it briefly) as a component. However, the thesis argued here is not meant in 
just this way, not as a contribution to the theory of the logical structure of 
linguistics. 11 
The preceding is properly a preview [VorblickJ and was said only in order 
to give his historical due to the great language researcher that de Saussure was 
and to do so by thinking out an assertion that we have to interpret in the last 
analysis probably as the experiential wisdom of a worker grown gray in solid 
handwork. The task, to act as a logician and to settie accounts with the whole 
pure outcome of de Saussure 's discussions of la langue and la parole, is a little 
laborious but rewarding. Here, I want to offer abrief, unavoidable preliminary 
discussion of le langage, the third fundamental concept that appears in de Saus-
sure in a closed circle with la langue and la parole, because it will be shown 
that we may eliminate le langage (as nonessential). 
After thorough study of the Course and conscientious attempts at interpre-
tation, I am of the opinion that it is impossible to find adefinition of le langage 
that could cover all cases of application without contradiction. I restrict myself 
to commenting first on the most important and most fruitful nuances of meaning 
in order then to offer a second criticism. Assuming that it would be valid to 
furnish a tenn for the apparent, roughly grasped state of affairs that zoologists 
and anthropologists use when they say that man and he alone has . 'speech 
capability," as a rule the French would choose le langage. This is what de 
Saussure does first, and to the state of affairs thus circumscribed, he brings some 
not unimportant recognition. He assumes, for example, "that what is lost in all 
cases of aphasia or agraphia is less the faculty of producing a given sound or 
writing a given sign than the ability to evoke by means of an instrument, re-
gardless of what it is, the signs of a regular system of speech. The obvious 
implication is that beyond the functioning of the various organs there exists a 
more general faculty wh ich governs signs and wh ich would be the linguistic 
faculty proper" (p. 11). With this conception, de Saussure, to his advantage, 
distinguished himself from the ruling doctrine of his medical contemporaries. 
Only today have the best theoretically oriented experts in speech pathology again 
arrived at similar conceptions. Certainly, one distinguishes the disturbances of 
IJ The well-known Aristotelian distinction between a TIPOTEPOV T1] 'fVOEt and a TIPOTEPOV TIPO~ 
~f.l.a~ does not directly touch what has been characterized in the course of OUf thoughts as different. 
Since ontic discussions have been in general excluded by uso the Aristotelian TIPOTEPOV TIPO~ 
oif.l.a~ has to be once again divided and the logical (from the point of view of theory) priority. 
about which we are speaking. has to be set off from all those quest ions 01' priority dealing with 
the psychologr of discoven-. They cannot be decided along this way. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
113 
the representational function from those of expression (of announcing) in, for 
example, Pötzl's circ1e of students, and we would not commit ourselves so 
quickly as de Saussure did to the assumption of a special general capacity that 
inc1udes both. But still, the descriptions and considerations of Goldstein and his 
co-workers as weil as those from lsserlin's work circle are much c10ser to the 
view of de Saussure than to the one he fought against. A clear language-theo-
retical research program, which one could project from this point, would have 
to be built around the central theme of 'speaking and human being' or 'the 
specifically human commerce with signs,' if it was to be adequate to the subject 
matter. 
And on this subject there is scarcely anything noteworthy to be found in 
the work of de Saussure. lt is again and again the derailment that befalls hirn 
along with all his contemporaries and thwarts an adequate treatment of questions 
of this sort. 
For in its second principal meaning the term le langage is with de Saussure 
no longer a dispositional concept [Dispositionsbegriff] but has to be rendered 
accordingly in English somewhat as '(actual human) speech.' Now we could still 
imagine, with a view toward la langue, that the term here must be understood 
in the way that one understands the "language of the individual" (le langage 
de Cicero, le langage de Balzac). Only that is not the case, but the reader is 
required to think of a mixture composed of la parole and la langue, or a whole 
built out of both. De Saussure cannot free hirnself from the chain representation 
[Vorstellungs-Kette], from the 'speech circuit,' which we have characterized as 
the customary mode of representation of linguists and psychologists in the second 
half of the nineteenth century. The essential conceptual component of all the 
processual parts of this circuit is le langage. No wonder that he came to the 
result that "taken as a whole, speech is many-sided and heterogeneous; straddling 
several areas simultaneously-physical, physiological, psychological-it be-
longs both to the individual and to society; we cannot put it into any category 
of human facts,for we cannot disco ver its unity." (p. 9; emphasis is Bühler's). 
To be sure, no one so far caught up in an analysis that restricts itself to material 
components knows how to discover its unity. At any rate, one recognizes from 
all this that we are not putting anything worthwhile to the side if we leave le 
langage completely out of consideration. 
De Saussure gave a number of excellent determinations of the object of his 
linguistique de la langue. They are incompatible with one specific determination, 
namely, with the not ion that this object is an "object of a concrete nature" and 
that it can be "localized" in "that part of the circuit where an auditory image 
becomes associated with a concept" (p. 14). Against this most fateful of all 

114 
KARL BÜHLER 
material derangements, our first task will be to defend the thesis of the ideality 
of the language structure [Sprachgebilde ] and second to discover the chief mis-
conception and to show it as a misconception to which all those have fallen prey 
who, under the speil of the classical association theory, mix up the undoubtedly 
identifiable chains of complexes and circuits in our representationallife with the 
experience of meaning. 
To get to the point immediately: if the experience of meaning (A means B) 
were identical with any degree of inner unity (degree of stability), of the ce-
menting together of two representations 'a' and 'b', then in all chains of asso-
ciation, which permit us to reproduce in order, like clockwork and as if while 
half asleep, what we have leamed, such as the Our Father, the alphabet, and the 
numbers, the constantly neglected logical test of reversibility in all definitional 
equations would have to be carried out. In the association chain of the alphabet, 
does every foregoing member 'mean' the following, 'thanks' to an inner asso-
ciation that undoubtedly exists? Does the representation 'a' me an the following 
'b' or does the object of 'a' me an the object of 'b' and so forth? If not, then the 
posited identity is nonsense and nothing more. No wonder that even a thinker 
of the stature of J. S. Mill, who was not able to free hirnself from being caught 
in the, to be sure, very simple fundamental thesis of the classical association 
theory, after lengthy considerations of the associative chain that exists, for ex-
ample, between 0' and 7T in the judgment S is P, came to the admission: this 
linking has to contain the specific element in the experience of a judgment, but 
the whole thing appeared to hirn as "the deepest mystery of humpan nature." 12 
Enough of criticism. Let us assemble in proper order de Saussure 's positively 
worthwhile assertions conceming the theory of linguistic structures. He hirnself 
presents them in four points: First, methodically foremost is the recognition of 
the simple detachability of the 'object' of the linguistique de La langue. "We 
can dispense with the other elements of speech; indeed, the science of language 
is possible only if the other elements are excluded" (p. 15). There speaks the 
wisdom of the successful empirical researcher, and only a logically precise 
interpretation is necessary in order to be relieved of the appearance of paradox 
that may be connected with it. We have already found the key to this. The second 
12 My first word as a young psyehologist in 1907 was an objeetion-whieh. at that time. was not 
reeeived by my eolleagues with friendliness-against this several-hundred-year-old theoretieal 
blunder. Today, in psyehologieal eircles, it is eonsidered unmasked and overcome: there is some 
cause now, conversely, to defend the old assoeiation idea in its limited area of validity against the 
tendencies of another, in more than one respect antithetical. monism of principles. On this topie. 
see E. Frenkel, "Atomismus und Mechanismus in der Assoeiationspsyehologie," Zeitschrift jür 
Psychologie 123 (1931). 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
115 
point is the application of the sign nature of language; "Language (La langue) 
is a system of signs in which the only essential thing is the union of meanings 
and sound images" (p. 15). We only have to replace the unusable meaning of 
this 'connection' as an association with something better, and we free ourselves 
from an entanglement in irresolvable pseudoproblems and destroy a real rats' 
nest of inadequacies. What remains is the recognition that the semantic relations, 
in fact, do constitute the object 'language.' We also, thirdly, do not lack an 
application of this regulative principle, by means of which de Saussure was in 
advance of his times. He came so dose to a conception of phonology that in his 
conception there was really only one thing lacking, namely, the dedaration of 
how phonology was related to phonetics. Why phonetics had to stand aside and 
why it had already taken the road of an exact natural science in his time-all 
that remained hidden from de Saussure. Even more: he, Jourthly, elaborated 
sharply the intersubjective character of the language structure and, in connection 
with it, its independence Jrom the individual speaker of a language community, 
perhaps in so me respects even too subtly. La langue "is outside the individual 
who can never create nor modify it by hirnself; it exists only by virtue of a sort 
of contract signed by the members of a linguistic community" (p. 15). 
2. Logic would really have to be able to accomplish an interesting task 
through an appropriate synoptic viewing of these determinations. The case is 
similar to that of a group of equations in which certain unknowns are contained; 
under certain circumstances, we can determine the unknown through an appro-
priate combination of equations. Our goal is to specify exactly what the final 
object [Endgegenstand] is, and we have here aseries of discrete determinations 
that in some ways must be brought together in that one object. How is that one 
thing to be thought, whereby the four determinations of de Saussure are to be 
possible with reference to it? 
What is, therefore, that one thing that is illustrated by examples that one 
customarily calls lingua latina or the Bantu languages or dialect a, wh ich for 
all one cares is spoken in an isolated settlement by only a dozen families? What 
is that thing in all cases, seen from one aspect, that, above all, is represented 
in the structure books of the linguists (one calls it grammar)? It is, so asserts 
de Saussure, abstracted from the mass of irrelevancies found hic et nunc in the 
concrete speech events, and no linguists will contradict hirn in that. One can 
hear, for example, Latin or Greek scholars say that how the sounds emerging 
from Cicero's mouth really sounded is of marginal importance for their field of 
interest. For the genuine content of the scientific study of Latin is not essentially 
curtailed through the circumstance that it must be derived solely from written 
documents. De Saussure reasons further that what has been determined in this 

116 
KARL BÜHLER 
fashion has an individual-transcending character and is the quintessence of that 
which specifies how one spoke in a given language community. Also, these are 
assertions that are disputed by no one versed in the subject matter. Naturally, 
this one whom we are speaking about can and may be a unitas multiplex; to be 
sure, we are not assuming beforehand that a systematic unity is coming into 
being if we succeed in arriving at closer and more exact statements about its 
mode of being or its character as an object [Gegenstandscharacterl (that last 
aspect is completely satisfactory for us). There can be varieties of the species 
'language structure' that appear in every individuallanguage and from the point 
of view of structural laws belong together and must appear together. This will 
be our topic later, in Section C. The question now deals with the meaning of 
the specijic concept of a language structure. So much for the time being for the 
term la langue. 
That part of de Saussure's philosophically tinted struggle with the clarifi-
cation of the linguistic categories that has most appealed to experts in the field 
and that, in fact, has deserved to be accepted in some form as a permanent 
contribution is the distinction [Scheidung] between la langue and la parole. 
Everyone perceives what is apt in this distinction even before logic has grasped 
the word for it. And this is the case although de Saussure himself made the 
conclusive confession not only quoad la langue but also quoad la parole that 
he did not know "how its unity was to be derived" (p. 9). His meager comments 
about the terminal object of a linguistics of la parole are, then, also essentially 
those kinds of assertions that one can arrive at by an investigation that simply 
inverts the assertions about la langue. The characteristics of the concept of la 
parole are nothing other than that non-A, non-B, non-C, etc., of those char-
acteristics A, B, C of the concept of la langue. "Speech is ... an individual 
act of the will and of the intelligence" (p. 14); it is the 'non-social factor,' it 
is 'what is accessory' and 'what is more-or-less incidental' in the territory of 
language research, etc. Things cannot, to be sure, stay this way. 
As a logician, one might think to identify simply what is meant by the word 
la parole with what comes into contact with the senses of the language researcher, 
with the essential concept [Inbegriff] of concrete speech events, and, therefore, 
with the initial object of linguistic research. But that does not work: it leads to 
nothing more than a totally skewed construction. As a matter of principle, 
linguistic research, just as little as any other scientific procedure, may not let 
stand, so to speak, any unclarified fluid in wh ich its initial object was nurtured. 
Rather, the whole theory of structures or structural research of the linguist could, 
to be sure, be practiced separately and, in fact, has existed for centuries as 
'descriptive grammar.' If its results should be in any way 'explained,' then they 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
117 
are in need of a scientifically adequate complement in the form of an analysis 
of the speech act. Within certain limits, we can sustain this undecided state of 
affairs of the grammar of the Greeks and the Romans, if we hold in opposition 
to it what modem linguistics, more in terms of demands and goals, has been 
able to grasp and, as one knows, also to accomplish. The path of historical 
linguistic research leads, no matter how one may twist and turn things, beyond 
the speech act as the point of origin of everything 'historical' in language and 
is in need of a theory of speech action [Sprechhandlung]. 
3. Human speech is a species, a modus, of action. This sentence needs no 
explicit justification, only an elucidation. In certain situations, we see that a man 
at one time takes with the hands and 'handles' those things that are graspable, 
that is, corporeal things; he busies hirnself with them. Another time, we see that 
he opens his mouth and speaks. In both cases, the observable occurrence appears 
to be guided toward a goal, toward something that should be reached. And that 
is exactly what the psychologist calls an action. German colloquiallanguage has 
prepared the scientific term Handlung (action) and brought it close to hand. 
Already in daily life we generalize; we call not only the manipulations in which 
the hands are actually at work actions, but also others; we call all goal-directed 
activities of the whole man actions. Comparative psychology applies the term 
even to the animals, but that does not interest us for the time being. 
More worth noting is perhaps the fact that in the initial two to four years 
of its life, the human child has already reached a certain first mastery, certain 
first maturational and developmental levels in action, with the hand and simul-
taneously with the speaking mouth. With the hand, the first use oj tools and, 
with the mouth, the earliest naming function attain adefinite, specifically human 
developmental plateau. One can raise the question how and why both belong 
together and discover something about it from child psychology. 13 However, we 
must go further back. 
The most recent psychology is much concemed about once again looking 
at animal and human action with new eyes, and it will accomplish this task in 
all cases with a comprehensive and carefullY prepared apparatus of questions, 
viewpoints, and investigative possibilities. For all the otherwise opposing di-
1J Compare the characterization of the 'second phase' (ages two to four) in Ch. Bühler. Kindheit lind 
JlIgend. where the attitude of positing (the theticl is worked out in parallel fashion for the case 
of speech. According to Ch. Bühler. the practice of human action as such and in its most important 
forms of appearing dominates simultaneously the manual play and the speech of the child in the 
second phase. This iso therefore. also the phase of the most decisive developmental steps in the 
building up of the child' s language. 

118 
KARL BÜHLER 
rections of modem psychology converge in the fact of action, and in a tangible 
way each already contributes today its portion to its c1arification. 
To prevent the preceding from remaining an empty assertion, let us give 
in addition a couple of side glances toward certain streams of present-day psy-
chology and its attitude toward action. To begin with a Viennese product, take 
psychoanalysis. Freud wrote a special book (The Psychopathology of Everyday 
Life) in wh ich he tried to c1arify from his point of view the known linguistic 
derailments, slips of the tongue, slips of the pen, misreadings. That is a con-
tribution to the theory of speech action-more specifically, an attempt to co m-
prehend the nonmanifest determining influences on the 'mechanism' of speech 
that stern from the domain of mastery of the libido. Freud assurnes that behind 
the manifest coursings of consciousness in a deeper region of the human being 
[Wesens], there are at work codefining, guiding, meaning-conferring factors that 
he is seeking to comprehend in his own way and theoretically to bring under 
contro!. 
Formally (not from the point of view of content), the same assumption of 
steering factors returns in the conceptions of the cognitive psychologist. We have 
also come up against research concerned with speech action in our own inves-
tigations. Ach, for example, developed the concept of determining tendencies. 
If a task is given and taken up, if a goal is intended by such a thing as a 
thinking-speaking man, from these elements emerge determining, steering effects 
[Wirkungen], which rule the course of speech. The evidence, grounded on careful 
observations, and theoretical expositions to be found in the work of K. Bühler, 
Selz, and eh. Bühler give information about how this steering takes place. They 
are also contributions to the theory of speech action; the most conclusive are to 
be found in Selz. 
Let us now take something totally different: even American behaviorism 
is competent and in its own way can be in the same boat with uso Behaviorism, 
to be sure, proclaims solemnly that "omnis actio est reactio" .. that is, it describes 
all animal and human behavior-therefore, even speech-as an interlocking of 
reactions to outer or inner stimuli. But if we take a c10ser look, the genuine 
content of this sentence is seen to be one of those sayings that we can, without 
detriment to its truth content, just as weil turn around and stand on its head: 
omnis reactio est actio in the domain of 'meaningful animal and human behavior. 
That is, the facts force a consistent behaviorism to go beyond, in certain definite 
places, its own concept [Konzept] and to recognize also the opposing factor, the 
contribution of interiority, which it is not able to master theoretically or even 
to exclude, with the formula that defines its starting point. Besides, the schema 
of stimulus-reaction has already functioned as a model in certain investigations 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
119 
of Steinthai and other greater language researchers of his time who concerned 
themselves with the speech act. And what is said there is not even completely 
obsolete. 
Next, the sensitive lecture of A. A. Grünbaum at the Language Conference 
of psychologists in Hamburg is an addition to what language theory directly 
needs, first for its general knowledge and considerations of human action and 
then for more special investigations into speech activity .14 After an apt critique 
of the older, purely experiential-psychological findings from the laboratory of 
the 'Würzburg school, , Grünbaum sketches the general resuIt of his own ob-
servations of persons with language disturbances and interprets the well-known 
comments of W. von Humboldt concerning the energeia idea in his own sense. 
Also, so me of the resuIts of the comprehensive and fundamental work of L. 
Lewin, whom I would like to mention as one of the most recent theoreticians 
of action in the field of psychology, are taken over, accordingly by Grünbaum, 
into the area of speech action. The impressive and finished lecture in Hamburg 
was the last publication of Grünbaum. Psychology mourns hirn, and many lost 
a friend through his unexpected early death. 
If we pull all this together in the proper fashion in order to determine that 
we need a reflection on axioms in order to arrive at a schematization, first, of 
human action in general and, from it, of speech action, we have to note at the 
beginning a twofold process of steering, adefinite polarity that one can label 
through the terms need and opportunity. If the idiom and the criminologist say 
that "opportunity makes the thief," they also know the other extreme, where 
powerful, overpowering, and pressing needs turn any situation whatsoever into 
an opportunity, and they speak in this case of actions determined by drives 
[Triebhandlungen]. In order to be able to note dimensions of depth in both these 
only-roughly-outlined groups of defining or codefining factors, Ch. Bühler dif-
ferentiated in her Lebenspsychologie the subjective final result of human action 
(l) into what one may call, in the biological domain or with the point of view 
of the biologist, satisfaction (or pacification) and (2) into what the person who 
14 A. A. Grünbaum, "Sprache als Handlung," 12th Kongress. -Bericht für Psychologie (1932): 
164-175. The following contributions to the language day in Hamburg are also printed in the same 
volume: K. Bühler, "Das Ganze der Sprachtheorie, ihr Autbau und ihre Teile" (a resurne: this 
essay constitutes the first chapter of an extensive presentation); N. Ach, "Zur psychologischen 
Grundlegung der sprachlichen Verständigung"; E. Cassirer, "Die Sprache und der Aufbau der 
Gegenstandswelt"; K. Goldstein, "Die pathologischen Tatsachen in ihrer Bedeutung für das 
Problem der Sprache"; Hans W. Gruhle, "Die Sprachstörungen der Schizophrenie"; G. Ipsen, 
"Sprache und Gemeinschaft"; Leo Weisgerber. "Sprachvergleichung and Psychologie"; and 
Heinz Wemer, "Sprache als Ausdruck"; As we can see, once upon a time it was possible to bring 
together at the session in Hamburg experts from quite different scientific disciplines. 

120 
KARL SÜHLER 
speaks about it and is not blind to spiritual things adequately labels asfulfillment. 15 
All the same, this end result is guided by the one acting by a dual consideration 
of both factors at the same time, with respect to need and to opportunity. To let 
oneself be 'appealed to' by opportunity, to stand open to its 'demand character' 
(Lewin), to use and comprehend it is one thing; to seek out the occasions and 
create them is another thing. In this way are posited two determining sources, 
independent of one another within certain limits. Every theory that wants to get 
by with only one of them, or that wanted to do so in the history of study of the 
will, seems to me to be unreliably equipped. The point at issue in the two-factor 
principle that I have recommended is, above all, that we must avoid the situation 
where we can never grasp the complex character of the facts. And, in my opinion, 
that is the case with every principle that contains less than two variable deter-
mining sources that, within certain limits, are independent of one another. 
4. We turn now to something that draws us cIoser to the action of speech 
and opens up the perspective that we need. Action [Handlung] is a historicalor, 
still more exactIy, a biographical concept; anyone who is concerned about proj-
ecting a scientific exposition-whether of an animal or of a human action, 
whether he calls hirnself a historian or a psychologist or anything else-becomes 
a biographer. Likewise, whether he thereby aims at an 'idiographic' or a 'no-
mothetic' determination in the sense of Rickert, he becomes in one or the other 
case a biographer. This is demanded by the way things are. If one places side 
by side what the historians and what the psychologists have to produce in this 
regard, with respect to what we are speaking about there is no difference to be 
found. A cautious comparative psychologist who investigates, at one time, bees 
and ants and, at another time, human beings, will, first not forget to take account 
of the so-called instincts that belong there. At this point, we will say nothing 
more about the historically conditioned character of these instincts. The second 
group of tasks must be derived from the individual history of the agent. We have 
to define precisely what belongs to the exposition of the action and what has 
been derived from the great area of individually appropriated and stabilized 
techniques of life. 
If action be reckoned a speech action, the expert knows immediately what 
in this case is to be brought under the heading of something individually acquired: 
the whole intellectual heritage of the power to speak [Sprechenkönnens] right 
"eh. Bühler. Der menschliche Lebenslauf als psychologisches Problem (1933). Previously: "Zwei 
Grundtypen von Lebensprozesse ... Zeitschriji fiir Psychologie 108 ( 1928). K. Lewin. in his article 
of the same title in the same journal. polemicizes adeptly. but on the decisive point he does not 
make contact. The best biological discussion of a similar two-factor principle is found in J. Le 
Dantec. La science de la vie' (1930). 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
121 
up to the level of readiness (or unreadiness) that we co me across in the moment 
of action. Everthing that belongs to it is best given in first outline per exclusionem. 
Above all, the third factor that also belongs in the exposition has to be selected. 
Every human action (if one takes a closer look, probably also, on another 
developmentallevel, animal action) has what one can, in a specific sense of the 
term, call its act history [Akt-Geschichte]. This can be understood at one time 
as a long and rich act-history, at another time, as a short and poor one. Ras-
kolnikov needs weeks from the first emergence of his idea to the action, a long 
and emotionally involved act-history. The criminal archives, novels, and dramas 
are full of others. What it is important to grasp is that seconds or fractions of 
seconds cannot be neglected by the theory if they circumscribe the shortest 
thinkable act-history. No sooner thought than done; but still the question remains, 
always permitted and necessary, whether a characteristic moment of action does 
not disappear so that it is transformed into something else, to the extent that its 
defining concept disappears from it. The conceptum that we are speaking about 
can also be included temporally in the happening itself, which is directed by it. 
With this conception, the leaming of all the psychologists who defend it-and 
lately who, from Ach and Michotte to Lindworsky, have carefully furnished 
proof with new observations and indirect proofs-when viewed in the right light, 
has truly only furnished noteworthy supports for the wisdom of the law books. 
These give as the characteristics of genuine action that of 'knowingly and will-
ingly.' The new theory of the will of the psychologists fits naturally into the 
aforementioned wisdom of the law books, just as a custom-made shoe fits the 
foot that is to wear it. 
What is still disputable here does not affect this general conclusion. The 
question of those who place an all-decisive value on 'consciousness'-whether 
this 'concept,' under the favorable conditions of a supplementary self-observation 
of the agent, is comprehensible or not-is not a decisive question, but a questio 
secunda. For my part, I simply do not understand why some people still hold 
fast to the much too narrow idea of the old 'pure' psychology of experience. It 
may be the case that Grünbaum's criticism is right; it may be the case that actions 
in the stream of life, in fact, regularly manifest the absence of consciousness of 
the guiding conception asserted by hirn, as opposed to those kinds of action 
observed in the laboratory (the actions of Ach and the other experimenters). In 
this way we have taken only a step in the direction of those theoreticians who, 
like Nietzsche and Freud, have for a long time asserted that what is manifest in 
experience is not only fuH of gaps but often also inauthentic and deceptive. The 
principle of an 'act his tory , in the exposition of the action is, on the contrary, 
in no way thereby caHed into question. 

122 
KARL BÜHLER 
It seems to me highly noteworthy that the theory of the will developed by 
jurists at the turn of the century accomplished practically the same transformation 
as that of the psychologists whom we discussed above. Compare the young 
Reinhard Frank and his 'representational theory" of the will, first of all, with 
what Oswald Külpe in his habilitation thesis of 1889 was able to say about the 
psychologists' theory of the will (Külpe, The Theory of the Will in Recent 
Psychology, Psychologische Studien 5 [1889]). And then compare what Frank 
today teaches with the synthetic presentation of Lindworsky in The Will: Its 
Appearance and Its Rule. Frank accepted in a conciliatory way the idea of his 
earlier opponents, the so-called theoreticians of the will, into his theory and 
thereby brought about on his own the decisive turn to a comprehensive conception 
that resembled closely that defended by Ach and Lindworsky. Külpe also did 
that, as, for example, his extensive review of Ach's first book in the "Göttinger 
Gelehrter Anzeiger" of 1907 shows. Abandonment of a pure analysis of ex-
perience was recommended very early and was carried through in a different 
form by the jurists. Right after that comes the attempt, wh ich I myself consider 
possible and demanded by the subject matter, of Radbruch (the Concept of Action 
in the System of Criminal Law, 1903) and of those who followed hirn. The 
attempt in the circle of these recent workers in the juridical theory of the will 
was simply enough to do justice to the simple demand of juridical praxis to treat 
action not as something cut into an outer and an inner, but as a unity. And, if 
one looks at it in the proper way, that is precisely the program of the theory of 
action in process of development in the heart of the most recent psychology. A 
determination of this unity in its many aspects would be, just as much for the 
jurist as for the linguist, a liberation from long-seen and bemoaned disadvantages. 
One could extract the same song-as de Saussure the linguist sang it concerning 
the evil of the glue pot-also from the juridical literature. There is something 
more: with reference to the keen construction of Kelsen, "accomplished for the 
purpose of settiing accounts," dealing with an "ethical-juridical concept of the 
will," a construction "that in no way can be identified with that soul event that 
psychology describes with the name of will " (Hauptprobleme der Staats-
rechtslehre [1923], p. 157)-the new theory of action [Handlung] (no longer 
the will conceived in an isolated manner) will first of all let itself be led by the 
sure hand of this sharp-minded theoretician to the highest abstractions demanded 
by the sphere of law. Second, however, it will demand to be led back from there 
with the same sureness to the realm of the observable and the protocol sentences 
about human action. Kelsen's interpretive framework is not so distant from the 
facts as he, for reasons of methodological purity, puts it. And no matter what 
one may say, the poor criminal-court judge must day after day slosh around in 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
123 
the bog of brutal facts, where he awaits guidelines from the starry heaven of 
pure theory. The will there and the will here-they must co me together in the 
knowledge of the judge. Some of Kelsen' s conclusions about so-called "causality 
through omission" (pp. 119ff.), which stands in contradiction to the legal praxis 
and theory of men such as Feuerbach and Binding, are illuminated by the con-
ception that psychology today is working on. One can safely say that either 
every form of causation must be denied or that a causation "through omission" 
must be theoretically allowed. And the simple reason is that there does not exist 
any other conceptual schema [Denkschema) for 'causation of the will' [Willen-
skausierung) than that schema, constructed according to the model of Sigwart 
and denied by Kelsen, of the so-called causation through omission. The positing 
and the genuine 'omission' of the positing of a supplementary influence on the 
physical causal complex of an event in process of occurring are not one hair 
different from one another. The dominant construction in legal praxis harmonizes 
completely in this point with the schema that the psychologist today sees himself 
forced to forge at every step. This is the case not only in the theory of action 
but wherever the central conception of a positing is active and has become 
indispensable for psychology. Both cases can be called perplexing: the positing 
and the neglectful nonpositing: there is nothing to be said against that. But the 
first, the positing, is no more perplexing than the second, and what is decisive 
for the psychologist is that he sees and experiences everywhere that the neglectful 
nonpositing is reckoned just as much a positive item in the weighing of the forms 
of control as the positing. Whether or not a theoretician has arrived at the true 
fundamental problem of psychology in general will have to be determined by 
reference to, among other things, this index, namely, whether he has recognized 
or not the fact that certain apparently negative quantities belonging to the type-
genuine juridical omission-must be reckoned by the evaluating psychologist 
as positive. Remotely comparable (in what concems the formal component) is 
the well-known situation in mathematics where the negative numbers taken to 
the second power proceed on the same track as the positive numbers. 
5. To the exposition of every speech action, therefore, there belongs a 
portion of the individual history of the speaker and what is known of his act 
history . Let it be granted without debate that the concept of a speech action-
if it is to cover, according to the context, all concrete speech events that contain 
anything of importance in the way of content and act history-demands a logical 
differentiation, presumably a very complex differentiation. At the lower limit 
may remain the chatter of repetitions of what has been leamed in global fashion, 
all those things that can be put for the behaviorists truly in the far drawer of 
linguistic 'conditioned reaction' and must be put there precisely because we 

124 
KARL BÜHLER 
cannot discover anything significant about it. It is an indispensable limit concept; 
whether any facts that correspond in a pure fashion to it can be found makes no 
theoretical difference. It is necessary only to beware of identifying the totality 
of events that are close to this concept with the language of parrots. For it is 
self-evident that the psychophysical speech apparatus in man is and remains a 
human one, even where it produces pure products of training, to the degree that 
these products can occur; above all, 'experience' is too little separated from the 
realm of training so that one may think of practically any experience whatsoever 
as participating in speech events, which, at will, come close to our limit, and 
probably one may consider such participation here and there proven also in the 
findings of speech pathology. 
From such a situation to speech actions that impress us in the eminent sense 
the word as an (outstanding) human deed of speech or, seen as a product, as a 
noteworthy work of language [Sprach werk], there must be steps that can be 
derived by a complete theory. Also, what is unusual and noteworthy about a 
linguistic deed or work of language can obviously lie hidden in the most diverse 
elements or moments. The philologists and literacy historians have their hands 
full with deriving from the documents something noteworthy dealing with gra-
dations and with putting them in a proper order, first for one research purpose 
and then for another. Thereby, almost as in the usual practice of life, questions 
in great abundance are asked and answered by the psychological ski II [Takt) of 
the experts, questions that have their logical horne in the theory of linguistic 
action. 
But now, to what one may extract from what has been said partly as a 
pro gram and partly as a building block of a future theory there is to be added 
something that is capable of giving to it a methodical way, a new impulse. For 
nowhere else in the wide territory of human action are the relations so favorable 
for a regressive movement from the product to the act, from the ergon to the 
energeia. We know the ergon of the speech act so precisely for the very reason 
that the structural research of the linguists has progressed so far. And here is the 
place where we have to say a word in general about, first, the object character 
ofthe linguistic structure and, secondly, its role in the speech action. Once again: 
what is that thing with which the four determinations of de Saussure (along with 
the best philosophically inclined linguistic researchers) are in agreement? We 
do not have to think it out for ourselves to determine what it must be regarded 
aso lt is the linguistic structure, which in a great number of kinds and classes 
constitutes every language (La langue). For Plato called objects that manifest 
quite similar determination ideas. Wh at a linguist determines in his books dealing 
with fundamental principles cannot be anything other than abstracta and gen er-

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
125 
alia, and in still another respect, it has a property or function that Plato ascribed 
to his ideas. That we have transfonned the 'etemal and immutable' into 'inter-
subjective' and thereby find this sufficient and simply cancel out a supersensible 
homeland in the fashion of Aristotle only needs to be said in order to exclude 
misunderstandings. It is sufficient in order to add also the name ELOO<; to the 
linguistic structure. 
De Saussure's aversion to abstracta and generalia and a similar opposition 
(horror abstraeti) to my thesis of the ideality of the linguistic structure among 
contemporary language researchers, which I respect, have never become really 
comprehensible to me. One is afraid, when one speaks of it, to lapse from logic 
with trivialities or with more comprehensible examples from some empirical 
science or other, in order to say that no scientific concept can grasp anything 
other than something abstract and general, the concept of a dollar in propositions 
of economics as little as the species of the zoologist. Where are the 'phonemes' 
of the Gennan language to be found? If it is not the case that concrete sound 
= phoneme, still the phonemes must be 'active' at least as 'representations' 
possessed by the memory of every speaker of the Gennan language, or as 
directions of the will in the concrete speech event. Or are we not forced to regard 
precisely the speech community as possessor of the sought-for 'realities'? It is 
difficult to say where we should begin to ans wer. Should we perhaps begin with 
the 'general' representation of a triangle of Locke, as one of the first among 
modem thinkers who have bowdlerized conceptualism through the equation eon-
ceptus (thought) = sensible image? Others point toward Rickert, who ascribed 
to the historian something sui generis as his object, and the sciences of language 
are, to be sure, historical sciences. We must request in this regard only that one 
again consult how indignantly Rickert in the second edition of his book The 
Limits of Coneept Formation in the Natural Seien ces railed at certain of his 
reviewers who had misunderstood his theory, to the effect that he assumed that 
a historical concept accomplishes a fe at that no other mode of concept fonnation 
sueeeeds in doing. "In order onee again to repeat my point: reality itself, in its 
perceptible and individual fonn, does not enter into any scienee" (pp. 338 and 
preceding) . 
Perhaps we could put some order into this play of quest ions and answers 
if we contrasted in some impressive way the species of the biologist and the 
language structure of the linguist and occupied ourselves with elaborating in 
what way the language structure stands closer to the Platonic way of thinking 
than the species of animals and plants as they are understood today by biologists. 
Let us proceed onward to a simple state of affairs from the history of physics 
and linguistics. While the physicist has to treat the opposition of his science to 

126 
KARL BÜHLER 
what in the Platonic-Aristotelian world picture was superseded by the conception 
of ubi materia ibi geometria as something constituting a genuine historical turning 
point, the backward glance of the linguistic researcher does not find anything 
analogous to this in the history of his discipline. On the contrary, wherever he 
satisfies in the most adequate and fruitful manner the demands of the object 
'language' by a conceptual system, he does so thanks to the resources of the 
Platonic-Aristotelian conceptual world. 
The Platonic ideas, the Aristotelian forms, are no historical phantoms for 
hirn but the simple abstract models of what he discovers and determines in his 
object as language structures. And if he looks for a completely general mode 
of expression [Kategoria] for the relationship of the (ideal) language structure 
to the product of the concrete speech act-if, to give an example, he is looking 
for a word for the relation of the ideal 'phoneme' to the sound material that is 
hic et nunc produced by a speaker-no other conceptual system can put something 
better at his disposal than what he, in fact or in intention, uses again and again. 
The phoneme, so runs his argument, is realized in the product of the concrete 
speech act. There is therefore a scientifically definable eidos according to which 
the concrete element is formed in the psychophysical system of the speaker; 
then, in reverse fashion, it is taken up again by the hearer out of the audible 
material [aus dem Hörbaren]. This reception, this taking up, is an abstrahere, 
a process of deriving. We can confidently shove anything ontological in this 
regard to the side and leave it to hirn who trusts in such things. Simple description 
observes and defines here a relationship that Plato called by the name of metexein 
and, from the opposite point of view, aphairein, and that is a description that 
fits the facts. More 1 do not assert. 
In the axioms [AnJangssätzen] of linguistics, we must and need no more 
discuss either an absolute or an individual spiritual essence [Geist-Wesen]. What 
has to be contained in them, however, is the assertion that language is something 
constituted by signs [ZeichenhaJtes] and the other axioms. And the straightfor-
ward description of the whole state of affairs, as the language researcher sees 
it, cannot be accomplished more exactly and more adequately than has all along 
been done in linguistic research with the aid of the Platonic-Aristotelian con-
ceptual apparatus. 
But not only has physics given up thinking in a Platonic mode, so have the 
botanists and the zoologists. Is the language researcher to be the only one to 
remain unmodern? Perhaps the biologists have good reasons to assert that they 
know nothing about the fact that the genesis of individuals in their field, the 
embryonic and postembryonic emergence and development of individuals, is 
intluenced and guided in any fashion by an ideal factor, by an eidos. The linguist, 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
127 
however, has no good reasons to reject such a thing in his field as not pertaining 
to the emergence of speech concreta in the psychophysical system of the speaker. 
Still, what does an exact psychophysics and the customary psychology have 
to say to this? The author of this essay takes his departure from that point where 
this objection wants to push the discussion. His opinion is, and his report on the 
status of the problems there runs, as folIows: insofar as 'psychology of language' 
comes into question, these problems cannot be put into order without taking up 
again the discussion at just about the point where it was let drop at the end of 
the Scholastic period. But I imagine that only those who are armed with modem 
research means are competent to renew such a discussion. The whole treatment 
of the problems of uni versals-let us say, from Locke to Husserl-took a path, 
with respect to the psychological side of all questions that belong to it, that can 
be described only in the following fashion: after a first keen impulse of psy-
chological nominalism, wh ich emerged with Locke, clothed in the garment of 
a putative conceptualism, there followed in the series of his classical English 
descendants down to J. S. Mill a further progression that one can describe by 
means of the well-known course of the development of cancer. And all the 
secondary waves and ripples, just as the great waves, ran their course up to the 
imposing theoretical reach backward of Husserl, whom I admire on account of 
his purifying force but do not consider the end of wisdom. 
The contribution of this essay to the psychological problem of uni versals 
is to be shown clearly:first. radical nominalism, about which alone I am speaking 
(anticonceptualistic nominalism), has to ruin ab ovo the very notion of linguistic 
research; second. I want to present as completely and as clearly as possible the 
notion of linguistic research in the axiomatic domain, so that third. on its basis 
[von da aus), I can reformulate the problems of a psychology of language in 
their unruined form. We have adduced facts in Denkpsychologie that sufficed 
to overtum the interpretation of the classical theory of association, and we 
believed that at the same time we made definitively available, from systematic 
self-observation, something positive conceming the experiential character of 
'thoughts.' It may be true that there were data in this material that did not derive 
from the experiential aspect as such. The new impulse has to be independent of 
the question of whether in the protocol sentences of psychology what is asserted 
as a fact derives from an experiential aspect or from other legitimate regions of 
psychological observations. 
6. Finally, a few observations about 'structure' and certain other things, 
but with no systematic compulsions. Anyone who consults the programmatic 
mono graph of Stumpf. .. Appearances and Psychical Functions," knows the 
origin of the expression structure [Gebilde J. Stumpf shows that among the fun-

128 
KARL BÜHLER 
damen tal conceptions of psychology since Locke, one is manifest or latent, 
which he thinks is most adequately called by the term psychic functions. For it 
occurs to hirn in the process of his cataloging of the psychic functions that on 
the object side there corresponds to everyone of them its own 'structure' (Ge-
bilde). There belongs, for example, to the experience of a judgment a 'state of 
affairs' [Sachverhalt] as a structural form, and according to essential laws the 
judgmental form of comportment is extended toward nothing other than toward 
a factual state of affairs. Now, we do not need to take from this more than the 
recognition that to the object of the psychology of experience plainly something 
like the correlation of subject and object is immanent, according to Stumpf. For 
if the structure occupies the object side, there remains nothing else for the 
functions than to appear, on their side in opposition, as subjective. In the in-
tentional schema of Brentano, from which Stumpf came, and in many other 
models of psychologists, the same point was mooted and asserted about the 
realm of 'experience' [Erlebnis]. The situation seems to me to be seen in a clear, 
philosophical way and to be developed in R. Reininger's "Das Psychophysische 
Problem," where the relationship with Stumpf and Külpe is emphasized. I am 
already bringing up this point here, because we will have to refer back to the 
conceptual model again. At bottom, it is certainly no surprising statement that 
experience appears to be bipolar. 
To get from Stumpfs and Reininger's schema to the relation speech action: 
language structure, it is necessary to understand that the object itself, 'language,' 
forces us to scmehow go beyond the solipsistic domain of observation proper 
to the psychology of experience. This clever treatment, it seems to me, is 
accomplished in the philosophically neatest manner in that, on the one hand, 
where action is introduced instead of psychic function, the introduction of this 
kind of thing must be treated as something that essentially cannot be defined in 
its innermost nature in a scientifically adequate way by mere psychological 
means. But then, another correlate to this factor has to be found, and it was 
found a long while ago, namely, by the language sciences. The relation of action 
to structures is indicated by the words realize and receive; for this is a self-
evident result of the idea that one also considers the understanding on the part 
of the hearer as, so to speak, a mirror image, as a speech action in the broadest 
sense of the word. Wh at is sketched out here is taken further in the next section. 
Interpretations must maintain themselves or disappear in science according 
to their fertility or infertility in furthering research; that is their well-deserved 
fate. One of the next opportunities for verification will be offered to our inter-
pretative framework by the old linguistic problem of the sentence. What is a 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
129 
sentence? I think that the concept of a sentence cannot be defined merely with 
the means offered by a theory of structures nor in the framework of a theory of 
speech action. That the sentence is a Iinguistic unity has not been mistaken or 
denied by anyone. As a unity of sense proper to discourse, we must bring it to 
the test in reference to the relation speech action: language structure. 

C. THE STRUCTURAL MODEL OF LANGUAGE 
1. We use the singular when we refer to language purely and simply, and we 
think that if a significant predicate can be joined with it as subject, we would 
have a structural model of language (la langue). Such astate of affairs, with 
which we are concemed, has not remained hidden from linguists; I will cite a 
passage from Meillet that is found in what is, for us, an important context: "Tous 
les hommes se servent de procectes par mots groupes de diverses manieres. Le 
detail varie; le fonds de procedes linguistiques est le meme dans toute 
l'humanite. "16 If we may reformulate this notion by means of a more precise 
interpretation, as we need to do, I would make three sentences out of Meillet's 
two. First, there are sounds. The common element [Moment] in the application 
of sounds, wh ich we find in all men, is found first in the (phonetic) fact of a 
completely fine and flexible power of 'articulation,' and then in another (phon-
ological) fact: that there exists everywhere a well-defined system of phonemes. 
The fact of articulation alone does not characterize human language sharply 
enough. This is rat her done by what is accomplished with the power of articu-
lation, the use of phonemes. Further, the process of speaking "par mots groupes 
de diverses manieres " is to be conceptually broken into two theses: (I) there are 
words in general and (2) the way in wh ich they are grouped together (= syntax) 
is decisive. To pull this together in a formulation that this essay recommends: 
there are in every human language first a system of phonemes: second, lexical 
lInities of meaning; and third, a syntax. What I am now maintaining is the 
following: 
these three states of affairs are not separated externally in human 
language as pebbles in a brook, but they mutuaHy condition one another; they 
stand in a context of law-constituted structures. 
In times gone by, philosophers, psychologists. and biologists put forth wide-
ranging investigations and considerations concerning the concept of structure, 
which we do not need for our purpose here to reproduce in fuH measure. 17 It is 
enough if we call to mind that the three men who stirred up the whole discussion-
Ib A. Meillet. in the very concise and weil put together introduction to the collaborative work. ooLes 
Langues du monde" (Paris. 192.+). p. 12. 
131 

132 
KARL SÜHLER 
Dilthey, Husserl, and Stumpf, each in their own way-treated the theme 'the 
whole and its parts' three times: Husserl in the widest framework and in the 
manner characteristic of his phenomenology (the early form), Dilthey with re-
spect to the unitary character of the object of psychology understood as the 
science of 'experiences,' and Stumpf solely with respect to what he first called 
the 'structure of psychic functions.' The term structurallaws for what becomes 
clearly known sub specie totalitatis appears, as far as I can tell, for the first time 
in 1907 in Stumpf' s "Appearances and Psychical Functions" and is explicated 
in this monograph, to emphasize it once again, not by an appeal, as in Dilthey, 
to the factual ebb and flow of 'experiences' (the psychic functions), but by an 
appeal to structures. Now we can shove to the side everything that stands outside 
this explication of Stumpf, because our 'structural model' has also solely to do 
with structures. That we can get any insight by relying on the use of structures 
in the back-and-forth observation of parts (moments) in their relation to wholes 
and vice versa or, as many theoretical physicists today (as did Bohr) are accus-
tomed to say, model insights, for such a position the field of elementary-school 
geometry offers the closest explicatory examples. 18 So much for a simple inter-
pretation of the thesis. 
2. Its proof is so simple that many who hear it for the first time do not 
rightly understand what has been gained by it-just where and how, in the last 
analysis, any fruitful influence can result from such 'trivial' considerations of 
linguistic research. To this, the philosopher can respond that his field is per 
definitionem that of so-called trivialities. Still, let us go back once again to 
Meillet so that we can at least point out the extent and fruitfulness of the topic. 
Taking his starting point from the special fact of the identical makeup of human 
languages (in the plural), he is satisfied with directing attention to the general 
17 One turns first, in order to get to know them in an overview, to the perceptive synoptic report of 
F. Krueger in the 8th Kongress-Bericht für Psychologie (Jena, 1924). An instructive supplement 
to this report is offered (in the same journal) by the uncommonly pregnant synoptic report of O. 
Selz. "Über die Persönlichkeitstypen und die Methoden ihrer Bestimmung." Selz's goal is a 
structural concept similar to ours. Compare especially the descriptions of Spranger's ideal system 
on pp. IOff.: they are to "be looked on as ideal regions that. similar to geometrical structures. 
show a lawful structural union of properties." (My emphasis: Bühler). Both works have also 
appeared in enlarged (book) form (G. Fischer. Jena). As [ correct the galleys. [ can now make 
reference to another new vo[ume introduced by Krueger. "Ganzheit und Form" (1932). 
18 All propositions for congruence and propositions of similarity for triangles. for example. always 
require a process of proof that defines from the given moments-the conditions of construction-
the moments that are not given concerning the whole: we are dealing here with the 'structural 
laws' of the triangle. We want to attain to a similar structural insight in the case of language (/a 
langue). 

THE AXIOMATlZATlON OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
133 
fact that men are anatomically, physiologically, and psychologically extremely 
similar in structure. 19 Any special fact is to be understood as apart of, parallel 
to, or a consequence of a general one. That is certainly not the last word; it is 
not even supposed to be but intends to hand over to the anthropologists and the 
psychologists the problem of where precisely in the total domain of identical 
characteristics, and in the domain of those things that men have in common, the 
structural identity of language is located. 
There is still another very important student of comparative linguistics, P. 
W. Schmidt, whom, after Meillet, it is very instructive to listen to on this same 
question. 20 Schmidt directs his thought about what prima vista is to be understood 
regarding the topic 'man and language' to two theses. The first of these is 
occupied critically with the contention that modem science has some place or 
other discovered or probably created a homo alalus. 21 while the second, in the 
manner and fashion of all those thinkers who, starting from the Greeks, have 
defined man as a being 'endowed with reason,' describes in summary fashion 
language as an instrument of the logos. of the logical 'functions of the spirit.' 
There does not exist any human language, according to Schmidt, in which general 
concepts do not appear in the vocabulary, a 'mental function' of judging in the 
formation of sentences, and a formal process of inference [Schliessen] in the 
sentential structure. But even Schmidt's ideas cannot be taken as the last word, 
" "La pari te des conditions anatomiques. physiologiques et psychologiques dans les divers types 
humains est teile que les traits essentials de structure sont sensiblement les memes partout. .. 
20 P. W. Schmidt. S.V.D .. Die Sprachfamilien und Sprachkreise der Erde (Heidelberg. 1926). 
Citation in the "Introduction ... especially p. 5. 
21 I will not argue here against Franke' S opinions about the lack 01' language of the oldest skeleton 
discoveries and the sequence 01' definite levels in the first. original articulation acquisition (in Die 
mutmassliche Sprache der Eis:eitmenschen. Halle. 1931 J. although there would be something to 
say. based on new systematic observations and recordings on parlograms in my institute. about 
the paralleIs underlined by Franke to what one can observe today in the case of a child in the 
process of leaming a language. If one holds fast-as does. for example. Menghin who otherwise 
stands close to Schmidt-to the developmental idea in general. a prehistoric nonspeaking being 
among the ancestors 01' man (that iso someone who still spoke no specifically human language) 
remains a logical postulate. even if the not-very-severe criticism of Franke has been successful. 
I regard as absolutely successful Schmidt's criticism of thc assumption that contemporary Pygmies 
are genuine homines alali because to a great extent they demonstrably speak languages loaned 
from highly developed neighboring peoples. For. complctely abstracting from the positive proof 
of the remains of their own language that Schmidt-the best expert in this area-produces. the 
psychologist may with good reason stand up for thc improbability of the position that a genuine 
alalus tribe would have taken over--completely as a loan language. by a process of imitation. 
from a neighboring tribe--Dne 01' the highly complicated languages such as are spoken today by 
Pygmies. One who is truly without language is not in a position simply to take over a complicated 
language through a process of imitation. becallse he lacks fundamental psychological presllppositions. 

134 
KARL BÜHLER 
no matter how little we have to say against them from the point of view of 
content. For they trace a wide arc around what really has to be treated. Our 
question is, Are there untold other indices contained in the works and behavior 
of men from wh ich the same thing can be conduded? The question is, Why did 
Aristotle try to develop a complete science explicitly by having recourse to the 
fact of language, and not by appealing to the construction of the Acropolis or 
to the Athenians' political structures or their music? Since that time, such a 
science has been customarily described as the instrument of all the other sciences, 
or as logic. 
What, then, is the situation with the well-known double meaning of the 
word logos in Greek? If we understand Schmidt correctly-that comparative 
linguist of universal interests-then he is in agreement with the thesis that Ar-
istotle, no matter where he was born, would have had, in principle, the oppor-
tunity to discover by a process of abstraction [ablesend] from any native language 
whatsoever the three 'elements' of his logic, for example, the concept by ap-
pealing to the word and the judgment by appealing to the sentence. That is a 
very significant thesis and demands, if one takes a dose look, that Schmidt's 
process of proof-and the others who have explicated the concept of Homo 
sapiens in a way similar to his procedures of relying on language--once again 
be given a thorough examination. Yet we immediately have to add something 
about which experts are in agreement, namely, that many details of the Aris-
totelian logic-among them, his whole table of categories-would have turned 
out to be considerably different if he had grown up not as a Greek but as a 
Chinese, an Eskimo, or a Bantu. Far greater are the modifications and deletions 
undertaken by modem logic in regard to what had been considered an integral 
part of 'pure logic' for two millennia. What is the real relation between logic 
and the structure of language? 
It is not possible to say everything at once. In agreement in principle with 
the attention-demanding modem reform movement in logic, I maintain the con-
ceptual equivalence: logic (in the widest sense of the term) = general theory 
of representation. Should there still exist in the research activities of the various 
sciences problems that one must reckon to logic but not as one of the problems 
dealing with representation, that is of no interest to us here; solely the 'theory 
of elements' is of importance for our goal. And this theory of elements can be 
developed, without remainder and purely as the general theory of representations, 
with the help of symbolic sign systems (of a language-like character). There is 
nothing said there about psychic functions, which obviously belong to the factual 
accomplishing of representations and to our dealing with symbolic, represen-
tational signs. Psychical functions also belong to our commerce with numbers 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
135 
and geometrie al structures, and nevertheless number theory and geometry abstain 
from saying anything about them. lt is necessary to require the same procedural 
abstract ion from sematology and, in its frame of reference, from the scientific 
treatment of language structures. 
We have thereby got our cue and the way has been indicated for our getting 
the structural insight we are looking for. Once again, why, according to the 
testimony of every student of comparative linguistics, do we find in every human 
language a system ofphonemes, a vocabulary, and a syntax? The answer, roughly 
put, runs as folIows: because they are the indispensable moments of a universal 
instrument of representation, wh ich has to be satisfied with the limit conditions 
of human language. 
3. That it is the job of language to represent cannot be prescribed to it by 
anyone other than its creator and user; and the individual user-for example, a 
poet-determines it, not at all infrequently, as different-within certain limits. 22 
That would presumably not be at all possible if language from the outset did not 
find itself having to perform some other task than representation (this is the 
theme of Section 0). Nevertheless, let us give ourselves over calmly to the 
wisdom of common sense, wh ich says about the human eye that generally 
speaking, it is there for the purpose of seeing and wh ich says, along with Plato, 
about human language that it is an instrument 'with which one person co m-
municates something to someone else about things,' that is, to put it in a modem 
form, it is an intersubjective means of representation. For this purpose, it pos-
sesses the quite indispensable properties of such an 'organon.' Let us also take 
as given that in the process of humanization, with the construction of a useful 
intersubjective representative instrument with other organs of the body, the larynx 
and esophagus-it is understood in cooperation with the receptor apparatus of 
the brain-were also charged with responsibilities. If we then consider in a 
general way what kinds of ways of representing could have been brought into 
play by means of this instrument, we find ourselves before an embarras de 
richesse of possibilities. With the human larynx and esophagus the task of 
constructing an intersubjective instrument of representation could have been 
accomplished in a practically unlimited number of manners and ways. Indeed, 
any number of things could be done with language even today, if we wanted to 
aim toward a demonstration of it by going in that direction. 
"Very highly instructive and even a school book example of what I am saying here is the distinctive 
use of language in thc poesie pure of modem French poets. Compare on this the insightful report. 
from a language-theoretical point of view. of E. Winkler. "Sprachtheorie und Valery-Deutung." 
Zeitschrift für französische Sprache und Literatllr 56( 1932). In the same article. an apt and fruitful 
application of the principle of abstractive relevance is carried out. 

136 
KARL BÜHLER 
Just consider, for example, a little further-in reference to that little bit of 
language painting that appears in the onomatopoetic sounds (as far as I know, 
of all languages)-something more about the domain of onomatopoeia. This 
orientation toward resemblance, as it is most familiar to us in painting, raised 
to the status of a principle, would havefirst of all (together with a limited number 
of conventions for the areas of the nonacoustic) been sufficient to bear the burden 
of men's communicative needs about things and, second, to do so far removed 
from what we have to deal with in language. Very many of the natural events 
that are important for man and the greater part of his own activities are accom-
panied by tones and sounds. We perceive and distinguish these tones and sounds 
with the ear very c1early and are easily able to imitate them in our own voices. 
An inventory of a few hundred or thousand vitally important, probably simple 
standard sounds effected through vocal imitation [stimmlich nachgeamt]-that, 
indeed, would already have been something. Above all, we must not forget that 
every one of these standard sounds, being comprehensible in many dimensions 
without any addition from outside, in the process of imitative repetition could 
have been fashioned and varied continuously in the service of communication. 
But enough about that; it is important for our task to grasp that this procedure, 
which is in itself possible, is not that which we have to do with in hu-
man language. Imitative painting is one thing and language is something else 
again. 
The topic of language and painting is not new. Up to now, the most illu-
minating treatment of it is found in Lessing's Laokoon, where good arguments 
are brought forward for the assertion of a fundamental structural difference 
between the two and against the old tag of ut pictura poesis. Note that Lessing, 
in general, presupposes as given human language as it now iso and shows that 
it is not fit for painting. He goes beyond this aspect of the problem only where 
he argues that the speech manifold can spread out only in the one-dimensional 
flow of time, while there stands open to the painter the richer possibilities of 
developing his work on a two-dimensional surface. And it is at this point that 
Lessing is satisfied too quickly; I repeat, human language could have become 
a means of understanding constituted by onomatopoeia. That it did not become 
so must be owing to more than purely material-technical reasons; in this matter, 
we have either to correct Lessing or to extend his work. 
One overcomes the dead point of the theory-that is, the helpless vision 
of a sea of possible and conceivable kinds of representations with tones and 
sounds-by means of arefleetion on the biological situation in which we have 
discovered and determined the point of origin of the use of signs by animals and 
men. If it is true that deixis is found at the beginning of a shared perceptual 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
137 
situation and that with respect to representation, sounds, above all others, possess 
a deictic function, then the onomatopoetic procedure loses its claim to priority 
in the process of development. It is not at all the first. And the end result, about 
which we are informed by a synopsis of the known languages of the globe, must 
not be construed in general by reference to any intermediate situation whatsoever, 
in which the onomatopoetic form of proceeding would have been dominant. In 
this way, the principle of the orientation toward resemblance will be banished 
from the central domain of languages to certain marginal areas and disappears 
first of all from the ordering overview to which the theorist of representation is 
trying to attain. Later, if the theory has already proceeded far, the principle must 
and can, with great profit in terms of new insight, be taken up where it is 
provable as a fact. Even the Greeks emphasized, with noteworthy acuteness for 
what is essential, this turning point in the consideration in their disjunctive 
putting of the problem of whether words got their meaning 6E(JEL or (jl1J(JEL. In 
my opinion the sublimest thing about the 'creative' action of the thetic process 
in language has been said in the philosophy of language of Cassirer. 23 We can 
consider by far the majority of what is to be read there as weil grounded and 
appropriate and still doubt the consistency of the proof that Cassirer attempts to 
derive from it--of the proof, that is, that only his basic epistemological position 
is able to do justice in full measure to this state of art·airs. But to develop this 
further would go beyond the framework of our essay. 
If, therefore, in the domain of representational language signs the essential 
fact of correlation [Kernbestand der Zuordnung I rests on, as one is accustomed 
to say, a 'free' positing, a positing out of unknown motives of reference, unknown 
to science and to the users of these signs, then it would be worth the effort to 
fix sematologically by means of an artificially constructed system of similar 
signs the general conditions of such systems and to institute a comparison of 
that artificial system with language. For this purpose, I will choose a system of 
signs that was invented by men with definite, circumscribed communication 
needs and that was of great use in their regard. a system that. besides. can be 
compared from definite points of view with an exactly circumscribed phase of 
child development in the acquisition of speech and whose difference from a 
complete human language is c1early to be shown. I am referring to the system 
of the international flag signals used by ships at sea. 
4. Before the introduction of wireless telegraphy, there were in use in ship 
traffic on the sea certain systems of flag signs, established by international 
agreement. Let us take one of them as an example here, which contains only 
03 Cf. especially pp. 132-145. 

138 
KARL SÜHLER 
three elementary forms (a circular, round ball; a triangular pennant; and a square 
flag). That would mean: 
Ob" 
b,,0 
00 
00 
b,,00 
o 0 b" 
o 0 b" 
Ob"b" 
Y ou are in danger. 
Shortage of food. Suffering hunger. 
Fire or leak. In need of immediate help. 
Aground. In immediate need of help. 
Stop or heave to. Important messages. 
Do you have telegrams or news for me? 
Yes. 
No. 
and so forth. That system furnished for the majority of cases an adequate number 
of signs. Each combination is to be read from left to right; in the case of a 
vertical ordering, from top to bottom. 24 
We begin by referring to two points: first, the three elementary forms that 
recur in all the combinations. No one of them-neither the simple ball, the 
simple pennant, the simple flag, nor any subgroup of them-has, taken by itself, 
a signal meaning; rather, each exhausts its whole function in this respect, that, 
standing in a specific place in the combination, it thereby construes the (sign) 
complex and sets it off, diacritically, from the others. These elementary forms 
are therefore elementary marks [Merkzeichen] precisely in the way that the 
phonemes of a language are. Second, only the combination as such, each flag 
proposition [FlaggensatzJ, has signal meaning. The translation of this meaning 
into current spoken speech often requires several and even different sorts of 
sentences (statements, orders, appeals, questions). To be specific, sometimes 
the issue is one of symbolizing in a single flag sentence the specific situation 
of the one signaling along with an appeal to the receiver, or the symbolizing of 
a demand, or of a question along with its reason. One could already be tempted 
here to characterize this as aglobai symbolization (an activity of global sym-
bolization). But this is not our conclusion, because in translating into spoken 
language, a mass of words and sentences is necessary; for that would be no 
immanent characteristic of the system but one imported from the outside. Rather, 
the decisive characteristic of the system is to be seen in the fact that no differ-
entiation whatsoever of the signal meaning appears attached to the sensibly 
perceptible signs. It is in this way that we want the term global symbolization 
14 The "Codice Commerciale de' Segnali" (Edizione Al!stro-U ngarica. Firenze. 1869). which lies 
before me, gives information about more complicated systems. It iso of course. also possible to 
speil with flags. but that is of no interest to us here. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
139 
to be understood. It would be just as erroneous to oppose the flag sentences to 
the sentences of a language as it would be to oppose them to names; they are 
neither one nor the other. What we can say is only: every combination of flags 
is called on to function in a typical traffic situation as an undifferentiated means 
of communication. The whole system contains only unities of meaning of this 
one kind of class; the system is nothing more than a collection of them, a one-
class sign instrument. Language, however, seen from the point of view of 
language structure, is (at least) a two-class system.~5 
Let us say a word in passing about the developmental phase of a child that 
can be compared with this one-class global signal-system of ships. As long as 
the child uses nothing other than his 'one-word sentences, ' which are well-known 
and familiar to every observer , his procedure is practically as global as that of 
a captain or a signal mate functioning with his flags. Of course, the child does 
not have a code at his disposal out of wh ich he can take what he needs to express 
himself on the occasion in an internationally intelligible manner. But that is also 
of no concern to the child. For the receivers of his messages are not foreign ship 
captains but the members of a quite narrow language community, in which one 
learns from daily doings the few typical situations in wh ich one signals by means 
of speech sounds and the more-or-less unique and specific code of a child. But 
then, sometimes even in the case of the child, a ship has run aground and is in 
need of immediate help, or the adult, sailing by, has to stop and heave to, 
because there are important messages to relay, and more of this sort. And all 
this is at any given time expressed and signaled to the receiver by means of a 
unique one-word sentence drawn from a few dozen of these that are immediately 
available to the child, but not directly codified or codifiable. The term one-word 
sentence is nothing more than an expression of embarrassment for child psy-
chology, an expression that should indicate that one can reckon the phenomena 
just as weil as words or as sentences, that they are genuinely 'still' both at once. 
This notion that they are 'not yet' the one and not yet the other will have to be 
corrected; for if the child passes over to the stage of constructing real sentences 
with words, a change of system has occurred, a step from a one-class system 
to the severaI-class system of our compiete language. 
"The purely auxiliary function of phonemes is another matter altogether and remains unconsidered 
in this categorization. Global signals. on the one hand. and differcntiated symbolism. on the 
other-that is the decisive systematic difference. The difference remains the same whether one 
constructs perceptible signs with or without the help of diacritically elementary distinguishing 
marks. There are isolated. exhibitable 'tlag marks' in the first case, just as there are isolated 
distinguishable sound marks (phonemes)-but that is 01' no further mterest to us here. 

140 
KARL BÜHLER 
Our conclusion is brief: a one-class system of global symbols of the ship-
signal type is defined in a scientificaUy exhaustive way if, first, the structure of 
the signals has been determined and, second, for every signal the typical situation 
in which it is used and the goal of the communication that it has to fulfill have 
been described. What is needed in the case of the artificially-agreed-upon flag 
signs of the code is a book with two chapters. 
5. However, a system such as language rests not on one but (at least) on 
two classes of posits (conventions) and contains, accordingly, two classes of 
language structures. A system of the language type, accordingly, also constructs 
each complete representation in (at least) two steps, distinguishable by abstrac-
tion. Let us put it briefly, even if unclearly and misleadingly: in word choice 
and sentence construction. The one class of posits proceeds as if it were all right 
to cut the world up into particles or to dissolve it into isolatable moments and 
to assign each of them a sign, while the other class is concerned with making 
the appropriate sign-media available for a systematic construal of the same worId 
(which is to be represented) according to relations. Looked at from the point of 
view of a theory of representation, those are two thoroughly disparate ways of 
proceeding. We have to be completely clear about this, and no one should let 
himself be deceived by the psychological fact of a smooth and friction-free 
cooperation in the use of these two classes of language structures. No one should 
let himself be deceived by the linguistic fact of a completely unrestricted shuttling 
back and forth of the elements of both systems. Roughly put, it is probably 
possible to see originally, in every language, syntactical elements pass over into 
the vocabulary and lexical elements into the syntactical class of language struc-
tures, and it is possible to let them do so. What that indicates-no more-is a 
marvelous sovereignty in the utilization of the respective moments that are cor-
re1ated and adjusted to one another. Each one, taken separately, is completely 
different from the other. 
The upshot of our comparison runs as folIows: the scientific determination 
of a system such as language demands something different than a book in the 
form of a code. It is possible to draw a partial parallel only between phonology 
in the strictest sense of the word and the first chapter of a code. A lexicon, 
however, and a grammar, which mirror the two classes of constituents [Setzung-
en) and structures in the domain of language, are essentially different, first, from 
one another and, second, from a code. 
A theory of language has to offer something systematic in principle con-
cerning the marvelous coming together of the two different moments that are 
abstracted here. lt has to present in its own way questions and answers concerning 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
141 
the process of synthesis and the realm of synthesized unities or synthemata in 
the linguistic domain. The fact that thereby comes emphatically to view-that 
the lexically graspable and denumerable unities of meaning of representative 
speech possess the character of wide-ranging and polyvalent symbols, or, viewed 
from the other side, the fact that only the concrete meaning structure [Sinngejüge] 
of the sentence confers upon the word the precision of meaning that is the highest 
reached by it-this fact occasioned the psychologists and linguists in the nine-
teenth century to put forth this thesis: in the beginning was the sentence and 
only the sentence, not the word. Or, only the sentence, and not the word, is the 
true, the actual unit of meaning of language, and so forth. c6 In a more precise 
interpretation, in such a thesis we can see something is correct, but we can also 
find assertions that are wholly untenable. From the point of view of a theory of 
representation, it is necessary to say only one thing: wherever this partially and 
very emphatically propounded thesis wants to understand language as a one-
class system of constitutive units of meaning, a misunderstanding or an error 
has to lie at the very beginning. The sentence can just as !ittle have existed 
be fore the word, as the word before the sentence, because both are correlative 
moments of one and the same (perhaps advanced) state of human language. 
One can construct all sorts of one-class systems that are able to fulfill the 
ends of human communication. But one cannot construct ones in which there 
would ex ist sentences in the strongest sense of the term before words, or vice 
versa. The pure sentence schema without its corresponding being filled by words 
is a moment that is precisely as incapable of existing as any relation whatsoever 
without its foundations. Besides, we can also turn the whole process of proof 
around and show that and in what way in the synthesized unity or synthema not 
only the-if treated in isolation-vague, often hard-to-grasp meaning of the 
lexical moments can be codetermined and made precise by the help of the 'other 
side,' but also how, vice versa, the same can be said for that other side, from 
this point of view, within certain limits. The 'vague' syntactical direction of the 
Indo-European compüund würd, für example, ür the ambiguous syntactical di-
rection of the Latin genitive or accusative-how they are to be completed is 
determined extensively and in many cases by the 'words' that enter into the 
schema (a determination that comes from the objects that are designated, from 
26 Already Saussure calls this conception a "rather widespread theory." and he defends the older 
conception. which iso according to his mind. indispensable. [t is instructive to see how the issue 
is shifted in Wundt's theory and becomes a problem dealing with actual psychologie al genesis: 
see Die Sprache r. pp. 602ff. 

142 
KARL SÜHLER 
the 'material'). We would not have to wait for other, more comprehensive eIues 
from the context. 27 
And last, but not least, anyone who tries to eliminate from the structure of 
language the dual moment that we are discussing violates, out of his theoretical 
incomprehension, one (perhaps the) structurallaw that is most characteristic for 
it. The comparative point of view may look where it wants, but there does not 
exist (for example, either in music, or in the case of the optical image, or in any 
of the manifold symbol systems that have been invented in modem science and 
beyond for this or that representational end) an exact analogon to the two com-
plementary moments of the units of meaning proper to language-to, in short, 
word and sentence. Only-and that is as intelligible as it is conelusive-those 
very representational symbol systems that are called on within certain limits to 
fulfill the same full representational function as language (e.g., the mathematical 
equation and the symbol systems of modem logic) also copy the lexicon and the 
syntactical component. The theoretically reflective logicians (e.g., Camap) have 
acknowledged this connection; I consider it of value to emphasize that I myself, 
independently of and probably also before them, presented and justified in my 
lectures on language theory the 'dogma of lexicon and of syntactic structure. '28 
What is there still to justify? 
" In order to verify quickly what has been said in the case of a single group of examples, let the 
reader not versed in linguistics consider how differently the meaning structure of the following 
composita have to be explicated in German: Back-Ofen (bake oven). Back-Stein (baked stone) 
Back-Huhn (baking chicken), Back-Pulver (baking powder). In all these cases. language groups 
the elements together in a completely identical way; one utilizing such a meaning structure has 
to depend on his knowledge of the subject matter in order not to commit amistake. In order to 
get a cIoser orientation conceming the uncommonly informative Indo-European composite word 
from a language-theoretical point of view, read first: Brugmann. Über das Wesen der sogenannten 
Wortzusammensetzung. Eine sprach-psychologische Studie. Sitzungsbericht der sachsischen Aka-
demie der Wissenschaften (1900). Then: B. Brugmann-Delbrüek, Grundriss. Bd. II. I Teil (pp. 
35-40.49--120); 3 Teil (pp. 8-10) (1911). 
" In the conceptual scheme of the great language researchers of the past, the recognition of what 
is meant here as a moment of duality appears sometimes in a remarkable obscurity or has to be 
revealed by a process of derivation. In the conceptual sehe me of Schleicher, for example, the 
opposition of meaning expression and relation expression in language plays a large role. In his 
first phase, therefore, Schleicher speculated in Hegelian fashion on the distinction and the alleged 
sequence of three steps: (I) monosyllabic-isolating; (2) agglutinative; (3) inflected languages. All 
that, as one knows, is long since superseded. What has remained and what has to be understood 
exactly from a language-theoretical point of view is the proposition-valid far all languages--{)f 
the indispensable two cIasses of language structures. Conceming what has been said here about 
word and sentence. see also the work ofCassirer. PhilosophY ofSvmbolic Forms. Vol. I (translated 
by Ralph Manheim. New Haven: Yale University Press. 1957) pp. 304ff. The moment of duality 
is introduced there in quite another way, but in the end we are in complete agreement. In the note 
to p. 304 Cassirer cites certain examples of what has been said. taken from the findings of 
comparative linguistics. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
143 
Let us once again contrast the one-class system of communicative symbols 
of the ship-signal variety with language and ask completely naively why, indeed, 
language, if it, as many believe, passed through a phase of the global deictic 
call, in its process of development did not remain in that phase. With the aid 
of a fund of diacritically effective phonemes, it was possible to put into operation 
a number of 'signals' (let us stick with that word) that were sufficient in practice. 
Such a procedure is convenient and conceptually clean and ne at. True, it has 
even other advantages. But there is one thing that it can never do that is attained 
immediately with a two-class system, to wit: with a limited fund of conventions 
and linguistic structures corresponding to them to bring to totally differentiated 
and exact representation an unrestricted manifold 0/ things. Let us imagine the 
user of a one-class system in 'novel' situations. If he wanted to invent new 
symbols because the old ones were not adequate, these would initially not be 
intersubjectively intelligible. What is he to do in order to get from the fund of 
existing conventions new well-defined expressions? All the human languages 
that we know today claim to beproductive, or, more precisely, universal symbol 
systems of this sort. And that is just what they are to an amazing degree. Parts 
of the Bible have been translated into I don't know how many thousand lan-
guages. Let us not ask whether the translation has been poor or correct, but 
rat her why, ab ovo, in 90 percent of the cases that is not a hopeless undertaking. 
The clear reason is that with patience and ingenuity, everywhere to any degree 
of approximation whatsoever, the claim of all languages can be fulfilled. That 
is evident on many levels and for many reasons. The only thing we are estab-
lishing is this, that such a claim-fulfillable in principle-can only be made by 
a two-class system that is familiar with the process of synthesis and with syn-
thetized unities or synthemata. With synthemata, judging by success, there stand 
on the same level and rest on the same psychological presuppositions what one 
is accustomed to call from the linguistic point of view derivations [Ableitungen) 
and (systematically established) transformations [Abwandlungen]. For the sake 
of brevity, let us bring them in in a simple way. 
A code of global systems, whether written or unwritten, must, just as the 
unwritten lexicon of a spoken language and for the same reasons, be limited, 
on the grounds simply of the limited capacity 01' human memory. Especially 
where it is a matter of setting up specific means of coordination of a great number 
of people so that they can be adequately and clearly and fluently enough used 
in their dealings with one another, in such a case one does not run up against 
very widely separated limits of ability. I am of the opinion that one could 
numerically determine them for more closely prescribed conditions by means of 
a mass experiment. In such a context, I am thinking first and foremost 01' really 

144 
KARL SÜHLER 
strictly isolated individual coordinative means, as, for example, would have to 
be used in the case of memorizing ship signals, as long as no immanent or 
artificial system that could help one was available and utilized. 
And that is precisely what we are dealing with here: every aid derived from 
the system widens the limits of capability. Language, however, has resolved this 
problem of these extensions with the aid of certain things that we discover in 
language itself, and in the decisive point, to put it briefly, skirted it, that is, 
disposed of it. For it is not because we ourselves and others are linguistic acrobats 
that we can bring to linguistic representation a practically infinite set of novel 
things in a linguistically intelligible fashion, but because this sort of thing is not 
demanded by a two-class system such as language iso We can also produce 
number symbols to infinity with only ten elementary signs and with a very 
simple, conventionally established 'syntax.' The rule of the decimal number 
system runs: numerals possess, going from right to left, the value of ones, tens, 
hundreds ... Wh at we here see the co-utilization and co-exploiting of the order 
of succession accomplish is contained identically and much more subtly from 
the point of view of design and performance in the syntax of language. 
6. In the process of thinking to the end such a delineated path of thought, 
the interests of the logician and the linguist perhaps branch off. But at the end, 
they certainly come together in the question of whether it is possible to prove 
that a representational instrument of the language type-to which, indeed, for 
example, the symbolic apparatus of logic belongs-is the only one that can 
fulfill, in principle, the claim to being considered a universal means of repre-
sentation. We can, I think, carry out this proof if, on the one hand, we presuppose 
that everything that is to be brought to representation can be adequately broken 
down into parts according to the logical schema of a relation with two foundations 
and, on the other hand, we observe and experience along with the best analysts 
of language that, at bottom, everything happens binomially in the structure of 
its synthemata. In the conception of these analysts, just as one begins with 
subject:predicate, so one proceeds in a consequent fashion. 2') The first conclusion 
is simple enough: then, if anything, a two-class representational instrument of 
29 The carrying out and critical validation of the idea (it will end in agreement in the domain of 
linguistic representation and will show that. on the contrary. the linguistic 'expression' and 'appeal" 
place other demands on the same sign apparatus) belong not in this section but to the special 
chapter dealing with the representational procedure of language. The idea uf the practically all-
penetrating binomial structure uf language is r.ut completely new but has led-for example. in the 
research circle around Trubetzkoy-to new. remarkable analytical consequences. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
145 
the language type is favored in the competition for the world championship of 
perfonnative universality. Here I stop. In our context, it is enough to demonstrate 
that a practically comprehensive productivity within the limit conditions of the 
given material and the capacities of memory which we have established can be 
attained only by a two-class system of the language type .1<1 
J() In a somewhat different form. a logical deduction of the dogma 01' lexicon and syntax was put 
fonh by Käthe Wolf at the Psychology Congress in Hamburg. Cf. Kongress-Bericht. pp. 449-453. 
In our present considerations. we will avoid going into the 'representational fields' [Darstellungs-
felder] of language. which are adduced there. 

D. THE SCHEMA OF LANGUAGE FUNCTIONS 
In Plato's commonsense saying that we have already cited, that language is an 
organum for one person's communicating with another about things, three fun-
damental relations are enumerated: one person communicating-another person 
being communicated tcr-the things being communicated. Let us draw a schema 
on a piece of paper, three points grouped together as a triangle, and a fourth 
point put in the middle, and let us begin to reflect on what this schema is able 
to symbolize (see Figure 1). The fourth point lying in the middJe stands for that 
to-be-investigated organum, which clearly must stand in some relation to the 
three foundations in the corners, whether the relation be a direct or a mediate 
one. We draw dotted lines from the center to the corner points of our schema 
and consider what these dotted lines symbolize. 
o THINGS 
· · · 
• 
ORGANUM 
... 0 .. 
. 
.. 
SENDER 0····· 
····0 RECEIVER 
Figure 1 
I. What today first occurs to every naive interpreter of this point-dot figure 
is a causal consideration. One person produces the second phenomenon and it 
works as a stimulus on the other. Thus, we have effectus and efficiens. In order 
to give the third dotted line a significance in the world order of a closed causal 
nexus, it is possible to proceed differently. The simplest procedure is to see it 
as a complex causal context that has been mediated by intermediate foundations. 
147 

148 
KARL BÜHLER 
Let us suppose that the production of the sound phenomenon is stimulated in the 
speaker by a preceding sense stimulus that has its origin in something lying in 
the perceptual field, and let the hearing of the linguistic sound phenomenon 
stimulate the hearer to direct his eyes toward that same thing. Take, for example, 
two men in a room: one of them notices a pattering , looks toward the window, 
and says, "It is raining." The other person also looks in that direction. 31 Here 
the circle is indeed closed in the most beautiful way and he who likes can let 
the event proceed forward in the closed circular fashion of an endless screw. If 
the thing or the event is rich enough for ever-new stimuli, which alternatively 
are taken up by one or the other partner, if the occurrence strikes the two in a 
productive fashion, then they will indulge, in dialogue, for some time in an 
observing feeling out and discussion of the thing or the states of affairs. 
If we take leave of our illustrative example and think once more of our 
model, the following would be the relational structure of the primary, but still 
perceptually supported, communication through sounds (see Figure 2). 
P$YCHOPHYSICAL 
SYSTEM CI 
Figure 2 
PSYCHOPHYSICAL 
SYSTEM ;J 
11 This example dealing with rain is discussed in Alan Gardiner's attractive book The Theorv 0/ 
Speech and Language (1932). I gladly acknowledge to the honored author that a year aga in 
London I discussed it on the board using my three-foundation schema. without knowing that he 
had al ready used it ten years before. Perhaps the London c1imate is responsible for the identical 
choice of examples. The three-foundation schema itself was conceived not by either one of us but 
first by Plato. to this extent. that a logician can derive it from Plato's leading principle. In 1918. 
when I began my essay" Kritische Musterung der neueren Theorien des Satzes" (/ ndogermanisches 
Jahrbuch 6) with the words. "The achievement of human language is a threefold one. announcing. 
arousing. and representing." I was not thinking of Plato. but like hirn. I was thinking about the 
thing itself and saw the model before me. The titles of my two lectures in University College in 
London were (I) "Structure of Language" and (2) "Psychology of Speech." In connection with 
them I had those thorough discussions with Gardiner mentioned by hirn. which showed us both 
that he. from the point of view of Egyptian. and I. from that of German. had cnme tn a completely 
compatible judgment about human language as such. This being in agreement was also to me. as 

THE AXIOMATIZATlON OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
149 
Now, a causal consideration--any causal consideration whatsoever-is just 
as unavoidable in the total framework of linguistics as in, for example, crimi-
nology. In the penal process, the judge has to determine not only the deed as 
a crime but also the one accused as the one who committed it, in order to judge 
hirn. Without any form whatsoever of a causal form 01' thinking, the ascription 
of the deed would be (seen purely from the logical point of viewl a meaningless 
undertaking. But in thinking the causal idea to its conclusion, we run up against, 
in the sphere 01' the law, so me well-known difficulties. I am 01' the opinion that 
the linguist dealing with causal factors runs up against the same sort 01' difficulties 
in his own sphere; they are, once again, the same as those that are quite generally 
evident in the core region 01' psychology. Now, if, from the point of view 01' 
scienti1'ic theory, the hope was justi1'iable that it must be possible to explain 
every event in this world, in the last analysis, without remainder by relying on 
physical axiomatization alone. then, for the time being, in precisely all the 
sciences that we have mentioned, there would remain these difficulties in the 
objective domain just like any other question mark or like the familiar white 
empty patches on the map 01' the geographer. And the research program-which, 
for example, robust behaviorism began to verify with youthful elan first on 
animals and human infants-would contain and show something 01' the, admit-
tedly still distant, end form to which linguistics would have to be brought. 
The true task of linguistics would be. accordingly, to show how the feat 
of intersubjective communication about things emerged in continuous fashion 
from that primary form (still supported by perception) and, 01' course, going 
back further, from even simpler forms. The development is long and there are 
many possibilities, so thinks behaviorism, but-we have only just begun to look 
at things in the right way. Nevertheless, we think, a whole generation has passed 
since the conception of radical behaviorism was formed, and several hundred 
brave pioneers have pursued the necessary and diligent experimental research 
as if it were a life task. lt should be the moment now, and worth the effort, to 
investigate how the result stands. I will formulate here a single proposition about 
it, which will suffice to justify fully, also from this point of view, our demand 
of extracting from the things their second face. lt is all the same whether one 
consults, in my opinion, the best works standing at the beginning of American 
behaviorism, those 01' Jennings and Thomdike, or the most recent integrative 
report of Ichlonski on the results fumished by the Russians Pavlov and Becterew, 
he said so of himself. an experience. An extraordinarily ckar and sound total presentation of my 
older contributions to language theory. which were scattered in various essays. is ollered by H. 
Dempe. Was ist Sprache:' Eine sprachphitosophische Untersllchllng il/1 Anscht/lss an die Sprach· 
theorie Kart Bühlers (1930). Wh at is necessary to say to the criticism ()f Dempe. inspired by 
Husserl. will be found in Stet/on 5. 

150 
KARl. BÜHl.ER 
or the extensive behavioristic language theory of the philosopher G. A. Delaguna. 
One who has not lost his eye for the genuine problem notices immediately that 
all these researchers were forced, from the very beginning and right up to the 
present day, by the subject matter itself to the decisive derailment of their 
program. 
They were not able and are not able to proceed forward without taking 
account of a sematological fundamental concept, that is, the concept of a signal. 
It was introduced by Jennings in a theoretically lax way in the form of a 'rep-
resentative stimulus' (our aliquid stat pro aliquo); it appears with Ichlonski 
garbed in an as-if treatment; and it is found in Delaguna from the very beginning 
in an underived and rough form. And this genuine sign concept has in the 
behavioristic program its logical place, not just anywhere on the periphery of 
the research domain, but right in the center, in such a fashion that, for example, 
as a matter of fact, it belongs or should belong to the inventory of every thinker 
who wants to understand the facts of animal forms of learning. For where it does 
not appear, there is a clear gap or a break at the pi ace where it has to be. The 
whole stagnation of behavioral theory, its splintering into more than seven colors 
of the rainbow in dealing with the learning process. about wh ich the books and 
journals of American psychologists are filled, could perhaps have been foreseen 
by a circumspect sematology. At any rate, the more comfortable prophecy is 
post Jestum and more than that; namely, a thorough logical ordering of differences 
of opinion concerning the learning process from this vantage point is possible. 
What I am saying has to remain for the time being without any detailed docu-
mentation. A theory of language has to contain a special chapter on the signal 
function of language, and there is the place for detail. There also would be the 
place to show that right in the lap of biology itself. as a sort of Hegelian anti thesis 
to a mechanical behaviorism, there arose the project of Uexküll, which is from 
the outset sematologically oriented in its fundamental concepts of 'receptor signs' 
and 'effector signs.' 
2. One who commits hirnself to the same orientation in the way of con-
sidering the matter-that way that is prescribed by the axiom of the sign nature 
of language-has to pay attention to the homogeneity of its concepts. The insight 
emphasized by Kant-that one may not simply mix up disparate sciences and 
parts taken from them, crudely put, as one mixes the ingredients of a cocktail-
is also valid for the two aspects of the object 'language,' about which we are 
speaking. Why and how an aspect cocktail must be avoided can be instructively 
seen in the case of phonology. According to the progress effected by phonology, 
in the future we have to regard the simple term language sound always in context 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
151 
or with the help of a supplementary word to determine whether what is meant 
is to be asound sign or a sound mark (i.e., a determinate unity taken from the 
system of phonemes of a determinate language), or whether what is meant is 
something from the factual domain of phonetics. For we know now that a single 
phoneme can be 'realized' in two places of the same language where it appears 
in a phonetically different way, and that a single sound, appearing in two different 
languages materially considered, can have phonologically different values. To 
repeat, the first case deals with the same languages, the second case, with 
different languages. A medley of concepts, belonging partly to a causal analysis 
and partly to a semiotic analysis, has to disorient the symbolic interpretation of 
our three-foundation schema so fundamentally that no one would rightly find 
his way about, and not hing but pseudoproblems would arise. The saying "March 
separately! " belongs to the self-evident presupposition of a homogeneity of 
concepts, which one wants to treat in synoptic fashion with the aid of a relational 
model. The complementary saying "And strike as a unit" is a matter that has 
to be resolved in another way in the bosom of science. That is to say, we have 
to proceed completely according to c1ear, assignable logical rules, the first in-
formation about which we can get by considering as paradigmatic the relation 
between phonetics and phonology. 
What, therefore, do, first of all, the dotted Iines of the three-foundation 
schema symbolize if we have determined that the relations are to be derived from 
a consideration of signs? Plato tried to c1arify only one of these relations, the 
sound-thing relation, and in the Cratylus he decided--even if in the dialogue 
a definite impulse to a new doubt is prepared-nevertheless overwhelmingly for 
the VOIL<f or ßECTEL alternative of his disjunctive question. There is therefore-
at that place on the schema, to put it in modem mathematical form-a coordi-
nation of the sound signs with objects and states of affairs. Contemporary speak-
ers do not know the historical preamble of this coordination. In many cases, 
Iinguistic research tries, to be sure, to pursue and sketch the coordination amaz-
ingly far back into the past; in the end, however, the thread breaks off everywhere. 
Speakers and Iinguistic researchers are familiar with both: if we 'today' recip-
rocally treat and compare the sound and the thing, we find no resemblance 
between the two of them. In most cases, we also do not know whether one ever 
existed and whether the coordination was originally instituted for the sake of 
this resemblance. That is all, and, indeed, already more than, we need at first. 
For coordinations 'exist, , if one observes ultimate conceptual precision, no matter 
how they may be motivated, always only through the power of a convention 
(agreement in the purely logical sense of the word) andjor parties to the contract 

152 
KARL BÜHLER 
along with their silent co-parties who are in the process of growing Up.32 Briefly, 
it is possible to abide by the decision of the Cratylus, and the lexicon of a 
scientifically accepted language accomplishes the task that is the first to result 
from the answer of Cratylus, that is, to put the names (as it is put there) of 
language into systematic relations of coordination with the 'things.' The fact that 
in a two-dass system of representational means such as language there are still 
syntactic conventions that belong to the lex.ical coordinations only expands the 
domain of coordinate relations that we find in it. In order to do justice to this 
domain, we now write at the place in the schema where the words the things 
stand the double designation: "objects and states of affairs." The further fact 
that there are besides, within wide limits, stereotyped forms of thinking 'things' 
that are coinstituted for the language community, that there are' inner language-
forms' in both dasses, complicates or simplifies matters, but without altering 
them. The epistemologist may, from his point of view, note, after recognizing 
the inner language form, that 'Ianguage' does not represent a thing in itself, but 
preciselya world, in the manner in which it 'appears' in one way to one language 
and in another way to another language. We are in complete agreement with 
this notion, because it does not disturb our circle at all. W. von Humboldt and 
Cassirer and (best of all) other epistemological theorists can begin their discussion 
here. 
The theme linguistic representation, inasmuch as it must be contained in 
a piece devoted to axiomatization, is adequately treated in Section C of our 
essay. To take it up once again in a new attempt and in a special chapter on 
language theory means that one is not satisfied that one has seen and characterized 
the sort of representation and the means of representation from the point of view 
of the axioms of linguistic research, but that one is aware of another problem 
belonging to the theory of language. We return in the new chapter to the concrete 
speech event and from this position ask the question: How do we go about 
representing something? What does a speaker do in a given situation, how can 
he 'avail hirnself' of the structures of his language in such a way, how can he 
J2 The word eoo-eoo may be more-or-less extensively 'similar' to the well-known call that we he ar 
in the forest. But still, this similarity itself is nothing more than the mori.'e for the correlation 01' 
sound and thing, which first constituies the name as a name; a name, not just 01' the call, but 01' 
the bird (note weil, while in the forest, only very few 01' those using this sound by convention may 
have perceived for themselves both bird and call at the same time). Much is lacking-Iogieally. 
everything is lacking-for the equation similarity = correlation. Wh at is established is this: every 
contemporary language speaker could-and, in tact, can-participate in the creation of new names 
in another and simpler way, wherever it has been agreed that similarity in general. any similarity 
whatsoever, can be a motive for a correlation, Correlation and motive of correlation have, however, 
to be logically distinguished, as is always the case. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
153 
(whether conceiving, imitating, or creating is irrelevant) so realize them in the 
sound stream of speech that representations result? Representations of everything 
in the world and outside the world, whatever one can represent in language. The 
ans wer to this question will be scientifically useful and generally adequate if it 
is able to discover diacritically the specificity of the Iinguistic domain as opposed 
to other forms of representation and to fix it in a conceptually exact way. 
3. Wh at now follows is adapted and determined to limit the dominance of 
the representational function of language, which we have not disputed. It is not 
true that everything for wh ich the sound is a medial phenomenon-a mediating 
element between speaker and hearer, a 'representative'-is covered by a concept 
of 'the things' or by the more adequate pair of concepts 'objects and states of 
affairs.' Rather, the opposite is true, namely, that in the structure of the speech 
situation a special position is occupied just as much by the sender as the agent 
of the act of speaking, the sender as the subject of the speech action, as by the 
receiver as the one spoken to, the receiver as addressee of the speech action. 
They are not simply apart of what the communication is about, but they are the 
partners in the exchange, and therefore, in the last analysis, it is possible that 
the medial sound product indeed exhibits its own specific sign relation to the 
one and to the other. We call the semantic relation of the sound sign to the 
performer of the speech deed the expression and the semantic relation of the 
sound sign to the addressee the appeal. 33 
Wh at we say in this context about the specific 'positions' of the speaker 
and hearer in the logical schema of the speech event, as the Iinguistic researcher 
uses it in his determinations, is of considerable importance in the exact phe-
nomenological validation of 'Ianguage. ' The correctness of this analysis becomes 
evident in an essential category [Inbegriffl of linguistic facts that I will try to 
make conceptually and systematically cIear in the theory of the primary repre-
sentational field of language. The words I. you, he and many others, which 
belong to the same context, obtain their fuIIness of meaning only in the coordinate 
system of the primary representational field. If one pursues as a phenomenologist, 
not being misled by all that has been learned from one's school books, this 
essential set of notions dealing with linguistic facts, then the Iinguistic observer 
sees before hirn in the concrete linguistic event an object having the foIIowing 
JJ I previously used the terms Kundgabe and Auslösung for these. It appears to me today that more 
and more the term expression [Ausdruck] is gaining in technical circles the narrow and precise 
meaning that we have recommended here; therefore. I use it in place of Kundgabe. The Latin 
word appellare (English; "appeal") appears to me to fit the ather word best. As everyone knows 
today. there is a sex appeal; speech appeal is just as much a precisely graspable fact. Admittedly. 
one may then no langer think of the ancient vocative case of nouns when speaking of ·appeal.' 

154 
KARL SÜHLER 
10gical constitution. He sees and hears in the methodologically most important 
case, as one who is not hirnself drawn into the conversation, how A communicates 
something to B about objects and states of affairs. The first question is, Is he 
allowed to introduce what he has observed into his protocol sentences as a kind 
of action? The answer is that he must indeed do so, in order not to exclude one 
of the indispensable axioms of his science (cf. section B). But as soon as he not 
only says but also thinks action, the whole experiences in its object domain (it 
is evident) a differentiation into moments. To wit, it experiences a differentiation 
according to the subject-object schema so weil known to the theory ofknowledge, 
a schema that is still enriched by precisely the addition of a further moment. 
That the subject-object correlation can be contained immanently in the object 
of a science is shown by the example of the psychology of experience. 34 The 
object 'language,' as the linguist deterrnines it, is still more complicated by one 
construction level than the object 'experience.' For the speech action contains 
the speaker as the subject of the action, the acting I, in addition the addressee 
you and, in correlation with both, that about which. In these, except for the 
personal third person, the essence of all objects and states of affairs is contained. 
In an object that is so constituted and only in it is there room for the three 
semantical relations of language signs. He who accepts or rejects one of them 
must do the same with the others. 
We can decisively verify this constitutional forrnula if we can establish that 
each one of the three relations, each one of the three meaning functions of 
language signs, opens up and thematizes its own domain of phenomena and facts 
that have relevance for linguistic theory. And so it iso For 'the linguistic expres-
sion' and 'the linguistic appeal' are partial objects oftotal research into language, 
which not only require their own efforts and methods but also manifest their 
own structures. To put it briefly, the lyric and rhetoric each have something 
specific to themselves, which distinguishes them from one another and from-
let us say, to stay in the same frame-the epic, and their structural laws are 
naturally even more noticeably different from the structural law of scientific 
representation. This is, put in the simplest words, the content of the theory of 
the three functions of language. 
4. In order to make this point, as far as it may go, probable in a purely 
sematological fashion, let us begin with the case of a linguistic expression. We 
establish by way of definition:the fact as such-that sound and discourse hic et 
nunc, with everything pertaining to them (representation being included, not 
J4 CL R. Reiniger. Das psychologische Problem' ( 1930). 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
155 
excluded), are the deed and work ofthe speaker in the speech situation-grounds 
the claim of sound and discourse to be treated as expressive [ausdruckshaltig 1 
and to function as the expressive component in linguistic intercourse. This new 
proposition about language, that it is an expression, must naturally (that is the 
first concern of the logician) have a place and can exist without touching the 
axiom of the representational function of language. How is representation related 
to expression? Is it possible, in order to bracket the existence question (in the 
sense of the mathematician), for the same thing to serve at the same time two 
masters, representation and expression, in one? The ans wer is, Yes it iso For the 
concrete item that is produced in a speech situation, the principle of abstractive 
relevance, functioning in both directions, is valid. The flow of sound in discourse 
enters along with the other relevant moments into the representation as weil as 
into the expression, and the moments that are relevant in both directions are 
shown to be, within certain limits, independent variables. 
So it is that-to say just one word more about this matter for the sake of 
clarification-the whole structural model of language that we have developed 
in Section C is to be understood from the point of view of representation. But 
this structure allows room everywhere for the sphere of expression. The Indo-
European languages, just like most of the others, for example, leave to the 
expression the great part of the musical modulations and variants (rhythm, mel-
ody, tempo, and so forth). The same goes for the majority of the formation 
possibilities of the sound stream in this dimension. This and much more besides 
can be expressive and function without touching the purely representational 
content of discourse. We recognize once again the importance of the principle 
of abstractive relevance; for what is unused by one is quite adequately at the 
disposal of the other. In this way, the hesitant language researcher understands 
here once again the validity of the proof of the ideality of the language structure. 
What one understands by such a thing can only be something that has been 
derived by abstraction. and the concrete object has to be able to be abstractively 
broken into parts, so as to become at one and the same time relevant in more 
than one direction with independently variable moments. 
Furthermore, the decisive element for the sematological distinction between 
expression and representation that we have met in this analysis was made prom-
inent by certain cIassical English logicians, followed by the philosophical math-
ematician Frege, then Marty, Meinong, Martinak, HusserI, and Gomperz, all 
of them in such agreement that I scarcely need to add anything to what I myself 
have written on this subject since 1918. Let us then only make the comment that 
one ought to divide again in a truly terminologically appropriate way the old 

156 
KARL BÜHLER 
saying ordo et connexio rerum, wh ich Spinoza had repeated as a formula fol-
lowing the Scholastics,35 so that we~an then attribute to representation, which 
is founded on coordination, the ordo part and to expression as weil as appeal 
the connexio rerum part. The same idea, only in other words, is contained in 
the distinction that I established elsewhere in factual agreement with Meinong, 
that is, the division of relations into relations of equivalence (or comparison) 
and dependencies. The first kind furnishes the foundation for the coordinate 
signs (or order signs), and the second kind furnishes the foundation for what 
one calls symptoms, indices, and so forth, or indications in general. Represen-
tation operates with order signs, while expression belongs to the domain of 
indications. A further terminological suggestion is to the effect of divesting for 
our purposes the Scholastic terms existentia and essentia of their main and 
supplementary ontological meanings in order then to establish that the reading 
and understanding of an expression slgnifies or also contains an inferential proc-
ess from one existent to another, a movement of inference, therefore, quoad 
existentiam from one given to another. 36 The reading and understanding of a 
Jl Mr. Dunin-Borkowski was so friendly as to communicate to me by letter the following, putting 
it in outline form. I reproduce it here with his agreement: . '( I) 'Ordo-connexio' was certainly 
known to Scholasticism; but this duality lay probably nearer to Spinoza in the popular philosophy 
of his time, which sought to realize a cosmos-unity. Factuallv it probably had everywhere the 
same meaning: not merely aseries of things following one another in time. but aseries with so me 
form or other of inner relation of quantities following one another (connexio). But it also denoted 
a unified species of all these 'connections' and their being brought to completion in a whole so 
that each ordo bespeaks a connexio, not vice versa. (2) Spinoza probably took over. as usual. the 
expressions but gave them another sense. Ordo idearum et rerum: in both series, the same sequence 
right up to the very top of the whole. Conllexio idearum et rerum: the same sort of dependence 
of two things and of two ideas, respectively. Therefore, there exists the same kind of sequentiality 
in ideas and in things from the simplest to the most complex whole. just as much in the kind of 
dependence (connexio) as in the things and ideas according to their essence and content (orda). 
So it seems to me." I conclude from this that my terminological recommendation comes rather 
close to the thought of Spinoza hirnself. 
36 The book of Ph. Lersch, Gesicht und Seele (1932), contains in its introduction so me sematological 
discussions which are inspired by Husserl. Lersch finds for the case of the expression the correct 
formulation, namely. that we are dealing here with the co-comprehension of "co-existing" 
(people). A couple of points are distorted and unreliable and could be correctly and reliably 
understood if the author had more carefully looked out for wh at has already been done in this 
matter. Soon the sparrows will sing it from every roof-the song namely of the 'representational 
function' of language: why does Lersch the psychologist think he has to begin once again ab ovo 
and develop new terms step by step?-The experimental discovery of Lersch iso if one extracts 
the strongest parts of his analysis, very instructive. Compare, for example. the expressive elements 
isolated by hirn in the case of the eye lids and the direction of sight and their merging with it in 
the compound unity of the expression just as svnthemata function in representative language. One 
recognizes immediately and sharply the common and the different element in expressive complexes 
and in the representative synthemata of language. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
157 
representation, on the other hand, contains the same process of inference at most 
secondarily and has to effect it in a roundabout manner, because coordination, 
essentially, relates one thing to another according to the structure common to 
both or, as the Scholastics said, quoad essentiam. 
Heinz Werner put forward the impressive formula that one must derive from 
things, in a way different from the physicist's manner of proceeding, an 'aspect' 
[Gesicht], so that, if they really have one, one can find their expression content. 
That is quite appropriate; nevertheless, it is nothing more than practical advice: 
proceed in the fashion that you customarily use in the case of the human face. 
One could just as weil say, "Proceed in the fashion that you customarily use 
in the case of the voice and of discourse. " If, proceeding beyond this point, we 
subsume the expressive element under the category of these worldly elements 
having the character of a sign, and if we thereby subsume expressions under the 
category of sign functions, then the scientific carrying out of this classification 
procedure is dependent on the extent to which, in sematology, one attains struc-
tural insights into what the nature of a sign in general is, to insights that are then 
also valid for expressionsY Propositions such as the principle of abstractive 
relevance should demolish any doubts about whether it is possible. It is better 
yet also for pure theory if it can support itself by means of good factual research. 
The situation today in the domain of research into expressions is very lively. 
The study of physiognomies is today not only asport; it has become a very 
earnestly pursued concern of science. If I were to indicate what appear to me 
to be the most important and most successful, the names of Klages and H. 
Werner could not be absent, the latter of whom has just published a compre-
hensive book on language as expression. J8 In Vienna we have already partly 
17 One should not argue much about whether it is more appropriate to reserve the term sign. say. 
for only the order sign or to let it also be used for indices, as German and all the other Indo-
European languages have suggested to the logician. One should not make a fuss about it before 
having derived definite consequences of the one and the other and, therefore. having discovered 
reasons pro and contra: I will show in another place that 'indices' (symptoms, indieators). to whieh 
expressions belong, stand cIoser logieally to order signs than both together stand to all the others. 
which raises the claim that they be treated as representational forms. Only a demonstration 01' this 
derivation and relationship will justify our following in the quest ion of definitions the proeedure 
01' the Indo-European languages and the best heads among the logieians who have oeeupied 
themselves with the matter (Husserl, Meinong, ete.). 
'8 H. Wemer, Grundfragen der Sprachphysiognomik (1932). Werner's psychologie al experiments 
make adetour along the path of the 'aspeet' of word sounds, so tu speak: 'out or this aspeet they 
try to determine what one understands as a speaker and hearer about the properties of things. That 
ean only be so meant (putting the quest ion of the history 01' language asideJ that one ean get just 
as mueh 'out of' the word sounds as one puts into them. The German feels. aeeording to Wemer. 
the word sound Seife somewhat differently than the Frenehman feels the word sm'on. "In so far 
as the things are an immediately feIt expression. the language which gives them their name is 

158 
KARL BÜHLER 
carried out and partly in progress aseries of investigations into 'voice and 
personality.' I want to sketch rapidly here what appears to us who are working 
on these matters as the two correlative factors in every human expression. No 
matter whether one begins with the growing up of the human child into the 
possibility of understanding express ions or stays with the phenomenologically 
perspicuous analyses of refined and experienced adults, one constantly comes 
up against two ways of proceeding that mesh with one another: the resonance 
method and the index method. Only the universally disseminated index method 
explains aseries of facts that are so familiar that as theorists we can make 
reference to them and take them as a starting point without involved reporting 
of specific observational findings. What is perhaps the most important element 
in this matter is that in a precomprehended, concrete life situation, practically 
each and every thing can become a support of the meaning of an expression 
exact1y as in every other kind of index method. 
Let the reader think for a moment about the modem master of the artistic 
creation of silent expressions in silent films, such as Charlie Chaplin, and about 
how he technically goes about shaking up the viewer through revelations of the 
inner life of the mimed hero. This hero falls into the most remarkable situations 
on the screen, situations that we think we know humanly through and through; 
and that is the first presupposition. Under such preconditions now, simply every-
thing-action as weil as the lack of action, whether he at a given moment laughs 
or does not laugh, whether he moves about or stands silent, and so forth .in 
infinitum-is weighted down with e.tpression. That is to be taken literally. The 
inventory of expressive means in such situations is just as inexhaustible for the 
theorist doing the ordering as any other inventory of indices that one would want 
to undertake. 39 
An expressive virtuoso often heaps up--but sometimes he also, in refined 
fashion, isolates-the indices to which he forces the spectators to pay attention. 
Those taking part in our experiments had simpler interpretive tasks than the 
person watching a movie; what they were to do was to match correctly the sounds 
of voices that they heard from a phonograph record with photographs of speakers 
expressive language'" (p. 10). It will be easy to show that the 'interiority' which tlows out of 
things to us through the 'aspect" of words i, an interiority that has previously been given to them 
by uso They reveal what one has put in them; they give back the rescued light like the moon. We. 
on the contrary, think. in the case of the linguistic expression, first of what one can he ar in the 
sound stream of discourse conceming the interiority of the speaker without the retlex conceming 
the nominative function. Both cases may be investigated vis-a-vis one another. I will subject 
Wemer's Sprachphysiognomik to criticism in another place. 
39 Helene Richter's biography of Kainz is a veritable storehouse 01' carefully noted directions that 
Kainz inserted into his stage presentation. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
159 
that had been presented to them, and they had to report to us how they accom-
plished this. They succeeded by a percentage far beyond mere chance or accident, 
and in their reports the index method was evident in many variants. But that is 
not the only thing. If we observe children and grown-ups, how they 'fasten on' 
to one another through expressive movements, then we call this unmediated 
appeal of one to the other figuratively a species of resonance. And this resonance 
process is the second factor that supports the expressive meaning in our exper-
iments and probably everywhere. This is not the place to discuss the details. I 
would like to touch on only one point more. 
What is the second foundation of the expressive relation? To state it in 
summary form: according to Klages, the 'personality' is revealed in the expres-
sion. That points in that direction and would prove, if one otherwise did not 
know it, that Klages wants to have what he calls "personality" defined preem-
inently in the experiential aspect of psychology; his personality determinations 
follow from an inventory of concepts belonging to the psychology of experience. 
What I would like to say is that it is also possible to proceed otherwise in 
characterology, but not in the theory of expressions. If we want to retain the 
concept of expression's specific meaning, then there has to exist, as the second 
foundation of the expressive relation, something such as the interiority of the 
person expressing, to which of course belong not only actual experiences but 
the conceptual core [Inbegri.ff1 of all the moments out of which Klages logically 
constructs the character of aperson. Interiority as a correlate of expressive 
phenomena-that gives us a well-defined conceptual pair. 
Now, does all that belong under the jurisdiction of sematology? As regards 
the issue of resonance, I abstain first of a11 from every ans wer to the question. 
The resonance component is in practice the simplest but in theory the darkest 
matter. 40 However, the indices, of course, belong to the domain of signs, and 
the index method belongs to the domain of the application of sematological 
insights. There is in the expression, as one can gather from Lersch's investigation, 
also something like a symptom syntax. Its structural law is, as far as I can see, 
a completely other kind of thing than that proper to the syntax of representational 
signs. Besides, a general theory of indices would be of extreme importance not 
only for physiognomy but also for criminology, for an insight into the diagnoses, 
supported by symptoms, of the physician, and so forth. In my Crisis of Psy-
'0 In our child psychology laboratory in Vienna, during a six-month period. my colleague Eino Kaia 
c1arified in an uncommonly circumspect and apt set of experiments aseries of known facts and 
new ones that he discovered. so that it is necessary today to say proceeding bv indices where we 
ourselves yesterday were still saying resonance. Cf. Annales Unil'ersitatis Aboensis, Sero B .• Tom. 
17 (1932). 

160 
KARL BÜHLER 
chology, I characterized the psychoanalytical method as a detective method. It 
seems that this thesis has been taken up circumspectly by a psychoanalyst who 
is certainly competent in these theoretical matters:" One recognizes once again, 
after these c1assifications, that the concept expression needs the diakritikon that 
we conferred on it through correlating it with 'interiority.' Otherwise, it lapses 
into indefiniteness. 
5. In order to discover what the old masters of linguistic research knew 
about the 'appeal' factor, one consults not descriptive grammar but what they 
called rhetoric. In the course of actually working out my language theory, as 
it now appears to me, perhaps it will be worth the effort to treat from new points 
of view the historical studies and, for example, the technique of the Roman and 
other great source rhetoricians. Descriptive grammar is quickly finished with the 
formal means of appeal that language has. There is the vocative, about which 
one already knew that, according to its function, it falls outside the system of 
the other noun 'cases' and behaves in a refractory way in the structure of the 
sentence. Right beside it stands the imperative, wh ich is separated in the same 
fashion from the usual verbal forms and besides, sometimes-for example, in 
the Indo-European languages-appears as a verbal stern without an ending (veni, 
komm). The historians interpret this phenomenon as the embedding of a later 
language layer in an earlier one; in our terminology, that means that the formed 
appeal words have become strangers in the dance of the other forms, whose 
calling lies purely or more purely in representing. I say "more purely" because 
the imperative form of the verb is, indeed, not completely devoid of the function 
of naming (in the widest sense of the word); the indication of activity in Come! 
is and remains a moment of representation, which only in the rare, practically 
pure, appeal words such as the Greek ä:YE or the German dialectal geh! (geh 
bleib da!) completely fades away. The cases of halloh, he, pst, and so forth, 
are limit phenomena. We cannot say whether they are vocatives or imperatives 
or equivalent to both at the same time. Considered exactly, such a question of 
principle shows itself to be falsely put, because it unjustifiably presupposes that 
even at the limit of formal language, everything must belong either one place 
or the other. The appeal words can be meaningfully set off only from the pure 
interjections. And at least at the tower limit of language, there does not exist 
a third person in the chorus,' that is, pure representational signs. Identifying 
exc1amations such as "eUAuaau!" or "fire!", which customarily emerge at 
the most various places in the systematic framework of the language theorist, 
" Cf. S. Bemfeld. "Die Deutung in der Psychoanalyse." Zeilschnji jiir Allgemeine Psvch%gie. 
42(\ 932). 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGLJAGE SCIENCES 
161 
are, at any rate-no matter what one may say about them-not to be thoroughly 
thought of or proved to be psychologically totally free from the informative and 
appellative elements. 
The chief crop of languagejorms, therefore, has representational functions, 
while the appeal, similar to the expression, is given over to certain modifications 
of the sound stream of discourse and beyond them to other skillfully used tech-
niques utilized by the most successful joiners of men (preachers, rhetoricians, 
poets). The concept of speech appeal has to comprehend all this appropriately; 
we may not, in the case of its definition, as with expression, think of this or that 
as cut out with a dissecting knife. The means change; there exist, in the age of 
'objectivity,' situations and audiences that demand a true rhetorician to become 
also a simple presenter of dry facts in numbers and tables. For he knows that 
where it comes to that it is possible to have a rhetorical effect even by that 
means. The way through representation can serve the purpose of an appeal, and 
there exist within representation places where the leader-by a knowledge of 
factors and circumstances behind the scenes, or, put quite generally , precisely 
by means of a considered control technique--can bring the hearer to the point 
where he wants hirn. Nietzsche expressed it in this way: one need Iie no more 
when one is in possession of enough truth and is able to lead and mislead men 
with it, wherever one wants. 42 
To begin the sematological investigation of an appeal with such an extremely 
refined case of human behavior would mean to venture unprepared immediately 
into the most intricate domain. Let it be, then, that we let ourselves be instructed 
at the outset of our investigation by the most intricate aspect only in this respect 
(which actually is unmistakably visible in it), namely, that in the total realm of 
the appellative an indirect and a direct factor have to be distinguished. Almost 
just as the analysis of the expression and its interpretation along the Iines of the 
resonance factor makes the index method c1ear, so the same 'resonance' has 
probably also to have its place in the theory of appeals. As a partner, however, 
it has something else beside it, which, indeed, just like the index method, may 
be named indirectly but cannot be simply identical with it. It is not the case that 
one may treat the appeal simply as the mirror-image appendage to the expression. 
Not at all; on the surface, some asymmetries, cutting across the symmetries, 
already speak against this. Marty has already shown this sensitively by exam-
" In the interest of exactness. let us cite completely the paradoxically pointed dictum 01' Nietzsehe: 
. 'One has no need of lies in human intercourse if one has a sufficient amount 01' truth~ With it one 
can deceive and seduce in any direction one wants." (Gesammelte Werke. Nachlass. 2 Abt. XII. 
268). 

162 
KARL SÜHLER 
p1esY Wh at is still more decisive is that the second foundation of the appeal 
relation cannot be the analogon to the second foundation of the expression 
relation. There is nothing simpler and clearer to a reader in the first quarter of 
an ho ur than the formula, a little summarily and popularly put: just as the 
expression reveals something of the personality (interiority) of the speaker, so 
the appeal directs itself to the personality (interiority) of the hearers. Behind 
that, however, I would like to put a large and well-grounded question mark. To 
be sure, the word personality can peacefully remain in the formula; but in the 
second case it may not contain 'interiority.' Thus, it seems to me, the total 
structure of a man (or, on another level, also of an animal) intended by the term 
personality is not exhausted, is not determined on every side by what, for 
example, Klages worked out. 
Briefly, the second foundation of the signal relation is the behavior of the 
addressee. The concrete thing, functioning as a sign, is called on to confer a 
new directing impulse on behavior. There exists an outer and an inner behavior; 
in this, the behaviorists are totally correct. If one understands this fundamental 
concept of behavior as broadly as, for example, Klages in his personality theory 
understands the concept of experience, then one attains to the true analogon to 
'interiority' and has, besides, what the signals in the strictest sense are directed 
toward (or intend). The immediate intentional goal of all signals is the behavior 
of the addressee. 
In order to demonstrate that only this way of thinking fits the facts, we may 
not shy away from taking adetour to the human through the findings of com-
parative psychology. What I am saying can be grasped in the case of animals 
and of human infants. 44 Nevertheless, it is impossible to report on the facts as 
much as would be necessary in order to successfully undertake such a demon-
stration. I will do this in aseparate chapter in Language Theory and will give 
here only a pair of indications from the book. Especially in the case of the social 
insects, the use of signals in community life is highly differentiated. All material 
intercourse-for example, among termites, ants, wasps, and bees-is regulated 
through signals. The things there are remotely comparable with the high-level 
signal structure that modern men have introduced to regulate their street traffic 
and their railroads, while previously. for centuries, only a pair of poor prede-
"A. Marty, Untersuchungen der allgemeinen Grammatik lind Sprachphilosophie 1 (1908). Compare 
the places in the index under the rubric of "interest-demanding phenomena" and "emotive ele-
ments." One should not, in order to get hold of psychological fine points, let oneself be frightened 
by the dignified diction of Marty, and beside;, one must expect no more than a collection of notes . 
.... Cf. R. Ripin and H. Hetzer, "Frühestens Lernen des Säuglings in der Ernährungssituation. " 
introd. Ch. Bühler. Zeitschrift für Psvchologie 118 (1930): IOOff. 

THE AXIOMATIZATION OF THE LANGUAGE SCIENCES 
163 
cessors, the sign posts, sufficed for the demands of traffic. It really makes a 
vast difference whether some traffic net binds together a few dozen or a hundred 
or a hundred thousand traffic partners and how dense the traffic iso Certain 
uniform moments between the signal structures in use in modern large cities-
uniformities that, in spite of the difference in level, are unmistakable and that, 
on account of the difference in level, are theoretically especially interesting-
may be grounded in the fact that we have been forced together like insects and 
have arrived at an insectlike density of traffic. And with that, we come to the 
punctum saliens: at first, we have to study the signals in these sorts of arrange-
ments. It cannot elude the man who starts with the animal realm what the end 
result is, because in the majority of cases it is external behavior. If he proceeds 
from that point to the signals in use in modern human traffic-structures, then he 
needs only to hold onto what he is already familiar with in order to put in order 
with one fell swoop the discussions, for example, of the theoreticians of railroad-
signal structures and of the structures of street traffic. The 'signal concept' -for 
example, that of the red and green light-has caused them much hard thought; 
our theory will immediately tell them how much the analogy of the so-called 
signal concept with the genuine concept limps, and whence come the difficulties 
of defining the 'signal concept' after the example of the genuine concept. The 
constant that one is looking for is no factual state of affairs but aform of behavior 
of the addressee. 
And now let us turn to the linguistic signals in the speech appeal. lt is 
interesting to ask where the performative limits of human language lie in the 
sec tor of the signal function. They lie enclosed, obviously. partly in the material; 
partly, however, language is not able to cope with the, to be sure, simpler but 
more exact demands of a den se traffic-structure, precisely because it has become, 
in the differentiated process of linguistic intercourse, a delicate instrument and 
is constructed with respect to complications and nuances that only cause a dis-
turbance there (in traffic structures). 
After all this, it is only the rough-logical facet. if for the sake of order we 
make the formula aliquid stat pro aliquo suffice for signals and recognize that 
the representing element here stands for what is being represented quoad effec-
tum. What is represented by means of a red signal light is, in the last analysis, 
perhaps, something existing among other perceptual relations; perhaps, also, it 
is an invisible hindrance to forward progress, about whose existence the signal 
giver decides. Only the introduction into the system of the signal giver, with his 
human possibilities, makes the model useful also for the understanding of the 
linguistic appeal. 
6. We have assembled everything that belongs to the elucidation of the 

164 
KARL BÜHLER 
eoneepts representation, expression, and appeal, and we eharaeterize onee more 
the organon model of language (see Figure 3). 
OBJECTS AND STATESQF AFFAIRS 
'''''''''1 -:-:, ,-:', -, ,'-, ""11 ~ 
ijii;iii;; 
'l'l"'lii 
! f ! ~ ! ! ! i ; i 
~~ 
"""" ~. ~ 
",W"" 
Figure 3 
The eircle in the middle symbolizes the eonerete sound phenomenon. Three 
variable moments on it are eapable of raising this phenomenon in three different 
ways to the rank of a sign. The sides of the drawn-in triangle symbolize these 
three moments. The triangle eneompasses, in one respeet, less than the eircle 
(the prineiple of abstraetive relevanee). In another direetion, however, it sur-
passes the eircle, in order to indicate that the sensibly given eonstantly experi-
enees an appereeptive enlargement. The multitude of lines symbolizes the defined 
semantie relations of the language sign. It is a symbol by reason of its being 
eoordinated to objeets and states of affairs; an index (indicium) by reason of its 
dependenee on the sender, whose interiority it expresses; and a signal by reason 
of its appeal to the hearer, whose outer or inner behavior it direets just as other 
traffie signs do. 

NAME INDEX 
Aristotle. 30. 80. 81. 112 n 
Baläzs. Bela. 62, 64 n, 71 
Beardsley. Monroe, 50 
Benveniste, Emile, 22 n, 28, 35 n. 71 
Black. Max, 50, 51, 71 
Bosch. Hieronymus, 52 
Brand, Gerd, 6 n, 71 
Brentano, Franz, 128 
Brugmann-Delbriick, Kar!, 21. 142 n 
Bühler, Charlotte, 117 n, 118, 119. 120 n. 
162 n 
Carnap, Rudolf. 31 n, 142 
Cassirer. Ernst, 3, 5, 6. 17.23,27.35.38. 
46, 71, 83 n, 100. 119 n, 137. 142 n, 
152 
Chaplin. Charlie, 158 
Chomsky, Noam. 4. 67-68 
Church. Joseph, 45. 71 
Cunningham. Suzanne, 6 n, 71 
Dalton. John, 43-44 
Descartes. Rene. 104 
Dilthey. Wilhelm, 132 
Durkheim. Emile. 12, 102 
Eco. Umberto. 21. 52. 59. 65. 71 
Ehrenfels, Christian von. 46, 47 
Freud. Sigmund, 118. 121 
Gadamer. Hans-Georg. 45. 71. 85 
Gardner. Howard, 44, 71 
Gomperz. Heinrich. 5, 94--97, 99. 100, 107 
Goodman. Nelson. 49-50. 51. 71 
Hjelmslev. Louis, 56. 65. 67. 71 
Homer. 18.45.63 
Hume. David. 105 
Husscrl. Edmund, 4. 6, 7, 8.16.17,21. 
n n, 29, 30. 31. 32, 33. 71, In 
lnnis. Robert. 6 n, 27 n. 40. 45, 48. 65. 72 
Jakobson. Roman. 4. 8. 52. 72 
Joyce, James. 51 
Kant. lmmanuel. 33. 34, 35, 49. 150 
Kelsen. Hans. 122-123 
Kepler. Johannes. 99. 111 
Klages, Ludwig. 157, 159. 162 
Köhler, Wolfgang, 38-39. 72 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von. 105 
Lessing, Gotthold E .. 56, 136 
Locke, John, 125 
Lonergan, Bernard. 15 n, 72 
Lotman. Jurij, 62 n. 72 
Mach, Ernst. 105 
Marty. Anton. 162 n 
Mead, Georgc Herbert, 6 
Meillet. AnIon. 131. 132. 133 
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 26 n 
Metz. Christian. 62 n 
Mill. John Stuart. 30. 31,32. 105. 114 
MukarovskY. Jal1. 4. 72 
Nietzsehe. Friedrich. 121. 161 
Occam. William of. 81. 93 n 
Paul. Hermann. 44. 47. 51 
Peirce. Charles Sanders, 58. 72 
Pesaresi. Massilllo. 6. 72 
Pettit. Philip. 65. 72 
Plalo. 7. 15.30. XO. XX. 108. 124. 125. 
147. 151 
165 

166 
NAME INDEX 
Polanyi, Michael, 4, 26 n, 31 n, 35, 39. 40. 
45,46.48.52.72 
Popper. Kar!. 4, 11. 31, 72 
Quintilian. 43 
Richards. I. A .. 48 
Rickert. Heinrich, 120 
Ricoeur, Pau!. 5 I. 72 
Rossi-Landi, Ferruccio, 6, 72 
Sacks, Sheldon, 44. 51, 72 
Sapir, Edward, 4, 18. 60 n, 72, 73 
Saussure. Ferdinand de, 4, 7. 28, 56. 68. 
73,83,84, 100, 101, 102. 103. 107. 
109, 11{}-117. 122. 124. 125, 141 n 
Schleicher, August. 142 n 
Schmidt, P. W., 133, 134 
Sebeok, Thomas, 7, 73 
Snel!. Bruno. 20, 73 
Sokolowski, Robert, 16 n, 73 
Sonneck, Bruno, 91 n 
Steintha!. Heymann, 81 n, 103. 119 
Stierle, Karlheinz. 40 n, 73 
Stumpf, Karl, 127, 128, 132 
Trfm-Duc-Thao, 20. 73 
Trier, Jost, 37-38. 73 
Trubetzkoy. N. S., 99. 144 n 
Uexküll, Jakob von, 6, 150 
Umiker-Sebeok, Donna Jean. 7. 73 
Volosinov, V. N. (Baxtin), 38 n, 73 
Volpe, Galvano della, 56. 65, 73 
von Humboldt, Wilhe1m, 7. 9. 16,36.37. 
60,73,81,82.83, 109, 119, 152 
Vygotsky, Lev S .. 36, 38 n, 39, 73 
Weissgerber, Leo. 36. 119 n 
Wemer. Heinz, 119 n. 157 
Wheelwright. Philip. 50. 52. 73 
Winner. Irene, 44. 71 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 6, 30. 31 n. 40, 69. 
73 
Wundt. Wilhelm. 141 

SUBJECT INDEX 
Abstraction 
and concept formation. 30-31 
and metaphor. 44-47 
paradigmatic role of phonology. 5. I 1-18. 
97-100 
principle of abstractive relevance, 12. 94. 
99. 160 
Acts and Actions. 16-18. 117-125 
comparison with legal action. 122-123 
concepts in psychology. 117-121 
Anaphora. 61-65 
and deixis in language. 23. 61-62 
in film and on stage. 62-64 
Appellative function 
directed toward behavior of addressee. 162 
relation to representatiol'. 160-163 
rhetorical role. 160 -161 
Ausdmckstheorie. 14. 44. 57 
Behaviorism. 149-150 
Code. 137-139 
differs from two-class representational 
system. 140-144 
and global symbolization. 137-139 
Concept Formation 
abstraction. 29 
concept signs. 21-31 
scope 01' a concept. 30. 33. 36-38 
synchytic conccpt. 30 
Consciousness 
acts. 5-6 
and language. 38-40 
and signs, 68 
supplement to formal theory of meaning. 
27 n. 141-142 
synthesis. 38 
Deixis 
ad oculos. 19-23 
Deixis (COIIt.) 
am Phantasma. 23-24 
generates the index field. 19-24. 149 
Kantian connection. 35-36 
key to shifters. 21 
as signifying act. 19. 136 
Expressive function 
known through indexes. 158 
known through resonance. 158 
reveals interiority 01' speaker. 153-160 
Fields 
>( implications of field theory. 35-41 
index field. See Deixis 
in nonlinguistic representational systems. 
55-59 
~ symbol field. 24--35 
two-field theory. 19 
Umfelder: empractical. symphysical. 
25-27 
Functions 01' language. See Expressive 
function: Appellative function: 
Reprcscntation 
Gestalt 
role of Gestalt in sign perccption. 12-14 
semiotic and Gestalt elements in 
metaphor.46-47 
Index. See Deixis 
Inner language form. 9. 82. 108. 152 
Linguistic Relativity. 36-41. See also Inner 
language form 
Linguistic Sign 
composed 01' diacritical moments. 11-18 
grasped through abstraction. 97-100 und 
passim 
performs different functions. 164 
167 

168 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Metaphor 
as abstract ion technique, 44 
aesthetic, 48--49, 51-52 
limitations of Bühler's model, 51-53 
model of, 45 
motives for. 44 
relation to contemporary theories, 48-53 
Method, 77-78, 85-88, 109-110 
material derailments, 107 
Nominalism, 104-105 
refuted by phonology, 104 
Onomatopoeia, 28-29, 131-133 
marginal role in representation, 135-137 
Organon model of language, 8-9, 104, 108, 
147-148, 164 
connection with homo faber, 108 
essential for semiotic exchange, 104 
Perception 
connection with linguistic apprehension, 
33-34, 38-39 
as model for metaphor, 43-47 
has semiotic structure, 26 n, 102 
Phonology 
key to abstraction , 14-16 
paradigmatic for language theory, I 1-18 
and sign character of language, 91-108 
Productivity of language, 143-145 
Proper names 
methodological importance, 31-33 
Representation, 131-145 
fidelity 01', 58-59 
iconic, 59 
Sachwissen (material knowledge) 
shows insufficiency 01' formal theory 01' 
meaning, 27 n, 141-142 
Schemata, 9, 34-35 
function in metaphor, 49-50 
syntactic. 9, 34-35 
Semiotic exchange. See Organon model 01' 
language 
Shifters, 21, 22 
Sign, 91-100. 107-108 
composed of abstract moments, 94 
point 01' origin. 91-92 
social nature. 6-8 
Sphercs 01' mcaning 
connection with metaphor, 43. 46-47. 
49-51 
Structure. 7-8. 113-116 
ideal. III 
in languagc and in Euclidean geometry, 
111 
as langue. 109-116 
Symbolization 
as conceptualization. 29-35 
and mediation. 28-29 
needs a field. 25-29 
Syntax, 137-145 
W ords and Sentences 
two correlative moments in language. 
131-135. 140--145 

